
1. Curr Genomics. 2016 Feb;17(1):14-32. doi: 10.2174/1389202916666151014221954.

Genetics of Bladder Malignant Tumors in Childhood.

Zangari A(1), Zaini J(2), Gulìa C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Azienda Ospedaliera San Camillo Forlanini, Roma, Italy. (2)Università degli
Studi della Tuscia, dipartimento di scienze biologiche (DEB), Viterbo, Italy.
(3)Università degli Studi di Roma La Sapienza, Dipartimento di Urologia, Roma,
Italy.

Bladder masses are represented by either benign or malignant entities. Malignant 
bladder tumors are frequent causes of disease and death in western countries.
However, in children they are less common. Additionally, different features are
found in childhood, in which non epithelial tumors are more common than
epithelial ones. Rhabdomyosarcoma is the most common pediatric bladder tumor, but
many other types of lesions may be found, such as malignant rhabdoid tumor (MRT),
inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor and neuroblastoma. Other rarer tumors
described in literature include urothelial carcinoma and other epithelial
neoplasms. Rhabdomyosarcoma is associated to a variety of genetic syndromes and
many genes are involved in tumor development. PAX3-FKHR and PAX7-FKHR (P-F)
fusion state has important implications in the pathogenesis and biology of RMS,
and different genes alterations are involved in the pathogenesis of P-F negative 
and embryonal RMS, which are the subsets of tumors most frequently affecting the 
bladder. These genes include p53, MEF2, MYOG, Ptch1, Gli1, Gli3, Myf5, MyoD1,
NF1, NRAS, KRAS, HRAS, FGFR4, PIK3CA, CTNNB1, FBXW7, IGF1R, PDGFRA, ERBB2/4, MET,
BCOR. Malignant rhabdoid tumor (MRT) usually shows SMARCB1/INI1 alterations.
Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene translocations are the most frequently
associated alterations in inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor (IMT). Few genes
alterations in urothelial neoplasms have been reported in the paediatric
population, which are mainly related to deletion of p16/lnk4, overexpression of
CK20 and overexpression of p53. Here, we reviewed available literature to
identify genes associated to bladder malignancies in children and discussed their
possible relationships with these tumors.

PMCID: PMC4780472 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 27013922  [PubMed]


2. Nat Commun. 2016 Mar 22;7:10993. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10993.

MicroRNA-378 limits activation of hepatic stellate cells and liver fibrosis by
suppressing Gli3 expression.

Hyun J(1), Wang S(1), Kim J(1), Rao KM(2), Park SY(2), Chung I(2), Ha CS(2), Kim 
SW(1,)(3), Yun YH(4), Jung Y(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrated Biological Science, College of Natural Science, Pusan
National University, Pusan 46241, Korea. (2)Department of Polymer Science and
Engineering, College of Engineering, Pusan National University, Pusan, 46241,
Korea. (3)Department of Biological Sciences, College of Natural Science, Pusan
National University, 63-2 Pusandaehak-ro, Kumjeong-gu, Pusan 46241, Korea.
(4)Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Engineering, The University
of Akron, Akron, Ohio 44685-0302, USA.

Hedgehog (Hh) signalling regulates hepatic fibrogenesis. MicroRNAs (miRNAs)
mediate various cellular processes; however, their role in liver fibrosis is
unclear. Here we investigate regulation of miRNAs in chronically damaged fibrotic
liver. MiRNA profiling shows that expression of miR-378 family members
(miR-378a-3p, miR-378b and miR-378d) declines in carbon tetrachloride
(CCl4)-treated compared with corn-oil-treated mice. Overexpression of
miR-378a-3p, directly targeting Gli3 in activated hepatic stellate cells (HSCs), 
reduces expression of Gli3 and profibrotic genes but induces gfap, the
inactivation marker of HSCs, in CCl4-treated liver. Smo blocks transcriptional
expression of miR-378a-3p by activating the p65 subunit of nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B
(NF-<U+03BA>B). The hepatic level of miR-378a-3p is inversely correlated with the
expression of Gli3 in tumour and non-tumour tissues in human hepatocellular
carcinoma. Our results demonstrate that miR-378a-3p suppresses activation of HSCs
by targeting Gli3 and its expression is regulated by Smo-dependent NF-<U+03BA>B
signalling, suggesting miR-378a-3p has therapeutic potential for liver fibrosis.

PMCID: PMC4804167
PMID: 27001906  [PubMed - in process]


3. Hum Pathol. 2016 Apr;50:43-50. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2015.08.026. Epub 2015 Nov 
24.

May Sonic Hedgehog proteins be markers for malignancy in uterine smooth muscle
tumors?

Garcia N(1), Bozzini N(1), Baiocchi G(2), da Cunha IW(2), Maciel GA(1), Soares JM
Junior(1), Soares FA(2), Baracat EC(1), Carvalho KC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Structural Gynecology, Disciplina de Ginecologia, 
Hospital das Clínicas, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao
Paulo, Brazil 01245-903. (2)CIPE, International Research Center, Hospital A C
Camargo Cancer Center, Sao Paulo, Brazil 01509-010. (3)Laboratory of Molecular
and Structural Gynecology, Disciplina de Ginecologia, Hospital das Clínicas,
Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil 01245-903. 
Electronic address: carvalhokc@gmail.com.

Several studies have demonstrated that the Sonic Hedgehog signaling pathway (SHH)
plays an important role in tumorigenesis and cellular differentiation. We
analyzed the protein expression of SHH pathway components and evaluated whether
their profile could be useful for the diagnosis, prognosis, or prediction of the 
risk of malignancy for uterine smooth muscle tumors (USMTs). A total of 176
samples (20 myometrium, 119 variants of leiomyoma, and 37 leiomyosarcoma) were
evaluated for the protein expression of the SHH signaling components, HHIP1 (SHH 
inhibitor), and BMP4 (SHH target) by immunohistochemistry. Western blot analysis 
was performed to verify the specificity of the antibodies. We grouped leiomyoma
samples into conventional leiomyomas and unusual leiomyomas that comprise
atypical, cellular, mitotically active leiomyomas and uterine smooth muscle
tumors of uncertain malignant potential. Immunohistochemical analysis showed that
SMO, SUFU, GLI1, GLI3, and BMP4 expression gradually increased depending on to
the histologic tissue type. The protein expression of SMO, SUFU, and GLI1 was
increased in unusual leiomyoma and leiomyosarcoma samples compared to normal
myometrium. The inhibitor HHIP1 showed higher expression in myometrium, whereas
only negative or basal expression of SMO, SUFU, GLI1, and GLI3 was detected in
these samples. Strong expression of SHH was associated with poorer overall
survival. Our data suggest that the expression of SHH proteins can be useful for 
evaluating the potential risk of malignancy for USMTs. Moreover, GLI1 and SMO may
serve as future therapeutic targets for women with USMTs.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26997437  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Dev Biol. 2016 Mar 15. pii: S0012-1606(16)30029-X. doi:
10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.03.007. [Epub ahead of print]

Fins into limbs: Autopod acquisition and anterior elements reduction by modifying
gene networks involving 5'Hox, Gli3, and Shh.

Tanaka M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of
Technology, B-17, 4259 Nagatsuta-cho, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan.
Electronic address: mitanaka@bio.titech.ac.jp.

Two major morphological changes occurred during the fin-to-limb transition: the
appearance of the autopod, and the reduction of anterior skeletal elements. In
the past decades, numerous approaches to the study of genetic developmental
systems involved in patterning of fins/limbs among different taxa have provided
clues to better understand the mechanism of the fin-to-limb transition. In this
article, I discuss recent progress toward elucidating the evolutionary origin of 
the autopod and the mechanism through which the multiple-basal bones of ancestral
fins were reduced into a single bone (humerus/femur). A particular focus of this 
article is the patterning mechanism of the tetrapod limb and chondrichthyan fin
controlled by gene networks involving the 5'Hox genes, Gli3 and Shh. These recent
data provide possible scenarios that could have led to the transformation of fins
into limbs.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 26992366  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. BMC Dev Biol. 2016 Feb 24;16(1):4. doi: 10.1186/s12861-016-0106-0.

Computational prediction and experimental validation of novel Hedgehog-responsive
enhancers linked to genes of the Hedgehog pathway.

Gurdziel K(1,)(2), Vogt KR(1), Schneider G(1), Richards N(1), Gumucio DL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI, 48109, USA. (2)Department of Computational Medicine and
Bioinformatics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA. (3)Department 
of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, 
USA. dgumucio@umich.edu.

BACKGROUND: The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway, acting through three homologous 
transcription factors (GLI1, GLI2, GLI3) in vertebrates, plays multiple roles in 
embryonic organ development and adult tissue homeostasis. At the level of the
genome, GLI factors bind to specific motifs in enhancers, some of which are
hundreds of kilobases removed from the gene promoter. These enhancers integrate
the Hh signal in a context-specific manner to control the spatiotemporal pattern 
of target gene expression. Importantly, a number of genes that encode Hh pathway 
molecules are themselves targets of Hh signaling, allowing pathway regulation by 
an intricate balance of feed-back activation and inhibition. However,
surprisingly few of the critical enhancer elements that control these pathway
target genes have been identified despite the fact that such elements are central
determinants of Hh signaling activity. Recently, ChIP studies have been carried
out in multiple tissue contexts using mouse models carrying FLAG-tagged GLI
proteins (GLI(FLAG)). Using these datasets, we tested whether a meta-analysis of 
GLI binding sites, coupled with a machine learning approach, could reveal genomic
features that could be used to empirically identify Hh-regulated enhancers linked
to loci of the Hh signaling pathway.
RESULTS: A meta-analysis of four existing GLI(FLAG) datasets revealed a library
of GLI binding motifs that was substantially more restricted than the potential
sites predicted by previous in vitro binding studies. A machine learning method
(kmer-SVM) was then applied to these datasets and enriched k-mers were identified
that, when applied to the mouse genome, predicted as many as 37,000 potential Hh 
enhancers. For functional analysis, we selected nine regions which were annotated
to putative Hh pathway molecules and found that seven exhibited GLI-dependent
activity, indicating that they are directly regulated by Hh signaling (78 %
success rate).
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that Hh enhancer regions share common sequence
features. The kmer-SVM machine learning approach identifies those features and
can successfully predict functional Hh regulatory regions in genomic DNA
surrounding Hh pathway molecules and likely, other Hh targets. Additionally, the 
library of enriched GLI binding motifs that we have identified may allow improved
identification of functional GLI binding sites.

PMCID: PMC4765071
PMID: 26912062  [PubMed - in process]


6. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 17;6:20727. doi: 10.1038/srep20727.

Endocytic recycling protein EHD1 regulates primary cilia morphogenesis and SHH
signaling during neural tube development.

Bhattacharyya S(1,)(2), Rainey MA(2), Arya P(3,)(2), Dutta S(4), George M(2),
Storck MD(2), McComb RD(1), Muirhead D(1), Todd GL(3), Gould K(3), Datta K(4),
Waes JG(5), Band V(3,)(2,)(6), Band H(1,)(3,)(2,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Pathology &Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, NE, USA. (2)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied
Diseases,University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA. (3)The Department
of Genetics, Cell Biology &Anatomy, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha,
NE, USA. (4)The Department of Biochemistry &Molecular Biology, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA. (5)Department of Pharmacology, Creighton
University School of Medicine, Omaha, NE, USA. (6)Fred and Pamela Buffett Cancer 
Center, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.

Members of the four-member C-terminal EPS15-Homology Domain-containing (EHD)
protein family play crucial roles in endocytic recycling of cell surface
receptors from endosomes to the plasma membrane. In this study, we show that Ehd1
gene knockout in mice on a predominantly B6 background is embryonic lethal.
Ehd1-null embryos die at mid-gestation with a failure to complete key
developmental processes including neural tube closure, axial turning and
patterning of the neural tube. We found that Ehd1-null embryos display short and 
stubby cilia on the developing neuroepithelium at embryonic day 9.5 (E9.5). Loss 
of EHD1 also deregulates the ciliary SHH signaling with Ehd1-null embryos
displaying features indicative of increased SHH signaling, including a
significant downregulation in the formation of the GLI3 repressor and increase in
the ventral neuronal markers specified by SHH. Using Ehd1-null MEFS we found that
EHD1 protein co-localizes with the SHH receptor Smoothened in the primary cilia
upon ligand stimulation. Under the same conditions, EHD1 was shown to co-traffic 
with Smoothened into the developing primary cilia and we identify EHD1 as a
direct binding partner of Smoothened. Overall, our studies identify the endocytic
recycling regulator EHD1 as a novel regulator of the primary cilium-associated
trafficking of Smoothened and Hedgehog signaling.

PMCID: PMC4756679
PMID: 26884322  [PubMed - in process]


7. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Nov 1;8(11):14574-9. eCollection 2015.

Suppression of hedgehog signaling regulates hepatic stellate cell activation and 
collagen secretion.

Li T(1), Leng XS(1), Zhu JY(1), Wang G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Peking University People's Hospital
Xizhimen South Street, West District, Beijing 100044, P. R. China.

Hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) play an important role in liver fibrosis. This
study investigates the expression of hedgehog in HSC and the role of hedgehog
signaling on activation and collagen secretion of HSC. Liver ex vivo perfusion
with collagenase IV and density gradient centrifugation were used to isolate HSC.
Expression of hedgehog signaling components Ihh, Smo, Ptc, Gli2 and Gli3 in HSC
were detected by RT-PCR. Hedgehog siRNA vectors targeting Ihh, Smo and Gli2 were 
constructed and transfected into HSC respectively. Suppression of hedgehog
signaling were detected by SYBR Green fluorescence quantitative RT-PCR. Effects
of hedgehog signaling inhibition on HSC activation and collagen I secretion were 
analyzed. Hedgehog signaling components Ihh, Smo, Ptc, Gli2 and Gli3 were
expressed in HSC. siRNA vectors targeting Ihh, Smo and Gli2 were successfully
constructed and decreased target gene expression. Suppression of hedgehog
signaling significantly decreased the expression of a-SMA in HSC (P<0.01).
Collagen type I secretion of HSC were also significantly decreased (P<0.01). In
summary, HSC activation and collagen secretion can be regulated by hedgehog
signaling. Hedgehog may play a role in the pathogenesis of liver fibrosis.

PMCID: PMC4713566
PMID: 26823780  [PubMed - in process]


8. J Biol Chem. 2016 Mar 25;291(13):7171-82. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.714857. Epub 2016
Jan 21.

The Pluripotency Factor NANOG Binds to GLI Proteins and Represses
Hedgehog-mediated Transcription.

Li Q(1), Lex RK(1), Chung H(1), Giovanetti SM(1), Ji Z(2), Ji H(2), Person MD(3),
Kim J(1), Vokes SA(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Molecular Biosciences, Institute for Cellular and
Molecular Biology, and. (2)Department of Biostatistics, The Johns Hopkins
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland 21205. (3)Institute for
Cellular and Molecular Biology, and Proteomics Facility, The University of Texas,
Austin, Texas 78712 and. (4)From the Department of Molecular Biosciences,
Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, and svokes@austin.utexas.edu.

The Hedgehog (HH) signaling pathway is essential for the maintenance and response
of several types of stem cells. To study the transcriptional response of stem
cells to HH signaling, we searched for proteins binding to GLI proteins, the
transcriptional effectors of the HH pathway in mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells.
We found that both GLI3 and GLI1 bind to the pluripotency factor NANOG. The
ectopic expression of NANOG inhibits GLI1-mediated transcriptional responses in a
dose-dependent fashion. In differentiating ES cells, the presence of NANOG
reduces the transcriptional response of cells to HH. Finally, we found
thatGli1andNanogare co-expressed in ES cells at high levels. We propose that
NANOG acts as a negative feedback component that provides stem cell-specific
regulation of the HH pathway.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4807297 [Available on 2017-03-25]
PMID: 26797124  [PubMed - in process]


9. J Hum Genet. 2016 Jan 21. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2015.161. [Epub ahead of print]

Tibial hemimelia associated with GLI3 truncation.

Deimling S(1), Sotiropoulos C(1), Lau K(1), Chaudhry S(2), Sturgeon K(1), Kelley 
S(2), Narayanan U(2), Howard A(2), Hui CC(1,)(3), Hopyan S(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Research Institute, The
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (2)Division of Orthopaedic 
Surgery, The Hospital for Sick Children and University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada. (3)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Tibial hemimelia is a rare, debilitating and often sporadic congenital
deficiency. In syndromic cases, mutations of a Sonic hedgehog (SHH) enhancer have
been identified. Here we describe an ~5<U+2009>kb deletion within the SHH repressor GLI3
in two patients with bilateral tibial hemimelia. This deletion results in a
truncated GLI3 protein that lacks a DNA-binding domain and cannot repress
hedgehog signaling. These findings strengthen the concept that tibial hemimelia
arises because of failure to restrict SHH activity to the posterior aspect of the
limb bud.Journal of Human Genetics advance online publication, 21 January 2016;
doi:10.1038/jhg.2015.161.

PMID: 26791356  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. J Autoimmun. 2016 Apr;68:86-97. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2015.12.004. Epub 2016 Jan 6.

Sonic Hedgehog regulates thymic epithelial cell differentiation.

Saldaña JI(1), Solanki A(1), Lau CI(1), Sahni H(1), Ross S(1), Furmanski AL(1),
Ono M(1), Holländer G(2), Crompton T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Section, UCL Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford Street
London WC1N 1EH, UK. (2)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, and
Department of Paediatrics, University of Oxford, UK. (3)Immunobiology Section,
UCL Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford Street London WC1N 1EH, UK. Electronic
address: t.crompton@ucl.ac.uk.

Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) is expressed in the thymus, where it regulates T cell
development. Here we investigated the influence of Shh on thymic epithelial cell 
(TEC) development. Components of the Hedgehog (Hh) signalling pathway were
expressed by TEC, and use of a Gli Binding Site-green fluorescence protein (GFP) 
transgenic reporter mouse demonstrated active Hh-dependent transcription in TEC
in the foetal and adult thymus. Analysis of Shh-deficient foetal thymus organ
cultures (FTOC) showed that Shh is required for normal TEC differentiation.
Shh-deficient foetal thymus contained fewer TEC than wild type (WT), the
proportion of medullary TEC was reduced relative to cortical TEC, and cell
surface expression of MHC Class II molecules was increased on both cortical and
medullary TEC populations. In contrast, the Gli3-deficient thymus, which shows
increased Hh-dependent transcription in thymic stroma, had increased numbers of
TEC, but decreased cell surface expression of MHC Class II molecules on both
cortical and medullary TEC. Neutralisation of endogenous Hh proteins in WT FTOC
led to a reduction in TEC numbers, and in the proportion of mature
Aire-expressing medullary TEC, but an increase in cell surface expression of MHC 
Class II molecules on medullary TEC. Likewise, conditional deletion of Shh from
TEC in the adult thymus resulted in alterations in TEC differentiation and
consequent changes in T cell development. TEC numbers, and the proportion of
mature Aire-expressing medullary TEC were reduced, and cell surface expression of
MHC Class II molecules on medullary TEC was increased. Differentiation of mature 
CD4 and CD8 single positive thymocytes was increased, demonstrating the
regulatory role of Shh production by TEC on T cell development. Treatment of
human thymus explants with recombinant Shh or neutralising anti-Shh antibody
indicated that the Hedgehog pathway is also involved in regulation of
differentiation from DP to mature SP T cells in the human thymus.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26778835  [PubMed - in process]


11. J Biol Chem. 2016 Mar 11;291(11):5611-22. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.700336. Epub 2016
Jan 14.

Glioma-associated Oncogene 2 Is Essential for Trophoblastic Fusion by Forming a
Transcriptional Complex with Glial Cell Missing-a.

Tang C(1), Tang L(2), Wu X(3), Xiong W(2), Ruan H(3), Hussain M(3), Wu J(4), Zou 
C(5), Wu X(6).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, 
Hangzhou 310058, China, the Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Tokyo 1130033, Japan, and. (2)the Children's Hospital and.
(3)From the Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, 
Hangzhou 310058, China. (4)First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310006, China. (5)the Children's Hospital and
zcc14@zju.edu.cn. (6)From the Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China, xiwu@zju.edu.cn.

Cell-cell fusion of human villous trophoblasts, referred to as a process of
syncytialization, acts as a prerequisite for the proper development and
functional maintenance of the human placenta. Given the fact that the main
components of the Hedgehog signaling pathway are expressed predominantly in the
syncytial layer of human placental villi, in this study, we investigated the
potential roles and underlying mechanisms of Hedgehog signaling in trophoblastic 
fusion. Activation of Hedgehog signaling by a variety of approaches robustly
induced cell fusion and the expression of syncytial markers, whereas suppression 
of Hedgehog signaling significantly attenuated cell fusion and the expression of 
syncytial markers in both human primary cytotrophoblasts and trophoblast-like
BeWo cells. Moreover, among glioma-associated oncogene (GLI) family
transcriptional factors in Hedgehog signaling, knockdown of GLI2 but not GLI1 and
GLI3 significantly attenuated Hedgehog-induced cell fusion, whereas
overexpression of the GLI2 activator alone was sufficient to induce cell fusion. 
Finally, GLI2 not only stabilized glial cell missing-a, a pivotal transcriptional
factor for trophoblastic syncytialization, but also formed a transcriptional
heterodimer with glial cell missing-a to transactivate syncytin-1, a
trophoblastic fusogen, and promote trophoblastic syncytialization. Taken
together, this study uncovered a so far uncharacterized role of Hedgehog/GLI2
signaling in trophoblastic fusion, implicating that Hedgehog signaling, through
GLI2, could be required for human placental development and pregnancy
maintenance.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4786702 [Available on 2017-03-11]
PMID: 26769961  [PubMed - in process]


12. Gene. 2016 Jan 5. pii: S0378-1119(16)00005-6. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2016.01.003.
[Epub ahead of print]

The early history of Pallister-Hall syndrome-Buried treasure of a sort.

Hall JG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medical Genetics and Pediatrics, University of British Columbia
and BC Children's Hospital, BC Children's Hospital, 4500 Oak Street, Room C234,
Vancouver, BC V6H 3N1, Canada. Electronic address: jhall@cw.bc.ca.

Pallister-Hall syndrome was initially recognized under fairly unique
circumstances involving exhumation of the very first case. The first two cases
had dramatic and unusual features including a hypothalamic hamartoblastoma,
imperforate anus, an unusual type of polydactyly with the extra digit being
central, hypopituitarism with secondary hypoadrenalism, and lethality after birth
(probably due to hypoadrenalism). Within a short time frame, four additional
cases were identified. As the full spectrum and variability of anomalies was
recognized, it became clear that it was not such a rare disorder. Shortly after
familial cases were recognized, the responsible gene was identified at GLI3.
However, since other different conditions also involved GLI3, elaborating the
domains of the gene and the types of mutations needed to be defined in order to
have a clear correlation of the genotype-phenotype relations.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 26768579  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


13. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 19;7(3):2201-19. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6876.

MiRNA-133b promotes the proliferation of human Sertoli cells through targeting
GLI3.

Yao C(1), Sun M(1), Yuan Q(1), Niu M(1), Chen Z(1), Hou J(1), Wang H(1), Wen
L(1), Liu Y(1), Li Z(2), He Z(1,)(2,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Renji-Med X Clinical Stem
Cell Research Center, Ren Ji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China. (2)Department of Urology, Ren Ji Hospital, School of
Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai Institute of Andrology,
Shanghai, China. (3)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Assisted Reproduction and
Reproductive Genetics, Shanghai, China. (4)Shanghai Key Laboratory of
Reproductive Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Sertoli cells play critical roles in regulating spermatogenesis and they can be
reprogrammed to the cells of other lineages, highlighting that they have
significant applications in reproductive and regenerative medicine. The fate
determinations of Sertoli cells are regulated precisely by epigenetic factors.
However, the expression, roles, and targets of microRNA (miRNA) in human Sertoli 
cells remain unknown. Here we have for the first time revealed that 174 miRNAs
were distinctly expressed in human Sertoli cells between Sertoli-cell-only
syndrome (SCOS) patients and obstructive azoospermia (OA) patients with normal
spermatogenesis using miRNA microarrays and real time PCR, suggesting that these 
miRNAs may be associated with the pathogenesis of SCOS. MiR-133b is upregulated
in Sertoli cells of SCOS patients compared to OA patients. Proliferation assays
with miRNA mimics and inhibitors showed that miR-133b enhanced the proliferation 
of human Sertoli cells. Moreover, we demonstrated that GLI3 was a direct target
of miR-133b and the expression of Cyclin B1 and Cyclin D1 was enhanced by
miR-133b mimics but decreased by its inhibitors. Gene silencing of GLI3 using RNA
inference stimulated the growth of human Sertoli cells. Collectively, miR-133b
promoted the proliferation of human Sertoli cells by targeting GLI3. This study
thus sheds novel insights into epigenetic regulation of human Sertoli cells and
the etiology of azoospermia and offers new targets for treating male infertility.

PMID: 26755652  [PubMed - in process]


14. Cereb Cortex. 2015 Dec 11. pii: bhv291. [Epub ahead of print]

Direct Interactions Between Gli3, Wnt8b, and Fgfs Underlie Patterning of the
Dorsal Telencephalon.

Hasenpusch-Theil K(1), Watson JA(1), Theil T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Integrative Physiology, Hugh Robson Building, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH8 9XD, UK.

A key step in the development of the cerebral cortex is a patterning process,
which subdivides the telencephalon into several molecularly distinct domains and 
is critical for cortical arealization. This process is dependent on a complex
network of interactions between signaling molecules of the Fgf and Wnt gene
families and the Gli3 transcription factor gene, but a better knowledge of the
molecular basis of the interplay between these factors is required to gain a
deeper understanding of the genetic circuitry underlying telencephalic
patterning. Using DNA-binding and reporter gene assays, we here investigate the
possibility that Gli3 and these signaling molecules interact by directly
regulating each other's expression. We show that Fgf signaling is required for
Wnt8b enhancer activity in the cortical hem, whereas Wnt/ß-catenin signaling
represses Fgf17 forebrain enhancer activity. In contrast, Fgf and Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling cooperate to regulate Gli3 expression. Taken together, these findings
indicate that mutual interactions between Gli3, Wnt8b, and Fgf17 are crucial
elements of the balance between these factors thereby conferring robustness to
the patterning process. Hence, our study provides a framework for understanding
the genetic circuitry underlying telencephalic patterning and how defects in this
process can affect the formation of cortical areas.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26656997  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


15. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Dec;31(12):1602-5.

[Up-regulating effect of leptin on Hedgehog signaling pathway in the process of
adipocyte differentiation and maturity].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu Y(1), Meng H(2), Chi S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, College of Basic Medicine, Fourth Military Medical
University, Xijing Hospital, Xi' an 710032, China. (2)PLA Clinic Center, Xijing
Hospital, Xi' an 710032, China. (3)Department of Physiology, College of Basic
Medicine, Fourth Military Medical University, Xijing Hospital, Xi' an 710032,
China. *Corresponding author, E-mail: chxinli@fmmu.edu.cn.

To study the regulating effect of leptin on Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway.
Methods 3T3-L1 cells were used to induce adipocyte differentiation. Real-time
quantitative PCR and Western blotting were performed to detect the mRNA and
protein levels of Gli, the key molecule in Hh signaling pathway, and investigate 
the effect of leptin on the levels in the process of adipocyte differentiation.
Results At 0, 4, 7, 10 days of adipose differentiation, mRNA and protein
expressions of Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3 in Hh signaling pathway were gradually
restrained and the down-regulation of Gli1 mRNA was the most significant.
However, 100 ng/mL leptin promoted the mRNA and protein expressions of Gli1, Gli2
and Gli3 during adipose differentiation. Conclusion In the process of adipocyte
differentiation and maturity, there is an interaction between leptin and Hh
signaling pathway. Leptin can upregulate the expression of Gli in Hh pathway, and
leptin may play a role in the inhibition of adipogenesis through activating Hh
signaling pathway.

PMID: 26648290  [PubMed - in process]


16. Nat Commun. 2015 Dec 9;6:10131. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10131.

Frequent alterations in cytoskeleton remodelling genes in primary and metastatic 
lung adenocarcinomas.

Wu K(1,)(2,)(3,)(4,)(5), Zhang X(2,)(3,)(4), Li F(1), Xiao D(2,)(3,)(6), Hou
Y(1,)(5), Zhu S(1,)(5), Liu D(1), Ye X(1,)(7), Ye M(1,)(8), Yang J(1), Shao L(1),
Pan H(2,)(3,)(6), Lu N(1), Yu Y(1), Liu L(2,)(3,)(6), Li J(2,)(3,)(6), Huang
L(2,)(3), Tang H(2,)(3), Deng Q(2,)(3,)(6), Zheng Y(1), Peng L(1), Liu G(1), Gu
X(9), He P(9), Gu Y(3,)(9), Lin W(6), He H(6), Xie G(1), Liang H(1), An N(1),
Wang H(1), Teixeira M(10), Vieira J(10), Liang W(2,)(3,)(4), Zhao X(1), Peng
Z(1,)(8), Mu F(1,)(11), Zhang X(1,)(8), Xu X(1), Yang H(1,)(12), Kristiansen
K(1,)(2), Wang J(1,)(12), Zhong N(3,)(4), Wang J(1,)(5), Pan-Hammarström
Q(1,)(7), He J(2,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)BGI-Shenzhen, Beishan Industrial Zone, Yantian District, Shenzhen 518083,
China. (2)Department of Thoracic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou 510120, China. (3)Guangzhou Institute of 
Respiratory Disease &State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou
510120, China. (4)National Clinical Research Center for Respiratory Disease,
Guangzhou 510120, China. (5)Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen,
DK-2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark. (6)Research Center for Translational Medicine, The
First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou 510120,
China. (7)Department of Laboratory of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm 
14186, Sweden. (8)Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Cancer Trans-Omics Research,
BGI-Guangzhou, Guangzhou 510006, China. (9)Department of Pathology, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou 510120, China.
(10)Genetics Department and Research Center, Portuguese Oncology Institute, Porto
4200-072, Portugal. (11)BGI-Wuhan, Wuhan 430075, China. (12)James D. Watson
Institute of Genome Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China.

The landscape of genetic alterations in lung adenocarcinoma derived from Asian
patients is largely uncharacterized. Here we present an integrated genomic and
transcriptomic analysis of 335 primary lung adenocarcinomas and 35 corresponding 
lymph node metastases from Chinese patients. Altogether 13 significantly mutated 
genes are identified, including the most commonly mutated gene TP53 and novel
mutation targets such as RHPN2, GLI3 and MRC2. TP53 mutations are furthermore
significantly enriched in tumours from patients harbouring metastases. Genes
regulating cytoskeleton remodelling processes are also frequently altered,
especially in metastatic samples, of which the high expression level of IQGAP3 is
identified as a marker for poor prognosis. Our study represents the first
large-scale sequencing effort on lung adenocarcinoma in Asian patients and
provides a comprehensive mutational landscape for both primary and metastatic
tumours. This may thus form a basis for personalized medical care and shed light 
on the molecular pathogenesis of metastatic lung adenocarcinoma.

PMCID: PMC4682110
PMID: 26647728  [PubMed - in process]


17. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Dec 29;112(52):15940-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1521818112. Epub 2015 Dec 7.

Molecular mechanisms underlying the exceptional adaptations of batoid fins.

Nakamura T(1), Klomp J(1), Pieretti J(1), Schneider I(2), Gehrke AR(1), Shubin
NH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organismal Biology and Anatomy, University of Chicago, Chicago, 
IL 60637; (2)Instituto de Ciencias Biologicas, Universidade Federal do Para,
66075 Belem, Brazil. (3)Department of Organismal Biology and Anatomy, University 
of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637; nshubin@uchicago.edu.

Extreme novelties in the shape and size of paired fins are exemplified by extinct
and extant cartilaginous and bony fishes. Pectoral fins of skates and rays, such 
as the little skate (Batoid, Leucoraja erinacea), show a strikingly unique
morphology where the pectoral fin extends anteriorly to ultimately fuse with the 
head. This results in a morphology that essentially surrounds the body and is
associated with the evolution of novel swimming mechanisms in the group. In an
approach that extends from RNA sequencing to in situ hybridization to functional 
assays, we show that anterior and posterior portions of the pectoral fin have
different genetic underpinnings: canonical genes of appendage development control
posterior fin development via an apical ectodermal ridge (AER), whereas an
alternative Homeobox (Hox)-Fibroblast growth factor (Fgf)-Wingless type MMTV
integration site family (Wnt) genetic module in the anterior region creates an
AER-like structure that drives anterior fin expansion. Finally, we show that GLI 
family zinc finger 3 (Gli3), which is an anterior repressor of tetrapod digits,
is expressed in the posterior half of the pectoral fin of skate, shark, and
zebrafish but in the anterior side of the pelvic fin. Taken together, these data 
point to both highly derived and deeply ancestral patterns of gene expression in 
skate pectoral fins, shedding light on the molecular mechanisms behind the
evolution of novel fin morphologies.

PMCID: PMC4702995
PMID: 26644578  [PubMed - in process]


18. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Dec 2;14(4):15783-92. doi: 10.4238/2015.December.1.30.

A genome-wide association study of growth trait-related single nucleotide
polymorphisms in Chinese Yancheng chickens.

Jin CF(1), Chen YJ(1), Yang ZQ(1), Shi K(1), Chen CK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Agricultural Sciences of Yanchen and Coastal Area of Jiangsu
Province, Yancheng, China.

Chicken (Gallus gallus) growth traits are important economic traits, and many
studies have been conducted on genetic selection for body weight. However, most
of these studies have detected functional chromosome mutations or regions by
conventional molecular markers or gene chips. In this study, we performed a new
genome-wide association study using specific-locus amplified fragment sequencing 
(SLAF-seq) technology in purebred Yancheng chickens. Single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) that were significantly associated with phenotypic traits
were identified by GAPIT-compressed mixed linear models. Eighteen SNP markers
reached 5% Bonferroni genome-wide significance. A region spanning 72.3 to 82.1 Mb
on GGA4 had a strong influence on growth traits. Four genes (FAM184B, KCNIP4,
MIR15A, and GLI3) were closely associated with body weight. Some SNPs were
coincident with previously reported quantitative trait locus regions. Our results
would promote the researches of Chinese chickens and accelerate the utilization
of Chinese chicken, specially Yancheng chicken.

PMID: 26634546  [PubMed - in process]


19. Cancers (Basel). 2015 Nov 27;7(4):2330-51. doi: 10.3390/cancers7040894.

Aberrant GLI1 Activation in DNA Damage Response, Carcinogenesis and
Chemoresistance.

Palle K(1), Mani C(2), Tripathi K(3), Athar M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncologic Sciences, Mitchell Cancer Institute, University of
South Alabama, 1660 Springhill Avenue, Mobile, AL 36604, USA.
kpalle@health.southalabama.edu. (2)Department of Oncologic Sciences, Mitchell
Cancer Institute, University of South Alabama, 1660 Springhill Avenue, Mobile, AL
36604, USA. cmani@health.southalabama.edu. (3)Department of Oncologic Sciences,
Mitchell Cancer Institute, University of South Alabama, 1660 Springhill Avenue,
Mobile, AL 36604, USA. ktripathi@health.southalabama.edu. (4)Department of
Dermatology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 1530 3rd Avenue South,
Birmingham, AL 35294, USA. mathar@uab.edu.

The canonical hedgehog (HH) pathway is a multicomponent signaling cascade (HH,
protein patched homolog 1 (PTCH1), smoothened (SMO)) that plays a pivotal role
during embryonic development through activation of downstream effector molecules,
namely glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (GLI1), GLI2 and GLI3. Activation of 
GLIs must be tightly regulated as they modulate target genes which control tissue
patterning, stem cell maintenance, and differentiation during development.
However, dysregulation or mutations in HH signaling leads to genomic instability 
(GI) and various cancers, for example, germline mutation in PTCH1 lead to Gorlin 
syndrome, a condition where patients develop numerous basal cell carcinomas and
rarely rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS). Activating mutations in SMO have also been
recognized in sporadic cases of medulloblastoma and SMO is overexpressed in many 
other cancers. Recently, studies in several human cancers have shown that GLI1
expression is independent from HH ligand and canonical intracellular signaling
through PTCH and SMO. In fact, this aberrantly regulated GLI1 has been linked to 
several non-canonical oncogenic growth signals such as Kirsten rat sarcoma viral 
oncogene homolog (KRAS), avian myelocytomatosis virus oncogene cellular homolog
(C-MYC), transforming growth factor ß (TGFß), wingless-type MMTV integration site
family (WNT) and ß-catenin. Recent studies from our lab and other independent
studies demonstrate that aberrantly expressed GLI1 influences the integrity of
several DNA damage response and repair signals, and if altered, these networks
can contribute to GI and impact tumor response to chemo- and radiation therapies.
Furthermore, the ineffectiveness of SMO inhibitors in clinical studies argues for
the development of GLI1-specific inhibitors in order to develop effective
therapeutic modalities to treat these tumors. In this review, we focus on
summarizing current understanding of the molecular, biochemical and cellular
basis for aberrant GLI1 expression and discuss GLI1-mediated HH signaling on DNA 
damage responses, carcinogenesis and chemoresistance.

PMCID: PMC4695894
PMID: 26633513  [PubMed]


20. Neurosci Lett. 2016 Jan 12;611:94-100. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2015.10.076. Epub
2015 Nov 24.

Expression pattern of the Hedgehog signaling pathway in pituitary adenomas.

Yavropoulou MP(1), Maladaki A(2), Topouridou K(2), Kotoula V(3), Poulios C(3),
Daskalaki E(3), Foroglou N(4), Karkavelas G(3), Yovos JG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Clinical Endocrinology, 1st Department of Internal
Medicine, AHEPA Univ. Hospital, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece.
Electronic address: margia@med.auth.gr. (2)Laboratory of Molecular and Clinical
Endocrinology, 1st Department of Internal Medicine, AHEPA Univ. Hospital,
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece. (3)Pathology Department, Faculty of
Medicine, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece. (4)Department of
Neurosurgery, AHEPA Univ. Hospital, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece.

Several studies have demonstrated the role of Wnt and Notch signaling in the
pathogenesis of pituitary adenomas, but data are scarce regarding the role of
Hedgehog signaling. In this study we investigated the differential expression of 
gene targets of the Hedgehog signaling pathway. Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded
specimens from adult patients who underwent transphenoidal resection and normal
human pituitary tissues that were obtained from autopsies were used. Clinical
information and data from pre-operative MRI scan (extracellular tumor extension, 
tumor size, displacement of the optic chiasm) were retrieved from the Hospital's 
database. We used a customized RT(2) Profiler PCR Array, to investigate the
expression of genes related to Notch and Hedgehog signaling pathways (PTCH1,
PTCH2, GLI1, GLI3, NOTCH3, JAG1, HES1, and HIP). A total of 52 pituitary adenomas
(32 non-functioning adenomas, 15 somatotropinomas and 5 prolactinomas) were used 
in the final analysis. In non-functioning pituitary adenomas there was a
significant decrease (approximately 75%) in expression of all Hedgehog related
genes that were tested, while Notch3 and Jagged-1 expression was found
significantly increased, compared with normal pituitary tissue controls. In
contrast, somatotropinomas demonstrated a significant increase in expression of
all Hedgehog related genes and a decrease in the expression of Notch3 and
Jagged-1. There was no significant difference in the expression of Hedgehog and
Notch related genes between prolactinomas and healthy pituitary tissues. Hedgehog
signalling appears to be activated in somatotropinomas but not in non-functioning
pituitary adenomas in contrast to the expression pattern of Notch signalling
pathway.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26620835  [PubMed - in process]


21. Hum Mol Genet. 2016 Feb 1;25(3):437-47. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv483. Epub 2015 Nov
24.

Urogenital development in Pallister-Hall syndrome is disrupted in a
cell-lineage-specific manner by constitutive expression of GLI3 repressor.

Blake J(1), Hu D(2), Cain JE(2), Rosenblum ND(3).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Department of Physiology,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (2)Program in Developmental and 
Stem Cell Biology. (3)Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Division of
Nephrology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada and
Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
norman.rosenblum@sickkids.ca.

Pallister-Hall syndrome (PHS) is a rare disorder caused by mutations in GLI3 that
produce a transcriptional repressor (GLI3R). Individuals with PHS present with a 
variably penetrant variety of urogenital system malformations, including renal
aplasia or hypoplasia, hydroureter, hydronephrosis or a common urogenital sinus. 
The embryologic mechanisms controlled by GLI3R that result in these pathologic
phenotypes are undefined. We demonstrate that germline expression of GLI3R causes
renal hypoplasia, associated with decreased nephron number, and hydroureter and
hydronephrosis, caused by blind-ending ureters. Mice with obligate GLI3R
expression also displayed duplication of the ureters that was caused by aberrant 
common nephric duct patterning and ureteric stalk outgrowth. These developmental 
abnormalities are associated with suppressed Hedgehog signaling activity in the
cloaca and adjacent vesicular mesenchyme. Mice with conditional expression of
GLI3R were utilized to identify lineage-specific effects of GLI3R. In the
ureteric bud, GLI3R expression decreased branching morphogenesis. In
Six2-positive nephrogenic progenitors, GLI3R decreased progenitor cell
proliferation reducing the number of nephrogenic precursor structures. Using
mutant mice with Gli3R and Gli3 null alleles, we demonstrate that urogenital
system patterning and development is controlled by the levels of GLI3R and not by
an absence of full-length GLI3. We conclude that the urogenital system phenotypes
observed in PHS are caused by GLI3R-dependent perturbations in nephric duct
patterning, renal branching morphogenesis and nephrogenic progenitor
self-renewal.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4731018 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26604140  [PubMed - in process]


22. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2016 Jan 5;371(1685):20150040. doi:
10.1098/rstb.2015.0040.

Loss of neurogenesis in Hydra leads to compensatory regulation of neurogenic and 
neurotransmission genes in epithelial cells.

Wenger Y(1), Buzgariu W(1), Galliot B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Evolution, Institute of Genetics and Genomics in
Geneva (IGe3), Faculty of Sciences, University of Geneva, 30 quai Ernest
Ansermet, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland. (2)Department of Genetics and Evolution,
Institute of Genetics and Genomics in Geneva (IGe3), Faculty of Sciences,
University of Geneva, 30 quai Ernest Ansermet, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland
brigitte.galliot@unige.ch.

Hydra continuously differentiates a sophisticated nervous system made of
mechanosensory cells (nematocytes) and sensory-motor and ganglionic neurons from 
interstitial stem cells. However, this dynamic adult neurogenesis is dispensable 
for morphogenesis. Indeed animals depleted of their interstitial stem cells and
interstitial progenitors lose their active behaviours but maintain their
developmental fitness, and regenerate and bud when force-fed. To characterize the
impact of the loss of neurogenesis in Hydra, we first performed transcriptomic
profiling at five positions along the body axis. We found neurogenic genes
predominantly expressed along the central body column, which contains stem cells 
and progenitors, and neurotransmission genes predominantly expressed at the
extremities, where the nervous system is dense. Next, we performed
transcriptomics on animals depleted of their interstitial cells by hydroxyurea,
colchicine or heat-shock treatment. By crossing these results with
cell-type-specific transcriptomics, we identified epithelial genes up-regulated
upon loss of neurogenesis: transcription factors (Dlx, Dlx1, DMBX1/Manacle, Ets1,
Gli3, KLF11, LMX1A, ZNF436, Shox1), epitheliopeptides (Arminins, PW peptide),
neurosignalling components (CAMK1D, DDCl2, Inx1), ligand-ion channel receptors
(CHRNA1, NaC7), G-Protein Coupled Receptors and FMRFRL. Hence epitheliomuscular
cells seemingly enhance their sensing ability when neurogenesis is compromised.
This unsuspected plasticity might reflect the extended multifunctionality of
epithelial-like cells in early eumetazoan evolution.

© 2015 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4685579
PMID: 26598723  [PubMed - in process]


23. Dev Biol. 2016 Jan 1;409(1):55-71. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.10.033. Epub 2015
Nov 2.

Primary cilia are critical for Sonic hedgehog-mediated dopaminergic neurogenesis 
in the embryonic midbrain.

Gazea M(1), Tasouri E(2), Tolve M(1), Bosch V(1), Kabanova A(1), Gojak C(3),
Kurtulmus B(4), Novikov O(5), Spatz J(3), Pereira G(4), Hübner W(6), Brodski
C(5), Tucker KL(7), Blaess S(8).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Reconstructive Neurobiology, University of Bonn, 53127 Bonn,
Germany. (2)Interdisciplinary Center for Neurosciences, University of Heidelberg,
69120 Heidelberg, Germany; Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of
Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (3)Department of Biophysical Chemistry,
University of Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany; Department of New Materials 
and Biosystems, Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, 70569 Stuttgart,
Germany. (4)Molecular Biology of Centrosomes and Cilia, German Cancer Research
Center, DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (5)Department of
Physiology and Cell Biology, Zlotowski Center for Neuroscience, Faculty of Health
Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva 84105, Israel.
(6)Molecular Biophotonics, University of Bielefeld, 33615 Bielefeld, Germany.
(7)Interdisciplinary Center for Neurosciences, University of Heidelberg, 69120
Heidelberg, Germany; Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of
Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany; University of New England, College of
Osteopathic Medicine, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Center for Excellence in
the Neurosciences, Biddeford, ME 04005, USA. Electronic address:
ktucker2@une.edu. (8)University of New England, College of Osteopathic Medicine, 
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Center for Excellence in the Neurosciences,
Biddeford, ME 04005, USA. Electronic address: sblaess@uni-bonn.de.

Midbrain dopaminergic (mDA) neurons modulate various motor and cognitive
functions, and their dysfunction or degeneration has been implicated in several
psychiatric diseases. Both Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) and Wnt signaling pathways have
been shown to be essential for normal development of mDA neurons. Primary cilia
are critical for the development of a number of structures in the brain by
serving as a hub for essential developmental signaling cascades, but their role
in the generation of mDA neurons has not been examined. We analyzed mutant mouse 
lines deficient in the intraflagellar transport protein IFT88, which is critical 
for primary cilia function. Conditional inactivation of Ift88 in the midbrain
after E9.0 results in progressive loss of primary cilia, a decreased size of the 
mDA progenitor domain, and a reduction in mDA neurons. We identified Shh
signaling as the primary cause of these defects, since conditional inactivation
of the Shh signaling pathway after E9.0, through genetic ablation of Gli2 and
Gli3 in the midbrain, results in a phenotype basically identical to the one seen 
in Ift88 conditional mutants. Moreover, the expansion of the mDA progenitor
domain observed when Shh signaling is constitutively activated does not occur in 
absence of Ift88. In contrast, clusters of Shh-responding progenitors are
maintained in the ventral midbrain of the hypomorphic Ift88 mouse mutant,
cobblestone. Despite the residual Shh signaling, the integrity of the mDA
progenitor domain is severely disturbed, and consequently very few mDA neurons
are generated in cobblestone mutants. Our results identify for the first time a
crucial role of primary cilia in the induction of mDA progenitors, define a
narrow time window in which Shh-mediated signaling is dependent upon normal
primary cilia function for this purpose, and suggest that later Wnt
signaling-dependent events act independently of primary cilia.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26542012  [PubMed - in process]


24. Expert Rev Mol Med. 2015 Oct 30;17:e18. doi: 10.1017/erm.2015.18.

Advances in the molecular genetics of non-syndromic polydactyly.

Deng H(1), Tan T(1), Yuan L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental Medicine and Department of Neurology,the Third Xiangya
Hospital,Central South University,Changsha 410013,China.

Polydactyly is one of the most common inherited limb abnormalities, characterised
by supernumerary fingers or toes. It results from disturbances in the normal
programme of the anterior-posterior axis of the developing limb, with diverse
aetiology and variable inter- and intra-familial clinical features. Polydactyly
can occur as an isolated disorder (non-syndromic polydactyly) or as a part of an 
anomaly syndrome (syndromic polydactyly). On the basis of the anatomic location
of the duplicated digits, non-syndromic polydactyly is divided into three kinds, 
including preaxial polydactyly, axial polydactyly and postaxial polydactyly.
Non-syndromic polydactyly frequently exhibits an autosomal dominant inheritance
with variable penetrance. To date, in human, at least ten loci and four
disease-causing genes, including the GLI3 gene, the ZNF141 gene, the MIPOL1 gene 
and the PITX1 gene, have been identified. In this paper, we review clinical
features of non-syndromic polydactyly and summarise the recent progress in the
molecular genetics, including loci and genes that are responsible for the
disorder, the signalling pathways that these genetic factors are involved in, as 
well as animal models of the disorder. These progresses will improve our
understanding of the complex disorder and have implications on genetic
counselling such as prenatal diagnosis.

PMID: 26515020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 28;10(10):e0141525. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0141525.
eCollection 2015.

Cerebral Cortex Expression of Gli3 Is Required for Normal Development of the
Lateral Olfactory Tract.

Amaniti EM(1), Kelman A(1), Mason JO(1), Theil T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Integrative Physiology, University of Edinburgh, Hugh Robson
Building, George Square, Edinburgh, EH8 9XD, United Kingdom.

Formation of the lateral olfactory tract (LOT) and innervation of the piriform
cortex represent fundamental steps to allow the transmission of olfactory
information to the cerebral cortex. Several transcription factors, including the 
zinc finger transcription factor Gli3, influence LOT formation by controlling the
development of mitral cells from which LOT axons emanate and/or by specifying the
environment through which these axons navigate. Gli3 null and hypomorphic mutants
display severe defects throughout the territory covered by the developing lateral
olfactory tract, making it difficult to identify specific roles for Gli3 in its
development. Here, we used Emx1Cre;Gli3fl/fl conditional mutants to investigate
LOT formation and colonization of the olfactory cortex in embryos in which loss
of Gli3 function is restricted to the dorsal telencephalon. These mutants form an
olfactory bulb like structure which does not protrude from the telencephalic
surface. Nevertheless, mitral cells are formed and their axons enter the piriform
cortex though the LOT is shifted medially. Mitral axons also innervate a larger
target area consistent with an enlargement of the piriform cortex and form
aberrant projections into the deeper layers of the piriform cortex. No obvious
differences were found in the expression patterns of key guidance cues. However, 
we found that an expansion of the piriform cortex temporally coincides with the
arrival of LOT axons, suggesting that Gli3 affects LOT positioning and target
area innervation through controlling the development of the piriform cortex.

PMCID: PMC4624982
PMID: 26509897  [PubMed - in process]


26. Congenit Anom (Kyoto). 2016 Mar;56(2):94-97. doi: 10.1111/cga.12139.

GLI3 mutations in syndromic and non-syndromic polydactyly in two Indian families.

Patel R(1), Singh CB(1), Bhattacharya V(2), Singh SK(3), Ali A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Genetic Disorders, Faculty of Science, Banaras Hindu University,
Varanasi, India. (2)Department of Plastic Surgery, Institute of Medical Sciences,
Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, India. (3)G S Memorial Plastic Surgery
Hospital & Trauma Center, Varanasi, India.

The GLI3 protein is a zinc finger transcription factor, expressed early in
development. The GLI3 gene exhibits allelic heterogeneity as mutations in this
gene are associated with several developmental syndromic and non-syndromic
polydactyly. The present study reports two cases: first, a familial case of Greig
Cephalopolysyndactyly Syndrome (GCPS); the second is a sporadic case with both
postaxial polydactyly (PAP) type A and B. Resequencing of GLI3 gene reveals a
previously reported nonsense truncation mutation g.42007251G<U+2009>><U+2009>A (p.R792X;
rs121917714) in the GCPS family and a novel single nucleotide insertion
g.42004239_42004240insA (p.E1478X) in the sporadic case of postaxial polydactyly 
(PAP). Both nonsense truncation mutations; p.R792X (GCPS) and p.E1478X (PAP)
introduce a premature stop codon leading to loss of C-terminal domains.

© 2015 Japanese Teratology Society.

PMID: 26508445  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


27. J Hematol Oncol. 2015 Oct 20;8(1):114. doi: 10.1186/s13045-015-0211-8.

The Hedgehog pathway as targetable vulnerability with 5-azacytidine in
myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia.

Tibes R(1), Al-Kali A(2), Oliver GR(3), Delman DH(4), Hansen N(5), Bhagavatula
K(6), Mohan J(7), Rakhshan F(8), Wood T(9), Foran JM(10), Mesa RA(11),
Bogenberger JM(12).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Mayo Clinic/Mayo Clinic Cancer
Center, 13400 E. Shea Boulevard, Scottsdale, AZ, 85259, USA.
tibes.raoul@mayo.edu. (2)Mayo Clinic's Campus in Rochester, 200 First Street SW, 
Rochester, MN, 55905, USA. AlKali.Aref@mayo.edu. (3)Mayo Clinic's Campus in
Rochester, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN, 55905, USA. Oliver.Gavin@mayo.edu.
(4)Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Mayo Clinic/Mayo Clinic Cancer
Center, 13400 E. Shea Boulevard, Scottsdale, AZ, 85259, USA.
Delman.Devora@mayo.edu. (5)Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Mayo
Clinic/Mayo Clinic Cancer Center, 13400 E. Shea Boulevard, Scottsdale, AZ, 85259,
USA. Hansen.Nanna@mayo.edu. (6)Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Mayo 
Clinic/Mayo Clinic Cancer Center, 13400 E. Shea Boulevard, Scottsdale, AZ, 85259,
USA. keerthi.bhagavatula@gmail.com. (7)Washington University St. Louis, St.
Louis, MO, 63130-4899, USA. j.mohan@wustl.edu. (8)Mayo Clinic's Campus in
Rochester, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN, 55905, USA.
rakhshanrohakhtar.fariborz@mayo.edu. (9)Mayo Clinic's Campus in Rochester, 200
First Street SW, Rochester, MN, 55905, USA. Wood.thomas@mayo.edu. (10)Mayo
Clinic's Campus in Florida, 4500 San Pablo Road, Jacksonville, FL, 32224, USA.
Foran.James@mayo.edu. (11)Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Mayo
Clinic/Mayo Clinic Cancer Center, 13400 E. Shea Boulevard, Scottsdale, AZ, 85259,
USA. mesa.ruben@mayo.edu. (12)Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Mayo
Clinic/Mayo Clinic Cancer Center, 13400 E. Shea Boulevard, Scottsdale, AZ, 85259,
USA. Bogenberger.James@mayo.edu.

BACKGROUND: Therapy and outcome for elderly acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients
has not improved for many years. Similarly, there remains a clinical need to
improve response rates in advanced myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) patients
treated with hypomethylating agents, and few combination regimens have shown
clinical benefit. We conducted a 5-azacytidine (5-Aza) RNA-interference (RNAi)
sensitizer screen to identify gene targets within the commonly deleted regions
(CDRs) of chromosomes 5 and 7, whose silencing enhances the activity of 5-Aza.
METHODS AND RESULTS: An RNAi silencing screen of 270 genes from the CDRs of
chromosomes 5 and 7 was performed in combination with 5-Aza treatment in four AML
cell lines (TF-1, THP-1, MDS-L, and HEL). Several genes within the hedgehog
pathway (HhP), specifically SHH, SMO, and GLI3, were identified as 5-Aza
sensitizing hits. The smoothened (SMO) inhibitors LDE225 (erismodegib) and
GDC0449 (vismodegib) showed moderate single-agent activity in AML cell lines.
Further studies with erismodegib in combination with 5-Aza demonstrated
synergistic activity with combination index (CI) values of 0.48 to 0.71 in seven 
AML lines. Clonogenic growth of primary patient samples was inhibited to a
greater extent in the combination than with single-agent erismodegib or 5-Aza in 
55 % (6 of 11) primary patient samples examined. There was no association of the 
5-Aza/erismodegib sensitization potential to clinical-cytogenetic features or
common myeloid mutations. Activation of the HhP, as determined by greater
expression of HhP-related genes, showed less responsiveness to single-agent SMO
inhibition, while synergy between both agents was similar regardless of HhP gene 
expression. In vitro experiments suggested that concurrent dosing showed stronger
synergy than sequential dosing.
CONCLUSIONS: Inhibition of the HhP with SMO inhibitors in combination with the
hypomethylating agent 5-Aza demonstrates synergy in vitro and inhibits long-term 
repopulation capacity ex vivo in AML and MDS. A clinical trial combining 5-Aza
with LDE225 (erismodegib) in MDS and AML is ongoing based on these results as
well as additional publications suggesting a role for HhP signaling in myeloid
disease.

PMCID: PMC4615363
PMID: 26483188  [PubMed - in process]


28. J Mol Biol. 2015 Oct 22. pii: S0022-2836(15)00562-8. doi:
10.1016/j.jmb.2015.10.002. [Epub ahead of print]

Multiple Weak Linear Motifs Enhance Recruitment and Processivity in SPOP-Mediated
Substrate Ubiquitination.

Pierce WK(1), Grace CR(1), Lee J(1), Nourse A(2), Marzahn MR(1), Watson ER(3),
High AA(4), Peng J(5), Schulman BA(6), Mittag T(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural Biology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 262
Danny Thomas Place, Memphis, TN 38105, USA. (2)Molecular Interactions Analysis
Shared Resource, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 262 Danny Thomas Place,
Memphis, TN 38105, USA. (3)Department of Structural Biology, St. Jude Children's 
Research Hospital, 262 Danny Thomas Place, Memphis, TN 38105, USA; Department of 
Microbiology, Immunology, and Biochemistry, University of Tennessee Health
Sciences Center, Memphis, TN 38105, USA. (4)St. Jude Proteomics Facility, St.
Jude Children's Research Hospital, 262 Danny Thomas Place, Memphis, TN 38105,
USA. (5)Department of Structural Biology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
262 Danny Thomas Place, Memphis, TN 38105, USA; St. Jude Proteomics Facility, St.
Jude Children's Research Hospital, 262 Danny Thomas Place, Memphis, TN 38105,
USA; Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, 262 Danny Thomas Place, Memphis, TN 38105, USA. (6)Department of
Structural Biology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 262 Danny Thomas
Place, Memphis, TN 38105, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, St. Jude
Children's Research Hospital, 262 Danny Thomas Place, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.
(7)Department of Structural Biology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 262
Danny Thomas Place, Memphis, TN 38105, USA. Electronic address:
tanja.mittag@stjude.org.

Primary sequence motifs, with millimolar affinities for binding partners, are
abundant in disordered protein regions. In multivalent interactions, such weak
linear motifs can cooperate to recruit binding partners via avidity effects. If
linear motifs recruit modifying enzymes, optimal placement of weak motifs may
regulate access to modification sites. Weak motifs may thus exert physiological
relevance stronger than that suggested by their affinities, but molecular
mechanisms of their function are still poorly understood. Herein, we use the
N-terminal disordered region of the Hedgehog transcriptional regulator Gli3
(Gli3(1-90)) to determine the role of weak motifs encoded in its primary sequence
for the recruitment of its ubiquitin ligase CRL3(SPOP) and the subsequent effect 
on ubiquitination efficiency. The substrate adaptor SPOP binds linear motifs
through its MATH (meprin and TRAF homology) domain and forms higher-order
oligomers through its oligomerization domains, rendering SPOP multivalent for its
substrates. Gli3 has multiple weak SPOP binding motifs. We map three such motifs 
in Gli3(1-90), the weakest of which has a millimolar dissociation constant.
Multivalency of ligase and substrate for each other facilitates enhanced ligase
recruitment and stimulates Gli3(1-90) ubiquitination in in vitro ubiquitination
assays. We speculate that the weak motifs enable processivity through avidity
effects and by providing steric access to lysine residues that are otherwise not 
prioritized for polyubiquitination. Weak motifs may generally be employed in
multivalent systems to act as gatekeepers regulating post-translational
modification.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26475525  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


29. Dev Growth Differ. 2015 Oct;57(8):570-80. doi: 10.1111/dgd.12239. Epub 2015 Oct
14.

Identification and functional characterization of novel transcriptional enhancers
involved in regulating human GLI3 expression during early development.

Anwar S(1), Minhas R(2), Ali S(2), Lambert N(3), Kawakami Y(3), Elgar G(4), Azam 
SS(1), Abbasi AA(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Bioinformatics, Computational Biology Lab, Faculty of
Biological Sciences, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, 45320, Pakistan.
(2)National Center for Bioinformatics, Program of Comparative and Evolutionary
Genomics, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad,
45320, Pakistan. (3)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Development,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 55455, USA. (4)The Francis Crick
Institute, Mill Hill Laboratory, The Ridgeway, London, NW7 1AA, UK.

The zinc-finger transcription factor GLI3 acts as a primary transducer of Sonic
hedgehog (Shh) signaling in a context-dependent combinatorial fashion. GLI3
participates in the patterning and growth of many organs, including the central
nervous system (CNS) and limbs. Previously, we reported a subset of human
intronic cis-regulators controlling many known aspects of endogenous Gli3
expression in mouse and zebrafish. Here we demonstrate in a transgenic zebrafish 
assay the potential of two novel tetrapod-teleost conserved non-coding elements
(CNEs) docking within GLI3 intronic intervals (intron 3 and 4) to induce reporter
gene expression at known sites of endogenous Gli3 transcription in embryonic
domains such as the central nervous system (CNS) and limbs. Interestingly, the
cell culture based assays reveal harmony with the context dependent dual nature
of intra-GLI3 conserved elements. Furthermore, a transgenic zebrafish assay of
previously reported limb-specific GLI3 transcriptional enhancers (previously
tested in mice and chicken limb buds) induced reporter gene expression in
zebrafish blood precursor cells and notochord instead of fin. These results
demonstrate that the appendage-specific activity of a subset of GLI3-associated
enhancers might be a tetrapod innovation. Taken together with our recent data,
these results suggest that during the course of vertebrate evolution Gli3
expression control acquired a complex cis-regulatory landscape for spatiotemporal
patterning of CNS and limbs. Comparative data from fish and mice suggest that the
functional aspects of a subset of these cis-regulators have diverged
significantly between these two lineages.

© 2015 The Authors Development, Growth & Differentiation published by Wiley
Publishing Asia Pty Ltd on behalf of Japanese Society of Developmental
Biologists.

PMCID: PMC4609622 [Available on 2016-10-14]
PMID: 26464005  [PubMed - in process]


30. J Biol Chem. 2015 Dec 4;290(49):29663-75. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.665810. Epub 2015
Oct 8.

The Orphan G Protein-coupled Receptor Gpr175 (Tpra40) Enhances Hedgehog Signaling
by Modulating cAMP Levels.

Singh J(1), Wen X(1), Scales SJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Molecular Biology, Genentech, South San Francisco,
California 94080. (2)From the Department of Molecular Biology, Genentech, South
San Francisco, California 94080 sscales@gene.com.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway plays an essential role in vertebrate
embryonic tissue patterning of many developing organs. Signaling occurs
predominantly in primary cilia and is initiated by the entry of the G
protein-coupled receptor (GPCR)-like protein Smoothened into cilia and culminates
in gene transcription via the Gli family of transcription factors upon their
nuclear entry. Here we identify an orphan GPCR, Gpr175 (also known as Tpra1 or
Tpra40: transmembrane protein, adipocyte associated 1 or of 40 kDa), which also
localizes to primary cilia upon Hh stimulation and positively regulates Hh
signaling. Interaction experiments place Gpr175 at the level of PKA and upstream 
of the Gai component of heterotrimeric G proteins, which itself localizes to
cilia and can modulate Hh signaling. Gpr175 or Gai1 depletion leads to increases 
in cellular cAMP levels and in Gli3 processing into its repressor form. Thus we
propose that Gpr175 coupled to Gai1 normally functions to inhibit the production 
of cAMP by adenylyl cyclase upon Hh stimulation, thus maximizing signaling by
turning off PKA activity and hence Gli3 repressor formation. Taken together our
data suggest that Gpr175 is a novel positive regulator of the Hh signaling
pathway.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4705964 [Available on 2016-12-04]
PMID: 26451044  [PubMed - in process]


31. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Nov;12(5):6867-72. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4311. Epub 2015 Sep
10.

Microarray data analysis of neuroblastoma: Expression of SOX2 downregulates the
expression of MYCN.

Bao J(1), Qin L(2), Cui L(3), Wang X(1), Meng Q(1), Zhu L(1), Zhang S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Henan Provincial People's Hospital,
Zhengzhou, Henan 450003, P.R. China. (2)Nursing College, Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou, Henan 450001, P.R. China. (3)College of Public Health, Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou, Henan 450001, P.R. China.

The present study aimed to identify the genes directly or indirectly correlated
with the amplification of MYCN in neuroblastoma (NB). Microarray data (GSE53371) 
were downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus, and included 10 NB cell lines with 
MYCN amplification and 10 NB cell lines with normal MYCN copy numbers.
Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified using the Linear Models for
Microarray Data package, and a false discovery rate of <0.05 and |log2FC (fold
change)|>1 were selected as cut-off criteria. Hierarchical clustering analysis
and Gene Ontology analysis were respectively performed for the DEGs using the
Pheatmap package in R language and The Database for Annotation, Visualization and
Integrated Discovery. A protein-protein interaction network (PPI) was constructed
for the DEGs using the Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes
database. Pathway analysis was performed for the DEGs in the PPI network using
the WEB-based GEne SeT AnaLysis Toolkit. The correlation between MYCN and the key
gene associated with MYCN was determined using Pearson's correlation coefficient.
In total, 137 downregulated and 35 upregulated DEGs were identified. Functional
enrichment analysis indicated that KCNMB4 was involved in the regulation of
action potential in neuron term, and the FOS, GLI3 and GLI1 genes were involved
in the extracellular matrix-receptor interaction pathway. The PPI network and
correlation analysis revealed that the expression of SOX2 was directly correlated
with the expression of MYCN, and the correlation coefficient of SOX2 and MYCN was
-0.83. Therefore, SOX2, KCNMB4, FOS, GLI3 and GLI1 may be involved in the
pathogenesis of NB, with the expression of SOX2 downregulating the expression of 
MYCN.

PMID: 26398570  [PubMed - in process]


32. Cell Rep. 2015 Sep 29;12(12):2021-34. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.08.031. Epub
2015 Sep 17.

Suppressor of Fused Is Critical for Maintenance of Neuronal Progenitor Identity
during Corticogenesis.

Yabut OR(1), Fernandez G(1), Huynh T(1), Yoon K(2), Pleasure SJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (2)Department of Neurology, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; College of Biotechnology and
Bioengineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Gyeonggi-do 16419, Republic of
Korea. (3)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Programs in Neuroscience and Developmental Biology, Eli
and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. Electronic
address: sam.pleasure@ucsf.edu.

Proper lineage progression and diversification of neural progenitor cells (NPCs) 
ensures the generation of projection neuron (PN) subtypes in the mammalian
neocortex. Here, we show that Suppressor of Fused (Sufu) controls PN
specification by maintaining the identity of NPCs in the embryonic neocortex.
Deletion of Sufu in NPCs of the E10.5 mouse neocortex led to improper
specification of progenitors and a reduction in intermediate progenitors (IPs)
during corticogenesis. We found that Sufu deletion resulted in unstable Gli2 and 
Gli3 activity, leading to the ectopic activation of Sonic hedgehog (Shh)
signaling. The role of Sufu in maintaining progenitor identity is critical at
early stages of corticogenesis, since deletion of Sufu at E13.5 did not cause
similar abnormalities. Our studies revealed that Sufu critically modulates Shh
signaling at early stages of neurogenesis for proper specification and
maintenance of cortical NPCs to ensure the appropriate generation of cortical PN 
lineages.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4591209 [Available on 2016-09-29]
PMID: 26387942  [PubMed - in process]


33. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Dec;1852(12):2574-84. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2015.09.005. Epub 2015 Sep 15.

GSK3ß and Gli3 play a role in activation of Hedgehog-Gli pathway in human colon
cancer - Targeting GSK3ß downregulates the signaling pathway and reduces cell
proliferation.

Trnski D(1), Sabol M(2), Gojevic A(3), Martinic M(4), Ozretic P(5), Musani V(6), 
Ramic S(7), Levanat S(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Bijenicka 54,
Zagreb, Croatia. Electronic address: diana.trnski@irb.hr. (2)Department of
Molecular Medicine, Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Bijenicka 54, Zagreb, Croatia.
Electronic address: maja.sabol@irb.hr. (3)Department of Surgery, University
Hospital Center Zagreb, Kipaticeva 12, Zagreb, Croatia. Electronic address:
ante.gojevic@xnet.hr. (4)Department of Molecular Medicine, Rudjer Boskovic
Institute, Bijenicka 54, Zagreb, Croatia. Electronic address:
marina.martinic.87@gmail.com. (5)Department of Molecular Medicine, Rudjer
Boskovic Institute, Bijenicka 54, Zagreb, Croatia. Electronic address:
pozretic@irb.hr. (6)Department of Molecular Medicine, Rudjer Boskovic Institute, 
Bijenicka 54, Zagreb, Croatia. Electronic address: vmusani@irb.hr. (7)Department 
of Pathology, University Hospital for Tumors, Sestre milosrdnice University
Hospital Center, Ilica 197, Zagreb, Croatia. Electronic address:
snjezana.ramic@zg.t-com.hr. (8)Department of Molecular Medicine, Rudjer Boskovic 
Institute, Bijenicka 54, Zagreb, Croatia. Electronic address: levanat@irb.hr.

The role of Hedgehog-Gli (Hh-Gli) signaling in colon cancer tumorigenesis has not
yet been completely elucidated. Here we provide strong evidence of Hh-Gli
signaling involvement in survival of colon cancer cells, with the main trigger of
activation being deregulated GSK3ß. Our clinical data reveals high expression
levels of GSK3ß and Gli3 in human colon cancer tissue samples, with positive
correlation between GSK3ß expression and DUKES' stage. Further experiments on
colon cancer cell lines have shown that a deregulated GSK3ß upregulates Hh-Gli
signaling and positively affects colon cancer cell survival. We show that
inhibition of GSK3ß with lithium chloride enhances Gli3 processing into its
repressor form, consequently downregulating Hh-Gli signaling, reducing cell
proliferation and inducing cell death. Analysis of the molecular mechanisms
revealed that lithium chloride enhances Gli3-SuFu-GSK3ß complex formation leading
to more efficient Gli3 cleavage and Hh-Gli signaling downregulation. This work
proposes that activation of the Hh-Gli signaling pathway in colon cancer cells
occurs non-canonically via deregulated GSK3ß. Gli3 seems to be the main pathway
effector, highlighting the activator potential of this transcription factor,
which is highly dependent on GSK3ß function and fine tuning of the
Gli3-SuFu-GSK3ß platform.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26385428  [PubMed - in process]


34. J Neurosci. 2015 Aug 19;35(33):11462-81. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3046-14.2015.

Retinoic Acid-Mediated Regulation of GLI3 Enables Efficient Motoneuron Derivation
from Human ESCs in the Absence of Extrinsic SHH Activation.

Calder EL(1), Tchieu J(2), Steinbeck JA(3), Tu E(3), Keros S(4), Ying SW(5),
Jaiswal MK(5), Cornacchia D(3), Goldstein PA(5), Tabar V(1), Studer L(6).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Stem Cell Biology and Developmental Biology Program,
Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, New York 10065, Weill Graduate School of
Medical Sciences of Cornell University, New York, New York 10065. (2)Center for
Stem Cell Biology and Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute,
New York, New York 10065, studerl@mskcc.org tchieuj@mskcc.org. (3)Center for Stem
Cell Biology and Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New
York, New York 10065. (4)Pediatrics, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New
York 10065, and. (5)Departments of Anesthesiology and. (6)Center for Stem Cell
Biology and Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York,
New York 10065, Weill Graduate School of Medical Sciences of Cornell University, 
New York, New York 10065 studerl@mskcc.org tchieuj@mskcc.org.

The derivation of somatic motoneurons (MNs) from ES cells (ESCs) after exposure
to sonic hedgehog (SHH) and retinoic acid (RA) is one of the best defined,
directed differentiation strategies to specify fate in pluripotent lineages. In
mouse ESCs, MN yield is particularly high after RA + SHH treatment, whereas human
ESC (hESC) protocols have been generally less efficient. In an effort to optimize
yield, we observe that functional MNs can be derived from hESCs at high
efficiencies if treated with patterning molecules at very early differentiation
steps before neural induction. Remarkably, under these conditions, equal numbers 
of human MNs were obtained in the presence or absence of SHH exposure. Using
pharmacological and genetic strategies, we demonstrate that early RA treatment
directs MN differentiation independently of extrinsic SHH activation by
suppressing the induction of GLI3. We further demonstrate that neural induction
triggers a switch from a poised to an active chromatin state at GLI3. Early RA
treatment prevents this switch by direct binding of the RA receptor at the GLI3
promoter. Furthermore, GLI3 knock-out hESCs can bypass the requirement for early 
RA patterning to yield MNs efficiently. Our data demonstrate that RA-mediated
suppression of GLI3 is sufficient to generate MNs in an SHH-independent manner
and that temporal changes in exposure to patterning factors such as RA affect
chromatin state and competency of hESC-derived lineages to adopt specific
neuronal fates. Finally, our work presents a streamlined platform for the highly 
efficient derivation of human MNs from ESCs and induced pluripotent stem
cells.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Our study presents a rapid and efficient protocol
to generate human motoneurons from embryonic and induced pluripotent stem cells. 
Surprisingly, and in contrast to previous work, motoneurons are generated in the 
presence of retinoic acid but in the absence of factors that activate sonic
hedgehog signaling. We show that early exposure to retinoic acid modulates the
chromatin state of cells to be permissive for motoneuron generation and directly 
suppresses the induction of GLI3, a negative regulator of SHH signaling.
Therefore, our data point to a novel mechanism by which retinoic acid exposure
can bypass the requirement for extrinsic SHH treatment during motoneuron
induction.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/3511462-20$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4540792
PMID: 26290227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. EBioMedicine. 2015 May 1;2(6):536-43. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2015.04.019.
eCollection 2015.

GLI3 Links Environmental Arsenic Exposure and Human Fetal Growth.

Winterbottom EF(1), Fei DL(2), Koestler DC(3), Giambelli C(1), Wika E(3),
Capobianco AJ(4), Lee E(5), Marsit CJ(6), Karagas MR(7), Robbins DJ(8).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Program, DeWitt Daughtry Family Department of Surgery,
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA. (2)Molecular
Oncology Program, DeWitt Daughtry Family Department of Surgery, University of
Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA ; Department of
Pharmacology and Toxicology, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH 
03755, USA. (3)Department of Biostatistics, University of Kansas Medical Center, 
Kansas City, KS 66160, USA. (4)Molecular Oncology Program, DeWitt Daughtry Family
Department of Surgery, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL
33136, USA ; Molecular Oncology Program, Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.
(5)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA. (6)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology,
Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH 03755, USA ; Department of
Epidemiology, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH 03755, USA.
(7)Department of Epidemiology, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover,
NH 03755, USA. (8)Molecular Oncology Program, DeWitt Daughtry Family Department
of Surgery, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA ;
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Miami Miller
School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA ; Molecular Oncology Program, Sylvester 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine,
Miami, FL 33136, USA.

Although considerable evidence suggests that in utero arsenic exposure affects
children's health, these data are mainly from areas of the world where
groundwater arsenic levels far exceed the World Health Organization limit of
10 µg/L. We, and others, have found that more common levels of in utero arsenic
exposure may also impact children's health. However, the underlying molecular
mechanisms are poorly understood. To address this issue, we analyzed the
expression of key developmental genes in fetal placenta in a birth cohort of
women using unregulated water supplies in a US region with elevated groundwater
arsenic. We identified several genes whose expression associated with maternal
arsenic exposure in a fetal sex-specific manner. In particular, expression of the
HEDGEHOG pathway component, GLI3, in female placentae was both negatively
associated with arsenic exposure and positively associated with infant birth
weight. This suggests that modulation of GLI3 in the fetal placenta, and perhaps 
in other fetal tissues, contributes to arsenic's detrimental effects on fetal
growth. We showed previously that arsenic-exposed NIH3T3 cells have reduced GLI3 
repressor protein. Together, these studies identify GLI3 as a key signaling node 
that is affected by arsenic, mediating a subset of its effects on developmental
signaling and fetal health.

PMCID: PMC4535308
PMID: 26288817  [PubMed]


36. Elife. 2015 Aug 18;4. doi: 10.7554/eLife.07048.

A shift in anterior-posterior positional information underlies the fin-to-limb
evolution.

Onimaru K(1), Kuraku S(2), Takagi W(3), Hyodo S(3), Sharpe J(4), Tanaka M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of
Technology, Yokohama, Japan. (2)Phyloinformatics Unit, RIKEN Center for Life
Science Technologies, Kobe, Japan. (3)Laboratory of Physiology, Atmosphere and
Ocean Research Institute, The University of Tokyo, Chiba, Japan. (4)EMBL-CRG
Systems Biology Research Unit, Centre for Genomic Regulation, Universitat Pompeu 
Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.

The pectoral fins of ancestral fishes had multiple proximal elements connected to
their pectoral girdles. During the fin-to-limb transition, anterior proximal
elements were lost and only the most posterior one remained as the humerus. Thus,
we hypothesised that an evolutionary alteration occurred in the
anterior-posterior (AP) patterning system of limb buds. In this study, we
examined the pectoral fin development of catshark (Scyliorhinus canicula) and
revealed that the AP positional values in fin buds are shifted more posteriorly
than mouse limb buds. Furthermore, examination of Gli3 function and regulation
shows that catshark fins lack a specific AP patterning mechanism, which restricts
its expression to an anterior domain in tetrapods. Finally, experimental
perturbation of AP patterning in catshark fin buds results in an expansion of
posterior values and loss of anterior skeletal elements. Together, these results 
suggest that a key genetic event of the fin-to-limb transformation was alteration
of the AP patterning network.

PMCID: PMC4538735
PMID: 26283004  [PubMed - in process]


37. DNA Repair (Amst). 2015 Oct;34:9-17. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2015.06.006. Epub 2015
Aug 1.

p53 modulates the activity of the GLI1 oncogene through interactions with the
shared coactivator TAF9.

Yoon JW(1), Lamm M(1), Iannaccone S(1), Higashiyama N(1), Leong KF(1), Iannaccone
P(1), Walterhouse D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program of the Stanley Manne Children's Research
Institute, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine Chicago, IL 60611,
USA. (2)Developmental Biology Program of the Stanley Manne Children's Research
Institute, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine Chicago, IL 60611,
USA. Electronic address: d-walterhouse@northwestern.edu.

The GLI1 oncogene and p53 tumor suppressor gene function in an inhibitory loop
that controls stem cell and tumor cell numbers. Since GLI1 and p53 both interact 
with the coactivator TATA Binding Protein Associated Factor 9 (TAF9), we
hypothesized that competition between these transcription factors for TAF9 in
cancer cells may contribute to the inhibitory loop and directly affect GLI1
function and cellular phenotype. We showed that TAF9 interacts with the oncogenic
GLI family members GLI1 and GLI2 but not GLI3 in cell-free pull-down assays and
with GLI1 in rhabdomyosarcoma and osteosarcoma cell lines. Removal of the
TAF9-binding acidic alpha helical transactivation domain of GLI1 produced a
significant reduction in the ability of GLI1 to transform cells. We then
introduced a point mutation into GLI1 (L1052I) that eliminates TAF9 binding and a
point mutation into GLI3 (I1510L) that establishes binding. Wild-type and mutant 
GLI proteins that bind TAF9 showed enhanced transactivating and cell transforming
activity compared with those that did not. Therefore, GLI-TAF9 binding appears
important for oncogenic activity. We then determined whether wild-type p53
down-regulates GLI function by sequestering TAF9. We showed that p53 binds TAF9
with greater affinity than does GLI1 and that co-expression of p53 with GLI1 or
GLI2 down-regulated GLI-induced transactivation, which could be abrogated using
mutant forms of GLI1 or p53. This suggests that p53 sequesters TAF9 from GLI1,
which may contribute to inhibition of GLI1 activity by p53 and potentially impact
therapeutic success of agents targeting GLI-TAF9 interactions in cancer.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4592456 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26282181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Gastroenterology. 2015 Dec;149(7):1837-1848.e5. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2015.07.060. Epub 2015 Aug 7.

Identification of GLI Mutations in Patients With Hirschsprung Disease That
Disrupt Enteric Nervous System Development in Mice.

Liu JA(1), Lai FP(1), Gui HS(2), Sham MH(3), Tam PK(1), Garcia-Barcelo MM(1), Hui
CC(4), Ngan ES(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, University of Hong
Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong. (2)Department of Psychiatry, Li Ka Shing Faculty of
Medicine, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong; Center for Genomic
Sciences, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam,
Hong Kong. (3)Department of Biochemistry, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine,
University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong. (4)Program in Developmental and
Stem Cell Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children and Department of Molecular
Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (5)Department of
Surgery, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong
Kong. Electronic address: engan@hku.hk.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2015 Dec;149(7):1672-5.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Hirschsprung disease is characterized by a deficit in enteric 
neurons, which are derived from neural crest cells (NCCs). Aberrant hedgehog
signaling disrupts NCC differentiation and might cause Hirschsprung disease. We
performed genetic analyses to determine whether hedgehog signaling is involved in
pathogenesis.
METHODS: We performed deep-target sequencing of DNA from 20 patients with
Hirschsprung disease (16 men, 4 women), and 20 individuals without (controls),
and searched for mutation(s) in GLI1, GLI2, GLI3, SUFU, and SOX10. Biological
effects of GLI mutations were tested in luciferase reporter assays using HeLa or 
neuroblastoma cell lines. Development of the enteric nervous system was studied
in Sufu(f/f), Gli3(<U+0394>699), Wnt1-Cre, and Sox10(NGFP) mice using
immunohistochemical and whole-mount staining procedures to quantify enteric
neurons and glia and analyze axon fasciculation, respectively. NCC migration was 
studied using time-lapse imaging.
RESULTS: We identified 3 mutations in GLI in 5 patients with Hirschsprung disease
but no controls; all lead to increased transcription of SOX10 in cell lines.
SUFU, GLI, and SOX10 form a regulatory loop that controls the neuronal vs glial
lineages and migration of NCCs. Sufu mutants mice had high Gli activity, due to
loss of Sufu, disrupting the regulatory loop and migration of enteric NCCs,
leading to defective axonal fasciculation, delayed gut colonization, or
intestinal hypoganglionosis. The ratio of enteric neurons to glia correlated
inversely with Gli activity.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified mutations that increase GLI activity in patients with 
Hirschsprung disease. Disruption of the SUFU-GLI-SOX10 regulatory loop disrupts
migration of NCCs and development of the enteric nervous system in mice.

Copyright © 2015 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26261006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Dev Biol. 2015 Oct 1;406(1):92-103. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.07.022. Epub 2015
Jul 31.

Spatiotemporal regulation of GLI target genes in the mammalian limb bud.

Lewandowski JP(1), Du F(2), Zhang S(2), Powell MB(1), Falkenstein KN(1), Ji H(2),
Vokes SA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Institute for Cellular and Molecular
Biology, University of Texas at Austin, 2500 Speedway Stop A4800, Austin, TX
78712, USA. (2)Department of Biostatistics, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of
Public Health, 615 North Wolfe Street, Room E3638, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Institute for Cellular and Molecular
Biology, University of Texas at Austin, 2500 Speedway Stop A4800, Austin, TX
78712, USA. Electronic address: svokes@austin.utexas.edu.

GLI proteins convert Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling into a transcriptional output
in a tissue-specific fashion. The Shh pathway has been extensively studied in the
limb bud, where it helps regulate growth through a SHH-FGF feedback loop.
However, the transcriptional response is still poorly understood. We addressed
this by determining the gene expression patterns of approximately 200 candidate
GLI-target genes and identified three discrete SHH-responsive expression domains.
GLI-target genes expressed in the three domains are predominately regulated by
derepression of GLI3 but have different temporal requirements for SHH. The GLI
binding regions associated with these genes harbor both distinct and common DNA
motifs. Given the potential for interaction between the SHH and FGF pathways, we 
also measured the response of GLI-target genes to inhibition of FGF signaling and
found the majority were either unaffected or upregulated. These results provide
the first characterization of the spatiotemporal response of a large group of
GLI-target genes and lay the foundation for a systems-level understanding of the 
gene regulatory networks underlying SHH-mediated limb patterning.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4587286 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26238476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Jul 29;16(8):17344-67. doi: 10.3390/ijms160817344.

Pituitary Adenylate Cyclase Activating Polypeptide (PACAP) Pathway Is Induced by 
Mechanical Load and Reduces the Activity of Hedgehog Signaling in Chondrogenic
Micromass Cell Cultures.

Juhász T(1), Szentléleky E(2), Somogyi CS(3), Takács R(4), Dobrosi N(5), Engler
M(6), Tamás A(7), Reglodi D(8), Zákány R(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, University of Debrecen,
Medical and Health Science Centre, Nagyerdei krt. 98, H-4032 Debrecen, Hungary.
juhaszt@anat.med.unideb.hu. (2)Department of Anatomy, Histology and Embryology,
University of Debrecen, Medical and Health Science Centre, Nagyerdei krt. 98,
H-4032 Debrecen, Hungary. valaki006@gmail.com. (3)Department of Anatomy,
Histology and Embryology, University of Debrecen, Medical and Health Science
Centre, Nagyerdei krt. 98, H-4032 Debrecen, Hungary.
somogyics@anat.med.unideb.hu. (4)Department of Anatomy, Histology and Embryology,
University of Debrecen, Medical and Health Science Centre, Nagyerdei krt. 98,
H-4032 Debrecen, Hungary. takacs.roland@med.unideb.hu. (5)Department of Anatomy, 
Histology and Embryology, University of Debrecen, Medical and Health Science
Centre, Nagyerdei krt. 98, H-4032 Debrecen, Hungary. luysica@gmail.com.
(6)Department of Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, University of Debrecen,
Medical and Health Science Centre, Nagyerdei krt. 98, H-4032 Debrecen, Hungary.
engler.mate.janos@med.unideb.hu. (7)Department of Anatomy, MTA-PTE "Lendület"
PACAP Research Team, University of Pécs, Medical School, Szigeti út 12, H-7624
Pécs, Hungary. andreatamassz@gmail.com. (8)Department of Anatomy, MTA-PTE
"Lendület" PACAP Research Team, University of Pécs, Medical School, Szigeti út
12, H-7624 Pécs, Hungary. dora.reglodi@aok.pte.hu. (9)Department of Anatomy,
Histology and Embryology, University of Debrecen, Medical and Health Science
Centre, Nagyerdei krt. 98, H-4032 Debrecen, Hungary. roza@anat.med.unideb.hu.

Pituitary adenylate cyclase activating polypeptide (PACAP) is a neurohormone
exerting protective function during various stress conditions either in mature or
developing tissues. Previously we proved the presence of PACAP signaling elements
in chicken limb bud-derived chondrogenic cells in micromass cell cultures. Since 
no data can be found if PACAP signaling is playing any role during mechanical
stress in any tissues, we aimed to investigate its contribution in
mechanotransduction during chondrogenesis. Expressions of the mRNAs of PACAP and 
its major receptor, PAC1 increased, while that of other receptors, VPAC1, VPAC2
decreased upon mechanical stimulus. Mechanical load enhanced the expression of
collagen type X, a marker of hypertrophic differentiation of chondrocytes and
PACAP addition attenuated this elevation. Moreover, exogenous PACAP also
prevented the mechanical load evoked activation of hedgehog signaling: protein
levels of Sonic and Indian Hedgehogs and Gli1 transcription factor were lowered
while expressions of Gli2 and Gli3 were elevated by PACAP application during
mechanical load. Our results suggest that mechanical load activates PACAP
signaling and exogenous PACAP acts against the hypertrophy inducing effect of
mechanical load.

PMCID: PMC4581197
PMID: 26230691  [PubMed - in process]


41. Nat Commun. 2015 Jul 29;6:7671. doi: 10.1038/ncomms8671.

14-3-3<U+03B6> coordinates adipogenesis of visceral fat.

Lim GE(1), Albrecht T(1), Piske M(1), Sarai K(1), Lee JT(1), Ramshaw HS(2), Sinha
S(3), Guthridge MA(4), Acker-Palmer A(5), Lopez AF(2), Clee SM(1), Nislow C(3),
Johnson JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Physiological Sciences, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada V6T 1Z3. (2)The Centre for Cancer
Biology, SAPathology and University of South Australia, Adelaide, SA 5000,
Australia. (3)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada V6T 1Z3. (4)Division of Blood
Cancers, Australian Centre for Blood Diseases, Monash University, Melbourne,
Victoria, VIC 3004, Australia. (5)Institute of Cell Biology and Neuroscience and 
Buchmann Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, University of Frankfurt,
Frankfurt am Main 60438, Germany.

The proteins that coordinate complex adipogenic transcriptional networks are
poorly understood. 14-3-3<U+03B6> is a molecular adaptor protein that regulates insulin 
signalling and transcription factor networks. Here we report that
14-3-3<U+03B6>-knockout mice are strikingly lean from birth with specific reductions in 
visceral fat depots. Conversely, transgenic 14-3-3<U+03B6> overexpression potentiates
obesity, without exacerbating metabolic complications. Only the 14-3-3<U+03B6> isoform
is essential for adipogenesis based on isoform-specific RNAi. Mechanistic studies
show that 14-3-3<U+03B6> depletion promotes autophagy-dependent degradation of C/EBP-d, 
preventing induction of the master adipogenic factors, Ppar<U+03B3> and C/EBP-a.
Transcriptomic data indicate that 14-3-3<U+03B6> acts upstream of hedgehog
signalling-dependent upregulation of Cdkn1b/p27(Kip1). Indeed, concomitant
knockdown of p27(Kip1) or Gli3 rescues the early block in adipogenesis induced by
14-3-3<U+03B6> knockdown in vitro. Adipocyte precursors in 14-3-3<U+03B6>KO embryos also appear
to have greater Gli3 and p27(Kip1) abundance. Together, our in vivo and in vitro 
findings demonstrate that 14-3-3<U+03B6> is a critical upstream driver of adipogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4532800
PMID: 26220403  [PubMed - in process]


42. J Clin Invest. 2015 Aug 3;125(8):2935-51. doi: 10.1172/JCI74929. Epub 2015 Jul
20.

Pharmacological GLI2 inhibition prevents myofibroblast cell-cycle progression and
reduces kidney fibrosis.

Kramann R, Fleig SV, Schneider RK, Fabian SL, DiRocco DP, Maarouf O, Wongboonsin 
J, Ikeda Y, Heckl D, Chang SL, Rennke HG, Waikar SS, Humphreys BD.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Nephrol. 2015 Oct;11(10):568.

Chronic kidney disease is characterized by interstitial fibrosis and
proliferation of scar-secreting myofibroblasts, ultimately leading to end-stage
renal disease. The hedgehog (Hh) pathway transcriptional effectors GLI1 and GLI2 
are expressed in myofibroblast progenitors; however, the role of these effectors 
during fibrogenesis is poorly understood. Here, we demonstrated that GLI2, but
not GLI1, drives myofibroblast cell-cycle progression in cultured mesenchymal
stem cell-like progenitors. In animals exposed to unilateral ureteral
obstruction, Hh pathway suppression by expression of the GLI3 repressor in GLI1+ 
myofibroblast progenitors limited kidney fibrosis. Myofibroblast-specific
deletion of Gli2, but not Gli1, also limited kidney fibrosis, and induction of
myofibroblast-specific cell-cycle arrest mediated this inhibition. Pharmacologic 
targeting of this pathway with darinaparsin, an arsenical in clinical trials,
reduced fibrosis through reduction of GLI2 protein levels and subsequent
cell-cycle arrest in myofibroblasts. GLI2 overexpression rescued the cell-cycle
effect of darinaparsin in vitro. While darinaparsin ameliorated fibrosis in WT
and Gli1-KO mice, it was not effective in conditional Gli2-KO mice, supporting
GLI2 as a direct darinaparsin target. The GLI inhibitor GANT61 also reduced
fibrosis in mice. Finally, GLI1 and GLI2 were upregulated in the kidneys of
patients with high-grade fibrosis. Together, these data indicate that GLI
inhibition has potential as a therapeutic strategy to limit myofibroblast
proliferation in kidney fibrosis.

PMCID: PMC4563736
PMID: 26193634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Methods Mol Biol. 2015;1322:147-56. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2772-2_13.

Determination of Acetylation of the Gli Transcription Factors.

Coni S(1), Di Magno L, Canettieri G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, 324 Viale
Regina Elena, 00161, Rome, Italy.

The Gli transcription factors (Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3) are the final effectors of
the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling and play a key role in development and cancer. The
activity of the Gli proteins is finely regulated by covalent modifications, such 
as phosphorylation, ubiquitination, and acetylation. Both Gli1 and Gli2 are
acetylated at a conserved lysine, and this modification causes the inhibition of 
their transcriptional activity. Thus, the acetylation status of these proteins
represents a useful marker to monitor Hh activation in pathophysiological
conditions. Herein we describe the techniques utilized to detect in vitro and
intracellular acetylation of the Gli transcription factors.

PMID: 26179046  [PubMed - in process]


44. Methods Mol Biol. 2015;1322:125-30. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2772-2_11.

Rapid Screening of Gli2/3 Mutants Using the Flp-In System.

Niewiadomski P(1), Rohatgi R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology, 3
Pasteur Street, 02-093, Warszawa, Poland, p.niewiadomski@nencki.gov.pl.

Gli2 and Gli3 respond to the Hedgehog (Hh) signal in mammals by undergoing
posttranslational modifications and moving to the nucleus. The study of Gli
proteins has been hampered by the fact that their overexpression in cells
prevents their proper regulation. To address this issue, we have developed a
method of rapid generation of stable cell lines expressing near-endogenous and
approximately equal levels of wild-type and mutant Gli proteins. This method is
applicable to the study of effects of various mutations on Gli protein
modifications and activity.

PMID: 26179044  [PubMed - in process]


45. Methods Mol Biol. 2015;1322:81-92. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2772-2_8.

Measuring Expression Levels of Endogenous Gli Genes by Immunoblotting and
Real-Time PCR.

Niewiadomski P(1), Rohatgi R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology, 02-093, 
Warszawa, Poland, p.niewiadomski@nencki.gov.pl.

Gli proteins are transcription factors that mediate the transcriptional effects
of Hedgehog signaling in vertebrates. The activities of Gli2 and Gli3 are
regulated primarily by posttranslational modifications, while Gli1 is mostly
regulated at the transcriptional level. Detection of endogenous Gli proteins had 
been hampered by lack of good antibodies, but this problem has been mostly
resolved in recent years. In this chapter we describe methods of detecting
expression of endogenous Gli genes in whole-cell lysates and in subcellular
fractions and also provide protocols for the measurement of Gli mRNA levels by
quantitative real-time reverse transcriptase PCR (qPCR).

PMID: 26179041  [PubMed - in process]


46. Am J Hum Genet. 2015 Aug 6;97(2):311-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.06.003. Epub
2015 Jul 9.

Mutations in KIAA0586 Cause Lethal Ciliopathies Ranging from a Hydrolethalus
Phenotype to Short-Rib Polydactyly Syndrome.

Alby C(1), Piquand K(2), Huber C(3), Megarbané A(4), Ichkou A(1), Legendre M(5), 
Pelluard F(6), Encha-Ravazi F(1), Abi-Tayeh G(7), Bessières B(8), El
Chehadeh-Djebbar S(9), Laurent N(9), Faivre L(9), Sztriha L(10), Zombor M(10),
Szabó H(10), Failler M(11), Garfa-Traore M(12), Bole C(13), Nitschké P(14), Nizon
M(15), Elkhartoufi N(1), Clerget-Darpoux F(2), Munnich A(1), Lyonnet S(1),
Vekemans M(1), Saunier S(11), Cormier-Daire V(15), Attié-Bitach T(1), Thomas
S(16).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U1163, Laboratory of Embryology and Genetics of Congenital
Malformations, Paris Descartes University, Sorbonne Paris Cité and Imagine
Institute, 75015 Paris, France; Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker -
Enfants Malades, Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de Paris, 75015 Paris, France.
(2)INSERM U1163, Laboratory of Embryology and Genetics of Congenital
Malformations, Paris Descartes University, Sorbonne Paris Cité and Imagine
Institute, 75015 Paris, France. (3)INSERM U1163, Laboratory of Molecular and
Physiopathological Bases of Osteochondrodysplasia, Paris Descartes University,
Sorbonne Paris Cité and Imagine Institute, 75015 Paris, France. (4)Medical
Genetics Unit, Saint Joseph University, Rue de Damas, BP 175208, Mar Mikhaël,
Beyrouth 1104, Lebanon. (5)Department of Genetics, Poitiers University Hospital, 
2 Rue de la Milétrie, 86021 Poitiers, France. (6)Unité de Pathologie
Ftoplacentaire, Groupe Hospitalier Pellegrin, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, 
Place Amélie Raba-Léon, 33076 Bordeaux Cedex, France. (7)Service de Gynécologie
Obstétrique, Hôtel-Dieu de France, BP 166830, Achrafieh, Beyrouth 1100, Lebanon. 
(8)Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker - Enfants Malades, Assistance
Publique - Hôpitaux de Paris, 75015 Paris, France. (9)Génétique et Anomalies du
Développement EA4271, Université de Bourgogne, 21000 Dijon, France.
(10)Department of Paediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Szeged, Korányi
fasor 14-15, 6725 Szeged, Hungary. (11)INSERM U1163, Laboratory of Inherited
Kidney Diseases, Paris Descartes University, Sorbonne Paris Cité and Imagine
Institute, 75015 Paris, France. (12)Cell Imaging Platform, Paris Descartes
University, Sorbonne Paris Cité and Imagine Institute, 75015 Paris, France.
(13)Genomic Core Facility, Paris Descartes University, Sorbonne Paris Cité and
Imagine Institute, 75015 Paris, France. (14)Bioinformatics Core Facility, Paris
Descartes University, Sorbonne Paris Cité, 75015 Paris, France. (15)Département
de Génétique, Hôpital Necker - Enfants Malades, Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de
Paris, 75015 Paris, France; INSERM U1163, Laboratory of Molecular and
Physiopathological Bases of Osteochondrodysplasia, Paris Descartes University,
Sorbonne Paris Cité and Imagine Institute, 75015 Paris, France. (16)INSERM U1163,
Laboratory of Embryology and Genetics of Congenital Malformations, Paris
Descartes University, Sorbonne Paris Cité and Imagine Institute, 75015 Paris,
France. Electronic address: sophie.thomas@inserm.fr.

KIAA0586, the human ortholog of chicken TALPID3, is a centrosomal protein that is
essential for primary ciliogenesis. Its disruption in animal models causes
defects attributed to abnormal hedgehog signaling; these defects include
polydactyly and abnormal dorsoventral patterning of the neural tube. Here, we
report homozygous mutations of KIAA0586 in four families affected by lethal
ciliopathies ranging from a hydrolethalus phenotype to short-rib polydactyly. We 
show defective ciliogenesis, as well as abnormal response to SHH-signaling
activation in cells derived from affected individuals, consistent with a role of 
KIAA0586 in primary cilia biogenesis. Whereas centriolar maturation seemed
unaffected in mutant cells, we observed an abnormal extended pattern of CEP290, a
centriolar satellite protein previously associated with ciliopathies. Our data
show the crucial role of KIAA0586 in human primary ciliogenesis and subsequent
abnormal hedgehog signaling through abnormal GLI3 processing. Our results thus
establish that KIAA0586 mutations cause lethal ciliopathies.

Copyright © 2015 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4573270
PMID: 26166481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Development. 2015 Aug 1;142(15):2610-22. doi: 10.1242/dev.121616. Epub 2015 Jun
26.

Hedgehog signaling stimulates the formation of proliferating Müller glia-derived 
progenitor cells in the chick retina.

Todd L(1), Fischer AJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, College of Medicine, The Ohio State University,
4190 Graves Hall, 333 West 10th Ave, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (2)Department of
Neuroscience, College of Medicine, The Ohio State University, 4190 Graves Hall,
333 West 10th Ave, Columbus, OH 43210, USA fischer.412@osu.edu.

Müller glia can be stimulated to de-differentiate and become proliferating
progenitor cells that regenerate neurons in the retina. The signaling pathways
that regulate the formation of proliferating Müller glia-derived progenitor cells
(MGPCs) are beginning to be revealed. The purpose of this study was to
investigate whether Hedgehog (Hh) signaling influences the formation of MGPCs in 
the chick retina. We find that Hh signaling is increased in damaged retinas where
MGPCs are known to form. Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) is normally present in the axons of
ganglion cells, but becomes associated with Müller glia and MGPCs following
retinal damage. Activation of Hh signaling with recombinant human SHH (rhShh) or 
smoothened agonist (SAG) increased levels of Ptch1, Gli1, Gli2, Gli3, Hes1 and
Hes5, and stimulated the formation of proliferating MGPCs in damaged retinas. In 
undamaged retinas, SAG or rhShh had no apparent effect upon the Müller glia.
However, SAG combined with FGF2 potentiated the formation of MGPCs, whereas SAG
combined with IGF1 stimulated the nuclear migration of Müller glia, but not the
formation of MGPCs. Conversely, inhibition of Hh signaling with KAAD-cyclopamine,
Gli antagonists or antibody to Shh reduced numbers of proliferating MGPCs in
damaged and FGF2-treated retinas. Hh signaling potentiates Pax6, Klf4 and cFos
expression in Müller glia during the formation of MGPCs. We find that FGF2/MAPK
signaling recruits Hh signaling into the signaling network that drives the
formation of proliferating MGPCs. Our findings implicate Hh signaling as a key
component of the network of signaling pathways that promote the
de-differentiation of Müller glia and proliferation of MGPCs.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4529028 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26116667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Sep 1;24(17):4997-5014. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv221. Epub 2015
Jun 12.

The role of primary cilia in corpus callosum formation is mediated by production 
of the Gli3 repressor.

Laclef C(1), Anselme I(2), Besse L(2), Catala M(3), Palmyre A(2), Baas D(4),
Paschaki M(4), Pedraza M(5), Métin C(5), Durand B(4), Schneider-Maunoury S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR7622, CNRS, Institut de Biologie 
Paris Seine (IBPS)-Developmental Biology Laboratory, UMR7622, INSERM, ERL1156 and
christine.laclef@upmc.fr sylvie.schneider-maunoury@upmc.fr. (2)Sorbonne
Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR7622, CNRS, Institut de Biologie Paris Seine 
(IBPS)-Developmental Biology Laboratory, UMR7622, INSERM, ERL1156 and.
(3)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR7622, CNRS, Institut de Biologie 
Paris Seine (IBPS)-Developmental Biology Laboratory, UMR7622, INSERM, ERL1156 and
Fédération de Neurologie, Groupe hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière-APHP, F-75013
Paris, France. (4)Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1 and CNRS, CGPhiMC-UMR5534,
F-69622 Villeurbanne, France and. (5)Institut du Fer à Moulin, INSERM S839,
F-75005 Paris, France, Sorbonne Université, UPMC Univ Paris 06, S839, Paris,
France.

Agenesis of the corpus callosum (AgCC) is a frequent brain disorder found in over
80 human congenital syndromes including ciliopathies. Here, we report a severe
AgCC in Ftm/Rpgrip1l knockout mouse, which provides a valuable model for
Meckel-Grüber syndrome. Rpgrip1l encodes a protein of the ciliary transition
zone, which is essential for ciliogenesis in several cell types in mouse
including neuroepithelial cells in the developing forebrain. We show that AgCC in
Rpgrip1l(-/-) mouse is associated with a disturbed location of guidepost cells in
the dorsomedial telencephalon. This mislocalization results from early patterning
defects and abnormal cortico-septal boundary (CSB) formation in the medial
telencephalon. We demonstrate that all these defects primarily result from
altered GLI3 processing. Indeed, AgCC, together with patterning defects and
mispositioning of guidepost cells, is rescued by overexpressing in Rpgrip1l(-/-) 
embryos, the short repressor form of the GLI3 transcription factor (GLI3R),
provided by the Gli3(<U+0394>699) allele. Furthermore, Gli3(<U+0394>699) also rescues AgCC in
Rfx3(-/-) embryos deficient for the ciliogenic RFX3 transcription factor that
regulates the expression of several ciliary genes. These data demonstrate that
GLI3 processing is a major outcome of primary cilia function in dorsal
telencephalon morphogenesis. Rescuing CC formation in two independent ciliary
mutants by GLI3(<U+0394>699) highlights the crucial role of primary cilia in maintaining
the proper level of GLI3R required for morphogenesis of the CC.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26071364  [PubMed - in process]


49. Front Neuroanat. 2015 May 13;9:58. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2015.00058. eCollection
2015.

Corrigendum: Differential requirements for Gli2 and Gli3 in the regional
specification of the mouse hypothalamus.

Haddad-Tóvolli R(1), Paul FA(2), Zhang Y(1), Zhou X(1), Theil T(3), Puelles L(4),
Blaess S(2), Alvarez-Bolado G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroanatomy, University of Heidelberg Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Laboratory of Neurodevelopmental Genetics, Life and Brain Center, Institute of
Reconstructive Neurobiology, University of Bonn Bonn, Germany. (3)Centre for
Integrative Physiology, University of Edinburgh Edinburgh, UK. (4)Department of
Morphology, University of Murcia and IMIB, Murcia Murcia, Spain.

PMCID: PMC4429587
PMID: 26029060  [PubMed]


50. Mol Biosyst. 2015 Aug;11(8):2190-7. doi: 10.1039/c5mb00129c.

Fuzzy modeling reveals a dynamic self-sustaining network of the GLI transcription
factors controlling important metabolic regulators in adult mouse hepatocytes.

Schmidt-Heck W(1), Matz-Soja M, Aleithe S, Marbach E, Guthke R, Gebhardt R.

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans
Knoell Institute, Beutenbergstr. 11a, 07745 Jena, Germany.
Wolfgang.Schmidt-Heck@hki-jena.de.

The GLI transcription factors, GLI1, GLI2, and GLI3, transduce Hedgehog and
non-hedgehog signals and are involved in regulating development and tumorgenesis.
Surprisingly, they were recently found to modulate important functions of mature 
liver. However, less is known about their mutual interactions and possible target
genes in mature hepatocytes. To get a deeper insight into these interactions
cultured mouse hepatocytes were transfected with siRNAs against each GLI factor. 
RNA was extracted at different times and the expression levels of the genes of
interest were determined by quantitative real-time PCR. The time-dependent data
were analysed by a fuzzy logic-based modelling approach. The results indicated
that the GLI factors constitute an interconnected network. GLI2 inhibited GLI1
expression and was coupled with GLI3 by a positive feedback loop. The regulatory 
activity between GLI1 and GLI3 was more complex switching between a positive and 
a negative feedback loop depending on whether the level of GLI2 is low or high,
respectively. Generally, this network structure enables a dynamic behaviour. When
GLI2 is low, it may keep GLI1 and GLI3 activity balanced favouring the
appropriate modulation of transcription factors like the Ppars and Srebp1. When
GLI2 is high, it may prevent an uncontrolled amplification that may lead to
cancer. In conclusion, the three GLI factors in mature hepatocytes form an
interactive transcriptional network that is involved in the control of target
genes associated with metabolic zonation as well as with lipid and drug
metabolism. Its structure in mature cells seems different from embryonic cells.

PMID: 26010061  [PubMed - in process]


51. PLoS One. 2015 May 22;10(5):e0128006. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128006.
eCollection 2015.

Suppressor of Fused Is Required for Determining Digit Number and Identity via
Gli3/Fgfs/Gremlin.

Li J(1), Wang Q(1), Cui Y(1), Yang X(1), Li Y(1), Zhang X(1), Qiu M(2), Zhang
Z(3), Zhang Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Zhejiang Key Laboratory for Organogenesis and Regenerative technology,
Institute of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, College of Life and
Environmental Sciences, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou 310036, China.
(2)Zhejiang Key Laboratory for Organogenesis and Regenerative technology,
Institute of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, College of Life and
Environmental Sciences, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou 310036, China;
Department of Anatomical Sciences and Neurobiology, University of Louisville,
Louisville, Kentucky 40292, United States of America. (3)Department of
Ophthalmology, Tulane University Medical Center, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112,
United States of America.

The anterior-posterior patterning of the vertebrate limb bud requires closely
coordinated signaling interactions, including Sonic Hedgehog (Shh)-mediated
counteraction of the Gli3 transcription factor in the distal and posterior
mesenchyme of the limb bud. Suppressor of Fused (Sufu), an intracellular negative
regulator of Shh signaling via Gli2 and Gli3, is implicated in early development 
of the mouse limb bud. However, how Sufu is involved in the genetic regulation of
limb bud patterning still remains elusive. In this study, we show that the
conditional deletion of Sufu in the mesenchyme of the early limb bud results in
polydactyly with loss of digit identity and supernumerary bones in the wrist and 
the ankle. These pattern alterations are associated with anterior expansion of
HoxD genes located at the 5' end of the cluster. By focusing on gene expression
analysis of Shh/Gremlin1/Fgf signaling critical for the establishment and
maintenance of anterior-posterior patterning, we show that early response to loss
of Sufu involves anterior prolongation of Fgf4 and Fgf8 expression in the apical 
ectodermal ridge at E10.5. We also reveal the anterior activation of
Shh-dependent posterior markers Ptc1, Gli1 and Gremlin in limb buds lacking Sufu.
Furthermore, we find that loss of Sufu leads to attenuated levels of repressor
Gli2 and repressor Gli3 in the early limb bud. Moreover, expression of Hand2 is
activated in the entire limb bud at the early outgrowth stage in the mutant
lacking Sufu. Thus, we provide evidence that Sufu is involved in the genetic
network that restricts the posterior expression of Gli2/3/Hand2 and Gremlin/Fgf
in limb bud patterning.

PMCID: PMC4441507
PMID: 26001200  [PubMed - in process]


52. Development. 2015 Jul 1;142(13):2291-303. doi: 10.1242/dev.125237. Epub 2015 May 
20.

A conserved role for Notch signaling in priming the cellular response to Shh
through ciliary localisation of the key Shh transducer Smo.

Stasiulewicz M(1), Gray SD(1), Mastromina I(1), Silva JC(1), Björklund M(1),
Seymour PA(2), Booth D(1), Thompson C(1), Green RJ(1), Hall EA(3), Serup P(2),
Dale JK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Developmental Biology, College of Life Sciences,
University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland, UK. (2)Division of
Cell and Developmental Biology, College of Life Sciences, University of Dundee,
Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland, UK The Danish Stem Cell Center, Faculty of 
Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, Copenhagen DK-2200,
Denmark. (3)Division of Cell and Developmental Biology, College of Life Sciences,
University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland, UK MRC Human
Genetics, Institute for Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh EH4 2XU, UK. (4)Division of Cell and Developmental Biology, College of 
Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland, UK
j.k.dale@dundee.ac.uk.

Notochord-derived Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) is essential for dorsoventral patterning
of the overlying neural tube. Increasing concentration and duration of Shh signal
induces progenitors to acquire progressively more ventral fates. We show that
Notch signalling augments the response of neuroepithelial cells to Shh, leading
to the induction of higher expression levels of the Shh target gene Ptch1 and
subsequently induction of more ventral cell fates. Furthermore, we demonstrate
that activated Notch1 leads to pronounced accumulation of Smoothened (Smo) within
primary cilia and elevated levels of full-length Gli3. Finally, we show that
Notch activity promotes longer primary cilia both in vitro and in vivo.
Strikingly, these Notch-regulated effects are Shh independent. These data
identify Notch signalling as a novel modulator of Shh signalling that acts
mechanistically via regulation of ciliary localisation of key components of its
transduction machinery.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4510595
PMID: 25995356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Sci Rep. 2015 May 20;5:10444. doi: 10.1038/srep10444.

A novel DNA sequence motif in human and mouse genomes.

Zhang S(1), Du F(1), Ji H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 
615 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

We report a novel DNA sequence motif in human and mouse genomes. This motif has
several interesting features indicating that it is highly likely to be an unknown
functional sequence element. The motif is highly enriched in promoter regions.
Locations of the motif sites in the genome have strong tendency to be clustered
together. Motif sites are associated with increased phylogenetic conservation as 
well as elevated DNase I hypersensitivity (DHS) in ENCODE cell lines. Clustered
motif sites are found in promoter regions of a substantial fraction of the
protein-coding genes in the genome. All together, these indicate that the motif
may have important functions associated with a large number of genes.

PMCID: PMC4438489
PMID: 25990515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. EMBO J. 2015 Jun 3;34(11):1572-88. doi: 10.15252/embj.201490706. Epub 2015 Apr
23.

Sox2, Tlx, Gli3, and Her9 converge on Rx2 to define retinal stem cells in vivo.

Reinhardt R(1), Centanin L(2), Tavhelidse T(1), Inoue D(1), Wittbrodt B(1),
Concordet JP(3), Martinez-Morales JR(4), Wittbrodt J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Organismal Studies (COS) Heidelberg, Heidelberg University,
Heidelberg, Germany. (2)Centre for Organismal Studies (COS) Heidelberg,
Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany lazaro.centanin@cos.uni-heidelberg.de 
jochen.wittbrodt@cos.uni-heidelberg.de. (3)Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, 
Paris, France. (4)Centro Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo (CSIC/UPO/JA),
Sevilla, Spain.

Transcriptional networks defining stemness in adult neural stem cells (NSCs) are 
largely unknown. We used the proximal cis-regulatory element (pCRE) of the
retina-specific homeobox gene 2 (rx2) to address such a network. Lineage analysis
in the fish retina identified rx2 as marker for multipotent NSCs. rx2-positive
cells located in the peripheral ciliary marginal zone behave as stem cells for
the neuroretina, or the retinal pigmented epithelium. We identified upstream
regulators of rx2 interrogating the rx2 pCRE in a trans-regulation screen and
focused on four TFs (Sox2, Tlx, Gli3, and Her9) activating or repressing rx2
expression. We demonstrated direct interaction of the rx2 pCRE with the four
factors in vitro and in vivo. By conditional mosaic gain- and loss-of-function
analyses, we validated the activity of those factors on regulating rx2
transcription and consequently modulating neuroretinal and RPE stem cell
features. This becomes obvious by the rx2-mutant phenotypes that together with
the data presented above identify rx2 as a transcriptional hub balancing stemness
of neuroretinal and RPE stem cells in the adult fish retina.

© 2015 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY NC ND 4.0 license.

PMCID: PMC4474531
PMID: 25908840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Jul;1850(7):1438-48. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagen.2015.04.005. Epub 2015 Apr 15.

Hedgehog signaling through GLI1 and GLI2 is required for epithelial-mesenchymal
transition in human trophoblasts.

Tang C(1), Mei L(1), Pan L(1), Xiong W(2), Zhu H(2), Ruan H(1), Zou C(2), Tang
L(2), Iguchi T(3), Wu X(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,
China. (2)The Affiliated Children Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China. (3)Department of Toxicology, Osaka University,
Suita, Osaka, Japan. (4)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Zhejiang 
University, Hangzhou, China. Electronic address: xiwu@zju.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is critical for human
placental development, trophoblastic differentiation, and pregnancy-associated
diseases. Here, we investigated the effects of hedgehog (HH) signaling on EMT in 
human trophoblasts, and further explored the underlying mechanism.
METHODS: Human primary cytotrophoblasts and trophoblast-like JEG-3 cells were
used as in vitro models. Quantitative real-time RT-PCR and Western blot analysis 
were performed to examine mRNA and protein levels, respectively. Lentiviruses
expressing short hairpin RNA were used to knock down the target genes. Reporter
assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation were performed to determine the
transactivity. Cell migration, invasion and colony formation were accessed by
wound healing, Matrigel-coated transwell, and colony formation assays,
respectively.
RESULTS: Activation of HH signaling induced the transdifferentiation of
cytotrophoblasts and trophoblast-like JEG-3 cells from epithelial to mesenchymal 
phenotypes, exhibiting the decreases in E-Cadherin expression as well as the
increases in vimentin expression, invasion, migration and colony formation.
Knockdown of GLI1 and GLI2 but not GLI3 attenuated HH-induced
transdifferentiation, whereas GLI1 was responsible for the expression of
HH-induced key EMT regulators including Snail1, Slug, and Twist, and both GLI1
and GLI2 acted directly as transcriptional repressor of CDH1 gene encoding
E-Cadherin.
CONCLUSION: HH through GLI1 and GLI2 acts as critical signals in supporting the
physiological function of mature placenta.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: HH signaling through GLI1 and GLI2 could be required for
the maintenance of human pregnancy.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25888497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Clin Chim Acta. 2015 Jul 20;447:71. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2015.04.003. Epub 2015 Apr
10.

Letter to the editor regarding: "Novel frame-shift mutations of GLI3 gene in
non-syndromic postaxial polydactyly patients" Clinica Chimica acta 433 (2014)
195-199.

Baas M(1), Galjaard RJ(2), der Spek Pv(3), Hovius SE(1), van Nieuwenhoven CA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery and Hand Surgery, Erasmus
University Medical Center Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (2)Department of Clinical
Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Center Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Bioinformatics, Erasmus University Medical Center Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. (4)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery and Hand
Surgery, Erasmus University Medical Center Rotterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic
address: c.vannieuwenhoven@erasmusmc.nl.

Comment on
    Clin Chim Acta. 2014 Jun 10;433:195-9.

PMID: 25869409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Front Neuroanat. 2015 Mar 25;9:34. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2015.00034. eCollection
2015.

Differential requirements for Gli2 and Gli3 in the regional specification of the 
mouse hypothalamus.

Haddad-Tóvolli R(1), Paul FA(2), Zhang Y(1), Zhou X(1), Theil T(3), Puelles L(4),
Blaess S(2), Alvarez-Bolado G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Cell Biology and Neuroanatomy, University of Heidelberg 
Heidelberg, Germany. (2)Laboratory of Neurodevelopmental Genetics, Institute of
Reconstructive Neurobiology, Life and Brain Center, University of Bonn Bonn,
Germany. (3)Centre for Integrative Physiology, University of Edinburgh Edinburgh,
UK. (4)Department of Morphology, Instituto Murciano de Investigación
Biosanitaria, School of Medicine, University of Murcia Murcia, Spain ; Facultad
de Medicina, University of Murcia Murcia, Spain.

Secreted protein Sonic hedgehog (Shh) ventralizes the neural tube by modulating
the crucial balance between activating and repressing functions (GliA, GliR) of
transcription factors Gli2 and Gli3. This balance-the Shh-Gli code-is species-
and context-dependent and has been elucidated for the mouse spinal cord. The
hypothalamus, a forebrain region regulating vital functions like homeostasis and 
hormone secretion, shows dynamic and intricate Shh expression as well as complex 
regional differentiation. Here we asked if particular combinations of Gli2 and
Gli3 and of GliA and GliR functions contribute to the variety of hypothalamic
regions, i.e., we wanted to approach the question of a possible hypothalamic
version of the Shh-Gli code. Based on mouse mutant analysis, we show that: (1)
hypothalamic regional heterogeneity is based in part on differentially stringent 
requirements for Gli2 or Gli3; (2) another source of diversity are differential
requirements for Shh of neural vs. non-neural origin; (3) the medial progenitor
domain known to depend on Gli2 for its development generates several essential
hypothalamic nuclei plus the pituitary and median eminence; (4) the suppression
of Gli3R by neural and non-neural Shh is essential for hypothalamic
specification. Finally, we have mapped our results on a recent model which
considers the hypothalamus as a transverse region with alar and basal portions.
Our data confirm the model and are explained by it.

PMCID: PMC4373379
PMID: 25859185  [PubMed]


58. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Apr 21;112(16):5075-80. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1421949112. Epub 2015 Apr 6.

Sall4-Gli3 system in early limb progenitors is essential for the development of
limb skeletal elements.

Akiyama R(1), Kawakami H(1), Wong J(2), Oishi I(3), Nishinakamura R(4), Kawakami 
Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Development, Stem Cell Institute.
(2)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Development. (3)Health Research
Institute, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology,
Ikeda, Osaka 563-8577, Japan; and. (4)Department of Kidney Development, Institute
of Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 860-0811,
Japan. (5)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Development, Stem Cell
Institute, Developmental Biology Center, and Lillehei Heart Institute, University
of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455; kawak005@umn.edu.

Limb skeletal elements originate from the limb progenitor cells, which undergo
expansion and patterning to develop each skeletal element. Posterior-distal
skeletal elements, such as the ulna/fibula and posterior digits develop in a
Sonic hedgehog (Shh)-dependent manner. However, it is poorly understood how
anterior-proximal elements, such as the humerus/femur, the radius/tibia and the
anterior digits, are developed. Here we show that the zinc finger factors Sall4
and Gli3 cooperate for proper development of the anterior-proximal skeletal
elements and also function upstream of Shh-dependent posterior skeletal element
development. Conditional inactivation of Sall4 in the mesoderm before limb
outgrowth caused severe defects in the anterior-proximal skeletal elements in the
hindlimb. We found that Gli3 expression is reduced in Sall4 mutant hindlimbs, but
not in forelimbs. This reduction caused posteriorization of nascent hindlimb
buds, which is correlated with a loss of anterior digits. In proximal
development, Sall4 integrates Gli3 and the Plzf-Hox system, in addition to
proliferative expansion of cells in the mesenchymal core of nascent hindlimb
buds. Whereas forelimbs developed normally in Sall4 mutants, further genetic
analysis identified that the Sall4-Gli3 system is a common regulator of the early
limb progenitor cells in both forelimbs and hindlimbs. The Sall4-Gli3 system also
functions upstream of the Shh-expressing ZPA and the Fgf8-expressing AER in fore-
and hindlimbs. Therefore, our study identified a critical role of the Sall4-Gli3 
system at the early steps of limb development for proper development of the
appendicular skeletal elements.

PMCID: PMC4413345
PMID: 25848055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Development. 2015 May 1;142(9):1651-60. doi: 10.1242/dev.119669. Epub 2015 Apr 1.

The loss of Hh responsiveness by a non-ciliary Gli2 variant.

Liu J(1), Zeng H(1), Liu A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Eberly College of Science, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, PA 16802, USA. (2)Department of Biology, Eberly
College of Science, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802,
USA Center for Cellular Dynamics, Huck Institute of Life Sciences, The
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA axl25@psu.edu.

Hedgehog signaling is crucial for vertebrate development and physiology. Gli2,
the primary effector of Hedgehog signaling, localizes to the tip of the primary
cilium, but the importance of its ciliary localization remains unclear. We
address the roles of Gli2 ciliary localization by replacing endogenous Gli2 with 
Gli2(<U+0394>CLR), a Gli2 variant not localizing to the cilium. The resulting
Gli2(<U+0394>CLRKI) and Gli2(<U+0394>CLRKI);Gli3 double mutants resemble Gli2-null and
Gli2;Gli3 double mutants, respectively, suggesting the lack of Gli2(<U+0394>CLR)
activation in development. Significantly, Gli2(<U+0394>CLR) cannot be activated either
by pharmacochemical activation of Smo in vitro or by loss of Ptch1 in vivo.
Finally, Gli2(<U+0394>CLR) exhibits strong transcriptional activator activity in the
absence of Sufu, suggesting that the lack of its activation in vivo results from 
a specific failure in relieving the inhibitory function of Sufu. Our results
provide strong evidence that the ciliary localization of Gli2 is crucial for
cilium-dependent activation of Hedgehog signaling.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 25834022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Mar 31;112(13):4140-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1419690112. Epub 2015 Mar 17.

Inversion of Sonic hedgehog action on its canonical pathway by electrical
activity.

Belgacem YH(1), Borodinsky LN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Membrane Biology and Institute for Pediatric
Regenerative Medicine, Shriners Hospital for Children Northern California,
University of California Davis School of Medicine, Sacramento, CA 95817
lnborodinsky@ucdavis.edu yhbelgacem@ucdavis.edu.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is a morphogenic protein that operates through the Gli
transcription factor-dependent canonical pathway to orchestrate normal
development of many tissues. Because aberrant levels of Gli activity lead to a
wide spectrum of diseases ranging from neurodevelopmental defects to cancer,
understanding the regulatory mechanisms of Shh canonical pathway is paramount.
During early stages of spinal cord development, Shh specifies neural progenitors 
through the canonical signaling. Despite persistence of Shh as spinal cord
development progresses, Gli activity is switched off by unknown mechanisms. In
this study we find that Shh inverts its action on Gli during development.
Strikingly, Shh decreases Gli signaling in the embryonic spinal cord by an
electrical activity- and cAMP-dependent protein kinase-mediated pathway. The
inhibition of Gli activity by Shh operates at multiple levels. Shh promotes
cytosolic over nuclear localization of Gli2, induces Gli2 and Gli3 processing
into repressor forms, and activates cAMP-responsive element binding protein that 
in turn represses gli1 transcription. The regulatory mechanisms identified in
this study likely operate with different spatiotemporal resolution and ensure
effective down-regulation of the canonical Shh signaling as spinal cord
development progresses. The developmentally regulated intercalation of electrical
activity in the Shh pathway may represent a paradigm for switching from canonical
to noncanonical roles of developmental cues during neuronal differentiation and
maturation.

PMCID: PMC4386408
PMID: 25829542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2013 Nov 11;6(11):1429-50. doi: 10.3390/ph6111429.

Hedgehog pathway blockade inhibits melanoma cell growth in vitro and in vivo.

O'Reilly KE(1), de Miera EV, Segura MF, Friedman E, Poliseno L, Han SW, Zhong J, 
Zavadil J, Pavlick A, Hernando E, Osman I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, New York University School of Medicine, New York,
NY 10016, USA. Iman.Osman@nyumc.org.

Previous reports have demonstrated a role for hedgehog signaling in melanoma
progression, prompting us to explore the therapeutic benefit of targeting this
pathway in melanoma. We profiled a panel of human melanoma cell lines and control
melanocytes for altered expression of hedgehog pathway members and determined the
consequences of both genetic and pharmacological inhibition of the hedgehog
pathway activator Smoothened (SMO) in melanoma, both in vitro and in vivo. We
also examined the relationship between altered expression of hedgehog pathway
mediators and survival in a well-characterized cohort of metastatic melanoma
patients with prospectively collected follow up information. Studies revealed
that over 40% of the melanoma cell lines examined harbored significantly elevated
levels of the hedgehog pathway mediators SMO, GLI2, and PTCH1 compared to
melanocytes (p < 0.05). SMO inhibition using siRNA and the small molecule
inhibitor, NVP-LDE-225, suppressed melanoma growth in vitro, particularly in
those cell lines with moderate SMO and GLI2 expression. NVP-LDE-225 also induced 
apoptosis in vitro and inhibited melanoma growth in a xenograft model. Gene
expression data also revealed evidence of compensatory up-regulation of two other
developmental pathways, Notch and WNT, in response to hedgehog pathway
inhibition. Pharmacological and genetic SMO inhibition also downregulated genes
involved in human embryonic stem cell pluripotency. Finally, increased SMO
expression and decreased expression of the hedgehog pathway repressor GLI3
correlated with shorter post recurrence survival in metastatic melanoma patients.
Our data demonstrate that hedgehog pathway inhibition might be a promising
targeted therapy in appropriately selected metastatic melanoma patients.

PMCID: PMC3854019
PMID: 24287465  [PubMed]


122. Gene. 2014 Feb 1;535(1):17-23. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.11.014. Epub 2013 Nov 23.

Expression, SNV identification, linkage disequilibrium, and combined genotype
association analysis of the muscle-specific gene CSRP3 in Chinese cattle.

He H(1), Zhang HL(1), Li ZX(1), Liu Y(1), Liu XL(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Shaanxi
Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Agriculture, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, PR
China. (2)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University,
Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Agriculture, Yangling, Shaanxi
712100, PR China. Electronic address: liuxiaolin@nwsuaf.edu.cn.

The cysteine and glycine-rich protein 3 (CSRP3) plays an important role in the
myofiber differentiation. Here, we identified five SNVs in all exon and intron
regions of the CSRP3 gene using DNA sequencing, PCR-RFLP and forced-PCR-RFLP
methods in 554 cattle. Four of the five SNVs were significantly associated with
growth performance and carcass traits of the cattle. In addition, we evaluated
haplotype frequency and linkage disequilibrium coefficient of five sequence
variants. The result of haplotype analysis demonstrated 28 haplotypes present in 
Qinchuan and two haplotypes in Chinese Holstein. Only haplotypes 1 and 8 were
being shared by two populations, haplotype 14 had the highest haplotype frequency
in Qinchuan (17.4%) and haplotype 8 had the highest haplotype frequency in
Chinese Holstein (94.4%). Statistical analyses of combined genotypes indicated
that some combined genotypes were significantly or highly significantly
associated with growth and carcass traits in the Qinchuan cattle population. qPCR
analyses also showed that bovine CSRP3 gene was exclusively expressed in
longissimus dorsi muscle and heart tissues. The data support the high potential
of the CSRP3 as a marker gene for the improvement of growth performance and
carcass traits in selection programs.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24279998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 20;8(11):e80860. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080860.
eCollection 2013.

rs929387 of GLI3 is involved in tooth agenesis in Chinese Han population.

Liu H(1), Han D, Wong S, Nan X, Zhao H, Feng H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Prosthodontics, Peking University School and Hospital of
Stomatology, Beijing, China.

Tooth agenesis is one of the most common anomalies of human dentition. Recent
studies suggest that a number of genes are related to both syndromic and
non-syndromic forms of hypodontia. In a previous study, we observed that
polymorphism in rs929387 of GLI3 might be associated with hypodontia in the
Chinese Han population based on a limited population. To further confirm this
observation, in this study, we employed 89 individuals diagnosed with sporadic
non-syndromic oligodontia (40 males and 49 females) to investigate the
relationship between polymorphism in rs929387 of GLI3 and tooth agenesis. These
individuals were analyzed with 273 subjects (125 males and 148 females) diagnosed
with non-syndromic hypodontia and 200 healthy control subjects (100 males and 100
females). DNA was obtained from whole blood or saliva samples and genotyping was 
performed by a Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization Time of Flight Mass
Spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) method. Significant differences were observed in the 
allele and genotype frequencies of rs929387 of GLI3. Distributions of genotypes
TT, TC and CC of rs929387 polymorphism were significantly different between the
case group and the control group (P = 0.013) and C allelic frequency was higher
in case group [P = 0.002, OR = 1.690, 95% CI (1.200-2.379)]. Additionally, our
analysis shows that this difference is more pronounced when compared between the 
male case group and the male control group. The function study suggests that
variation in GLI3 caused by rs929387 leads to a decrease in its transcriptional
activity. These data demonstrated an association between rs929387 of GLI3 and
non-syndromic tooth agenesis in Chinese Han individuals. This information may
provide further understanding of the molecular mechanisms of tooth agenesis.
Furthermore, GLI3 can be regarded as a marker gene for the risk of tooth
agenesis.

PMCID: PMC3835326
PMID: 24278334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Oncogene. 2014 Nov 13;33(46):5370-8. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.480. Epub 2013 Nov 25.

Distinct cellular origin and genetic requirement of Hedgehog-Gli in postnatal
rhabdomyosarcoma genesis.

Rajurkar M(1), Huang H(2), Cotton JL(1), Brooks JK(1), Sicklick J(3), McMahon
AP(4), Mao J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA, USA. (2)1] Department of Cancer Biology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA [2] Department of Histology &
Embryology, Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South University, Changsha, PR
China. (3)Division of Surgical Oncology, Moores Cancer Center, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. (4)Department of Stem Cell Biology and 
Regenerative Medicine, Broad-CIRM Center for Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell 
Research, WM Keck School of Medicine of the University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Dysregulation of the Hedgehog (Hh)-Gli signaling pathway is implicated in a
variety of human cancers, including basal cell carcinoma (BCC), medulloblastoma
(MB) and embryonal rhabdhomyosarcoma (eRMS), three principle tumors associated
with human Gorlin syndrome. However, the cells of origin of these tumors,
including eRMS, remain poorly understood. In this study, we explore the cell
populations that give rise to Hh-related tumors by specifically activating
Smoothened (Smo) in both Hh-producing and -responsive cell lineages in postnatal 
mice. Interestingly, we find that unlike BCC and MB, eRMS originates from the
stem/progenitor populations that do not normally receive active Hh signaling.
Furthermore, we find that the myogenic lineage in postnatal mice is largely Hh
quiescent and that Pax7-expressing muscle satellite cells are not able to give
rise to eRMS upon Smo or Gli1/2 overactivation in vivo, suggesting that
Hh-induced skeletal muscle eRMS arises from Hh/Gli quiescent non-myogenic cells. 
In addition, using the Gli1 null allele and a Gli3 repressor allele, we reveal a 
specific genetic requirement for Gli proteins in Hh-induced eRMS formation and
provide molecular evidence for the involvement of Sox4/11 in eRMS cell survival
and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4309268
PMID: 24276242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 18;8(11):e79845. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0079845.
eCollection 2013.

Gli activity is critical at multiple stages of embryonic mammary and nipple
development.

Chandramouli A(1), Hatsell SJ, Pinderhughes A, Koetz L, Cowin P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, 
New York, United States of America ; The Ronald O. Perelman Department of
Dermatology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, New York, United
States of America.

Gli3 is a transcriptional regulator of Hedgehog (Hh) signaling that functions as 
a repressor (Gli3(R)) or activator (Gli3(A)) depending upon cellular context.
Previously, we have shown that Gli3(R) is required for the formation of mammary
placodes #3 and #5. Here, we report that this early loss of Gli3 results in
abnormal patterning of two critical regulators: Bmp4 and Tbx3, within the
presumptive mammary rudiment (MR) #3 zone. We also show that Gli3 loss leads to
failure to maintain mammary mesenchyme specification and loss of epithelial Wnt
signaling, which impairs the later development of remaining MRs: MR#2 showed
profound evagination and ectopic hairs formed within the presumptive areola; MR#4
showed mild invagination defects and males showed inappropriate retention of
mammary buds in Gli3(xt/xt) mice. Importantly, mice genetically manipulated to
misactivate Hh signaling displayed the same phenotypic spectrum demonstrating
that the repressor function of Gli3(R) is essential during multiple stages of
mammary development. In contrast, positive Hh signaling occurs during nipple
development in a mesenchymal cuff around the lactiferous duct and in muscle cells
of the nipple sphincter. Collectively, these data show that repression of Hh
signaling by Gli3(R) is critical for early placodal patterning and later mammary 
mesenchyme specification whereas positive Hh signaling occurs during nipple
development.

PMCID: PMC3832531
PMID: 24260306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Epigenetics. 2014 Mar;9(3):351-65. doi: 10.4161/epi.27160. Epub 2013 Nov 18.

Differentially methylated regions in maternal and paternal uniparental disomy for
chromosome 7.

Hannula-Jouppi K(1), Muurinen M(2), Lipsanen-Nyman M(3), Reinius LE(4), Ezer
S(2), Greco D(5), Kere J(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics; Haartman Institute; Molecular Neurology
Program; Research Program's Unit; Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics; University of
Helsinki; Helsinki, Finland; Department of Dermatology and Allergology; Skin and 
Allergy Hospital; Helsinki University Central Hospital; Helsinki University
Hospital; Helsinki, Finland. (2)Department of Medical Genetics; Haartman
Institute; Molecular Neurology Program; Research Program's Unit; Folkhälsan
Institute of Genetics; University of Helsinki; Helsinki, Finland. (3)Children's
Hospital; University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Central Hospital;
Helsinki University Hospital; Helsinki, Finland. (4)Department of Biosciences and
Nutrition; Center for Biosciences; Karolinska Institutet; Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Department of Medical Genetics; Haartman Institute; Molecular Neurology
Program; Research Program's Unit; Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics; University of
Helsinki; Helsinki, Finland; Department of Biosciences and Nutrition; Center for 
Biosciences; Karolinska Institutet; Stockholm, Sweden; Unit of Systems
Toxicology; Finnish Institute of Occupational Health (FIOH); Helsinki, Finland.
(6)Department of Medical Genetics; Haartman Institute; Molecular Neurology
Program; Research Program's Unit; Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics; University of
Helsinki; Helsinki, Finland; Department of Biosciences and Nutrition; Center for 
Biosciences; Karolinska Institutet; Stockholm, Sweden; Science for Life
Laboratory; Karolinska Institutet; Solna, Sweden.

DNA methylation is a hallmark of genomic imprinting and differentially methylated
regions (DMRs) are found near and in imprinted genes. Imprinted genes are
expressed only from the maternal or paternal allele and their normal balance can 
be disrupted by uniparental disomy (UPD), the inheritance of both chromosomes of 
a chromosome pair exclusively from only either the mother or the father. Maternal
UPD for chromosome 7 (matUPD7) results in Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) with
typical features and growth retardation, but no gene has been conclusively
implicated in SRS. In order to identify novel DMRs and putative imprinted genes
on chromosome 7, we analyzed eight matUPD7 patients, a segmental matUPD7q31-qter,
a rare patUPD7 case and ten controls on the Infinium HumanMethylation450K
BeadChip with 30<U+2009>017 CpG methylation probes for chromosome 7. Genome-scale
analysis showed highly significant clustering of DMRs only on chromosome 7,
including the known imprinted loci GRB10, SGCE/PEG10, and PEG/MEST. We found ten 
novel DMRs on chromosome 7, two DMRs for the predicted imprinted genes HOXA4 and 
GLI3 and one for the disputed imprinted gene PON1. Quantitative RT-PCR on blood
RNA samples comparing matUPD7, patUPD7, and controls showed differential
expression for three genes with novel DMRs, HOXA4, GLI3, and SVOPL. Allele
specific expression analysis confirmed maternal only expression of SVOPL and
imprinting of HOXA4 was supported by monoallelic expression. These results
present the first comprehensive map of parent-of-origin specific DMRs on human
chromosome 7, suggesting many new imprinted sites.

PMCID: PMC4053454
PMID: 24247273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Neurosci. 2013 Oct 30;33(44):17490-505. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2042-13.2013.

Titration of GLI3 repressor activity by sonic hedgehog signaling is critical for 
maintaining multiple adult neural stem cell and astrocyte functions.

Petrova R(1), Garcia AD, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, New York
10065, BCMB Graduate Program, Weill Cornell Medical School, New York, New York
10065, and Department of Biology, Drexel University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104.

Sonic hedgehog (SHH), a key regulator of embryonic neurogenesis, signals directly
to neural stem cells (NSCs) in the subventricular zone (SVZ) and to astrocytes in
the adult mouse forebrain. The specific mechanism by which the GLI2 and GLI3
transcriptional activators (GLI2(A) and GLI3(A)) and repressors (GLI2(R) and
GLI3(R)) carry out SHH signaling has not been addressed. We found that the
majority of slow-cycling NSCs express Gli2 and Gli3, whereas Gli1 is restricted
ventrally and all three genes are downregulated when NSCs transition into
proliferating progenitors. Surprisingly, whereas conditional ablation of Smo in
postnatal glial fibrillary acidic protein-expressing cells results in
cell-autonomous loss of NSCs and a progressive reduction in SVZ proliferation,
without an increase in glial cell production, removal of Gli2 or Gli3 does not
alter adult SVZ neurogenesis. Significantly, removing Gli3 in Smo conditional
mutants largely rescues neurogenesis and, conversely, expression of a
constitutive GLI3(R) in the absence of normal Gli2 and Gli3 abrogates
neurogenesis. Thus unattenuated GLI3(R) is a primary inhibitor of adult SVZ NSC
function. Ablation of Gli2 and Gli3 revealed a minor role for GLI2(R) and little 
requirement for GLI(A) function in stimulating SVZ neurogenesis. Moreover, we
found that similar rules of GLI activity apply to SHH signaling in regulating
SVZ-derived olfactory bulb interneurons and maintaining cortical astrocyte
function. Namely, fewer superficial olfactory bulb interneurons are generated in 
the absence of Gli2 and Gli3, whereas astrocyte partial gliosis results from an
increase in GLI3(R). Thus precise titration of GLI(R) levels by SHH is critical
to multiple functions of adult NSCs and astrocytes.

PMCID: PMC3812512
PMID: 24174682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 17;8(10):e76972. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076972.
eCollection 2013.

The transcriptional repressor domain of Gli3 is intrinsically disordered.

Tsanev R(1), Vanatalu K, Jarvet J, Tanner R, Laur K, Tiigimägi P, Kragelund BB,
Østerlund T, Kogerman P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene Technology, Tallinn University of Technology, Tallinn,
Estonia.

The transcription factor Gli3 is acting mainly as a transcriptional repressor in 
the Sonic hedgehog signal transduction pathway. Gli3 contains a repressor domain 
in its N-terminus from residue G106 to E236. In this study we have characterized 
the intracellular structure of the Gli3 repressor domain using a combined
bioinformatics and experimental approach. According to our findings the Gli3
repressor domain while being intrinsically disordered contains predicted anchor
sites for partner interactions. The obvious interaction partners to test were Ski
and DNA; however, with both of these the structure of Gli3 repressor domain
remained disordered. To locate residues important for the repressor function we
mutated several residues within the Gli3 repressor domain. Two of these, H141A
and H157N, targeting predicted helical regions, significantly decreased
transcriptional repression and thus identify important functional parts of the
domain.

PMCID: PMC3798401
PMID: 24146948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Nov;161A(11):2734-40. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36183. Epub 2013
Oct 10.

MED12 related disorders.

Graham JM Jr(1), Schwartz CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Medical Genetics Institute, Cedars Sinai Medical
Center, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, California.

MED12: is a member of the large Mediator complex, which has a critical and
central role in RNA polymerase II transcription. As a multiprotien complex,
Mediator regulates signals involved in cell growth, development, and
differentiation, and it is involved in a protein network required for
extraneuronal gene silencing and also functions as a direct suppressor of
Gli3-dependent Sonic hedgehog signaling. This may explain its role in several
different X-linked intellectual disability syndromes that share some overlapping 
clinical features. This review will compare and contrast four different clinical 
conditions that have been associated with different mutations in MED12, which is 
located at Xq13. To date, these conditions include Opitz-Kaveggia (FG) syndrome, 
Lujan syndrome, Ohdo syndrome (Maat-Kievit-Brunner type, or OSMKB), and one large
family with profound X-linked intellectual disability due to a novel c.5898insC
frameshift mutation that unlike the other three syndromes, resulted in affected
female carriers and truncation of the MED12 protein. It is likely that more MED12
mutations will be detected in sporadic patients and X-linked families with
intellectual disability and dysmorphic features as exome sequencing becomes more 
commonly utilized, and this overview of MED12-related disorders may help to
correlate MED12 genotypes with clinical findings.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3839301
PMID: 24123922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Dev Growth Differ. 2013 Oct;55(8):699-709. doi: 10.1111/dgd.12076. Epub 2013 Sep 
19.

Cis-regulatory underpinnings of human GLI3 expression in embryonic craniofacial
structures and internal organs.

Abbasi AA(1), Minhas R, Schmidt A, Koch S, Grzeschik KH.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biological Sciences, National Center for Bioinformatics, Program of
Comparative and Evolutionary Genomics, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, 45320,
Pakistan.

The zinc finger transcription factor Gli3 is an important mediator of Sonic
hedgehog (Shh) signaling. During early embryonic development Gli3 participates in
patterning and growth of the central nervous system, face, skeleton, limb, tooth 
and gut. Precise regulation of the temporal and spatial expression of Gli3 is
crucial for the proper specification of these structures in mammals and other
vertebrates. Previously we reported a set of human intronic cis-regulators
controlling almost the entire known repertoire of endogenous Gli3 expression in
mouse neural tube and limbs. However, the genetic underpinning of GLI3 expression
in other embryonic domains such as craniofacial structures and internal organs
remain elusive. Here we demonstrate in a transgenic mice assay the potential of a
subset of human/fish conserved non-coding sequences (CNEs) residing within GLI3
intronic intervals to induce reporter gene expression at known regions of
endogenous Gli3 transcription in embryonic domains other than central nervous
system (CNS) and limbs. Highly specific reporter expression was observed in
craniofacial structures, eye, gut, and genitourinary system. Moreover, the
comparison of expression patterns directed by these intronic cis-acting
regulatory elements in mouse and zebrafish embryos suggests that in accordance
with sequence conservation, the target site specificity of a subset of these
elements remains preserved among these two lineages. Taken together with our
recent investigations, it is proposed here that during vertebrate evolution the
Gli3 expression control acquired multiple, independently acting, intronic
enhancers for spatiotemporal patterning of CNS, limbs, craniofacial structures
and internal organs.

© 2013 The Authors Development, Growth & Differentiation © 2013 Japanese Society 
of Developmental Biologists.

PMID: 24102645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 25;8(9):e75253. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075253. eCollection
2013.

Hedgehog signaling regulates telomerase reverse transcriptase in human cancer
cells.

Mazumdar T(1), Sandhu R, Qadan M, DeVecchio J, Magloire V, Agyeman A, Li B,
Houghton JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America.

The Hedgehog (HH) signaling pathway is critical for normal embryonic development,
tissue patterning and cell differentiation. Aberrant HH signaling is involved in 
multiple human cancers. HH signaling involves a multi-protein cascade activating 
the GLI proteins that transcriptionally regulate HH target genes. We have
previously reported that HH signaling is essential for human colon cancer cell
survival and inhibition of this signal induces DNA damage and extensive cell
death. Here we report that the HH/GLI axis regulates human telomerase reverse
transcriptase (hTERT), which determines the replication potential of cancer
cells. Suppression of GLI1/GLI2 functions by a C-terminus truncated GLI3
repressor mutant (GLI3R), or by GANT61, a pharmacological inhibitor of GLI1/GLI2,
reduced hTERT protein expression in human colon cancer, prostate cancer and
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) cell lines. Expression of an N-terminus deleted
constitutively active mutant of GLI2 (GLI2<U+0394>N) increased hTERT mRNA and protein
expression and hTERT promoter driven luciferase activity in human colon cancer
cells while GANT61 inhibited hTERT mRNA expression and hTERT promoter driven
luciferase activity. Chromatin immunoprecipitation with GLI1 or GLI2 antibodies
precipitated fragments of the hTERT promoter in human colon cancer cells, which
was reduced upon exposure to GANT61. In contrast, expression of GLI1 or GLI2<U+0394>N in
non-malignant 293T cells failed to alter the levels of hTERT mRNA and protein, or
hTERT promoter driven luciferase activity. Further, expression of GLI2<U+0394>N
increased the telomerase enzyme activity, which was reduced by GANT61
administration in human colon cancer, prostate cancer, and GBM cells. These
results identify hTERT as a direct target of the HH signaling pathway, and reveal
a previously unknown role of the HH/GLI axis in regulating the replication
potential of cancer cells. These findings are of significance in understanding
the important regulatory mechanisms that determine the functions of HH/GLI
signaling in cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3783395
PMID: 24086482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Circ Res. 2013 Oct 25;113(10):1148-58. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.113.301546. Epub
2013 Sep 17.

Gli3 regulation of myogenesis is necessary for ischemia-induced angiogenesis.

Renault MA(1), Vandierdonck S, Chapouly C, Yu Y, Qin G, Metras A, Couffinhal T,
Losordo DW, Yao Q, Reynaud A, Jaspard-Vinassa B, Belloc I, Desgranges C, Gadeau
AP.

Author information: 
(1)From the Université de Bordeaux, Adaptation cardiovasculaire à l'ischémie,
U1034, Pessac, France.

RATIONALE: A better understanding of the mechanism underlying skeletal muscle
repair is required to develop therapies that promote tissue regeneration in
adults. Hedgehog signaling has been shown previously to be involved in myogenesis
and angiogenesis: 2 crucial processes for muscle development and regeneration.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to identify the role of the hedgehog
transcription factor Gli3 in the cross-talk between angiogenesis and myogenesis
in adults.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using conditional knockout mice, we found that Gli3
deficiency in endothelial cells did not affect ischemic muscle repair, whereas in
myocytes, Gli3 deficiency resulted in severely delayed ischemia-induced
myogenesis. Moreover, angiogenesis was also significantly impaired in
HSA-Cre(ERT2); Gli3(Flox/Flox) mice, demonstrating that impaired myogenesis
indirectly affects ischemia-induced angiogenesis. The role of Gli3 in myocytes
was then further investigated. We found that Gli3 promotes myoblast
differentiation through myogenic factor 5 regulation. In addition, we found that 
Gli3 regulates several proangiogenic factors, including thymidine phosphorylase
and angiopoietin-1 both in vitro and in vivo, which indirectly promote
endothelial cell proliferation and arteriole formation. In addition, we found
that Gli3 is upregulated in proliferating myoblasts by the cell cycle-associated 
transcription factor E2F1.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows for the first time that Gli3-regulated postnatal
myogenesis is necessary for muscle repair-associated angiogenesis. Most
importantly, it implies that myogenesis drives angiogenesis in the setting of
skeletal muscle repair and identifies Gli3 as a potential target for regenerative
medicine.

PMCID: PMC4339272
PMID: 24044950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Gene. 2013 Dec 1;531(2):398-402. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.09.002. Epub 2013 Sep
10.

A critical functional missense mutation (H173R) in the bovine PROP1 gene
significantly affects growth traits in cattle.

Pan C(1), Wu C, Jia W, Xu Y, Lei C, Hu S, Lan X, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 
Shaanxi 712100, PR China. Electronic address: panyu1980@126.com.

The PROP1 protein, encoded by the prophet of Pit-1 (PROP1) gene, exhibits both
DNA-binding and transcriptional activation abilities. Its expression leads to the
ontogenesis of growth hormone (GH), prolactin (PRL), thyroid-stimulating hormone 
(TSH), and pituitary hormone. The missense mutation H173R in PROP1 may result in 
deficiencies of GH, PRL, TSH, and Pit-1, thereby affecting growth traits. The
objective of this study was to characterize the H173R mutation within the PROP1
gene and examine its associations with growth traits in cattle. Accordingly, the 
H173R mutation was genotyped in 1207 cows belonging to five Chinese native
breeds. Three genotypes were identified among the specimens, with genotype AA
being the major one. Consequently, the "G" allele was the minor allele.
Association testing revealed that the H173R mutation was significantly associated
with body weight, average daily weight gain and physical parameters in the
analyzed breeds. Interestingly, the cows with genotype AG and/or AA had superior 
growth traits compared with those expressing the GG genotype, in all tested
breeds. These findings revealed that the "A" allele had positive effects on
growth traits, which was consistent with the increasing binding ability and
enhanced activation capacity associated with the bovine isoform PROP1-173H,
representing the "A" allele. Therefore, the H173R mutation can be considered as a
DNA marker for selecting individuals with superior growth traits, thereby
contributing to research on breeding and genetics in the beef industry.

© 2013.

PMID: 24029076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Clin Genet. 2014 Mar;85(3):203-12. doi: 10.1111/cge.12276. Epub 2013 Oct 18.

Polydactyly: phenotypes, genetics and classification.

Malik S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Program, Department of Animal Sciences, Faculty of Biological
Sciences, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan.

Polydactyly is one of the most common hereditary limb malformations featuring
additional digits in hands and/or feet. It constituted the highest proportion
among the congenital limb defects in various epidemiological surveys.
Polydactyly, primarily presenting as an additional pre-axial or post-axial digit 
of autopod, is a highly heterogeneous condition and depicts broad inter- and
intra-familial clinical variability. There is a plethora of polydactyly
classification methods reported in the medical literature which approach the
heterogeneity in polydactyly in various ways. In this communication,
well-characterized, non-syndromic polydactylies in humans are reviewed. The
cardinal features, phenotypic variability and molecular advances of each type
have been presented. Polydactyly at cellular and developmental levels is mainly a
failure in the control of digit number. Interestingly, GLI3 and SHH (ZRS/SHH
enhancer), two antagonistic factors known to modulate digit number and identity
during development, have also been implicated in polydactyly. Mutations in GLI3
and ZRS/SHH cause overlapping polydactyly phenotypes highlighting shared
molecular cascades in the etiology of additional digits, and thus suggesting the 
lumping of at least six distinct polydactyly entities. However, owing to the
extreme phenotypic and clinical heterogeneity witnessed in polydactyly a
substantial genetic heterogeneity is expected across different populations and
ethnic groups.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24020795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Cereb Cortex. 2015 Feb;25(2):460-71. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bht244. Epub 2013 Sep 7.

Expansion of the piriform cortex contributes to corticothalamic pathfinding
defects in Gli3 conditional mutants.

Amaniti EM(1), Fu C(1), Lewis S(1), Saisana M(1), Magnani D(1), Mason JO(1),
Theil T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Integrative Physiology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH8 9XD,
UK.

The corticothalamic and thalamocortical tracts play essential roles in the
communication between the cortex and thalamus. During development, axons forming 
these tracts have to follow a complex path to reach their target areas. While
much attention has been paid to the mechanisms regulating their passage through
the ventral telencephalon, very little is known about how the developing cortex
contributes to corticothalamic/thalamocortical tract formation. Gli3 encodes a
zinc finger transcription factor widely expressed in telencephalic progenitors
which has important roles in corticothalamic and thalamocortical pathfinding.
Here, we conditionally inactivated Gli3 in dorsal telencephalic progenitors to
determine its role in corticothalamic tract formation. In Emx1Cre;Gli3(fl/fl)
mutants, only a few corticothalamic axons enter the striatum in a restricted
dorsal domain. This restricted entry correlates with a medial expansion of the
piriform cortex. Transplantation experiments showed that the expanded piriform
cortex repels corticofugal axons. Moreover, expression of Sema5B, a
chemorepellent for corticofugal axons produced by the piriform cortex, is
similarly expanded. Finally, time course analysis revealed an expansion of the
ventral pallial progenitor domain which gives rise to the piriform cortex. Hence,
control of lateral cortical development by Gli3 at the progenitor level is
crucial for corticothalamic pathfinding.

© The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 24014668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Oncogene. 2013 Dec 12;32(50):5574-81. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.343. Epub 2013 Sep 2.

Imiquimod directly inhibits Hedgehog signalling by stimulating adenosine
receptor/protein kinase A-mediated GLI phosphorylation.

Wolff F(1), Loipetzberger A(1), Gruber W(1), Esterbauer H(2), Aberger F(1),
Frischauf AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Medical University Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Imiquimod (IMQ), a nucleoside analogue of the imidazoquinoline family, is used in
the topical treatment of basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and other skin diseases. It
is reported to be a TLR7 and TLR8 agonist and, as such, initiates a Th1 immune
response by activating sentinel cells in the vicinity of the tumour. BCC is a
hedgehog (HH)-driven malignancy with oncogenic glioma-associated oncogene (GLI)
signalling activated in a ligand-independent manner. Here we show that IMQ can
also directly repress HH signalling by negatively modulating GLI activity in BCC 
and medulloblastoma cells. Further, we provide evidence that the repressive
effect of IMQ on HH signalling is not dependent on TLR/MYD88 signalling. Our
results suggest a mechanism for IMQ engaging adenosine receptors (ADORAs) to
control GLI signalling. Pharmacological activation of ADORA with either an ADORA 
agonist or IMQ resulted in a protein kinase A (PKA)-mediated GLI phosphorylation 
and reduction in GLI activator levels. The activation of PKA and HH pathway
target gene downregulation in response to IMQ were abrogated by ADORA inhibition.
Furthermore, activated Smoothened signalling, which positively signals to GLI
transcription factors, could be effectively counteracted by IMQ. These results
reveal a previously unknown mode of action of IMQ in the treatment of BCC and
also suggest a role for ADORAs in the regulation of oncogenic HH signalling.

PMCID: PMC3898320
PMID: 23995793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Dev Biol. 2013 Nov 1;383(1):90-105. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.08.015. Epub 2013
Aug 29.

Sost and its paralog Sostdc1 coordinate digit number in a Gli3-dependent manner.

Collette NM(1), Yee CS, Murugesh D, Sebastian A, Taher L, Gale NW, Economides AN,
Harland RM, Loots GG.

Author information: 
(1)Biology and Biotechnology Division, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory,
7000 East Avenue, L-452, Livermore, CA 94550, USA.

WNT signaling is critical in most aspects of skeletal development and
homeostasis, and antagonists of WNT signaling are emerging as key regulatory
proteins with great promise as therapeutic agents for bone disorders. Here we
show that Sost and its paralog Sostdc1 emerged through ancestral genome
duplication and their expression patterns have diverged to delineate
non-overlapping domains in most organ systems including musculoskeletal,
cardiovascular, nervous, digestive, reproductive and respiratory. In the
developing limb, Sost and Sostdc1 display dynamic expression patterns with Sost
being restricted to the distal ectoderm and Sostdc1 to the proximal ectoderm and 
the mesenchyme. While Sostdc1(-/-) mice lack any obvious limb or skeletal
defects, Sost(-/-) mice recapitulate the hand defects described for Sclerosteosis
patients. However, elevated WNT signaling in Sost(-/-); Sostdc1(-/-) mice causes 
misregulation of SHH signaling, ectopic activation of Sox9 in the digit 1 field
and preaxial polydactyly in a Gli1- and Gli3-dependent manner. In addition, we
show that the syndactyly documented in Sclerosteosis is present in both Sost(-/-)
and Sost(-/-); Sostdc1(-/-) mice, and is driven by misregulation of Fgf8 in the
AER, a region lacking Sost and Sostdc1 expression. This study highlights the
complexity of WNT signaling in skeletal biology and disease and emphasizes how
redundant mechanism and non-cell autonomous effects can synergize to unveil new
intricate phenotypes caused by elevated WNT signaling.

© 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3861057
PMID: 23994639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Methods. 2014 Apr 1;66(3):390-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2013.08.022. Epub 2013 Aug 
24.

Reagents for developmental regulation of Hedgehog signaling.

Lewis C(1), Krieg PA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Arizona College
of Medicine, Tucson, AZ, United States. (2)Department of Cellular and Molecular
Medicine, University of Arizona College of Medicine, Tucson, AZ, United States.
Electronic address: pkrieg@email.arizona.edu.

We have examined a number of reagents for their ability to modulate activity of
the Hh signaling pathway during embryonic development of Xenopus. In particular
we have focused on regulation of events occurring during tailbud stages and
later. Two inducible protein reagents based on the Gli1 and Gli3 transcription
factors were generated and the activity of these proteins was compared to the Hh 
signaling pathway inhibitor, cyclopamine, and the activators, Smoothened agonist 
(SAG) and purmorphamine (PMA). Effectiveness of reagents was assayed using both
molecular biological techniques and biological readouts. We found that the small 
molecule modulators of the Hh pathway were highly specific and effective and
produced results generally superior to the more conventional protein reagents for
examination of later stage developmental processes.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 23981360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Biol Chem. 2013 Oct 11;288(41):29518-29. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.492066. Epub
2013 Aug 16.

Centrosomal protein DZIP1 regulates Hedgehog signaling by promoting cytoplasmic
retention of transcription factor GLI3 and affecting ciliogenesis.

Wang C(1), Low WC, Liu A, Wang B.

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Genetic Medicine and.

The primary cilium is required for Hedgehog signaling. So far, all known
ciliogenic proteins regulate Hedgehog signaling through their role in
ciliogenesis. Here we show that the mouse DZIP1 regulates Hedgehog signaling
through two mechanisms. First, DZIP1 interacts with GLI3, a transcriptional
regulator for Hedgehog signaling, and prevents GLI3 from entering the nucleus.
Second, DZIP1 is required for ciliogenesis. We show that DZIP1 colocalizes and
interacts with CEP164, a protein localizing at appendages of the mother
centrioles, and IFT88, a component of the intraflagellar transport (IFT)
machinery. Functionally, both CEP164 and Ninein appendage proteins fail to
localize to ciliary appendages in Dzip1 mutant cells; IFT components are not
recruited to the basal body of cilia. Importantly, the accumulation of GLI3 in
the nucleus is independent of loss of primary cilia in Dzip1 mutant cells.
Therefore, DZIP1 is the first known ciliogenic protein that regulates Hedgehog
signaling through a dual mechanism and that biochemically links IFT machinery
with Hedgehog pathway components.

PMCID: PMC3795250
PMID: 23955340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Eur J Hum Genet. 2014 Mar;22(3):350-7. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.160. Epub 2013 Aug 
14.

Genetic analysis of the role of Alx4 in the coordination of lower body and
external genitalia formation.

Matsumaru D(1), Haraguchi R(2), Moon AM(3), Satoh Y(1), Nakagata N(4), Yamamura
K(5), Takahashi N(6), Kitazawa S(7), Yamada G(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Developmental Genetics, Institute of Advanced Medicine,
Wakayama Medical University, Wakayama, Japan [2] Institute of Molecular
Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan. (2)1] Department
of Developmental Genetics, Institute of Advanced Medicine, Wakayama Medical
University, Wakayama, Japan [2] Institute of Molecular Embryology and Genetics,
Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan [3] Department of Molecular Pathology, Ehime
University Graduate School of Medicine, Ehime, Japan. (3)Weis Center for
Research, Geisinger Clinic, Danville, PA, USA. (4)Division of Reproductive
Engineering, Center for Animal Resources and Development, Kumamoto University,
Kumamoto, Japan. (5)Division of Developmental Genetics, Institute of Resource
Development and Analysis, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan. (6)Department of 
Applied Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life Sciences, 
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (7)Department of Molecular Pathology,
Ehime University Graduate School of Medicine, Ehime, Japan.

Although several syndromes include abnormalities of both the ventral body wall
and external genitalia, the developmental bases of this correlation are largely
unknown. Naturally occurring mutations in Aristaless-like 4 (Alx4, Strong's
luxoid: Alx4Lst) have ventral body wall and pelvic girdle abnormalities. We
sought to determine whether the development of the genital tubercle (GT) and its 
derivatives, the external genitalia, is affected by this mutation. We thus
performed genetic and tissue labeling analyses in mutant mice. Alx4Lst/Lst
mutants displayed hypoplasia of the dorsal GT and reduced expression of
Fibronectin. We analyzed cell migration during GT formation by tissue labeling
experiments and discovered that the cells located in the proximal segment of the 
umbilical cord (infra-umbilical mesenchyme) migrate toward the dorsal part of the
GT. The Alx4Lst/Lst mutants also displayed augmented expression of Hh
signal-related genes. Hence, we analyzed a series of combinatorial mutants for
Alx4, Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and GLI-Kruppel family member 3 (Gli3). These
phenotype-genotype analyses suggested a genetic interaction between Alx4 and Hh
signaling during GT formation. Moreover, Hh gain-of-function mutants phenocopied 
some of these phenotypes. These observations reveal novel information regarding
the pathogenic mechanisms of syndromic lower ventral body malformations, which
are largely unknown.

PMCID: PMC3925283
PMID: 23942202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2013 Jul;33(7):1057-61.

[MiR-143 inhibits migration of human nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells by negatively
regulating GLI3 gene].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhong W(1), He B, Zhu C, Xiao L, Zhou S, Peng X.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Examination Center, 421 Hospital of PLA, Guangzhou, China.
zhongwen909219@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the possible biological function and mechanism of
miR-143 in the metastasis of human nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC).
METHODS: Using bioinformatics to predict the target gene of miR-143, the 3'UTR
and mutant 3'UTR of GLI3 gene was cloned into psiCHECK-2 vector. Dual-luciferase 
reporter gene assay was employed to examine the repression of the GLI3 gene.
miR-143 and GLI3 expression levels in 5-8F cells transfected with miR-143 mimics,
inhibitor, or siGLI3 were examined, and the changes in the cell migration ability
was assessed by Transwell invasion assay.
RESULTS: Bioinformatics prediction indicated the Hh pathway transcription gene
GLI3 as a target gene of miR-143, and dual-luciferase reporter assay showed that 
miR-143 directly combined with the 3'UTR of GLI3. qRT-PCR and Western blotting
demonstrated that the expression of miR-143 in 5-8F cells was negatively
correlated to GLI3 and suppressed the migration of 5-8F cells.
CONCLUSION: MiR-143 can inhibit the invasion of NPC cells by negative regulation 
of GLI3 gene, which sheds light on the role of miR-143 and Hh pathway in NPC.

PMID: 23895853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Neuropathology. 2014 Feb;34(1):1-10. doi: 10.1111/neup.12052. Epub 2013 Jul 29.

Neuronal differentiation associated with Gli3 expression predicts favorable
outcome for patients with medulloblastoma.

Miyahara H(1), Natsumeda M, Yoshimura J, Ogura R, Okazaki K, Toyoshima Y, Fujii
Y, Takahashi H, Kakita A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brain Research Institute, University of Niigata;
Department of Pediatrics and Child Neurology, Oita University Faculty of
Medicine, Oita, Japan.

Medulloblastoma (MB) is a malignant cerebellar tumor arising in children, and its
ontogenesis is regulated by Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signaling. No data are available
regarding the correlation between expression of Gli3, a protein lying downstream 
of Shh, and neuronal differentiation of MB cells, or the prognostic significance 
of these features. We re-evaluated the histopathological features of surgical
specimens of MB taken from 32 patients, and defined 15 of them as MB with
neuronal differentiation (ND), three as MB with both glial and neuronal
differentiation (GD), and 14 as differentiation-free (DF) MB.
Gli3-immunoreactivity (IR) was evident as a clear circular stain outlining the
nuclei of the tumor cells. The difference in the frequency of IR between the
ND+GD (94.4%) and DF (0%) groups was significant (P < 0.001). The tumor cells
with ND showed IR for both Gli3 and neuronal nuclei. Ultrastructurally, Gli3-IR
was observed at the nuclear membrane. The overall survival and event-free
survival rates of the patients in the ND group were significantly higher than
those in the other groups. The expression profile of Gli3 is of considerable
significance, and the association of ND with this feature may be prognostically
favorable in patients with MB.

© 2013 Japanese Society of Neuropathology.

PMID: 23889567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Genome Res. 2013 Oct;23(10):1740-8. doi: 10.1101/gr.158105.113. Epub 2013 Jul 22.

Coelacanth genomes reveal signatures for evolutionary transition from water to
land.

Nikaido M(1), Noguchi H, Nishihara H, Toyoda A, Suzuki Y, Kajitani R, Suzuki H,
Okuno M, Aibara M, Ngatunga BP, Mzighani SI, Kalombo HW, Masengi KW, Tuda J,
Nogami S, Maeda R, Iwata M, Abe Y, Fujimura K, Okabe M, Amano T, Maeno A,
Shiroishi T, Itoh T, Sugano S, Kohara Y, Fujiyama A, Okada N.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of
Technology, Yokohama, Kanagawa 226-8501, Japan;

Coelacanths are known as "living fossils," as they show remarkable morphological 
resemblance to the fossil record and belong to the most primitive lineage of
living Sarcopterygii (lobe-finned fishes and tetrapods). Coelacanths may be key
to elucidating the tempo and mode of evolution from fish to tetrapods. Here, we
report the genome sequences of five coelacanths, including four Latimeria
chalumnae individuals (three specimens from Tanzania and one from Comoros) and
one L. menadoensis individual from Indonesia. These sequences cover two African
breeding populations and two known extant coelacanth species. The genome is ~2.74
Gbp and contains a high proportion (~60%) of repetitive elements. The genetic
diversity among the individuals was extremely low, suggesting a small population 
size and/or a slow rate of evolution. We found a substantial number of genes that
encode olfactory and pheromone receptors with features characteristic of tetrapod
receptors for the detection of airborne ligands. We also found that limb
enhancers of bmp7 and gli3, both of which are essential for limb formation, are
conserved between coelacanth and tetrapods, but not ray-finned fishes. We expect 
that some tetrapod-like genes may have existed early in the evolution of
primitive Sarcopterygii and were later co-opted to adapt to terrestrial
environments. These coelacanth genomes will provide a cornerstone for studies to 
elucidate how ancestral aquatic vertebrates evolved into terrestrial animals.

PMCID: PMC3787270
PMID: 23878157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. BMC Med Genomics. 2013;6 Suppl 2:S6. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-6-S2-S6. Epub 2013
May 7.

BioBin: a bioinformatics tool for automating the binning of rare variants using
publicly available biological knowledge.

Moore CB(1), Wallace JR, Frase AT, Pendergrass SA, Ritchie MD.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics Research, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN
37232, USA.

BACKGROUND: With the recent decreasing cost of genome sequence data, there has
been increasing interest in rare variants and methods to detect their association
to disease. We developed BioBin, a flexible collapsing method inspired by
biological knowledge that can be used to automate the binning of low frequency
variants for association testing. We also built the Library of Knowledge
Integration (LOKI), a repository of data assembled from public databases, which
contains resources such as: dbSNP and gene Entrez database information from the
National Center for Biotechnology (NCBI), pathway information from Gene Ontology 
(GO), Protein families database (Pfam), Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes
(KEGG), Reactome, NetPath - signal transduction pathways, Open Regulatory
Annotation Database (ORegAnno), Biological General Repository for Interaction
Datasets (BioGrid), Pharmacogenomics Knowledge Base (PharmGKB), Molecular
INTeraction database (MINT), and evolutionary conserved regions (ECRs) from UCSC 
Genome Browser. The novelty of BioBin is access to comprehensive knowledge-guided
multi-level binning. For example, bin boundaries can be formed using genomic
locations from: functional regions, evolutionary conserved regions, genes, and/or
pathways.
METHODS: We tested BioBin using simulated data and 1000 Genomes Project low
coverage data to test our method with simulated causative variants and a pairwise
comparison of rare variant (MAF < 0.03) burden differences between Yoruba
individuals (YRI) and individuals of European descent (CEU). Lastly, we analyzed 
the NHLBI GO Exome Sequencing Project Kabuki dataset, a congenital disorder
affecting multiple organs and often intellectual disability, contrasted with
Complete Genomics data as controls.
RESULTS: The results from our simulation studies indicate type I error rate is
controlled, however, power falls quickly for small sample sizes using variants
with modest effect sizes. Using BioBin, we were able to find simulated variants
in genes with less than 20 loci, but found the sensitivity to be much less in
large bins. We also highlighted the scale of population stratification between
two 1000 Genomes Project data, CEU and YRI populations. Lastly, we were able to
apply BioBin to natural biological data from dbGaP and identify an interesting
candidate gene for further study.
CONCLUSIONS: We have established that BioBin will be a very practical and
flexible tool to analyze sequence data and potentially uncover novel associations
between low frequency variants and complex disease.

PMCID: PMC3654874
PMID: 23819467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Int J Oncol. 2013 Sep;43(3):695-702. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2013.2010. Epub 2013 Jul 8.

Anti-apoptotic role of the sonic hedgehog signaling pathway in the proliferation 
of ameloblastoma.

Kanda S(1), Mitsuyasu T, Nakao Y, Kawano S, Goto Y, Matsubara R, Nakamura S.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Oral and Maxillofacial Oncology, Division of Maxillofacial
Diagnostic and Surgical Sciences, Faculty of Dental Science, Kyushu University,
Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

Sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway is crucial to growth and patterning during
organogenesis. Aberrant activation of the SHH signaling pathway can result in
tumor formation. We examined the expression of SHH signaling molecules and
investigated the involvement of the SHH pathway in the proliferation of
ameloblastoma, the most common benign tumor of the jaws. We used
immunohistochemistry on ameloblastoma specimens and immunocytochemistry and
reverse transcription-PCR on the ameloblastoma cell line AM-1. We also used the
inhibitors of SHH signaling, SHH neutralizing antibody and cyclopamine, to assess
the effects of SHH on the proliferation of AM-1 cells. We detected expression of 
SHH, patched, GLI1, GLI2 and GLI3 in the ameloblastoma specimens and AM-1 cells. 
The proliferation of these cells was significantly inhibited in the presence of
SHH neutralizing antibody or cyclopamine; this was confirmed by BrdU
incorporation assays. Furthermore, in the presence of SHH neutralizing antibody, 
nuclear translocation of GLI1 and GLI2 was abolished, apoptosis was induced,
BCL-2 expression decreased and BAX expression increased. Our results suggest that
the SHH signaling pathway is constitutively active in ameloblastoma and plays an 
anti-apoptotic role in the proliferation of ameloblastoma cells through autocrine
loop stimulation.

PMCID: PMC3787891
PMID: 23835807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Nature. 2013 Aug 22;500(7463):445-8. doi: 10.1038/nature12336. Epub 2013 Jul 7.

Digit loss in archosaur evolution and the interplay between selection and
constraints.

de Bakker MA(1), Fowler DA, den Oude K, Dondorp EM, Navas MC, Horbanczuk JO, Sire
JY, Szczerbinska D, Richardson MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Zoology, Institute of Biology, Leiden University,
Sylvius Laboratory, Sylviusweg 72, 2333BE Leiden, the Netherlands.

Evolution involves interplay between natural selection and developmental
constraints. This is seen, for example, when digits are lost from the limbs
during evolution. Extant archosaurs (crocodiles and birds) show several instances
of digit loss under different selective regimes, and show limbs with one, two,
three, four or the ancestral number of five digits. The 'lost' digits sometimes
persist for millions of years as developmental vestiges. Here we examine digit
loss in the Nile crocodile and five birds, using markers of three successive
stages of digit development. In two independent lineages under different
selection, wing digit I and all its markers disappear. In contrast, hindlimb
digit V persists in all species sampled, both as cartilage, and as Sox9-
expressing precartilage domains, 250<U+2009>million years after the adult digit
disappeared. There is therefore a mismatch between evolution of the embryonic and
adult phenotypes. All limbs, regardless of digit number, showed similar
expression of sonic hedgehog (Shh). Even in the one-fingered emu wing, expression
of posterior genes Hoxd11 and Hoxd12 was conserved, whereas expression of
anterior genes Gli3 and Alx4 was not. We suggest that the persistence of digit V 
in the embryo may reflect constraints, particularly the conserved posterior gene 
networks associated with the zone of polarizing activity (ZPA). The more rapid
and complete disappearance of digit I may reflect its ZPA-independent
specification, and hence, weaker developmental constraints. Interacting with
these constraints are selection pressures for limb functions such as flying and
perching. This model may help to explain the diverse patterns of digit loss in
tetrapods. Our study may also help to understand how selection on adults leads to
changes in development.

PMID: 23831646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Differentiation. 2013 Apr-Jun;85(4-5):121-30. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2013.03.002.
Epub 2013 Jun 19.

The hedgehog target Vlk genetically interacts with Gli3 to regulate chondrocyte
differentiation during mouse long bone development.

Probst S(1), Zeller R, Zuniga A.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics, Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel,
Mattenstrasse 28, CH-4058 Basel, Switzerland.

Endochondral bone development is orchestrated by the spatially and temporally
coordinated differentiation of chondrocytes along the longitudinal axis of the
cartilage anlage. Initially, the slowly proliferating, periarticular chondrocytes
give rise to the pool of rapidly dividing columnar chondrocytes, whose expansion 
determines the length of the long bones. The Indian hedgehog (IHH) ligand
regulates both the proliferation of columnar chondrocytes and their
differentiation into post-mitotic hypertrophic chondrocytes in concert with GLI3,
one of the main transcriptional effectors of HH signal transduction. In the
absence of Hh signalling, the expression of Vlk (vertebrate lonesome kinase, also
called Pkdcc) is increased. We now show that the shortening of limb long bones in
Vlk-deficient mouse embryos is aggravated by additional inactivation of Gli3. Our
analysis establishes that Vlk and Gli3 synergize to control the temporal kinetics
of chondrocyte differentiation during long bone development. Whereas
differentiation of limb mesenchymal progenitors into chondrocytes and the initial
formation of the cartilage anlagen of the limb skeleton are not altered, Vlk and 
Gli3 are required for the temporally coordinated differentiation of periarticular
into columnar and ultimately hypertrophic chondrocytes in long bones. In limbs
lacking both Vlk and Gli3, the appearance of columnar and hypertrophic
chondrocytes is severely delayed and zones of morphologically distinct
chondrocytes are not established until E16.5. At the molecular level, these
morphological alterations are reflected by delayed activation and lowered
expression of Ihh, Pth1r and Col10a1 in long bone rudiments of double mutant
limbs. In summary, our genetic analysis establishes that VLK plays a role in the 
IHH/GLI3 interactions and that Vlk and Gli3 cooperate to regulate long bone
development by modulating the temporal kinetics of establishing columnar and
hypertrophic chondrocyte domains.

Copyright © 2013 International Society of Differentiation. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23792766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Cell Sci. 2013 Aug 15;126(Pt 16):3533-40. doi: 10.1242/jcs.125757. Epub 2013
Jun 20.

Non-invasive neural stem cells become invasive in vitro by combined FGF2 and BMP4
signaling.

Sailer MH(1), Gerber A, Tostado C, Hutter G, Cordier D, Mariani L, Ritz MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, Brain Tumor Biology Laboratory, Klingelbergstrasse 
50/70, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland. martin.sailer@usb.ch

Neural stem cells (NSCs) typically show efficient self-renewal and selective
differentiation. Their invasion potential, however, is not well studied. In this 
study, Sox2-positive NSCs from the E14.5 rat cortex were found to be non-invasive
and showed only limited migration in vitro. By contrast, FGF2-expanded NSCs
showed a strong migratory and invasive phenotype in response to the combination
of FGF2 and BMP4. Invasive NSCs expressed Podoplanin (PDPN) and p75NGFR (Ngfr) at
the plasma membrane after exposure to FGF2 and BMP4. FGF2 and BMP4 together
upregulated the expression of Msx1, Snail1, Snail2, Ngfr, which are all found in 
neural crest (NC) cells during or after epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), 
but not in forebrain stem cells. Invasive cells downregulated the expression of
Olig2, Sox10, Egfr, Pdgfra, Gsh1/Gsx1 and Gsh2/Gsx2. Migrating and invasive NSCs 
had elevated expression of mRNA encoding Pax6, Tenascin C (TNC), PDPN, Hey1,
SPARC, p75NGFR and Gli3. On the basis of the strongest upregulation in
invasion-induced NSCs, we defined a group of five key invasion-related genes:
Ngfr, Sparc, Snail1, Pdpn and Tnc. These genes were co-expressed and upregulated 
in seven samples of glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) compared with normal human
brain controls. Induction of invasion and migration led to low expression of
differentiation markers and repressed proliferation in NSCs. Our results indicate
that normal forebrain stem cells have the inherent ability to adopt a glioma-like
invasiveness. The results provide a novel in vitro system to study stem cell
invasion and a novel glioma invasion model: tumoral abuse of the developmental
dorsoventral identity regulation.

PMCID: PMC3744023
PMID: 23788430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 7;8(6):e65448. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065448. Print 2013.

Kif3a controls murine nephron number via GLI3 repressor, cell survival, and gene 
expression in a lineage-specific manner.

Chi L(1), Galtseva A, Chen L, Mo R, Hui CC, Rosenblum ND.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, The Hospital for Sick
Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The primary cilium is required during early embryo patterning, epithelial
tubulogenesis, and growth factor-dependent signal transduction. The requirement
for primary cilia during renal epithelial-mesenchymal tissue interactions that
give rise to nephrons is undefined. Here, we used Cre-mediated recombination to
generate mice with Kif3a deficiency targeted to the ureteric and/or metanephric
mesenchyme cell lineages in the embryonic kidney. Gradual loss of primary cilia
in either lineage leads to a phenotype of reduced nephron number. Remarkably, in 
addition to cyst formation, loss of primary cilia in the ureteric epithelial cell
leads to decreased expression of Wnt11 and Ret and reduced ureteric branching.
Constitutive expression of GLI3 repressor (Gli3(<U+0394>699/+) ) rescues these
abnormalities. In embryonic metanephric mesenchyme cells, Kif3a deficiency limits
survival of nephrogenic progenitor cells and expression of genes required for
nephron formation. Together, our data demonstrate that Kif3a controls nephron
number via distinct cell lineage-specific mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3676467
PMID: 23762375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 10;8(6):e65403. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065403. Print 2013.

Synergism between Hedgehog-GLI and EGFR signaling in Hedgehog-responsive human
medulloblastoma cells induces downregulation of canonical Hedgehog-target genes
and stabilized expression of GLI1.

Götschel F(1), Berg D, Gruber W, Bender C, Eberl M, Friedel M, Sonntag J,
Rüngeler E, Hache H, Wierling C, Nietfeld W, Lehrach H, Frischauf A,
Schwartz-Albiez R, Aberger F, Korf U.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genome Analysis, German Cancer Research Center-DKFZ,
Heidelberg, Germany.

Aberrant activation of Hedgehog (HH) signaling has been identified as a key
etiologic factor in many human malignancies. Signal strength, target gene
specificity, and oncogenic activity of HH signaling depend profoundly on
interactions with other pathways, such as epidermal growth factor
receptor-mediated signaling, which has been shown to cooperate with HH/GLI in
basal cell carcinoma and pancreatic cancer. Our experimental data demonstrated
that the Daoy human medulloblastoma cell line possesses a fully inducible
endogenous HH pathway. Treatment of Daoy cells with Sonic HH or Smoothened
agonist induced expression of GLI1 protein and simultaneously prevented the
processing of GLI3 to its repressor form. To study interactions between HH- and
EGF-induced signaling in greater detail, time-resolved measurements were carried 
out and analyzed at the transcriptomic and proteomic levels. The Daoy cells
responded to the HH/EGF co-treatment by downregulating GLI1, PTCH, and HHIP at
the transcript level; this was also observed when Amphiregulin (AREG) was used
instead of EGF. We identified a novel crosstalk mechanism whereby EGFR signaling 
silences proteins acting as negative regulators of HH signaling, as AKT- and
ERK-signaling independent process. EGFR/HH signaling maintained high GLI1 protein
levels which contrasted the GLI1 downregulation on the transcript level.
Conversely, a high-level synergism was also observed, due to a strong and
significant upregulation of numerous canonical EGF-targets with putative
tumor-promoting properties such as MMP7, VEGFA, and IL-8. In conclusion,
synergistic effects between EGFR and HH signaling can selectively induce a switch
from a canonical HH/GLI profile to a modulated specific target gene profile. This
suggests that there are more wide-spread, yet context-dependent interactions,
between HH/GLI and growth factor receptor signaling in human malignancies.

PMCID: PMC3677915
PMID: 23762360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Reprod Toxicol. 2013 Nov;41:49-56. doi: 10.1016/j.reprotox.2013.05.012. Epub 2013
Jun 7.

Sonic hedgehog expression is disrupted following in ovo ethanol exposure during
early chick eye development.

Brennan D(1), Giles S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine and Medical Science, University College Dublin, Belfield,
Ireland. brennan.deirdre@gmail.com

The eye is particularly sensitive to ethanol's teratogenic effects. Our previous 
work, using a chick embryo model system, has shown that ethanol acts rapidly to
perturb vital processes of early eye development producing defects of the lens
and retina. Ethanol-induced disruption of the midline ventral telencephalon, a
key site for expression of ocular morphogens such as sonic hedgehog (Shh), was
further established. Consequently, in this study we have examined the effects of 
ethanol on the Shh pathway during the period of optic vesicle/optic cup
formation. Chick embryos were injected in ovo with 125µL of a 20% ethanol
solution directly into the yolk-sac at HH-stage 7, resulting in peak ethanol
uptake of 0.294g/dL. Subsequent molecular analysis at 12, 24 and 48h
post-treatment revealed that ethanol had no affect on Shh transcription, while, a
significant reduction in the expression of the active signalling Shh protein was 
found. Surprisingly, none of the downstream Shh pathway members (Ptc, Gli1 and
Gli3) were significantly altered by ethanol exposure. Overall, our results
indicate that ethanol's disruption of Shh may be mediated through some
alternative mechanism independent of the classical signalling pathway. However,
the precise role of Shh in relation to ethanol teratogenicity continues to be
debated. Thus, in conclusion, our findings are discussed in relation to the
varied and often conflicting reports of ethanol-induced Shh perturbation found in
the literature.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23751449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Dev Cell. 2013 Jun 24;25(6):636-44. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2013.05.006. Epub 2013 
Jun 6.

Ter94 ATPase complex targets k11-linked ubiquitinated ci to proteasomes for
partial degradation.

Zhang Z(1), Lv X, Yin WC, Zhang X, Feng J, Wu W, Hui CC, Zhang L, Zhao Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.

The Cubitus interruptus (Ci)/Gli family of transcription factors can be degraded 
either completely or partially from a full-length form (Ci155/Gli(FL)) to a
truncated repressor (Ci75/Gli(R)) by proteasomes to mediate Hedgehog (Hh)
signaling. The mechanism by which proteasomes distinguish ubiquitinated Ci/Gli to
carry out complete versus partial degradation is not known. Here, we show that
Ter94 ATPase and its mammalian counterpart, p97, are involved in processing Ci
and Gli3 into Ci75 and Gli3(R), respectively. Ter94 regulates the partial
degradation of ubiquitinated Ci by Cul1-Slimb-based E3 ligase through its
adaptors Ufd1-like and dNpl4. We demonstrate that Cul1-Slimb-based E3 ligase, but
not Cul3-Rdx-based E3 ligase, modifies Ci by efficient addition of K11-linked
ubiquitin chains. Ter94(Ufd1-like/dNpl4) complex interacts directly with
Cul1-Slimb, and, intriguingly, it prefers K11-linked ubiquitinated Ci. Thus,
Ter94 ATPase and K11-linked ubiquitination in Ci contribute to the selectivity by
proteasomes for partial degradation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23747190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Cancer Biomark. 2013;13(1):37-47. doi: 10.3233/CBM-130312.

High expression of truncated GLI3 is associated with poor overall survival in
patients with non-small cell lung cancer.

Bai XY(1), Lin JY, Zhang XC, Xie Z, Yan HH, Chen ZH, Xu CR, An SJ, Sheng GM, Wu
YL.

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Lung Cancer Institute, Guangdong General Hospital and Guangdong
Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.

BACKGROUND: The hedgehog (Hh) pathway is involved in embryogenesis and
organogenesis. GLI3 is one of the zinc-finger transcription factors in the Hh
signaling pathway, which exist in both full-length (GLI3FL) and truncated
(GLI3TR) forms. We investigated GLI3 expression in patients with non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC). The role of GLI3 in lung carcinogenesis and its correlation 
with clinicopathological factors and overall survival (OS) in patients with NSCLC
were explored.
METHODS: GLI3FL and GLI3TR expression were analyzed immunohistochemically in 330 
and 352 evaluable NSCLC tissues respectively. The association between GLI3FL and 
GLI3TR expression and clinicopathological parameters and OS were statistically
analyzed.
RESULTS: GLI3FL immunohistochemical staining could be observed in the cytoplasm, 
while GLI3TR staining could be observed in nucleus of malignant epithelial cells.
High level expression of GLI3FL and GLI3TR were 52.7% and 45.2% respectively.
GLI3FL was not significantly correlated with any clinicopathological parameter
and survival. However, high-expression of GLI3TR was significantly associated
with lymph node metastasis (P = 0.013) and poor OS (28.4 vs. 40.8 months, P =
0.010). In patients with adenocarcinoma of high and low GLI3TR expression, the
median OS were 25.7 and 50.6 months respectively (P = 0.004). Multivariate
analysis showed that GLI3TR expression (P = 0.036), tumor differentiation (P <
0.001), disease stage (P < 0.001) were independent prognostic factors for
patients with NSCLC.
CONCLUSION: Overexpression of GLI3TR in NSCLC, especially in adenocarcinoma, is
associated with poor prognosis. GLI3TR expression is an independent prognostic
factor in OS. GLI3TR may play an important role in the tumorigenesis of NSCLC.

PMID: 23736020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Gene. 2013 Sep 10;526(2):471-3. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.05.046. Epub 2013 Jun 1.

The unclassified variant: c.2044AD>G, p.T682A (het.) in exon 12 of the GLI3 gene 
in a patient with oral-facial-digital syndrome type II (Mohr syndrome) phenotype.

Al-Qattan MM(1), Al Balwi MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

The gene mutation for oral-facial digital syndrome type II (Mohr syndrome) is
unknown. We describe a Saudi female infant with Mohr syndrome. An unclassified
variant: c.2044 A>G, p.T682A in exon 12 of the GLI3 gene in a heterozygous state 
was identified in the infant. Mutation Taster (http://www.mutationtaster.org)
considers this variant as "disease causing". However, when the unaffected parents
were tested, the father was found to have the same variant, also in a
heterozygous state. Hence, the pathogenic role of this variant seems unlikely;
although apparent non-penetrance remains a possibility.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23732295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Urol. 2013 Nov;190(5):1884-92. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2013.05.061. Epub 2013 May
30.

Hypospadias and genes related to genital tubercle and early urethral development.

Carmichael SL(1), Ma C, Choudhry S, Lammer EJ, Witte JS, Shaw GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, Stanford, California. Electronic address: scarmichael@stanford.edu.

PURPOSE: We determined whether variants in genes associated with genital tubercle
(the anlage for the penis) and early urethral development were associated with
hypospadias in humans.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We examined 293 relatively common tag single nucleotide
polymorphisms in BMP4, BMP7, FGF8, FGF10, FGFR2, HOXA13, HOXD13, HOXA4, HOXB6,
SRY, WT1, WTAP, SHH, GLI1, GLI2 and GLI3. The analysis included 624 cases (81
mild, 319 moderate, 209 severe, 15 undetermined severity) and 844 population
based nonmalformed male controls born in California from 1990 to 2003.
RESULTS: There were 28 single nucleotide polymorphisms for which any of the
comparisons (ie overall or for a specific severity) had a p value of less than
0.01. The homozygous variant genotypes for 4 single nucleotide polymorphisms in
BMP7 were associated with at least a twofold increased risk of hypospadias
regardless of severity. Five single nucleotide polymorphisms for FGF10 were
associated with threefold to fourfold increased risks, regardless of severity.
For 4 of them the results were restricted to whites. For GLI1, GLI2 and GLI3
there were 12 associated single nucleotide polymorphisms but results were
inconsistent by severity and race/ethnicity. For SHH 1 single nucleotide
polymorphism was associated with a 2.4-fold increased risk of moderate
hypospadias. For WT1 6 single nucleotide polymorphisms were associated with
approximately a twofold increased risk, primarily for severe hypospadias.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides evidence that single nucleotide polymorphisms in
several genes that contribute to genital tubercle and early urethral development 
are associated with hypospadias risk.

Copyright © 2013 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4103581
PMID: 23727413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Onkologie. 2013;36(5):279-86. doi: 10.1159/000350322. Epub 2013 Mar 28.

Overexpression of the Hedgehog signalling pathway in head and neck squamous cell 
carcinoma.

Dimitrova K(1), Stoehr M, Dehghani F, Dietz A, Wichmann G, Bertolini J, Mozet C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University of Leipzig,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Overexpression of the Hedgehog (HH) signalling pathway has been
described in several malignancies and is associated with a poor prognosis. HH
signalling blockade reduces tumour growth in vitro and in vivo. We aimed to
determine whether head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCCs) express HH
proteins in comparison to healthy mucosa.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissue sections of 10 
patients with HNSCC were stained with fluorescence-labelled antibodies for
cytokeratin and HH proteins (SHH, PTCH1/2, SMO, Gli1-3) and photographs were
taken with a laser scanning microscope. The pixel count and colour intensity were
analysed in RGB (red/green/blue) colour mode, and expression levels were compared
to healthy mucosa.
RESULTS: Image analysis in RGB mode provided objective evidence for the
over-expression of HH signalling components in HNSCC, particularly with regard to
the transcription factors Gli1 (10-fold) and SHH (5-fold) in comparison with
healthy mucosa. The lowest levels were found for Gli3 in HNSCC.
CONCLUSIONS: We postulate pivotal roles of Gli1 and SHH expression in the
carcinogenesis of HNSCC. HH pathway overexpression appears to be involved in the 
initiation of tumour growth and spread due to its stem cell-modulating
properties. Detection of HH pathway components, and especially Gli1 and SHH, in
HNSCC might offer a promising target for further anticancer research in HNSCC.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23689223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia. 2013 Jun;18(2):133-8. doi:
10.1007/s10911-013-9291-7. Epub 2013 May 16.

Hedgehog and Gli signaling in embryonic mammary gland development.

Lee MY(1), Sun L, Veltmaat JM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, A*STAR (Agency for Science,
Technology and Research), 61 Biopolis Drive, Singapore 138673, Singapore.

The first mouse mutation associated with a heritable defect in embryonic mammary 
gland development was Extratoes. It represents a functional null-mutation of the 
gene encoding Gli3, which is best known as a transcription factor mediating
canonical Hedgehog (Hh) signaling. Here we review the roles of Hh and Gli
proteins in murine embryonic mammary development. We propose that an off-state
for Hh signaling, mediated by Gli3-repressor, is determinant for induction of a
mammary instead of hair follicle fate in the trunk surface ectoderm.

PMCID: PMC3691482
PMID: 23677624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. PLoS One. 2013 May 7;8(5):e63226. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063226. Print 2013.

Gli1 mediates lung cancer cell proliferation and Sonic Hedgehog-dependent
mesenchymal cell activation.

Bermudez O(1), Hennen E, Koch I, Lindner M, Eickelberg O.

Author information: 
(1)Comprehensive Pneumology Center, University Hospital of the
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich, Germany.

Non-Small-Cell-Lung-Cancer (NSCLC) represents approximately 85% of all lung
cancers and remains poorly understood. While signaling pathways operative during 
organ development, including Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) and associated Gli
transcription factors (Gli1-3), have recently been found to be reactivated in
NSCLC, their functional role remains unclear. Here, we hypothesized that
Shh/Gli1-3 could mediate NSCLC autonomous proliferation and epithelial/stromal
signaling in the tumoral tissue. In this context, we have investigated the
activity of Shh/Gli1-3 signaling in NSCLC in both, cancer and stromal cells. We
report here that inhibition of Shh signaling induces a significant decrease in
the proliferation of NSCLC cells. This effect is mediated by Gli1 and Gli2, but
not Gli3, through regulation of cyclin D1 and cyclin D2 expression. While
exogenous Shh was unable to induce signaling in either A549 lung adenocarcinoma
or H520 lung squamous carcinoma cells, both cells were found to secrete Shh
ligand, which induced fibroblast proliferation, survival, migration, invasion,
and collagen synthesis. Furthermore, Shh secreted by NSCLC mediates the
production of proangiogenic and metastatic factors in lung fibroblasts. Our
results thus provide evidence that Shh plays an important role in mediating
epithelial/mesenchymal crosstalk in NSCLC. While autonomous Gli activity controls
NSCLC proliferation, increased Shh expression by NSCLC is associated with
fibroblast activation in tumor-associated stroma. Our study highlights the
relevance of studying stromal-associated cells in the context of NSCLC regarding 
new prognosis and therapeutic options.

PMCID: PMC3646741
PMID: 23667589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jun 14;288(24):17589-96. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.467498. Epub
2013 May 3.

Specific requirement of Gli transcription factors in Hedgehog-mediated intestinal
development.

Huang H(1), Cotton JL, Wang Y, Rajurkar M, Zhu LJ, Lewis BC, Mao J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is involved in multiple aspects of embryonic gut
development, including mesenchymal growth and smooth muscle differentiation. The 
Gli family transcription factors is thought to collectively mediate Hh signaling 
in mammals. However, the function of different Gli proteins in gut development
remains uncharacterized. Here, we genetically dissect the contribution of Gli
transcriptional activation and de-repression in intestinal growth and patterning.
We find that removal of the Gli3 repressor is dispensable for intestinal
development and does not play a major role in Hh-controlled gut development.
However, Gli2 activation is able to fully rescue the Smoothened (Smo)-null
intestinal phenotype, suggesting that the Gli2 transcription factor is the main
effector for Hh signaling in the intestine. To understand further the molecular
mechanism underlying Hh/Gli function in the developing gut, we identify a subset 
of small leucine-rich glycoproteins (SLRPs) that may function downstream of Hh
signaling in the mesenchyme. We show that osteoglycin, a SLRP, inhibits
Hh-induced differentiation toward the smooth muscle lineage in C3H10T1/2
pluripotent mesenchymal cells. Taken together, our study reveals, for the first
time, the distinct roles of Gli proteins in intestine development and suggests
SLRPs as novel regulators of smooth muscle cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3682558
PMID: 23645682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Dev Biol. 2013 Jul 15;379(2):221-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.04.025. Epub 2013
May 2.

Mouse limbs expressing only the Gli3 repressor resemble those of Sonic hedgehog
mutants.

Cao T(1), Wang C, Yang M, Wu C, Wang B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Life Science, Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.

Anterioposterior vertebrate limb patterning is controlled by opposing action
between Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) and the Gli3 transcriptional repressor.
Unexpectedly, Gli3(<U+0394>699) mutant mice, which are thought to express only a Gli3
repressor and not the full-length activator, exhibit limb phenotypes inconsistent
with those of Shh mutant mice. Therefore, it remains debatable whether Shh
patterns the anterioposterior limb primarily by inhibiting generation of the Gli3
repressor. However, one caveat is that Gli3(<U+0394>699) may not be as potent as the
natural form of Gli3 repressor because of the nature of the mutant allele. In the
present study, we created a conditional Gli3 mutant allele that exclusively
expresses Gli3 repressor in the presence of Cre recombinase. Using this mutant,
we show that the phenotypes of mouse limbs expressing only the Gli3 repressor
exhibit no or single digit, resembling those of Shh mutant limbs. Consistent with
the limb phenotypes, the expression of genes dependent on Shh signaling is also
inhibited in both mutants. This inhibition by the Gli3 repressor is independent
of Shh. Thus, our study clarifies the current controversy and provides important 
genetic evidence to support the hypothesis that Shh patterns the anterioposterior
limb primarily through the inhibition of Gli3 repressor formation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3707282
PMID: 23644062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Development. 2013 May;140(10):2130-8. doi: 10.1242/dev.089409.

Decoupling the function of Hox and Shh in developing limb reveals multiple inputs
of Hox genes on limb growth.

Sheth R(1), Grégoire D, Dumouchel A, Scotti M, Pham JM, Nemec S, Bastida MF, Ros 
MA, Kmita M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Development, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de
Montréal (IRCM, Québec, Canada.

Limb development relies on an exquisite coordination between growth and
patterning, but the underlying mechanisms remain elusive. Anterior-posterior and 
proximal-distal specification initiates in early limb bud concomitantly with the 
proliferative expansion of limb cells. Previous studies have shown that limb bud 
growth initially relies on fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) produced in the
apical ectodermal ridge (AER-FGFs), the maintenance of which relies on a
positive-feedback loop involving sonic hedgehog (Shh) and the BMP antagonist
gremlin 1 (Grem1). The positive cross-regulation between Shh and the HoxA and
HoxD clustered genes identified an indirect effect of Hox genes on the
maintenance of AER-FGFs but the respective function of Shh and Hox genes in this 
process remains unknown. Here, by uncoupling Hox and Shh function, we show that
HoxA and HoxD genes are required for proper AER-FGFs expression, independently of
their function in controlling Shh expression. In addition, we provide evidence
that the Hox-dependent control of AER-FGF expression is achieved through the
regulation of key mesenchymal signals, namely Grem1 and Fgf10, ensuring proper
epithelial-mesenchymal interactions. Notably, HoxA and HoxD genes contribute to
both the initial activation of Grem1 and the subsequent anterior expansion of its
expression domain. We propose that the intricate interactions between Hox genes
and the FGF and Shh signaling pathways act as a molecular network that ensures
proper limb bud growth and patterning, probably contributing to the coordination 
of these two processes.

PMID: 23633510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Jun;161A(6):1394-400. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35874. Epub 2013
Apr 30.

A de novo GLI3 mutation in a patient with acrocallosal syndrome.

Speksnijder L(1), Cohen-Overbeek TE, Knapen MF, Lunshof SM, Hoogeboom AJ, van den
Ouwenland AM, de Coo IF, Lequin MH, Bolz HJ, Bergmann C, Biesecker LG, Willems
PJ, Wessels MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Erasmus MC University Medical Center,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Acrocallosal syndrome is characterized by postaxial polydactyly, macrocephaly,
agenesis of the corpus callosum, and severe developmental delay. In a few
patients with this disorder, a mutation in the KIF7 gene has been reported, which
was associated with impaired GLI3 processing and dysregulaton of GLI3
transcription factors. A single patient with acrocallosal syndrome and a de novo 
p.Ala934Pro mutation in GLI3 has been reported, whereas diverse and numerous GLI3
mutations have also been described in syndromes with overlapping clinical
manifestations, including Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome, Pallister-Hall
syndrome, trigonocephaly with craniosynostosis and polydactyly,
oral-facial-digital syndrome, and non-syndromic polydactyly. Here, we describe a 
second patient with acrocallosal syndrome, who has a de novo, novel c.2786T>C
mutation in GLI3, which predicts p.Leu929Pro. This mutation is in the same domain
as the mutation in the previously reported patient. These data confirm that
mutations in GLI3 are a cause of the acrocallosal phenotype.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23633388  [PubMed - in process]


163. Theriogenology. 2013 Jul 1;80(1):18-23. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2013.03.004. Epub 2013 Apr 25.

Effects of electromagnetic pulse on polydactyly of mouse fetuses.

Yang MJ(1), Liu JY, Wang YF, Lang HY, Miao X, Zhang LY, Zeng LH, Guo GZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Medicine and the Ministry of Education Key Lab of
Hazard Assessment and Control in Special Operational Environment, School of
Public Health, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, China.

There is an increasing public concern regarding potential health impacts from
electromagnetic radiation exposure. Embryonic development is sensitive to the
external environment, and limb development is vital for life quality. To
determine the effects of electromagnetic pulse (EMP) on polydactyly of mouse
fetuses, pregnant mice were sham-exposed or exposed to EMP (400 kV/m with 400
pulses) from Days 7 to 10 of pregnancy (Day 0 = day of detection of vaginal
plug). As a positive control, mice were treated with 5-bromodeoxyuridine on Days 
9 and 10. On Days 11 or 18, the fetuses were isolated. Compared with the
sham-exposed group, the group exposed to EMP had increased rates of polydactyly
fetuses (5.1% vs. 0.6%, P < 0.05) and abnormal gene expression (22.2% vs. 2.8%, P
< 0.05). Ectopic expression of Fgf4 was detected in the apical ectodermal ridge, 
whereas overexpression and ectopic expression of Shh were detected in the zone of
polarizing activity of limbs in the EMP-exposed group and in the positive control
group. However, expression of Gli3 decreased in mesenchyme cells in those two
groups. The percentages of programmed cell death of limbs in EMP-exposed and
positive control group were decreased (3.57% and 2.94%, respectively, P < 0.05,
compared with 7.76% in sham-exposed group). In conclusion, polydactyly induced by
EMP was accompanied by abnormal expression of the above-mentioned genes and
decreased percentage of programmed cell death during limb development.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23623167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Neural Dev. 2013 Apr 26;8:8. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-8-8.

Temporal and spatial requirements of Smoothened in ventral midbrain neuronal
development.

Tang M(1), Luo SX, Tang V, Huang EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

BACKGROUND: Several studies have indicated that Sonic hedgehog (Shh) regulates
the expansion of dopaminergic (DA) progenitors and the subsequent generation of
mature DA neurons. This prevailing view has been based primarily on in vitro
culture results, and the exact in vivo function of Shh signaling in the
patterning and neurogenesis of the ventral midbrain (vMB) remains unclear.
METHODS: We characterized the transcriptional codes for the vMB progenitor
domains, and correlated them with the expression patterns of Shh signaling
effectors, including Shh, Smoothened, Patched, Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3.
RESULTS: While Shh and its downstream effectors showed robust expression in the
neurogenic niche for DA progenitors at embryonic day (E)8 to E8.5, their
expression shifted to the lateral domains from E9.5 to E12.5. Consistent with
this dynamic change, conditional mutants with region-specific removal of the Shh 
receptor Smoothened in the vMB progenitors (Shh-Cre;Smo(fl/fl)) showed a
transient reduction in DA progenitors and DA neurons at E10.5, but had more
profound defects in neurons derived from the more lateral domains, including
those in the red nucleus, oculomotor nucleus, and raphe nuclei. Conversely,
constitutive activation of Smoothened signaling in vMB (Shh-Cre;SmoM2) showed
transient expansion of the same progenitor population. To further characterize
the nature of Shh-Smoothened signaling in vMB, we examined the BAT-GAL reporter
and the expression of Wnt1 in vMB, and found that the antagonistic effects of Shh
and Wnt signaling critically regulate the development of DA progenitors and DA
neurons.
CONCLUSION: These results highlight previously unrecognized effects of
Shh-Smoothened signaling in the region-specific neurogenesis within the vMB.

PMCID: PMC3680293
PMID: 23618354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. FASEB J. 2013 Aug;27(8):2977-87. doi: 10.1096/fj.13-227264. Epub 2013 Apr 16.

Regulation and function of immunosuppressive molecule human leukocyte antigen G5 
in human bone tissue.

Deschaseaux F(1), Gaillard J, Langonné A, Chauveau C, Naji A, Bouacida A, Rosset 
P, Heymann D, De Pinieux G, Rouas-Freiss N, Sensébé L.

Author information: 
(1)Stromalab Unité Mixte de Recherche (UMR) Université Paul Sabatier (UPS)/Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), Etablissement Français du Sang
(EFS)-Pyrénées-Méditerranée Toulouse, Toulouse, France.

Bone-marrow mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are the origin of bone-forming cells
with immunomodulation potential. HLA-G5 is among the generated immunosuppressive 
molecules. HLA-G proteins play a crucial role in promoting the acceptance of
allografts. However, the mechanisms regulating the expression of HLA-G5 in human 
MSCs are unknown. We induced differentiation of MSCs and found that HLA-G5 was
greatly up-regulated only in osteoblastic cells (+63% for mRNA). Growth plates
and bone callus postfracture in adults showed that only bone-lining cells and
mesenchymal progenitors were positive for HLA-G5. Use of gene silencing and
dominant-negative factors revealed that HLA-G5 depends on the expression and
function of the skeletogenesis master genes RUNX2 and DLX5. In addition, HLA-G5
could directly inhibit osteoclastogenesis by acting on monocytes through SHP1.
However, in mature osteoblasts, the expression of HLA-G5 protein was greatly
suppressed whereas the proosteoclastogenic factor, RANKL, was concomitantly
increased. Down-regulation of HLA-G5 expression during the maturation of
osteoblasts was due to binding of the repressor GLI3, a signal transducer of the 
Hedgehog pathway, to the GLI binding element within the HLA-G promoter. Our
findings show that mesenchymal progenitors and osteoblastic cells specifically
express HLA-G5 during osteogenesis, with a key role in bone homeostasis.

PMID: 23592762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. BMC Dev Biol. 2013 Apr 8;13:11. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-13-11.

Expression of SHH signaling molecules in the developing human primary dentition.

Hu X(1), Zhang S, Chen G, Lin C, Huang Z, Chen Y, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Fujian Key Laboratory of Developmental and Neuro Biology, College of Life
Science, Fujian Normal University, Fuzhou, Fujian, 350108, PR China.

BACKGROUND: Our current knowledge on tooth development derives primarily from
studies in mice. Very little is known about gene expression and function during
human odontogenesis. Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) signaling has been demonstrated to play
crucial roles in the development of multiple organs in mice, including the tooth.
However, if SHH signaling molecules are expressed and function in the developing 
human embryonic tooth remain unknown.
RESULTS: We conducted microarray assay to reveal the expression profile of SHH
signaling pathway molecules. We then used in situ hybridization to validate and
reveal spatial and temporal expression patterns of a number of selected
molecules, including SHH, PTC1, SMO, GLI1, GLI2, and GLI3, in the developing
human embryonic tooth germs, and compared them with that in mice. We found that
all these genes exhibit similar but slightly distinct expression patterns in the 
human and mouse tooth germ at the cap and bell stages.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate the operation of active SHH signaling in the
developing human tooth and suggest a conserved function of SHH signaling pathway 
during human odontogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3639830
PMID: 23566240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Eur Arch Paediatr Dent. 2013 Dec;14(6):405-10. doi: 10.1007/s40368-013-0010-2.
Epub 2013 Apr 3.

Candidate gene studies in hypodontia suggest role for FGF3.

Vieira AR(1), D'Souza RN, Mues G, Deeley K, Hsin HY, Küchler EC, Meira R, Patir
A, Tannure PN, Lips A, Costa MC, Granjeiro JM, Seymen F, Modesto A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology, School of Dental Medicine, University of
Pittsburgh, 614 Salk Hall, Pittsburgh, PA, 15261, USA, arv11@pitt.edu.

INTRODUCTION: The majority of tooth agenesis cases are mild (hypodontia) and
typically not associated with the gene mutations linked to oligodontia. From
this, we hypothesise that most cases of tooth agenesis fit a polygenic mode of
inheritance, where several genes with small effects cause a variety of varying
phenotypes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this study, we looked at 18 not typically studied genes
in this condition, to ascertain their contribution to hypodontia. Our study
subjects consisted of 167 patients with hypodontia and their parents from two
cohorts (one from Brazil and one from Turkey). An additional 465 DNA samples (93 
cases with hypodontia and 372 controls without family history for tooth agenesis 
or oral clefts) from Brazil were also available for this study. Ninety-three
single nucleotide polymorphisms that maximally represent the linkage
disequilibrium structure of the genes for the 18 genes were selected and
genotyped using Taqman chemistry. Chi square was used to test if genotype
distributions were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, and 24 markers that were in
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium and had allele frequencies higher than 5 % in a panel 
of 50 CEPH samples were further tested. Association between hypodontia and
genetic variants was tested with the transmission disequilibrium test within the 
programme Family-Based Association Test (FBAT) and by using Chi square and
Fisher's exact tests. Alpha at a level of 0.05 was used to report results.
RESULTS: Results suggest possible associations between several genes and
hypodontia in the three populations. In the Turkish cohort (n = 51
parent-affected child trios) the most significant results were as follows: FGF3
rs1893047, p = 0.08; GLI3 rs929387, p = 0.03; GLI3 haplotype rs929387-rs846266,
p = 0.002; and PAX9 rs2073242, p = 0.03. In the Brazilian cohort (n = 116
parent-affected child trios), the results were as follows: DLX1 rs788173,
p = 0.07; FGF3 rs12574452, p = 0.03; GLI2 rs1992901, p = 0.03; and PITX2
rs2595110, p = 0.01. The second Brazilian cohort also suggested that FGF3
(rs12574452, p = 0.01) is associated with hypodontia and added EDAR (rs17269487, 
p = 0.04), LHX6 (rs989798, p = 0.02), and MSX1 (rs12532, p = 0.003).
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that several genes are potentially associated
with hypodontia and their individual contributions may be modest. Hence, these
cases may not be explained by inactivating mutations such as many oligodontia
cases segregating in a Mendelian fashion but rather are influenced by one or more
susceptibility alleles in multiple small effect genes.

PMCID: PMC3732557
PMID: 23549991  [PubMed - in process]


168. Development. 2013 Apr;140(7):1594-604. doi: 10.1242/dev.090845.

Floor plate-derived sonic hedgehog regulates glial and ependymal cell fates in
the developing spinal cord.

Yu K(1), McGlynn S, Matise MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Cell Biology, UMDNJ/Robert Wood Johnson Medical
School, 675 Hoes Lane, Piscataway, NJ 08840, USA.

Cell fate specification in the CNS is controlled by the secreted morphogen sonic 
hedgehog (Shh). At spinal cord levels, Shh produced by both the notochord and
floor plate (FP) diffuses dorsally to organize patterned gene expression in
dividing neural and glial progenitors. Despite the fact that two discrete sources
of Shh are involved in this process, the individual contribution of the FP, the
only intrinsic source of Shh throughout both neurogenesis and gliogenesis, has
not been clearly defined. Here, we have used conditional mutagenesis approaches
in mice to selectively inactivate Shh in the FP (Shh(FP)) while allowing
expression to persist in the notochord, which underlies the neural tube during
neurogenesis but not gliogenesis. We also inactivated Smo, the common Hh
receptor, in neural tube progenitors. Our findings confirm and extend prior
studies suggesting an important requirement for Shh(FP) in specifying
oligodendrocyte cell fates via repression of Gli3 in progenitors. Our studies
also uncover a connection between embryonic Shh signaling and astrocyte-mediated 
reactive gliosis in adults, raising the possibility that this pathway is involved
in the development of the most common cell type in the CNS. Finally, we find that
intrinsic spinal cord Shh signaling is required for the proper formation of the
ependymal zone, the epithelial cell lining of the central canal that is also an
adult stem cell niche. Together, our studies identify a crucial late embryonic
role for Shh(FP) in regulating the specification and differentiation of glial and
epithelial cells in the mouse spinal cord.

PMCID: PMC3596997
PMID: 23482494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Clin Pathol. 2013 Jul;66(7):589-96. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2012-201425. Epub
2013 Mar 1.

Frequent expression of follicular dendritic cell markers in Hodgkin lymphoma and 
anaplastic large cell lymphoma.

Kim SH(1), Choe JY, Jeon Y, Huh J, Jung HR, Choi YD, Kim HJ, Cha HJ, Park WS, Kim
JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, National Cancer Center, Goyang, Korea.

AIMS: Although the tumour cells of Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) are derived from mature 
B-cells, the lineage infidelity of Hodgkin/Reed-Sternberg cells (HRSs) often
causes diagnostic problems. Recently introduced HRS markers are also positive for
follicular dendritic cells (FDCs). We investigated the expression of several FDC 
markers in HL and anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) and evaluated their
diagnostic efficacy.
METHODS: Eighty-five cases of HL and 52 cases of ALCL were included in this
study. Immunohistochemistry was performed for glioma-associated homologue (GLI)
3, class III ß-tubulin (TUBB3), fascin, clusterin, <U+03B3>-synuclein, podoplanin,
syntenin, CD21, CD35 and EGFR.
RESULTS: HRSs were diffusely positive for GLI3, fascin and TUBB3; the mean
positivity rates per case were 94% for GLI3, 82% for fascin, 69% for TUBB3, 17%
for clusterin, 17% for <U+03B3>-synuclein and 14% for syntenin. Podoplanin, CD21, CD35
and EGFR were almost negative. However, the frequency of marker expression was
not associated with the histologic subtype or the presence of Epstein-Barr virus 
(EBV). ALCL showed a similar pattern to HL, but the overall frequency of
positivity was lower than that observed in HL. The mean positivity rates were 56%
for GLI3, 62% for fascin, 58% for TUBB3 and 21% for clusterin. The other markers 
were nearly negative. Anaplastic large cell lymphoma kinase positivity did not
affect the expression rates.
CONCLUSIONS: This study confirmed the frequent expression of FDC markers in HL
and ALCL. Especially, GLI3, fascin and TUBB3 are the most sensitive markers.
Further studies are required to evaluate the association between FDCs, HRSs and
ALCL cells.

PMID: 23454725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Neurosci. 2013 Feb 27;33(9):3967-80. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0726-12.2013.

Wnt signal specifies the intrathalamic limit and its organizer properties by
regulating Shh induction in the alar plate.

Martinez-Ferre A(1), Navarro-Garberi M, Bueno C, Martinez S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neurosciences, Miguel Hernández University-Spanish National
Research Council, 03550 San Juan, Alicante, Spain.

The structural complexity of the brain depends on precise molecular and cellular 
regulatory mechanisms orchestrated by regional morphogenetic organizers. The
thalamic organizer is the zona limitans intrathalamica (ZLI), a transverse linear
neuroepithelial domain in the alar plate of the diencephalon. Because of its
production of Sonic hedgehog, ZLI acts as a morphogenetic signaling center. Shh
is expressed early on in the prosencephalic basal plate and is then gradually
activated dorsally within the ZLI. The anteroposterior positioning and the
mechanism inducing Shh expression in ZLI cells are still partly unknown, being a 
subject of controversial interpretations. For instance, separate experimental
results have suggested that juxtaposition of prechordal (rostral) and epichordal 
(caudal) neuroepithelium, anteroposterior encroachment of alar lunatic fringe
(L-fng) expression, and/or basal Shh signaling is required for ZLI specification.
Here we investigated a key role of Wnt signaling in the molecular regulation of
ZLI positioning and Shh expression, using experimental embryology in ovo in the
chick. Early Wnt expression in the ZLI regulates Gli3 and L-fng to generate a
permissive territory in which Shh is progressively induced by planar signals of
the basal plate.

PMID: 23447606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Dis Esophagus. 2013 Sep-Oct;26(7):678-81. doi: 10.1111/dote.12036. Epub 2013 Feb 
26.

Normal exon copy number of the GLI2 and GLI3 genes in patients with esophageal
atresia.

Bednarczyk D(1), Smigiel R, Patkowski D, Laczmanska I, Lebioda A, Laczmanski L,
Sasiadek MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland.

Esophageal atresia (EA) is a congenital developmental defect of the alimentary
tract concerning the interruption of the esophagus with or without connection to 
the trachea. The incidence of EA is 1 in 3000-3500 of live-born infants, and
occurs in both isolated and syndromic (in combination with abnormalities in other
organ systems) forms. The molecular mechanisms underlying the development of EA
are poorly understood. Knockout studies in mice indicate that genes like Sonic
hedgehog, Gli2, and Gli3 play a role in the etiology of EA. These facts led us to
hypothesize that Sonic hedgehog-GLI gene rearrangements are associated with EA in
humans. To test this hypothesis, we screened patients with isolated and syndromic
EA for GLI2 and/or GLI3 microrearrangements using methods to estimate the copy
number (Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification, real-time polymerase
chain reaction). To our best knowledge this is the first study assessing copy
number of GLI2 and GLI3 genes in patients with EA.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. and the International Society for Diseases of the 
Esophagus.

PMID: 23442119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Hand Surg Eur Vol. 2013 Nov;38(9):934-9. doi: 10.1177/1753193413479263. Epub
2013 Feb 22.

The pathogenesis of ulnar polydactyly in humans.

Al-Qattan MM(1), Al-Motairi MI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

The pathogenesis of ulnar polydactyly in humans is not known. There are numerous 
syndromes that are associated with ulnar polydactyly. We have noted that the
genetic defects in these syndromes lead to a disturbance of the normal balance
between the two forms of the Gli3 protein (the active and repressor forms of
Gli3, which are known as Gli3-A and Gli3-R, respectively), leading to a relative 
increase in the Gli3-R protein. We offer the hypothesis of a unified pathogenesis
of ulnar polydactyly through the relative predominance of Gli3-R.

PMID: 23435486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Dev Biol. 2013 Apr 15;376(2):113-24. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.02.001. Epub 2013 
Feb 8.

Gli3 is required in Emx1+ progenitors for the development of the corpus callosum.

Amaniti EM(1), Hasenpusch-Theil K, Li Z, Magnani D, Kessaris N, Mason JO, Theil
T.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Integrative Physiology, University of Edinburgh, Hugh Robson
Building, George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9XD, United Kingdom.

The corpus callosum (CC) is the largest commissure in the forebrain and mediates 
the transfer of sensory, motor and cognitive information between the cerebral
hemispheres. During CC development, a number of strategically located glial and
neuronal guidepost structures serve to guide callosal axons across the midline at
the corticoseptal boundary (CSB). Correct positioning of these guideposts
requires the Gli3 gene, mutations of which result in callosal defects in humans
and mice. However, as Gli3 is widely expressed during critical stages of
forebrain development, the precise temporal and spatial requirements for Gli3
function in callosal development remain unclear. Here, we used a conditional
mouse mutant approach to inactivate Gli3 in specific regions of the developing
telencephalon in order to delineate the domain(s) in which Gli3 is required for
normal development of the corpus callosum. Inactivation of Gli3 in the septum or 
in the medial ganglionic eminence had no effect on CC formation, however Gli3
inactivation in the developing cerebral cortex led to the formation of a severely
hypoplastic CC at E18.5 due to a severe disorganization of midline guideposts.
Glial wedge cells translocate prematurely and Slit1/2 are ectopically expressed
in the septum. These changes coincide with altered Fgf and Wnt/ß-catenin
signalling during CSB formation. Collectively, these data demonstrate a crucial
role for Gli3 in cortical progenitors to control CC formation and indicate how
defects in CSB formation affect the positioning of callosal guidepost cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23396189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Anticancer Agents Med Chem. 2014 Jan;14(1):9-17.

The microarray gene profiling analysis of glioblastoma cancer cells reveals genes
affected by FAK inhibitor Y15 and combination of Y15 and temozolomide.

Huang G, Ho B, Conroy J, Liu S, Qiang H, Golubovskaya V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY,
14263, USA. Vita.Golubovskaya@roswellpark.org.

Focal adhesion is known to be highly expressed and activated in glioma cells.
Recently, we demonstrated that FAK autophosphorylation inhibitor, Y15
significantly decreased tumor growth of DBTRG and U87 cells, especially in
combination with temozolomide. In the present report, we performed gene
expression analysis in these cells to reveal genes affected by Y15, temozolomide 
and combination of Y15 and temozolomide. We tested the effect of Y15 on gene
expression by Illumina Human HT12v4 microarray assay and detected 8087 and 6555
genes, which were significantly either up- or down-regulated by Y15-treatment in 
DBTRG and U87 cells, respectively (p<0.05). Moreover, DBTRG and U87 cells treated
with Y15 changed expression of 1332 and 462 genes more than 1.5 fold, p<0.05,
respectively and had 237 common genes affected by Y15. The common genes
up-regulated by Y15 included GADD45A, HSPA6 (heat-shock 70); DUSP1, DUSP 5
(dual-phosphatase 5); CDKN1A (p21) and common down-regulated genes included
kinesins, such as KIF11, 14, 20A, 20B; topoisomerase II, TOP2A; cyclin F; cell
cycle protein: BUB1; PARP1, POLA1. In addition, we detected genes affected by
temozolomide and by combination of Y15 and temozolomide treatment in U87 cells.
Among genes up-regulated by Y15 and temozolomide more significantly than by each 
agent alone were: COX7B; interferon, gamma-inducible transcript: IFI16; DDIT4;
GADD45G and down-regulated: KIF3A, AKT1; ABL; JAK1, GLI3 and ALDH1A3. Thus,
microarray gene expression analysis can be effective in establishing genes
affected in response to FAK inhibitor alone and in response to combination of Y15
with temozolomide that is important for glioblastoma therapy.

PMCID: PMC3883957
PMID: 23387973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Ann Plast Surg. 2013 Jul;71(1):118-24. doi: 10.1097/SAP.0b013e318248b67f.

Preaxial polydactyly of the upper limb viewed as a spectrum of severity of
embryonic events.

Al-Qattan MM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Plastic and Hand Surgery, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia. moqattan@hotmail.com

Preaxial polydactyly (PPD) is a common congenital abnormality and its
classification varies among geneticists and hand surgeons. For example, the
triphalangeal thumb, preaxial polysyndactyly, and the mirror hand deformity are
considered as forms of PPD only in the genetics literature. Preaxial polydactyly 
is an error in the anteroposterior axis of the development of the upper limb. In 
this paper, the development of this axis is detailed and all molecular events
that are known to lead to PPD are reviewed. Finally, based on the review, PPD is 
viewed as a spectrum of severity of embryonic events.

PMID: 23364674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Eur J Pediatr. 2013 Aug;172(8):1131-5. doi: 10.1007/s00431-013-1938-2. Epub 2013 
Jan 19.

Two Indian families with Greig cephalopolysyndactyly with non-syndromic
phenotype.

Sethi SK(1), Goyal D, Khalil S, Yadav DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, PGIMER and Associated RML Hospital, New Delhi
110001, India. sidsdoc@gmail.com

The Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS) is a rare, autosomal dominant,
pleiotropic, multiple congenital anomaly syndrome. The typical findings include
hypertelorism, macrocephaly with frontal bossing, and polysyndactyly. We present 
two families, with GCPS with a non-syndromic phenotype, without the
characteristic craniofacial anomalies and with the presence of complex digital
anomalies including various types of polydactyly and syndactyly of the fingers
and toes. The cases were proven to be GCPS by mutational analysis of GL13 gene.
Our patients support the fact that the phenotypic spectrum of GL13 mutations is
broader than that encompassed by the usual clinical diagnostic criteria.
Individuals with features of familial polysyndactyly should be screened for
mutations in GL13 even if they do not fulfill clinical criteria.

PMID: 23334564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Cell. 2013 Jan 17;152(1-2):210-23. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.12.026.

The ciliary G-protein-coupled receptor Gpr161 negatively regulates the Sonic
hedgehog pathway via cAMP signaling.

Mukhopadhyay S(1), Wen X, Ratti N, Loktev A, Rangell L, Scales SJ, Jackson PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research Oncology, Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, CA
94080, USA. saikat.mukhopadhyay@utsouthwestern.edu

Comment in
    Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Mar;14(3):129.

The primary cilium is required for Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling in vertebrates.
In contrast to mutants affecting ciliary assembly, mutations in the
intraflagellar transport complex A (IFT-A) paradoxically cause increased Shh
signaling. We previously showed that the IFT-A complex, in addition to its
canonical role in retrograde IFT, binds to the tubby-like protein, Tulp3, and
recruits it to cilia. Here, we describe a conserved vertebrate G-protein-coupled 
receptor, Gpr161, which localizes to primary cilia in a Tulp3/IFT-A-dependent
manner. Complete loss of Gpr161 in mouse causes midgestation lethality and
increased Shh signaling in the neural tube, phenocopying Tulp3/IFT-A mutants.
Constitutive Gpr161 activity increases cAMP levels and represses Shh signaling by
determining the processing of Gli3 to its repressor form. Conversely, Shh
signaling directs Gpr161 to be internalized from cilia, preventing its activity. 
Thus, Gpr161 defines a morphogenetic pathway coupling protein kinase A activation
to Shh signaling during neural tube development.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23332756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Evol Dev. 2013 Jan;15(1):18-27. doi: 10.1111/ede.12011.

Development of the marsupial shoulder girdle complex: a case study in Monodelphis
domestica.

Hübler M(1), Molineaux AC, Keyte A, Schecker T, Sears KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, School of Integrative Biology, University of
Illinois, 505 South Goodwin Avenue, Urbana, IL, 61801, USA.

During their embryogenesis, marsupials transiently develop a unique structure,
the shoulder arch, which provides the structural support and muscle-attachments
necessary for the newborn's crawl to the teat. One of the most pronounced and
functionally important aspects of the shoulder arch is an enlarged coracoid. The 
goal of this study is to determine the molecular basis of shoulder arch formation
in marsupials. To achieve this goal, this study investigates the relative
expression of several genes with known roles in shoulder girdle morphogenesis in 
a marsupial-the opossum, Monodelphis domestica-and a placental, the mouse, Mus
musculus. Results indicate that Hoxc6, a gene involved in coracoid patterning, is
expressed for a longer period of time and at higher levels in opossum relative to
mouse. Functional manipulation suggests that these differences in Hoxc6
expression are independent of documented differences in retinoic acid signaling
in opossum and mouse forelimbs. Results also indicate that Emx2, a gene involved 
in scapular blade condensation, is upregulated in opossum relative to mouse.
However, several other genes involved in shoulder girdle patterning (e.g., Gli3, 
Pax1, Pbx1, Tbx15) are comparably expressed in these species. These findings
suggest that the upregulation of Hoxc6 and Emx2 occurs through independent
genetic modifications in opossum relative to mouse. In summary, this study
documents a correlation between gene expression and the divergent shoulder girdle
morphogenesis of marsupial (i.e., opossum) and placental (i.e., mouse) mammals,
and thereby provides a foundation for future research into the genetic basis of
shoulder girdle morphogenesis in marsupials. Furthermore, this study supports the
hypothesis that the mammalian shoulder girdle is a highly modular structure whose
elements are relatively free to evolve independently.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23331914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53830. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053830. Epub 2013 Jan 11.

Insights into the genetic architecture of early stage age-related macular
degeneration: a genome-wide association study meta-analysis.

Holliday EG(1), Smith AV, Cornes BK, Buitendijk GH, Jensen RA, Sim X, Aspelund T,
Aung T, Baird PN, Boerwinkle E, Cheng CY, van Duijn CM, Eiriksdottir G, Gudnason 
V, Harris T, Hewitt AW, Inouye M, Jonasson F, Klein BE, Launer L, Li X, Liew G,
Lumley T, McElduff P, McKnight B, Mitchell P, Psaty BM, Rochtchina E, Rotter JI, 
Scott RJ, Tay W, Taylor K, Teo YY, Uitterlinden AG, Viswanathan A, Xie S;
Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium 2, Vingerling JR, Klaver CC, Tai ES,
Siscovick D, Klein R, Cotch MF, Wong TY, Attia J, Wang JJ.

Collaborators: Donnelly P, Barroso I, Blackwell JM, Bramon E, Brown MA, Casas JP,
Corvin A, Deloukas P, Duncanson A, Jankowski J, Markus HS, Mathew CG, Palmer CN, 
Plomin R, Rautanen A, Sawcer SJ, Trembath RC, Viswanathan AC, Wood NW, Spencer C,
Band G, Bellenguez C, Freeman C, Hellenthal G, Giannoulatou E, Pirinen M, Pearson
R, Strange A, Su Z, Vukcevic D, Donnelly P, Langford C, Hunt SE, Edkins S,
Gwilliam R, Blackburn H, Bumpstead SJ, Dronov S, Gillman M, Gray E, Hammond N,
Jayakumar A, McCann OT, Liddle J, Potter SC, Ravindrarajah R, Ricketts M, Waller 
M, Weston P, Widaa S, Whittaker P, Barroso I, Deloukas P, Mathew C, Blackwell JM,
Brown MA, Corvin A, Spencer CC.

Genetic factors explain a majority of risk variance for age-related macular
degeneration (AMD). While genome-wide association studies (GWAS) for late AMD
implicate genes in complement, inflammatory and lipid pathways, the genetic
architecture of early AMD has been relatively under studied. We conducted a GWAS 
meta-analysis of early AMD, including 4,089 individuals with prevalent signs of
early AMD (soft drusen and/or retinal pigment epithelial changes) and 20,453
individuals without these signs. For various published late AMD risk loci, we
also compared effect sizes between early and late AMD using an additional 484
individuals with prevalent late AMD. GWAS meta-analysis confirmed previously
reported association of variants at the complement factor H (CFH) (peak
P<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.5×10(-31)) and age-related maculopathy susceptibility 2 (ARMS2)
(P<U+200A>=<U+200A>4.3×10(-24)) loci, and suggested Apolipoprotein E (ApoE) polymorphisms
(rs2075650; P<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.1×10(-6)) associated with early AMD. Other possible loci that
did not reach GWAS significance included variants in the zinc finger protein gene
GLI3 (rs2049622; P<U+200A>=<U+200A>8.9×10(-6)) and upstream of GLI2 (rs6721654;
P<U+200A>=<U+200A>6.5×10(-6)), encoding retinal Sonic hedgehog signalling regulators, and in
the tyrosinase (TYR) gene (rs621313; P<U+200A>=<U+200A>3.5×10(-6)), involved in melanin
biosynthesis. For a range of published, late AMD risk loci, estimated effect
sizes were significantly lower for early than late AMD. This study confirms the
involvement of multiple established AMD risk variants in early AMD, but suggests 
weaker genetic effects on the risk of early AMD relative to late AMD. Several
biological processes were suggested to be potentially specific for early AMD,
including pathways regulating RPE cell melanin content and signalling pathways
potentially involved in retinal regeneration, generating hypotheses for further
investigation.

PMCID: PMC3543264
PMID: 23326517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Dev Biol. 2013 Mar 15;375(2):160-71. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.12.018. Epub 2013 
Jan 8.

Sonic hedgehog signaling directly targets Hyaluronic Acid Synthase 2, an
essential regulator of phalangeal joint patterning.

Liu J(1), Li Q, Kuehn MR, Litingtung Y, Vokes SA, Chiang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signal, mediated by the Gli family of transcription factors,
plays an essential role in the growth and patterning of the limb. Through
analysis of the early limb bud transcriptome, we identified a
posteriorly-enriched gene, Hyaluronic Acid Synthase 2 (Has2), which encodes a key
enzyme for the synthesis of hyaluronan (HA), as a direct target of Gli
transcriptional regulation during early mouse limb development. Has2 expression
in the limb bud is lost in Shh null and expanded anteriorly in Gli3 mutants. We
identified an ~3kb Has2 promoter fragment that contains two strong Gli-binding
consensus sequences, and mutation of either site abrogated the ability of Gli1 to
activate Has2 promoter in a cell-based assay. Additionally, this promoter
fragment is sufficient to direct expression of a reporter gene in the posterior
limb mesenchyme. Chromatin immunoprecipitation of DNA-Gli3 protein complexes from
limb buds indicated that Gli3 strongly binds to the Has2 promoter region,
suggesting that Has2 is a direct transcriptional target of the Shh signaling
pathway. We also showed that Has2 conditional mutant (Has2cko) hindlimbs display 
digit-specific patterning defects with longitudinally shifted phalangeal joints
and impaired chondrogenesis. Has2cko limbs show less capacity for mesenchymal
condensation with mislocalized distributions of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans
(CSPGs), aggrecan and link protein. Has2cko limb phenotype displays striking
resemblance to mutants with defective chondroitin sulfation suggesting tight
developmental control of HA on CSPG function. Together, our study identifies Has2
as a novel downstream target of Shh signaling required for joint patterning and
chondrogenesis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3820152
PMID: 23313125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53675. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053675. Epub 2013 Jan 7.

Analysis of the Sonic Hedgehog signaling pathway in normal and abnormal bladder
development.

DeSouza KR(1), Saha M, Carpenter AR, Scott M, McHugh KM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Human Genetics, The Research Institute at Nationwide 
Children's Hospital, Columbus, Ohio, United States of America.
kristin.desouza@nationwidechildrens.org

In this study, we examined the expression of Sonic Hedgehog, Patched, Gli1, Gli2,
Gli3 and Myocardin in the developing bladders of male and female normal and
megabladder (mgb-/-) mutant mice at embryonic days 12 through 16 by in situ
hybridization. This analysis indicated that each member of the Sonic Hedgehog
signaling pathway as well as Myocardin displayed distinct temporal and spatial
patterns of expression during normal bladder development. In contrast, mgb-/-
bladders showed both temporal and spatial changes in the expression of Patched,
Gli1 and Gli3 as well as a complete lack of Myocardin expression. These changes
occurred primarily in the outer mesenchyme of developing mgb-/- bladders
consistent with the development of an amuscular bladder phenotype in these
animals. These results provide the first comprehensive analysis of the Sonic
Hedgehog signaling pathway during normal bladder development and provide strong
evidence that this key signaling cascade is critical in establishing radial
patterning in the developing bladder. In addition, the lack of detrusor smooth
muscle development observed in mgb-/- mice is associated with bladder-specific
temporospatial changes in Sonic Hedgehog signaling coupled with a lack of
Myocardin expression that appears to result in altered patterning of the outer
mesenchyme and poor initiation and differentiation of smooth muscle cells within 
this region of the developing bladder.

PMCID: PMC3538723
PMID: 23308271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Blood. 2013 Feb 28;121(9):1543-52. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-09-457747. Epub 2013
Jan 4.

Gli3-mediated hedgehog inhibition in human pluripotent stem cells initiates and
augments developmental programming of adult hematopoiesis.

McIntyre BA(1), Ramos-Mejia V, Rampalli S, Mechael R, Lee JH, Alev C, Sheng G,
Bhatia M.

Author information: 
(1)McMaster Stem Cell and Cancer Research Institute, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

Programs that control early lineage fate decisions and transitions from embryonic
to adult human cell types during development are poorly understood. Using human
pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs), in the present study, we reveal reduction of
Hedgehog (Hh) signaling correlates to developmental progression of hematopoiesis 
throughout human ontogeny. Both chemical- and gene-targetingmediated
inactivation of Hh signaling augmented hematopoietic fate and initiated
transitions from embryonic to adult hematopoiesis, as measured by globin
regulation in hPSCs. Inhibition of the Hh pathway resulted in truncation of Gli3 
to its repressor, Gli3R, and was shown to be necessary and sufficient for
initiating this transition. Our results reveal an unprecedented role for Hh
signaling in the regulation of adult hematopoietic specification, thereby
demonstrating the ability to modulate the default embryonic programs of hPSCs.

PMID: 23293081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Cells. 2013 Jun 27;2(3):496-505. doi: 10.3390/cells2030496.

The Role of Tricho-Rhino-Phalangeal Syndrome (TRPS) 1 in Apoptosis during
Embryonic Development and Tumor Progression.

Sun Y(1), Gui T(1), Shimokado A(1), Muragaki Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Pathology, Wakayama Medical University School of Medicine,
811-1 Kimiidera, Wakayama 641-0012, Japan. (2)First Department of Pathology,
Wakayama Medical University School of Medicine, 811-1 Kimiidera, Wakayama
641-0012, Japan. ymuragak@wakayama-med.ac.jp.

TRPS1 is a GATA-type transcription factor that is closely related to human
tricho-rhino-phalangeal syndrome (TRPS) types I and III, variants of an autosomal
dominant skeletal disorder. During embryonic development, Trps1 represses Sox9
expression and regulates Wnt signaling pathways that determine the number of hair
follicles and their normal morphogenesis. In the growth plate, Trps1 regulates
chondrocytes condensation, proliferation, and maturation and phalangeal joint
formation by functioning downstream of Gdf5 signaling and by targeting at Pthrp, 
Stat3 and Runx2. Also, Trps1 protein directly interacts with an activated form of
Gli3. In embryonic kidneys, Trps1 functions downstream of BMP7 promoting the
mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition, and facilitating tubule morphogenesis and
ureteric bud branching. Moreover, Trps1 has been found to be closely related to
tumorigenesis, invasion, and metastasis in prostate and breast cancers. It is
interesting to note that during the development of hair follicles, bones, and
kidneys, mutations in Trps1 cause, either directly or through crosstalk with
other regulators, a notable change in cell proliferation and cell death. In this 
review, we will summarize the most recent studies on Trps1 and seek to elucidate 
the role for Trps1 in apoptotic regulation.

PMCID: PMC3972667
PMID: 24709795  [PubMed]


184. Science. 2012 Dec 14;338(6113):1476-80. doi: 10.1126/science.1226804.

Hox genes regulate digit patterning by controlling the wavelength of a
Turing-type mechanism.

Sheth R(1), Marcon L, Bastida MF, Junco M, Quintana L, Dahn R, Kmita M, Sharpe J,
Ros MA.

Author information: 
(1)Facultad de Medicina, Instituto de Biomedicina y Biotecnología de Cantabria,
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas-Sociedad para el Desarrollo
Regional de Cantabria-Universidad de Cantabria, 39011 Santander, Spain.

Comment in
    Science. 2012 Dec 14;338(6113):1406.
    Genome Biol. 2013;14(1):101.

The formation of repetitive structures (such as stripes) in nature is often
consistent with a reaction-diffusion mechanism, or Turing model, of
self-organizing systems. We used mouse genetics to analyze how digit patterning
(an iterative digit/nondigit pattern) is generated. We showed that the
progressive reduction in Hoxa13 and Hoxd11-Hoxd13 genes (hereafter referred to as
distal Hox genes) from the Gli3-null background results in progressively more
severe polydactyly, displaying thinner and densely packed digits. Combined with
computer modeling, our results argue for a Turing-type mechanism underlying digit
patterning, in which the dose of distal Hox genes modulates the digit period or
wavelength. The phenotypic similarity with fish-fin endoskeleton patterns
suggests that the pentadactyl state has been achieved through modification of an 
ancestral Turing-type mechanism.

PMCID: PMC4486416
PMID: 23239739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Biol Open. 2012 Nov 15;1(11):1102-10. doi: 10.1242/bio.20122386. Epub 2012 Aug
21.

Joint interpretation of AER/FGF and ZPA/SHH over time and space underlies hairy2 
expression in the chick limb.

Sheeba CJ(1), Andrade RP, Palmeirim I.

Author information: 
(1)Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), School of Health Sciences,
University of Minho , 4710-057 Braga , Portugal; ICVS/3B's - PT Government
Associate Laboratory, Braga/Guimarães, Portugal ; Regenerative Medicine Program, 
Departamento de Ciências Biomédicas e Medicina, Universidade do Algarve ,
8005-139 Faro , Portugal; IBB-Institute for Biotechnology and Bioengineering,
Centro de Biomedicina Molecular e Estrutural, Universidade do Algarve, 8005-139
Faro, Portugal.

Embryo development requires precise orchestration of cell proliferation and
differentiation in both time and space. A molecular clock operating through gene 
expression oscillations was first described in the presomitic mesoderm (PSM)
underlying periodic somite formation. Cycles of HES gene expression have been
further identified in other progenitor cells, including the chick distal limb
mesenchyme, embryonic neural progenitors and both mesenchymal and embryonic stem 
cells. In the limb, hairy2 is expressed in the distal mesenchyme, adjacent to the
FGF source (AER) and along the ZPA-derived SHH gradient, the two major regulators
of limb development. Here we report that hairy2 expression depends on joint
AER/FGF and ZPA/SHH signaling. FGF plays an instructive role on hairy2, mediated 
by Erk and Akt pathway activation, while SHH acts by creating a permissive state 
defined by Gli3-A/Gli3-R>1. Moreover, we show that AER/FGF and ZPA/SHH present
distinct temporal and spatial signaling properties in the distal limb mesenchyme:
SHH acts at a long-term, long-range on hairy2, while FGF has a short-term,
short-range action. Our work establishes limb hairy2 expression as an output of
integrated FGF and SHH signaling in time and space, providing novel clues for
understanding the regulatory mechanisms underlying HES oscillations in multiple
systems, including embryonic stem cell pluripotency.

PMCID: PMC3507187
PMID: 23213390  [PubMed]


186. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Nov 27;109(48):19519-20. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1217267109. Epub 2012 Nov 26.

Yin and yang of mediator function revealed by human mutants.

Berk AJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, Molecular
Biology Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
berk@mbi.ucla.edu

Comment on
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Nov 27;109(48):19763-8.

PMCID: PMC3511750
PMID: 23184968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Cancer Sci. 2013 Mar;104(3):328-36. doi: 10.1111/cas.12073. Epub 2013 Jan 10.

Hedgehog Gli3 activator signal augments tumorigenicity of colorectal cancer via
upregulation of adherence-related genes.

Iwasaki H(1), Nakano K, Shinkai K, Kunisawa Y, Hirahashi M, Oda Y, Onishi H,
Katano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Therapy and Research, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

Hedgehog signal is re-activated in several cancers. In this study, we examined
the role of Gli3 on malignant phenotype of tumorigenicity for colorectal cancer
and its relationship with p53, WNT and ERK/AKT signals. Gli3 expression was
detected in HT29 and SW480 (p53-mutant) cells, but not in DLD-1 (p53-mutant) or
HCT116 (p53-wild type) cells by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
and immunocytochemistry. Full-length Gli3 transfection increased
anchor-independent growth for all cells regardless of p53 status, with
upregulation of adhesion-related genes. Exogenous Sonic-Hedgehog increased
activator-type of Gli3 and colony formation in Gli3-positive HT29 and SW480
cells. After implantation of Gli3-FL or mock-transfectant DLD-1 cells into SCID
mice, tumor formation was highly observed in only Gli3-FL-transfectant group. In 
clinical specimens, Gli3 expression was detected in subsets of colorectal cancer 
and related with poorly-differentiated histological type, while Sonic-Hedgehog
was present with high incidence. In conclusion, activator Gli3 signal augments
tumorigenicity of colorectal cancer irrespective of p53 status.

© 2012 Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 23176625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Oncogene. 2013 Oct;32(40):4737-47. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.502. Epub 2012 Nov 12.

WIP1 phosphatase modulates the Hedgehog signaling by enhancing GLI1 function.

Pandolfi S(1), Montagnani V, Penachioni JY, Vinci MC, Olivito B, Borgognoni L,
Stecca B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tumor Cell Biology, Core Research Laboratory-Istituto Toscano
Tumori (CRL-ITT), Florence, Italy.

The Hedgehog-GLI (HH-GLI) signaling plays a critical role in controlling growth
and tissue patterning during embryogenesis and is implicated in a variety of
human malignancies, including those of the skin. Phosphorylation events have been
shown to regulate the activity of the GLI transcription factors, the final
effectors of the HH-GLI signaling pathway. Here, we show that WIP1 (or PPM1D), an
oncogenic phosphatase amplified/overexpressed in several types of human cancer,
is a positive modulator of the HH signaling. Mechanistically, WIP1 enhances the
function of GLI1 by increasing its transcriptional activity, nuclear localization
and protein stability, but not of GLI2 nor GLI3. We also find that WIP1 and GLI1 
are in a complex. Modulation of the transcriptional activity of GLI1 by WIP1
depends on the latter's phosphatase activity and, remarkably, does not require
p53, a known WIP1 target. Functionally, we find that WIP1 is required for
melanoma and breast cancer cell proliferation and self-renewal in vitro and
melanoma xenograft growth induced by activation of the HH signaling.
Pharmacological blockade of the HH pathway with the SMOOTHENED antagonist
cyclopamine acts synergistically with inhibition of WIP1 in reducing growth of
melanoma and breast cancer cells in vitro. Overall, our data uncover a role for
WIP1 in modulating the activity of GLI1 and in sustaining cancer cell growth and 
cancer stem cell self-renewal induced by activation of the HH pathway. These
findings open a novel therapeutic approach for human melanomas and, possibly,
other cancer types expressing WIP1 and with activated HH pathway.

PMID: 23146903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Gene. 2013 Jan 15;513(1):141-6. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.10.052. Epub 2012 Nov 9.

Haplotype distribution in the GLI3 gene and their associations with growth traits
in cattle.

Huang YZ(1), Wang KY, He H, Shen QW, Lei CZ, Lan XY, Zhang CL, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Shaanxi
Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Agriculture, Yangling Shaanxi 712100,
China. huangyongzhen2009@yahoo.com.cn

The glioma-associated oncogene family zinc finger 3 gene (GLI3) mediates in all
vertebrates hedgehog (Hh) signaling that plays an essential role in the induction
and patterning of numerous cell types during invertebrate and vertebrate
development. In this study, a total of 6 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs:
1-6) were identified by polymerase chain reaction-single stranded conformational 
polymorphism (PCR-SSCP) and DNA pool sequencing, including all 13 exons and 12
exon-intron boundaries within the bovine GLI3 gene. 16 haplotypes and 13 combined
genotypes were revealed and the linkage disequilibrium was assessed in 708
individuals representing three main cattle breeds from China. The statistical
analyses indicated that the SNP2, 3 and 4 are associated with the body weight at 
birth and 6 months in Nanyang cattle population (P<0.05). No significant
association was detected between 11 combined genotypes and body weight at five
different ages. Our results provide evidence that polymorphisms in the GLI3 gene 
are associated with growth traits, and may be used for marker-assisted selection 
in beef cattle breeding program.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 23142388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e48039. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048039. Epub 2012 Oct 24.

Inflammation and Gli2 suppress gastrin gene expression in a murine model of
antral hyperplasia.

Saqui-Salces M(1), Covés-Datson E, Veniaminova NA, Waghray M, Syu LJ, Dlugosz AA,
Merchant JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 
United States of America.

Chronic inflammation in the stomach can lead to gastric cancer. We previously
reported that gastrin-deficient (Gast<U+207B>/<U+207B>) mice develop bacterial overgrowth,
inflammatory infiltrate, increased Il-1ß expression, antral hyperplasia and
eventually antral tumors. Since Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is active in gastric
cancers but its role in precursor lesions is poorly understood, we examined the
role of inflammation and Hh signaling in antral hyperplasia. LacZ reporter mice
for Sonic hedgehog (Shh), Gli1, and Gli2 expression bred onto the Gast<U+207B>/<U+207B>
background revealed reduced Shh and Gli1 expression in the antra compared to wild
type controls (WT). Gli2 expression in the Gast<U+207B>/<U+207B> corpus was unchanged. However 
in the hyperplastic Gast<U+207B>/<U+207B> antra, Gli2 expression increased in both the
mesenchyme and epithelium, whereas expression in WT mice remained exclusively
mesenchymal. These observations suggested that Gli2 is differentially regulated
in the hyperplastic Gast<U+207B>/<U+207B> antrum versus the corpus and by a Shh
ligand-independent mechanism. Moreover, the proinflammatory cytokines Il-1ß and
Il-11, which promote gastric epithelial proliferation, were increased in the
Gast<U+207B>/<U+207B> stomach along with Inf<U+03B3>. To test if inflammation could account for
elevated epithelial Gli2 expression in the Gast<U+207B>/<U+207B> antra, the human gastric cell 
line AGS was treated with IL-1ß and was found to increase GLI2 but decrease GLI1 
levels. IL-1ß also repressed human GAST gene expression. Indeed, GLI2 but not
GLI1 or GLI3 expression repressed gastrin luciferase reporter activity by ~50
percent. Moreover, chromatin immunoprecipitation of GLI2 in AGS cells confirmed
that GLI2 directly binds to the GAST promoter. Using a mouse model of
constitutively active epithelial GLI2 expression, we found that activated GLI2
repressed Gast expression but induced Il-1ß gene expression and proliferation in 
the gastric antrum, along with a reduction of the number of G-cells. In summary, 
epithelial Gli2 expression was sufficient to stimulate Il-1ß expression, repress 
Gast gene expression and increase proliferation, leading to antral hyperplasia.

PMCID: PMC3480483
PMID: 23110168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Mol Biol Rep. 2013 Feb;40(2):1911-5. doi: 10.1007/s11033-012-2247-y. Epub 2012
Oct 25.

Analysis of the polymorphisms in the caprine Gli3 gene and their associations
with production traits in goats.

Jin QJ(1), Chen DX, Yang L, Fang XT, Zhang CL, Lei CZ, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Jiangsu Normal University, No.
101 Shanghai Road, Xuzhou, 221116, Jiangsu, People's Republic of China.

Gli3 is a zinc finger transcription factor which plays a critical role in
regulating animal development, metabolism and energy partitioning and thus has
the potential to influence economical important traits in farm animals. In this
study, we screened the complete exons of the caprine Gli3 gene using PCR-SSCP
methods in 430 individuals from three goat breeds to identify sequence variants
that might be associated with growth traits. Six novel mutations
(GU363952:g.739C>G, 749A>T, 1636C>A, 1982delT, 1983T>C, 2856T>C) were identified.
Significant associations were observed between the mutations GU363952:g.739C>G
and g.749A>T with body height, chest circumference and canon circumference.
Individuals with genotype G4-CC/AA and G4-CG/AT were significantly higher than
individuals with genotype G4-GG/TT in body height, chest circumference and canon 
circumference. The results of this study suggested that the Gli3-gene-specific
SNP could be a useful marker for growth traits in future marker-assisted
selection programs in goat.

PMID: 23096093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Nov 27;109(48):19763-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1121120109. Epub 2012 Oct 22.

MED12 mutations link intellectual disability syndromes with dysregulated
GLI3-dependent Sonic Hedgehog signaling.

Zhou H(1), Spaeth JM, Kim NH, Xu X, Friez MJ, Schwartz CE, Boyer TG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
University of California, Berkeley, CA 94270, USA.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Nov 27;109(48):19519-20.

Recurrent missense mutations in the RNA polymerase II Mediator subunit MED12 are 
associated with X-linked intellectual disability (XLID) and multiple congenital
anomalies, including craniofacial, musculoskeletal, and behavioral defects in
humans with FG (or Opitz-Kaveggia) and Lujan syndromes. However, the molecular
mechanism(s) underlying these phenotypes is poorly understood. Here we report
that MED12 mutations R961W and N1007S causing FG and Lujan syndromes,
respectively, disrupt a Mediator-imposed constraint on GLI3-dependent Sonic
Hedgehog (SHH) signaling. We show that the FG/R961W and Lujan/N1007S mutations
disrupt the gene-specific association of MED12 with a second Mediator subunit,
CDK8, identified herein to be a suppressor of GLI3 transactivation activity. In
FG/R961W and Lujan/N1007S patient-derived cells, we document enhanced SHH pathway
activation and GLI3-target gene induction coincident with impaired recruitment of
CDK8 onto promoters of GLI3-target genes, but not non-GLI3-target genes.
Together, these findings suggest that dysregulated GLI3-dependent SHH signaling
contributes to phenotypes of individuals with FG and Lujan syndromes and further 
reveal a basis for the gene-specific manifestation of pathogenic mutations in a
global transcriptional coregulator.

PMCID: PMC3511715
PMID: 23091001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Jan 15;22(2):300-12. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds429. Epub 2012 Oct
16.

22q11 Gene dosage establishes an adaptive range for sonic hedgehog and retinoic
acid signaling during early development.

Maynard TM(1), Gopalakrishna D, Meechan DW, Paronett EM, Newbern JM, LaMantia AS.

Author information: 
(1)GW Institute for Neuroscience and Department of Pharmacology and Physiology,
The George Washington University School of Medicine and Health Sciences,
Washington DC, USA.

We asked whether key morphogenetic signaling pathways interact with 22q11 gene
dosage to modulate the severity of cranial or cardiac anomalies in DiGeorge/22q1 
deletion syndrome (22q11DS). Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and retinoic acid (RA)
signaling is altered in the brain and heart-clinically significant 22q11DS
phenotypic sites-in LgDel mouse embryos, an established 22q11DS model. LgDel
embryos treated with cyclopamine, an Shh inhibitor, or carrying mutations in
Gli3(Xtj), an Shh-signaling effector, have morphogenetic anomalies that are
either not seen, or seen at significantly lower frequencies in control or
single-mutant embryos. Similarly, RA exposure or genetic loss of RA function via 
heterozygous mutation of the RA synthetic enzyme Raldh2 induces novel cranial
anomalies and enhances cardiovascular phenotypes in LgDel but not other
genotypes. These changes are not seen in heterozygous Tbx1 mutant embryos-a 22q11
gene thought to explain much of 22q11DS pathogenesis-in which Shh or RA signaling
has been similarly modified. Our results suggest that full dosage of 22q11 genes 
beyond Tbx1 establish an adaptive range for morphogenetic signaling via Shh and
RA. When this adaptive range is constricted by diminished dosage of 22q11 genes, 
embryos are sensitized to otherwise benign changes in Shh and RA signaling. Such 
sensitization, in the face of environmental or genetic factors that modify Shh or
RA signaling, may explain variability in 22q11DS morphogenetic phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC3526161
PMID: 23077214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Pediatr Nephrol. 2013 Sep;28(9):1757-61. doi: 10.1007/s00467-012-2321-7. Epub
2012 Oct 5.

A translational approach to congenital non-obstructive hydronephrosis.

Thom RP(1), Rosenblum ND.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, The Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto Medical Discovery Towers, 101 College Street, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada, M5G 1 L7.

Congenital hydronephrosis, defined as congenital dilatation of one or more
components of the renal collecting system, is detected in 1-2% of all
pregnancies. The majority of antenatally detected hydronephrosis is
non-obstructive and either resolves or stabilizes. Management of persistently
severe cases may include surgical intervention, the only available treatment.
Recent data demonstrate that hedgehog signaling plays a critical role in
regulating the structure and function of the collecting system in a manner
dependent on the formation of GLI3 repressor. Here, we review the pathobiology
and clinical management of non-obstructive hydronephrosis and describe how
inhibitors of GLI3 repressor formation may serve as novel therapies for this
disorder.

PMID: 23052658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Cereb Cortex. 2014 Jan;24(1):186-98. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhs303. Epub 2012 Oct 4.

Gli3 controls corpus callosum formation by positioning midline guideposts during 
telencephalic patterning.

Magnani D(1), Hasenpusch-Theil K, Benadiba C, Yu T, Basson MA, Price DJ, Lebrand 
C, Theil T.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Integrative Physiology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.

The corpus callosum (CC) represents the major forebrain commissure connecting the
2 cerebral hemispheres. Midline crossing of callosal axons is controlled by
several glial and neuronal guideposts specifically located along the callosal
path, but it remains unknown how these cells acquire their position. Here, we
show that the Gli3 hypomorphic mouse mutant Polydactyly Nagoya (Pdn) displays
agenesis of the CC and mislocation of the glial and neuronal guidepost cells.
Using transplantation experiments, we demonstrate that agenesis of the CC is
primarily caused by midline defects. These defects originate during telencephalic
patterning and involve an up-regulation of Slit2 expression and altered Fgf and
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling. Mutations in sprouty1/2 which mimic the changes in these
signaling pathways cause a disorganization of midline guideposts and CC agenesis.
Moreover, a partial recovery of midline abnormalities in Pdn/Pdn;Slit2(-/-)
embryos mutants confirms the functional importance of correct Slit2 expression
levels for callosal development. Hence, Gli3 controlled restriction of Fgf and
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling and of Slit2 expression is crucial for positioning
midline guideposts and callosal development.

PMCID: PMC3862269
PMID: 23042737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Oct;29(5):537-41. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1003-9406.2012.05.008.

[Mechanism of GLI3 gene transcription regulation in idiopathic congenital talipes
equinovarus].

[Article in Chinese]

Cao DH(1), Lin CK, Jin CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning, 
People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the mechanism of transcription regulation of GLI3 gene 
in idiopathic congenital talipes equinovarus.
METHODS: pGL3-Gli3 luciferase report vectors were constructed, and the activity
of Gli3 promoter was explored. A P-Match software was used to analyze the
sequence upstream of the transcription start site of rat Gli3 gene, which was
subsequently verified with chromatin immunoprecipitation assay (CHIP) and
electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA). Expression of the Gli3 gene was
analyzed in L6 cells transfected with Hoxd13 small interference RNA(siRNA) and
Hoxd13 expression vectors.
RESULTS: The 5' region of rat Gli3 gene contains two potential binding sites for 
the Hoxd13 protein. CHIP and EMSA assays both confirmed that Hoxd13 can directly 
bind with site 2. As shown in L6 cells, expression of Gli3 may be enhanced with
silencing of Hoxd13, whilst exogenous expression of Hoxd13 can down-regulate
transcription of Gli3.
CONCLUSION: Hoxd13 can directly regulate the expression of Gli3 gene through a
Hoxd13 binding site in the limb of rat embryo.

PMID: 23042389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Gastroenterology. 2013 Jan;144(1):134-144.e6. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2012.09.061. 
Epub 2012 Oct 3.

Inactivation of Patched1 in mice leads to development of gastrointestinal
stromal-like tumors that express Pdgfra but not kit.

Pelczar P(1), Zibat A, van Dop WA, Heijmans J, Bleckmann A, Gruber W, Nitzki F,
Uhmann A, Guijarro MV, Hernando E, Dittmann K, Wienands J, Dressel R, Wojnowski
L, Binder C, Taguchi T, Beissbarth T, Hogendoorn PC, Antonescu CR, Rubin BP,
Schulz-Schaeffer W, Aberger F, van den Brink GR, Hahn H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University Medical Center, Göttingen, Germany.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: A fraction of gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) cells
overexpress the platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR)A, although most
overexpress KIT. It is not known if this is because these receptor tyrosine
kinases have complementary oncogenic potential, or because of heterogeneity in
the cellular origin of GIST. Little also is known about why Hedgehog (HH)
signaling is activated in some GIST. HH binds to and inactivates the receptor
protein patched homolog (PTCH).
METHODS: Ptch was conditionally inactivated in mice (to achieve constitutive HH
signaling) using a Cre recombinase regulated by the lysozyme M promoter.
Cre-expressing cells were traced using R26R-LacZ reporter mice. Tumors were
characterized by in situ hybridization, immunohistochemistry, immunoblot, and
quantitative reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction analyses. Cell
transformation was assessed by soft agar assay.
RESULTS: Loss of Ptch from lysozyme M-expressing cells resulted in the
development of tumors of GIST-like localization and histology; these were reduced
when mice were given imatinib, a drug that targets KIT and PDGFRA. The Hh
signaling pathway was activated in the tumor cells, and Pdgfra, but not Kit, was 
overexpressed and activated. Lineage tracing revealed that Cre-expressing
intestinal cells were Kit-negative. These cells sometimes expressed Pdgfra and
were located near Kit-positive interstitial cells of Cajal. In contrast to KIT,
activation of PDGFRA increased anchorage-independent proliferation and was
required for tumor formation in mice by cells with activated HH signaling.
CONCLUSIONS: Inactivation of Ptch in mice leads to formation of GIST-like tumors 
that express Pdgfra, but not Kit. Activation of Pdgfra signaling appears to
facilitate tumorigenesis.

Copyright © 2013 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4231777
PMID: 23041331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Jan 1;22(1):124-39. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds409. Epub 2012 Oct 1.

The ciliary Evc/Evc2 complex interacts with Smo and controls Hedgehog pathway
activity in chondrocytes by regulating Sufu/Gli3 dissociation and Gli3
trafficking in primary cilia.

Caparrós-Martín JA(1), Valencia M, Reytor E, Pacheco M, Fernandez M, Perez-Aytes 
A, Gean E, Lapunzina P, Peters H, Goodship JA, Ruiz-Perez VL.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas de Madrid, Arturo Duperier 4, Madrid
28029, Spain.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is involved in patterning and morphogenesis of most
organs in the developing mammalian embryo. Despite many advances in understanding
core components of the pathway, little is known about how the activity of the Hh 
pathway is adjusted in organ- and tissue-specific developmental processes.
Mutations in EVC or EVC2 disrupt Hh signaling in tooth and bone development.
Using mouse models, we show here that Evc and Evc2 are mutually required for
localizing to primary cilia and also for maintaining their normal protein levels.
Consistent with Evc and Evc2 functioning as a complex, the skeletal phenotypes in
either single or double homozygous mutant mice are virtually indistinguishable.
Smo translocation to the cilium was normal in Evc2-deficient chondrocytes
following Hh activation with the Smo-agonist SAG. However, Gli3 recruitment to
cilia tips was reduced and Sufu/Gli3 dissociation was impaired. Interestingly, we
found Smo to co-precipitate with Evc/Evc2, indicating that in some cells Hh
signaling requires direct interaction of Smo with the Evc/Evc2 complex.
Expression of a dominantly acting Evc2 mutation previously identified in Weyer's 
acrodental dysostosis (Evc2<U+0394>43) caused mislocalization of Evc/Evc2<U+0394>43 within the 
cilium and also reproduced the Gli3-related molecular defects observed in
Evc2(-/-) chondrocytes. Moreover, Evc silencing in Sufu(-/-) cells attenuated the
output of the Hh pathway, suggesting that Evc/Evc2 also promote Hh signaling in
the absence of Sufu. Together our data reveal that the Hh pathway involves
Evc/Evc2-dependent modulations that are necessary for normal endochondral bone
formation.

PMID: 23026747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Development. 2012 Nov;139(21):4062-71. doi: 10.1242/dev.082321. Epub 2012 Sep 26.

Temporal deletion of Arl13b reveals that a mispatterned neural tube corrects cell
fate over time.

Su CY(1), Bay SN, Mariani LE, Hillman MJ, Caspary T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Genetics and Molecular Biology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Cilia are necessary for sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling, which is required to
pattern the neural tube. We know that ventral neural cell fates are defined by a 
specific cohort of transcription factors that are induced by distinct thresholds 
of Shh activity mediated by opposing gradients of Gli activator (GliA) and Gli
repressor (GliR). Despite this understanding, the role of Shh as an instructive
morphogen is viewed as increasingly complex, with current models integrating
positive inputs in terms of ligand concentration and time, along with negative
feedback via the downstream gene regulatory network. To investigate the relative 
contributions of the positive and negative inputs from Shh signaling in neural
patterning, we took advantage of a protein that uncouples the regulation of GliA 
and GliR: the cilia protein ADP-ribosylation factor-like 13b (Arl13b). By
deleting Arl13b in mouse, we induced low-level constitutive GliA function at
specific developmental stages and defined a crucial period prior to E10.5 when
shifts in the level of GliA cause cells to change their fate. Strikingly, we
found that improperly patterned cells in these mice converted to the wild-type
pattern by E12.5. We further showed that the recovery of patterning did not occur
when we also deleted Gli3, the primary GliR in the neural tube, revealing a
crucial role of Gli3 in the maintenance of neural patterning.

PMCID: PMC3472586
PMID: 23014696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Eur J Oral Sci. 2012 Oct;120(5):378-85. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0722.2012.00986.x.
Epub 2012 Aug 18.

A case-control study of the association between tooth-development gene
polymorphisms and non-syndromic hypodontia in the Chinese Han population.

Liu H(1), Zhang J, Song S, Zhao H, Han D, Feng H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Prosthodontics, Peking University School and Hospital of
Stomatology, Beijing, China.

Hypodontia is one of the most common anomalies of human dentition. Recent genetic
studies provide information on a number of genes related to both syndromic and
non-syndromic forms of hypodontia. Fifty putative single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in 20 genes that play important roles in tooth development were selected, 
and a case-control study was conducted in 273 subjects with hypodontia (cases)
and 200 subjects without hypodontia (controls). DNA was obtained from samples of 
whole blood or saliva. Genotyping was performed by matrix-assisted laser
desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF-MS). A
significant difference was observed, between subjects with non-syndromic
hypodontia and controls, in the allele and genotype frequencies of two markers
[rs929387 of GLI family zinc finger 3 (GLI3) and rs11001553 of Dickkopf-related
protein 1 (DKK1)]. Similar results were observed in a subgroup analysis of test
subjects (stratified by gender or missing tooth position). However, this analysis
showed no significant difference in the haplotype distribution between the
controls and the affected subjects. These data demonstrate an association between
some SNPs in tooth development-associated genes and sporadic non-syndromic
hypodontia in Chinese Han individuals. This information may provide further
understanding of the molecular mechanisms of tooth agenesis. Furthermore, these
genes can be regarded as candidates for mutation detection in individuals with
tooth agenesis.

© 2012 Eur J Oral Sci.

PMID: 22984994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Cereb Cortex. 2013 Nov;23(11):2552-67. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhs234. Epub 2012 Aug 
23.

The doublesex homolog Dmrt5 is required for the development of the caudomedial
cerebral cortex in mammals.

Saulnier A(1), Keruzore M, De Clercq S, Bar I, Moers V, Magnani D, Walcher T,
Filippis C, Kricha S, Parlier D, Viviani L, Matson CK, Nakagawa Y, Theil T, Götz 
M, Mallamaci A, Marine JC, Zarkower D, Bellefroid EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique du Développement, Université Libre de Bruxelles,
Institut de Biologie et de Médecine Moléculaires (IBMM), Gosselies, Belgium.

Regional patterning of the cerebral cortex is initiated by morphogens secreted by
patterning centers that establish graded expression of transcription factors
within cortical progenitors. Here, we show that Dmrt5 is expressed in cortical
progenitors in a high-caudomedial to low-rostrolateral gradient. In its absence, 
the cortex is strongly reduced and exhibits severe abnormalities, including
agenesis of the hippocampus and choroid plexus and defects in commissural and
thalamocortical tracts. Loss of Dmrt5 results in decreased Wnt and Bmp in one of 
the major telencephalic patterning centers, the dorsomedial telencephalon, and in
a reduction of Cajal-Retzius cells. Expression of the dorsal midline signaling
center-dependent transcription factors is downregulated, including Emx2, which
promotes caudomedial fates, while the rostral determinant Pax6, which is
inhibited by midline signals, is upregulated. Consistently, Dmrt5(-/-) brains
exhibit patterning defects with a dramatic reduction of the caudomedial cortex.
Dmrt5 is increased upon the activation of Wnt signaling and downregulated in
Gli3(xt/xt) mutants. We conclude that Dmrt5 is a novel Wnt-dependent
transcription factor required for early cortical development and that it may
regulate initial cortical patterning by promoting dorsal midline signaling center
formation and thereby helping to establish the graded expression of the other
transcription regulators of cortical identity.

PMCID: PMC3792737
PMID: 22923088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Appl Genet. 2012 Nov;53(4):415-22. doi: 10.1007/s13353-012-0109-x. Epub 2012
Aug 18.

Expanded mutational spectrum of the GLI3 gene substantiates genotype-phenotype
correlations.

Jamsheer A(1), Sowinska A, Trzeciak T, Jamsheer-Bratkowska M, Geppert A,
Latos-Bielenska A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Medical Sciences, ul.
Grunwaldzka 55 paw. 15, 60-352 Poznan, Poland. jamsheer@wp.pl

Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS) and isolated preaxial polydactyly
type IV (PPD-IV) are rare autosomal dominant disorders, both caused by mutations 
in the GLI3 gene. GCPS is mainly characterised by craniofacial abnormalities
(macrocephaly/prominent forehead, hypertelorism) and limb malformations, such as 
PPD-IV, syndactyly and postaxial polydactyly type A or B (PAPA/B). Mutations in
the GLI3 gene can also lead to Pallister-Hall syndrome (PHS) and isolated PAPA/B.
In this study, we investigated 16 unrelated probands with the clinical diagnosis 
of GCPS/PPD-IV and found GLI3 mutations in 12 (75%) of them (nine familial and
three sporadic cases). We also performed a detailed clinical evaluation of all 12
GLI3-positive families, with a total of 27 patients. The hallmark triad of GCPS
(preaxial polydactyly, macrocephaly/prominent forehead, hypertelorism) was
present in 14 cases (52%), whereas at least one typical dysmorphic feature was
manifested in 17 patients (63%). Upon sequencing of the GLI3 gene, we
demonstrated eight novel and two previously reported heterozygous point
mutations. We also performed multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification
(MLPA) to screen for intragenic copy number changes and identified heterozygous
deletions in the two remaining cases (16.7%). Our findings fully support previous
genotype-phenotype correlations, showing that exonic deletions, missense
mutations, as well as truncating variants localised out of the middle third of
the GLI3 gene result in GCPS/PPD-IV and not PHS. Additionally, our study shows
that intragenic GLI3 deletions may account for a significant proportion of
GCPS/PPD-IV causative mutations. Therefore, we propose that MLPA or quantitative 
polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) should be implemented into routine molecular
diagnostic of the GLI3 gene.

PMCID: PMC3477483
PMID: 22903559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Cereb Cortex. 2013 Nov;23(11):2542-51. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhs237. Epub 2012 Aug 
17.

Gli3 controls subplate formation and growth of cortical axons.

Magnani D(1), Hasenpusch-Theil K, Theil T.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Integrative Physiology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.

The formation of a functional cortical circuitry requires the coordinated growth 
of cortical axons to their target areas. While the mechanisms guiding cortical
axons to their targets have extensively been studied, very little is known about 
the processes which promote their growth in vivo. Gli3 encodes a zinc finger
transcription factor which is expressed in cortical progenitor cells and has
crucial roles in cortical development. Here, we characterize the Gli3 compound
mutant Gli3(Xt/Pdn), which largely lacks Neurofilament(+) fibers in the rostral
and intermediate neocortex. DiI labeling and Golli-tGFP immunofluorescence
indicate that Gli3(Xt/Pdn) cortical neurons form short and stunted axons. Using
transplantation experiments we demonstrate that this axon growth defect is
primarily caused by a nonpermissive cortical environment. Furthermore, in
Emx1Cre;Gli3(Pdn/fl) conditional mutants, which mimic the reduction of Gli3
expression in the dorsal telencephalon of Gli3(Xt/Pdn) embryos, the growth of
cortical axons is not impaired, suggesting that Gli3 controls this process early 
in telencephalic development. In contrast to cortical plate neurons, Gli3(Xt/Pdn)
embryos largely lack subplate (SP) neurons which normally pioneer cortical
projections. Collectively, these findings show that Gli3 specifies a cortical
environment permissive to the growth of cortical axons at the progenitor level by
controlling the formation of SP neurons.

PMID: 22903314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Development. 2012 Oct;139(19):3499-509. doi: 10.1242/dev.079582. Epub 2012 Aug
16.

Antagonistic cross-regulation between Wnt and Hedgehog signalling pathways
controls post-embryonic retinal proliferation.

Borday C(1), Cabochette P, Parain K, Mazurier N, Janssens S, Tran HT, Sekkali B, 
Bronchain O, Vleminckx K, Locker M, Perron M.

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris-Sud, UPR CNRS 3294, 91405 Orsay, France.

Continuous neurogenesis in the adult nervous system requires a delicate balance
between proliferation and differentiation. Although Wnt/ß-catenin and Hedgehog
signalling pathways are thought to share a mitogenic function in adult neural
stem/progenitor cells, it remains unclear how they interact in this process.
Adult amphibians produce retinal neurons from a pool of neural stem cells
localised in the ciliary marginal zone (CMZ). Surprisingly, we found that
perturbations of the Wnt and Hedgehog pathways result in opposite proliferative
outcomes of neural stem/progenitor cells in the CMZ. Additionally, our study
revealed that Wnt and Hedgehog morphogens are produced in mutually exclusive
territories of the post-embryonic retina. Using genetic and pharmacological
tools, we found that the Wnt and Hedgehog pathways exhibit reciprocal inhibition.
Our data suggest that Sfrp-1 and Gli3 contribute to this negative
cross-regulation. Altogether, our results reveal an unexpected antagonistic
interplay of Wnt and Hedgehog signals that may tightly regulate the extent of
neural stem/progenitor cell proliferation in the Xenopus retina.

PMID: 22899850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. BMC Dev Biol. 2012 Aug 13;12:23. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-12-23.

Conserved cis-regulatory regions in a large genomic landscape control SHH and
BMP-regulated Gremlin1 expression in mouse limb buds.

Zuniga A(1), Laurent F, Lopez-Rios J, Klasen C, Matt N, Zeller R.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics, Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel,
Mattenstrasse 28, CH-4058, Basel, Switzerland. aimee.zuniga@unibas.ch

BACKGROUND: Mouse limb bud is a prime model to study the regulatory interactions 
that control vertebrate organogenesis. Major aspects of limb bud development are 
controlled by feedback loops that define a self-regulatory signalling system. The
SHH/GREM1/AER-FGF feedback loop forms the core of this signalling system that
operates between the posterior mesenchymal organiser and the ectodermal
signalling centre. The BMP antagonist Gremlin1 (GREM1) is a critical node in this
system, whose dynamic expression is controlled by BMP, SHH, and FGF signalling
and key to normal progression of limb bud development. Previous analysis
identified a distant cis-regulatory landscape within the neighbouring Formin1
(Fmn1) locus that is required for Grem1 expression, reminiscent of the genomic
landscapes controlling HoxD and Shh expression in limb buds.
RESULTS: Three highly conserved regions (HMCO1-3) were identified within the
previously defined critical genomic region and tested for their ability to
regulate Grem1 expression in mouse limb buds. Using a combination of BAC and
conventional transgenic approaches, a 9<U+2009>kb region located ~70<U+2009>kb downstream of
the Grem1 transcription unit was identified. This region, termed Grem1 Regulatory
Sequence 1 (GRS1), is able to recapitulate major aspects of Grem1 expression, as 
it drives expression of a LacZ reporter into the posterior and, to a lesser
extent, in the distal-anterior mesenchyme. Crossing the GRS1 transgene into
embryos with alterations in the SHH and BMP pathways established that GRS1
depends on SHH and is modulated by BMP signalling, i.e. integrates inputs from
these pathways. Chromatin immunoprecipitation revealed interaction of endogenous 
GLI3 proteins with the core cis-regulatory elements in the GRS1 region. As GLI3
is a mediator of SHH signal transduction, these results indicated that SHH
directly controls Grem1 expression through the GRS1 region. Finally, all
cis-regulatory regions within the Grem1 genomic landscape locate to the DNAse I
hypersensitive sites identified in this genomic region by the ENCODE consortium.
CONCLUSIONS: This study establishes that distant cis-regulatory regions scattered
through a larger genomic landscape control the highly dynamic expression of
Grem1, which is key to normal progression of mouse limb bud development.

PMCID: PMC3541112
PMID: 22888807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Aug 10;91(2):372-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.06.017.

TCTN3 mutations cause Mohr-Majewski syndrome.

Thomas S(1), Legendre M, Saunier S, Bessières B, Alby C, Bonnière M, Toutain A,
Loeuillet L, Szymanska K, Jossic F, Gaillard D, Yacoubi MT, Mougou-Zerelli S,
David A, Barthez MA, Ville Y, Bole-Feysot C, Nitschke P, Lyonnet S, Munnich A,
Johnson CA, Encha-Razavi F, Cormier-Daire V, Thauvin-Robinet C, Vekemans M,
Attié-Bitach T.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U781, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, 75015 Paris, France; Université
Paris Descartes, 75006 Paris Sorbonne, France.

Orofaciodigital syndromes (OFDSs) consist of a group of heterogeneous disorders
characterized by abnormalities in the oral cavity, face, and digits and
associated phenotypic abnormalities that lead to the delineation of 13 OFDS
subtypes. Here, by a combined approach of homozygozity mapping and exome ciliary 
sequencing, we identified truncating TCTN3 mutations as the cause of an extreme
form of OFD associated with bone dysplasia, tibial defect, cystic kidneys, and
brain anomalies (OFD IV, Mohr-Majewski syndrome). Analysis of 184 individuals
with various ciliopathies (OFD, Meckel, Joubert, and short rib polydactyly
syndromes) led us to identify four additional truncating TCTN3 mutations in
unrelated fetal cases with overlapping Meckel and OFD IV syndromes and one
homozygous missense mutation in a family with Joubert syndrome. By exploring
roles of TCTN3 in human ciliary related functions, we found that TCTN3 is
necessary for transduction of the sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway, as
revealed by abnormal processing of GLI3 in patient cells. These results are
consistent with the suggested role of its murine ortholog, which forms a complex 
at the ciliary transition zone with TCTN1 and TCTN2, both of which are also
implicated in the transduction of SHH signaling. Overall, our data show the
involvement of the transition zone protein TCTN3 in the regulation of the key SHH
signaling pathway and that its disruption causes a severe form of ciliopathy,
combining features of Meckel and OFD IV syndromes.

Copyright © 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3415538
PMID: 22883145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Mol Syndromol. 2012 Jun;3(1):1-5. Epub 2012 May 16.

Genetic Overlap between Holoprosencephaly and Kallmann Syndrome.

Vaaralahti K(1), Raivio T, Koivu R, Valanne L, Laitinen EM, Tommiska J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine/Physiology, University of Helsinki, Finland.

Patients with Kallmann syndrome (KS; congenital hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and
decreased/absent sense of smell), septo-optic dysplasia (SOD), or
holoprosencephaly (HPE) reportedly have midline defects. In this study, we
investigate a genetic overlap between KS, SOD, and HPE. Nineteen subjects (18
males, 1 female) with KS and without mutations in the known KS genes were
screened for mutations in SOX2, SHH, SIX3,TGIF1,TDGF1,FOXH1,GLI2, and GLI3. One
male carried 2 heterozygous missense changes, one in SIX3 (c.428G>A, p.G143D) and
the other in GLI2 (c.2509G>A, p.E837K). Both of these genes have been implicated 
in the etiology of HPE and neither of these changes were present in 200 control
subjects. Other variants found among the subjects were known polymorphisms. KS
and HPE may display a genetic overlap. The involvement of genes implicated in the
etiology of midline defects in patients with KS warrants further studies.

PMCID: PMC3398826
PMID: 22855648  [PubMed]


208. Dev Biol. 2012 Oct 1;370(1):110-24. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.07.017. Epub 2012
Jul 25.

Limb anterior-posterior polarity integrates activator and repressor functions of 
GLI2 as well as GLI3.

Bowers M(1), Eng L, Lao Z, Turnbull RK, Bao X, Riedel E, Mackem S, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, NY 10065, 
USA.

Anterior-posterior (AP) limb patterning is directed by sonic hedgehog (SHH)
signaling from the posteriorly located zone of polarizing activity (ZPA). GLI3
and GLI2 are the transcriptional mediators generally utilized in SHH signaling,
and each can function as an activator (A) and repressor (R). Although GLI3R has
been suggested to be the primary effector of SHH signaling during limb AP
patterning, a role for GLI3A or GLI2 has not been fully ruled out, nor has it
been determined whether Gli3 plays distinct roles in limb development at
different stages. By conditionally removing Gli3 in the limb at multiple
different time points, we uncovered four Gli3-mediated functions in limb
development that occur at distinct but partially over-lapping time windows: AP
patterning of the proximal limb, AP patterning of the distal limb, regulation of 
digit number and bone differentiation. Furthermore, by removing Gli2 in Gli3
temporal conditional knock-outs, we uncovered an essential role for Gli2 in
providing the remaining posterior limb patterning seen in Gli3 single mutants. To
test whether GLIAs or GLIRs regulate different aspects of AP limb patterning
and/or digit number, we utilized a knock-in allele in which GLI1, which functions
solely as an activator, is expressed in place of the bifunctional GLI2 protein.
Interestingly, we found that GLIAs contribute to AP patterning specifically in
the posterior limb, whereas GLIRs predominantly regulate anterior patterning and 
digit number. Since GLI3 is a more effective repressor, our results explain why
GLI3 is required only for anterior limb patterning and why GLI2 can compensate
for GLI3A in posterior limb patterning. Taken together, our data suggest that
establishment of a complete range of AP positional identities in the limb
requires integration of the spatial distribution, timing, and dosage of GLI2 and 
GLI3 activators and repressors.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3432687
PMID: 22841643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Jul 13;423(4):889-94. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.06.077. Epub 2012 Jun 21.

Retinoic acid signaling regulates embryonic clock hairy2 gene expression in the
developing chick limb.

Sheeba CJ(1), Palmeirim I, Andrade RP.

Author information: 
(1)Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), School of Health Sciences,
University of Minho, Braga 4710-057, Portugal.

Embryo development proceeds under strict temporal control and an embryonic
molecular clock (EC), evidenced by cyclic gene expression, is operating during
somite formation and limb development, providing temporal information to
precursor cells. In somite precursor cells, EC gene expression and periodicity
depends on Retinoic acid (RA) signaling and this morphogen is also essential for 
limb initiation, outgrowth and patterning. Since the limb EC gene hairy2 is
differentially expressed along the proximal-distal axis as growth proceeds,
concomitant with changes in flank-derived RA activity in the mesenchyme, we have 
interrogated the role of RA signaling on limb hairy2 expression regulation. We
describe RA as a positive regulator of limb hairy2 expression. Ectopic
supplementation of RA induced hairy2 in a short time period, with simultaneous
transient activation of Erk/MAPK, Akt/PI3K and Gli3 intracellular pathways. We
further found that FGF8, an inducer of Erk/MAPK, Akt/PI3K pathways, was not
sufficient for ectopic hairy2 induction. However, joint treatment with both RA
and FGF8 induced hairy2, indicating that RA is creating a permissive condition
for p-Erk/p-Akt action on hairy2, most likely by enhancing Gli3-A/Gli3-R levels. 
Finally, we observed an inhibitory action of BMP4 on hairy2 and propose a model
whereby RA shapes limb hairy2 expression during limb development, by activating
its expression and counteracting the inhibitory action of BMP4 on hairy2.
Overall, our work reports a novel role for RA in the regulation of limb clock
hairy2 gene expression and elucidates the temporal response of multiple
intracellular pathways to RA signaling in limb development.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22728880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Dev Biol. 2012 Aug 15;368(2):382-92. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.06.008. Epub 2012 
Jun 12.

Forward genetics uncovers Transmembrane protein 107 as a novel factor required
for ciliogenesis and Sonic hedgehog signaling.

Christopher KJ(1), Wang B, Kong Y, Weatherbee SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Cilia are dynamic organelles that are essential for a vast array of developmental
patterning events, including left-right specification, skeletal formation, neural
development, and organogenesis. Despite recent advances in understanding cilia
form and function, many key ciliogenesis components have yet to be identified. By
using a forward genetics approach, we isolated a novel mutant allele (schlei) of 
the mouse Transmembrane protein 107 (Tmem107) gene, which we show here is
critical for cilia formation and embryonic patterning. Tmem107 is required for
normal Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling in the neural tube and acts in combination 
with Gli2 and Gli3 to pattern ventral and intermediate neuronal cell types.
schlei mutants also form extra digits, and we demonstrate that Tmem107 acts in
the Shh pathway to determine digit number, but not identity, by regulating a
subset of Shh target genes. Phenotypically, schlei mutants share several features
with other cilia mutants; however, spatial restriction of mutant phenotypes and
lack of left-right patterning defects in schlei animals suggest differential
requirements for Tmem107 in cilia formation in distinct tissues. Also, in
contrast to mutants with complete loss of cilia, schlei mutants retain some
function of both Gli activator and repressor forms. Together, these studies
identify a previously unknown regulator of ciliogenesis and provide insight into 
how ciliary factors affect Shh signaling and cilia biogenesis in distinct
tissues.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3402655
PMID: 22698544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Jun;29(3):260-5. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1003-9406.2012.03.003.

[Possible role of GLI3 gene in the pathogenesis of idiopathic congenital talipes 
equinovarus].

[Article in Chinese]

Cao DH(1), Zhang X, Lin CK, Jin CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning
110001, P.R. China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the relationship between GLI3 gene and pathogenesis of 
idiopathic congenital talipes equinovarus (ICTEV).
METHOD: Potential mutations in the coding region of GLI3 were detected among 84
patients with ICTEV by denaturing gradient electrophoresis. Expression of GLI3 in
the ICTEV patients' disease tissues was assessed by reverse transcription PCR.
Following generation of rat model for ICTEV, mRNA and protein levels of GLI3 were
evaluated by real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry and Western blotting.
RESULTS: No mutation was found in exons 1 - 8 and 13 of GLI3 gene among the 84
ICTEV patients. No expression of GLI3 gene was detected in the flexor hallucis
longus of ICTEV patients or normal controls. Expression of Gli3, in terms of both
mRNA and protein, was stronger in the hindlimb of ICTEV rat embryos compared with
normal controls.
CONCLUSION: Mutation in the coding region of GLI3 may not be responsible for the 
occurrence of ICTEV. However, there may still be connection between abnormal
expression of the gene and pathogenesis of ICTEV.

PMID: 22678783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Nat Commun. 2012 May 15;3:841. doi: 10.1038/ncomms1817.

Activin induces cortical interneuron identity and differentiation in embryonic
stem cell-derived telencephalic neural precursors.

Cambray S(1), Arber C, Little G, Dougalis AG, de Paola V, Ungless MA, Li M,
Rodríguez TA.

Author information: 
(1)British Heart Foundation Centre of Research Excellence, National Heart and
Lung Institute, Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, Du Cane
Road, London W12 ONN, UK.

Understanding the mechanisms underlying neural progenitor differentiation and
neuronal fate specification is critical for the use of embryonic stem cells
(ESCs) for regenerative medicine. Cortical interneurons are of particular
interest for cell transplantation; however, only a limited subset of these
neurons can be generated from ESCs. Here we uncover a pivotal role for Activin in
regulating the differentiation and identity of telencephalic neural precursors
derived from mouse and human ESCs. We show that Activin directly inhibits the
mitogenic sonic hedgehog pathway in a Gli3-dependent manner while enhancing
retinoic acid signalling, the pro-neurogenic pathway. In addition, we demonstrate
that Activin provides telencephalic neural precursors with positional cues that
specifically promote the acquisition of a calretinin interneuron fate by
controlling the expression of genes that regulate cortical interneuron identity. 
This work demonstrates a novel means for regulating neuronal differentiation and 
specification of subtype identity.

PMID: 22588303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Front Physiol. 2012 May 3;3:121. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2012.00121. eCollection 2012.

Loss-of-Function of Gli3 in Mice Causes Abnormal Frontal Bone Morphology and
Premature Synostosis of the Interfrontal Suture.

Veistinen L(1), Takatalo M, Tanimoto Y, Kesper DA, Vortkamp A, Rice DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics, Institute of Dentistry, University of Helsinki
Helsinki, Finland.

Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS) is an autosomal dominant disorder
with polydactyly and syndactyly of the limbs and a broad spectrum of craniofacial
abnormalities. Craniosynostosis of the metopic suture (interfrontal suture in
mice) is an important but rare feature associated with GCPS. GCPS is caused by
mutations in the transcription factor GLI3, which regulates Hedgehog signaling.
The Gli3 loss-of-function (Gli3(Xt-J/Xt-J)) mouse largely phenocopies the human
syndrome with the mice exhibiting polydactyly and several craniofacial
abnormalities. Here we show that Gli3(Xt-J/Xt-J) mice exhibit ectopic
ossification in the interfrontal suture and in the most severe cases the suture
fuses already prior to birth. We show that abnormalities in frontal bones occur
early in calvarial development, before the establishment of the interfrontal
suture. It provides a model for the metopic suture pathology that can occur in
GCPS.

PMCID: PMC3342524
PMID: 22563320  [PubMed]


214. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jun 15;287(25):21429-38. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.362145. Epub
2012 Apr 30.

Prevention of premature fusion of calvarial suture in GLI-Kruppel family member 3
(Gli3)-deficient mice by removing one allele of Runt-related transcription factor
2 (Runx2).

Tanimoto Y(1), Veistinen L, Alakurtti K, Takatalo M, Rice DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics, Institute of Dentistry, University of Helsinki,
Helsinki 00014, Finland.

Mutations in the gene encoding the zinc finger transcription factor GLI3
(GLI-Kruppel family member 3) have been identified in patients with Grieg
cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome in which premature fusion of calvarial suture
(craniosynostosis) is an infrequent but important feature. Here, we show that
Gli3 acts as a repressor in the developing murine calvaria and that Dlx5, Runx2
type II isoform (Runx2-II), and Bmp2 are expressed ectopically in the calvarial
mesenchyme, which results in aberrant osteoblastic differentiation in
Gli3-deficient mouse (Gli3(Xt-J/Xt-J)) and resulted in craniosynostosis. At the
same time, enhanced activation of phospho-Smad1/5/8 (pSmad1/5/8), which is a
downstream mediator of canonical Bmp signaling, was observed in Gli3(Xt-J/Xt-J)
embryonic calvaria. Therefore, we generated Gli3;Runx2 compound mutant mice to
study the effects of decreasing Runx2 dosage in a Gli3(Xt-J/Xt-J) background.
Gli3(Xt-J/Xt-J) Runx2(+/-) mice have neither craniosynostosis nor additional
ossification centers in interfrontal suture and displayed a normalization of
Dlx5, Runx2-II, and pSmad1/5/8 expression as well as sutural mesenchymal cell
proliferation. These findings suggest a novel role for Gli3 in regulating
calvarial suture development by controlling canonical Bmp-Smad signaling, which
integrates a Dlx5/Runx2-II cascade. We propose that targeting Runx2 might provide
an attractive way of preventing craniosynostosis in patients.

PMCID: PMC3375564
PMID: 22547067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Biomaterials. 2012 Jul;33(21):5297-307. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2012.04.008. 
Epub 2012 Apr 26.

The expression of sonic hedgehog in diabetic wounds following treatment with
poly(methacrylic acid-co-methyl methacrylate) beads.

Fitzpatrick LE(1), Lisovsky A, Sefton MV.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomaterials and Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada. lindsay.fitzpatrick@utoronto.ca

The expression of native sonic hedgehog (Shh) was significantly increased in
poly(methacrylic acid-co-methyl methacrylate) bead (MAA) treated wounds at day 4 
compared to both poly(methyl methacrylate) bead (PMMA) treated and untreated
wounds in diabetic db/db mice. MAA beads also increased the expression of the Shh
transcription factor Gli3 at day 4. Previously, topical application of MAA beads 
(45 mol % methacrylic acid) improved wound closure and blood vessel density in
excisional wounds in these mice, while PMMA beads did not. Gene expression within
the granulation tissue of healing wounds was studied to provide insight into the 
mechanism of vessel formation and wound healing in the presence of MAA beads. In 
addition to the increased expression of Shh, MAA-treated wounds had increased
expression of osteopontin (OPN), IL-1ß and TNF-a, (at day 7) similar to the
previously reported MAA response of macrophage-like and endothelial cells in
vitro.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22541537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jul 20;287(30):25325-34. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.370809. Epub
2012 Apr 25.

Novel AKT1-GLI3-VMP1 pathway mediates KRAS oncogene-induced autophagy in cancer
cells.

Lo Ré AE(1), Fernández-Barrena MG, Almada LL, Mills LD, Elsawa SF, Lund G, Ropolo
A, Molejon MI, Vaccaro MI, Fernandez-Zapico ME.

Author information: 
(1)Schulze Center for Novel Therapeutics, Division of Oncology Research, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

Autophagy is an evolutionarily conserved degradation process of cytoplasmic
cellular constituents. It has been suggested that autophagy plays a role in tumor
promotion and progression downstream oncogenic pathways; however, the molecular
mechanisms underlying this phenomenon have not been elucidated. Here, we provide 
both in vitro and in vivo evidence of a novel signaling pathway whereby the
oncogene KRAS induces the expression of VMP1, a molecule needed for the formation
of the authophagosome and capable of inducing autophagy, even under
nutrient-replete conditions. RNAi experiments demonstrated that KRAS requires
VMP1 to induce autophagy. Analysis of the mechanisms identified GLI3, a
transcription factor regulated by the Hedgehog pathway, as an effector of KRAS
signaling. GLI3 regulates autophagy as well as the expression and promoter
activity of VMP1 in a Hedgehog-independent manner. Chromatin immunoprecipitation 
assays demonstrated that GLI3 binds to the VMP1 promoter and complexes with the
histone acetyltransferase p300 to regulate promoter activity. Knockdown of p300
impaired KRAS- and GLI3-induced activation of this promoter. Finally, we
identified the PI3K-AKT1 pathway as the signaling pathway mediating the
expression and promoter activity of VMP1 upstream of the GLI3-p300 complex.
Together, these data provide evidence of a new regulatory mechanism involved in
autophagy that integrates this cellular process into the molecular network of
events regulating oncogene-induced autophagy.

PMCID: PMC3408195
PMID: 22535956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Biol Chem. 2012 May 18;287(21):17860-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.347716. Epub 2012
Apr 9.

Gli1 protein participates in Hedgehog-mediated specification of osteoblast
lineage during endochondral ossification.

Hojo H(1), Ohba S, Yano F, Saito T, Ikeda T, Nakajima K, Komiyama Y, Nakagata N, 
Suzuki K, Takato T, Kawaguchi H, Chung UI.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Disease Biology and Integrative Medicine, University of Tokyo,
Tokyo 113-0033, Japan. hojo@bmw.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

With regard to Hedgehog signaling in mammalian development, the majority of
research has focused on Gli2 and Gli3 rather than Gli1. This is because Gli1(-/-)
mice do not show any gross abnormalities in adulthood, and no detailed analyses
of fetal Gli1(-/-) mice are available. In this study, we investigated the
physiological role of Gli1 in osteogenesis. Histological analyses revealed that
bone formation was impaired in Gli1(-/-) fetuses compared with WT fetuses.
Gli1(-/-) perichondrial cells expressed neither runt-related transcription factor
2 (Runx2) nor osterix, master regulators of osteogenesis, in contrast to WT
cells. In vitro analyses showed that overexpression of Gli1 up-regulated early
osteogenesis-related genes in both WT and Runx2(-/-) perichondrial cells, and
Gli1 activated transcription of those genes via its association with their
5'-regulatory regions, underlying the function of Gli1 in the perichondrium.
Moreover, Gli1(-/-);Gli2(-/-) mice showed more severe phenotypes of impaired bone
formation than either Gli1(-/-) or Gli2(-/-) mice, and osteoblast differentiation
was impaired in Gli1(-/-);Gli3(-/-) perichondrial cells compared with Gli3(-/-)
cells in vitro. These data suggest that Gli1 itself can induce early osteoblast
differentiation, at least to some extent, in a Runx2-independent manner. It also 
plays a redundant role with Gli2 and is involved in the repressor function of
Gli3 in osteogenesis. On the basis of these findings, we propose that upon
Hedgehog input, Gli1 functions collectively with Gli2 and Gli3 in osteogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3366782
PMID: 22493482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Hepatology. 2012 Sep;56(3):1108-16. doi: 10.1002/hep.25758.

Osteopontin is a novel downstream target of SOX9 with diagnostic implications for
progression of liver fibrosis in humans.

Pritchett J(1), Harvey E, Athwal V, Berry A, Rowe C, Oakley F, Moles A, Mann DA, 
Bobola N, Sharrocks AD, Thomson BJ, Zaitoun AM, Irving WL, Guha IN, Hanley NA,
Hanley KP.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology and Diabetes Group, School of Biomedicine, University of
Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.

Osteopontin (OPN) is an important component of the extracellular matrix (ECM),
which promotes liver fibrosis and has been described as a biomarker for its
severity. Previously, we have demonstrated that Sex-determining region Y-box 9
(SOX9) is ectopically expressed during activation of hepatic stellate cells (HSC)
when it is responsible for the production of type 1 collagen, which causes scar
formation in liver fibrosis. Here, we demonstrate that SOX9 regulates OPN. During
normal development and in the mature liver, SOX9 and OPN are coexpressed in the
biliary duct. In rodent and human models of fibrosis, both proteins were
increased and colocalized to fibrotic regions in vivo and in culture-activated
HSCs. SOX9 bound a conserved upstream region of the OPN gene, and abrogation of
Sox9 in HSCs significantly decreased OPN production. Hedgehog (Hh) signaling has 
previously been shown to regulate OPN expression directly by glioblastoma (GLI)
1. Our data indicate that in models of liver fibrosis, Hh signaling more likely
acts through SOX9 to modulate OPN. In contrast to Gli2 and Gli3, Gli1 is sparse
in HSCs and is not increased upon activation. Furthermore, reduction of GLI2, but
not GLI3, decreased the expression of both SOX9 and OPN, whereas overexpressing
SOX9 or constitutively active GLI2 could rescue the antagonistic effects of
cyclopamine on OPN expression.CONCLUSION: These data reinforce SOX9, downstream
of Hh signaling, as a core factor mediating the expression of ECM components
involved in liver fibrosis. Understanding the role and regulation of SOX9 during 
liver fibrosis will provide insight into its potential modulation as an
antifibrotic therapy or as a means of identifying potential ECM targets, similar 
to OPN, as biomarkers of fibrosis.

Copyright © 2012 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC3638324
PMID: 22488688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(3):e1002606. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002606. Epub 2012 Mar 
29.

The ciliogenic transcription factor RFX3 regulates early midline distribution of 
guidepost neurons required for corpus callosum development.

Benadiba C(1), Magnani D, Niquille M, Morlé L, Valloton D, Nawabi H, Ait-Lounis
A, Otsmane B, Reith W, Theil T, Hornung JP, Lebrand C, Durand B.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biologie Cellulaire et de Morphologie, University of Lausanne, 
Lausanne, Switzerland.

The corpus callosum (CC) is the major commissure that bridges the cerebral
hemispheres. Agenesis of the CC is associated with human ciliopathies, but the
origin of this default is unclear. Regulatory Factor X3 (RFX3) is a transcription
factor involved in the control of ciliogenesis, and Rfx3-deficient mice show
several hallmarks of ciliopathies including left-right asymmetry defects and
hydrocephalus. Here we show that Rfx3-deficient mice suffer from CC agenesis
associated with a marked disorganisation of guidepost neurons required for axon
pathfinding across the midline. Using transplantation assays, we demonstrate that
abnormalities of the mutant midline region are primarily responsible for the CC
malformation. Conditional genetic inactivation shows that RFX3 is not required in
guidepost cells for proper CC formation, but is required before E12.5 for proper 
patterning of the cortical septal boundary and hence accurate distribution of
guidepost neurons at later stages. We observe focused but consistent ectopic
expression of Fibroblast growth factor 8 (Fgf8) at the rostro commissural plate
associated with a reduced ratio of GLIoma-associated oncogene family zinc finger 
3 (GLI3) repressor to activator forms. We demonstrate on brain explant cultures
that ectopic FGF8 reproduces the guidepost neuronal defects observed in Rfx3
mutants. This study unravels a crucial role of RFX3 during early brain
development by indirectly regulating GLI3 activity, which leads to FGF8
upregulation and ultimately to disturbed distribution of guidepost neurons
required for CC morphogenesis. Hence, the RFX3 mutant mouse model brings novel
understandings of the mechanisms that underlie CC agenesis in ciliopathies.

PMCID: PMC3315471
PMID: 22479201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Dev Cell. 2012 Apr 17;22(4):837-48. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2012.01.006. Epub 2012 
Mar 29.

GLI3 constrains digit number by controlling both progenitor proliferation and
BMP-dependent exit to chondrogenesis.

Lopez-Rios J(1), Speziale D, Robay D, Scotti M, Osterwalder M, Nusspaumer G,
Galli A, Holländer GA, Kmita M, Zeller R.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics, Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, 4058
Basel, Switzerland.

Inactivation of Gli3, a key component of Hedgehog signaling in vertebrates,
results in formation of additional digits (polydactyly) during limb bud
development. The analysis of mouse embryos constitutively lacking Gli3 has
revealed the essential GLI3 functions in specifying the anteroposterior (AP) limb
axis and digit identities. We conditionally inactivated Gli3 during mouse hand
plate development, which uncoupled the resulting preaxial polydactyly from known 
GLI3 functions in establishing AP and digit identities. Our analysis revealed
that GLI3 directly restricts the expression of regulators of the G(1)-S
cell-cycle transition such as Cdk6 and constrains S phase entry of digit
progenitors in the anterior hand plate. Furthermore, GLI3 promotes the exit of
proliferating progenitors toward BMP-dependent chondrogenic differentiation by
spatiotemporally restricting and terminating the expression of the BMP antagonist
Gremlin1. Thus, Gli3 is a negative regulator of the proliferative expansion of
digit progenitors and acts as a gatekeeper for the exit to chondrogenic
differentiation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4486391
PMID: 22465667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Fetal Pediatr Pathol. 2012 Oct;31(5):315-8. doi: 10.3109/15513815.2012.659390.
Epub 2012 Mar 20.

Holoprosencephaly-polydactyly (pseudotrisomy 13) syndrome: case report and
diagnostic criteria.

Sergi C(1), Gekas J, Kamnasaran D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

We report a new case of a fetus with holoprosencephaly-polydactyly syndrome, also
known as pseudo-trisomy 13 syndrome, and no other apparent abnormalities except
for septal agenesis of the left lung. The fetal karyotype was normal. Mutational 
analysis of five genes (SHH, SIX3, TGIF, ZIC2, and GLI3), which are major genes
associated with holoprosencephaly, did not disclose any mutational findings. We
therefore propose that the abnormalities of our fetus support the demarcation of 
this syndrome as an autonomous phenotype. Specific diagnostic criteria for
holoprosencephaly-polydactyly syndrome need to be complemented by the absence of 
mutations in the major holoprosencephaly genes.

PMID: 22432933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Clin Genet. 2012 Nov;82(5):502-4. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2012.01866.x. Epub
2012 Mar 20.

A novel frameshift mutation of the GLI3 gene in a family with broad thumbs
with/without big toes, postaxial polydactyly and variable syndactyly of the
hands/feet.

Al-Qattan MM.

PMID: 22428873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Vitam Horm. 2012;88:73-89. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-394622-5.00004-3.

Gli protein nuclear localization signal.

Hatayama M(1), Aruga J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Behavioral and Developmental Disorders, RIKEN Brain Science
Institute, Wako-shi, Saitama, Japan.

Drosophila cubitus interruptus (Ci) and its vertebrate homologues, the
glioblastoma (Gli) protein family, are the transcription factors belonging to the
metazoan Gli/Glis/Zic ZF protein superfamily that shares similar five tandemly
repeated C2H2-type zinc finger (ZF) motifs. Nuclear transport of Gli/Ci proteins 
is regulated by hedgehog (Hh) signaling and is an essential part of the Hh signal
transduction pathway. Gli/Ci proteins possess a nuclear localization signal (NLS)
and a nuclear export signal (NES), both of which are key signatures for
controlling nucleocytoplasmic shuttling. The NLS of the Gli/Ci proteins has been 
mapped to the fifth ZF domain and its C-terminal side. It contains two clusters
of basic residues (classical bipartite-type), which are conserved in metazoan
Gli/Ci homologues, but which partially deviate from the intra-ZF domain NLSs in
the Glis and Zic proteins. Recently, Importin a3 was identified as a nuclear
transport protein for Ci. When we modeled the 3D structure of the Gli
NLS-Importin a complex, the two basic clusters were predicted to fit in the two
binding interfaces of Importin a. The mechanisms controlling the function of NLSs
and NESs involve the elimination of the NES by Hh signaling-dependent protein
cleavage in the Ci and the Gli3 proteins, and the phosphorylation of a threonine 
residue close to the NLS in Gli1. Both processes depend on the activity of
protein kinase A, which has a critical role in Hh signaling in fly wing discs. In
addition, the Roadkill protein, a substrate recognition component of E3 ubiquitin
ligase, competes with the Ci protein to interact with Importin a3 resulting in
inhibition of Ci protein nuclear import.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22391300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(2):e1002524. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002524. Epub 2012 Feb 
23.

Loss of Tgif function causes holoprosencephaly by disrupting the SHH signaling
pathway.

Taniguchi K(1), Anderson AE, Sutherland AE, Wotton D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics and Center for Cell
Signaling, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, United States of
America.

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is a severe human genetic disease affecting craniofacial 
development, with an incidence of up to 1/250 human conceptions and 1.3 per
10,000 live births. Mutations in the Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) gene result in HPE in
humans and mice, and the Shh pathway is targeted by other mutations that cause
HPE. However, at least 12 loci are associated with HPE in humans, suggesting that
defects in other pathways contribute to this disease. Although the TGIF1
(TG-interacting factor) gene maps to the HPE4 locus, and heterozygous loss of
function TGIF1 mutations are associated with HPE, mouse models have not yet
explained how loss of Tgif1 causes HPE. Using a conditional Tgif1 allele, we show
that mouse embryos lacking both Tgif1 and the related Tgif2 have HPE-like
phenotypes reminiscent of Shh null embryos. Eye and nasal field separation is
defective, and forebrain patterning is disrupted in embryos lacking both Tgifs.
Early anterior patterning is relatively normal, but expression of Shh is reduced 
in the forebrain, and Gli3 expression is up-regulated throughout the neural tube.
Gli3 acts primarily as an antagonist of Shh function, and the introduction of a
heterozygous Gli3 mutation into embryos lacking both Tgif genes partially rescues
Shh signaling, nasal field separation, and HPE. Tgif1 and Tgif2 are
transcriptional repressors that limit Transforming Growth Factor ß/Nodal
signaling, and we show that reducing Nodal signaling in embryos lacking both
Tgifs reduces the severity of HPE and partially restores the output of Shh
signaling. Together, these results support a model in which Tgif function limits 
Nodal signaling to maintain the appropriate output of the Shh pathway in the
forebrain. These data show for the first time that Tgif1 mutation in mouse
contributes to HPE pathogenesis and provide evidence that this is due to
disruption of the Shh pathway.

PMCID: PMC3285584
PMID: 22383895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Jun 1;21(11):2464-75. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds060. Epub 2012 Feb 
27.

An N-terminal G11A mutation in HOXD13 causes synpolydactyly and interferes with
Gli3R function during limb pre-patterning.

Brison N(1), Debeer P, Fantini S, Oley C, Zappavigna V, Luyten FP, Tylzanowski P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Skeletal Development and Joint Disorders, University of Leuven, 
Herestraat 49, O&N1 Box 813, 3000 Leuven, Belgium.

Synpolydactyly (SPD) is a distal limb anomaly characterized by incomplete digit
separation and the presence of supernumerary digits in the syndactylous web. This
phenotype has been associated with mutations in the homeodomain or polyalanine
tract of the HOXD13 gene. We identified a novel mutation (G11A) in HOXD13 that is
located outside the previously known domains and affects the intracellular half
life of the protein. Misexpression of HOXD13(G11A) in the developing chick limb
phenocopied the human SPD phenotype. Finally, we demonstrated through in vitro
studies that this mutation has a destabilizing effect on GLI3R uncovering an
unappreciated mechanism by which HOXD13 determines the patterning of the limb.

PMID: 22373878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Front Neurosci. 2012 Feb 22;6:27. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2012.00027. eCollection
2012.

Mouse thalamic differentiation: gli-dependent pattern and gli-independent
prepattern.

Haddad-Tóvolli R(1), Heide M, Zhou X, Blaess S, Alvarez-Bolado G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroanatomy, Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University 
of Heidelberg Heidelberg, Germany.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling is essential for thalamic development. The Gli
transcription factors act downstream of Shh - while Gli2 is the major activator
(GliA), Gli3 acts primarily as a repressor (GliR). The thalamus is remarkable
among dorsal structures because of its proximity to the mid-diencephalic
organizer, a unique dorsal Shh source. This lends complexity to the interactions 
between Shh, Gli2, and Gli3, suggesting the presence of a dorsal Gli activator
which elsewhere is found only ventrally, and making the dissection of thalamic
Gli functions particularly interesting. A current model based on mutant
phenotypes in telencephalon and midbrain postulates a degree of reciprocal
antagonism of Shh and Gli3 in dorsal brain regions. To approach the role of Gli
factors in thalamic specification we first analyzed mice deficient in Gli2 or
Gli3. In Gli2 mutants, the thalamus is small and poorly differentiated with the
exception of the medial and intralaminar nuclei which, in contrast, are
specifically and severely affected by Gli3 inactivation. Gbx2 expression is very 
reduced in the Gli3 mutant. Most thalamic nuclei are present in both mutants,
although incompletely differentiated, as reflected by the loss of specific
markers. The ventral posterior group, revealed by novel specific marker Hes1, is 
present in both mutants and extends axons to the telencephalon. To test the
Gli3/Shh interaction we generated a novel mutant deficient in Gli3 and
neuroepithelial Shh. The thalamus of the n-Shh/Gli3 double mutants is very large 
and very poorly differentiated except for a broad domain of Gbx2, Lhx2, and Calb2
expression. In utero electroporation experiments on wild type embryos suggest
that a stage-specific factor acting early is responsible for this prepattern. We 
show that, in the thalamus, GliA acts downstream of Shh to specify pattern and
size of the thalamic nuclei to the exception of the medial and intralaminar
groups. Gli3A can partially substitute for Gli2A in the Gli2 mutant. GliR is
essential for specification and growth of the medial and intralaminar nuclei,
contributes to the specification of other thalamic nuclei and reduces thalamic
size. GliA (from neuroepithelial Shh signaling) and GliR do not show reciprocal
antagonism in the thalamus, and their joint abolition does not rescue the wild
type phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3283895
PMID: 22371696  [PubMed]


227. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2012 May 8. doi: 10.1089/ars.2011.4422. Epub 2012 May 8.

Novel GSK-3ß inhibitors and CBM-1078 guide hATSCs' deaging via Oct4 and ß-catenin
activation.

Choi JI(1), Jee MK, Im YB, Kang SK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Department of Biotechnology, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Seoul National University , Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Retraction in
    Antioxid Redox Signal. 2012 Sep 1;17(5):848.

Abstract Aims: The fate decision of adult stem cells is determined by the
activation of specific intracellular signaling pathways after exposure to
specific stimuli. In this study, we demonstrated specific functions of a novel
small molecule, CBM-1078, that induced cell self-renewal via Oct4- and canonical 
Wnt/ß-catenin-mediated deaging in cultured human adipose tissue-derived stem
cells (hATSCs).RESULTS: As a potential glycogen synthase kinase-3ß (GSK-3ß)
inhibitor, CBM-1078 primarily activated ß-catenin and Oct4 expression after
inhibition of GSK-3ß. Treatment of hATSCs with CBM-1078 led to
transdifferentiation toward a neural precursor cell fate after transient
self-renewal, and the cells were capable of differentiation into
gamma-Aminobutyric acid (GABA)-secreting neuronal cells with pain-modulating
functions in an animal model of neuropathic pain. During cell self-renewal,
CBM-1078 directs the translocalization of ß-catenin and Oct4 into the nucleus, an
event that is crucial for the cooperative activation of hATSC neurogenesis via
Oct4 and Wnt/ß-catenin. Nuclear-localized ß-catenin and Oct4 act together to
regulate the expression of Oct4, Nanog, Sox2, ß-catenin, c-Myc, and STAT3 after
binding to the regulatory regions of these genes. Nuclear Oct4 and
Wnt3a/ß-catenin also control cell growth by binding to the promoters of STAT3,
Gli3, and c-Myc after complex formation and direct interaction. CBM-1078 actively
enhanced the DNA-binding affinity of Oct4 and ß-catenin to functional genes and
activated the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway to promote hATSC reprogramming.
INNOVATION AND CONCLUSION: This study revealed the value of a single small
molecule, CBM-1078, showing a definitive cell reprogramming mechanism. Finally,
we confirmed the therapeutic potential of GABA-hATSCs for treatment of
neuropathic pain, which could be used for therapeutic purposes in humans.
Antioxid. Redox Signal. 00, 000-000.

PMID: 22364277  [PubMed]


228. J Biol Chem. 2012 Apr 6;287(15):11751-60. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.281014. Epub 2012
Feb 1.

a-Catenin inhibits ß-catenin-T-cell factor/lymphoid enhancing factor
transcriptional activity and collagen type II expression in articular
chondrocytes through formation of Gli3R.a-catenin.ß-catenin ternary complex.

Rhee J(1), Ryu JH, Kim JH, Chun CH, Chun JS.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Dynamics Research Center and School of Life Sciences, Gwangju Institute
of Science and Technology, Gwangju 500-712, Korea.

Chondrocytes, a unique cell type in cartilage tissue, are responsible for the
regulation of anabolic and catabolic homeostasis in cartilage-specific
extracellular matrix synthesis. Activation of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling induces
dedifferentiation of articular chondrocytes, resulting in suppression of type II 
collagen expression. We have shown previously that a-catenin inhibits
ß-catenin-Tcf/Lef (T-cell factor/lymphoid-enhancing factor) transcriptional
activity in articular chondrocytes with a concomitant recovery of type II
collagen expression. In the current study, we elucidated the mechanism underlying
this inhibition of ß-catenin-Tcf/Lef transcriptional activity by a-catenin,
showing that it requires direct interaction between a-catenin and ß-catenin. We
further showed that it involves recruitment of Gli3R, the short
transcription-repressing form of the transcription factor Gli3, to ß-catenin by
a-catenin. The resulting inhibition of ß-catenin transcriptional activity leads
to increased expression of type II collagen. Gli3R and a-catenin actions are
co-dependent: both are necessary for the observed inhibitory effects on ß-catenin
transcriptional activity. Reducing Gli3R expression levels through activation of 
Indian Hedgehog (Ihh) signaling also is sufficient to activate ß-catenin
transcriptional activity, suggesting that the ternary complex,
Gli3R·a-catenin·ß-catenin, mediates Ihh-dependent activation of Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling in articular chondrocytes. Collectively, this study shows that
a-catenin functions as a nuclear factor that recruits the transcriptional
repressor Gli3R to ß-catenin to inhibit ß-catenin transcriptional activity and
dedifferentiation of articular chondrocytes. Finally, osteoarthritic cartilage
showed elevated levels of ß-catenin and decreased levels of a-catenin and Gli3R, 
suggesting that decreased levels of a-catenin and Gli3R levels contribute to
increased ß-catenin transcriptional activity during osteoarthritic cartilage
destruction.

PMCID: PMC3320923
PMID: 22298781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2012 Mar;49(3):333-40. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2011.12.008. Epub
2012 Jan 16.

Comparative genomics identification of a novel set of temporally regulated
hedgehog target genes in the retina.

McNeill B(1), Perez-Iratxeta C, Mazerolle C, Furimsky M, Mishina Y,
Andrade-Navarro MA, Wallace VA.

Author information: 
(1)Vision Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, 501 Smyth Road, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada K1H 8L6.

The hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is involved in numerous developmental and
adult processes with many links to cancer. In vertebrates, the activity of the Hh
pathway is mediated primarily through three Gli transcription factors (Gli1, 2
and 3) that can serve as transcriptional activators or repressors. The
identification of Gli target genes is essential for the understanding of the
Hh-mediated processes. We used a comparative genomics approach using the mouse
and human genomes to identify 390 genes that contained conserved Gli binding
sites. RT-qPCR validation of 46 target genes in E14.5 and P0.5 retinal explants
revealed that Hh pathway activation resulted in the modulation of 30 of these
targets, 25 of which demonstrated a temporal regulation. Further validation
revealed that the expression of Bok, FoxA1, Sox8 and Wnt7a was dependent upon
Sonic Hh (Shh) signaling in the retina and their regulation is under positive and
negative controls by Gli2 and Gli3, respectively. We also show using chromatin
immunoprecipitation that Gli2 binds to the Sox8 promoter, suggesting that Sox8 is
an Hh-dependent direct target of Gli2. Finally, we demonstrate that the Hh
pathway also modulates the expression of Sox9 and Sox10, which together with Sox8
make up the SoxE group. Previously, it has been shown that Hh and SoxE group
genes promote Müller glial cell development in the retina. Our data are
consistent with the possibility for a role of SoxE group genes downstream of Hh
signaling on Müller cell development.

Crown Copyright Â© 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22281533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Mol Vis. 2012;18:139-50. Epub 2012 Jan 18.

Interaction between hedgehog signalling and PAX6 dosage mediates maintenance and 
regeneration of the corneal epithelium.

Kucerova R(1), Dorà N, Mort RL, Wallace K, Leiper LJ, Lowes C, Neves C, Walczysko
P, Bruce F, Fowler PA, Rajnicek AM, McCaig CD, Zhao M, West JD, Collinson JM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Institute of Medical
Sciences, Foresterhill, Aberdeen, UK.

PURPOSE: To investigate the roles of intracellular signaling elicited by Hedgehog
(Hh) ligands in corneal maintenance and wound healing.
METHODS: The expression of Hedgehog pathway components in the cornea was assayed 
by immunohistochemistry, western blot and reverse-transcription polymerase chain 
reaction (RT-PCR), in wild-type mice and mice that were heterozygous null for the
gene encoding the transcription factor, paired box gene 6 (Pax6).  Corneal
epithelial wound healing and cell migration assays were performed after
pharmacological upregulation and downregulation of the hedgehog pathway. 
Reporter mice, mosaic for expression of the gene encoding ß-galactosidase (LacZ),
were crossed to Pax6(+/-) mice, mice heterozygous for the gene encoding
GLI-Kruppel family member GLI3, and Pax6(+/-)Gli3(+/-) double heterozygotes, to
assay patterns of cell migration and corneal epithelial organization in vivo.
RESULTS: Corneal epithelial wound healing rates increased in response to
application of Sonic hedgehog (Shh), but only in mice with wild-type Pax6
dosage.  Downregulation of Hedgehog signalling inhibited corneal epithelial cell 
proliferation.  Pax6(+/-) corneal epithelia showed increased proliferation in
response to exogenous Shh, but not increased migration. Desert hedgehog (Dhh) was
shown to be the major endogenous ligand, with Shh detectable only by RT-PCR and
only after epithelial wounding. The activity of phosphatidylinositol-3-OH
kinase-<U+03B3> (PI3K<U+03B3>) was not required for the increased migration response in
response to Shh.  Nuclear expression of the activator form of the transcription
factor Gli3 (which mediates Hh signalling) was reduced in Pax6(+/-) corneal
epithelia. Pax6(+/-)Gli3(+/-) double heterozygotes showed highly disrupted
patterns of clonal arrangement of cells in the corneal epithelium.
CONCLUSIONS: The data show key roles for endogenous Dhh signalling in maintenance
and regeneration of the corneal epithelium, demonstrate an interaction between
Pax6 and Hh signalling in the corneal epithelium, and show that failure of Hh
signalling pathways is a feature of Pax6(+/-) corneal disease that cannot be
remedied pharmacologically by addition of the ligands.

PMCID: PMC3265179
PMID: 22275805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Dev Dyn. 2012 Mar;241(3):627-37. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23745.

Neogenin regulates Sonic Hedgehog pathway activity during digit patterning.

Hong M(1), Schachter KA, Jiang G, Krauss RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, New York 10029, USA.

BACKGROUND: Digit patterning integrates signaling by the Sonic Hedgehog (SHH),
fibroblast growth factor (FGF), and bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) pathways.
GLI3, a component of the SHH pathway, is a major regulator of digit number and
identity. Neogenin (encoded by Neo1) is a cell surface protein that serves to
transduce signals from several ligands, including BMPs, in various developmental 
contexts. Although neogenin is implicated in BMP signaling, it has not been
linked to SHH signaling and its role in digit patterning is unknown.
RESULTS: We report that Neo1 mutant mice have preaxial polydactyly with low
penetrance. Expression of SHH target genes, but not BMP target genes, is altered 
in Neo1 mutant limb buds. Analysis of mice carrying mutations in both Neo1 and
Gli3 reveals that, although neogenin plays a role in constraint of digit numbers,
suppressing polydactyly, it is also required for the severe polydactyly caused by
loss of GLI3. Furthermore, embryo fibroblasts from Neo1 mutant mice are
sensitized to SHH pathway activation in vitro.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that neogenin regulates SHH signaling in the
limb bud to achieve proper digit patterning.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3424067
PMID: 22275192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Cell. 2012 Jan 20;148(1-2):273-84. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.10.047.

Gene regulatory logic for reading the Sonic Hedgehog signaling gradient in the
vertebrate neural tube.

Balaskas N(1), Ribeiro A, Panovska J, Dessaud E, Sasai N, Page KM, Briscoe J,
Ribes V.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology, National Institute for Medical Research, Mill Hill,
London NW7 1AA, UK.

Secreted signals, known as morphogens, provide the positional information that
organizes gene expression and cellular differentiation in many developing
tissues. In the vertebrate neural tube, Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) acts as a morphogen 
to control the pattern of neuronal subtype specification. Using an in vivo
reporter of Shh signaling, mouse genetics, and systems modeling, we show that a
spatially and temporally changing gradient of Shh signaling is interpreted by the
regulatory logic of a downstream transcriptional network. The design of the
network, which links three transcription factors to Shh signaling, is responsible
for differential spatial and temporal gene expression. In addition, the network
renders cells insensitive to fluctuations in signaling and confers
hysteresis--memory of the signal. Our findings reveal that morphogen
interpretation is an emergent property of the architecture of a transcriptional
network that provides robustness and reliability to tissue patterning.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3267043
PMID: 22265416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Cereb Cortex. 2012 Dec;22(12):2878-93. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhr365. Epub 2012 Jan 
10.

Transcriptional analysis of Gli3 mutants identifies Wnt target genes in the
developing hippocampus.

Hasenpusch-Theil K(1), Magnani D, Amaniti EM, Han L, Armstrong D, Theil T.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Integrative Physiology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH8 9XD,
UK.

Early development of the hippocampus, which is essential for spatial memory and
learning, is controlled by secreted signaling molecules of the Wnt gene family
and by Wnt/ß-catenin signaling. Despite its importance, little is known, however,
about Wnt-regulated genes during hippocampal development. Here, we used the Gli3 
mutant mouse extra-toes (Xt(J)), in which Wnt gene expression in the forebrain is
severely affected, as a tool in a microarray analyses to identify potential Wnt
target genes. This approach revealed 53 candidate genes with restricted or graded
expression patterns in the dorsomedial telencephalon. We identified conserved
Tcf/Lef-binding sites in telencephalon-specific enhancers of several of these
genes, including Dmrt3, Gli3, Nfia, and Wnt8b. Binding of Lef1 to these sites was
confirmed using electrophoretic mobility shift assays. Mutations in these
Tcf/Lef-binding sites disrupted or reduced enhancer activity in vivo. Moreover,
ectopic activation of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in an ex vivo explant system led to
increased telencephalic expression of these genes. Finally, conditional
inactivation of Gli3 results in defective hippocampal growth. Collectively, these
data strongly suggest that we have identified a set of direct Wnt target genes in
the developing hippocampus and provide inside into the genetic hierarchy
underlying Wnt-regulated hippocampal development.

PMCID: PMC3491769
PMID: 22235033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Apr 15;21(8):1888-96. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds002. Epub 2012 Jan 
10.

Preaxial polydactyly caused by Gli3 haploinsufficiency is rescued by Zic3 loss of
function in mice.

Quinn ME(1), Haaning A, Ware SM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Cardiovascular Biology, Cincinnati Childrens Hospital
Medical Center, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH
45229, USA.

Limb anomalies are important birth defects that are incompletely understood
genetically and mechanistically. GLI3, a mediator of hedgehog signaling, is a
genetic cause of limb malformations including pre- and postaxial polydactyly,
Pallister-Hall syndrome and Greig cephalopolysyndactyly. A closely related Gli
(glioma-associated oncogene homolog)-superfamily member, ZIC3, causes X-linked
heterotaxy syndrome in humans but has not been investigated in limb development. 
During limb development, post-translational processing of Gli3 from activator to 
repressor antagonizes and posteriorly restricts Sonic hedgehog (Shh). We
demonstrate that Zic3 and Gli3 expression overlap in developing limbs and that
Zic3 converts Gli3 from repressor to activator in vitro. In Gli3 mutant mice,
Zic3 loss of function abrogates ectopic Shh expression in anterior limb buds,
limits overexpression in the zone of polarizing activity and normalizes aberrant 
Gli3 repressor/Gli3 activator ratios observed in Gli3+/- embryos. Zic3
null;Gli3+/- neonates show rescue of the polydactylous phenotype seen in Gli3+/- 
animals. These studies identify a previously unrecognized role for Zic3 in
regulating limb digit number via its modifying effect on Gli3 and Shh expression 
levels. Together, these results indicate that two Gli superfamily members that
cause disparate human congenital malformation syndromes interact genetically and 
demonstrate the importance of Zic3 in regulating Shh pathway in developing limbs.

PMCID: PMC3313802
PMID: 22234993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Stem Cells. 2012 Apr;30(4):741-52. doi: 10.1002/stem.1030.

Genome-wide analysis of N1ICD/RBPJ targets in vivo reveals direct transcriptional
regulation of Wnt, SHH, and hippo pathway effectors by Notch1.

Li Y(1), Hibbs MA, Gard AL, Shylo NA, Yun K.

Author information: 
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine, USA.

The Notch pathway plays a pivotal role in regulating cell fate decisions in many 
stem cell systems. However, the full repertoire of Notch target genes in vivo and
the mechanisms through which this pathway activity is integrated with other
signaling pathways are largely unknown. Here, we report a transgenic mouse in
which the activation of the Notch pathway massively expands the neural stem cell 
(NSC) pool in a cell context-dependent manner. Using this in vivo system, we
identify direct targets of RBPJ/N1ICD in cortical NSCs at a genome-wide level
through combined ChIP-Seq and transcriptome analyses. Through a highly
conservative analysis of these datasets, we identified 98 genes that are directly
regulated by N1ICD/RPBJ in vivo. These include many transcription factors that
are known to be critical for NSC self-renewal (Sox2, Pax6, Tlx, and Id4) and the 
transcriptional effectors of the Wnt, SHH, and Hippo pathways, TCF4, Gli2, Gli3, 
Yap1, and Tead2. Since little is known about the function of the Hippo-Yap
pathway in NSCs, we analyzed Yap1 expression and function in NSCs. We show that
Yap1 expression is restricted to the stem cell compartment in the developing
forebrain and that its expression is sufficient to rescue Notch pathway
inhibition in NSC self-renewal assays. Together, results of this study reveal a
previously underappreciated complexity and breadth of Notch1 targets in vivo and 
show direct interaction between Notch and Hippo-Yap pathways in NSCs.

Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC3734558
PMID: 22232070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Exp Cell Res. 2012 Mar 10;318(5):539-49. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2011.12.010. Epub
2011 Dec 27.

Abrogation of Gli3 expression suppresses the growth of colon cancer cells via
activation of p53.

Kang HN(1), Oh SC, Kim JS, Yoo YA.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Medicine, Korea University College of Medicine, Korea
University, Seoul 136-705, South Korea.

p53, the major human tumor suppressor, appears to be related to sonic hedgehog
(Shh)-Gli-mediated tumorigenesis. However, the role of p53 in tumor progression
by the Shh-Gli signaling pathway is poorly understood. Herein we investigated the
critical regulation of Gli3-p53 in tumorigenesis of colon cancer cells and the
molecular mechanisms underlying these effects. RT-PCR analysis indicated that the
mRNA level of Shh and Gli3 in colon tumor tissues was significantly higher than
corresponding normal tissues (P<0.001). The inhibition of Gli3 by treatment with 
Gli3 siRNA resulted in a clear decrease in cell proliferation and enhanced the
level of expression of p53 proteins compared to treatment with control siRNA. The
half-life of p53 was dramatically increased by treatment with Gli3 siRNA. In
addition, treatment with MG132 blocked MDM2-mediated p53 ubiquitination and
degradation, and led to accumulation of p53 in Gli3 siRNA-overexpressing cells.
Importantly, ectopic expression of p53 siRNA reduced the ability of Gli3 siRNA to
suppress proliferation of those cells compared with the cells treated with Gli3
siRNA alone. Moreover, Gli3 siRNA sensitized colon cancer cells to treatment with
anti-cancer agents (5-FU and bevacizumab). Taken together, our studies
demonstrate that loss of Gli3 signaling leads to disruption of the MDM2-p53
interaction and strongly potentiate p53-dependent cell growth inhibition in colon
cancer cells, indicating a basis for the rational use of Gli3 antagonists as a
novel treatment option for colon cancer.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22227409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 May 1;21(7):1016-46. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0271. Epub 2012
Feb 8.

Pharmacological modulation of the Hedgehog pathway differentially affects
dorsal/ventral patterning in mouse and human embryonic stem cell models of
telencephalic development.

Nat R(1), Salti A, Suciu L, Ström S, Dechant G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Neuroscience, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria. 
irina-roxana.nat@i-med.ac.at

A complex set of extrinsic and intrinsic signals acts in specific temporal and
spatial orders to enable neural differentiation during development. These
processes have been extensively studied in animal models, but human neural
development remains much less understood. This lack of detailed information about
human early neurogenesis is a hindrance for the differentiation of pluripotent
stem cell lines into specific neuronal phenotypes. Therefore, it is important to 
strengthen the interspecies comparative approaches. We describe a novel model
system in which in vitro differentiation of human and mouse embryonic stem (ES)
cells are temporally aligned to each other and compared with mouse telencephalic 
neurogenesis in vivo. In this comparative model system, we tested the in vitro
role of Hedgehog (Hh) signaling for ES cell-derived telencephalic
differentiation. In vivo, Hh signaling mediates dorsal/ventral patterning during 
early stages of telencephalic development. We monitored the effect of
pharmacological modulators of the Hh signaling pathway, purmorphamine-an agonist 
and cyclopamine-an antagonist of the Smoothened receptor (Smo), on the expression
of region-specific transcription factors and signaling molecules relevant for
telencephalic development in vivo. Purmorphamine strongly upregulated the
expression of telencephalic ventral markers Nkx2.1, Nkx6.2, Lhx6, and Lhx8 in
mouse and human cells, thus reflecting the in vivo process of the medial
ganglionic eminence patterning and specification. Cyclopamine upregulated the
expression of telencephalic dorsal markers, but at lower levels in human compared
with mouse cells. Modulation of Smo in vitro differentially affected, in mouse
and human cells, the expression of molecules of the Hh pathway, especially the
Gli1 and Gli3 effectors, Sonic Hh ligand and Ptch receptors. These results
provide evidence for the different default differentiation of mouse and human ES 
cells and prove the utility of the comparative system for optimizing the directed
differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells.

PMID: 22204396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Dev Dyn. 2012 Feb;241(2):403-14. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23723. Epub 2011 Dec 20.

Thyroid hormone-induced sonic hedgehog signal up-regulates its own pathway in a
paracrine manner in the Xenopus laevis intestine during metamorphosis.

Hasebe T(1), Kajita M, Fu L, Shi YB, Ishizuya-Oka A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Nippon Medical School, Nakahara-ku, Kawasaki, Kanagawa,
Japan. hasebet@nms.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: During Xenopus laevis metamorphosis, Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is directly
induced by thyroid hormone (TH) at the transcription level as one of the earliest
events in intestinal remodeling. However, the regulation of other components of
this signaling pathway remains to be analyzed. Here, we analyzed the
spatiotemporal expression of Patched (Ptc)-1, Smoothened (Smo), Gli1, Gli2, and
Gli3 during natural and TH-induced intestinal remodeling.
RESULTS: We show that all of the genes examined are transiently up-regulated in
the mesenchymal tissues during intestinal metamorphosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Interestingly, in the presence of protein synthesis inhibitors, Gli2
but not the others was induced by TH, suggesting that Gli2 is a direct TH
response gene, while the others are likely indirect ones. Furthermore, we
demonstrate by the organ culture experiment that overexpression of Shh enhances
the expression of Ptc-1, Smo, and Glis even in the absence of TH, indicating that
Shh regulates its own pathway components during intestinal remodeling.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3428560
PMID: 22190352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Dev Biol. 2012 Feb 15;362(2):141-53. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.11.022. Epub 2011 
Dec 11.

Dual function of suppressor of fused in Hh pathway activation and mouse spinal
cord patterning.

Liu J(1), Heydeck W, Zeng H, Liu A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Eberly College of Science, Center for Cellular
Dynamics, Huck Institute of Life Sciences, The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, PA 16802, USA.

The morphogen Sonic hedgehog, one of the Hedgehog (Hh) family of secreted
proteins, plays a key role in patterning the mammalian spinal cord along its
dorsoventral (D/V) axis through the activation of Glioma-associated oncogene
(Gli) family of transcription factors. Suppressor of Fused (Sufu), a
Gli-interacting protein, modulates the D/V patterning of the spinal cord by
antagonizing Hh signaling. The molecular mechanisms underlying the function of
Sufu in Hh pathway activation and spinal cord D/V patterning remain
controversial, particularly in light of recent findings that Sufu protects Gli2
and Gli3 proteins from proteasomal degradation. In the current study, we show
that Hh pathway activation and dorsal expansion of ventral spinal cord cell types
in the absence of Sufu depend on the activator activities of all three Gli family
proteins. We also show that Sufu plays a positive role in the maximal activation 
of Hh signaling that defines the ventral-most cell fate in the mammalian spinal
cord, likely through protecting Gli2 and Gli3 proteins from degradation. Finally,
by altering the level of Gli3 repressor on a background of reduced Gli activator 
activities, we reveal an important contribution of Gli3 repressor activity to the
Hh pathway activation and the D/V patterning of the spinal cord.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22182519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Acta Histochem. 2012 Oct;114(6):620-5. doi: 10.1016/j.acthis.2011.11.007. Epub
2011 Dec 15.

Different expression patterns of Gli1-3 in mouse embryonic maxillofacial
development.

Du J(1), Fan Z, Ma X, Wu Y, Liu S, Gao Y, Wang J, Shen Y, Fan M, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Laboratory for Gene Therapy and Tooth Regeneration, Capital Medical 
University School of Stomatology, Beijing, China.

The Sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway plays many key roles in the
development of Drosophila and vertebrate embryos, including regulating
craniofacial development. The GLI family of transcription factors (GLI1, 2, and
3) mediates the SHH morphogenetic signal by regulating the expression of
downstream target genes. Signaling aberrations seriously affect vertebrate
development. To better understand the regulation of GLI transcription factors, we
investigated the expression patterns of Gli1-3 during murine embryonic
craniofacial development using in situ hybridization with whole-mounts and
sections and quantitative real-time PCR. We found that Gli1 expression was mostly
detected in the mesenchyme in embryonic dermis, and strongly detected in
embryonic oral mucosa at late stages of face development. Gli2 was strong in
mesenchyme, both in dermis and oral mucosa. Gli3 expression was detected fainter 
in the epithelium than the mesenchyme at 11 days post-coitum (dpc), but at 14.5
dpc, expression was stronger in the epithelium. Of the three genes, Gli1
expression was highest in early stages of face development, Gli3 expression was
highest in the second half of facial development (and remained stable
thereafter), whereas Gli2 expression remained low throughout facial development. 
The present findings suggest that Gli1-3 may play different roles during facial
development.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22178118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2012 Feb;20(2):152-61. doi: 10.1016/j.joca.2011.11.009.
Epub 2011 Nov 27.

Depletion of primary cilia in articular chondrocytes results in reduced Gli3
repressor to activator ratio, increased Hedgehog signaling, and symptoms of early
osteoarthritis.

Chang CF(1), Ramaswamy G, Serra R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
AL 35294-0005, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Primary cilia are present in almost every cell type including
chondrocytes. Studies have shown that defects in primary cilia result in skeletal
dysplasia. The purpose of this study was to understand how loss of primary cilia 
affects articular cartilage.
DESIGN: Ift88 encodes a protein that is required for intraflagellar transport and
formation of primary cilia. In this study, we used Col2aCre;Ift88(fl/fl)
transgenic mice in which primary cilia were deleted in chondrocytes.
Col2aCre;Ift88(fl/fl) articular cartilage was characterized by histological
staining, real time RT-PCR, and microindentation. Hedgehog (Hh) signaling was
measured by expression of Ptch1 and Gli1 mRNA. The levels of Gli3 proteins were
determined by western blot.
RESULTS: Col2aCre;Ift88(fl/fl) articular cartilage was thicker and had increased 
cell density, likely due to decreased apoptosis during cartilage remodeling.
Mutant articular cartilage also showed increased expression of osteoarthritis
(OA) markers including Mmp13, Adamts5, ColX, and Runx2. OA was also evident by
reduced stiffness in mutant cartilage as measured by microindentation.
Up-regulation of Hh signaling, which has been associated with OA, was present in 
mutant articular cartilage as measured by expression of Ptch1 and Gli1.
Col2aCre;Ift88(fl/fl) cartilage also demonstrated reduced Gli3 repressor to
activator ratio.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that primary cilia are required for normal
development and maintenance of articular cartilage. It was shown that primary
cilia are required for processing full length Gli3 to the truncated repressor
form. We propose that OA symptoms in Col2aCre;Ift88(fl/fl) cartilage are due to
reduced Hh signal repression by Gli3.

Copyright © 2011 Osteoarthritis Research Society International. Published by
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3260404
PMID: 22173325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. PLoS Genet. 2011 Nov;7(11):e1002356. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002356. Epub 2011
Nov 3.

SOX9 governs differentiation stage-specific gene expression in growth plate
chondrocytes via direct concomitant transactivation and repression.

Leung VY(1), Gao B, Leung KK, Melhado IG, Wynn SL, Au TY, Dung NW, Lau JY, Mak
AC, Chan D, Cheah KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

Cartilage and endochondral bone development require SOX9 activity to regulate
chondrogenesis, chondrocyte proliferation, and transition to a non-mitotic
hypertrophic state. The restricted and reciprocal expression of the collagen X
gene, Col10a1, in hypertrophic chondrocytes and Sox9 in immature chondrocytes
epitomise the precise spatiotemporal control of gene expression as chondrocytes
progress through phases of differentiation, but how this is achieved is not
clear. Here, we have identified a regulatory element upstream of Col10a1 that
enhances its expression in hypertrophic chondrocytes in vivo. In immature
chondrocytes, where Col10a1 is not expressed, SOX9 interacts with a conserved
sequence within this element that is analogous to that within the intronic
enhancer of the collagen II gene Col2a1, the known transactivation target of
SOX9. By analysing a series of Col10a1 reporter genes in transgenic mice, we show
that the SOX9 binding consensus in this element is required to repress expression
of the transgene in non-hypertrophic chondrocytes. Forced ectopic Sox9 expression
in hypertrophic chondrocytes in vitro and in mice resulted in down-regulation of 
Col10a1. Mutation of a binding consensus motif for GLI transcription factors,
which are the effectors of Indian hedgehog signaling, close to the SOX9 site in
the Col10a1 regulatory element, also derepressed transgene expression in
non-hypertrophic chondrocytes. GLI2 and GLI3 bound to the Col10a1 regulatory
element but not to the enhancer of Col2a1. In addition to Col10a1, paired
SOX9-GLI binding motifs are present in the conserved non-coding regions of
several genes that are preferentially expressed in hypertrophic chondrocytes and 
the occurrence of pairing is unlikely to be by chance. We propose a regulatory
paradigm whereby direct concomitant positive and negative transcriptional control
by SOX9 ensures differentiation phase-specific gene expression in chondrocytes.
Discrimination between these opposing modes of transcriptional control by SOX9
may be mediated by cooperation with different partners such as GLI factors.

PMCID: PMC3207907
PMID: 22072985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e26242. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026242. Epub 2011 Oct 27.

Ectodermal influx and cell hypertrophy provide early growth for all murine
mammary rudiments, and are differentially regulated among them by Gli3.

Lee MY(1), Racine V, Jagadpramana P, Sun L, Yu W, Du T, Spencer-Dene B, Rubin N, 
Le L, Ndiaye D, Bellusci S, Kratochwil K, Veltmaat JM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Agency for Science, Technology and
Research, Singapore, Singapore.

Mammary gland development starts in utero with one or several pairs of mammary
rudiments (MRs) budding from the surface ectodermal component of the mammalian
embryonic skin. Mice develop five pairs, numbered MR1 to MR5 from pectoral to
inguinal position. We have previously shown that Gli3(Xt-J/Xt-J) mutant embryos, 
which lack the transcription factor Gli3, do not form MR3 and MR5. We show here
that two days after the MRs emerge, Gli3(Xt-J/Xt-J) MR1 is 20% smaller, and
Gli3(Xt-J/Xt-J) MR2 and MR4 are 50% smaller than their wild type (wt)
counterparts. Moreover, while wt MRs sink into the underlying dermis,
Gli3(Xt-J/Xt-J) MR4 and MR2 protrude outwardly, to different extents. To
understand why each of these five pairs of functionally identical organs has its 
own, distinct response to the absence of Gli3, we determined which cellular
mechanisms regulate growth of the individual MRs, and whether and how Gli3
regulates these mechanisms. We found a 5.5 to 10.7-fold lower cell proliferation 
rate in wt MRs compared to their adjacent surface ectoderm, indicating that MRs
do not emerge or grow via locally enhanced cell proliferation. Cell-tracing
experiments showed that surface ectodermal cells are recruited toward the
positions where MRs emerge, and contribute to MR growth during at least two days.
During the second day of MR development, peripheral cells within the MRs undergo 
hypertrophy, which also contributes to MR growth. Limited apoptotic cell death
counterbalances MR growth. The relative contribution of each of these processes
varies among the five MRs. Furthermore, each of these processes is impaired in
the absence of Gli3, but to different extents in each MR. This differential
involvement of Gli3 explains the variation in phenotype among Gli3(Xt-J/Xt-J)
MRs, and may help to understand the variation in numbers and positions of mammary
glands among mammals.

PMCID: PMC3203106
PMID: 22046263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Oct;155A(10):2469-72.

MODY type 2 in Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS) as part of a
contiguous gene deletion syndrome.

Zung A(1), Petek E, Ben-Zeev B, Schwarzbraun T, Ben-Yehoshua SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Endocrinology Unit, Kaplan Medical Center, Rehovot, Israel.
amzung2@bezeqimt.net

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 2 (MODY2) is a form of monogenic
diabetes, characterized by mild fasting hyperglycemia. MODY2 is caused by
heterozygous mutations in the GCK gene that encodes the glucokinase enzyme. We
describe the clinical features and the underlying genetic defect of MODY2 in a
patient with atypical Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS). The patient
presented with the limb formation and the craniofacial developmental
abnormalities typical to GCPS, in addition to mental retardation and epilepsy
(assigned as atypical syndrome). Fasting hyperglycemia in the diabetic range,
impaired glucose tolerance, and lack of diabetes autoantibodies were compatible
with MODY2. In order to delineate the genetic aberrations relevant both to MODY2 
and Greig syndrome in this patient, we performed cytogenetic analysis, real-time 
PCR of the GCK gene, and comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) array.
Cytogenetic study has shown a microscopic detectable deletion in the 7p13-15
chromosomal region. Real-time PCR demonstrated a deletion of the GCK gene in the 
patient but not her parents, and CGH array revealed a deleted region of
approximately 12 Mb in the 7p13-15 region. This deleted region included GLI3 and 
GCK genes (where heterozygous mutations cause GCPS and MODY2, respectively), and 
many other contiguous genes. Our patient manifests a unique form of MODY2, where 
GCK gene deletion is part of a large deleted segment in the 7p13-15 chromosomal
region.

PMID: 22043488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Hepatogastroenterology. 2011 Nov-Dec;58(112):2071-6. doi: 10.5754/hge11155.

The role of hedgehog signaling pathway in liver regeneration.

Cai Y(1), Zheng H, Gong W, Che Y, Jiang B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: In this study, we explored the role of the Hedgehog signaling
pathway in liver regeneration.
METHODOLOGY: Retrorsine, partial hepatectomy and combined were utilized in mature
Fisher344 rats. Specific assays, such as RT-PCR, real-time PCR and
immunohistochemistry were used to detect the constituents of the Hedgehog
signaling pathway during liver regeneration.
RESULTS: mRNA expression of Ihh, Ptc, Smo, Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3 were all shown in 
liver tissue homogenates in control/normal, retrorsine, partial hepatectomy and
retrorsine/partial hepatectomy groups while no Shh expression was found.
Real-time PCR analysis indicated that there were significant differences in
Hedgehog signaling pathway-related constituents (Ihh, Ptc, Gli1 and Gli3) among
the different treatment groups and at distinct time points in the same treatment 
group during liver regeneration. The data also suggested an interaction effect
between different treatment and time to the variation of Ihh, Ptc, Gli1 and Gli3.
The protein expression of Ptc and Gli1 in liver regeneration was confirmed by
immunohistochemistry, which differed in the duration among different groups.
Nevertheless, the protein expression of Ptc and Gli1 were not detected
successfully by western blot.
CONCLUSIONS: It appears that the Hedgehog signaling pathway may be involved in
liver regeneration.

PMID: 22024090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Development. 2011 Nov;138(22):4921-30. doi: 10.1242/dev.070805. Epub 2011 Oct 17.

Protein kinase A acts at the basal body of the primary cilium to prevent Gli2
activation and ventralization of the mouse neural tube.

Tuson M(1), He M, Anderson KV.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, 1275 York Avenue,
New York, NY 10065, USA.

Protein kinase A (PKA) is an evolutionarily conserved negative regulator of the
hedgehog (Hh) signal transduction pathway. PKA is known to be required for the
proteolytic processing event that generates the repressor forms of the Ci and Gli
transcription factors that keep target genes off in the absence of Hh. Here, we
show that complete loss of PKA activity in the mouse leads to midgestation
lethality and a completely ventralized neural tube, demonstrating that PKA is as 
strong a negative regulator of the sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway as patched 1
(Ptch1) or suppressor of fused (Sufu). Genetic analysis shows that although PKA
is important for production of the repressor form of Gli3, the principal function
of PKA in the Shh pathway in neural development is to restrain activation of
Gli2. Activation of the Hh pathway in PKA mutants depends on cilia, and the
catalytic and regulatory subunits of PKA are localized to a compartment at the
base of the primary cilia, just proximal to the basal body. The data show that
PKA does not affect cilia length or trafficking of smoothened (Smo) in the
cilium. Instead, we find that there is a significant increase in the level of
Gli2 at the tips of cilia of PKA-null cells. The data suggest a model in which
PKA acts at the base of the cilium after Gli proteins have transited the primary 
cilium; in this model the sequential movement of Gli proteins between
compartments in the cilium and at its base controls accessibility of Gli proteins
to PKA, which determines the fates of Gli proteins and the activity of the Shh
pathway.

PMCID: PMC3201661
PMID: 22007132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. J Mol Neurosci. 2012 May;47(1):31-41. doi: 10.1007/s12031-011-9660-x. Epub 2011
Oct 7.

Sonic hedgehog is cytoprotective against oxidative challenge in a cellular model 
of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Peterson R(1), Turnbull J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, McMaster University Medical Centre, Rm 4U7, 1200 Main 
St West, Hamilton, Ontario L8N 3Z5, Canada.

We have previously demonstrated that primary cilia on spinal motor neurons are
reduced in G93A SOD1 (mSOD) mice, a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
(ALS). Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling involves the primary cilium and Shh has
been shown to be cytoprotective in models of other neurodegenerative diseases.
Thus, the Shh signaling pathway may bear further study in ALS. Accordingly, we
established that interference with the Shh pathway (with the Shh antagonist
cyclopamine or with miRNA 3245p) sensitized HT22 cells, while augmentation of the
Shh pathway (with Shh or the Shh agonist purmorphamine) protected cells against
hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) challenge. We ectopically expressed mSOD, human
wild-type SOD1 (wtSOD), or an empty vector in HT22 cells. Compared to empty
vector, wtSOD decreased cell death and mSOD increased cell death in response to
H2O2 challenge. Treatment with cyclopamine or miRNA 3245p sensitized all three
transfections to H2O2 challenge. Treatment with recombinant human Shh or
purmorphamine decreased cell death after H2O2 challenge, an effect more
pronounced in mSOD cells. Compared with empty vector, overexpression of wtSOD
increased Shh and Gli transcript levels and increased activity in a
Gli-responsive reporter assay. Overexpression of mSOD did not change Shh
transcript levels, but decreased Gli transcript levels, especially Gli3, and
reduced activity in a Gli reporter assay. These results suggest that
overexpression of mSOD but not wtSOD reduces signaling in the Shh pathway and
renders mSOD cells more susceptible to H2O2 challenge, and that treatment with
Shh or Shh agonists is cytoprotective to mSOD cells. Shh or Shh agonists merit
further consideration as potential therapy in ALS.

PMID: 21979788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Mol Biol Cell. 2011 Dec;22(23):4694-703. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E10-12-0994. Epub 2011 
Oct 5.

Arl13b regulates ciliogenesis and the dynamic localization of Shh signaling
proteins.

Larkins CE(1), Aviles GD, East MP, Kahn RA, Caspary T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, School of Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta,
GA 30322, USA.

Arl13b, a ciliary protein within the ADP-ribosylation factor family and Ras
superfamily of GTPases, is required for ciliary structure but has poorly defined 
ciliary functions. In this paper, we further characterize the role of Arl13b in
cilia by examining mutant cilia in vitro and determining the localization and
dynamics of Arl13b within the cilium. Previously, we showed that mice lacking
Arl13b have abnormal Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling; in this study, we show the
dynamics of Shh signaling component localization to the cilium are disrupted in
the absence of Arl13b. Significantly, we found Smoothened (Smo) is enriched in
Arl13b-null cilia regardless of Shh pathway stimulation, indicating Arl13b
regulates the ciliary entry of Smo. Furthermore, our analysis defines a role for 
Arl13b in regulating the distribution of Smo within the cilium. These results
suggest that abnormal Shh signaling in Arl13b mutant embryos may result from
defects in protein localization and distribution within the cilium.

PMCID: PMC3226485
PMID: 21976698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Dev Neurobiol. 2012 Sep;72(9):1196-212. doi: 10.1002/dneu.20985. Epub 2012 Jun
21.

Primary cilia and Gli3 activity regulate cerebral cortical size.

Wilson SL(1), Wilson JP, Wang C, Wang B, McConnell SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA.

During neural development patterning, neurogenesis, and overall growth are highly
regulated and coordinated between different brain regions. Here, we show that
primary cilia and the regulation of Gli activity are necessary for the normal
expansion of the cerebral cortex. We show that loss of Kif3a, an important
functional component of primary cilia, leads to the degeneration of primary
cilia, marked overgrowth of the cortex, and altered cell cycle kinetics within
cortical progenitors. The G1 phase of the cell cycle is shortened through a
mechanism likely involving reduced Gli3 activity and a resulting increase in
expression of cyclin D1 and Fgf15. The defects in Gli3 activity alone are
sufficient to accelerate cell cycle kinetics and cause the molecular changes seen
in brains that lack cilia. Finally, we show that levels of full-length and
repressor Gli3 proteins are tightly regulated during normal development and
correlate with changes in expression of two known Shh-target genes, CyclinD1 and 
Fgf15, and with the normal lengthening of the cell cycle during corticogenesis.
These data suggest that Gli3 activity is regulated through the primary cilium to 
control cell cycle length in the cortex and thus determine cortical size.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3350755
PMID: 21976438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Dev Biol. 2011 Nov 15;359(2):242-50. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.08.026. Epub 2011 
Sep 7.

Shh and Gli3 regulate formation of the telencephalic-diencephalic junction and
suppress an isthmus-like signaling source in the forebrain.

Rash BG(1), Grove EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Committees on Neurobiology and Developmental
Biology, The University of Chicago, IL 60637, USA. brian.rash@yale.edu

In human holoprosencephaly (HPE), the forebrain does not separate fully into two 
hemispheres. Further, the border between the telencephalon and diencephalon, the 
telencephalic/diencephalic junction (TDJ), is often indistinct, and the
ventricular system can be blocked at the third ventricle, creating a forebrain
'holosphere'. Mice deficient in Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) have previously been
described to show HPE and associated cyclopia. Here we report that the third
ventricle is blocked in Shh null mutants, similar to human HPE, and that
characteristic telencephalic and diencephalic signaling centers, the cortical hem
and zona limitans intrathalamica (ZLI), are merged, obliterating the TDJ. The
resulting forebrain holosphere comprises Foxg1-positive telencephalic- and
Foxg1-negative diencephalic territories. Loss of one functional copy of Gli3 in
Shh nulls rescues ventricular collapse and substantially restores the TDJ.
Characteristic regional gene expression patterns are rescued on the telencephalic
side of the TDJ but not in the diencephalon. Further analysis of compound
Shh;Gli3 mutants revealed an unexpected type of signaling center deregulation. In
Shh;Gli3 mutants, adjacent rings of Fgf8 and Wnt3a expression are induced in the 
diencephalon at the ZLI, reminiscent of the Fgf8/Wnt1-expressing isthmic
organizer. Neither Shh nor Gli3 single mutants show this forebrain double ring of
Fgf/Wnt expression; thus both Shh and Gli3 are independently required to suppress
it. Adjacent tissue is not respecified to a midbrain/hindbrain fate, but shows
overgrowth, consistent with ectopic mitogen expression. Our observations indicate
that the separation of the telencephalon and diencephalon depends on interactions
between Shh and Gli3, and, moreover, demonstrate that both Shh and Gli3 suppress 
a potential Fgf/Wnt signaling source in the forebrain. That optional signaling
centers are actively repressed in normal development is a striking new insight
into the processes of vertebrate brain development.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3213684
PMID: 21925158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Biol Chem. 2011 Nov 11;286(45):39051-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.274993. Epub 2011
Sep 15.

A three-part signal governs differential processing of Gli1 and Gli3 proteins by 
the proteasome.

Schrader EK(1), Harstad KG, Holmgren RA, Matouschek A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences and the Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois 60208, USA.

The Gli proteins are the transcriptional effectors of the mammalian Hedgehog
signaling pathway. In an unusual mechanism, the proteasome partially degrades or 
processes Gli3 in the absence of Hedgehog pathway stimulation to create a Gli3
fragment that opposes the activity of the full-length protein. In contrast, Gli1 
is not processed but degraded completely, despite considerable homology with
Gli3. We found that these differences in processing can be described by defining 
a processing signal that is composed of three parts: the zinc finger domain, an
adjacent linker sequence, and a degron. Gli3 processing is inhibited when any one
component of the processing signal is disrupted. We show that the zinc fingers
are required for processing only as a folded structure and that the location but 
not the identity of the processing degron is critical. Within the linker
sequence, regions of low sequence complexity play a crucial role, but other
sequence features are also important. Gli1 is not processed because two
components of the processing signal, the linker sequence and the degron, are
ineffective. These findings provide new insights into the molecular elements that
regulate Gli protein processing by the proteasome.

PMCID: PMC3234730
PMID: 21921029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2011 Nov;137(11):1679-86. doi:
10.1007/s00432-011-1038-5. Epub 2011 Sep 1.

Identification of CD44+CD24+ gastric cancer stem cells.

Zhang C(1), Li C, He F, Cai Y, Yang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing 400037, China.

OBJECTIVE: Purification and characterization of cancer stem cells (CSCs) can lead
to the identification of targets for therapeutic interventions of cancer. With
regard to gastric cancer, studies have not yet defined and characterized CSCs.
METHODS: The expression of the cell surface markers CD44 and CD24 was examined in
gastric cell lines AGS and gastric cancer tissues from five patients with
fluorescence-activated cell sorting analysis (FACS). The tumorigenic properties, 
self-renewal, and differentiated progeny in the two distinct cell populations
CD44+CD24+ and CD44-CD24- were identified in vivo serial transplantation and in
vitro culture. Real-time RT-PCR was used to assess the expression of sonic
hedgehog (SHH), patched 1 (PTCH1), and GLI3 signaling molecules in CD44+CD24+ and
CD44-CD24- cells.
RESULTS: As few as 200 CD44+CD24+ cells injected in NOD-SCID mice were able to
generate tumors in 50% of mice (6 of 12), while tumors did not form in mice until
at least 10,000 CD44-CD24- cells were injected, where only one of 12 mice formed 
a tumor, further verifying that CD44+CD24+ gastric cancer cells have the capacity
to both self-renew and produce differentiated progeny. Moreover, SHH, PTCH1, and 
GLI3 mRNA expression increased significantly in the CD44+CD24+ subpopulation when
compared with the CD44-CD24- subpopulation.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies strongly suggest that the CD44+CD24+ subpopulation of 
human gastric cancer cell lines, AGS, is gastric cancer stem cells.

PMID: 21882047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Oncotarget. 2011 Aug;2(8):638-45.

The GLI genes as the molecular switch in disrupting Hedgehog signaling in colon
cancer.

Mazumdar T(1), DeVecchio J, Agyeman A, Shi T, Houghton JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

The Hedgehog (HH) signaling pathway leads to activation of GLI, which
transcriptionally regulate target genes. Regulated HH signaling activity is
critical during embryogenesis while aberrantly activated HH signaling is evident 
in a variety of human cancers. Canonical HH signaling engages the transmembrane
receptor Patched (PTCH) and the signaling intermediate Smoothened (SMO) to
activate GLI1 and GLI2. In addition GLI1 and GLI2 are activated by non-canonical 
oncogenic signaling pathways to further drive HH-dependent survival. We have
demonstrated in human colon carcinoma cells that inhibition of the RAS/RAF
pathway by U0126 decreases p-ERK protein expression and also inhibits
GLI-luciferase activity and GLI1 mRNA and protein levels. Of importance is the
demonstration that targeting of SMO (using cyclopamine) has minimal effect on
cell survival in comparison to the inhibition of GLI (using GANT61), which
induced extensive cell death in 7/7 human colon carcinoma cell lines. Genetic
inhibition of the function of GLI1 and GLI2 by transient transfection of the
C-terminus deleted repressor GLI3R, reduced proliferation and induced cleavage of
caspase-3 and cell death in HT29 cells, similar to the effects of GANT61.
Mechanistically, downstream of GLI1 and GLI2 inhibition, <U+03B3>H2AX (a marker of DNA
double strand breaks) expression was upregulated, and <U+03B3>H2AX nuclear foci were
demonstrated in cells that expressed GLI3R. Activation of the ATM/Chk2 axis with 
co-localization of <U+03B3>H2AX and p-Chk2 nuclear foci were demonstrated following
GLI1/GLI2 inhibition. GANT61 induced cellular accumulation at G1/S and early S
with no further progression before cells became subG1, while cDNA microarray gene
profiling demonstrated downregulation of genes involved in DNA replication, the
DNA damage response, and DNA repair, mechanisms that are currently being pursued.
These studies highlight the importance of targeting the GLI genes downstream of
SMO for terminating HH-dependent survival, suggesting that GLI may constitute a
molecular switch that determines the balance between cell survival and cell death
in human colon carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC3248207
PMID: 21860067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e23755. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023755. Epub 2011 Aug 17.

Identification of a novel ZIC3 isoform and mutation screening in patients with
heterotaxy and congenital heart disease.

Bedard JE(1), Haaning AM, Ware SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center and
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio, United States of 
America.

Patients with heterotaxy have characteristic cardiovascular malformations,
abnormal arrangement of their visceral organs, and midline patterning defects
that result from abnormal left-right patterning during embryogenesis. Loss of
function of the transcription factor ZIC3 causes X-linked heterotaxy and isolated
congenital heart malformations and represents one of the few known monogenic
causes of congenital heart disease. The birth incidence of heterotaxy-spectrum
malformations is significantly higher in males, but our previous work indicated
that mutations within ZIC3 did not account for the male over-representation.
Therefore, cross species comparative sequence alignment was used to identify a
putative novel fourth exon, and the existence of a novel alternatively spliced
transcript was confirmed by amplification from murine embryonic RNA and
subsequent sequencing. This transcript, termed Zic3-B, encompasses exons 1, 2,
and 4 whereas Zic3-A encompasses exons 1, 2, and 3. The resulting protein
isoforms are 466 and 456 amino acid residues respectively, sharing the first 407 
residues. Importantly, the last two amino acids in the fifth zinc finger DNA
binding domain are altered in the Zic3-B isoform, indicating a potential
functional difference that was further evaluated by expression, subcellular
localization, and transactivation analyses. The temporo-spatial expression
pattern of Zic3-B overlaps with Zic3-A in vivo, and both isoforms are localized
to the nucleus in vitro. Both isoforms can transcriptionally activate a Gli
binding site reporter, but only ZIC3-A synergistically activates upon
co-transfection with Gli3, suggesting that the isoforms are functionally
distinct. Screening 109 familial and sporadic male heterotaxy cases did not
identify pathogenic mutations in the newly identified fourth exon and larger
studies are necessary to establish the importance of the novel isoform in human
disease.

PMCID: PMC3157443
PMID: 21858219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Hum Mutat. 2011 Nov;32(11):1332-3. doi: 10.1002/humu.21570. Epub 2011 Sep 19.

GLI3 is rarely implicated in OFD syndromes with midline abnormalities.

Avila M, Gigot N, Aral B, Callier P, Gautier E, Thevenon J, Pasquier L, Lopez E, 
Gueneau L, Duplomb L, Goldenberg A, Baumann C, Cormier V, Marlin S,
Masurel-Paulet A, Huet F, Attié-Bitach T, Faivre L, Thauvin-Robinet C.

Comment on
    Hum Mutat. 2010 Oct;31(10):1142-54.

PMID: 21796731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Development. 2011 Sep;138(17):3759-67. doi: 10.1242/dev.063180. Epub 2011 Jul 27.

Ezh2 regulates anteroposterior axis specification and proximodistal axis
elongation in the developing limb.

Wyngaarden LA(1), Delgado-Olguin P, Su IH, Bruneau BG, Hopyan S.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental and Stem Cell Biology Program, Research Institute, Hospital for 
Sick Children, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada.

Specification and determination (commitment) of positional identities precedes
overt pattern formation during development. In the limb bud, it is clear that the
anteroposterior axis is specified at a very early stage and is prepatterned by
the mutually antagonistic interaction between Gli3 and Hand2. There is also
evidence that the proximodistal axis is specified early and determined
progressively. Little is known about upstream regulators of these processes or
how epigenetic modifiers influence axis formation. Using conditional mutagenesis 
at different time points, we show that the histone methyltransferase Ezh2 is an
upstream regulator of anteroposterior prepattern at an early stage. Mutants
exhibit posteriorised limb bud identity. During later limb bud stages, Ezh2 is
essential for cell survival and proximodistal segment elongation. Ezh2 maintains 
the late phase of Hox gene expression and cell transposition experiments suggest 
that it regulates the plasticity with which cells respond to instructive
positional cues.

PMID: 21795281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Genes Cancer. 2010 Sep;1(9):941-51. doi: 10.1177/1947601910385449.

Reduction of human embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma tumor growth by inhibition of the
hedgehog signaling pathway.

Tostar U(1), Toftgård R, Zaphiropoulos PG, Shimokawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge,
SE-14183 Sweden.

Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most frequent soft-tissue sarcoma in children.
Embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma (E-RMS) represents the most common RMS subtype, but
the molecular events driving this tumor are still largely unknown. The hedgehog
(HH) pathway, a major signal transduction cascade, is linked with many cancers,
including RMS. As we previously have detected loss of heterozygosity of PTCH1 in 
E-RMS, we now examined 8 E-RMS tumor samples and 5 E-RMS cell lines for the
presence of PTCH1 mutations, but none was detected. However, in the E-RMS cell
lines, a variable pattern of up-regulated expression of certain HH signaling
target genes, including HHIP, PTCH1, SFRP1, and GLI1, was observed. Moreover,
treatment with the small molecule HH signaling inhibitors cyclopamine and GANT61 
inhibited cell proliferation in all E-RMS cell lines analyzed. Interestingly,
GANT61 was more effective, and this was accompanied by increased apoptosis, while
cyclopamine promoted necrotic events. Specific knockdown of SMO had no effect on 
the proliferation of E-RMS cells, indicating the presence of an SMO-independent
HH signaling pathway in the E-RMS cell lines. Furthermore, in an in vivo
xenograft model, tumor growth was significantly reduced by GANT61 treatment of
E-RMS cells. Additionally, siRNA experiments provided evidence that inhibition of
GLI1 or GLI3 but not GLI2 was sufficient to reduce proliferation of these cell
lines. As GANT61 is known to block GLI1/GLI2 transcriptional activity, the
inhibition of E-RMS growth by GANT61 is likely to be mediated through GLI1. In
conclusion, our findings implicate that GLI1 could constitute an effective
therapeutic target in pediatric E-RMS.

PMCID: PMC3092259
PMID: 21779473  [PubMed]


258. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Aug 2;108(31):12758-63. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1018510108. Epub 2011 Jul 18.

Dual role of Brg chromatin remodeling factor in Sonic hedgehog signaling during
neural development.

Zhan X(1), Shi X, Zhang Z, Chen Y, Wu JI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Developmental Biology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, Dallas, TX 75390-9133, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling plays diverse roles during animal development and 
adult tissue homeostasis through differential regulation of Gli family
transcription factors. Dysregulated Shh signaling activities have been linked to 
birth defects and tumorigenesis. Here we report that Brg, an ATP-dependent
chromatin remodeling factor, has dual functions in regulating Shh target gene
expression. Using a Brg conditional deletion in Shh-responding neural progenitors
and fibroblasts, we demonstrate that Brg is required both for repression of the
basal expression and for the activation of signal-induced transcription of Shh
target genes. In developing telencephalons deficient for Brg, Shh target genes
were derepressed, whereas Brg-deleted cerebellar granule neuron precursors failed
to respond to Shh to increase their proliferation. The repressor function of Brg 
was mediated through Gli3 and both the repressor and activator functions of Brg
appeared to be independent of its ATPase activity. Furthermore, Brg facilitates
Gli coactivator histone deacetylase (HDAC) binding to the regulatory regions of
Shh target genes, providing a possible mechanism for its positive role in Shh
signaling. Our results thus reveal that a complex chromatin regulation mechanism 
underlies the precise transcription outcomes of Shh signaling and its diverse
roles during development.

PMCID: PMC3150941
PMID: 21768360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Cancer Res. 2011 Sep 1;71(17):5904-14. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-4173. Epub
2011 Jul 11.

Blocking Hedgehog survival signaling at the level of the GLI genes induces DNA
damage and extensive cell death in human colon carcinoma cells.

Mazumdar T(1), Devecchio J, Agyeman A, Shi T, Houghton JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

Canonical Hedgehog (HH) signaling is characterized by Smoothened (Smo)-dependent 
activation of the transcription factors Gli1 and Gli2, which regulate HH target
genes. In human colon carcinoma cells, treatment with the Gli small-molecule
inhibitor GANT61 induces extensive cell death in contrast to the Smo inhibitor
cyclopamine. Here we elucidate cellular events upstream of cell death elicited by
GANT61, which reveal the basis for its unique cytotoxic activity in colon
carcinoma cells. Unlike cyclopamine, GANT61 induced transient cellular
accumulation at G(1)-S (24 hours) and in early S-phase (32 hours), with elevated 
p21(Cip1), cyclin E, and cyclin A in HT29 cells. GANT61 induced DNA damage within
24 hours, with the appearance of p-ATM and p-Chk2. Pharmacologic inhibition of
Gli1 and Gli2 by GANT61 or genetic inhibition by transient transfection of the
Gli3 repressor (Gli3R) downregulated Gli1 and Gli2 expression and induced <U+03B3>H2AX, 
PARP cleavage, caspase-3 activation, and cell death. GANT61 induced <U+03B3>H2AX nuclear
foci, while transient transfection of Gli3R showed expression of Gli3R and <U+03B3>H2AX 
foci within the same nuclei in HT29, SW480, and HCT116. GANT61 specifically
targeted Gli1 and Gli2 substantiated by specific inhibition of (i) direct binding
of Gli1 and Gli2 to the promoters of target genes HIP1 and BCL-2, (ii)
Gli-luciferase activity, and (iii) transcriptional activation of BCL-2. Taken
together, these findings establish that inhibition of HH signaling at the level
of the GLI genes downstream of Smo is critical in the induction of DNA damage in 
early S-phase, leading to cell death in human colon carcinoma cells.

©2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3165104
PMID: 21747117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Anat Rec (Hoboken). 2011 Aug;294(8):1352-9. doi: 10.1002/ar.21434. Epub 2011 Jun 
29.

Normal location of thumb/big toe may be related to programmed cell death in the
preaxial area of embryonic limb.

Kimura S(1), Yamada S, Naruse I.

Author information: 
(1)Congenital Anomaly Research Center, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Japan. skimura2428@gmail.com

The forelimbs and hindlimbs of newborn Polydactyly Nagoya (Pdn) mice were
examined to analyze the roles of programmed cell death (PCD) in the preaxial
region of the limb. Special attention was paid to the relationship between the
PCD in the preaxial area and the location and shape of the first digit (thumb/big
toe). Although a large, bifurcated or duplicated thumb/big toe appeared in Pdn/+ 
mice, digit I (thumb/big toe) in Pdn/+ mice, as in +/+ ones, was located more
ventro-proximally than the other four digits. On the other hand, abnormal
preaxial digits of the fore/hindlimb in Pdn/Pdn mice lay distally and were
aligned at the radial/tibial end of a serial curved plane formed by digits II-V; 
that is, a thumb and big toe of normal shape and location were not detectable in 
any preaxial digits of Pdn/Pdn mice. In the limb development of Pdn mouse embryos
on Day 11-12, PCD did not occur in the preaxial mesoderm of fore/hindlimb only in
one-fourths of all embryos obtained by Pdn/+ x Pdn/+ mating. In addition to
digital rays II-V, extra preaxial digital rays appeared in the prominent preaxial
expansion of fore/hindlimbs in these embryos on early Day 12. These abnormal limb
configurations in embryos were closely similar to those in Pdn/Pdn newborn mice. 
The present findings suggest that PCD in the preaxial region not only prevents
the formation of extra digits but also determines the location of the thumb/big
toe for the normal limb morphogenesis.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21717586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e21158. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021158. Epub 2011 Jun 20.

Using regulatory and epistatic networks to extend the findings of a genome scan: 
identifying the gene drivers of pigmentation in merino sheep.

García-Gámez E(1), Reverter A, Whan V, McWilliam SM, Arranz JJ; International
Sheep Genomics Consortium, Kijas J.

Author information: 
(1)Livestock Industries, Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research
Organisation (CSIRO), Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.

Extending genome wide association analysis by the inclusion of gene expression
data may assist in the dissection of complex traits. We examined piebald, a
pigmentation phenotype in both human and Merino sheep, by analysing multiple data
types using a systems approach. First, a case control analysis of 49,034 ovine
SNP was performed which confirmed a multigenic basis for the condition. We
combined these results with gene expression data from five tissue types analysed 
with a skin-specific microarray. Promoter sequence analysis of differentially
expressed genes allowed us to reverse-engineer a regulatory network. Likewise, by
testing two-loci models derived from all pair-wise comparisons across
piebald-associated SNP, we generated an epistatic network. At the intersection of
both networks, we identified thirteen genes with insulin-like growth factor
binding protein 7 (IGFBP7), platelet-derived growth factor alpha (PDGFRA) and the
tetraspanin platelet activator CD9 at the kernel of the intersection. Further, we
report a number of differentially expressed genes in regions containing highly
associated SNP including ATRN, DOCK7, FGFR1OP, GLI3, SILV and TBX15. The
application of network theory facilitated co-analysis of genetic variation with
gene expression, recapitulated aspects of the known molecular biology of skin
pigmentation and provided insights into the transcription regulation and
epistatic interactions involved in piebald Merino sheep.

PMCID: PMC3119053
PMID: 21701676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2011 Jul;65(1):e17-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2010.12.010.

A novel phenotype with features of basal cell nevus syndrome and basaloid
follicular hamartoma syndrome.

Waxweiler WT, Adigun CG, Groben P, Rubenstein DS.

PMID: 21679799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Aug;47(1):99-107. doi: 10.1530/JME-10-0177.

Organization of the Indian hedgehog--parathyroid hormone-related protein system
in the postnatal growth plate.

Chau M(1), Forcinito P, Andrade AC, Hegde A, Ahn S, Lui JC, Baron J, Nilsson O.

Author information: 
(1)Growth and Cartilage Unit, Center for Molecular Medicine and Division of
Pediatric Endocrinology, Department of Womens and Childrens Health, Karolinska 
Institutet and Karolinska University Hospital, SE-171 76 Stockholm, Sweden.

In embryonic growth cartilage, Indian hedgehog (Ihh) and parathyroid
hormone-related protein (PTHrP) participate in a negative feedback loop that
regulates chondrocyte differentiation. Postnatally, this region undergoes major
structural and functional changes. To explore the organization of the IhhPTHrP
system in postnatal growth plate, we microdissected growth plates of 7-day-old
rats into their constituent zones and assessed expression of genes participating 
in the hPTHrP feedback loop. Ihh, Patched 1, Smoothened, Gli1, Gli2, Gli3, and
Pthr1 were expressed in regions analogous to the expression domains in embryonic 
growth cartilage. However, PTHrP was expressed in resting zone cartilage, a site 
that differs from the embryonic source, the periarticular cells. We then used
mice in which lacZ has replaced coding sequences of Gli1 and thus serves as a
marker for active hedgehog signaling. At 1, 4, 8, and 12 weeks of age, lacZ
expression was detected in a pattern analogous to that of embryonic cartilage.
The findings support the hypothesis that the embryonic IhhPTHrP feedback loop is
maintained in the postnatal growth plate except that the source of PTHrP has
shifted to a more proximal location in the resting zone.

PMID: 21642420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Development. 2011 Jun;138(12):2533-42. doi: 10.1242/dev.063479.

Regulation of mammalian Gli proteins by Costal 2 and PKA in Drosophila reveals
Hedgehog pathway conservation.

Marks SA(1), Kalderon D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027,
USA.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling activates full-length Ci/Gli family transcription factors
and prevents Ci/Gli proteolytic processing to repressor forms. In the absence of 
Hh, Ci/Gli processing is initiated by direct Pka phosphorylation. Despite those
fundamental similarities between Drosophila and mammalian Hh pathways, the
differential reliance on cilia and some key signal transduction components had
suggested a major divergence in the mechanisms that regulate Ci/Gli protein
activities, including the role of the kinesin-family protein Costal 2 (Cos2),
which directs Ci processing in Drosophila. Here, we show that Cos2 binds to three
regions of Gli1, just as for Ci, and that Cos2 functions to silence mammalian
Gli1 in Drosophila in a Hh-regulated manner. Cos2 and the mammalian kinesin Kif7 
can also direct Gli3 and Ci processing in fly, underscoring a fundamental
conserved role for Cos2 family proteins in Hh signaling. We also show that direct
PKA phosphorylation regulates the activity, rather than the proteolysis of Gli in
Drosophilia, and we provide evidence for an analogous action of PKA on Ci.

PMCID: PMC3100709
PMID: 21610030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2011 Jun;70(6):430-7. doi:
10.1097/NEN.0b013e31821b94db.

GLI2 is a potential therapeutic target in pediatric medulloblastoma.

Buczkowicz P(1), Ma J, Hawkins C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, Department of Paediatric Laboratory Medicine, The
Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Canada.

To determine whether the zinc finger transcription factors GLI1 to GLI3 and
suppressor of fused (SUFU) components of the Sonic hedgehog signaling pathway may
be prognostic markers and potential therapeutic targets in pediatric
medulloblastoma (MB), we investigated the relationship of the expression of these
proteins to prognosis in the MB of 124 patients who had undergone surgery at the 
Hospital for Sick Children (Toronto, Ontario, Canada). The expressions of GLI1 (p
= 0.011) and GLI2 (p = 0.003), but not of GLI3 (p = 0.774) or SUFU (p = 0.137),
in the MB were associated with a worse overall survival by Kaplan-Meier analysis.
Overall survival of patients positive for GLI1 and GLI2 was 6.01 ± 0.85 years and
5.27 ± 1.44 years, respectively, versus 10.11 ± 1.52 years and 10.18 ± 0.22 years
for patients negative for GLI1 and GLI2, respectively. Knockdown of GLI2 in 3 MB 
cell lines resulted in decreased cell number and viability, as determined by the 
MTT (3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) assay;
knockdown of GLI1 had no effect. The decrease in cell number with GLI2 knockdown 
was caused by G0 cell cycle arrest; there was no induction of apoptosis. These
results suggest that targeting the Sonic hedgehog pathway in positive patients
may be a useful adjuvant therapeutic strategy for MB.

PMID: 21572341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Nat Genet. 2011 Jun;43(6):601-6. doi: 10.1038/ng.826. Epub 2011 May 8.

KIF7 mutations cause fetal hydrolethalus and acrocallosal syndromes.

Putoux A(1), Thomas S, Coene KL, Davis EE, Alanay Y, Ogur G, Uz E, Buzas D, Gomes
C, Patrier S, Bennett CL, Elkhartoufi N, Frison MH, Rigonnot L, Joyé N, Pruvost
S, Utine GE, Boduroglu K, Nitschke P, Fertitta L, Thauvin-Robinet C, Munnich A,
Cormier-Daire V, Hennekam R, Colin E, Akarsu NA, Bole-Feysot C, Cagnard N,
Schmitt A, Goudin N, Lyonnet S, Encha-Razavi F, Siffroi JP, Winey M, Katsanis N, 
Gonzales M, Vekemans M, Beales PL, Attié-Bitach T.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U-781, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France.

KIF7, the human ortholog of Drosophila Costal2, is a key component of the
Hedgehog signaling pathway. Here we report mutations in KIF7 in individuals with 
hydrolethalus and acrocallosal syndromes, two multiple malformation disorders
with overlapping features that include polydactyly, brain abnormalities and cleft
palate. Consistent with a role of KIF7 in Hedgehog signaling, we show
deregulation of most GLI transcription factor targets and impaired GLI3
processing in tissues from individuals with KIF7 mutations. KIF7 is also a likely
contributor of alleles across the ciliopathy spectrum, as sequencing of a diverse
cohort identified several missense mutations detrimental to protein function. In 
addition, in vivo genetic interaction studies indicated that knockdown of KIF7
could exacerbate the phenotype induced by knockdown of other ciliopathy
transcripts. Our data show the role of KIF7 in human primary cilia, especially in
the Hedgehog pathway through the regulation of GLI targets, and expand the
clinical spectrum of ciliopathies.

PMCID: PMC3674836
PMID: 21552264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Dev Biol. 2011 Jul 1;355(1):55-64. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.04.018. Epub 2011
Apr 22.

Hmx4 regulates Sonic hedgehog signaling through control of retinoic acid
synthesis during forebrain patterning.

Gongal PA(1), March LD, Holly VL, Pillay LM, Berry-Wynne KM, Kagechika H,
Waskiewicz AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB,
Canada.

Mutations in H6-homeobox (HMX) genes are linked to neural mispatterning and
neural tube closure defects in humans. We demonstrate that zebrafish Hmx4
regulates the signaling of two morphogens critical for neural development,
retinoic acid (RA) and Sonic hedgehog (Shh). Hmx4-depleted embryos have a
strongly narrowed eye field and reduced forebrain Shh target gene expression.
hmx4 morphants fail to properly transcribe the Shh signal transducer gli3, and
have reduced ventral forebrain specification. Hmx4-depleted embryos also have
neural tube patterning defects that phenocopy RA-deficiency. We show that Hmx4 is
required for the initiation and maintenance of aldh1a2, the principal
RA-synthesizing gene. Loss of RA is the primary defect in Hmx4-depleted embryos, 
as RA treatment rescues a number of the neural patterning defects. Surprisingly, 
RA treatment also rescues forebrain morphology, gli3 transcription, and Shh
signaling. We propose that Hmx4 is a critical regulator of retinoic acid
synthesis in a developing embryo, and that this regulation is essential for
controlling Shh signaling and forebrain development.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21539831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Dev Biol. 2011 Jul 1;355(1):124-37. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.04.023. Epub 2011
Apr 22.

The Dkk1 dose is critical for eye development.

Lieven O(1), Rüther U.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Animal Developmental, Molecular Biology,
Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany. Oliver.Lieven@med.lu.se

During mammalian ocular development, several signaling pathways control the
spatiotemporal highly defined realization of the three-dimensional eye
architecture. Given the complexity of these inductive signals, the developing eye
is a sensitive organ for several diseases. In this study, we investigated a
Dkk1+/- haploinsufficiency during eye development, resulting in coloboma and
anterior eye defects, two common developmental eye disorders. Dkk1 impacts eye
development from a defined developmental time point on, and is critical for lens 
separation from the surface ectoderm via ß-catenin mediated Pdgfra and E-cadherin
expression. Dkk1 does not impact the dorso ventral retina patterning in general
but is critical for Shh dependent Pax2 extension into the midline region. The
described results also indicate that the retinal Dkk1 dose is critical for
important steps during eye development, such as optic fissure closure and cornea 
formation. Further analysis of the relationship between Dkk1 and Shh signaling
revealed that Dkk1 and Shh coordinatively control anterior head formation and eye
induction. During eye development itself, retinal Dkk1 activation is depending on
cilia mediated Gli3 regulation. Therefore, our data essentially improve the
knowledge of coloboma and anterior eye defects, which are common human eye
developmental defects.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21539829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Nat Genet. 2011 Jun;43(6):607-11. doi: 10.1038/ng.825. Epub 2011 May 1.

Sox2 cooperates with Chd7 to regulate genes that are mutated in human syndromes.

Engelen E(1), Akinci U, Bryne JC, Hou J, Gontan C, Moen M, Szumska D, Kockx C,
van Ijcken W, Dekkers DH, Demmers J, Rijkers EJ, Bhattacharya S, Philipsen S,
Pevny LH, Grosveld FG, Rottier RJ, Lenhard B, Poot RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus Medical Center (MC), Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2011 Jun;43(6):505-6.

The HMG-box transcription factor Sox2 plays a role throughout neurogenesis and
also acts at other stages of development, as illustrated by the multiple organs
affected in the anophthalmia syndrome caused by SOX2 mutations. Here we combined 
proteomic and genomic approaches to characterize gene regulation by Sox2 in
neural stem cells. Chd7, a chromatin remodeling ATPase associated with CHARGE
syndrome, was identified as a Sox2 transcriptional cofactor. Sox2 and Chd7
physically interact, have overlapping genome-wide binding sites and regulate a
set of common target genes including Jag1, Gli3 and Mycn, genes mutated in
Alagille, Pallister-Hall and Feingold syndromes, which show malformations also
associated with SOX2 anophthalmia syndrome or CHARGE syndrome. Regulation of
disease-associated genes by a Sox2-Chd7 complex provides a plausible explanation 
for several malformations associated with SOX2 anophthalmia syndrome or CHARGE
syndrome. Indeed, we found that Chd7-haploinsufficient embryos showed severely
reduced expression of Jag1 in the developing inner ear.

PMID: 21532573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Hum Pathol. 2011 Nov;42(11):1643-52. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2010.12.023. Epub
2011 Apr 29.

Glioma-associated oncogene homologue 3, a hedgehog transcription factor, is
highly expressed in Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg cells of classical Hodgkin
lymphoma.

Greaves WO(1), Kim JE, Singh RR, Drakos E, Kunkalla K, Sánchez-Espiridión B,
Garcia JF, Medeiros LJ, Vega F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The hedgehog signaling pathway has been shown to play a pathogenic role in
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and anaplastic large cell lymphoma, but has not
been assessed in classical Hodgkin lymphoma. Glioma-associated oncogene
homologues 1, 2, and 3 are transcriptional effectors of the hedgehog pathway. In 
this study, we first used real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction to
investigate the expressions of GLI1, GLI2, and GLI3 in 3 classical Hodgkin
lymphoma cell lines. GLI1 and GLI2 were variably expressed, but GLI3 was highly
expressed in all cell lines. We then used immunohistochemistry to assess
glioma-associated oncogene homologues 1, 2, and 3 in 39 classical Hodgkin
lymphoma patient samples. Glioma-associated oncogene homologues 1 and 2 were
weakly to variably expressed in a subset of classical Hodgkin lymphoma patient
samples. In contrast, glioma-associated oncogene homologue 3 showed strong,
uniform nuclear expression in virtually all Hodgkin/Reed-Stenberg cells. We then 
performed an immunohistochemical survey of glioma-associated oncogene homologue 3
expression in 13 cases of nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin lymphoma and 218
non-Hodgkin lymphomas. Most other lymphoma types showed variable or no expression
of glioma-associated oncogene homologue 3, with a minor subset of cases of
nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin lymphoma, ALK-positive and ALK-negative
anaplastic large cell lymphoma, and B-cell lymphoma, unclassifiable with features
intermediate between diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and classical Hodgkin lymphoma
showing a glioma-associated oncogene homologue 3 staining pattern
indistinguishable from classical Hodgkin lymphoma. Our data provide a rationale
to further investigate the biologic significance of glioma-associated oncogene
homologue 3 in classical Hodgkin lymphoma biology.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3165071
PMID: 21531006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. J Neurosci. 2011 Apr 27;31(17):6440-8. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4892-10.2011.

Gli3 is required for maintenance and fate specification of cortical progenitors.

Wang H(1), Ge G, Uchida Y, Luu B, Ahn S.

Author information: 
(1)Unit on Developmental Neurogenetics, Program in Genomics of Differentiation,
Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Gli3, one of three vertebrate Gli transcription factors in Hedgehog (Hh) pathway,
is processed into a repressor form (Gli3R) in the absence of Hh signal and acts
as the major negative transducer of the pathway. Although the role of Gli3 in
embryonic patterning has been extensively studied, its role in cortical
neurogenesis, especially in the regulation of neural progenitors in proliferation
and cell fate specification, is largely unknown. To bypass the patterning defects
caused by loss of Gli3, we conditionally deleted Gli3 after patterning was
complete in mouse. Our results from birthdating and in utero electroporation
experiments demonstrate that the Gli3, specifically Gli3R, is critical for
specifying the fate of cortical neurons that are generated following a
stereotypical temporal order. Moreover, Gli3 is required for maintaining the
cortical progenitors in active cell cycle, suggesting that cells may acquire
differentiated status as they turn off Gli3 expression during neurogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3096934
PMID: 21525285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Development. 2011 May;138(10):2079-88. doi: 10.1242/dev.059808. Epub 2011 Apr 13.

Primary cilia control telencephalic patterning and morphogenesis via Gli3
proteolytic processing.

Besse L(1), Neti M, Anselme I, Gerhardt C, Rüther U, Laclef C, Schneider-Maunoury
S.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 7622, 9 Quai Saint Bernard, Boîte 24, F-75005, Paris, France.

Primary cilia have essential functions in vertebrate development and signaling.
However, little is known about cilia function in brain morphogenesis, a process
that is severely affected in human ciliopathies. Here, we study telencephalic
morphogenesis in a mouse mutant for the ciliopathy gene Ftm (Rpgrip1l). We show
that the olfactory bulbs are present in an ectopic location in the telencephalon 
of Ftm(-/-) fetuses and do not display morphological outgrowth at the end of
gestation. Investigating the developmental origin of this defect, we have
established that E12.5 Ftm(-/-) telencephalic neuroepithelial cells lack primary 
cilia. Moreover, in the anterior telencephalon, the subpallium is expanded at the
expense of the pallium, a phenotype reminiscent of Gli3 mutants. This phenotype
indeed correlates with a decreased production of the short form of the Gli3
protein. Introduction of a Gli3 mutant allele encoding the short form of Gli3
into Ftm mutants rescues both telencephalic patterning and olfactory bulb
morphogenesis, despite the persistence of cilia defects. Together, our results
show that olfactory bulb morphogenesis depends on primary cilia and that the
essential role of cilia in this process is to produce processed Gli3R required
for developmental patterning. Our analysis thus provides the first in vivo
demonstration that primary cilia control a developmental process via production
of the short, repressor form of Gli3. Moreover, our findings shed light on the
developmental origin of olfactory bulb agenesis and of other brain morphogenetic 
defects found in human diseases affecting the primary cilium.

PMID: 21490064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Comp Neurol. 2011 Jun 15;519(9):1640-57. doi: 10.1002/cne.22592.

Wnt/ß-catenin signaling is disrupted in the extra-toes (Gli3(Xt/Xt) ) mutant from
early stages of forebrain development, concomitant with anterior neural plate
patterning defects.

Fotaki V(1), Price DJ, Mason JO.

Author information: 
(1)Genes and Development Group, Centre for Integrative Physiology, School of
Biomedical Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH8 9XD, United Kingdom. 
vfotaki@ed.ac.uk

The zinc finger transcription factor Gli3 is essential for normal development of 
the forebrain. Mutant mice with no functional Gli3 (extra-toes, Gli3(Xt/Xt)
mutants) display a massive reduction in the size of the telencephalic lobes and
absence of dorsomedial telencephalic structures, including the cortical hem,
which normally expresses a number of Wnt molecules essential for patterning the
hippocampus. Dorsomedial telencephalic Wnt activity, transduced through the
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway, is also required for hippocampal specification
and dorsoventral telencephalic patterning. Wnts whose normal expression is
restricted to the cortical hem are completely absent in Gli3(Xt/Xt) embryos, but 
some expression of those Wnts with a broader expression domain persists, raising 
the possibility that Wnt/ß-catenin signaling may still be active in this mutant. 
We examined whether the Wnt expression that persists in the Gli3(Xt/Xt) mutant
neocortex activates Wnt/ß-catenin signaling, using the BAT-gal transgenic
reporter. We found Wnt/ß-catenin signaling consistently decreased in the
forebrains of Gli3(Xt/Xt) mutants, even prior to the formation of the cortical
hem. This is accompanied by a severe reduction in expression of Wnt7b and Wnt8b
at the lateral edges of the anterior neural plate that will give rise to the
pallium. In addition, we found a significant increase in the expression of
rostroventral markers of the anterior neural plate that will give rise to the
basal forebrain. Our data reveal that Gli3 is required at the neural plate stage 
to regulate Wnt expression and Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in the presumptive
forebrain and confirm its previously proposed role in patterning the anterior
neural plate.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21452227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2011 Jun;28(5):437-49. doi: 10.1007/s10585-011-9382-z. Epub 
2011 Mar 27.

Gli1 enhances migration and invasion via up-regulation of MMP-11 and promotes
metastasis in ERa negative breast cancer cell lines.

Kwon YJ(1), Hurst DR, Steg AD, Yuan K, Vaidya KS, Welch DR, Frost AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL
35294, USA.

Gli1 is an established oncogene and its expression in Estrogen Receptor (ER) a
negative and triple negative breast cancers is predictive of a poor prognosis;
however, the biological functions regulated by Gli1 in breast cancer have not
been extensively evaluated. Herein, Gli1 was over-expressed or down-regulated (by
RNA interference and by expression of the repressor form of Gli3) in the ERa
negative, human breast cancer cell lines MDA-MB-231 and SUM1315. Reduced
expression of Gli1 in these two cell lines resulted in a decrease in migration
and invasion. Gli1 over-expression increased the migration and invasion of
MDA-MB-231 cells with a corresponding increase in expression of MMP-11. Silencing
MMP-11 in MDA-MB-231 cells that over-expressed Gli1 abrogated the Gli1-induced
enhancement of migration and invasion. Sustained suppression of Gli1 expression
decreased growth of MDA-MB-231 in vitro by increasing apoptosis and decreasing
proliferation. In addition, silencing of Gli1 reduced the numbers and sizes of
pulmonary metastases of MDA-MB-231 in an in vivo experimental metastasis assay.
In summary, Gli1 promotes the growth, survival, migration, invasion and
metastasis of ERa negative breast cancer. Additionally, MMP-11 is up-regulated by
Gli1 and mediates the migration and invasion induced by Gli1 in MDA-MB-231.

PMCID: PMC3081062
PMID: 21442356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Mar 22;108(12):4888-91. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1018161108. Epub 2011 Mar 7.

Axial Hox9 activity establishes the posterior field in the developing forelimb.

Xu B(1), Wellik DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200, USA.

Current models hold that the early limb field becomes polarized into anterior and
posterior domains by the opposing activities of Hand2 and Gli3. This polarization
is essential for the initiation of Shh expression in the posterior margin of the 
limb bud, but how this polarity is established is not clear. Here we show that
initial anteroposterior polarization of the early forelimb field requires the
function of all four Hox9 paralogs (Hoxa9, Hoxb9, Hoxc9, and Hoxd9). This is
unexpected, given that only HoxA and HoxD AbdB group genes have been shown to
play a role in forelimb patterning, regulating the activation and maintenance of 
Shh expression and subsequent proximal-distal patterning of the forelimb. Our
analysis of Hox9 quadruple mutants demonstrates that Hox9 function is required
for the expression of Hand2 in the posterior limb field. Subsequently, Gli3
expression is not repressed posteriorly, Shh expression is not initiated, and
collinear expression of HoxA/D10-13 is not established, resulting in severely
malformed forelimbs lacking all posterior, Shh-regulated elements. This Hox9
mutant phenotype is restricted to the forelimbs; mutant hindlimbs are normal,
revealing fundamental differences in the patterning mechanisms governing the
establishment of forelimb and hindlimb fields.

PMCID: PMC3064354
PMID: 21383175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2011 Mar;127(3):1182-90. doi: 10.1097/PRS.0b013e3182043a07.

Role of Indian hedgehog signaling in palatal osteogenesis.

Levi B(1), James AW, Nelson ER, Brugmann SA, Sorkin M, Manu A, Longaker MT.

Author information: 
(1)Hagey Laboratory for Pediatric Regenerative Medicine, Department of Surgery,
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery Division, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, Calif., USA. benlevimd@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Cleft lip-cleft palate is a common congenital disability and
represents a large biomedical burden. Through the use of animal models, the
molecular underpinnings of cleft palate are becoming increasingly clear. Indian
hedgehog (Ihh) has been shown to be associated with craniofacial development and 
to be active in the palatine bone. The authors hypothesize that Indian hedgehog
activity plays a role in osteogenesis within the secondary palate and that
defects in this pathway may inhibit osteogenesis of the secondary palate.
METHODS: Palates were isolated from wild-type mice during the period of palate
development (embryonic days 9.5 to 17.5). Quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction was used for detecting gene expression during osteogenic differentiation
and cellular differentiation (Shh, Ihh, Ptc1, Gli1, Gli2, Gli3, Runx2, Alp, and
Col1a1). Next, palates were analyzed by hematoxylin and eosin, aniline blue,
pentachrome, and in situ hybridization to assess osteogenesis of the palatal
shelf and expression of hedgehog pathway genes. Finally, the palates of Indian
hedgehog-null mice were analyzed to determine the effect of genetic deficiency on
palatal development osteogenesis.
RESULTS: Increased Indian hedgehog and osteogenic signaling coincided with
ossification and fusion of the palate in wild-type mice. This included a fivefold
to 150-fold peak in expression of hedgehog elements, including Ihh, at embryonic 
day 15.5 as compared with embryonic day 9.5. Contrarily, loss of Indian hedgehog 
by genetic knockout (Ihh-/-) resulted in decreased secondary palate ossification.
CONCLUSIONS: The authors' results suggest a role for hedgehog signaling during
palatal ossification. The hedgehog pathway is activated during palatal fusion,
and deletion of Indian hedgehog leads to diminished ossification of the secondary
hard palate.

PMCID: PMC3078688
PMID: 21364421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Clin Invest. 2011 Mar;121(3):1199-206. doi: 10.1172/JCI45523. Epub 2011 Feb 21.

GLI3 repressor controls functional development of the mouse ureter.

Cain JE(1), Islam E, Haxho F, Blake J, Rosenblum ND.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Hospital for Sick Children,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2011 Mar;121(3):836-8.

Obstructive and nonobstructive forms of hydronephrosis (increased diameter of the
renal pelvis and calyces) and hydroureter (dilatation of the ureter) are the most
frequently detected antenatal abnormalities, yet the underlying molecular
mechanisms are largely undefined. Hedgehog (Hh) proteins control tissue
patterning and cell differentiation by promoting GLI-dependent transcriptional
activation and by inhibiting the processing of GLI3 to a transcriptional
repressor. Genetic mutations that generate a truncated GLI3 protein similar in
size to the repressor in humans with Pallister-Hall syndrome (PHS; a disorder
whose characteristics include renal abnormalities) and hydroureter implicate
Hh-dependent signaling in ureter morphogenesis and function. Here, we determined 
that Hh signaling controls 2 cell populations required for the initiation and
transmission of coordinated ureter contractions. Tissue-specific inactivation of 
the Hh cell surface effector Smoothened (Smo) in the renal pelvic and upper
ureteric mesenchyme resulted in nonobstructive hydronephrosis and hydroureter
characterized by ureter dyskinesia. Mutant mice had reduced expression of markers
of cell populations implicated in the coordination of unidirectional ureter
peristalsis (specifically, Kit and hyperpolarization-activation cation-3 channel 
[Hcn3]), but exhibited normal epithelial and smooth muscle cell differentiation. 
Kit deficiency in a mouse model of PHS suggested a pathogenic role for GLI3
repressor in Smo-deficient embryos; indeed, genetic inactivation of Gli3 in
Smo-deficient mice rescued their hydronephrosis, hydroureter, Kit and Hcn3
expression, and ureter peristalsis. Together, these data demonstrate that Hh
signaling controls Kit and Hcn3 expression and ureter peristalsis.

PMCID: PMC3049374
PMID: 21339645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Clin Invest. 2011 Mar;121(3):836-8. doi: 10.1172/JCI46400. Epub 2011 Feb 21.

Upper urinary tract pacemaker cells join the GLI club.

Herzlinger D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Cornell University Medical College,
New York, New York 10021-4805, USA. daherzli@med.cornell.edu

Comment on
    J Clin Invest. 2011 Mar;121(3):1199-206.

Mutations in GLI3, a component of the Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway,
cause a variety of human developmental syndromes. In this issue of the JCI, Cain 
and colleagues show that tightly regulated GLI3 repressor activity is essential
for Shh-dependent differentiation of upper urinary tract pacemaker cells and the 
efficient flow of urine from the kidney to the bladder. These results link
defective pacemaker cell differentiation with hydronephrosis and provide a
cellular basis for one of the abnormal renal defects observed in humans with the 
GLI3-linked disease Pallister-Hall syndrome.

PMCID: PMC3049378
PMID: 21339639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Dev Dyn. 2011 Apr;240(4):766-74. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22578. Epub 2011 Feb 18.

Increased proteolytic processing of full-length Gli2 transcription factor reduces
the hedgehog pathway activity in vivo.

Li J(1), Wang C, Pan Y, Bai Z, Wang B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Developmental Immunology, College of Life Science, Shandong
University, Jinan, P. R. China.

The proteolytic processing of Gli2 and Gli3 full-length transcription factors
into repressors is a key step of the regulation in Hedgehog (Hh) signaling. The
differential Gli2 and Gli3 processing is controlled by the processing determinant
domain or PDD, but its significance is not clear. We generated a Gli2 mutant
allele, Gli2(3PDD) , in which the Gli3PDD substitutes for the Gli2PDD. As
expected, Gli2(3PDD) is processed more efficiently and at a different position as
compared to Gli2, indicating that PDD also determines the extent and site of Gli2
and Gli3 processing in vivo. The increase in levels of the Gli2 repressor in
Gli2(3PDD) mutant reduces the Hh pathway activity. Gli2(3PDD) processing is still
regulated by Hh signaling. These results indicate that the proper balance between
the Gli2 full-length activator and repressor is essential for Hh signaling.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3071291
PMID: 21337666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Eur J Hum Genet. 2011 Jul;19(7):757-62. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2011.13. Epub 2011 Feb 
16.

Metopic and sagittal synostosis in Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome: five
cases with intragenic mutations or complete deletions of GLI3.

Hurst JA(1), Jenkins D, Vasudevan PC, Kirchhoff M, Skovby F, Rieubland C, Gallati
S, Rittinger O, Kroisel PM, Johnson D, Biesecker LG, Wilkie AO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Oxford Radcliffe Hospitals NHS Trust, Oxford,
UK.

Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS) is a multiple congenital malformation
characterised by limb and craniofacial anomalies, caused by heterozygous mutation
or deletion of GLI3. We report four boys and a girl who were presented with
trigonocephaly due to metopic synostosis, in association with pre- and post-axial
polydactyly and cutaneous syndactyly of hands and feet. Two cases had additional 
sagittal synostosis. None had a family history of similar features. In all five
children, the diagnosis of GCPS was confirmed by molecular analysis of GLI3 (two 
had intragenic mutations and three had complete gene deletions detected on array 
comparative genomic hybridisation), thus highlighting the importance of
trigonocephaly or overt metopic or sagittal synostosis as a distinct presenting
feature of GCPS. These observations confirm and extend a recently proposed
association of intragenic GLI3 mutations with metopic synostosis; moreover, the
three individuals with complete deletion of GLI3 were previously considered to
have Carpenter syndrome, highlighting an important source of diagnostic
confusion.

PMCID: PMC3128494
PMID: 21326280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Clin Chim Acta. 2011 May 12;412(11-12):1012-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2011.02.007.
Epub 2011 Feb 12.

A novel frame-shift mutation of GLI3 causes non-syndromic and complex digital
anomalies in a Chinese family.

Cheng F(1), Ke X, Lv M, Zhang F, Li C, Zhang X, Zhang Y, Zhao X, Wang X, Liu B,
Han J, Li Y, Zeng C, Li S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory in Cancer Genomics and Individualized Medicine, Beijing Institute
of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Erratum in
    Clin Chim Acta. 2011 Sep 18;412(19-20):1898.

A three-generation Han Chinese family was found with complex digital anomalies
including various types of polydactyly and syndactyly of fingers and toes. Some
extra digits are composed only of soft tissues while others are complete fingers 
or toes, making this complex case different from previously reported pedigrees.
The digital disease shows an autosomal dominant inheritance model. To locate the 
causative gene, whole-genome SNP analysis was performed using Illumina 370 K
CNV-Quad chips followed by linkage analysis with a self-developed algorithm
Haplo2Ped (http://bighapmap.big.ac.cn/software.html). Three candidate regions
with the highest signals (LOD scores 2.1070) were identified. In one region from 
33,904,914 bp to 45,529,271 bp in chromosome 7, GLI3 was selected for further
analysis. PCR sequencing and subsequent clone sequencing revealed a single
nucleotide deletion (c.2884delG) in exon 14. This frame shift mutation generated 
a truncated protein with 40 non-endogenous amino acids in its C-terminal
(p.Asp962MetfsX41). GLI3 was previously reported to associate with Greig
Cephalopolysyndactyly Syndrome, Pallister-Hall Syndrome, and a few cases of
preaxial and postaxial polydactylies. We report for the first time a novel
mutation of GLI3 causing various digital abnormalities, including multi symptoms 
as both polydactyly and syndactyly among affected members but no other body
maldevelopments (non-syndromic).

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21320477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. J Biol Chem. 2011 Apr 15;286(15):13502-11. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.217604. Epub
2011 Feb 11.

Dual Phosphorylation of suppressor of fused (Sufu) by PKA and GSK3beta regulates 
its stability and localization in the primary cilium.

Chen Y(1), Yue S, Xie L, Pu XH, Jin T, Cheng SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics, Center for Cancer Research, Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing, Jiansu 210029, China.

Suppressor of fused (Sufu) is an essential negative regulator of the sonic
hedgehog (Shh) pathway, but little is known about how Sufu itself is normally
regulated. Here, we report that Sufu is phosphorylated at Ser-342 and Ser-346 by 
GSK3ß and cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA), respectively, and
phosphorylation at this dual site stabilizes Sufu against Shh signaling-induced
degradation. We further show that localization of Sufu in the primary cilium is
induced by Shh signaling and is required for the turnover of both phosphorylated 
and total Sufu. Perturbing Sufu phosphorylation with PKA inhibitors or replacing 
Ser-346 with alanine reduced the stay and replacing Ser-342 and Ser-346 with
aspartic acid prolonged the stay of Sufu in the cilia. Finally, ciliary
localization of Gli2/3 also required Smo and was similarly influenced by
perturbations of PKA activity or mutations at the dual Sufu phosphorylation site.
Thus, Shh likely induced trafficking of phospho-Sufu into the primary cilium in a
complex with Gli2/3, and dephosphorylation triggered a retrograde export,
allowing Sufu to be degraded by the ubiquitin-proteasome system.

PMCID: PMC3075696
PMID: 21317289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Dent Res. 2011 May;90(5):625-31. doi: 10.1177/0022034510397836. Epub 2011 Feb
4.

Ihh signaling regulates mandibular symphysis development and growth.

Sugito H(1), Shibukawa Y, Kinumatsu T, Yasuda T, Nagayama M, Yamada S,
Minugh-Purvis N, Pacifici M, Koyama E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia Research
Institute, 3615 Civic Center Boulevard, Abramson Research Center, 902
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Symphyseal secondary cartilage is important for mandibular development, but the
molecular mechanisms underlying its formation remain largely unknown. Here we
asked whether Indian hedgehog (Ihh) regulates symphyseal cartilage development
and growth. By embryonic days 16.5 to 18.5, Sox9-expressing chondrocytes formed
within condensed Tgfß-1/Runx2-expressing mesenchymal cells at the prospective
symphyseal joint site, and established a growth-plate-like structure with
distinct Ihh, collagen X, and osteopontin expression patterns. In post-natal
life, mesenchymal cells expressing the Ihh receptor Patched1 were present
anterior to the Ihh-expressing secondary cartilage, proliferated, differentiated 
into chondrocytes, and contributed to anterior growth of alveolar bone. In
Ihh-null mice, however, symphyseal development was defective, mainly because of
enhanced chondrocyte maturation and reduced proliferation of chondroprogenitor
cells. Proliferation was partially restored in dual Ihh;Gli3 mutants, suggesting 
that Gli3 is normally a negative regulator of symphyseal development. Thus, Ihh
signaling is essential for symphyseal cartilage development and anterior
mandibular growth.

PMID: 21297010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. An Pediatr (Barc). 2011 Apr;74(4):266-9. doi: 10.1016/j.anpedi.2010.11.017. Epub 
2011 Feb 5.

[7p14.1 microdeletion and Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome].

[Article in Spanish]

Montoro Cremades D(1), Manchón Trives I, Botella López V, Alcaraz Más L, García
Martínez MR, Galán Sánchez F.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Neonatología, Hospital General Universitario, Alicante, España.

Greig cephalopolysyndactyly is a rare autosomic dominant syndrome caused by
mutations in GLI3 gene located on cytoband 7p14.1 and characterized by the
clinical triad of polysyndactyly, macrocephaly and hypertelorism. In
approximately 20% of the cases a deletion of variable size is detected. If
deletion is large and affects other genes as well as GLI3, a more severe
phenotype is expected. Thus, Greig cephalopolysyndactyly contiguous gene syndrome
is a multiple malformation syndrome caused by haploinsufficiency of GLI3 and
adjacent genes. We describe the case of a newborn female with polysyndactyly,
hypertelorism and microcephaly and a 1.5 Mb 7p14.1 microdeletion of paternal
origin diagnosed by array-CGH.

Copyright © 2010 Asociación Española de Pediatría. Published by Elsevier Espana. 
All rights reserved.

PMID: 21296629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. FASEB J. 2011 May;25(5):1596-605. doi: 10.1096/fj.10-169771. Epub 2011 Feb 3.

The pleiotropic mouse phenotype extra-toes spotting is caused by translation
initiation factor Eif3c mutations and is associated with disrupted sonic hedgehog
signaling.

Gildea DE(1), Luetkemeier ES, Bao X, Loftus SK, Mackem S, Yang Y, Pavan WJ,
Biesecker LG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biomedical Sciences, George Washington University, Washington,
District of Columbia, USA.

Polydactyly is a common malformation and can be an isolated anomaly or part of a 
pleiotropic syndrome. The elucidation of the mutated genes that cause polydactyly
provides insight into limb development pathways. The extra-toes spotting (Xs)
mouse phenotype manifests anterior polydactyly, predominantly in the forelimbs,
with ventral hypopigmenation. The mapping of Xs(J) to chromosome 7 was confirmed,
and the interval was narrowed to 322 kb using intersubspecific crosses. Two
mutations were identified in eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3 subunit C
(Eif3c). An Eif3c c.907C>T mutation (p.Arg303X) was identified in Xs(J), and a
c.1702_1758del mutation (p.Leu568_Leu586del) was identified in extra-toes
spotting-like (Xsl), an allele of Xs(J). The effect of the Xs(J) mutation on the 
SHH/GLI3 pathway was analyzed by in situ hybridization analysis, and we show that
Xs mouse embryos have ectopic Shh and Ptch1 expression in the anterior limb. In
addition, anterior limb buds show aberrant Gli3 processing, consistent with
perturbed SHH/GLI3 signaling. Based on the occurrence of Eif3c mutations in 2 Xs 
lines and haploinsufficiency of the Xs(J) allele, we conclude that the Xs
phenotype is caused by a mutation in Eif3c, a component of the translation
initiation complex, and that the phenotype is associated with aberrant SHH/GLI3
signaling.

PMCID: PMC3079303
PMID: 21292980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Neurosci. 2011 Feb 2;31(5):1825-36. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2166-10.2011.

Suppressor of fused controls mid-hindbrain patterning and cerebellar
morphogenesis via GLI3 repressor.

Kim JJ(1), Gill PS, Rotin L, van Eede M, Henkelman RM, Hui CC, Rosenblum ND.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, The Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada.

Sonic Hedgehog and its GLI transcriptional effectors control foliation complexity
during cerebellar morphogenesis by promoting granule cell precursor
proliferation. Here, we reveal a novel contribution of Sonic Hedgehog-GLI
signaling to cerebellar patterning and cell differentiation by generating mice
with targeted deletion of Suppressor of Fused (SuFu), a regulator of Sonic
Hedgehog signaling, in the mid-hindbrain. Postnatal SuFu-deficient mice exhibit
impaired motor coordination and severe cerebellar mispatterning. SuFu conditional
knock-out embryos display abnormal mid-hindbrain morphology associated with
misexpression of Fgf8, and delayed differentiation and abnormal migration of
major cerebellar cell types. Sonic Hedgehog is ectopically expressed in the
external granule layer and Hedgehog signaling is upregulated. While expression of
full-length GLI transcriptional activators downstream of Hedgehogs is markedly
reduced, a processed form of GLI3, a transcriptional repressor, is essentially
lost. Genetic expression of a Gli3 allele encoding GLI3 repressor in
SuFu-deficient mice largely rescues abnormal cerebellar patterning and cell
differentiation observed in mice with SuFu deficiency alone. Together, our data
demonstrate that SuFu controls cerebellar patterning and cell differentiation in 
a GLI3 repressor-dependent manner.

PMID: 21289193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Mol Biol Cell. 2011 Apr;22(7):1104-19. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E10-07-0596. Epub 2011
Feb 2.

Functional characterization of putative cilia genes by high-content analysis.

Lai CK(1), Gupta N, Wen X, Rangell L, Chih B, Peterson AS, Bazan JF, Li L, Scales
SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Genetech, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA.

Cilia are microtubule-based protrusions from the cell surface that are involved
in a number of essential signaling pathways, yet little is known about many of
the proteins that regulate their structure and function. A number of putative
cilia genes have been identified by proteomics and comparative sequence analyses,
but functional data are lacking for the vast majority. We therefore monitored the
effects in three cell lines of small interfering RNA (siRNA) knockdown of 40 of
these genes by high-content analysis. We assayed cilia number, length, and
transport of two different cargoes (membranous serotonin receptor 6-green
fluorescent protein [HTR6-GFP] and the endogenous Hedgehog [Hh] pathway
transcription factor Gli3) by immunofluorescence microscopy; and cilia function
using a Gli-luciferase Hh signaling assay. Hh signaling was most sensitive to
perturbations, with or without visible structural cilia defects. Validated hits
include Ssa2 and mC21orf2 with ciliation defects; Ift46 with short cilia; Ptpdc1 
and Iqub with elongated cilia; and Arl3, Nme7, and Ssna1 with distinct ciliary
transport but not length defects. Our data confirm various ciliary roles for
several ciliome proteins and show it is possible to uncouple ciliary cargo
transport from cilia formation in vertebrates.

PMCID: PMC3069013
PMID: 21289087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. PLoS One. 2011 Jan 20;6(1):e16260. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016260.

Genetic analysis of Hedgehog signaling in ventral body wall development and the
onset of omphalocele formation.

Matsumaru D(1), Haraguchi R, Miyagawa S, Motoyama J, Nakagata N, Meijlink F,
Yamada G.

Author information: 
(1)Global COE, Cell Fate Regulation Research and Education Unit, Department of
Organ Formation, Institute of Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto
University, Kumamoto, Japan.

BACKGROUND: An omphalocele is one of the major ventral body wall malformations
and is characterized by abnormally herniated viscera from the body trunk. It has 
been frequently found to be associated with other structural malformations, such 
as genitourinary malformations and digit abnormalities. In spite of its clinical 
importance, the etiology of omphalocele formation is still controversial.
Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is one of the essential growth factor signaling pathways 
involved in the formation of the limbs and urogenital system. However, the
relationship between Hh signaling and ventral body wall formation remains
unclear.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To gain insight into the roles of Hh signaling in
ventral body wall formation and its malformation, we analyzed phenotypes of mouse
mutants of Sonic hedgehog (Shh), GLI-Kruppel family member 3 (Gli3) and
Aristaless-like homeobox 4 (Alx4). Introduction of additional Alx4(Lst) mutations
into the Gli3(Xt/Xt) background resulted in various degrees of severe omphalocele
and pubic diastasis. In addition, loss of a single Shh allele restored the
omphalocele and pubic symphysis of Gli3(Xt/+); Alx4(Lst/Lst) embryos. We also
observed ectopic Hh activity in the ventral body wall region of Gli3(Xt/Xt)
embryos. Moreover, tamoxifen-inducible gain-of-function experiments to induce
ectopic Hh signaling revealed Hh signal dose-dependent formation of omphaloceles.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We suggest that one of the possible causes of
omphalocele and pubic diastasis is ectopically-induced Hh signaling. To our
knowledge, this would be the first demonstration of the involvement of Hh
signaling in ventral body wall malformation and the genetic rescue of omphalocele
phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC3024424
PMID: 21283718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Sci Signal. 2011 Jan 25;4(157):ra4. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2001225.

Genome-wide RNAi screen reveals disease-associated genes that are common to
Hedgehog and Wnt signaling.

Jacob LS(1), Wu X, Dodge ME, Fan CW, Kulak O, Chen B, Tang W, Wang B, Amatruda
JF, Lum L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

The Hedgehog (Hh) and Wnt signal transduction pathways are master regulators of
embryogenesis and tissue renewal and represent anticancer therapeutic targets.
Using genome-wide RNA interference screening in murine cultured cells, we
established previously unknown associations between these signaling pathways and 
genes linked to developmental malformations, diseases of premature tissue
degeneration, and cancer. We identified functions in both pathways for the
multitasking kinase Stk11 (also known as Lkb1), a tumor suppressor implicated in 
lung and cervical cancers. We found that Stk11 loss resulted in disassembly of
the primary cilium, a cellular organizing center for Hh pathway components, thus 
dampening Hh signaling. Loss of Stk11 also induced aberrant signaling through the
Wnt pathway. Chemicals that targeted the Wnt acyltransferase Porcupine or that
restored primary cilia length by inhibiting the tubulin deacetylase HDAC6
(histone deacetylase 6) countered deviant pathway activities driven by Stk11
loss. Our study demonstrates that Stk11 is a critical mediator in both the Hh and
the Wnt pathways, and our approach provides a platform to support the development
of targeted therapeutic strategies.

PMCID: PMC3790583
PMID: 21266715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Apr 15;20(8):1560-73. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr033. Epub 2011 Jan 
25.

APP-dependent up-regulation of Ptch1 underlies proliferation impairment of neural
precursors in Down syndrome.

Trazzi S(1), Mitrugno VM, Valli E, Fuchs C, Rizzi S, Guidi S, Perini G,
Bartesaghi R, Ciani E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and General Physiology, University of Bologna, Italy.

Mental retardation in Down syndrome (DS) appears to be related to severe
neurogenesis impairment during critical phases of brain development. Recent lines
of evidence in the cerebellum of a mouse model for DS (the Ts65Dn mouse) have
shown a defective responsiveness to Sonic Hedgehog (Shh), a potent mitogen that
controls cell division during brain development, suggesting involvement of the
Shh pathway in the neurogenesis defects of DS. Based on these premises, we sought
to identify the molecular mechanisms underlying derangement of the Shh pathway in
neural precursor cells (NPCs) from Ts65Dn mice. By using an in vitro model of
NPCs obtained from the subventricular zone and hippocampus, we found that
trisomic NPCs had an increased expression of the Shh receptor Patched1 (Ptch1), a
membrane protein that suppresses the action of a second receptor, Smoothened
(Smo), thereby maintaining the pathway in a repressed state. Partial silencing of
Ptch1 expression in trisomic NPCs restored cell proliferation, indicating that
proliferation impairment was due to Ptch1 overexpression. The overexpression of
Ptch1 in trisomic NPCs resulted from increased levels of AICD [a
transcription-promoting fragment of amyloid precursor protein (APP)] and
increased AICD binding to the Ptch1 promoter. Our data provide novel evidence
that Ptch1 overexpression underlies derangement of the Shh pathway in trisomic
NPCs with consequent proliferation impairment. The demonstration that Ptch1
overexpression in trisomic NPCs is due to an APP fragment provides a link between
this trisomic gene and the defective neuronal production that characterizes the
DS brain.

PMID: 21266456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Apr;31(7):1432-43. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00451-10. Epub 2011 Jan
24.

A novel Gli3 enhancer controls the Gli3 spatiotemporal expression pattern through
a TALE homeodomain protein binding site.

Coy S(1), Caamaño JH, Carvajal J, Cleary ML, Borycki AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TN, 
United Kindgom.

The zinc finger transcription factor Gli3 is an essential mediator of hedgehog
signaling. Gli3 has a dynamic expression pattern during embryonic development. In
the neural tube, Gli3 transcripts are patterned along the anteroposterior and
dorsoventral axes such that the initial broad expression in the posterior neural 
tube becomes dorsally restricted as neurogenesis takes place. Little is known
about the molecular mechanisms that regulate this dynamic expression. Here, we
report on a phylogenetic analysis of the Gli3 locus that uncovered a novel
regulatory element, HCNE1. HCNE1 contains a compound Pbx/Meis binding site that
binds Pbx and Meis/Prep proteins in vitro and in vivo. We show that HCNE1
recapitulates Gli3 expression in the developing neural tube and that mutations in
the Pbx/Meis binding site affect the spatiotemporal control of HCNE1
transcriptional activity. Ectopic expression or loss of function of Pbx and
Meis/Prep proteins in the chick and mouse embryo results in aberrant expression
of endogenous Gli3 transcripts. We propose a novel role for TALE proteins in
establishing the correct spatiotemporal expression pattern of Gli3 in the
vertebrate spinal cord, thus implicating TALE transcription factors in early
embryonic patterning events controlled by Sonic hedgehog signaling.

PMCID: PMC3135294
PMID: 21262763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Dev Biol. 2011 Mar 15;351(2):254-65. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.01.005. Epub 2011 
Jan 20.

The microRNA-processing enzyme Dicer is dispensable for somite segmentation but
essential for limb bud positioning.

Zhang Z(1), O'Rourke JR, McManus MT, Lewandoski M, Harfe BD, Sun X.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706,
USA.

Dicer is an enzyme that processes microRNAs (miRNAs) to their mature forms. As
miRNAs were first discovered for their role in the control of developmental
timing, we investigated their potential requirement in mouse somitogenesis, an
event with precise temporal periodicity. To address the collective role of miRNAs
in mesoderm development including somite formation, we used T (Brachyury)-Cre
mouse line to inactivate Dicer in most cells of the mesoderm lineage. This Dicer 
mutant exhibits a reduced anterior-posterior axis. Somite number remains normal
in mutant embryos up until the death of the embryos more than two days after
Dicer inactivation. Consistent with this, the molecular machineries required for 
establishing segmentation, including clock and wave front, are not perturbed.
However, somite size is reduced and later-formed somites are caudalized,
coincident with increased cell death. Outside of the paraxial mesoderm and prior 
to apparent reduction of the axis in the mutant, the position of the hindlimb
bud, a lateral plate mesoderm-derived structure, is posteriorly shifted and the
timing of hindlimb bud initiation is delayed accordingly. We observed changes in 
the expression of genes critical for limb positioning, which include a shifted
and delayed downregulation of Hand2 and Tbx3, and shifted and delayed
upregulation of Gli3 in the prospective limb bud field. The 3' UTRs of both Hand2
and Tbx3 harbor target sites for a seed sequence-sharing family of miRNAs
mir-25/32/92/363/367. As an example of the family we show that mir-363, a miRNA
with elevated expression in the prospective limb bud field, is capable of
inhibiting Hand2/Tbx3 expression in vitro in a binding site-dependent manner.
Together, our findings provide the first demonstration that in mouse embryonic
mesoderm, while Dicer is dispensable for somite segmentation, it is essential for
proper limb bud positioning.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3541530
PMID: 21256124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 29;5(12):e15900. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015900.

Coordinated translocation of mammalian Gli proteins and suppressor of fused to
the primary cilium.

Zeng H(1), Jia J, Liu A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Eberly College of Science, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Intracellular transduction of Hedgehog (Hh) signals in mammals requires
functional primary cilia. The Hh signaling effectors, the Gli family of
transcription factors, and their negative regulator, Suppressor of Fused (Sufu), 
accumulate at the tips of cilia; however, the molecular mechanism regulating this
localization remains elusive. In the current study, we show that the ciliary
localization of mammalian Gli proteins depends on both their N-terminal domains
and a central region lying C-terminal to the zinc-finger DNA-binding domains.
Invertebrate Gli homologs Ci and Tra1, when over-expressed in ciliated mouse
fibroblasts, fail to localize to the cilia, suggesting the lack of a
vertebrate-specific structural feature required for ciliary localization. We
further show that activation of protein kinase A (PKA) efficiently inhibits
ciliary localization of Gli2 and Gli3, but only moderately affects the ciliary
localization of Gli1. Interestingly, variants of Gli2 mimicking the
phosphorylated or non-phosphorylated states of Gli2 are both localized to the
cilia, and their ciliary localizations are subjected to the inhibitory effect of 
PKA activation, suggesting a likely indirect mechanism underlying the roles of
PKA in Gli ciliary localization. Finally, we show that ciliary localization of
Sufu is dependent on ciliary-localized Gli proteins, and is inhibited by PKA
activation, suggesting a coordinated mechanism for the ciliary translocation of
Sufu and Gli proteins.

PMCID: PMC3012114
PMID: 21209912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Jan 25;108(4):1456-61. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1011410108. Epub 2011 Jan 5.

Intraflagellar transport protein 122 antagonizes Sonic Hedgehog signaling and
controls ciliary localization of pathway components.

Qin J(1), Lin Y, Norman RX, Ko HW, Eggenschwiler JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544,
USA.

Primary cilia are required for proper Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signaling in mammals. 
However, their role in the signal transduction process remains unclear. We have
identified sister of open brain (sopb), a null allele of mouse Intraflagellar
transport protein 122 (Ift122). IFT122 negatively regulates the Shh pathway in
the cilium at a step downstream of the Shh ligand and the transmembrane protein
Smoothened, but upstream of the Gli2 transcription factor. Ift122(sopb) mutants
generate primary cilia, but they show features of defective retrograde
intraflagellar transport. IFT122 controls the ciliary localization of Shh pathway
regulators in different ways. Disruption of IFT122 leads to accumulation of Gli2 
and Gli3 at cilia tips while blocking the ciliary localization of the antagonist 
TULP3. Suppressor of Fused and Smoothened localize to the cilium through an
IFT122-independent mechanism. We propose that the balance between positive and
negative regulators of the Shh pathway at the cilium tip controls the output of
the pathway and that Shh signaling regulates this balance through intraflagellar 
transport.

PMCID: PMC3029728
PMID: 21209331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Apr;39(7):2492-502. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq1081. Epub 2010
Nov 24.

Integrative analysis of genomic, functional and protein interaction data predicts
long-range enhancer-target gene interactions.

Rödelsperger C(1), Guo G, Kolanczyk M, Pletschacher A, Köhler S, Bauer S, Schulz 
MH, Robinson PN.

Author information: 
(1)Berlin-Brandenburg Center for Regenerative Therapies,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, 
Berlin, Germany.

Multicellular organismal development is controlled by a complex network of
transcription factors, promoters and enhancers. Although reliable computational
and experimental methods exist for enhancer detection, prediction of their target
genes remains a major challenge. On the basis of available literature and
ChIP-seq and ChIP-chip data for enhanceosome factor p300 and the transcriptional 
regulator Gli3, we found that genomic proximity and conserved synteny predict
target genes with a relatively low recall of 12-27% within 2 Mb intervals
centered at the enhancers. Here, we show that functional similarities between
enhancer binding proteins and their transcriptional targets and proximity in the 
protein-protein interactome improve prediction of target genes. We used all four 
features to train random forest classifiers that predict target genes with a
recall of 58% in 2 Mb intervals that may contain dozens of genes, representing a 
better than two-fold improvement over the performance of prediction based on
single features alone. Genome-wide ChIP data is still relatively poorly
understood, and it remains difficult to assign biological significance to binding
events. Our study represents a first step in integrating various genomic features
in order to elucidate the genomic network of long-range regulatory interactions.

PMCID: PMC3074119
PMID: 21109530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Am J Med Genet A. 2010 Dec;152A(12):3143-7. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33720.

Genital abnormalities in Pallister-Hall syndrome: Report of two patients and
review of the literature.

Narumi Y(1), Kosho T, Tsuruta G, Shiohara M, Shimazaki E, Mori T, Shimizu A,
Igawa Y, Nishizawa S, Takagi K, Kawamura R, Wakui K, Fukushima Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Shinshu University School of Medicine,
Matsumoto, Japan. ynarumi@shinshu-u.ac.jp

We describe two patients with Pallister-Hall syndrome (PHS) with genital
abnormalities: a female with hydrometrocolpos secondary to vaginal atresia and a 
male with micropenis, hypoplastic scrotum, and bilateral cryptorchidism. Nonsense
mutations in GLI3 were identified in both patients. Clinical and molecular
findings of 12 previously reported patients who had GLI3 mutations and genital
abnormalities were reviewed. Genital features in the male patients included
hypospadias, micropenis, and bifid or hypoplastic scrotum, whereas all the
females had hydrometrocolpos and/or vaginal atresia. No hotspot for GLI3
mutations has been found. The urogenital and anorectal abnormalities associated
with PHS might be related to dysregulation of SHH signaling caused by GLI3
mutations rather than hormonal aberrations. We recommend that clinical
investigations of genital abnormalities are considered in patients with PHS, even
those without hypopituitarism.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21108399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Cell Cycle. 2010 Nov 15;9(22):4428. Epub 2010 Nov 15.

Hedgehog signalling in T-cell development: a non-redundant role for Gli1.

Bommhardt U.

Comment on
    Cell Cycle. 2010 Oct 15;9(20):4144-52.

PMID: 21088480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Cell Cycle. 2010 Nov 15;9(22):4428-9. Epub 2010 Nov 15.

Dissecting the functions of Gli transcription factors in T-cell development.

Varas A, Sacedón R.

Comment on
    Cell Cycle. 2010 Oct 15;9(20):4144-52.

PMID: 21088481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Am J Med Genet A. 2010 Dec;152A(12):3007-15. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33703.

Genetic basis of potential therapeutic strategies for craniosynostosis.

Melville H(1), Wang Y, Taub PJ, Jabs EW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Mount Sinai School of Medicine,
New York, New York 10029, USA.

Craniosynostosis, the premature fusion of one or more cranial sutures, is a
common malformation of the skull that can result in facial deformity and
increased intracranial pressure. Syndromic craniosynostosis is present in ~15% of
craniosynostosis patients and often is clinically diagnosed by neurocranial
phenotype as well as various other skeletal abnormalities. The most common
genetic mutations identified in syndromic craniosynostosis involve the fibroblast
growth factor receptor (FGFR) family with other mutations occurring in genes for 
transcription factors TWIST, MSX2, and GLI3, and other proteins EFNB1, RAB23,
RECQL4, and POR, presumed to be involved either upstream or downstream of the
FGFR signaling pathway. Both syndromic and nonsyndromic craniosynostosis patients
require early diagnosis and intervention. The premature suture fusion can impose 
pressure on the growing brain and cause continued abnormal postnatal craniofacial
development. Currently, treatment options for craniosynostosis are almost
exclusively surgical. Serious complications can occur in infants requiring either
open or endoscopic repair and therefore the development of nonsurgical techniques
is highly desirable although arguably difficult to design and implement. Genetic 
studies of aberrant signaling caused by mutations underlying craniosynostosis in 
in vitro calvarial culture and in vivo animal model systems have provided
promising targets in designing genetic and pharmacologic strategies for systemic 
or adjuvant nonsurgical treatment. Here we will review the current literature and
provide insights to future possibilities and limitations of therapeutic
applications.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21082653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Med Clin (Barc). 2010 Nov 13;135(14):653-7. doi: 10.1016/j.medcli.2010.04.013.
Epub 2010 Jun 17.

[Holt-Oram syndrome: study of 7 cases].

[Article in Spanish]

Martínez-García M(1), Lorda-Sanchez I, García-Hoyos M, Ramos C, Ayuso C,
Trujillo-Tiebas MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Genética, Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, España.
mmartinezg@fjd.es

FUNDAMENTAL AND OBJECTIVE: Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) is a heart-hand disease with 
an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. About 85% of the affected patients
present de novo mutations in the TBX5 gene. The aim of this study is to propose a
molecular strategy to diagnose patients with clinical suspicion of HOS.PATIENTS
AND METHODS: A sequence analysis of 7 patients from exon 2 to exon 8 of the TBX5 
gene was performed. MLPAp179 and MLPAp180 were performed in those cases in which 
no mutation was found.
RESULTS: p.Arg270X and p.Ala34Glyfsx27 mutations were identified in 2 cases.
These cases fulfilled the strict clinical criteria, had a family history of HOS
and had similar clinical features. In other three cases, MLPA results showed
deletions of the GLI3 coding region.
CONCLUSIONS: In order to increase the TBX5 mutation detection rate, an exhaustive
physical examination focused on the strict clinical criteria may be necessary to 
rule out clinical overlapping syndromes. We propose that molecular analysis of
GLI3 may be performed in patients with clinical suspicion of HOS without
mutations in TBX5.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier España, S.L. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21070912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Pediatr Surg Int. 2011 Feb;27(2):205-9. doi: 10.1007/s00383-010-2779-y.

Disruption of GLI3-ZIC3 interaction in the cadmium-induced omphalocele chick
model.

Doi T(1), Puri P, Bannigan J, Thompson J.

Author information: 
(1)National Children's Research Centre, Our Lady's Children's Hospital, Dublin
12, Ireland.

PURPOSE: Administration of heavy metal cadmium (Cd) after 60-h incubation induces
omphalocele spectrum in the chick embryo. Although previous studies have shown
that the earliest detectable histological changes in the chick Cd model occurs
commencing at 4-h post-treatment (4H). However, the molecular mechanism by which 
Cd acts in the critical period of early embryogenesis still remains unclear.
Zic3, a Gli superfamily transcription factor, is expressed in somites and plays
an important role in vertebrate development, including somitogenesis and thus
ventral body wall formation. Gli3 is also expressed in somites and interacts with
Zic3 physically and functionally. It has been reported that Gli3 homozygous
double mutants display omphalocele. Zic3 mutant mice have also been known to
result in omphalocele phenotype. We designed this study to test the hypothesis
that Gli3 and Zic3 gene expression is downregulated during the critical period of
very early embryogenesis in the Cd-induced omphalocele in the chick model.
METHODS: After 60-h incubation, chick embryos were exposed to either saline or
50 µM cadmium and divided into two groups: control and Cd (n = 24 for each
group). Real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction was performed
to evaluate the relative mRNA expression levels of Gli3 and Zic3 in the
Cd-induced omphalocele chick model. Differences between the two groups at each
time point were analyzed statistically and the significance was accepted at
p < 0.05. Immunohistochemistry was also performed to evaluate the
expression/distribution of those proteins in chick embryo.
RESULTS: The relative mRNA expression level of Gli3 and Zic3 was significantly
decreased in the Cd group at 4H when compared with controls (p < 0.05). However, 
there were no significant differences at the other time points. At 4H,
immunoreactivity of GLI3 and ZIC3 was also markedly decreased in Cd-treated
embryos, whereas strong expression of them was seen in the somite in controls.
CONCLUSION: We provide evidence, for the first time, that Gli3 and Zic3 gene
expression is downregulated during the narrow window of very early embryogenesis 
in Cd chick model. Disruption of Gli3-Zic3 interaction in the critical period for
ventral body wall formation may contribute to omphalocele phenotype in Cd chick
model.

PMID: 21069353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Dis Model Mech. 2011 Jan;4(1):43-56. doi: 10.1242/dmm.006262. Epub 2010 Nov 2.

Disruption of Mks1 localization to the mother centriole causes cilia defects and 
developmental malformations in Meckel-Gruber syndrome.

Cui C(1), Chatterjee B, Francis D, Yu Q, SanAgustin JT, Francis R, Tansey T,
Henry C, Wang B, Lemley B, Pazour GJ, Lo CW.

Author information: 
(1)University of Pittsburgh, Department of Developmental Biology, 8111 Rangos
Research Center, 530 45th Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15201, USA.

Meckel-Gruber syndrome (MKS) is a recessive disorder resulting in multiple birth 
defects that are associated with mutations affecting ciliogenesis. We recovered a
mouse mutant with a mutation in the Mks1 gene (Mks1(del64-323)) that caused a
260-amino-acid deletion spanning nine amino acids in the B9 domain, a protein
motif with unknown function conserved in two other basal body proteins. We showed
that, in wild-type cells, Mks1 was localized to the mother centriole from which
the cilium was generated. However, in mutant Mks1(del64-323) cells, Mks1 was not 
localized to the centriole, even though it maintained a punctate distribution.
Resembling MKS patients, Mks1 mutants had craniofacial defects, polydactyly,
congenital heart defects, polycystic kidneys and randomized left-right
patterning. These defects reflected disturbance of functions subserved by motile 
and non-motile cilia. In the kidney, glomerular and tubule cysts were observed
along with short cilia, and cilia were reduced in number to a near-complete loss.
Underlying the left-right patterning defects were fewer and shorter nodal cilia, 
and analysis with fluorescent beads showed no directional flow at the embryonic
node. In the cochlea, the stereocilia were mal-patterned, with the kinocilia
being abnormally positioned. Together, these defects suggested disruption of
planar cell polarity, which is known to regulate node, kidney and cochlea
development. In addition, we also showed that Shh signaling was disrupted. Thus, 
in the neural tube, the floor plate was not specified posteriorly even as
expression of the Shh mediator Gli2 increased. By contrast, the Shh signaling
domain was expanded in the anterior neural tube and anterior limb bud, consistent
with reduced Gli3-repressor (Gli3R) function. The latter probably accounted for
the preaxial digit duplication exhibited by the Mks1(del64-323) mutants. Overall,
these findings indicate that centriole localization of Mks1 is required for
ciliogenesis of motile and non-motile cilia, but not for centriole assembly. On
the basis of these results, we hypothesize a role for the B9 domain in mother
centriole targeting, a possibility that warrants further future investigations.

PMCID: PMC3008963
PMID: 21045211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. J Assoc Genet Technol. 2010;36(3):111-4.

Examining Hedgehog pathway genes GLI3, SHH, and PTCH1 and the p53 target
GLIPR1/GLIPR1L1/GLIPR1L2 gene cluster using fluorescence in situ hybridization
uncovers GLIPR1/GLIPR1L1/GLIPR1L2 deletion in 9% of patients with multiple
myeloma.

Tam M(1), Lin P, Hu P, Lennon PA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Health Professions, University of Texas at Houston, Texas.

Mutations in genes regulating cell cycle and apoptosis are considered major
culprits for the malignant transformation of cancer cells. Aberrant activation of
the Hedgehog (HH) signaling pathway which primarily regulates genes involved in
cell growth, proliferation, survival and apoptosis has been demonstrated in
multiple myeloma. Mutations resulting in defective components of the p53 pathway,
which serves a critical role in mediating cellular stress response by triggering 
DNA repair, cell cycle arrest, senescence and apoptosis, have also been
identified. This study focuses on detecting copy number variations for the
GLIPR1/GLIPR1L1/GLIPR1L2 gene cluster of the p53 pathway and three elements of
the HH pathway, SHH, PTCH1 and GLI3 in multiple myeloma (MM) using fluorescence
in situ hybridization (FISH). In eighteen samples, there was no evidence of
abnormal copy number for PTCH1, GLI3 or SHH. Thus, it is unlikely that copy
number variations of these genes are linked to multiple myeloma. However, a
deletion of the GLIPR1/GLIPR1L1/ GLIPR1L2 gene cluster, all p53 targets, was
found in three of 32 samples (9.4%) indicating that these deleted genes may have 
significant implications in MM. Further studies should be performed to determine 
the role of the GLIPR1/GLIPR1L1/GLIPR1L2 gene cluster in the pathogenesis of
multiple myeloma.

PMID: 20978342  [PubMed]


304. J Neurosci. 2010 Oct 13;30(41):13883-94. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3650-10.2010.

The Gli3 hypomorphic mutation Pdn causes selective impairment in the growth,
patterning, and axon guidance capability of the lateral ganglionic eminence.

Magnani D(1), Hasenpusch-Theil K, Jacobs EC, Campagnoni AT, Price DJ, Theil T.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Integrative Physiology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United 
Kingdom.

Previous studies have defined a requirement for Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling in
patterning the ventral telencephalon, a major source of the neuronal diversity
found in the mature telencephalon. The zinc finger transcription factor Gli3 is a
critical component of the Shh signaling pathway and its loss causes major defects
in telencephalic development. Gli3 is expressed in a graded manner along the
dorsoventral axis of the telencephalon but it is unknown whether Gli3 expression 
levels are important for dorsoventral telencephalic patterning. To address this, 
we used the Gli3 hypomorphic mouse mutant Polydactyly Nagoya (Pdn). We show that 
in Pdn/Pdn embryos, the telencephalic expression of Gli3 remains graded, but Gli3
mRNA and protein levels are reduced, resulting in an upregulation of Shh
expression and signaling. These changes mainly affect the development of the
lateral ganglionic eminence (LGE), with some disorganization of the medial
ganglionic eminence mantle zone. The pallial/subpallial boundary is shifted
dorsally and the production of postmitotic neurons is reduced. Moreover, LGE
pioneer neurons that guide corticofugal axons into the LGE do not form properly, 
delaying the entry of corticofugal axons into the ventral telencephalon. Pdn/Pdn 
mutants also show severe pathfinding defects of thalamocortical axons in the
ventral telencephalon. Transplantation experiments demonstrate that the intrinsic
ability of the Pdn ventral telencephalon to guide thalamocortical axons is
compromised. We conclude that correct Gli3 levels are particularly important for 
the LGE's growth, patterning, and development of axon guidance capabilities.

PMID: 20943929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Cell Cycle. 2010 Oct 15;9(20):4144-52. Epub 2010 Oct 27.

Non-redundant role for the transcription factor Gli1 at multiple stages of
thymocyte development.

Drakopoulou E(1), Outram SV, Rowbotham NJ, Ross SE, Furmanski AL, Saldana JI,
Hager-Theodorides AL, Crompton T.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Unit, UCL Institute of Child Health, London, UK.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2010 Nov 15;9(22):4428-9.
    Cell Cycle. 2010 Nov 15;9(22):4428.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway influences multiple stages of murine T-cell
development. Hh signaling mediates transcriptional changes by the activity of the
Gli family of transcription factors, Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3. Both Gli2 and Gli3 are 
essential for mouse development and can be processed to function as
transcriptional repressors or transcriptional activators, whereas Gli1, itself a 
transcriptional target of Hh pathway activation, can only function as a
transcriptional activator and is not essential for mouse development.
Gli1-deficient mice are healthy and appear normal and nonredundant functions for 
Gli1 have been difficult to identify. Here we show that Gli1 is non-redundant in 
the regulation of T-cell development in the thymus, at multiple developmental
stages. Analysis of Gli1-deficient embryonic mouse thymus shows a role for Gli1
to promote the differentiation of CD4<U+207B>CD8<U+207B> double negative (DN) thymocytes before
pre- TCR signal transduction, and a negative regulatory function after pre-TCR
signaling. In addition, introduction of a Class I-restricted transgenic TCR into 
the adult Gli1-deficient and embryonic Gli2-deficient thymus showed that both
Gli1 and Gli2 influence its selection to the CD8 lineage.

PMCID: PMC3055198
PMID: 20935514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Eur J Med Genet. 2011 Jan-Feb;54(1):89-93. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2010.09.006. Epub 
2010 Oct 8.

Large de novo deletion of 7p15.1 to 7p12.1 involving the imprinted gene GRB10
associated with a complex phenotype including features of Beckwith Wiedemann
syndrome.

Naik S, Riordan-Eva E, Thomas NS, Poole R, Ashton M, Crolla JA, Temple IK.

We present an infant with a de novo cytogenetically visible interstitial deletion
of approximately 21.9Mb involving chromosome bands 7p15.1-7p12.1, with the loss
of 119 genes confirmed by array CGH. The infant had a ventricular septal defect, 
hand and skull anomalies, and hyperglycaemia compatible with haploinsufficiency
of TBX20, GLI3, and GCK genes, respectively. In addition, the infant had some
features reminiscent of Beckwith Wiedemann syndrome including macroglossia,
umbilical hernia, and a relatively large birth weight and we speculate that this 
is due to the deletion of GRB10, an imprinted gene on chromosome 7. This report
illustrates how knowledge of genes within a deleted interval facilitates optimal 
medical management, can explain observed phenotypes, and stimulates research
questions.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20933618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Dev Biol. 2011 Jan 15;349(2):179-91. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.09.020. Epub 2010 
Oct 14.

Ofd1 is required in limb bud patterning and endochondral bone development.

Bimonte S(1), De Angelis A, Quagliata L, Giusti F, Tammaro R, Dallai R, Ascenzi
MG, Diez-Roux G, Franco B.

Author information: 
(1)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Via Pietro Castellino
111, Naples, Italy.

Oral-facial-digital type I (OFDI) syndrome is an X-linked male lethal
developmental disorder. It is ascribed to ciliary dysfunction and characterized
by malformation of the face, oral cavity, and digits. Conditional inactivation
using different Cre lines allowed us to study the role of the Ofd1 transcript in 
limb development. Immunofluorescence and ultrastructural studies showed that Ofd1
is necessary for correct ciliogenesis in the limb bud but not for cilia
outgrowth, in contrast to what was previously shown for the embryonic node.
Mutants with mesenchymal Ofd1 inactivation display severe polydactyly with loss
of antero-posterior (A/P) digit patterning and shortened long bones. Loss of
digit identity was found to be associated with a progressive loss of Shh
signaling and an impaired processing of Gli3, whereas defects in limb outgrowth
were due to defective Ihh signaling and to mineralization defects during
endochondral bone formation. Our data demonstrate that Ofd1 plays a role in
regulating digit number and identity during limb and skeletal patterning
increasing insight on the functional role of primary cilia during development.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20920500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. PLoS Comput Biol. 2010 Aug 26;6(8). pii: e1000908. doi:
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000908.

Computational prediction and experimental verification of new MAP kinase docking 
sites and substrates including Gli transcription factors.

Whisenant TC(1), Ho DT, Benz RW, Rogers JS, Kaake RM, Gordon EA, Huang L, Baldi
P, Bardwell L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, University of California,
Irvine, California, United States of America.

In order to fully understand protein kinase networks, new methods are needed to
identify regulators and substrates of kinases, especially for weakly expressed
proteins. Here we have developed a hybrid computational search algorithm that
combines machine learning and expert knowledge to identify kinase docking sites, 
and used this algorithm to search the human genome for novel MAP kinase
substrates and regulators focused on the JNK family of MAP kinases. Predictions
were tested by peptide array followed by rigorous biochemical verification with
in vitro binding and kinase assays on wild-type and mutant proteins. Using this
procedure, we found new 'D-site' class docking sites in previously known JNK
substrates (hnRNP-K, PPM1J/PP2Czeta), as well as new JNK-interacting proteins
(MLL4, NEIL1). Finally, we identified new D-site-dependent MAPK substrates,
including the hedgehog-regulated transcription factors Gli1 and Gli3, suggesting 
that a direct connection between MAP kinase and hedgehog signaling may occur at
the level of these key regulators. These results demonstrate that a genome-wide
search for MAP kinase docking sites can be used to find new docking sites and
substrates.

PMCID: PMC2928751
PMID: 20865152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2010 Oct;3(10):1235-45. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-10-0035. Epub 2010 Sep 21.

Genetic variations in the sonic hedgehog pathway affect clinical outcomes in
non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer.

Chen M(1), Hildebrandt MA, Clague J, Kamat AM, Picornell A, Chang J, Zhang X,
Izzo J, Yang H, Lin J, Gu J, Chanock S, Kogevinas M, Rothman N, Silverman DT,
Garcia-Closas M, Grossman HB, Dinney CP, Malats N, Wu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, The University of Texas M D Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway genetic variations may affect bladder cancer risk
and clinical outcomes. Therefore, we genotyped 177 single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNP) in 11 Shh pathway genes in a study including 803 bladder
cancer cases and 803 controls. We assessed SNP associations with cancer risk and 
clinical outcomes in 419 cases of non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC) and 
318 cases of muscle-invasive and metastatic bladder cancer (MiMBC). Only three
SNPs (GLI3 rs3823720, rs3735361, and rs10951671) reached nominal significance in 
association with risk (P = 0.05), which became nonsignificant after adjusting for
multiple comparisons. Nine SNPs reached a nominally significant individual
association with recurrence of NMIBC in patients who received transurethral
resection (TUR) only (P = 0.05), of which two (SHH rs1233560 and GLI2 rs11685068)
were replicated independently in 356 TUR-only NMIBC patients, with P values of
1.0 × 10(-3) (SHH rs1233560) and 1.3 × 10(-3) (GLI2 rs11685068). Nine SNPs also
reached a nominally significant individual association with clinical outcome of
NMIBC patients who received Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG; P = 0.05), of which
two, the independent GLI3 variants rs6463089 and rs3801192, remained significant 
after adjusting for multiple comparisons (P = 2 × 10(-4) and 9 × 10(-4),
respectively). The wild-type genotype of either of these SNPs was associated with
a lower recurrence rate and longer recurrence-free survival (versus the
variants). Although three SNPs (GLI2 rs735557, GLI2 rs4848632, and SHH rs208684) 
showed nominal significance in association with overall survival in MiMBC
patients (P = 0.05), none remained significant after multiple-comparison
adjustments. Germ-line genetic variations in the Shh pathway predicted clinical
outcomes of TUR and BCG for NMIBC patients.

©2010 AACR.

PMCID: PMC2955764
PMID: 20858759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Histochem Cell Biol. 2010 Oct;134(4):327-35. doi: 10.1007/s00418-010-0738-2. Epub
2010 Sep 7.

Expression of SHH signaling pathway components in the developing human lung.

Zhang M(1), Wang H, Teng H, Shi J, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Fujian Key Laboratory of Developmental Biology and Neurobiology, College of
Life Sciences, Fujian Normal University, Qishan Campus, Fuzhou, 350108 Fujian,
People's Republic of China.

The Sonic hedgehog (Shh) cascade is crucial for the patterning of the early lung 
morphogenesis in mice, but its role in the developing human lung remains to be
determined. In the present study, the expression patterns of SHH signaling
pathway components, including SHH, PTCH1, SMO, GLI1, GLI2 and GLI3 were examined 
by in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry, and compared with the
equivalent patterns in mice. Our results showed that, as in mice, SHH was
expressed in the epithelium of the developing human lung. However, SHH receptors 
(PTCH1 and SMO) and SHH signaling effectors (GLI1-3) were strongly detected in
the human lung epithelium, but weakly in the mesenchyme, slightly different from 
their expressions in mice. Furthermore, the expression levels of SHH signaling
pathway genes in human lung, but not that of GLI1, were subsequently
downregulated at the canalicular stage evaluated by real-time PCR, coincident
with a decline in the developing murine lung. In conclusion, in spite of slight
differences, the considerable similarities of gene expression in human and mice
suggest that conserved molecular networks regulate mammalian lung development.

PMID: 20821230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Oncogene. 2010 Dec 2;29(48):6323-30. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.368. Epub 2010 Sep 6.

Activation of the hedgehog pathway confers a poor prognosis in embryonal and
fusion gene-negative alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma.

Zibat A(1), Missiaglia E, Rosenberger A, Pritchard-Jones K, Shipley J, Hahn H,
Fulda S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany.

Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most common soft tissue sarcoma in children and
comprises two major histological subtypes: alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma (ARMS) and
embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma (ERMS). Seventy-five percent of ARMS harbor reciprocal
chromosomal translocations leading to fusion genes of the forkhead transcription 
factor FOXO1 and PAX3 or PAX7. The hedgehog (Hh) pathway has been implied in
tumor formation and progression of various cancers including RMS. However,
whether Hh pathway activation presents a general feature of RMS or whether it is 
restricted to specific subgroups has not yet been addressed. Here, we report that
marker genes of active Hh signaling, that is, Patched1 (Ptch1), Gli1, Gli3 and
Myf5, are expressed at significantly higher levels in ERMS and fusion
gene-negative ARMS compared with fusion gene-positive ARMS in two distinct
cohorts of RMS patients. Consistently, Gli1 expression correlates with Ptch1
expression in ERMS and fusion gene-negative ARMS, but not in fusion gene-positive
ARMS. In addition, expression levels of MyoD1 are significantly lower in ERMS and
fusion gene-negative ARMS, pointing to an inverse association of Hh activation
and early muscle differentiation. Moreover, Myf5 is identified as a novel
excellent class predictor for RMS by receiver operating characteristic analysis. 
Importantly, high expression of Ptch1 or low MyoD1 expression significantly
correlate with reduced cumulative survival in fusion gene-negative RMS
underscoring the clinical relevance of these findings. By showing that Hh
signaling is preferentially activated in specific subgroups of RMS, our study has
important implications for molecular targeted therapies, such as small molecule
Hh inhibitors, in RMS.

PMID: 20818440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Cancer Biol Ther. 2010 Nov 1;10(9):893-902. doi: 10.4161/cbt.10.9.13252. Epub
2010 Nov 1.

Gli3 mediates cell survival and sensitivity to cyclopamine in pancreatic cancer.

Steg A(1), Amm HM, Novak Z, Frost AR, Johnson MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, USA.

Activation of the hedgehog (HH) pathway plays a critical role in the development 
and continued growth of pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PAC). Cyclopamine, a HH
pathway inhibitor, has been shown to suppress PAC cell proliferation in vitro and
in vivo. However, the molecular basis of response to cyclopamine has not been
fully elucidated nor have genes that predict sensitivity to this compound been
identified. To better understand these features of HH pathway inhibition, we
evaluated the biological and molecular effects of cyclopamine in vitro. The
viability of 9 human PAC cell lines following cyclopamine exposure was determined
using MTS assay. Proliferation and induction of apoptosis in treated cells were
examined by bromo-deoxyuridine incorporation, caspase activation, and
mitochondrial membrane potential. Gene expression before and after cyclopamine
treatment was determined using Taqman real-time quantitative polymerase chain
reaction (RTQ-PCR) and Taqman low-density array (TLDA). Among the cell lines
examined, cyclopamine IC50 values ranged from 8.79 to >30 µM. Response to
cyclopamine included reduced cell proliferation and induction of apoptosis with
and without mitochondrial membrane depolarization. Regression analysis revealed
that GLI3 expression significantly correlated with cyclopamine resistance (r =
0.80; p = 0.0102). Knockdown of GLI3 using siRNAs increased sensitivity to
cyclopamine. In addition, GLI3 siRNAs decreased PAC cell viability and reduced
expression of genes involved in HH signaling (Patched 1 and GLI1) and cell
proliferation, similar to cyclopamine. These effects were not observed in PAC
cells with undetectable GLI3 expression. These data suggest that Gli3 mediates
cell survival and sensitivity to cyclopamine in pancreatic cancer.

PMCID: PMC3230294
PMID: 20814245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Hum Mutat. 2010 Oct;31(10):1142-54. doi: 10.1002/humu.21328.

Molecular analysis expands the spectrum of phenotypes associated with GLI3
mutations.

Johnston JJ(1), Sapp JC, Turner JT, Amor D, Aftimos S, Aleck KA, Bocian M,
Bodurtha JN, Cox GF, Curry CJ, Day R, Donnai D, Field M, Fujiwara I, Gabbett M,
Gal M, Graham JM, Hedera P, Hennekam RC, Hersh JH, Hopkin RJ, Kayserili H, Kidd
AM, Kimonis V, Lin AE, Lynch SA, Maisenbacher M, Mansour S, McGaughran J, Mehta
L, Murphy H, Raygada M, Robin NH, Rope AF, Rosenbaum KN, Schaefer GB, Shealy A,
Smith W, Soller M, Sommer A, Stalker HJ, Steiner B, Stephan MJ, Tilstra D,
Tomkins S, Trapane P, Tsai AC, Van Allen MI, Vasudevan PC, Zabel B, Zunich J,
Black GC, Biesecker LG.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Disease Research Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4472, USA.
jjohnsto@mail.nih.gov

Comment in
    Hum Mutat. 2011 Nov;32(11):1332-3.

A range of phenotypes including Greig cephalopolysyndactyly and Pallister-Hall
syndromes (GCPS, PHS) are caused by pathogenic mutation of the GLI3 gene. To
characterize the clinical variability of GLI3 mutations, we present a subset of a
cohort of 174 probands referred for GLI3 analysis. Eighty-one probands with
typical GCPS or PHS were previously reported, and we report the remaining 93
probands here. This includes 19 probands (12 mutations) who fulfilled clinical
criteria for GCPS or PHS, 48 probands (16 mutations) with features of GCPS or PHS
but who did not meet the clinical criteria (sub-GCPS and sub-PHS), 21 probands (6
mutations) with features of PHS or GCPS and oral-facial-digital syndrome, and 5
probands (1 mutation) with nonsyndromic polydactyly. These data support
previously identified genotype-phenotype correlations and demonstrate a more
variable degree of severity than previously recognized. The finding of GLI3
mutations in patients with features of oral-facial-digital syndrome supports the 
observation that GLI3 interacts with cilia. We conclude that the phenotypic
spectrum of GLI3 mutations is broader than that encompassed by the clinical
diagnostic criteria, but the genotype-phenotype correlation persists. Individuals
with features of either GCPS or PHS should be screened for mutations in GLI3 even
if they do not fulfill clinical criteria.

Hum Mutat 31:1142-1154, 2010. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2947617
PMID: 20672375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jul 20;107(29):12907-12. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1000979107. Epub 2010 Jul 1.

Sonic hedgehog in temporal control of somite formation.

Resende TP(1), Ferreira M, Teillet MA, Tavares AT, Andrade RP, Palmeirim I.

Author information: 
(1)Life and Health Sciences Research Institute, School of Health Sciences,
University of Minho, 4710-057 Braga, Portugal.

Vertebrate embryo somite formation is temporally controlled by the cyclic
expression of somitogenesis clock genes in the presomitic mesoderm (PSM). The
somitogenesis clock is believed to be an intrinsic property of this tissue,
operating independently of embryonic midline structures and the signaling
molecules produced therein, namely Sonic hedgehog (Shh). This work revisits the
notochord signaling contribution to temporal control of PSM segmentation by
assessing the rate and number of somites formed and somitogenesis molecular clock
gene expression oscillations upon notochord ablation. The absence of the
notochord causes a delay in somite formation, accompanied by an increase in the
period of molecular clock oscillations. Shh is the notochord-derived signal
responsible for this effect, as these alterations are recapitulated by Shh
signaling inhibitors and rescued by an external Shh supply. We have characterized
chick smoothened expression pattern and have found that the PSM expresses both
patched1 and smoothened Shh signal transducers. Upon notochord ablation,
patched1, gli1, and fgf8 are down-regulated, whereas gli2 and gli3 are
overexpressed. Strikingly, notochord-deprived PSM segmentation rate recovers over
time, concomitant with raldh2 overexpression. Accordingly, exogenous RA
supplement rescues notochord ablation effects on somite formation. A model is
presented in which Shh and RA pathways converge to inhibit PSM Gli activity,
ensuring timely somite formation. Altogether, our data provide evidence that a
balance between different pathways ensures the robustness of timely somite
formation and that notochord-derived Shh is a component of the molecular network 
regulating the pace of the somitogenesis clock.

PMCID: PMC2919945
PMID: 20615943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Carcinogenesis. 2010 Sep;31(9):1612-9. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgq146. Epub 2010 Jul 
7.

Genome-wide association study for colorectal cancer identifies risk polymorphisms
in German familial cases and implicates MAPK signalling pathways in disease
susceptibility.

Lascorz J(1), Försti A, Chen B, Buch S, Steinke V, Rahner N, Holinski-Feder E,
Morak M, Schackert HK, Görgens H, Schulmann K, Goecke T, Kloor M, Engel C,
Büttner R, Kunkel N, Weires M, Hoffmeister M, Pardini B, Naccarati A, Vodickova
L, Novotny J, Schreiber S, Krawczak M, Bröring CD, Völzke H, Schafmayer C,
Vodicka P, Chang-Claude J, Brenner H, Burwinkel B, Propping P, Hampe J, Hemminki 
K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetic Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Heidelberg 69120, Germany. j.lascorz@dkfz.de

Genetic susceptibility accounts for approximately 35% of all colorectal cancer
(CRC). Ten common low-risk variants contributing to CRC risk have been identified
through genome-wide association studies (GWASs). In our GWAS, 610 664 genotyped
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) passed the quality control filtering in
371 German familial CRC patients and 1263 controls, and replication studies were 
conducted in four additional case-control sets (4915 cases and 5607 controls).
Known risk loci at 8q24.21 and 11q23 were confirmed, and a previously unreported 
association, rs12701937, located between the genes GLI3 (GLI family zinc finger
3) and INHBA (inhibin, beta A) [P = 1.1 x 10(-3), odds ratio (OR) 1.14, 95%
confidence interval (CI) 1.05-1.23, dominant model in the combined cohort], was
identified. The association was stronger in familial cases compared with
unselected cases (P = 2.0 x 10(-4), OR 1.36, 95% CI 1.16-1.60, dominant model).
Two other unreported SNPs, rs6038071, 40 kb upstream of CSNK2A1 (casein kinase 2,
alpha 1 polypeptide) and an intronic marker in MYO3A (myosin IIIA), rs11014993,
associated with CRC only in the familial CRC cases (P = 2.5 x 10(-3), recessive
model, and P = 2.7 x 10(-4), dominant model). Three software tools successfully
pointed to the overrepresentation of genes related to the mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) signalling pathways among the 1340 most strongly associated
markers from the GWAS (allelic P value < 10(-3)). The risk of CRC increased
significantly with an increasing number of risk alleles in seven genes involved
in MAPK signalling events (P(trend) = 2.2 x 10(-16), OR(per allele) = 1.34, 95%
CI 1.11-1.61).

PMID: 20610541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Am J Med Genet A. 2010 Jul;152A(7):1654-60. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33495.

Metopic craniosynostosis due to mutations in GLI3: A novel association.

McDonald-McGinn DM(1), Feret H, Nah HD, Bartlett SP, Whitaker LA, Zackai EH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, The Children's Hospital 
of Philadelphia, The University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA. mcginn@email.chop.edu

We report on the novel association of trigonocephaly and polysyndactyly in two
unrelated patients due to mutations within the last third (exon 14) and first
third (exon 6) of the GLI3 gene, respectively. GLI3 acts as a downstream mediator
of the Sonic hedgehog signal-transduction pathway which is essential for early
development; and plays a role in cell growth, specialization, and patterning of
structures such as the brain and limbs. GLI3 mutations have been identified in
patients with Pallister-Hall, Grieg cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS),
postaxial polydactyly type A1, preaxial polydactyly type IV, and in one patient
with acrocallosal syndrome (ACLS). Furthermore, deletions including the GLI3 gene
have been reported in patients with features of GCPS and ACLS. To date,
trigonocephaly has not been associated with abnormalities of GLI3 and
craniosynostosis is not a feature of GCPS. However, Hootnick and Holmes reported 
on a father with polysyndactyly and son with trigonocephaly, polysyndactyly, and 
agenesis of the corpus callosum, considered GCPS thereafter. Guzzetta et al.
subsequently described a patient with trigonocephaly, polysyndactyly, and
agenesis of the corpus callosum postulating a diagnosis of GCPS, later considered
ACLS. In retrospect, these two patients, evaluated prior to mutational analysis, 
and our patients, with confirmed mutations, likely fall within the GLI3
morphopathy spectrum and may provide a bridge to better understanding those
patients with overlapping features of GCPS and ACLS. Based on this observation,
we suggest GLI3 studies in patients presenting with this constellation of
findings, specifically metopic craniosynostosis with polysyndactyly, in order to 
provide appropriate medical management and genetic counseling.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20583172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Sep 1;19(17):3457-67. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq258. Epub 2010 Jun 
22.

Gli3Xt-J/Xt-J mice exhibit lambdoid suture craniosynostosis which results from
altered osteoprogenitor proliferation and differentiation.

Rice DP(1), Connor EC, Veltmaat JM, Lana-Elola E, Veistinen L, Tanimoto Y,
Bellusci S, Rice R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics, Institute of Dentistry, 00014 University of
Helsinki, PO Box 41 (Mannerheimintie 172), Finland. david.rice@helsinki.fi

Gli3 is a zinc-finger transcription factor whose activity is dependent on the
level of hedgehog (Hh) ligand. Hh signaling has key roles during endochondral
ossification; however, its role in intramembranous ossification is still unclear.
In this study, we show that Gli3 performs a dual role in regulating both
osteoprogenitor proliferation and osteoblast differentiation during
intramembranous ossification. We discovered that Gli3Xt-J/Xt-J mice, which
represent a Gli3-null allele, exhibit craniosynostosis of the lambdoid sutures
and that this is accompanied by increased osteoprogenitor proliferation and
differentiation. These cellular changes are preceded by ectopic expression of the
Hh receptor Patched1 and reduced expression of the transcription factor Twist1 in
the sutural mesenchyme. Twist1 is known to delay osteogenesis by binding to and
inhibiting the transcription factor Runx2. We found that Runx2 expression in the 
lambdoid suture was altered in a pattern complimentary to that of Twist1. We
therefore propose that loss of Gli3 results in a Twist1-, Runx2-dependent
expansion of the sutural osteoprogenitor population as well as enhanced
osteoblastic differentiation which results in a bony bridge forming between the
parietal and interparietal bones. We show that FGF2 will induce Twist1, normalize
osteoprogenitor proliferation and differentiation and rescue the lambdoid suture 
synostosis in Gli3Xt-J/Xt-J mice. Taken together, we define a novel role for Gli3
in osteoblast development; we describe the first mouse model of lambdoid suture
craniosynostosis and show how craniosynostosis can be rescued in this model.

PMCID: PMC2916710
PMID: 20570969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Oncogene. 2010 Aug 26;29(34):4848-58. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.235. Epub 2010 Jun
21.

GLI3-dependent repression of DR4 mediates hedgehog antagonism of TRAIL-induced
apoptosis.

Kurita S(1), Mott JL, Almada LL, Bronk SF, Werneburg NW, Sun SY, Roberts LR,
Fernandez-Zapico ME, Gores GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, College of Medicine,
Rochester, MN, USA.

Tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) induces apoptosis
through its cognate receptors death receptor 4 (DR4) and death receptor 5 (DR5), 
preferentially in malignant cells. However, many malignant cells remain resistant
to TRAIL cytotoxicity by poorly characterized mechanisms. Here, using
cholangiocarcinoma cells, as a model for TRAIL resistance, we identified a role
for the oncogenic Hedgehog (Hh)-GLI pathway in the regulation of TRAIL
cytotoxicity. Blockade of Hh using pharmacological and genetic tools sensitizes
the cells to TRAIL cytotoxicity. Restoration of apoptosis sensitivity coincided
with upregulation of DR4 expression, while expression of other death effector
proteins remained unaltered. Knockdown of DR4 mimics Hh-mediated resistance to
TRAIL cytotoxicity. Hh regulates the expression of DR4 by modulating the activity
of its promoter. Luciferase, chromatin immunoprecipitation and expression assays 
show that the transcription factor GLI3 binds to the DR4 promoter and Hh requires
an intact GLI3-repression activity to silence DR4 expression. Finally, small
interfering RNA (siRNA)-targeted knockdown of GLI3, but not GLI1 or GLI2,
restores DR4 expression and TRAIL sensitivity, indicating that the Hh effect is
exclusively mediated by this transcription factor. In conclusion, these data
provide evidence of a regulatory mechanism, which modulates TRAIL signaling in
cancer cells and suggest new therapeutic approaches for TRAIL-resistant
neoplasms.

PMCID: PMC2928864
PMID: 20562908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. BMC Neurosci. 2010 Jun 8;11:70. doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-11-70.

Newly generated cells are increased in hippocampus of adult mice lacking a serine
protease inhibitor.

Lino MM(1), Vaillant C, Orolicki S, Sticker M, Kvajo M, Monard D.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, CH-4058 Basel,
Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Neurogenesis in the hippocampal dentate gyrus and the subventricular 
zone occurs throughout the life of mammals and newly generated neurons can
integrate functionally into established neuronal circuits. Neurogenesis levels in
the dentate gyrus are modulated by changes in the environment (enrichment,
exercise), hippocampal-dependent tasks, NMDA receptor (NMDAR) activity, sonic
hedgehog (SHH) and/or other factors.
RESULTS: previously, we showed that Protease Nexin-1 (PN-1), a potent serine
protease inhibitor, regulates the NMDAR availability and activity as well as SHH 
signaling. Compared with wild-type (WT), we detected a significant increase in
BrdU-labeled cells in the dentate gyrus of mice lacking PN-1 (PN-1 -/-) both in
controls and after running exercise. Patched homologue 1 (Ptc1) and Gli1 mRNA
levels were higher and Gli3 down-regulated in mutant mice under standard
conditions and to a lesser extent after running exercise. However, the number of 
surviving BrdU-positive cells did not differ between WT and PN-1 -/- animals.
NMDAR availability was altered in the hippocampus of mutant animals after
exercise.
CONCLUSION: All together our results indicate that PN-1 controls progenitors
proliferation through an effect on the SHH pathway and suggest an influence of
the serpin on the survival of newly generated neurons through modulation of NMDAR
availability.

PMCID: PMC2896953
PMID: 20529321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2010 Jun;17(6):718-25. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1833. Epub 2010 May
30.

DYRK1B-dependent autocrine-to-paracrine shift of Hedgehog signaling by mutant
RAS.

Lauth M(1), Bergström A, Shimokawa T, Tostar U, Jin Q, Fendrich V, Guerra C,
Barbacid M, Toftgård R.

Author information: 
(1)Karolinska Institutet, Center for Biosciences, Department of Biosciences and
Nutrition, Huddinge, Sweden.

Synergism between the RAS and Hedgehog (HH) pathways has been suggested for
carcinogenesis in the pancreas, lung and colon. We investigated the molecular
cross-talk between RAS and HH signaling and found that, although mutant RAS
induces or enhances SHH expression and favors paracrine HH signaling, it
antagonizes autocrine HH signal transduction. Activated RAS can be found in
primary cilia, the central organelle of HH signal transduction, but functions in 
a cilium-independent manner and interferes with Gli2 function and Gli3
processing. In addition, the cell-autonomous negative regulation of HH signal
transduction involves the RAS effector molecule dual specificity tyrosine
phosphorylated and regulated kinase 1B (DYRK1B). In line with a redirection of
autocrine toward paracrine HH signaling by a KRAS-DYRK1B network, we find high
levels of GLI1 expression restricted to the stromal compartment and not to
SHH-expressing tumor cells in human pancreatic adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 20512148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Dev Dyn. 2010 Jun;239(6):1818-26. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22301.

Gli2 activator function in preosteoblasts is sufficient to mediate Ihh-dependent 
osteoblast differentiation, whereas the repressor function of Gli2 is dispensable
for endochondral ossification.

Kesper DA(1), Didt-Koziel L, Vortkamp A.

Author information: 
(1)University of Duisburg-Essen, Center of Medical Biotechnology, Essen, Germany.

Signaling of Indian hedgehog (Ihh), one of the key regulators of endochondral
ossification is mediated by transcription factors of the Gli family, Gli1, Gli2, 
and Gli3. Gli3 and to a lesser extent Gli2 can be proteolytically processed into 
short repressor proteins. Upon Ihh signaling, processing is inhibited and the
full-length proteins function as activators of transcription. Gli3 has been shown
to mainly act as a repressor of Ihh target genes in chondrocytes, but the role of
other Gli isoforms is less clear. Analyzing mouse mutants deficient for Ihh;Gli2 
or Gli3;Gli2, we show here that the Gli2 repressor has no detectable function in 
chondrocyte or osteoblast differentiation. Instead, Gli2 seems to act as an
activator to fully induce the expression of Ihh target genes in skeletal tissues.
Furthermore, we show that, in the absence of Gli3, the activator function of Gli2
is sufficient to induce Ihh-dependent osteoblast differentiation.

PMID: 20503377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2010 Sep;49(3):490-8. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2010.05.003. Epub 
2010 May 15.

Sonic hedgehog induces angiogenesis via Rho kinase-dependent signaling in
endothelial cells.

Renault MA(1), Roncalli J, Tongers J, Thorne T, Klyachko E, Misener S, Volpert
OV, Mehta S, Burg A, Luedemann C, Qin G, Kishore R, Losordo DW.

Author information: 
(1)Feinberg Cardiovascular Research Institute, Northwestern University Feinberg
School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

The morphogen Sonic hedgehog (Shh) promotes neovascularization in adults by
inducing pro-angiogenic cytokine expression in fibroblasts; however, the direct
effects of Shh on endothelial cell (EC) function during angiogenesis are unknown.
Our findings indicate that Shh promotes capillary morphogenesis (tube length on
Matrigel increased to 271+/-50% of the length in untreated cells, p=0.00003),
induces EC migration (modified Boyden chamber assay, 191+/-35% of migration in
untreated cells, p=0.00009), and increases EC expression of matrix
metalloproteinase 9 (MMP-9) and osteopontin (OPN) mRNA (real-time RT-PCR), which 
are essential for Shh-induced angiogenesis both in vitro and in vivo. Shh
activity in ECs is mediated by Rho, rather than through the "classic" Shh
signaling pathway, which involves the Gli transcription factors. The Rho
dependence of Shh-induced EC angiogenic activity was documented both in vitro,
with dominant-negative RhoA and Rho kinase (ROCK) constructs, and in vivo, with
the ROCK inhibitor Y27632 in the mouse corneal angiogenesis model. Finally,
experiments performed in MMP-9- and OPN-knockout mice confirmed the roles of the 
ROCK downstream targets MMP-9 and OPN in Shh-induced angiogenesis. Collectively, 
our results identify a "nonclassical" pathway by which Shh directly modulates EC 
phenotype and angiogenic activity.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2917529
PMID: 20478312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Development. 2010 Jun;137(12):2001-9. doi: 10.1242/dev.052126. Epub 2010 May 12.

Suppressor of fused and Spop regulate the stability, processing and function of
Gli2 and Gli3 full-length activators but not their repressors.

Wang C(1), Pan Y, Wang B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine, Weill Medical College of Cornell University,
1300 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Gli2 and Gli3 are primary transcriptional regulators that mediate hedgehog (Hh)
signaling. Mechanisms that stabilize and destabilize Gli2 and Gli3 are essential 
for the proteins to promptly respond to Hh signaling or to be inactivated
following the activation. In this study, we show that loss of suppressor of fused
(Sufu; an inhibitory effector for Gli proteins) results in destabilization of
Gli2 and Gli3 full-length activators but not of their C-terminally processed
repressors, whereas overexpression of Sufu stabilizes them. By contrast, RNAi
knockdown of Spop (a substrate-binding adaptor for the cullin3-based ubiquitin E3
ligase) in Sufu mutant mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) can restore the levels 
of Gli2 and Gli3 full-length proteins, but not those of their repressors, whereas
introducing Sufu into the MEFs stabilizes Gli2 and Gli3 full-length proteins and 
rescues Gli3 processing. Consistent with these findings, forced Spop expression
promotes Gli2 and Gli3 degradation and Gli3 processing. The functions of Sufu and
Spop oppose each other through their competitive binding to the N- and C-terminal
regions of Gli3 or the C-terminal region of Gli2. More importantly, the Gli3
repressor expressed by a Gli3 mutant allele (Gli3(Delta699)) can mostly rescue
the ventralized neural tube phenotypes of Sufu mutant embryos, indicating that
the Gli3 repressor can function independently of Sufu. Our study provides a new
insight into the regulation of Gli2 and Gli3 stability and processing by Sufu and
Spop, and reveals the unexpected Sufu-independent Gli3 repressor function.

PMCID: PMC2875842
PMID: 20463034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. BMC Dev Biol. 2010 Apr 28;10:44. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-10-44.

Human intronic enhancers control distinct sub-domains of Gli3 expression during
mouse CNS and limb development.

Abbasi AA(1), Paparidis Z, Malik S, Bangs F, Schmidt A, Koch S, Lopez-Rios J,
Grzeschik KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Philipps-Universität Marburg, 35037 Marburg,
Germany. abbasiam@qau.edu.pk

BACKGROUND: The zinc-finger transcription factor GLI3 is an important mediator of
Sonic hedgehog signaling and crucial for patterning of many aspects of the
vertebrate body plan. In vertebrates, the mechanism of SHH signal transduction
and its action on target genes by means of activating or repressing forms of GLI3
have been studied most extensively during limb development and the specification 
of the central nervous system. From these studies it has emerged, that Gli3
expression must be subject to a tight spatiotemporal regulation. However, the
genetic mechanisms and the cis-acting elements controlling the expression of Gli3
remained largely unknown.
RESULTS: Here, we demonstrate in chicken and mouse transgenic embryos that human 
GLI3-intronic conserved non-coding sequence elements (CNEs) autonomously control 
individual aspects of Gli3 expression. Their combined action shows many aspects
of a Gli3-specific pattern of transcriptional activity. In the mouse limb bud,
different CNEs enhance Gli3-specific expression in evolutionary ancient stylopod 
and zeugopod versus modern skeletal structures of the autopod. Limb bud
specificity is also found in chicken but had not been detected in zebrafish
embryos. Three of these elements govern central nervous system specific gene
expression during mouse embryogenesis, each targeting a subset of endogenous Gli3
transcription sites. Even though fish, birds, and mammals share an ancient
repertoire of gene regulatory elements within Gli3, the functions of individual
enhancers from this catalog have diverged significantly. During evolution,
ancient broad-range regulatory elements within Gli3 attained higher specificity, 
critical for patterning of more specialized structures, by abolishing the
potential for redundant expression control.
CONCLUSION: These results not only demonstrate the high level of complexity in
the genetic mechanisms controlling Gli3 expression, but also reveal the
evolutionary significance of cis-acting regulatory networks of early
developmental regulators in vertebrates.

PMCID: PMC2875213
PMID: 20426846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2010 Mar;1192:307-16. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.05234.x.

Hox11 paralogous genes are required for formation of wrist and ankle joints and
articular surface organization.

Koyama E(1), Yasuda T, Wellik DM, Pacifici M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, 
USA.

Limb skeletal elements are connected by distinct synovial joints, but the
mechanisms regulating joint formation, diversity, and organization remain
unclear. Previous studies showed that Hox11 mouse mutants have severe
developmental defects in radius and ulna and tibia and fibula, but wrist and
ankle joint formation and characteristics were not examined in detail. We now
find that E11.5 and E12.5 triple Hox11aaccdd mutants exhibit a significant
reduction in prospective carpal and tarsal mesenchyme. Although the mesenchyme
became segmented into individual carpal and tarsal skeletal elements with further
development, the elements were ill defined and the more proximal elements
(radiale, ulnare, talus, and calcaneous) actually underwent involution and/or
fusion. Wild-type carpal and tarsal elements displayed a thick articulating
superficial zone at their outer perimeter that expressed genes typical of
developing joint interzones and articulating cells, including Gdf5, Erg, Gli3,
collagen IIA, and lubricin, and defined each element anatomically. In mutant
wrists and ankles, the superficial zone around each element was thin and ill
defined, and expression of several of those genes was low and often interrupted. 
These and other data provide novel and clear evidence that Hox11 paralogous genes
regulate wrist and ankle joint organization and are essential for establishing
carpal and tarsal element boundary and maintaining their articulating surface
tissue.

PMID: 20392252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. PLoS Genet. 2010 Apr 8;6(4):e1000901. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000901.

Distinct roles of Hand2 in initiating polarity and posterior Shh expression
during the onset of mouse limb bud development.

Galli A(1), Robay D, Osterwalder M, Bao X, Bénazet JD, Tariq M, Paro R, Mackem S,
Zeller R.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics, Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel,
Switzerland. ag2994@columbia.edu

The polarization of nascent embryonic fields and the endowment of cells with
organizer properties are key to initiation of vertebrate organogenesis. One such 
event is antero-posterior (AP) polarization of early limb buds and activation of 
morphogenetic Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) signaling in the posterior mesenchyme, which
in turn promotes outgrowth and specifies the pentadactylous autopod. Inactivation
of the Hand2 transcriptional regulator from the onset of mouse forelimb bud
development disrupts establishment of posterior identity and Shh expression,
which results in a skeletal phenotype identical to Shh deficient limb buds. In
wild-type limb buds, Hand2 is part of the protein complexes containing Hoxd13,
another essential regulator of Shh activation in limb buds. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation shows that Hand2-containing chromatin complexes are bound to 
the far upstream cis-regulatory region (ZRS), which is specifically required for 
Shh expression in the limb bud. Cell-biochemical studies indicate that Hand2 and 
Hoxd13 can efficiently transactivate gene expression via the ZRS, while the Gli3 
repressor isoform interferes with this positive transcriptional regulation.
Indeed, analysis of mouse forelimb buds lacking both Hand2 and Gli3 reveals the
complete absence of antero-posterior (AP) polarity along the entire
proximo-distal axis and extreme digit polydactyly without AP identities. Our
study uncovers essential components of the transcriptional machinery and key
interactions that set-up limb bud asymmetry upstream of establishing the SHH
signaling limb bud organizer.

PMCID: PMC2851570
PMID: 20386744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Genes Dev. 2010 Apr 1;24(7):670-82. doi: 10.1101/gad.1902910.

The output of Hedgehog signaling is controlled by the dynamic association between
Suppressor of Fused and the Gli proteins.

Humke EW(1), Dorn KV, Milenkovic L, Scott MP, Rohatgi R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, California 94305, USA.

The transcriptional program orchestrated by Hedgehog signaling depends on the Gli
family of transcription factors. Gli proteins can be converted to either
transcriptional activators or truncated transcriptional repressors. We show that 
the interaction between Gli3 and Suppressor of Fused (Sufu) regulates the
formation of either repressor or activator forms of Gli3. In the absence of
signaling, Sufu restrains Gli3 in the cytoplasm, promoting its processing into a 
repressor. Initiation of signaling triggers the dissociation of Sufu from Gli3.
This event prevents formation of the repressor and instead allows Gli3 to enter
the nucleus, where it is converted into a labile, differentially phosphorylated
transcriptional activator. This key dissociation event depends on Kif3a, a
kinesin motor required for the function of primary cilia. We propose that the
Sufu-Gli3 interaction is a major control point in the Hedgehog pathway, a pathway
that plays important roles in both development and cancer.

PMCID: PMC2849124
PMID: 20360384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. FASEB J. 2010 Aug;24(8):2893-903. doi: 10.1096/fj.09-148908. Epub 2010 Mar 30.

Zic1 transcription factor in bone: neural developmental protein regulates
mechanotransduction in osteocytes.

Kalogeropoulos M(1), Varanasi SS, Olstad OK, Sanderson P, Gautvik VT, Reppe S,
Francis RM, Gautvik KM, Birch MA, Datta HK.

Author information: 
(1)Musculoskeletal Research Group, ICM, The Medical School, Newcastle University,
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

A transcriptome analysis compared gene expression in human bone biopsy samples
taken from lumbar spine and iliac crest, sites that experience high and low
levels of mechanical stress, respectively. The analysis revealed that the zinc
finger protein of cerebellum (Zic) family member transcription factor Zic1 was
the most up-regulated gene in the lumbar spine (202-fold; P<10(-7)) in comparison
with the iliac crest. Software analysis of differential gene expression in the
biopsy samples identified the ciliary-related proteins PATCH1 and GLI-Kruppel
family members Gli1 and Gli3 as part of a potential molecular network associated 
with Zic1. RT-PCR confirmed the expression of Zic1, Gli1, and Gli3 and other
related key signaling mediators in osteoblastic cells and osteocytes in vitro.
Zic1 was immunolocalized in the cytosol and nucleus of the murine osteocyte cell 
line MLO-Y4 and osteoblast-like cells MC3T3-E1 and in primary rat osteoblasts.
MLO-Y4 cells subjected to prolonged oscillatory fluid flow showed increased
localization of Zic1 in the nucleus with diminished levels in the cytosol, but no
such changes were seen in MC3T3-E1 cells. A shear stress-induced increase in
T-cell factor/lymphoid enhancer factor transcriptional activity was abolished by 
Zic1 gene silencing. These results suggest that Zic1, perhaps together with Gli1 
and Gli3, may act as a link between mechanosensing and Wnt signaling. We conclude
that Zic1, a neural developmental transcription factor, plays an important role
in shear flow mechanotransduction in osteocytes.

PMID: 20354137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. J Hered. 2010 Jul-Aug;101(4):469-75. doi: 10.1093/jhered/esq037. Epub 2010 Mar
22.

Polydactyl inheritance in the pig.

Gorbach D(1), Mote B, Totir L, Fernando R, Rothschild M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science and Center for Integrated Animal Genomics, Iowa
State University, 2255 Kildee Hall, Ames, IA 50011, USA.

Two pigs were identified having "extra feet" (preaxial polydactyly) within a
purebred population of Yorkshire pigs. Polydactyly is an inherited disorder in
many species that may be controlled by either recessive or dominant genes.
Experimental matings were conducted using pigs that had produced affected
offspring with the result of 12 polydactyl offspring out of 95 piglets. One
polydactyl-producing boar was also mated to 4 Duroc sows and 8 distantly related 
Yorkshire sows to produce 129 unaffected offspring. Together, these results
suggest a recessive mode of inheritance, possibly with incomplete penetrance.
Candidate genes, LMBR1, EN2, HOXA10-13, GLI3, WNT2, WNT16, and SHH, were
identified based on association with similar phenotypes in other species.
Homologues for these genes are all found on SSC18. Sequencing and linkage studies
showed no evidence for association with HOXA10-13, WNT2, and WNT16. Results for
the regions including GLI3, LMBR1, and SHH, however, were inconclusive. A whole
genome scan was conducted on DNA samples from 10 affected pigs and 12 close
relatives using the Illumina PorcineSNP60 BeadChip and compared with 69 more
distantly related animals in the same population. No evidence was found for a
major gene causing polydactyly. However, a 25-Mb stretch of homozygosity on SSC8 
was identified as fairly unique to the family segregating for this trait.
Therefore, this chromosome segment may play a role in development of polydactyly 
in concert with other genes.

PMID: 20308080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Pallister-Hall Syndrome.

Biesecker LG.
In: Pagon RA, Adam MP, Ardinger HH, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Bean LJH, Bird TD,
Fong CT, Mefford HC, Smith RJH, Stephens K, editors. GeneReviews(®) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2016.
2000 May 25.

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Pallister-Hall syndrome (referred to as PHS in this
entry) is characterized by a spectrum of anomalies ranging from polydactyly,
asymptomatic bifid epiglottis, and hypothalamic hamartoma at the mild end to
laryngotracheal cleft with neonatal lethality at the severe end. Individuals with
mild PHS may be incorrectly diagnosed as having isolated postaxial polydactyly
type A. Individuals with PHS can have pituitary insufficiency and may die as
neonates from undiagnosed and untreated adrenal insufficiency.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of Pallister-Hall syndrome is based on family
history and the clinical findings of hypothalamic hamartoma, central and
postaxial polydactyly, bifid epiglottis, imperforate anus, and renal
abnormalities. GLI3 is the only gene in which pathogenic variants are known to
cause Pallister-Hall syndrome.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Urgent treatment for endocrine
abnormalities, especially cortisol deficiency; management of epiglottic
abnormalities depending on the abnormality and the extent of respiratory
compromise; bifid epiglottis, the most common abnormality, typically does not
need treatment. Standard treatment of anal atresia or stenosis; symptomatic
treatment of seizures; elective repair of polydactyly; developmental intervention
or special education for developmental delays. Prevention of secondary
complications: Biopsy or resection of hypothalamic hamartoma may result in
complications and lifelong need for hormone replacement; seizures may begin or
worsen with use of stimulants for attention deficit disorder. Surveillance:
During childhood, annual developmental assessment and annual medical evaluation
to assess growth and monitor for signs of precocious puberty.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Pallister-Hall syndrome is inherited in an autosomal dominant
manner. Individuals with PHS may have an affected parent or may have the disorder
as the result of de novo mutation. About 25% of individuals have a de novo
pathogenic variant. Persons with de novo pathogenic variant are generally more
severely affected than those with a family history of PHS. The risk to offspring 
of an affected individual is 50%. Prenatal testing for pregnancies at increased
risk is possible if the pathogenic variant in the family is known. The
reliability of ultrasound examination for prenatal diagnosis is unknown.

PMID: 20301638  [PubMed]


331. Greig Cephalopolysyndactyly Syndrome.

Biesecker LG.
In: Pagon RA, Adam MP, Ardinger HH, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Bean LJH, Bird TD,
Fong CT, Mefford HC, Smith RJH, Stephens K, editors. GeneReviews(®) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2016.
2001 Jul 9.

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Typical Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS) is 
characterized by preaxial polydactyly or mixed pre- and postaxial polydactyly,
true widely spaced eyes, and macrocephaly. Individuals with mild GCPS may have
subtle craniofacial findings. The mild end of the GCPS spectrum is a continuum
with preaxial polysyndactyly type IV and crossed polydactyly (preaxial
polydactyly of the feet and postaxial polydactyly of the hands plus syndactyly of
fingers 3-4 and toes 1-3). Individuals with severe GCPS can have seizures,
hydrocephalus, and intellectual disability.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of GCPS is based on clinical findings and family
history. GLI3 is the only gene known to be associated with GCPS; GLI3 alterations
(i.e., cytogenetic abnormalities involving GLI3 or pathogenic variants of GLI3)
can be identified in more than 75% of typically affected individuals.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Elective surgical repair of polydactyly 
with greatest priority given to correction of preaxial polydactyly of the hands; 
evaluation and treatment as needed for hydrocephalus or other CNS abnormalities
in individuals showing signs of increased intracranial pressure, developmental
delay, loss of milestones, and/or seizures. Surveillance: Monitoring for evidence
of occipitofrontal circumference (OFC) increasing faster than normal.
GENETIC COUNSELING: GCPS either is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner
(either as a pathogenic variant in GLI3 or as a deletion of 7p13 involving GLI3) 
or occurs as the result of a de novo or inherited chromosome rearrangement.
Individuals with GCPS as the result of a GLI3 pathogenic variant may have an
affected parent or may have the disorder as the result of a de novo pathogenic
variant. The proportion of cases caused by de novo pathogenic variants is
unknown. Each child of an individual with a GLI3 pathogenic variant has a 50%
chance of inheriting the pathogenic variant. Prenatal testing for pregnancies at 
increased risk is possible if the underlying genetic cause in the family (i.e.,
deletion of 7p13, balanced chromosome rearrangement, or GLI3 pathogenic variant) 
has been identified. The reliability of ultrasound examination for prenatal
diagnosis is unknown.

PMID: 20301619  [PubMed]


332. Congenit Anom (Kyoto). 2010 Mar;50(1):29-39. doi:
10.1111/j.1741-4520.2009.00255.x.

Gender-dependent differences in the incidence of ochratoxin A-induced neural tube
defects in the Pdn/Pdn mouse.

Ueta E(1), Kodama M, Sumino Y, Kurome M, Ohta K, Katagiri R, Naruse I.

Author information: 
(1)Tottori University, Yonago, Japan.

Genetic polydactyly/arhinencephaly mouse embryo, Pdn/Pdn, exhibits suppression of
Gli3 gene expression. Ochratoxin A (OTA) is a teratogen that causes neural tube
defects (NTD) in mice. We investigated gender-dependent differences in the
incidence of NTD induced by OTA in the Pdn/Pdn mouse. After administering 2 mg/kg
OTA to Pdn/+ female mice, mated with Pdn/+ males, on day 7.5 of gestation, we
examined the genotypes, sex and NTD of fetuses on day 18. Non-treated Pdn/Pdn had
a 15.8% risk of NTD, and all NTD fetuses were female. When Pdn/Pdn embryos were
exposed to OTA, the incidence of NTD increased to 16 (51.6%) of 31 Pdn/Pdn
fetuses, and 10 (71.4%) of 14 male Pdn/Pdn fetuses exhibited NTD. From these
results, it was speculated that NTD in OTA-treated male Pdn/Pdn were due to the
synergistic effect between depressed Gli3 and altered sex-correlated gene
expression from OTA treatment. After treatment with OTA, the embryos were
recovered on day 9 and gene expressions, which were correlated with Gli3,
telencephalic morphogenesis, formation of gonadal anlage, and gender-dependent
differentiation were investigated. From real-time polymerase chain reaction
analysis results, it was suggested that the manifestation of NTD in the male
OTA-treated Pdn/Pdn might be due to the complicated altered gene expressions
among Gli3, Wnt7b, Wnt8b, Fez1, Barx1, Lim1, Dmrt1, Igf1, Fog2, Dax1 and Sox9,
and in particular, upregulation and gender-dependent difference in Barx1 and
gender-dependent difference in Sox9 gene expressions might be noteworthy
findings.

PMID: 20201966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Congenit Anom (Kyoto). 2010 Mar;50(1):1-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1741-4520.2009.00266.x.

Birth defects caused by mutations in human GLI3 and mouse Gli3 genes.

Naruse I(1), Ueta E, Sumino Y, Ogawa M, Ishikiriyama S.

Author information: 
(1)Tottori University, Yonago, Japan. inaruse@med.tottori-u.ac.jp

ABSTRACT GLI3 is the gene responsible for Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome
(GCPS), Pallister-Hall syndrome (PHS) and Postaxial polydactyly type-A (PAP-A).
Genetic polydactyly mice such as Pdn/Pdn (Polydactyly Nagoya), Xt(H)/Xt(H) (Extra
toes) and Xt(J)/Xt(J) (Extra toes Jackson) are the mouse homolog of GCPS, and
Gli3(tmlUrtt)/Gli3(tmlUrt) is produced as the mouse homolog of PHS. In the
present review, relationships between mutation points of GLI3 and Gli3, and
resulting phenotypes in humans and mice are described. It has been confirmed that
mutation in the upstream or within the zinc finger domain of the GLI3 gene
induces GCPS; that in the post-zinc finger region including the protease cleavage
site induces PHS; and that in the downstream of the GLI3 gene induces PAP-A. A
mimicking phenomenon was observed in the mouse homolog. Therefore, human GLI3 and
mouse Gli3 genes have a common structure, and it is suggested here that mutations
in the same functional regions produce similar phenotypes in human and mice. The 
most important issue might be that GCPS and PHS exhibit an autosomal dominant
trait, but mouse homologs, such as Pdn/Pdn, Xt(H)/Xt(H), Xt(J)/Xt(J) and
Gli3(tmlUrt)/Gli3(tmlUrt), are autosomal recessive traits in the manifestation of
similar phenotypes to human diseases. It is discussed here how the reduced
amounts of the GLI3 protein, or truncated mutant GLI3 protein, disrupt
development of the limbs, head and face.

PMID: 20201963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Oncol Lett. 2010 Mar;1(2):319-325. Epub 2010 Mar 1.

Sonic Hedgehog pathway activity in prostate cancer.

Bragina O(1), Njunkova N, Sergejeva S, Järvekülg L, Kogerman P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Technomedicum, Tallinn
University of Technology, Tallinn, Estonia.

Abnormal activation of the Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway has been
demonstrated in a number of human tumors, including prostate cancer. The study
aimed to assess the activity of Shh pathway components (Shh, Gli1, Gli2 and
Gli3), as well as the proliferation markers FoxA1 and Notch1 during cancer
progression in the transgenic adenocarcinoma of the mouse prostate (TRAMP). We
evaluated changes in respective proteins by immunohistochemistry at three time
points (12, 17 and 21 weeks of age) in the tissue of TRAMP and C57Bl/6 mice.
Moreover, the expression of mRNA of these proteins was assessed. The present
study shows a significant age-dependent increase in the number of Shh, Gli1, Gli3
and FoxA1-positive prostate cells and a decrease in Gli2-positive cells in TRAMP.
The study also supports the hypothesis that the development of prostate cancer
and its metastasis is associated with activation of the Shh signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC3436354
PMID: 22966302  [PubMed]


335. Cancer Res. 2010 Mar 1;70(5):1981-8. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-2898. Epub
2010 Feb 23.

Activation of Hedgehog signaling by the environmental toxicant arsenic may
contribute to the etiology of arsenic-induced tumors.

Fei DL(1), Li H, Kozul CD, Black KE, Singh S, Gosse JA, DiRenzo J, Martin KA,
Wang B, Hamilton JW, Karagas MR, Robbins DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, 
New Hampshire, USA.

Exposure to the environmental toxicant arsenic, through both contaminated water
and food, contributes to significant health problems worldwide. In particular,
arsenic exposure is thought to function as a carcinogen for lung, skin, and
bladder cancer via mechanisms that remain largely unknown. More recently, the
Hedgehog signaling pathway has also been implicated in the progression and
maintenance of these same cancers. Based on these similarities, we tested the
hypothesis that arsenic may act in part through activating Hedgehog signaling.
Here, we show that arsenic is able to activate Hedgehog signaling in several
primary and established tissue culture cells as well as in vivo. Arsenic
activates Hedgehog signaling by decreasing the stability of the repressor form of
GLI3, one of the transcription factors that ultimately regulate Hedgehog
activity. We also show, using tumor samples from a cohort of bladder cancer
patients, that high levels of arsenic exposure are associated with high levels of
Hedgehog activity. Given the important role Hedgehog signaling plays in the
maintenance and progression of a variety of tumors, including bladder cancer,
these results suggest that arsenic exposure may in part promote cancer through
the activation of Hedgehog signaling. Thus, we provide an important insight into 
the etiology of arsenic-induced human carcinogenesis, which may be relevant to
millions of people exposed to high levels of arsenic worldwide.

PMCID: PMC2831120
PMID: 20179202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Apr;30(8):1910-22. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01089-09. Epub 2010 Feb
12.

Kinetics of hedgehog-dependent full-length Gli3 accumulation in primary cilia and
subsequent degradation.

Wen X(1), Lai CK, Evangelista M, Hongo JA, de Sauvage FJ, Scales SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genentech, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling in vertebrates depends on intraflagellar transport (IFT) 
within primary cilia. The Hh receptor Patched is found in cilia in the absence of
Hh and is replaced by the signal transducer Smoothened within an hour of Hh
stimulation. By generating antibodies capable of detecting endogenous pathway
transcription factors Gli2 and Gli3, we monitored their kinetics of accumulation 
in cilia upon Hh stimulation. Localization occurs within minutes of Hh addition, 
making it the fastest reported readout of pathway activity, which permits more
precise temporal and spatial localization of Hh signaling events. We show that
the species of Gli3 that accumulates at cilium tips is full-length and likely not
protein kinase A phosphorylated. We also confirmed that phosphorylation and
betaTrCP/Cul1 are required for endogenous Gli3 processing and that this is
inhibited by Hh. Surprisingly, however, Hh-dependent inhibition of processing
does not lead to accumulation of full-length Gli3, but instead renders it labile,
leading to its proteasomal degradation via the SPOP/Cul3 complex. In fact,
full-length Gli3 disappears with faster kinetics than the Gli3 repressor, the
latter not requiring SPOP/Cul3 or betaTrCP/Cul1. This may contribute to the
increased Gli3 activator/repressor ratios found in IFT mutants.

PMCID: PMC2849461
PMID: 20154143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Apr 15;19(8):1577-92. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq030. Epub 2010 Jan 
27.

A primary cilia-dependent etiology for midline facial disorders.

Brugmann SA(1), Allen NC, James AW, Mekonnen Z, Madan E, Helms JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery,
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Human faces exhibit enormous variation. When pathological conditions are
superimposed on normal variation, a nearly unbroken series of facial morphologies
is produced. When viewed in full, this spectrum ranges from cyclopia and
hypotelorism to hypertelorism and facial duplications. Decreased Hedgehog pathway
activity causes holoprosencephaly and hypotelorism. Here, we show that excessive 
Hedgehog activity, caused by truncating the primary cilia on cranial neural crest
cells, causes hypertelorism and frontonasal dysplasia (FND). Elimination of the
intraflagellar transport protein Kif3a leads to excessive Hedgehog responsiveness
in facial mesenchyme, which is accompanied by broader expression domains of Gli1,
Ptc and Shh, and reduced expression domains of Gli3. Furthermore, broader domains
of Gli1 expression correspond to areas of enhanced neural crest cell
proliferation in the facial prominences of Kif3a conditional knockouts. Avian
Talpid embryos that lack primary cilia exhibit similar molecular changes and
similar facial phenotypes. Collectively, these data support our hypothesis that a
severe narrowing of the facial midline and excessive expansion of the facial
midline are both attributable to disruptions in Hedgehog pathway activity. These 
data also raise the possibility that genes encoding ciliary proteins are
candidates for human conditions of hypertelorism and FNDs.

PMCID: PMC2846163
PMID: 20106874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Development. 2010 Feb;137(3):487-97. doi: 10.1242/dev.039800.

The transcription factor Foxg1 regulates the competence of telencephalic cells to
adopt subpallial fates in mice.

Manuel M(1), Martynoga B, Yu T, West JD, Mason JO, Price DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genes and Development Group, University of Edinburgh, Hugh Robson Building,
George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9XD, UK. martine.manuel@ed.ac.uk

Foxg1 is required for development of the ventral telencephalon in the embryonic
mammalian forebrain. Although one existing hypothesis suggests that failed
ventral telencephalic development in the absence of Foxg1 is due to reduced
production of the morphogens sonic hedgehog (Shh) and fibroblast growth factor 8 
(Fgf8), the possibility that telencephalic cells lacking Foxg1 are intrinsically 
incompetent to generate the ventral telencephalon has remained untested. We
examined the ability of Foxg1(-/-) telencephalic cells to respond to Shh and Fgf8
by examining the expression of genes whose activation requires Shh or Fgf8 in
vivo and by testing their responses to Shh and Fgf8 in culture. We found that
many elements of the Shh and Fgf8 signalling pathways continue to function in the
absence of Foxg1 but, nevertheless, we were unable to elicit normal responses of 
key ventral telencephalic marker genes in Foxg1(-/-) telencephalic tissue
following a range of in vivo and in vitro manipulations. We explored the
development of Foxg1(-/-) cells in Foxg1(-/-) Foxg1(+/+) chimeric embryos that
contained ventral telencephalon created by normally patterned wild-type cells. We
found that Foxg1(-/-) cells contributed to the chimeric ventral telencephalon,
but that they retained abnormal specification, expressing dorsal rather than
ventral telencephalic markers. These findings indicate that, in addition to
regulating the production of ventralising signals, Foxg1 acts cell-autonomously
in the telencephalon to ensure that cells develop the competence to adopt ventral
identities.

PMCID: PMC2858907
PMID: 20081193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Dev Biol. 2010 Mar 15;339(2):418-28. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.01.003. Epub 2010 
Jan 11.

PCP effector gene Inturned is an important regulator of cilia formation and
embryonic development in mammals.

Zeng H(1), Hoover AN, Liu A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Eberly College of Science, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, PA 16802, USA.

The PCP effector gene Inturned regulates planar cell polarity (PCP) and wing hair
formation in Drosophila wings. In order to understand the roles for Inturned in
mammalian embryonic development, we generated a null mutant allele for the mouse 
homologue of Inturned (Intu) via gene-targeting in ES cells. Mouse Intu null
mutants are homozygous lethal at midgestation, exhibiting multiple defects
including neural tube closure defects, abnormal dorsal/ventral patterning of the 
central nervous system and abnormal anterior-posterior patterning of the limbs
resulting in severe polydactyly (7-9 digits each limb). The developmental
processes affected by the Intu mutation are under the control of Hh signaling
through Gli-family transcription factors. We found that in Intu mutant embryos
the expression of Gli1 and Ptch1, two direct transcriptional targets of Hh
signaling, is down-regulated, and the proteolytic processing of Gli3 is
compromised. We further demonstrate that Intu plays significant roles in the
formation of primary cilia both during embryonic development and in cultured
fibroblasts. Finally, a cytoplasmic GFP-Intu fusion protein efficiently rescues
the ciliogenic defects in Intu mutant cells. In conclusion, we show that PCP
effector gene Intu is an important regulator of cilia formation, Hh signal
transduction, and embryonic development in mammals.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20067783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Yi Chuan. 2009 Dec;31(12):1214-20.

[The functions of GLI3 and EN1 genes in idiopathic congenital talipes
equinovarus].

[Article in Chinese]

Cao DH(1), Wang Q, Lin CK, Wang ZD, Zhang X, Jin CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, China Medical University, Shenyang 110001,
China. dhcao427@sina.com

To investigate the role of gene Gli3 in idiopathic congenital talipes equinovarus
(ICTEV), we constructed the Gli3 luciferase reporter gene expression vectors to
analyze the promoter activity of the rat gene Gli3. The regulatory element in the
promoter region of the rat Gli3 was predicted using P-Match software and further 
verified by ChIP experiment. Meanwhile, the correlation between the rat En1 and
ICTEV was evaluated by RT-PCR, immunohistochemistry, and Western blotting
analyses. The result from P-Match software prediction showed that only one of the
three possible En1 binding sites in Gli3 promoter region was interacted directly 
with En1 in vivo, which was confirmed by ChIP analysis. The results from RT-PCR, 
immunohistochemistry and Western blotting analyses suggested that En1 was
down-regulated in ICTEV model rats compared to the controls. Our results
indicated that En1 might be the negative regulatory element in the upstream of
Gli3. The low expression level of EN1 in ICTEV could contribute to the
up-regulation of GLI3, which led to the genesis of ICTEV.

PMID: 20042388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Development. 2010 Jan;137(2):293-302. doi: 10.1242/dev.041178.

Role of Fgf8 signalling in the specification of rostral Cajal-Retzius cells.

Zimmer C(1), Lee J, Griveau A, Arber S, Pierani A, Garel S, Guillemot F.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Medical Research (NIMR), Medical Research Council
(MRC), Department of Molecular Neurobiology, London NW7 1AA, UK.
zimmer@ibdml.univ-mrs.fr

Cajal-Retzius (CR) cells play a key role in the formation of the cerebral cortex.
These pioneer neurons are distributed throughout the cortical marginal zone in
distinct graded distributions. Fate mapping and cell lineage tracing studies have
recently shown that CR cells arise from restricted domains of the pallial
ventricular zone, which are associated with signalling centres involved in the
early regionalisation of the telencephalic vesicles. In this study, we identified
a subpopulation of CR cells in the rostral telencephalon that expresses Er81, a
downstream target of Fgf8 signalling. We investigated the role of the rostral
telencephalic patterning centre, which secretes FGF molecules, in the
specification of these cells. Using pharmacological inhibitors and genetic
inactivation of Fgf8, we showed that production of Fgf8 by the rostral
telencephalic signalling centre is required for the specification of the Er81+ CR
cell population. Moreover, the analysis of Fgf8 gain-of-function in cultivated
mouse embryos and of Emx2 and Gli3 mutant embryos revealed that ectopic Fgf8
signalling promotes the generation of CR cells with a rostral phenotype from the 
dorsal pallium. These data showed that Fgf8 signalling is both required and
sufficient to induce rostral CR cells. Together, our results shed light on the
mechanisms specifying rostral CR cells and further emphasise the crucial role of 
telencephalic signalling centres in the generation of distinct CR cell
populations.

PMCID: PMC2799162
PMID: 20040495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2010 Oct;42(10):1651-60. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2009.12.001. Epub 2009 Dec 18.

Proteomics identifies multipotent and low oncogenic risk stem cells of the
spleen.

Dieguez-Acuña F(1), Kodama S, Okubo Y, Paz AC, Gygi SP, Faustman DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The adult spleen harbors a population of naturally occurring multipotent stem
cells of non-lymphoid lineage (CD45-). In animal models, these splenic stem cells
can directly or indirectly contribute to regeneration of bone, inner ear, cranial
nerves, islets, hearts and salivary glands. Here we characterize the CD45- stem
cell proteome to determine its potential broader multipotency versus its
protection from malignant transformation. Using state-of-the-art proteomics and
in vivo testing, we performed functional analyses of unique proteins of CD45-
(non-lymphoid) splenic stem cells, as compared with CD45+ (lymphoid) cells. CD45-
stem cell-specific proteins were identical to those in iPS, including OCT3/4,
SOX2, KLF4, c-MYC and NANOG. They also expressed Hox11, Gli3, Wnt2, and Adam12,
the benchmark transcription factors of embryonic stem cells. These transcription 
factors were functional because their mRNA was upregulated in the spleen in
association with ongoing damage to the pancreas and salivary glands, organs to
which they normally contribute stem cells. We also show low likelihood of
malignant transformation. Our proteomic and functional analyses reveals that
naturally occurring CD45- stem cells of the spleen are the first-ever candidates 
for naturally occurring population of embryonic and iPS cells with low oncogenic 
risk. Given their presence in normal humans and mice, splenic stem cells are
poised for translational research.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2891339
PMID: 20005973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. J Biol Chem. 2010 Feb 5;285(6):4185-94. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.038232. Epub 2009
Dec 7.

Identification of a suppressive mechanism for Hedgehog signaling through a novel 
interaction of Gli with 14-3-3.

Asaoka Y(1), Kanai F, Ichimura T, Tateishi K, Tanaka Y, Ohta M, Seto M, Tada M,
Ijichi H, Ikenoue T, Kawabe T, Isobe T, Yaffe MB, Omata M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

Gli transcription factors are central effectors of Hedgehog signaling in
development and tumorigenesis. Using a tandem affinity purification (TAP)
strategy and mass spectrometry, we have found that Gli1 interacts with
14-3-3epsilon, and that Gli2 and Gli3 also bind to 14-3-3epsilon through
homologous sites. This interaction depends on their phosphorylation, and
cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA), a known negative regulator of Hedgehog
signaling serves as a responsible kinase. A Gli2 mutant engineered to eliminate
this interaction exhibited increased transcriptional activity (2 approximately
3x). Transcriptional repression by 14-3-3 binding was also observed with Gli3,
when its N-terminal repressor domain was deleted. The phosphorylation sites
responsible for the binding to 14-3-3 are distinct from those required for
proteolysis, the known mechanism for PKA-induced repression of Hh signaling. Our 
data propose a novel mechanism in which PKA down-regulates Hedgehog signaling by 
promoting the interaction between Gli and 14-3-3 as well as proteolysis. Given
the certain neuronal or malignant disorders in human caused by the abnormality of
17p13 encompassing 14-3-3epsilon overlap with increased Hh signaling, the
Gli-14-3-3 interaction may have pathological significance for those human
diseases.

PMCID: PMC2823557
PMID: 19996099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Ultrasound Med. 2009 Dec;28(12):1735-42.

Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome: diagnosis based on prenatal sonographic
features coupled with comparative genomic hybridization.

Timor-Tritsch IE(1), Kapp S, Berg R, Bejjani BA, Adams SA, Monteagudo A, Divon M,
Pappas JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, New York University School of
Medicine, 550 First Ave, NBV-9N26, New York, NY 10016, USA. Ilan.timor@nyumc.org

PMID: 19933491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2009 Nov 19;10:142. doi: 10.1186/1471-2474-10-142.

The expression of Gli3, regulated by HOXD13, may play a role in idiopathic
congenital talipes equinovarus.

Cao D(1), Jin C, Ren M, Lin C, Zhang X, Zhao N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, China Medical University, Shenyang 110001, PR 
China.

BACKGROUND: Idiopathic congenital talipes equinovarus (ICTEV) is a congenital
limb deformity. Based on extended transmission disequilibrium testing,
Gli-Kruppel family member 3 (Gli3) has been identified as a candidate gene for
ICTEV. Here, we verify the role of Gli3 in ICTEV development.
METHODS: Using the rat ICTEV model, we analyzed the differences in Gli3
expression levels between model rats and normal control rats. We used luciferase 
reporter gene assays and ChIP/EMSA assays to analyze the regulatory elements of
Gli3.
RESULTS: Gli3 showed higher expression levels in ICTEV model rats compared to
controls (P < 0.05). We identified repressor and activator regions in the rat
Gli3 promoter. The Gli3 promoter also contains two putative Hoxd13 binding sites.
Using EMSA, the Hoxd13 binding site 2 was found to directly interact with Hoxd13 
in vitro. ChIP assays of the Hoxd13-Gli3 promoter complex from a developing limb 
confirmed that endogenous Hoxd13 interacts with this region in vivo.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that HoxD13 directly interacts with the promoter
of Gli3. The increase of Gli3 expression in ICTEV model animal might result from 
the low expression of HoxD13.

PMCID: PMC2784749
PMID: 19925654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Development. 2009 Dec;136(23):4055-63. doi: 10.1242/dev.036624.

Coordination of sonic hedgehog and Wnt signaling determines ventral and dorsal
telencephalic neuron types from human embryonic stem cells.

Li XJ(1), Zhang X, Johnson MA, Wang ZB, Lavaute T, Zhang SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Stem Cell Institute, University of Connecticut
Health Center, Farmington, CT 06030, USA. xjli@uchc.edu

The directed differentiation of forebrain neuronal types from human embryonic
stem cells (hESCs) has not been achieved. Here, we show that hESCs differentiate 
to telencephalic progenitors with a predominantly dorsal identity in a chemically
defined medium without known morphogens. This is attributed to endogenous Wnt
signaling, which upregulates the truncated form of GLI3, a repressor of sonic
hedgehog (SHH). A high concentration of SHH, or the inhibition of Wnt by dickkopf
1 (DKK1) together with a low concentration of SHH, almost completely converts the
primitive dorsal precursors to ventral progenitors, which is partially achieved
through both downregulation of the truncated GLI3 and upregulation of full-length
GLI3 expression. These dorsal and ventral telencephalic progenitors differentiate
to functional glutamatergic and GABAergic neurons, respectively. Thus, although
hESCs generate dorsal telencephalic cells, as opposed to ventral progenitors in
other vertebrates, in the absence of exogenous morphogens, human cells use a
similar molecular mechanism to control the dorsal versus ventral fate. The
coordination of Wnt and SHH signaling through GLI3 represents a novel mechanism
that regulates ventral-dorsal patterning in the development of forebrain neuronal
subtypes.

PMCID: PMC2778748
PMID: 19906872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Development. 2009 Dec;136(24):4177-85. doi: 10.1242/dev.041624. Epub 2009 Nov 11.

The Gli2 transcriptional activator is a crucial effector for Ihh signaling in
osteoblast development and cartilage vascularization.

Joeng KS(1), Long F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO
63110, USA.

Indian hedgehog (Ihh) critically regulates multiple aspects of endochondral bone 
development. Although it is generally believed that all Ihh functions are
mediated by the Gli family of transcription activators and repressors, formal
genetic proof for this notion has not been provided. Moreover, the extent to
which different Gli proteins contribute to Ihh functions is not fully understood.
Previous work has shown that de-repression of the Gli3 repressor is the
predominant mode through which Ihh controls chondrocyte proliferation and
maturation, but that osteoblast differentiation and hypertrophic cartilage
vascularization require additional mechanisms. To test the involvement of Gli2
activation in these processes, we have generated a mouse strain that expresses a 
constitutive Gli2 activator in a Cre-dependent manner, and have attempted to
rescue the Ihh-null mouse with the Gli2 activator, either alone or in combination
with Gli3 removal. Here, we report that the Gli2 activator alone is sufficient to
induce vascularization of the hypertrophic cartilage in the absence of Ihh but
requires simultaneous removal of Gli3 to restore osteoblast differentiation.
These results therefore provide direct genetic evidence that Gli2 and Gli3
collectively mediate all major aspects of Ihh function during endochondral
skeletal development.

PMCID: PMC2781053
PMID: 19906844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Curr Eye Res. 2009 Aug;34(8):623-35.

Sonic hedgehog expression and its role in form-deprivation myopia in mice.

Qian YS(1), Chu RY, Hu M, Hoffman MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Eye, Ear, Nose, Throat Hospital, Fudan
University, Shanghai Medical College, Shanghai.

PURPOSE: To investigate whether sonic hedgehog (Shh) plays a role in postnatal
eye development and the development of experimentally induced myopia.
METHODS: Expression of Shh, Patched-1 (Ptc-1), and Gli3 was evaluated in the eyes
of 13- to 14-day-old C57B/L6 mice with form-deprivation myopia (FDM) (n = 100)
and controls (n = 100) using real-time PCR and Western blot analysis. In a second
experiment, 336 mice were divided into two groups: the first wore a unilateral
translucent diffuser to induce myopia and the second served as a control. Both
groups received four intravitreal injections of either Shh-N (Sonic hedgehog
amino-terminal peptide) or cyclopamine (a specific inhibitor of the Shh pathway) 
every other day. Retinoscopic refraction and axial length measurements were
performed on the 11th day of form deprivation. Sections of the eyes were observed
using a light microscope.
RESULTS: Inducing myopia caused a significant increase in expression of Shh mRNA 
(7 days: t = 6.09, p = 0.004; 14 days: t = 3.48, p = 0.025) and protein (7 days: 
t = 4.06, p = 0.015; 14 days: t = 4.25, p = 0.013). Expression of both Gli3 mRNA 
(t = 7.61, p = 0.002) and protein (t = 2.89, p = 0.045) increased after 7 days of
occlusion. Administration of Shh-N stimulated the development of myopia and axial
growth in both occluded (refraction: F = 7.49, p = 0.001; axial length: F = 9.89,
p < 0.001) and non-occluded eyes (refraction: F = 14.20, p < 0.001; axial length:
F = 20.37, p < 0.001). Cyclopamine reduced myopic refractive error and axial
elongation in occluded eyes (refraction: F = 27.91, p < 0.001; axial length: F = 
15.18, p < 0.001). It also influenced non-occluded eyes, reducing axial growth
and shifting the refraction toward hyperopia (refraction: F = 14.81, p < 0.001;
axial length: F = 3.99, p = 0.024). No difference in retinal thickness was found 
between experimental and control eyes.
CONCLUSIONS: The Shh signaling pathway may influence both form-deprivation myopia
and the postnatal growth of eyes with normal visual input.

PMID: 19899989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Sci Signal. 2009 Nov 3;2(95):ra70. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2000602.

The Rfx4 transcription factor modulates Shh signaling by regional control of
ciliogenesis.

Ashique AM(1), Choe Y, Karlen M, May SR, Phamluong K, Solloway MJ, Ericson J,
Peterson AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Genentech, South San Francisco, CA 94080,
USA.

Regulatory factor X (Rfx) homologs regulate the transcription of genes necessary 
for ciliogenesis in invertebrates and vertebrates. Primary cilia are necessary
for Hedgehog signaling and regulation of the activity of the transcriptional
regulators known as Gli proteins, which are targets of Hedgehog signaling. Here, 
we describe an Rfx4(L298P) mouse mutant with distinct dorsoventral patterning
defects in the ventral spinal cord and telencephalon due to aberrant Sonic
hedgehog (Shh) signaling and Gli3 activity. We find that Ift172, which encodes an
intraflagellar transport protein necessary for ciliogenesis, is a direct
transcriptional target of Rfx4, and the decrease in its expression in the
developing telencephalon and spinal cord of Rfx4(L298P) mutants correlates with
defects in patterning and cilia formation. Our data indicate that Rfx4 is a
regionally specific transcriptional regulator of ciliogenesis and thus is also a 
regionally specific modulator of Shh signaling during development of the central 
nervous system.

PMID: 19887680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Dev Dyn. 2009 Dec;238(12):3035-42. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22130.

Planar cell polarity effector gene Fuzzy regulates cilia formation and Hedgehog
signal transduction in mouse.

Heydeck W(1), Zeng H, Liu A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Eberly College of Science, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, USA.

Precise planar cell polarity (PCP) is critical for the development of multiple
organ systems in animals. A group of core-PCP proteins are recognized to play
crucial roles in convergent extension and other PCP-related processes in mammals.
However, the functions of another group of PCP-regulating proteins, the
PCP-effector proteins, are yet to be fully studied. In this study, the generation
and characterization of a mouse mutant for the PCP effector gene Fuzzy (Fuz) is
reported. Fuz homozygous mutants are embryonically lethal, with multiple defects 
including neural tube defects, abnormal dorsal/ventral patterning of the spinal
cord, and defective anterior/posterior patterning of the limb buds. Fuz mutants
also exhibit abnormal Hedgehog (Hh) signaling and inefficient proteolytic
processing of Gli3. Finally, a significant decrease in cilia was found in Fuz
homozygous mutants. In conclusion, Fuz plays an important role in cilia
formation, Hh signal transduction, and embryonic development in mammals.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19877275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Dev Dyn. 2009 Dec;238(12):3175-84. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22126.

The metalloendopeptidase gene Pitrm1 is regulated by hedgehog signaling in the
developing mouse limb and is expressed in muscle progenitors.

Town L(1), McGlinn E, Fiorenza S, Metzis V, Butterfield NC, Richman JM, Wicking
C.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Queensland, Institute for Molecular Bioscience, Queensland, 
Australia.

Pitrm1 is a zinc metalloendopeptidase that has been implicated in Alzheimer's
disease and mitochondrial peptide degradation, but to date no major role in
embryonic development has been documented. In a screen for genes regulated by
hedgehog signaling in the mouse limb, we showed that expression of Pitrm1 is
upregulated in response to loss of the Gli3 transcription factor. Here we confirm
spatial changes in Pitrm1 expression in the Gli3 mutant mouse limb and examine
Pitrm1 expression in Shh null and Ptch1 conditional deletion mouse mutants. In
wild-type mice, Pitrm1 is expressed in a number of developing tissues known to be
patterned by Sonic hedgehog, including the limbs, face, cortex, hippocampus,
cerebellum, tectum, sub-mandibular gland, lung, genital tubercle, hair follicles,
and the enamel knot of the teeth. Additionally, Pitrm1 is expressed in
Pax3-expressing myoblast progenitors in the limb, the dermomyotome, and
developing muscles of the face and torso.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19877269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. BMC Bioinformatics. 2009 Oct 15;10 Suppl 12:S8. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-10-S12-S8.

Identification of functionally related genes using data mining and data
integration: a breast cancer case study.

Mosca E(1), Bertoli G, Piscitelli E, Vilardo L, Reinbold RA, Zucchi I, Milanesi
L.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Tecnologie Biomediche, Consiglio Nazionale Ricerche, Via Fratelli
Cervi 93, Segrate (MI), Italy. ettore.mosca@itb.cnr.it

BACKGROUND: The identification of the organisation and dynamics of molecular
pathways is crucial for the understanding of cell function. In order to
reconstruct the molecular pathways in which a gene of interest is involved in
regulating a cell, it is important to identify the set of genes to which it
interacts with to determine cell function. In this context, the mining and the
integration of a large amount of publicly available data, regarding the
transcriptome and the proteome states of a cell, are a useful resource to
complement biological research.
RESULTS: We describe an approach for the identification of genes that interact
with each other to regulate cell function. The strategy relies on the analysis of
gene expression profile similarity, considering large datasets of expression
data. During the similarity evaluation, the methodology determines the most
significant subset of samples in which the evaluated genes are highly correlated.
Hence, the strategy enables the exclusion of samples that are not relevant for
each gene pair analysed. This feature is important when considering a large set
of samples characterised by heterogeneous experimental conditions where different
pools of biological processes can be active across the samples. The putative
partners of the studied gene are then further characterised, analysing the
distribution of the Gene Ontology terms and integrating the protein-protein
interaction (PPI) data. The strategy was applied for the analysis of the
functional relationships of a gene of known function, Pyruvate Kinase, and for
the prediction of functional partners of the human transcription factor TBX3. In 
both cases the analysis was done on a dataset composed by breast primary tumour
expression data derived from the literature. Integration and analysis of PPI data
confirmed the prediction of the methodology, since the genes identified to be
functionally related were associated to proteins close in the PPI network. Two
genes among the predicted putative partners of TBX3 (GLI3 and GATA3) were
confirmed by in vivo binding assays (crosslinking immunoprecipitation, X-ChIP) in
which the putative DNA enhancer sequence sites of GATA3 and GLI3 were found to be
bound by the Tbx3 protein.
CONCLUSION: The presented strategy is demonstrated to be an effective approach to
identify genes that establish functional relationships. The methodology
identifies and characterises genes with a similar expression profile, through
data mining and integrating data from publicly available resources, to contribute
to a better understanding of gene regulation and cell function. The prediction of
the TBX3 target genes GLI3 and GATA3 was experimentally confirmed.

PMCID: PMC2762073
PMID: 19828084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. PLoS One. 2009 Oct 16;4(10):e7491. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007491.

Enteric neural crest differentiation in ganglioneuromas implicates Hedgehog
signaling in peripheral neuroblastic tumor pathogenesis.

Gershon TR(1), Shiraz A, Qin LX, Gerald WL, Kenney AM, Cheung NK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
New York, United States of America. gershont@neurology.unc.edu

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014 Jul 25;9(7):e103881. Shirazi, Arash [corrected to Shiraz, Ashton].

Peripheral neuroblastic tumors (PNTs) share a common origin in the sympathetic
nervous system, but manifest variable differentiation and growth potential.
Malignant neuroblastoma (NB) and benign ganglioneuroma (GN) stand at opposite
ends of the clinical spectrum. We hypothesize that a common PNT progenitor is
driven to variable differentiation by specific developmental signaling pathways. 
To elucidate developmental pathways that direct PNTs along the differentiation
spectrum, we compared the expression of genes related to neural crest development
in GN and NB. In GNs, we found relatively low expression of sympathetic markers
including adrenergic biosynthesis enzymes, indicating divergence from sympathetic
fate. In contrast, GNs expressed relatively high levels of enteric neuropeptides 
and key constituents of the Hedgehog (HH) signaling pathway, including Dhh, Gli1 
and Gli3. Predicted HH targets were also differentially expressed in GN,
consistent with transcriptional response to HH signaling. These findings indicate
that HH signaling is specifically active in GN. Together with the known role of
HH activity in enteric neural development, these findings further suggested a
role for HH activity in directing PNTs away from the sympathetic lineage toward a
benign GN phenotype resembling enteric ganglia. We tested the potential for HH
signaling to advance differentiation in PNTs by transducing NB cell lines with
Gli1 and determining phenotypic and transcriptional response. Gli1 inhibited
proliferation of NB cells, and induced a pattern of gene expression that
resembled the differential pattern of gene expression of GN, compared to NB
(p<0.00001). Moreover, the transcriptional response of SY5Y cells to Gli1
transduction closely resembled the transcriptional response to the
differentiation agent retinoic acid (p<0.00001). Notably, Gli1 did not induce
N-MYC expression in neuroblastoma cells, but strongly induced RET, a known
mediator of RA effect. The decrease in NB cell proliferation induced by Gli1, and
the similarity in the patterns of gene expression induced by Gli1 and by RA,
corroborated by closely matched gene sets in GN tumors, all support a model in
which HH signaling suppresses PNT growth by promoting differentiation along
alternative neural crest pathways.

PMCID: PMC2759000
PMID: 19834598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. PLoS One. 2009 Oct 15;4(10):e7471. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007471.

Point mutations in GLI3 lead to misregulation of its subcellular localization.

Krauss S(1), So J, Hambrock M, Köhler A, Kunath M, Scharff C, Wessling M,
Grzeschik KH, Schneider R, Schweiger S.

Author information: 
(1)Charité University Hospital, Department of Dermatology, Berlin, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in the transcription factor GLI3, a downstream target of
Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) signaling, are responsible for the development of
malformation syndromes such as Greig-cephalopolysyndactyly-syndrome (GCPS), or
Pallister-Hall-syndrome (PHS). Mutations that lead to loss of function of the
protein and to haploinsufficiency cause GCPS, while truncating mutations that
result in constitutive repressor function of GLI3 lead to PHS. As an exception,
some point mutations in the C-terminal part of GLI3 observed in GCPS patients
have so far not been linked to loss of function. We have shown recently that
protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) regulates the nuclear localization and
transcriptional activity a of GLI3 function.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We have shown recently that protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) and
the ubiquitin ligase MID1 regulate the nuclear localization and transcriptional
activity of GLI3. Here we show mapping of the functional interaction between the 
MID1-alpha4-PP2A complex and GLI3 to a region between amino acid 568-1100 of
GLI3. Furthermore we demonstrate that GCPS-associated point mutations, that are
located in that region, lead to misregulation of the nuclear GLI3-localization
and transcriptional activity. GLI3 phosphorylation itself however appears
independent of its localization and remains untouched by either of the point
mutations and by PP2A-activity, which suggests involvement of an as yet unknown
GLI3 interaction partner, the phosphorylation status of which is regulated by
PP2A activity, in the control of GLI3 subcellular localization and activity.
CONCLUSIONS: The present findings provide an explanation for the pathogenesis of 
GCPS in patients carrying C-terminal point mutations, and close the gap in our
understanding of how GLI3-genotypes give rise to particular phenotypes.
Furthermore, they provide a molecular explanation for the phenotypic overlap
between Opitz syndrome patients with dysregulated PP2A-activity and syndromes
caused by GLI3-mutations.

PMCID: PMC2758996
PMID: 19829694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Evol Bioinform Online. 2009 May 18;5:5-13.

Evolution and functional diversification of the GLI family of transcription
factors in vertebrates.

Abbasi AA(1), Goode DK, Amir S, Grzeschik KH.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Bioinformatics, Faculty of Biological Sciences,
Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad 45320, Pakistan. abbasiam@qau.edu.pk

BACKGROUND: In vertebrates the "SONIC HEDGEHOG" signalling pathway has been
implicated in cell-fate determination, proliferation and the patterning of many
different cell types and organs. As the GLI family members (GLI1, GLI2 and GLI3) 
are key mediators of hedgehog morphogenetic signals, over the past couple of
decades they have been extensively scrutinized by genetic, molecular and
biochemical means. Thus, a great deal of information is currently available about
the functional aspects of GLI proteins in various vertebrate species. To address 
the roles of GLI genes in diversifying the repertoire of the Hh signalling and
deploying them for the vertebrate specifications, in this study we have examined 
the evolutionary patterns of vertebrate GLI sequences within and between species.
RESULTS: Phylogenetic tree analysis suggests that the vertebrate GLI1, GLI2 and
GLI3 genes diverged after the separation of urochordates from vertebrates and
before the tetrapods-bony fishes split. Lineage specific duplication events were 
also detected. Estimation of mode and strength of selection acting on GLI
orthologs demonstrated that all members of the GLI gene family experienced more
relaxed selection in teleost fish than in the mammalian lineage. Furthermore, the
GLI1 gene appeared to have been exposed to different functional constraints in
fish and tetrapod lineages, whilst a similar level of functional constraints on
GLI2 and GLI3 was suggested by comparable average non-synonymous (Ka)
substitutions across the lineages. A relative rate test suggested that the
majority of the paralogous copies of the GLI family analyzed evolved with similar
evolutionary rates except GLI1 which evolved at a significantly faster rate than 
its paralogous counterparts in tetrapods.
CONCLUSIONS: Our analysis shows that sequence evolutionary patterns of GLI family
members are largely correlated with the reported similarities and differences in 
the functionality of GLI proteins within and between the various vertebrate
species. We propose that duplication and divergence of GLI genes has increased in
the complexity of vertebrate body plan by recruiting the hedgehog signalling for 
the novel developmental tasks.

PMCID: PMC2747127
PMID: 19812723  [PubMed]


356. PLoS One. 2009 Oct 7;4(10):e7313. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007313.

GLI3 repressor controls nephron number via regulation of Wnt11 and Ret in
ureteric tip cells.

Cain JE(1), Islam E, Haxho F, Chen L, Bridgewater D, Nieuwenhuis E, Hui CC,
Rosenblum ND.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, The Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto Medical Discovery Towers, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Truncating GLI3 mutations in Pallister-Hall Syndrome with renal malformation
suggests a requirement for Hedgehog signaling during renal development.
HH-dependent signaling increases levels of GLI transcriptional activators and
decreases processing of GLI3 to a shorter transcriptional repressor. Previously, 
we showed that Shh-deficiency interrupts early inductive events during renal
development in a manner dependent on GLI3 repressor. Here we identify a novel
function for GLI3 repressor in controlling nephron number. During renal
morphogenesis, HH signaling activity, assayed by expression of Ptc1-lacZ, is
localized to ureteric cells of the medulla, but is undetectable in the cortex.
Targeted inactivation of Smo, the HH effector, in the ureteric cell lineage
causes no detectable abnormality in renal morphogenesis. The functional
significance of absent HH signaling activity in cortical ureteric cells was
determined by targeted deletion of Ptc1, the SMO inhibitor, in the ureteric cell 
lineage. Ptc1(-/-UB) mice demonstrate ectopic Ptc1-lacZ expression in ureteric
branch tips and renal hypoplasia characterized by reduced kidney size and a
paucity of mature and intermediate nephrogenic structures. Ureteric tip cells are
remarkable for abnormal morphology and impaired expression of Ret and Wnt11,
markers of tip cell differentiation. A finding of renal hypoplasia in Gli3(-/-)
mice suggests a pathogenic role for reduced GLI3 repressor in the Ptc1(-/-UB)
mice. Indeed, constitutive expression of GLI3 repressor via the Gli3(Delta699)
allele in Ptc1(-/-UB) mice restores the normal pattern of HH signaling, and
expression of Ret and Wnt11 and rescued the renal phenotype. Thus, GLI3 repressor
controls nephron number by regulating ureteric tip cell expression of Wnt11 and
Ret.

PMCID: PMC2754339
PMID: 19809516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Development. 2009 Oct;136(20):3515-24. doi: 10.1242/dev.037507.

Patched 1 is a crucial determinant of asymmetry and digit number in the
vertebrate limb.

Butterfield NC(1), Metzis V, McGlinn E, Bruce SJ, Wainwright BJ, Wicking C.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Queensland, Institute for Molecular Bioscience, Queensland, 
Australia.

The vertebrate hedgehog receptor patched 1 (Ptc1) is crucial for negative
regulation of the sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway during anterior-posterior
patterning of the limb. We have conditionally inactivated Ptc1 in the mesenchyme 
of the mouse limb using Prx1-Cre. This results in constitutive activation of
hedgehog (Hh) signalling during the early stages of limb budding. Our data
suggest that variations in the timing and efficiency of Cre-mediated excision
result in differential forelimb and hindlimb phenotypes. Hindlimbs display
polydactyly (gain of digits) and a molecular profile similar to the Gli3 mutant
extra-toes. Strikingly, forelimbs are predominantly oligodactylous (displaying a 
loss of digits), with a symmetrical, mirror-image molecular profile that is
consistent with re-specification of the anterior forelimb to a posterior
identity. Our data suggest that this is related to very early inactivation of
Ptc1 in the forelimb perturbing the gene regulatory networks responsible for both
the pre-patterning and the subsequent patterning stages of limb development.
These results establish the importance of the downstream consequences of Hh
pathway repression, and identify Ptc1 as a key player in limb patterning even
prior to the onset of Shh expression.

PMID: 19783740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Development. 2009 Oct;136(20):3495-504. doi: 10.1242/dev.036087.

Sonic hedgehog-dependent synthesis of laminin alpha1 controls basement membrane
assembly in the myotome.

Anderson C(1), Thorsteinsdóttir S, Borycki AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK.

Basement membranes have essential structural and signalling roles in tissue
morphogenesis during embryonic development, but the mechanisms that control their
formation are still poorly understood. Laminins are key components of basement
membranes and are thought to be essential for initiation of basement membrane
assembly. Here, we report that muscle progenitor cells populating the myotome
migrate aberrantly in the ventral somite in the absence of sonic hedgehog (Shh)
signalling, and we show that this defect is due to the failure to form a myotomal
basement membrane. We reveal that expression of Lama1, which encodes laminin
alpha1, a subunit of laminin-111, is not activated in Shh(-/-) embryos. Recovery 
of Lama1 expression or addition of exogenous laminin-111 to Shh(-/-);Gli3(-/-)
embryos restores the myotomal basement membrane, demonstrating that laminin-111
is necessary and sufficient to initiate assembly of the myotomal basement
membrane. This study uncovers an essential role for Shh signalling in the control
of laminin-111 synthesis and in the initiation of basement membrane assembly in
the myotome. Furthermore, our data indicate that laminin-111 function cannot be
compensated by laminin-511.

PMCID: PMC2752398
PMID: 19783738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Dev Biol. 2009 Nov 1;335(1):166-78. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.08.023. Epub 2009
Sep 2.

Ttc21b is required to restrict sonic hedgehog activity in the developing mouse
forebrain.

Stottmann RW(1), Tran PV, Turbe-Doan A, Beier DR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Organizing centers in the developing brain provide an assortment of instructive
patterning cues, including Sonic hedgehog (Shh). Here we characterize the
forebrain phenotype caused by loss of Ttc21b, a gene we identified in an ENU
mutagenesis screen as a novel ciliary gene required for retrograde intraflagellar
transport. The Ttc21b mutant has defects in limb, eye and, most dramatically,
brain development. We show that Shh signaling is elevated in the rostral portion 
of the mutant embryo, including in a domain in or near the zona limitans
intrathalamica. We demonstrate here that ciliary defects seen in the Ttc21b
mutant extend to the embryonic brain, adding forebrain development to the
spectrum of tissues affected by defects in ciliary physiology. We show that
development of the Ttc21b brain phenotype is modified by lowering levels of the
Shh ligand, supporting our hypothesis that the abnormal patterning is a
consequence of elevated Shh signaling. Finally, we evaluate Wnt signaling but do 
not find evidence that this plays a role in causing the perturbed
neurodevelopmental phenotype we describe.

PMCID: PMC2778284
PMID: 19732765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Circ Res. 2009 Oct 9;105(8):818-26. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.109.206706. Epub 2009
Sep 3.

The Hedgehog transcription factor Gli3 modulates angiogenesis.

Renault MA(1), Roncalli J, Tongers J, Misener S, Thorne T, Jujo K, Ito A, Clarke 
T, Fung C, Millay M, Kamide C, Scarpelli A, Klyachko E, Losordo DW.

Author information: 
(1)Feinberg Cardiovascular Research Institute, Northwestern University School of 
Medicine, 303 E Chicago Ave., Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

RATIONALE: The Gli transcription factors are mediators of Hedgehog (Hh) signaling
and have been shown to play critical roles during embryogenesis. Previously, we
have demonstrated that the Hh pathway is reactivated by ischemia in adult
mammals, and that this pathway can be stimulated for therapeutic benefit;
however, the specific roles of the Gli transcription factors during
ischemia-induced Hh signaling have not been elucidated.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of Gli3 in ischemic tissue repair.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Gli3-haploinsufficient (Gli3(+/-)) mice and their wild-type 
littermates were physiologically similar in the absence of ischemia; however,
histological assessments of capillary density and echocardiographic measurements 
of left ventricular ejection fractions were reduced in Gli3(+/-) mice compared to
wild-type mice after surgically induced myocardial infarction, and fibrosis was
increased. Gli3-deficient mice also displayed reduced capillary density after
induction of hindlimb ischemia and an impaired angiogenic response to vascular
endothelial growth factor in the corneal angiogenesis model. In endothelial
cells, adenovirus-mediated overexpression of Gli3 promoted migration (modified
Boyden chamber), small interfering RNA-mediated downregulation of Gli3 delayed
tube formation (Matrigel), and Western analyses identified increases in Akt
phosphorylation, extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)1/2 activation, and
c-Fos expression; however, promoter-reporter assays indicated that Gli3
overexpression does not modulate Gli-dependent transcription. Furthermore, the
induction of endothelial cell migration by Gli3 was dependent on Akt and ERK1/2
activation.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, these observations indicate that Gli3 contributes to
vessel growth under both ischemic and nonischemic conditions and provide the
first evidence that Gli3 regulates angiogenesis and endothelial cell activity in 
adult mammals.

PMCID: PMC3175353
PMID: 19729595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Mech Dev. 2009 Oct;126(10):804-16. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2009.08.002. Epub 2009 Aug 
22.

The role of miR-124a in early development of the Xenopus eye.

Qiu R(1), Liu K, Liu Y, Mo W, Flynt AS, Patton JG, Kar A, Wu JY, He R.

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory of Brain and Cognitive Science, Institute of
Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chaoyang District, Beijing 100101,
China.

It has been reported that miR-124a is abundant in the central nervous system
including the eye, and is related to neurogenesis in several species. However,
the role of miR-124a in the eye remains unclear. In this study, we show that the 
expression of miR-124a in Xenopus laevis begins along the neural fold, including 
the protruding eye anlagen, at a low level at around stage 18; its expression
level gradually increases in the neural tube and the eye as embryos develop into 
later stages and then maintains at a high level in eye to adult stages.
Microinjection of a miR-124a precursor at the 8-cell stage leads to malformation 
of the optic nerve and optic cup, indicating the importance of maintaining low
levels of miR-124a during early embryonic development. In addition, miR-124a
overexpression markedly down regulates the expression of its predicted targets
Lhx2, Hairy2, Gli3, NeuroD1 and Otx2 in/around the eye anlagen, and the
interaction of miR-124a with the 3' UTR of Lhx2 represses gene expression as
shown by luciferase assays. Moreover, excess miR-124a inhibits cell proliferation
in the eye of Xenopus embryos during retinogenesis. These results indicate that
miR-124a acts as a post-transcriptional regulator in the genetic network
controlling eye morphogenesis and neurogenesis. The mechanism of miR-124a's early
interaction with the genetic network may also persist in its later role in the
maturing and adult eye and brain.

PMCID: PMC4445405
PMID: 19703558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Genes Dev. 2009 Aug 15;23(16):1910-28. doi: 10.1101/gad.1794109.

Cilium-independent regulation of Gli protein function by Sufu in Hedgehog
signaling is evolutionarily conserved.

Chen MH(1), Wilson CW, Li YJ, Law KK, Lu CS, Gacayan R, Zhang X, Hui CC, Chuang
PT.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California at San Francisco, 
San Francisco, California 94158, USA.

Comment in
    Genes Dev. 2009 Aug 15;23(16):1843-8.

A central question in Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is how evolutionarily conserved
components of the pathway might use the primary cilium in mammals but not fly. We
focus on Suppressor of fused (Sufu), a major Hh regulator in mammals, and reveal 
that Sufu controls protein levels of full-length Gli transcription factors, thus 
affecting the production of Gli activators and repressors essential for graded Hh
responses. Surprisingly, despite ciliary localization of most Hh pathway
components, regulation of Gli protein levels by Sufu is cilium-independent. We
propose that Sufu-dependent processes in Hh signaling are evolutionarily
conserved. Consistent with this, Sufu regulates Gli protein levels by
antagonizing the activity of Spop, a conserved Gli-degrading factor. Furthermore,
addition of zebrafish or fly Sufu restores Gli protein function in Sufu-deficient
mammalian cells. In contrast, fly Smo is unable to translocate to the primary
cilium and activate the mammalian Hh pathway. We also uncover a novel positive
role of Sufu in regulating Hh signaling, resulting from its control of both Gli
activator and repressor function. Taken together, these studies delineate
important aspects of cilium-dependent and cilium-independent Hh signal
transduction and provide significant mechanistic insight into Hh signaling in
diverse species.

PMCID: PMC2725943
PMID: 19684112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Genes Dev. 2009 Aug 15;23(16):1843-8. doi: 10.1101/gad.1838109.

Variations in Hedgehog signaling: divergence and perpetuation in Sufu regulation 
of Gli.

Ruel L(1), Thérond PP.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Biologie du Développement et Cancer-IBDC, Université de Nice-Sophia
Antipolis, CNRS UMR 6543, Centre de Biochimie, Nice Cedex 02, France.

Comment on
    Genes Dev. 2009 Aug 15;23(16):1910-28.

The Hedgehog (Hh) proteins play a universal role in metazoan development.
Nevertheless, fundamental differences exist between Drosophila and vertebrates in
the transduction of the Hh signal, notably regarding the role of primary cilia in
mammalian cells. In this issue of Genes & Development, Chen and colleagues (pp.
1910-1928) demonstrate that mouse Suppressor of fused (Sufu) regulates the
stability of the transcription factors Gli2 and Gli3 by antagonizing the
conserved Gli degradation device mediated by Hib/Spop in a cilia-independent
manner.

PMCID: PMC2725945
PMID: 19684109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Dev Dyn. 2010 Jan;239(1):69-76. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22058.

Wnt won the war: antagonistic role of Wnt over Shh controls dorso-ventral
patterning of the vertebrate neural tube.

Ulloa F(1), Martí E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Biomedicine, Parc Cientific de Barcelona; Centro de 
Investigación Biomédica en Red sobre Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), 
Department of Cell Biology, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

The spinal cord has been used as a model to dissect the mechanisms that govern
the patterning of tissues during animal development, since the principles that
rule the dorso-ventral patterning of the neural tube are applicable to other
systems. Signals that determine the dorso-ventral axis of the spinal cord include
Sonic hedgehog (Shh), acting as a bona fide morphogenetic signal to determine
ventral progenitor identities, and members of the Bmp and the Wnt families,
acting in the dorsal neural tube. Although Wnts have been initially recognized as
important in proliferation of neural progenitor cells, their role in the
dorso-ventral patterning has been controversial. In this review, we discuss
recent reports that show an important contribution of the Wnt canonical pathway
in dorso-ventral pattern formation. These data allow building a model by which
the ventralizing activity of Shh is antagonized by Wnt activity through the
expression of Gli3, a potent inhibitor of the Shh pathway. Therefore,
antagonistic interactions between canonical Wnt, promoting dorsal identities, and
Shh pathways, inducing ventral ones, would define the dorso-ventral patterning of
the developing central nervous system.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19681160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Immunol. 2009 Sep 1;183(5):3023-32. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0900152. Epub 2009
Aug 10.

The Gli3 transcription factor expressed in the thymus stroma controls thymocyte
negative selection via Hedgehog-dependent and -independent mechanisms.

Hager-Theodorides AL(1), Furmanski AL, Ross SE, Outram SV, Rowbotham NJ, Crompton
T.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Unit, University College London Institute of Child Health,
London, United Kingdom.

The Hedgehog (Hh) responsive transcription factor Gli3 is required for efficient 
thymocyte development in the fetus. In this study we show that Gli3, not detected
in adult thymocytes, is expressed in the murine fetal and adult thymus stroma.
PCR array analysis revealed Cxcl9, Rbp1, and Nos2 as novel target genes of Gli3. 
We show that Gli3 positively regulates the expression of these genes, most likely
by suppressing an intermediate repressor. Deletion of autoreactive thymocytes
depends on their interactions with the thymus stroma. Repression of the
proapoptotic gene Nos2 in Gli3 mutants coincides with reduced apoptosis of double
positive thymocytes undergoing negative selection in vitro and in vivo, and the
production of autoreactive thymocytes. Taken together these data indicate that
Gli3 controls thymocyte apoptosis and negative selection possibly via the
regulation of Nos2. Defective Gli3 expression in the thymus stroma also resulted 
in decreased CD5 expression on mature thymocytes and inappropriate production of 
MHC class I-selected CD4(+) cells, both consistent with reduced TCR signal
strength. Overall our data indicate that Gli3 expressed in the thymus stroma
regulates negative selection and TCR signal strength via Hh-dependent and
-independent mechanisms, with implications for autoimmunity.

PMID: 19667090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Head Neck. 2010 Mar;32(3):333-40. doi: 10.1002/hed.21191.

Expression of hedgehog signaling molecules in Merkel cell carcinoma.

Brunner M(1), Thurnher D, Pammer J, Heiduschka G, Petzelbauer P, Schmid C,
Schneider S, Erovic BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Medical University of
Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

BACKGROUND: The Hedgehog signaling pathway is important for human development and
carcinogenesis in various malignancies.
METHODS: One tissue microarray with triplets of 28 samples from 25 patients with 
Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) was constructed. Six samples of normal skin and 5
samples of normal oral mucosa served as controls. All samples were analyzed
immunohistochemically with antibodies directed against Sonic hedgehog, Indian
hedgehog, Patched, Smoothened, Gli-1, Gli-2, and Gli-3.
RESULTS: All investigated proteins were frequently and intensely overexpressed in
MCCs (Sonic hedgehog, 93%; Indian hedgehog, 84%; Patched, 86%; Smoothened, 79%;
Gli-1, 79%; Gli-2, 79%; Gli-3, 86%) compared with control samples. High levels of
Patched and Indian hedgehog were significantly associated with an increase in
patients overall (p = .015) and recurrence-free survival (p = .011),
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that the Hedgehog signaling pathway is strongly
activated in MCC and thus may play a role in carcinogenesis.

PMID: 19644931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Dev Biol. 2009 Oct 1;334(1):264-75. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.07.026. Epub 2009
Jul 24.

Patterning of ventral telencephalon requires positive function of Gli
transcription factors.

Yu W(1), Wang Y, McDonnell K, Stephen D, Bai CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine,
Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

The ability of neuroepithelial cells to generate a diverse array of neurons is
influenced by locally secreted signals. In the spinal cord, Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) 
is known to induce distinct cell fates in a concentration-dependent manner by
regulating the activities of the three Gli transcription factors in neural
precursors. However, whether Gli-mediated Shh signaling is also required to
induce different cell types in the ventral telencephalon has been controversial. 
In particular, loss of Shh has little effect on dorsoventral patterning of the
telencephalon when Gli3 is also removed. Furthermore, no ventral telencephalic
phenotypes have been found in individual Gli mutants. To address this issue, we
first characterized Shh-responding ventral telencephalic progenitors between E9.5
and E12.5 and found that they produce neurons migrating to different layers of
the cortex. We also discovered a loss of Nkx2.1 and Nkx6.2 expression in two
subgroups of progenitors in embryos lacking major Gli activators. Finally, we
analyzed the telencephalic phenotypes of embryos lacking all Gli genes and found 
that the ventral telencephalon was highly disorganized with intermingling of
distinct neuronal cell types. Together, these studies unravel a role for Gli
transcription factors in mediating Shh signaling to control specification,
differentiation and positioning of ventral telencephalic neurons.

PMID: 19632216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Sep 25;387(3):569-74. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.07.087. Epub 2009 Jul 19.

Sufu recruits GSK3beta for efficient processing of Gli3.

Kise Y(1), Morinaka A, Teglund S, Miki H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Intracellular Signaling, Institute for Protein Research, Osaka
University, 3-2 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling activates the transcription factor Gli by suppressing the
function of the suppressor of fused (Sufu) protein in mammals. Here, a novel role
of mammalian Sufu is identified where it mediates the phosphorylation of Gli3 by 
GSK3beta, essential for Gli3 processing to generate a transcriptional repressor
for Hh-target genes. Studies using Sufu(-/-) mouse embryonic fibroblasts and
siRNA targeting Sufu demonstrate the requirement of Sufu for Gli3 processing. In 
addition, Sufu can bind to GSK3beta as well as Gli3, and mediates formation of
the trimolecular complex Gli3/Sufu/GSK3beta. Thus, Sufu stimulates Gli3
phosphorylation by GSK3beta and Gli3 processing. Furthermore, Sonic Hh
stimulation dissociates the Sufu/GSK3beta complex from Gli3, resulting in the
blockade of Gli3 processing. Collectively, Sufu presumably functions as a
GSK3beta recruiter for Hh-dependent regulation of Gli3 processing. Such a
function is very similar to that of Costal2 in Drosophila, suggesting a
functional complementation through evolution.

PMID: 19622347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Mod Pathol. 2009 Oct;22(10):1312-20. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2009.98. Epub 2009
Jul 10.

Sonic hedgehog signaling proteins and ATP-binding cassette G2 are aberrantly
expressed in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Kim JE(1), Singh RR, Cho-Vega JH, Drakos E, Davuluri Y, Khokhar FA, Fayad L,
Medeiros LJ, Vega F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Dysregulation of the sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway has been shown in
several cancer types, but has not been explored in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.
We assessed 67 cases of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma for expression of SHH
(ligand), GLI1, GLI2 and GLI3 (transcriptional effectors of SHH signaling), and
the ATP-binding cassette (ABC)G2 (a downstream target of SHH signaling), using
immunohistochemistry. For comparison, we assessed the expression levels of these 
proteins in 28 cases of follicular lymphoma, 5 chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small
lymphocytic lymphoma, and 5 reactive lymph nodes. In diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma, SHH was expressed in 61 of 67 (91%) cases, GLI1 in 62 of 67 (93%), GLI2
in 41 of 56 (73%), and GLI3 in 22 of 56 (39%). Expression of ABCG2 was detected
in 52 of 55 (95%) cases and was high in 15 (27%) cases. SHH expression positively
correlated with expression levels of ABCG2 (P=0.05). Patients with diffuse large 
B-cell lymphoma with high ABCG2 expression showed significantly shorter overall
survival (P=0.031) and failure-free survival (P=0.029) compared with patients
with tumors with low or no expression of ABCG2. Diffuse large B-cell lymphomas
expressed SHH, and GLI1, GLI2, and GLI3 more frequently and more intensely than
cases of follicular lymphoma or chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic
lymphoma. In conclusion, our data show that SHH signaling proteins and ABCG2 are 
aberrantly expressed in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and that ABCG2 expression
has prognostic implications. These findings also provide evidence that
dysregulation of the SHH pathway may be involved in the pathogenesis of diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma.

PMID: 19593328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Curr Biol. 2009 Aug 11;19(15):1320-6. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2009.06.046. Epub 2009
Jul 9.

The mammalian Cos2 homolog Kif7 plays an essential role in modulating Hh signal
transduction during development.

Endoh-Yamagami S(1), Evangelista M, Wilson D, Wen X, Theunissen JW, Phamluong K, 
Davis M, Scales SJ, Solloway MJ, de Sauvage FJ, Peterson AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Genentech, Inc., 1 DNA Way, South San
Francisco, CA 94080, USA.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2009 Sep 15;19(17):R729-31.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway regulates development in animals ranging from
flies to humans. Although its framework is conserved, differences in pathway
components have been reported. A kinesin-like protein, Costal2 (Cos2), plays a
central role in the Hh pathway in flies. Knockdown of a zebrafish homolog of
Cos2, Kif7, results in ectopic Hh signaling, suggesting that Kif7 acts primarily 
as a negative regulator of Hh signal transduction. However, in vitro analysis of 
the function of mammalian Kif7 and the closely related Kif27 has led to the
conclusion that neither protein has a role in Hh signaling. Using Kif7 knockout
mice, we demonstrate that mouse Kif7, like its zebrafish and Drosophila homologs,
plays a role in transducing the Hh signal. We show that Kif7 accumulates at the
distal tip of the primary cilia in a Hh-dependent manner. We also demonstrate a
requirement for Kif7 in the efficient localization of Gli3 to cilia in response
to Hh and for the processing of Gli3 to its repressor form. These results suggest
a role for Kif7 in coordinating Hh signal transduction at the tip of cilia and
preventing Gli3 cleavage into a repressor form in the presence of Hh.

PMID: 19592253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2010 May;42(5):615-25. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2008-0390OC. 
Epub 2009 Jul 2.

Gli2 influences proliferation in the developing lung through regulation of cyclin
expression.

Rutter M(1), Wang J, Huang Z, Kuliszewski M, Post M.

Author information: 
(1)Physiology and Experimental Medicine Program, Hospital for Sick Children
Research Institute, Toronto, Ontario, M5G 1X8 Canada.

The sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway is crucial for normal lung
development. In the lung, epithelial-produced Shh signals via mesenchymal Gli1-3 
transcription factors. Gli-null lung phenotypes suggest that Gli2 is the primary 
Gli transcription factor transducing Shh-regulated lung growth, although the
mechanism has yet to be elucidated. To clarify the role of Gli2 during lung
development, we overexpressed gli2 in the lung mesenchyme of mice, to investigate
for changes in Shh signaling, and cellular proliferation. The ectopic
overexpression of gli2 resulted in increased Shh pathway activation as evident by
increased expression of shh, ptc1, ptc2, smo, hhip, and gli1. Interestingly, we
also observed increased expression of gli3 transcripts. Using two different mouse
models, gli3-null and gli3Delta699 (Gli3 constitutive repressor), it was found
that Gli3 activity does not affect the levels of gli2 in the developing lung.
Real-time PCR and immunoblotting revealed that there is increased expression of
cyclins D1, D2, and E1 associated with increased gli2 levels. Furthermore, the
increase and decrease of cyclins (associated with changes in gli2 levels)
positively correlated with cellular proliferation, as assessed by phospho-histone
H3 immunohistochemistry. To determine if Gli3 has an effect on cyclin expression 
in the developing lung, we measured the levels of cyclin D1, D2, and E1, in
gli3-null and gli3Delta699 mice and compared them to their wild-type
counterparts. However, no change in the levels of cyclins D1, D2, or E1 due to
altered Gli3 was observed. These findings suggest that Gli2 and not Gli3 is the
primary mediator of Shh signaling influencing fetal lung growth through cyclin
regulation.

PMID: 19574535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Genesis. 2009 Sep;47(9):628-37. doi: 10.1002/dvg.20532.

Targeted disruption of Sonic Hedgehog in the mouse adrenal leads to
adrenocortical hypoplasia.

Ching S(1), Vilain E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of California, Los Angeles,
California, USA.

Development of the mammalian adrenal gland is regulated by a diverse network of
growth and transcription factors. Disruptions in these pathways often result in
adrenal insufficiency because of adrenal hypoplasia. Several lines of evidence
have suggested that the Hedgehog signaling pathway, which controls many aspects
of tissue and organ patterning, may play a direct role in adrenal morphogenesis
as well. Therefore, we examined the role of Sonic Hedgehog (Shh), a member of the
Hedgehog family, in mouse adrenal development. We show that Shh and its
downstream effectors Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3 are expressed in the adrenal cortex
throughout development, and that Shh is required for normal adrenal
organogenesis. Conditional inactivation of Shh in the adrenal cortex using a
Cre-loxP system resulted in severe hypoplasia and disorganization of the cortex. 
In mice carrying the targeted mutation (Shh(fl/fl;SF-1/Cre+)), adrenal mass was
significantly reduced and the cortex failed to encapsulate the adrenal medulla.
Taken together, these results establish a direct role for Shh signaling in normal
adrenal development.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19536807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Dev Biol. 2009 Aug 15;332(2):429-43. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.05.579. Epub 2009 
Jun 6.

BMP7 and SHH regulate Pax2 in mouse retinal astrocytes by relieving TLX
repression.

Sehgal R(1), Sheibani N, Rhodes SJ, Belecky Adams TL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis,
Indianapolis, IN-46202, USA.

Pax2 is essential for development of the neural tube, urogenital system, optic
vesicle, optic cup and optic tract. In the eye, Pax2 deficiency is associated
with coloboma, a loss of astrocytes in the optic nerve and retina, and abnormal
axonal pathfinding of the ganglion cell axons at the optic chiasm. Thus,
appropriate expression of Pax2 is essential for astrocyte determination and
differentiation. Although BMP7 and SHH have been shown to regulate Pax2
expression, the molecular mechanism by which this regulation occurs is not well
understood. In this study, we determined that BMP7 and SHH activate Pax2
expression in mouse retinal astrocyte precursors in vitro. SHH appeared to play a
dual role in Pax2 regulation; 1) SHH may regulate BMP7 expression, and 2) the SHH
pathway cooperates with the BMP pathway to regulate Pax2 expression. BMP and SHH 
pathway members can interact separately or together with TLX, a repressor protein
in the tailless transcription factor family. Here we show that the interaction of
both pathways with TLX relieves the repression of Pax2 expression in mouse
retinal astrocytes. Together these data reveal a new mechanism for the
cooperative actions of signaling pathways in astrocyte determination and
differentiation and suggest interactions of regulatory pathways that are
applicable to other developmental programs.

PMCID: PMC2917894
PMID: 19505455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Mol Vis. 2009 May 18;15:1036-44.

Sonic hedgehog: its expression in a healing cornea and its role in
neovascularization.

Fujita K(1), Miyamoto T, Saika S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Wakayama Medical University, Kimiidera, Wakayama,
Japan. kyoko@wakayama-med.ac.jp

PURPOSE: To examine if sonic hedgehog (Shh) is involved in tissue
neovascularization by using cell culture and an animal cornea.
METHODS: The effects of exogenous Shh (5.0 nM), vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF), and/or a Shh signal inhibitor (2.5 or 10.0 muM cyclopamine) on
vessel-like tube formation of vascular endothelial cells were examined in vitro. 
The effects of Shh on the expression of angiogenic cytokines in cultured cell
types were examined in cultured cells. The expression of Shh and its receptor,
Patched 1 (Ptc), was examined in a vascularized mouse cornea during post-alkali
burn healing. The effect of exogenous Shh on corneal neovascularization in vivo
was assayed using a rat cornea system. The effect of a topical injection of
cyclopamine on cauterization-induced corneal neovascularization was then studied.
RESULTS: Adding Shh promoted vessel-like tube formation of vascular endothelial
cells. This effect was counteracted by addition of cyclopamine. Cyclopamine did
not affect VEGF-enhanced tube formation. Shh did not affect the expression levels
of angiogenic cytokines in cultured cell types. mRNA and protein expression
levels of Shh and Ptc were under the detection limit in an uninjured cornea, but 
Shh but not Ptc was upregulated in a healing, alkali-burned, vascularized cornea.
Exogenous Shh promoted neovascularization (NV) formation in vivo in a rat cornea.
Topical cyclopmine blocked Gli signaling (blocked translocation of Gli3) and the 
length of neovascularization in the peripheral cornea post-cauterization as
compared with the control vehicle-treated cornea.
CONCLUSIONS: Shh enhances endothelial tube formation independently through VEGF
signaling in vitro. Shh signaling is involved in the development of unfavorable
corneal neovascularization in animal corneas.

PMCID: PMC2684749
PMID: 19471603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Am J Med Genet A. 2009 Jun;149A(6):1108-15. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32859.

Giant diencephalic harmartoma and related anomalies: a newly recognized entity
distinct from the Pallister-Hall syndrome.

Guimiot F(1), Marcorelles P, Aboura A, Bonyhay G, Patrier S, Menez F,
Drouin-Garraud V, Icowick V, Eurin D, Garel C, Moirot H, Verspyck E,
Saugier-Veber P, Attie-Bitach T, Picone O, Oury JF, Verloes A, Delezoide AL,
Laquerrière A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, AP-HP- Robert Debré Hospital, Denis
Diderot University, Paris, France.

Comment in
    Am J Med Genet A. 2010 Jan;152A(1):264-6; author reply 267-8.

An hypothalamic hamartoma is an abnormal mass of mature glio-neuronal tissue
present in the hypothalamic area. It usually measures <2 cm of diameter. Most of 
the time, this hamartoma occurs in Pallister-Hall syndrome (PHS), due to
heterozygous GLI3 mutations. We report on five fetuses with giant diencephalic
hamartoma and other midline brain and facial malformations, without mutation in
the GLI3 gene or genomic rearrangements in three of them. The fetuses showed
facial asymmetry, unilateral ear and eye anomalies, and facial cleft.
Extracephalic malformations consisted of vertebral anomalies and short nails,
without polydactyly and cardiac malformation. The diencephalon was replaced by an
encephaloid mass protruding into the facial cleft. Normal cerebral structures
were not detectable. In one patient, holoprosencephaly of the syntelencephalic
type was noted. Arhinencephaly was present in all patients. Histologically, the
ill-defined, multilobulated lesion was made of neuroblastic and neurocytic cell
foci, lying in a fibrillar network, elaborating sometimes perivascular
pseudorosettes, with a maturation gradient in accordance with the fetal age.
Owing to their location, the tumors could be described as diencephalic, rather
than hypothalamic hamartomas. The striking asymmetry of the facial anomalies and 
the diencephalic malformations are not in the spectrum observed with PHS and
related syndromes, suggesting a distinct entity involving abnormal morphogenetic 
developmental fields at around 5 weeks of gestation.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19449422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Dev Biol. 2009 Jul 15;331(2):261-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.05.539. Epub 2009
May 9.

Shh and Gli3 activities are required for timely generation of motor neuron
progenitors.

Oh S(1), Huang X, Liu J, Litingtung Y, Chiang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Center for Molecular
Neuroscience, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Generation of distinct ventral neuronal subtypes in the developing spinal cord
requires Shh signaling mediated by the Gli family of transcription factors.
Genetic studies of Shh(-/-);Gli3(-/-) double mutants indicated that the
inhibition of Gli3 repressor activity by Shh is sufficient for the generation of 
different neurons including motor neurons. In this study, we show that although
ventral neural progenitors are initiated in normal numbers in Shh(-/-);Gli3(-/-) 
mutants, the subsequent appearance of motor neuron progenitors shows a
approximately 20-hour lag, concomitant with a delay in the activation of a
pan-neuronal differentiation program and cell cycle exit of ventral neural
progenitors. Accordingly, the Shh(-/-);Gli3(-/-) mutant spinal cord exhibits a
delay in motor neuron differentiation and an accumulation of a ventral neural
progenitor pool. The requirement of Shh and Gli3 activities to promote the timely
appearance of motor neuron progenitors is further supported by the analysis of
Ptch1(-/-) mutants, in which constitutive Shh pathway activity is sufficient to
elicit ectopic and premature differentiation of motor neurons at the expense of
ventral neural progenitors. Taken together, our analysis suggests that, beyond
its well established dorso-ventral patterning function through a
Gli3-derepression mechanism, Shh signaling is additionally required to promote
the timely appearance of motor neuron progenitors in the developing spinal cord.

PMCID: PMC2703695
PMID: 19433083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Pathol Int. 2009 May;59(5):279-87. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.2009.02366.x.

Expression of sonic hedgehog signaling molecules in normal, hyperplastic and
carcinomatous endometrium.

Kim KH(1), Kim JM, Choi YL, Shin YK, Lee HC, Seong IO, Kim BK, Chae SW, Chung YS,
Kim SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Eulji University College of Medicine, Daejeon, Korea.

The aim of the present study was to determine the expression profile of the
hedgehog (Hh) signaling molecules in normal, hyperplastic, and carcinomatous
uterine endometrium. For this purpose, 271 endometrial tissue samples, (62 of
normal endometrium, 127 of endometrial hyperplasias, and 82 endometrial
adenocarcinomas) were studied using antibodies recognizing Hh-related signaling
proteins, such as, sonic hedgehog (Shh), Patched (PTCH), Smoothened (Smo),
Suppressor of fused [Su(Fu)], Gli-1, Gli-2, and Gli-3 by immunohistochemistry.
The mRNA expression of these molecules was also assessed on reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. In the normal endometrium, the
expression of Hh signaling molecules was generally downregulated except for
Su(Fu), Gli-2, and Shh. In particular, the expression of both PTCH and Smo was
very low or almost absent. Overall expression of Hh signaling molecules increased
in hyperplastic endometrium; in particular, PTCH and Smo were significantly
highly expressed in complex and atypical hyperplasia. In carcinoma samples
extensive alterations were observed in the expression pattern of the signaling
molecules. Nuclear Gli-2, cytoplasmic Gli-3, and Su(Fu) were overexpressed,
whereas Shh, PTCH, and Smo expression were significantly reduced compared with
the hyperplastic endometrium. The results suggest that the alteration of Hh
signaling may be implicated in tumorigenesis of the endometrium.

PMID: 19432668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. J Med Genet. 2009 Nov;46(11):730-5. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2009.066027. Epub 2009 May
7.

Genetic screening of 202 individuals with congenital limb malformations and
requiring reconstructive surgery.

Furniss D(1), Kan SH, Taylor IB, Johnson D, Critchley PS, Giele HP, Wilkie AO.

Author information: 
(1)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, OX3 9DS, UK.

BACKGROUND: Congenital limb malformations (CLMs) are common and present to a
variety of specialties, notably plastic and orthopaedic surgeons, and clinical
geneticists. The authors aimed to characterise causative mutations in an
unselected cohort of patients with CLMs requiring reconstructive surgery.
METHODS: 202 patients presenting with CLM were recruited. The authors obtained
G-banded karyotypes and screened EN1, GLI3, HAND2, HOXD13, ROR2, SALL1, SALL4,
ZRS of SHH, SPRY4, TBX5, TWIST1 and WNT7A for point mutations using denaturing
high performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) and direct sequencing. Multiplex
ligation dependent probe amplification (MLPA) kits were developed and used to
measure copy number in GLI3, HOXD13, ROR2, SALL1, SALL4, TBX5 and the ZRS of SHH.
RESULTS: Within the cohort, causative genetic alterations were identified in 23
patients (11%): mutations in GLI3 (n = 5), HOXD13 (n = 5), the ZRS of SHH (n =
4), and chromosome abnormalities (n = 4) were the most common lesions found.
Clinical features that predicted the discovery of a genetic cause included a
bilateral malformation, positive family history, and having increasing numbers of
limbs affected (all p<0.01). Additionally, specific patterns of malformation
predicted mutations in specific genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on higher mutation prevalence the authors propose that GLI3,
HOXD13 and the ZRS of SHH should be prioritised for introduction into molecular
genetic testing programmes for CLM. The authors have developed simple criteria
that can refine the selection of patients by surgeons for referral to clinical
geneticists. The cohort also represents an excellent resource to test for
mutations in novel candidate genes.

PMCID: PMC2764122
PMID: 19429598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Dev Biol. 2009 Jul 15;331(2):189-98. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.04.038. Epub 2009 
May 5.

Msx genes are important apoptosis effectors downstream of the Shh/Gli3 pathway in
the limb.

Lallemand Y(1), Bensoussan V, Cloment CS, Robert B.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS URA, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

In tetrapods, the anteroposterior (AP) patterning of the limb is under the
control of the antagonistic activities of the secreted factor Sonic hedgehog
(Shh) and Gli3R, the truncated repressor form of the transcription factor Gli3.
In this report, we show that Msx1 and Msx2 are targets and downstream effectors
of Gli3R. Consequently, in Shh null mutants, Msx genes are overexpressed and,
furthermore, partially responsible for the limb phenotype. This is exemplified by
the fact that reducing Msx activity in Shh mutants partially restores a normal
limb development. Finally, we show that the main action of the Msx genes, in both
normal and Shh(-/-) limb development, is to control cell death in the mesenchyme.
We propose that, in the limb, Msx genes act downstream of the Shh/Gli3 pathway by
transducing BMP signaling and that, in the absence of Shh signaling, their
deregulation contributes to the extensive apoptosis that impairs limb
development.

PMID: 19422820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Dev Biol. 2009 Apr 1;328(1):40-53. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.01.012. Epub 2009
Jan 14.

Trps1, a regulator of chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation, interacts
with the activator form of Gli3.

Wuelling M(1), Kaiser FJ, Buelens LA, Braunholz D, Shivdasani RA, Depping R,
Vortkamp A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Biotechnology, Department of Developmental Biology,
University Duisburg-Essen, 45117 Essen, Germany.

Trps1, the gene mutated in human Tricho-Rhino-Phalangeal syndrome, represents an 
atypical member of the GATA-family of transcription factors. Here we show that
Trps1 interacts with Indian hedgehog (Ihh)/Gli3 signaling and regulates
chondrocyte differentiation and proliferation. We demonstrate that Trps1
specifically binds to the transactivation domain of Gli3 in vitro and in vivo,
whereas the repressor form of Gli3 does not interact with Trps1. A domain of
185aa within Trps1, containing three predicted zinc fingers, is sufficient for
interaction with Gli3. Using different mouse models we find that in distal
chondrocytes Trps1 and the repressor activity of Gli3 are required to expand
distal cells and locate the expression domain of Parathyroid hormone related
peptide. In columnar proliferating chondrocytes Trps1 and Ihh/Gli3 have an
activating function. The differentiation of columnar and hypertrophic
chondrocytes is supported by Trps1 independent of Gli3. Trps1 seems thus to
organize chondrocyte differentiation interacting with different subsets of
co-factors in distinct cell types.

PMID: 19389374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Dev Biol. 2009 Jun 15;330(2):452-60. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.04.009. Epub 2009 
Apr 14.

Suppressor of Fused inhibits mammalian Hedgehog signaling in the absence of
cilia.

Jia J(1), Kolterud A, Zeng H, Hoover A, Teglund S, Toftgård R, Liu A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Eberly College of Science, The Pennsylvania State
University, 201 Life Science Building, University Park, PA 16802, USA.

The Hedgehog (Hh) family of secreted proteins regulates mammalian development and
cancer formation through Gli transcription factors, which exist in both activator
and repressor forms. In vertebrates, the primary cilia play an essential role in 
Hh signal transduction and are required for both the activator and repressor
activities of Gli proteins. In the current study, we demonstrate that mouse
Suppressor of Fused (Sufu) interacts with Gli proteins and inhibits Gli activator
activity in the absence of cilia. Removal of Sufu in both Smoothened (Smo) and
Ift88 mutants, respectively, leads to full activation of Hh signaling, suggesting
that Smo-mediated repression of Sufu, but not the inhibitory function of Sufu,
requires cilia. Finally, we show that Sufu is important for proper
activator/repressor ratio of Gli3 protein in mice, both in the presence and
absence of cilia.

PMCID: PMC2687323
PMID: 19371734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Hum Genet. 2009 Jul;126(1):133-47. doi: 10.1007/s00439-009-0661-6. Epub 2009 Apr 
5.

Balanced translocations in mental retardation.

Vandeweyer G(1), Kooy RF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Universiteitsplein 1,
2610 Antwerp, Belgium.

Over the past few decades, the knowledge on genetic defects causing mental
retardation has dramatically increased. In this review, we discuss the importance
of balanced chromosomal translocations in the identification of genes responsible
for mental retardation. We present a database-search guided overview of balanced 
translocations identified in patients with mental retardation. We divide those in
four categories: (1) balanced translocations that helped to identify a causative 
gene within a contiguous gene syndrome, (2) balanced translocations that led to
the identification of a mental retardation gene confirmed by independent methods,
(3) balanced translocations disrupting candidate genes that have not been
confirmed by independent methods and (4) balanced translocations not reported to 
disrupt protein coding sequences. It can safely be concluded that balanced
translocations have been instrumental in the identification of multiple genes
that are involved in mental retardation. In addition, many more candidate genes
were identified with a suspected but (as yet?) unconfirmed role in mental
retardation. Some balanced translocations do not disrupt a protein coding gene
and it can be speculated that in the light of recent findings concerning ncRNA's 
and ultra-conserved regions, such findings are worth further investigation as
these potentially may lead us to the discovery of novel disease mechanisms.

PMID: 19347365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Nat Neurosci. 2009 Apr;12(4):409-17. doi: 10.1038/nn.2287. Epub 2009 Mar 15.

Proteoglycan interactions with Sonic Hedgehog specify mitogenic responses.

Chan JA(1), Balasubramanian S, Witt RM, Nazemi KJ, Choi Y, Pazyra-Murphy MF,
Walsh CO, Thompson M, Segal RA.

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiology Department, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2009 Apr;12(4):371-2.

Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) has dual roles in vertebrate development, promoting
progenitor cell proliferation and inducing tissue patterning. We found that the
mitogenic and patterning functions of Shh can be uncoupled from one another.
Using a genetic approach to selectively inhibit Shh-proteoglycan interactions in 
a mouse model, we found that binding of Shh to proteoglycans was required for
proliferation of neural stem/precursor cells, but not for tissue patterning.
Shh-proteoglycan interactions regulated both spatial and temporal features of Shh
signaling. Proteoglycans localized Shh to specialized mitogenic niches and also
acted at the single-cell level to regulate the duration of Shh signaling, thereby
promoting a gene expression program that is important for cell division. Because 
activation of the Shh pathway is a feature of diverse human cancers, selective
stimulation of proliferation by Shh-proteoglycan interactions may also figure
prominently in neoplastic growth.

PMCID: PMC2676236
PMID: 19287388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Virchows Arch. 2009 Apr;454(4):369-79. doi: 10.1007/s00428-009-0753-7. Epub 2009 
Mar 12.

Hedgehog signaling is involved in differentiation of normal colonic tissue rather
than in tumor proliferation.

Alinger B(1), Kiesslich T, Datz C, Aberger F, Strasser F, Berr F, Dietze O,
Kaserer K, Hauser-Kronberger C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, General Hospital, Paracelsus Medical University
Salzburg, Muellner Hauptstrasse 48, 5020 Salzburg, Austria.

The Hedgehog (Hh) pathway is a main regulation cascade in embryonic
differentiation. It is also present in adult tissues and unusual expression has
been associated with formation of benign and malignant lesions. We examined the
presence of the Hedgehog pathway in normal and pathological human colon tissue.
Components investigated include Sonic (Shh), Indian (Ihh), and Desert Hedgehog
(Dhh), Gli1, Gli2, Gli3, and Patched (Ptch). Pathological tissue samples
comprised 23 benign and 20 malignant lesions of human colon. The influence of the
Hedgehog pathway on differentiation and proliferation has been investigated by
analyzing the effect of the pathway inhibitor Cyclopamine on human colon cancer
cell lines HT29 and CaCo2. In normal colon, we detected expression of Shh and Dhh
within the lining epithelium and Patched, Gli1, and Gli2 along the whole crypts. 
Within all benign lesions, positive staining of Shh, Dhh, Gli1, Gli2, and Ptch
was detected. Expression of Shh and Dhh was restricted to single cell aggregates.
Malignant lesions also displayed focal staining pattern for Shh and Dhh but to a 
much lesser extent. We conclude that Hedgehog signaling is involved rather in
constant differentiation and renewing of the colonic lining epithelium than in
cancer formation, growth, or proliferation.

PMID: 19280222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Dev Biol. 2009 Apr 15;328(2):506-16. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.02.017. Epub 2009 
Feb 24.

A SHH-independent regulation of Gli3 is a significant determinant of
anteroposterior patterning of the limb bud.

Hill P(1), Götz K, Rüther U.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Entwicklungs- und Molekularbiologie der Tiere,
Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.

The family of GLI proteins (GLI1-3) comprises the intracellular mediators of the 
hedgehog pathway, which regulates a myriad of developmental processes, one of
which is limb development. Whereas GLI1 and GLI2 seem to be dispensable during
limb development, GLI3 is especially crucial since all GLI3-associated human
congenital diseases comprise limb malformations. Furthermore, Gli3(-/-) mouse
embryos exhibit pronounced polydactyly in conjunction with a loss of digit
identities. Here we examined how the quantity of GLI3 contributes to its function
by using different Gli3 mutants in order to vary overall GLI3 levels. In
addition, we made use of the Gli3(Delta699) allele, which encodes a C-terminally 
truncated version of GLI3, thus mimicking the processed GLI3 isoform (GLI3R). The
Gli3(Delta699) mutant made it feasible to analyze isoform-specific contributions 
of GLI3 within the context of anteroposterior patterning of the limb bud. We
revealed a so far unappreciated variation in the quantitative demand for GLI3
within different phases and aspects of distal limb formation. In addition, our
analyses provide evidence that unprocessed full-length GLI3 is dispensable for
anteroposterior patterning of the limb bud. Instead, digit identities are most
likely defined by GLI3 repressor activity alone. Furthermore, we present evidence
that the anteroposterior grading of GLI3 activity by the action of SHH is
supported by a prototype patterning, which regulates Gli3 independently from SHH.

PMID: 19248778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 May 15;18(10):1719-39. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp075. Epub 2009 Feb
17.

Mouse hitchhiker mutants have spina bifida, dorso-ventral patterning defects and 
polydactyly: identification of Tulp3 as a novel negative regulator of the Sonic
hedgehog pathway.

Patterson VL(1), Damrau C, Paudyal A, Reeve B, Grimes DT, Stewart ME, Williams
DJ, Siggers P, Greenfield A, Murdoch JN.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian Genetics Unit, MRC Harwell, Harwell Science and Innovation Campus,
Oxon, UK.

The mammalian Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signalling pathway is essential for embryonic 
development and the patterning of multiple organs. Disruption or activation of
Shh signalling leads to multiple birth defects, including holoprosencephaly,
neural tube defects and polydactyly, and in adults results in tumours of the skin
or central nervous system. Genetic approaches with model organisms continue to
identify novel components of the pathway, including key molecules that function
as positive or negative regulators of Shh signalling. Data presented here define 
Tulp3 as a novel negative regulator of the Shh pathway. We have identified a new 
mouse mutant that is a strongly hypomorphic allele of Tulp3 and which exhibits
expansion of ventral markers in the caudal spinal cord, as well as neural tube
defects and preaxial polydactyly, consistent with increased Shh signalling. We
demonstrate that Tulp3 acts genetically downstream of Shh and Smoothened (Smo) in
neural tube patterning and exhibits a genetic interaction with Gli3 in limb
development. We show that Tulp3 does not appear to alter expression or processing
of Gli3, and we demonstrate that transcriptional regulation of other negative
regulators (Rab23, Fkbp8, Thm1, Sufu and PKA) is not affected. We discuss the
possible mechanism of action of Tulp3 in Shh-mediated signalling in light of
these new data.

PMCID: PMC2671985
PMID: 19223390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Development. 2009 Feb;136(4):585-94. doi: 10.1242/dev.027748.

Sall genes regulate region-specific morphogenesis in the mouse limb by modulating
Hox activities.

Kawakami Y(1), Uchiyama Y, Rodriguez Esteban C, Inenaga T, Koyano-Nakagawa N,
Kawakami H, Marti M, Kmita M, Monaghan-Nichols P, Nishinakamura R, Izpisua
Belmonte JC.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

The genetic mechanisms that regulate the complex morphogenesis of generating
cartilage elements in correct positions with precise shapes during organogenesis,
fundamental issues in developmental biology, are still not well understood. By
focusing on the developing mouse limb, we confirm the importance of transcription
factors encoded by the Sall gene family in proper limb morphogenesis, and further
show that they have overlapping activities in regulating regional morphogenesis
in the autopod. Sall1/Sall3 double null mutants exhibit a loss of digit1 as well 
as a loss or fusion of digit2 and digit3, metacarpals and carpals in the autopod.
We show that Sall activity affects different pathways, including the Shh
signaling pathway, as well as the Hox network. Shh signaling in the mesenchyme is
partially impaired in the Sall mutant limbs. Additionally, our data suggest an
antagonism between Sall1-Sall3 and Hoxa13-Hoxd13. We demonstrate that expression 
of Epha3 and Epha4 is downregulated in the Sall1/Sall3 double null mutants, and, 
conversely, is upregulated in Hoxa13 and Hoxd13 mutants. Moreover, the expression
of Sall1 and Sall3 is upregulated in Hoxa13 and Hoxd13 mutants. Furthermore, by
using DNA-binding assays, we show that Sall and Hox compete for a target sequence
in the Epha4 upstream region. In conjunction with the Shh pathway, the
antagonistic interaction between Hoxa13-Hoxd13 and Sall1-Sall3 in the developing 
limb may contribute to the fine-tuning of local Hox activity that leads to proper
morphogenesis of each cartilage element of the vertebrate autopod.

PMCID: PMC3266482
PMID: 19168674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Dev Biol. 2009 Mar 1;327(1):204-15. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.12.008. Epub 2008
Dec 24.

Gli3 is required autonomously for dorsal telencephalic cells to adopt appropriate
fates during embryonic forebrain development.

Quinn JC(1), Molinek M, Mason JO, Price DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Integrative Physiology, The University of Edinburgh, Hugh Robson
Building, George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9XD, UK.

The Gli3 zinc finger transcription factor is expressed in developing forebrain,
with the highest levels of expression in dorsal telencephalon. In Gli3(-/-)
embryos the dorsal telencephalon is abnormally small and fails to develop
dorsomedial telencephalic structures, including hippocampus and cortical hem,
while the ventral telencephalon appears to expand. A hurdle to understanding the 
underlying mechanisms is that abnormalities of developing Gli3(-/-) telencephalic
cells in Gli3(-/-) mutants result from a combination of their own cell autonomous
defects and defects in the Gli3(-/-) cells that surround them. Here we used
chimeras to identify some of the defects of Gli3(-/-) telencephalic cells that
are likely to be autonomous by studying how Gli3(-/-) cells develop when
surrounded by a majority of wild-type cells. We found that Gli3(-/-) cells are
present in all components of the Gli3(-/-)<-->Gli3(+/+) chimeric forebrain,
including dorsomedial structures, in proportions that either equal or exceed
proportions found elsewhere in the embryo. Gli3(-/-) cells segregate from
Gli3(+/+) cells to form many abnormal structures particularly in dorsal
telencephalon. Gli3(-/-) cells in some locations are misspecified: in those parts
of the dorsal telencephalon near to its boundaries with the diencephalon and the 
ventral telencephalon, mutant cells express sets of transcription factors
expressed by wild-type cells on the other side of the boundary. Elsewhere in the 
dorsal telencephalon, in the diencephalon and in the ventral telencephalon,
mutant cells express sets of transcription factors similar to those expressed by 
their immediately surrounding wild-type cells. We propose that an important cell 
autonomous action of Gli3 is to regulate the competence of dorsal telencephalic
cells, preventing cells near to its boundaries expressing regulatory factors
normally restricted to adjacent tissues.

PMID: 19121302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. FEBS Lett. 2009 Jan 5;583(1):224-8. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2008.12.010. Epub 2008
Dec 10.

Identification of the gene transcription repressor domain of Gli3.

Tsanev R(1), Tiigimägi P, Michelson P, Metsis M, Østerlund T, Kogerman P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene Technology, Tallinn University of Technology, Tallinn,
Estonia.

Gli transcription factors are downstream targets of the Hedgehog signaling
pathway. Two of the three Gli proteins harbor gene transcription repressor
function in the N-terminal half. We have analyzed the sequences and identified a 
potential repressor domain in Gli2 and Gli3 and have tested this experimentally. 
Overexpression studies confirm that the N-terminal parts harbor gene repression
activity and we mapped the minimal repressor to residues 106 till 236 in Gli3.
Unlike other mechanisms that inhibit Gli induced gene transcription, the
repressor domain identified here does not utilize Histone deacetylases (HDACs) to
achieve repression, as confirmed by HDAC inhibition studies and pull-down assays.
This distinguishes the identified domain from other regulatory parts with
negative influence on transcription.

PMCID: PMC2697317
PMID: 19084012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2008 Nov;1144:36-41. doi: 10.1196/annals.1418.006.

Parathyroid hormone-related protein regulates glioma-associated oncogene
transcriptional activation: lessons learned from bone development and cartilage
neoplasia.

Alman BA(1), Wunder JS.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Hospital for Sick Children,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. benjamin.alman@sickkids.ca

Hedgehog and parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP) signaling play important
roles regulating the differentiation of chondrocytes, which form the template for
growing bone. By studying the interaction of the pathways in normal and
neoplastic growth-plate chondrocytes (from enchondromas, a benign cartilage
tumor), an unexpected direct regulation of hedgehog-mediated transcriptional
activation by parathyroid hormone-related protein was uncovered. This regulation 
acts through the processing of the hedgehog-activated transcription factor,
glioma-associated oncogene-three (Gli3). When PTHrP activates its receptor, Gli3 
is processed to its repressor form though a protein kinase A (PKA) -dependent
mechanism. Thus, activation of a G protein-coupled receptor can negatively
regulate hedgehog-mediated transcription independent of hedgehog ligand activity,
raising intriguing therapeutic possibilities.

PMID: 19076361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Dev Biol. 2009 Feb 1;326(1):143-54. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.11.006. Epub 2008
Nov 20.

A dynamic Gli code interprets Hh signals to regulate induction, patterning, and
endocrine cell specification in the zebrafish pituitary.

Devine CA(1), Sbrogna JL, Guner B, Osgood M, Shen MC, Karlstrom RO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, USA.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is necessary for the induction and functional patterning 
of the pituitary placode, however the mechanisms by which Hh signals are
interpreted by placodal cells are unknown. Here we show distinct temporal
requirements for Hh signaling in endocrine cell differentiation and describe a
dynamic Gli transcriptional response code that interprets these Hh signals within
the developing adenohypophysis. Gli1 is required for the differentiation of
selected endocrine cell types and acts as the major activator of Hh-mediated
pituitary induction, while Gli2a and Gli2b contribute more minor activator
functions. Intriguingly, this Gli response code changes as development proceeds. 
Gli1 continues to be required for the activation of the Hh response anteriorly in
the pars distalis. In contrast, Gli2b is required to repress Hh target gene
expression posteriorly in the pars intermedia. Consistent with these changing
roles, gli1, gli2a, and gli2b, but not gli3, are expressed in pituitary precursor
cells at the anterior neural ridge. Later in development, gli1 expression is
maintained throughout the adenohypophysis while gli2a and gli2b expression are
restricted to the pars intermedia. Given the link between Hh signaling and
pituitary adenomas in humans, our data suggest misregulation of Gli function may 
contribute to these common pituitary tumors.

PMID: 19056374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Dev Biol. 2009 Feb 1;326(1):177-89. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.11.009. Epub 2008
Nov 20.

Phosphorylation of Gli2 by protein kinase A is required for Gli2 processing and
degradation and the Sonic Hedgehog-regulated mouse development.

Pan Y(1), Wang C, Wang B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine, Weill Medical College of Cornell University,
1300 York Avenue, W404, New York, NY 10065, USA.

In mice, Gli2 and Gli3 are the transcription factors that mediate the initial
Hedgehog (Hh) signaling. In the absence of Hh signaling, the majority of the
full-length Gli3 protein undergoes proteolytic processing into a repressor, while
only a small fraction of the full-length Gli2 protein is processed. Gli3
processing is dependent on phosphorylation of the first four of the six protein
kinase A (PKA) sites at its C-terminus. However, whether the same phosphorylation
of Gli2 by PKA is required for Gli2 processing and, if so, whether such
phosphorylation regulates additional Gli2 function are unknown. To address these 
questions, we mutated these PKA sites in the mouse Gli2 locus to create the
Gli2(P1-4) allele. Gli2(P1-4) homozygous embryos die in utero and exhibit
exencephaly, defects in neural tube closure, enlarged craniofacial structures,
and an extra anterior digit. Analysis of spinal cord patterning shows that
domains of motoneurons and V2, V1, and V0 interneurons are expanded to different 
degrees in both Gli2(P1-4) single and Gli2(P1-4);Shh double mutants. Furthermore,
Gli2(P1-4) expression prevents massive cell death and promotes cell proliferation
in Shh mutant. Analysis of Gli2(P1-4) protein in vivo reveals that the mutant
protein is not processed and is twice as stable as wild type Gli2 protein. We
also show that the Gli2 repressor can effectively antagonize Gli2P1-4 activity.
Together, these results indicate that phosphorylation of Gli2 by PKA induces Gli2
processing and destabilization in vivo and plays an important role in the
Hh-regulated mouse embryonic patterning.

PMCID: PMC2650378
PMID: 19056373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. J Biol Chem. 2009 Feb 27;284(9):5936-44. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M808103200. Epub 2008
Dec 2.

FoxF1 and FoxL1 link hedgehog signaling and the control of epithelial
proliferation in the developing stomach and intestine.

Madison BB(1), McKenna LB, Dolson D, Epstein DJ, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is a key component of cross-talk during
vertebrate gut development, involving endodermally secreted Sonic (Shh) and
Indian hedgehog (Ihh) proteins that directly signal to adjacent mesoderm. Here we
show that the closely linked mesenchymal forkhead transcription factors Foxf1 and
Foxl1 are part of this signaling cascade. Analysis of conserved non-coding
sequences surrounding Foxf1 and Foxl1 identified seven Gli binding sites, with
two sites near Foxl1 being identical among mammalian, bird, fish, and amphibian
species. In vitro experiments indicate that Gli2 binds to these Gli sites,
several of which are critical for Gli2-mediated activation of a luciferase
reporter in 293 cells. In addition, we demonstrate occupancy of one of these
elements by Gli proteins in the intestine in vivo using chromatin
immunoprecipitation. Furthermore, expression of both Foxf1 and Foxl1 is reduced
in the Gli2/Gli3 mutant gut. These results provide compelling evidence that Foxf1
and Foxl1 are mediators of the Hh (endoderm) to mesoderm signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC2645837
PMID: 19049965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. J Comp Neurol. 2009 Feb 10;512(5):613-27. doi: 10.1002/cne.21918.

Analysis of early ventral telencephalic defects in mice lacking functional Gli3
protein.

Yu T(1), Fotaki V, Mason JO, Price DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centres for Integrative Physiology and Neuroscience Research, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.

The transcription factor Gli3 is expressed throughout developing telencephalon.
Previous studies have focused on Gli3's role in dorsal telencephalon, which is
greatly reduced in size in Gli3(Xt/Xt) mutants. We examined the effects of loss
of Gli3 on early development of ventral telencephalon. Ventral telencephalon was 
defined in both wildtypes and Gli3(Xt/Xt) mutants on the basis of its expression 
of Olig2, Nkx2.1, Mash1, and Foxg1 and its lack of expression of Pax6. We found
that at embryonic day (E)10.5 the volume of the ventral telencephalon is about
50% greater in Gli3(Xt/Xt) mutants than in wildtypes. By E12.5, however, the
volume of the ventral telencephalon is about 20% lower in Gli3(Xt/Xt) mutants
than in wildtypes. We observed a significant increase in the number of both
apoptotic cells and newly differentiated neurons in the E10.5 Gli3(Xt/Xt) ventral
telencephalon, suggesting that increased cell death and withdrawal of cells from 
the cell cycle might account for the failure of the Gli3(Xt/Xt) ventral
telencephalon to grow normally by E12.5. We found no changes in the lengths of
the cell cycles of proliferating ventral telencephalic cells at E10.5. We used
marker analysis and optical projection tomography to assess the Gli3(Xt/Xt)
forebrain in three dimensions and found that the Gli3(Xt/Xt) diencephalon is
shifted relatively rostrally. We conclude that in the absence of Gli3 an
abnormally large portion of the newly formed telencephalon is specified to a
ventral fate but this then suffers impaired growth, due to defects of cell
differentiation and death, contributing to severe distortion of the forebrain.

PMID: 19048639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. J Neurosci. 2008 Nov 26;28(48):12887-900. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2084-08.2008.

A crucial role for primary cilia in cortical morphogenesis.

Willaredt MA(1), Hasenpusch-Theil K, Gardner HA, Kitanovic I, Hirschfeld-Warneken
VC, Gojak CP, Gorgas K, Bradford CL, Spatz J, Wölfl S, Theil T, Tucker KL.

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Center for Neurosciences, Department of Anatomy, University 
of Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Primary cilia are important sites of signal transduction involved in a wide range
of developmental and postnatal functions. Proteolytic processing of the
transcription factor Gli3, for example, occurs in primary cilia, and defects in
intraflagellar transport (IFT), which is crucial for the maintenance of primary
cilia, can lead to severe developmental defects and diseases. Here we report an
essential role of primary cilia in forebrain development. Uncovered by
N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea-mutagenesis, cobblestone is a hypomorphic allele of the IFT
gene Ift88, in which Ift88 mRNA and protein levels are reduced by 70-80%.
cobblestone mutants are distinguished by subpial heterotopias in the forebrain.
Mutants show both severe defects in the formation of dorsomedial telencephalic
structures, such as the choroid plexus, cortical hem and hippocampus, and also a 
relaxation of both dorsal-ventral and rostral-caudal compartmental boundaries.
These defects phenocopy many of the abnormalities seen in the Gli3 mutant
forebrain, and we show that Gli3 proteolytic processing is reduced, leading to an
accumulation of the full-length activator isoform. In addition, we observe an
upregulation of canonical Wnt signaling in the neocortex and in the caudal
forebrain. Interestingly, the ultrastructure and morphology of ventricular cilia 
in the cobblestone mutants remains intact. Together, these results indicate a
critical role for ciliary function in the developing forebrain.

PMID: 19036983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Genes Cells. 2009 Jan;14(1):17-28. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2008.01246.x. Epub
2008 Nov 21.

Ski co-repressor complexes maintain the basal repressed state of the TGF-beta
target gene, SMAD7, via HDAC3 and PRMT5.

Tabata T(1), Kokura K, Ten Dijke P, Ishii S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, RIKEN Tsukuba Institute, 3-1-1 Koyadai,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0074, Japan.

The products encoded by ski and its related gene, sno, (Ski and Sno) act as
transcriptional co-repressors and interact with other co-repressors such as
N-CoR/SMRT and mSin3A. Ski and Sno mediate transcriptional repression by various 
repressors, including Mad, Rb and Gli3. Ski/Sno also suppress transcription
induced by multiple activators, such as Smads and c-Myb. In particular, the
inhibition of TGF-beta-induced transcription by binding to Smads is correlated
with the oncogenic activity of Ski and Sno. However, the molecular mechanism by
which Ski and Sno mediate transcriptional repression remains unknown. In this
study, we report the purification and characterization of Ski complexes. The Ski 
complexes purified from HeLa cells contained histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3) and
protein arginine methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5), in addition to multiple Smad
proteins (Smad2, Smad3 and Smad4). Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays indicated
that these components of the Ski complexes were localized on the SMAD7 gene
promoter, which is the TGF-beta target gene, in TGF-beta-untreated HepG2 cells.
Knockdown of these components using siRNA led to up-regulation of SMAD7 mRNA.
These results indicate that Ski complexes serve to maintain a TGF-beta-responsive
promoter at a repressed basal level via the activities of histone deacetylase and
histone arginine methyltransferase.

PMID: 19032343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Development. 2008 Dec;135(24):4049-58. doi: 10.1242/dev.029835. Epub 2008 Nov 12.

C2cd3 is required for cilia formation and Hedgehog signaling in mouse.

Hoover AN(1), Wynkoop A, Zeng H, Jia J, Niswander LA, Liu A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Eberly College of Science, The Pennsylvania State
University, 201 Life Science Building, University Park, PA 16802, USA.

Cilia are essential for mammalian embryonic development as well as for the
physiological activity of various adult organ systems. Despite the multiple
crucial roles that cilia play, the mechanisms underlying ciliogenesis in mammals 
remain poorly understood. Taking a forward genetic approach, we have identified
Hearty (Hty), a recessive lethal mouse mutant with multiple defects, including
neural tube defects, abnormal dorsal-ventral patterning of the spinal cord, a
defect in left-right axis determination and severe polydactyly (extra digits). By
genetic mapping, sequence analysis of candidate genes and characterization of a
second mutant allele, we identify Hty as C2cd3, a novel gene encoding a
vertebrate-specific C2 domain-containing protein. Target gene expression and
double-mutant analyses suggest that C2cd3 is an essential regulator of
intracellular transduction of the Hedgehog signal. Furthering a link between
Hedgehog signaling and cilia function, we find that cilia formation and
proteolytic processing of Gli3 are disrupted in C2cd3 mutants. Finally, we
observe C2cd3 protein at the basal body, consistent with its essential function
in ciliogenesis. Interestingly, the human ortholog for this gene lies in
proximity to the critical regions of Meckel-Gruber syndrome 2 (MKS2) and Joubert 
syndrome 2 (JBTS2), making it a potential candidate for these two human genetic
disorders.

PMCID: PMC3120044
PMID: 19004860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Dev Biol. 2009 Jan 1;325(1):225-37. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.10.020. Epub 2008
Oct 29.

Defective ciliogenesis, embryonic lethality and severe impairment of the Sonic
Hedgehog pathway caused by inactivation of the mouse complex A intraflagellar
transport gene Ift122/Wdr10, partially overlapping with the DNA repair gene
Med1/Mbd4.

Cortellino S(1), Wang C, Wang B, Bassi MR, Caretti E, Champeval D, Calmont A,
Jarnik M, Burch J, Zaret KS, Larue L, Bellacosa A.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA.

Primary cilia are assembled and maintained by evolutionarily conserved
intraflagellar transport (IFT) proteins that are involved in the coordinated
movement of macromolecular cargo from the basal body to the cilium tip and back. 
The IFT machinery is organized in two structural complexes named complex A and
complex B. Recently, inactivation in the mouse germline of Ift genes belonging to
complex B revealed a requirement of ciliogenesis, or proteins involved in
ciliogenesis, for Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signaling in mammals. Here we report on a 
complex A mutant mouse, defective for the Ift122 gene. Ift122-null embryos show
multiple developmental defects (exencephaly, situs viscerum inversus, delay in
turning, hemorrhage and defects in limb development) that result in lethality. In
the node, primary cilia were absent or malformed in homozygous mutant and
heterozygous embryos, respectively. Impairment of the Shh pathway was apparent in
both neural tube patterning (expansion of motoneurons and rostro-caudal
level-dependent contraction or expansion of the dorso-lateral interneurons), and 
limb patterning (ectrosyndactyly). These phenotypes are distinct from both
complex B IFT mutant embryos and embryos defective for the ciliary protein
hennin/Arl13b, and suggest reduced levels of both Gli2/Gli3 activator and Gli3
repressor functions. We conclude that complex A and complex B factors play
similar but distinct roles in ciliogenesis and Shh/Gli3 signaling.

PMCID: PMC2645042
PMID: 19000668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Development. 2008 Nov;135(22):3687-96. doi: 10.1242/dev.021899. Epub 2008 Oct 16.

Wnt signaling determines ventral spinal cord cell fates in a time-dependent
manner.

Yu W(1), McDonnell K, Taketo MM, Bai CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine,
Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

The identity of distinct cell types in the ventral neural tube is generally
believed to be specified by sonic hedgehog (Shh) in a concentration-dependent
manner. However, recent studies have questioned whether Shh is the sole signaling
molecule determining ventral neuronal cell fates. Here we provide evidence that
canonical Wnt signaling is involved in the generation of different cell types in 
the ventral spinal cord. We show that Wnt signaling is active in the mouse
ventral spinal cord at the time when ventral cell types are specified.
Furthermore, using an approach that stabilizes beta-catenin protein in small
patches of ventral spinal cord cells at different stages, we show that Wnt
signaling activates different subsets of target genes depending on the time when 
Wnt signaling is amplified. Moreover, disruption of Wnt signaling results in the 
expansion of ventrally located progenitors. Finally, we show genetically that Wnt
signaling interacts with Hh signaling at least in part through regulating the
transcription of Gli3. Our results reveal a novel mechanism by which ventral
patterning is achieved through a coordination of Wnt and Shh signaling.

PMID: 18927156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Genes Dev. 2008 Oct 1;22(19):2651-63. doi: 10.1101/gad.1693008.

A genome-scale analysis of the cis-regulatory circuitry underlying sonic
hedgehog-mediated patterning of the mammalian limb.

Vokes SA(1), Ji H, Wong WH, McMahon AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02138, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signals via Gli transcription factors to direct digit number
and identity in the vertebrate limb. We characterized the Gli-dependent
cis-regulatory network through a combination of whole-genome chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-on-chip and transcriptional profiling of the
developing mouse limb. These analyses identified approximately 5000 high-quality 
Gli3-binding sites, including all known Gli-dependent enhancers. Discrete binding
regions exhibit a higher-order clustering, highlighting the complexity of
cis-regulatory interactions. Further, Gli3 binds inertly to previously identified
neural-specific Gli enhancers, demonstrating the accessibility of their
cis-regulatory elements. Intersection of DNA binding data with gene expression
profiles predicted 205 putative limb target genes. A subset of putative
cis-regulatory regions were analyzed in transgenic embryos, establishing Blimp1
as a direct Gli target and identifying Gli activator signaling in a direct,
long-range regulation of the BMP antagonist Gremlin. In contrast, a long-range
silencer cassette downstream from Hand2 likely mediates Gli3 repression in the
anterior limb. These studies provide the first comprehensive characterization of 
the transcriptional output of a Shh-patterning process in the mammalian embryo
and a framework for elaborating regulatory networks in the developing limb.

PMCID: PMC2559910
PMID: 18832070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Dev Dyn. 2008 Oct;237(10):3079-87. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21714.

Gli3-deficient mice exhibit cleft palate associated with abnormal tongue
development.

Huang X(1), Goudy SL, Ketova T, Litingtung Y, Chiang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

Palatogenesis depends on appropriate growth, elevation, and fusion of the palatal
shelves and aberration in these processes can lead to palatal clefting. We
observed a high incidence of palate clefting in mice deficient in Gli3, known for
its role as a repressor in the absence of Shh signaling. In contrast with several
current mouse models of cleft palate, Meckel's cartilage extension, cranial
neural crest migration, palatal shelf proliferation, apoptosis, and key signaling
components mediated by Shh, Bmp, Fgf, and Tgfbeta, appeared unaffected in Gli3-/-
mice. Palatal clefting in Gli3-/- mice was consistently associated with tongue
abnormalities such as failure to flatten and improper positioning, implicating a 
critical role of Gli3 and normal tongue morphogenesis for timely palatal shelf
elevation and joining. Furthermore, Gli3-/- palatal shelves grown in roller
cultures without tongue can fuse suggesting that the abnormal tongue is likely an
impediment for palatal shelf joining in Gli3-/- mutants.

Copyright (c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18816854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Int J Oncol. 2008 Oct;33(4):881-6.

Integrative genomic analyses on GLI2: mechanism of Hedgehog priming through basal
GLI2 expression, and interaction map of stem cell signaling network with P53.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan. mkatoh-kkr@umin.ac.jp

Hedgehog-binding to Patched family receptors results in Smoothened-mediated
activation of MAP3K10 (MST) and inactivation of SUFU. MAP3K10-induced DYRK2
phosphorylation combined with SUFU inhibition results in the stabilization and
nuclear accumulation of GLI2 for transcriptional activation of GLI1, CCND1,
CCND2, FOXA2, FOXC2, FOXP3, FOXQ1, RUNX2, and JAG2. Here, integrative genomic
analyses on GLI2 orthologs were carried out. Rat Gli2 complete coding sequence
was determined by assembling nucleotide sequences of exons 1, 2, and 5'-truncated
rat Gli2 RefSeq (NM_001107169.1). GLI2 orthologs were more related to GLI3
orthologs than to GLI1 orthologs lacking the N-terminal repressor domain.
betaTRCP1 (FBXW1)-binding DSYxxxS motif was conserved in GLI2 and GLI3 orthologs,
while betaTRCP2 (FBXW11)-binding DSGxxxxxxxxxS motif in GLI2 and GLI1 orthologs. 
Human GLI2 mRNA was expressed in ES cells, NT2 cells, fetal lung, fetal heart,
regenerating liver, gastric cancer, and other tumors. Mouse Gli2 mRNA was
expressed in unfertilized egg, ES cells, and EG cells. Tandem RRRCWWGYYY motifs
for P53, P63 or P73, and also four conserved bHLH-binding sites were identified
within GLI2 proximal promoter region. Interaction map of P53 and stem cell
signaling network were then constructed. P53-induced NOTCH1 upregulation leads to
HES1, HES5, HEY1, HEY2 or HEYL upregulation for the repression of tissue specific
bHLH transcriptional activators. DYRK2 functions as a positive regulator of
P53-mediated apoptosis, and also as a negative regulator of the Hedgehog
signaling cascade. GLI2 expression is regulated based on the balance of P53,
Notch, and TGF-beta signaling, and Hedgehog signaling activation results in cell 
survival and proliferation due to transcriptional activation of Hedgehog-target
genes, and also partly due to perturbation of P53-mediated transcriptional
regulation.

PMID: 18813803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. J Neurosci. 2008 Sep 17;28(38):9504-18. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2341-08.2008.

Molecular specification and patterning of progenitor cells in the lateral and
medial ganglionic eminences.

Tucker ES(1), Segall S, Gopalakrishna D, Wu Y, Vernon M, Polleux F, Lamantia AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Physiology, The University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

We characterized intrinsic and extrinsic specification of progenitors in the
lateral and medial ganglionic eminences (LGE and MGE). We identified seven genes 
whose expression is enriched or restricted in either the LGE [biregional cell
adhesion molecule-related/downregulated by oncogenes binding protein (Boc),
Frizzled homolog 8 (Fzd8), Ankrd43 (ankyrin repeat domain-containing protein 43),
and Ikzf1 (Ikaros family zinc finger 1)] or MGE [Map3k12 binding inhibitory
protein 1 (Mbip); zinc-finger, SWIM domain containing 5 (Zswim5); and Adamts5 [a 
disintegrin-like and metallopeptidase (reprolysin type) with thrombospondin type 
1 motif, 5]]. Boc, Fzd8, Mbip, and Zswim5 are apparently expressed in LGE or MGE 
progenitors, whereas the remaining three are seen in the postmitotic mantle zone.
Relative expression levels are altered and regional distinctions are lost for
each gene in LGE or MGE cells propagated as neurospheres, indicating that these
newly identified molecular characteristics of LGE or MGE progenitors depend on
forebrain signals not available in the neurosphere assay. Analyses of
Pax6(Sey/Sey), Shh(-/-), and Gli3(XtJ/XtJ) mutants suggests that LGE and MGE
progenitor identity does not rely exclusively on previously established
forebrain-intrinsic patterning mechanisms. Among a limited number of additional
potential patterning mechanisms, we found that extrinsic signals from the
frontonasal mesenchyme are essential for Shh- and Fgf8-dependent regulation of
LGE and MGE genes. Thus, extrinsic and intrinsic forebrain patterning mechanisms 
cooperate to establish LGE and MGE progenitor identity, and presumably their
capacities to generate distinct classes of neuronal progeny.

PMCID: PMC3619227
PMID: 18799682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Am J Med Genet A. 2008 Oct 15;146A(20):2589-97. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32503.

Two new patients with Curry-Jones syndrome with trichoblastoma and
medulloblastoma suggest an etiologic role of the sonic hedgehog-patched-GLI
pathway.

Grange DK(1), Clericuzio CL, Bayliss SJ, Berk DR, Heideman RL, Higginson JK,
Julian S, Lind A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.
grange_d@kids.wustl.edu

Curry-Jones syndrome (OMIM #601707) is a rare multiple malformation disorder of
unknown etiology, associated with brain and skull abnormalities, polysyndactyly, 
and defects of the eyes, skin and gastrointestinal tract. We report on two new
cases of Curry-Jones syndrome with previously unreported features, including
benign and malignant neoplasms. The first patient had typical features of
Curry-Jones syndrome as well as multiple intra-abdominal smooth muscle hamartomas
and trichoblastoma of the skin. The second patient was born with occipital
meningoceles and developed a desmoplastic medulloblastoma. Routine lymphocyte
karyotype, GLI3 gene analysis and Patched (PTCH) gene analysis on both patients
and chromosome microarray analysis on the first patient were normal. We review
the previously reported cases of Curry-Jones syndrome and compare our patients'
findings. In view of the association of trichoblastoma with basal cell carcinoma 
and desmoplastic medulloblastoma with nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome
(NBCCS) and PTCH mutations, we hypothesize that Curry-Jones syndrome is caused by
malfunction of an element in the sonic hedgehog pathway.

2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18798318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. BMC Cell Biol. 2008 Sep 13;9:49. doi: 10.1186/1471-2121-9-49.

Establishment and characterization of immortalized Gli-null mouse embryonic
fibroblast cell lines.

Lipinski RJ(1), Bijlsma MF, Gipp JJ, Podhaizer DJ, Bushman W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, School of Medicine and Public Health, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA. lipinski@surgery.wisc.edu

BACKGROUND: Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is a conserved morphogenetic pathway which
plays critical roles in embryonic development, with emerging evidence also
supporting a role in healing and repair processes and tumorigenesis. The Gli
family of transcription factors (Gli1, 2 and 3) mediate the Hedgehog
morphogenetic signal by regulating the expression of downstream target genes. We 
previously characterized the individual and cooperative roles of the Gli proteins
in Hh target gene regulation using a battery of primary embryonic fibroblasts
from Gli null mice.
RESULTS: Here, we describe the establishment of spontaneously immortalized mouse 
embryonic fibroblast (iMEF) cell lines lacking single and multiple Gli genes.
These non-clonal cell lines recapitulate the unique ligand mediated
transcriptional response of primary MEFs. While loss of Gli1 had no effect on
target gene induction, Gli2 null cells demonstrated reduced target gene induction
while Gli3 null cells exhibited elevated basal and ligand-induced expression.
Target gene response in Gli1-/-2-/-iMEFs was severely reduced while
Gli2-/-3-/-iMEFs were incapable of ligand-induced transcriptional response.
However, we found that both Gli1-/-2-/- and Gli2-/-3-/-iMEFs exhibited robust
leukotriene synthesis-dependent migration responses to Hh ligand, demonstrating
that this response is not transcriptionally-dependent.
CONCLUSION: This study provides fundamental characterizations of the
transcriptional and non-transcriptional Hh responsiveness of a battery of
Gli-null iMEFs. Moving forward, these cell lines should prove a valuable tool set
to study the unique functional regulation of the Gli proteins in a Hh-responsive 
cell-type.

PMCID: PMC2542994
PMID: 18789160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Development. 2008 Oct;135(20):3325-31. doi: 10.1242/dev.027078. Epub 2008 Sep 11.

Temporal progression of hypothalamic patterning by a dual action of BMP.

Ohyama K(1), Das R, Placzek M.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental and Biomedical Genetics and Department of
Biomedical Science, University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK.

In the developing chick hypothalamus, Shh and BMPs are expressed in a spatially
overlapping, but temporally consecutive, manner. Here, we demonstrate how the
temporal integration of Shh and BMP signalling leads to the late acquisition of
Pax7 expression in hypothalamic progenitor cells. Our studies reveal a
requirement for a dual action of BMPs: first, the inhibition of GliA function
through Gli3 upregulation; and second, activation of a Smad5-dependent BMP
pathway. Previous studies have shown a requirement for spatial antagonism of Shh 
and BMPs in early CNS patterning; here, we propose that neural pattern
elaboration can be achieved through a versatile temporal antagonism between Shh
and BMPs.

PMID: 18787065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Sep 2;105(35):13127-32. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0804558105. Epub 2008 Aug 26.

Primary cilia regulate hippocampal neurogenesis by mediating sonic hedgehog
signaling.

Breunig JJ(1), Sarkisian MR, Arellano JI, Morozov YM, Ayoub AE, Sojitra S, Wang
B, Flavell RA, Rakic P, Town T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Kavli Institute of Neuroscience, New York, NY
10021, USA.

Primary cilia are present on mammalian neurons and glia, but their function is
largely unknown. We generated conditional homozygous mutant mice for a gene we
termed Stumpy. Mutants lack cilia and have conspicuous abnormalities in
postnatally developing brain regions, including a hypoplasic hippocampus
characterized by a primary deficiency in neural stem cells known as
astrocyte-like neural precursors (ALNPs). Previous studies suggested that primary
cilia mediate sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling. Here, we find that loss of ALNP
cilia leads to abrogated Shh activity, increased cell cycle exit, and
morphological abnormalities in ALNPs. Processing of Gli3, a mediator of Shh
signaling, is also altered in the absence of cilia. Further, key mediators of the
Shh pathway localize to ALNP cilia. Thus, selective targeting of Shh machinery to
primary cilia confers to ALNPs the ability to differentially respond to Shh
mitogenic signals compared to neighboring cells. Our data suggest these
organelles are cellular "antennae" critically required to modulate ALNP behavior.

PMCID: PMC2529104
PMID: 18728187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Int J Mol Med. 2008 Sep;22(3):271-5.

Hedgehog signaling, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and miRNA (review).

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical Bioinformatics, Hongo 113-003, Japan.

SHH, IHH, and DHH are lipid-modified secreted proteins binding to Patched
receptors, and CDON, BOC or GAS1 co-receptors. In the absence of Hedgehog
signaling, GLI1 is transcriptionally repressed, GLI2 is phosphorylated by GSK3
and CK1 for the FBXW11 (betaTRCP2)-mediated degradation, and GLI3 is processed to
a cleaved repressor. In the presence of Hedgehog signaling, Smoothened is
relieved from Patched-mediated suppression due to the Hedgehog-dependent
internalization of Patched, which leads to MAP3K10 (MST) activation and SUFU
inactivation for the stabilization and nuclear accumulation of GLI family
members. GLI activators then upregulate CCND1, CCND2 for cell cycle acceleration,
FOXA2, FOXC2, FOXE1, FOXF1, FOXL1, FOXP3, POU3F1, RUNX2, SOX13, TBX2 for cell
fate determination, JAG2, INHBC, and INHBE for stem cell signaling regulation.
Hedgehog signals also upregulate SFRP1 in mesenchymal cells for WNT signaling
regulation. Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) during embryogenesis,
adult tissue homeostasis and carcinogenesis is characterized by class switch from
E-cadherin to N-cadherin. SNAI1 (Snail), SNAI2 (Slug), SNAI3, ZEB1, ZEB2 (SIP1), 
KLF8, TWIST1, and TWIST2 are EMT regulators repressing CDH1 gene encoding
E-cadherin. Hedgehog signals induce JAG2 upregulation for Notch-CSL-mediated
SNAI1 upregulation, and also induce TGFbeta1 secretion for ZEB1 and ZEB2
upregulation via TGFbeta receptor and NF-kappaB. TGFbeta-mediated downregulation 
of miR-141, miR-200a, miR-200b, miR-200c, miR-205, and miR-429 results in
upregulation of ZEB1 and ZEB2 proteins. Hedgehog signaling activation indirectly 
leads to EMT through FGF, Notch, TGFbeta signaling cascades, and miRNA regulatory
networks. miRNAs targeted to stem cell signaling components or EMT regulators are
potent drug targets; however, off-target effects should be strictly controlled
before clinical application of synthetic miRNA. Peptide mimetic and RNA aptamer
could also be utilized as Hedgehog signaling inhibitors or EMT suppressors.

PMID: 18698484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2008 Sep;82(9):644-8. doi:
10.1002/bdra.20482.

Mutational analysis of SHH and GLI3 in anorectal malformations.

Garcia-Barceló MM(1), Chi-Hang Lui V, Miao X, So MT, Yuk-yu Leon T, Yuan ZW, Li
L, Liu L, Wang B, Sun XB, Huang LM, Tou JF, Sau-wai Ngan E, Cherny SS, Chan KW,
Lee KH, Wang W, Kak-yuen Wong K, Kwong-hang Tam P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.

BACKGROUND: Anorectal malformations (congenital absence of the anal opening) are 
among the most common pediatric surgical problems and carry a significant chronic
morbidity.
METHODS: Direct sequencing was used to screen 88 anorectal malformations patients
for mutations and polymorphisms in SHH and GLI3. These genes were chosen
according to the phenotype presented by mutant mice and their expression
patterns.
RESULTS: We report on 10 GLI3 variants (IVS3+141C>G, T183A, IVS4+124T>C,
IVS7+17G>A, IVS8+1 G>C, N503N, P941P, P998L, A1005A, A1039A) and four SHH
mutation/variants (IVS1-49C>T, IVS2+111A>C, L214L, G290D).
CONCLUSIONS: These variants are not over-represented in the healthy population
and most are predicted to be benign. This study conveys the problematic
assessment of the pathogenic role in disease of rare point mutations and
variants.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18655123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. J Neurosci. 2008 Jul 16;28(29):7350-8. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0312-08.2008.

Hedgehog signaling regulates sensory cell formation and auditory function in mice
and humans.

Driver EC(1), Pryor SP, Hill P, Turner J, Rüther U, Biesecker LG, Griffith AJ,
Kelley MW.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Developmental Neuroscience, National Institute on Deafness and
Other Communication Disorders, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. drivere@nidcd.nih.gov

Auditory perception is mediated through a finite number of mechanosensory hair
cells located in a specialized sensory epithelium within the inner ear. The
formation of the appropriate number of hair cells and the location of those cells
is crucial for normal auditory function. However, the factors that regulate the
formation of this epithelium remain poorly understood. Truncating mutations in
the transcription factor GLI3, a downstream effector of the Hedgehog (HH)
pathway, lead to a partial loss of HH signaling and cause Pallister-Hall syndrome
(PHS). Here, we report that cochleae from a mouse model of PHS (Gli3(Delta699)), 
which produces only the truncated, repressor form of GLI3, have a variably
penetrant phenotype that includes an increase in the size of the sensory
epithelium and the development of large ectopic sensory patches in Kölliker's
organ (KO). Consistent with the mouse model, some PHS individuals exhibit hearing
loss across a broad range of frequencies. Moreover, inhibition of HH signaling in
vitro results in an increase in the size of the prosensory domain, a precursor
population that gives rise to the sensory epithelium, whereas treatment with
Sonic hedgehog (SHH) inhibits prosensory formation. Finally, we demonstrate that 
HH signaling within the cochlea regulates expression of prosensory markers and
that the effects of HH in KO are dependent on activation of Notch, an inducer of 
prosensory fate. These results suggest that HH signaling plays a key role in the 
specification, size, and location of the prosensory domain, and therefore of hair
cells, within the cochlea.

PMCID: PMC2581462
PMID: 18632939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Dev Dyn. 2008 Aug;237(8):2039-52. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21610.

Characterization of primary cilia and Hedgehog signaling during development of
the human pancreas and in human pancreatic duct cancer cell lines.

Nielsen SK(1), Møllgård K, Clement CA, Veland IR, Awan A, Yoder BK, Novak I,
Christensen ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling controls pancreatic development and homeostasis; aberrant
Hh signaling is associated with several pancreatic diseases. Here we investigated
the link between Hh signaling and primary cilia in the human developing
pancreatic ducts and in cultures of human pancreatic duct adenocarcinoma cell
lines, PANC-1 and CFPAC-1. We show that the onset of Hh signaling from human
embryogenesis to fetal development is associated with accumulation of Hh
signaling components Smo and Gli2 in duct primary cilia and a reduction of Gli3
in the duct epithelium. Smo, Ptc, and Gli2 localized to primary cilia of PANC-1
and CFPAC-1 cells, which may maintain high levels of nonstimulated Hh pathway
activity. These findings indicate that primary cilia are involved in pancreatic
development and postnatal tissue homeostasis.

Copyright (c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18629868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Dev Biol. 2008 Sep 1;321(1):188-96. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.06.014. Epub 2008
Jun 18.

The decoupling of Smoothened from Galphai proteins has little effect on Gli3
protein processing and Hedgehog-regulated chick neural tube patterning.

Low WC(1), Wang C, Pan Y, Huang XY, Chen JK, Wang B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine, Weill Medical College of Cornell University,
1300 York Avenue, W404, New York, NY 10021, USA.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signal is transmitted by two receptor molecules, Patched (Ptc) 
and Smoothened (Smo). Ptc suppresses Smo activity, while Hh binds Ptc and
alleviates the suppression, which results in activation of Hh targets. Smo is a
seven-transmembrane protein with a long carboxyl terminal tail. Vertebrate Smo
has been previously shown to be coupled to Galpha(i) proteins, but the biological
significance of the coupling in Hh signal transduction is not clear. Here we show
that although inhibition of Galpha(i) protein activity appears to significantly
reduce Hh pathway activity in Ptc(-/-) mouse embryonic fibroblasts and the
NIH3T3-based Shh-light cells, it fails to derepress Shh- or a Smo-agonist-induced
inhibition of Gli3 protein processing, a known in vivo indicator of Hh signaling 
activity. The inhibition of Galpha(i) protein activity also cannot block the
Sonic Hedgehog (Shh)-dependent specification of neural progenitor cells in the
neural tube. Consistent with these results, overexpression of a constitutively
active Galpha(i) protein, Galpha(i2)QL, cannot ectopically specify the neural
cell types in the spinal cord, whereas an active Smo, SmoM2, can. Thus, our
results indicate that the Smo-induced Galpha(i) activity plays an insignificant
role in the regulation of Gli3 processing and Shh-regulated neural tube
patterning.

PMCID: PMC2597282
PMID: 18590719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Science. 2008 Jun 27;320(5884):1726-7. doi: 10.1126/science.1160448.

Cell biology. Arrestin' movement in cilia.

Rohatgi R(1), Scott MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA 94305-5439, USA.

Comment on
    Science. 2008 Jun 27;320(5884):1777-81.

PMID: 18583599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Hybridoma (Larchmt). 2008 Jun;27(3):167-74. doi: 10.1089/hyb.2008.0004.

Generation and characterization of a single-chain Fv antibody against G, a
hedgehog signaling pathway transcription factor.

Laht S(1), Meerits K, Altroff H, Faust H, Tsaney R, Kogerman P, Järvekülg L,
Paalme V, Valkna A, Timmusk S.

Author information: 
(1)Celecure AS, Akadeemia tee, Tallinn, Estonia.

Gli3 is a key regulator of development, controlling multiple patterning steps.
Here we report the generation of a scFv antibody specific to the repressor domain
of human Gli3. We show that this scFv retains the binding capacity of its parent 
anti-Gli3 monoclonal antibody derived from hybridoma clone 5E1. When expressed in
mammalian cells, the anti-Gli3 scFv co-localizes with intracellular Gli3.
Immunocytochemical staining of the intrabody in Gli3-positive TM4 cells shows a
distinct perinuclear cytoplasmic localization. Such a scFv constitutes a useful
tool for studying transcriptional regulation of the hedgehog pathway in mammals
and offers a starting point for developing novel Gli-related therapeutic
intrabodies.

PMID: 18582209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Cancer Res. 2008 Jun 15;68(12):4658-65. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6174.

Protein phosphatase 2A and rapamycin regulate the nuclear localization and
activity of the transcription factor GLI3.

Krauss S(1), Foerster J, Schneider R, Schweiger S.

Author information: 
(1)Charité University Hospital, Department of Dermatology and Max-Planck
Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.

Gain-of-function alterations to the sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling cascade have
been found in a wide range of tumors. Three SHH effectors, GLI1, GLI2, and GLI3, 
regulate transcription of diverse genes involved in cell growth and cell
proliferation. Here, we show that protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A), its regulatory
subunit, alpha4, and rapamycin, an inhibitor of the mammalian target of rapamycin
kinase complex 1 (mTORC1), regulate the nuclear localization and transcriptional 
activity of GLI3. An increase in PP2A activity or treatment with rapamycin leads 
to cytosolic retention of GLI3 and, consequently, reduced transcription of the
GLI3 target gene and cell cycle regulator, cyclin D1. Conversely, inhibition of
PP2A results in increased expression of cyclin D1. In summary, our findings
reveal the existence of a hitherto unrecognized molecular cross-talk between the 
oncogenic SHH pathway and the tumor suppressor PP2A and suggest a novel mechanism
underlying the anticancerogenic effects of rapamycin.

PMID: 18559511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Dev Biol. 2008 Aug 1;320(1):92-101. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.04.034. Epub 2008
May 8.

FGF8 signaling patterns the telencephalic midline by regulating putative key
factors of midline development.

Okada T(1), Okumura Y, Motoyama J, Ogawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Cell Culture Development, Brain Science Institute, RIKEN, 2-1
Hirosawa, Wako-shi, Saitama, 351-0198, Japan. toshiokada@brain.riken.jp

FGF8 has been reported to act as a primary regulator of neocortical patterning
along the anteroposterior (AP) axis in the mouse telencephalon, and disruption of
FGF signaling causes distortion of molecular arealization along the AP axis.
Since hypoplasia of midline structures is observed in Fgf8 mutant mice, FGF8 is
also postulated to be involved in telencephalic midline development. In this
study we analyzed the role of FGF8 in midline development by means of
gain-of-function and loss-of-function experiments. The results showed that FGF8
up-regulates the expression of transcription factor (TF) genes, including
putative key factors involved in midline development. Although FGF8 had been
thought to act downstream of SHH signaling, ectopic FGF8 up-regulates the
expression of midline TF genes in Shh null mice, suggesting that FGF signaling
acts as an upstream positive regulator of midline TFs during midline development 
independently of SHH.

PMID: 18547559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Gut. 2008 Oct;57(10):1398-405. doi: 10.1136/gut.2008.148395. Epub 2008 Jun 3.

Regional variation in gene expression in the healthy colon is dysregulated in
ulcerative colitis.

Noble CL(1), Abbas AR, Cornelius J, Lees CW, Ho GT, Toy K, Modrusan Z, Pal N,
Zhong F, Chalasani S, Clark H, Arnott ID, Penman ID, Satsangi J, Diehl L.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Unit, Molecular Medicine Centre, Western General Hospital,
Edinburgh, EH4 2XU, UK. noblecolin@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate differential intestinal gene expression in patients
with ulcerative colitis and in controls.
DESIGN: Genome-wide expression study (41,058 expression sequence tags, 215
biopsies).
SETTING: Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, UK, and Genentech, San Francisco,
USA.
PATIENTS: 67 patients with ulcerative colitis and 31 control subjects (23 normal 
subjects and 8 patients with inflamed non-inflammatory bowel disease biopsies).
INTERVENTIONS: Paired endoscopic biopsies were taken from 5 specific anatomical
locations for RNA extraction and histology. The Agilent microarray platform was
used and confirmation of results was undertaken by real time polymerase chain
reaction and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: In healthy control biopsies, cluster analysis showed differences in gene
expression between the right and left colon. (chi(2) = 25.1, p<0.0001).
Developmental genes, homeobox protein A13 (HOXA13), (p = 2.3x10(-16)), HOXB13
(p<1x10(-45)), glioma-associated oncogene 1 (GLI1) (p = 4.0x10(-24)), and GLI3 (p
= 2.1x10(-28)) primarily drove this separation. When all ulcerative colitis
biopsies and control biopsies were compared, 143 sequences had a fold change of
>1.5 in the ulcerative colitis biopsies (0.01>p>10(-45)) and 54 sequences had a
fold change of <-1.5 (0.01>p>10(-20)). Differentially upregulated genes in
ulcerative colitis included serum amyloid A1 (SAA1) (p<10(-45)) the alpha
defensins 5 and 6 (DEFA5 and 6) (p = 0.00003 and p = 6.95x10(-7), respectively), 
matrix metalloproteinase 3 (MMP3) (p = 5.6x10(-10)) and MMP7 (p = 2.3x10(-7)).
Increased DEFA5 and 6 expression was further characterised to Paneth cell
metaplasia by immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridisation. Sub-analysis of the
inflammatory bowel disease 2 (IBD2) and IBD5 loci, and the ATP-binding cassette
(ABC) transporter genes revealed a number of differentially regulated genes in
the ulcerative colitis biopsies.
CONCLUSIONS: Key findings are the expression gradient in the healthy adult colon 
and the involvement of novel gene families, as well as established candidate
genes in the pathogenesis of ulcerative colitis.

PMID: 18523026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2008 Aug;233(8):980-8. doi: 10.3181/0802-RM-48. Epub 2008
May 14.

Polydactyly in mice lacking HDAC9/HDRP.

Morrison BE(1), D'Mello SR.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Texas at Dallas, 2601 N.
Floyd Road, Richardson, TX 75080, USA.

Mice lacking histone deacetylase 9 (HDAC9) and its truncated variant, HDRP,
exhibit post-axial polydactyly that manifests as an extra big toe on the right
hind foot. Polydactyly in HDAC9/ HDRP knockout mice occurs with incomplete
penetrance and affects both genders similarly. Because polydactyly can result
from overactivity of sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling, we investigated whether HDRP
acted as a negative regulator of the Shh pathway. We find that Gli1, a
transcription factor and downstream mediator of Shh signaling, is expressed at
substantially higher levels in the feet of perinatal HDAC9/ HDRP-/- mice as
compared with wild-type littermates. To more directly examine whether HDRP
negatively-regulates Shh signaling we utilized cell lines that express components
of the Shh pathway and that respond to the Shh agonist purmorphamine. We find
that purmorphamine-mediated stimulation of Gli1 in the NIH 3T3 and HT22 cell
lines is inhibited by the expression of HDRP. In HT22 cells, purmorphamine
treatment leads to an increase in the rate of cell proliferation, which is also
inhibited by HDRP. This inhibitory effect of HDRP on purmorphamine-mediated cell 
proliferation was also observed in primary cultures of glial cells. Although the 
mechanism by which it inhibits Gli1 induction and cell proliferation by
purmorphamine is not clear, HDRP localizes to the nucleus suggesting it acts just
upstream of Gli3 activation in the signaling cascade activated by Shh. Taken
together our results suggest that HDRP acts as a negative regulator of the Shh
pathway and that the absence of HDRP results in hyper-activation of this pathway 
resulting in polydactyly.

PMCID: PMC2656257
PMID: 18480421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Development. 2008 Jun;135(12):2093-103. doi: 10.1242/dev.015990. Epub 2008 May
14.

Gli3 coordinates three-dimensional patterning and growth of the tectum and
cerebellum by integrating Shh and Fgf8 signaling.

Blaess S(1), Stephen D, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275
York Avenue, Box 511, New York, NY 10021, USA.

The coordination of anterior-posterior (AP) and dorsal-ventral (DV) patterning of
the mesencephalon (mes) and rhombomere 1 (r1) is instrumental for the development
of three distinct brain structures: the tectum and cerebellum dorsally and the
tegmentum ventrally. Patterning of the mes/r1 is primarily mediated by signaling 
molecules secreted from two organizers: sonic hedgehog (Shh) from the floor plate
(DV) and Fgf8 from the isthmus (AP). Gli3, a zinc-finger transcription factor in 
the Shh signaling pathway, has been implicated in regulating Fgf8 expression and 
is therefore a potential candidate for coordinating the action of the two
organizers. By inactivating mouse Gli3 at successive embryonic time points in
vivo, we uncovered the extent and the underlying mechanism of Gli3 function in
the mes/r1. We demonstrate that before E9.0, Gli3 is required for establishing a 
distinct posterior tectum, isthmus and cerebellum, but does not play a role in
the development of the tegmentum. Between E9.0 and E11.0, Gli3 continues to be
required for isthmus and cerebellum development, but primarily for defining the
cerebellar foliation pattern. We show that Gli3 regulates patterning of the
isthmus and cerebellar anlage by confining Fgf8 expression to the isthmus, and
attenuates growth of dorsal r1 (before E11.0) and the dorsal mes and isthmus
(beyond E11.0) through regulation of cell proliferation and viability. In
conclusion, our results show that Gli3 is essential for the coordinated
three-dimensional patterning and growth of the dorsal mes/r1.

PMCID: PMC2673693
PMID: 18480159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Pediatr Radiol. 2008 Aug;38(8):902-6. doi: 10.1007/s00247-008-0870-5. Epub 2008
May 14.

Hydrometrocolpos, postaxial polydactyly, and hypothalamic hamartoma in a patient 
with confirmed Pallister-Hall syndrome: a clinical overlap with McKusick-Kaufman 
syndrome.

Kos S(1), Roth K, Korinth D, Zeilinger G, Eich G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Radiology, University Hospital Basel, Petersgraben 4, Basel,
Switzerland. skos@gmx.de

We present a preterm-born girl with polydactyly of both hands and massive
hydrometrocolpos, the latter due to vaginal atresia. This association led
initially to the diagnosis of McKusick-Kaufman syndrome (MKKS). However,
additional features, including characteristic radiographic findings of the hands 
and a large hypothalamic tumour, presumably a hamartoma, favoured the diagnosis
of Pallister-Hall syndrome (PHS), which was then genetically confirmed by
detection of a GLI3 mutation (Q717X). This is the second genetically confirmed
case revealing the previously described association of PHS with hydrometrocolpos 
due to vaginal atresia as a clinical overlap with MKKS.

PMID: 18478223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Dev Cell. 2008 May;14(5):689-99. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2008.03.007.

Patched1 haploinsufficiency increases adult bone mass and modulates Gli3
repressor activity.

Ohba S(1), Kawaguchi H, Kugimiya F, Ogasawara T, Kawamura N, Saito T, Ikeda T,
Fujii K, Miyajima T, Kuramochi A, Miyashita T, Oda H, Nakamura K, Takato T, Chung
UI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sensory and Motor System Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, 
The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan. shin-o@umin.ac.jp

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2008 May;14(5):637-8.

Hedgehog (Hh)-Patched1 (Ptch1) signaling plays essential roles in various
developmental processes, but little is known about its role in postnatal
homeostasis. Here, we demonstrate regulation of postnatal bone homeostasis by
Hh-Ptch1 signaling. Ptch1-deficient (Ptch1+/-) mice and patients with nevoid
basal cell carcinoma syndrome showed high bone mass in adults. In culture,
Ptch1+/- cells showed accelerated osteoblast differentiation, enhanced
responsiveness to the runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2), and reduced
generation of the repressor form of Gli3 (Gli3rep). Gli3rep inhibited DNA binding
by Runx2 in vitro, suggesting a mechanism that could contribute to the bone
phenotypes seen in the Ptch1 heterozygotes. Moreover, systemic administration of 
the Hh signaling inhibitor cyclopamine decreased bone mass in adult mice. These
data provide evidence that Hh-Ptch1 signaling plays a crucial role in postnatal
bone homeostasis and point to Hh-Ptch1 signaling as a potential molecular target 
for the treatment of osteoporosis.

PMID: 18477452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Congenit Anom (Kyoto). 2008 Jun;48(2):74-80. doi:
10.1111/j.1741-4520.2008.00182.x.

Altered signaling pathway in the dysmorphogenesis of telencephalon in the Gli3
depressed mouse embryo, Pdn/Pdn.

Ueta E(1), Kurome M, Teshima Y, Kodama M, Otsuka Y, Naruse I.

Author information: 
(1)School of Health Science, Faculty of Medicine, Tottori University, Yonago,
Japan.

The responsible gene of genetic polydactyly/arhinencephaly mouse (Pdn/Pdn) is
Gli3. Pdn/Pdn exhibits absence of the olfactory bulb, suggesting telencephalic
dysmorphogenesis. It has been cleared that a transposon was inserted into intron 
3 of the Gli3 gene in the Pdn mouse. Adequate PCR primers in the intron 3 and
transposon allowed us to discriminate +/+, Pdn/+ and Pdn/Pdn embryos. After
genotyping of the Pdn embryos using genomic DNA from the yolk sac membrane, gene 
expressions in the embryo proper were analyzed by DNA microarray, real-time PCR
and whole-mount in situ hybridization (WISH) methods. DNA microarray detected 368
depressed and 425 over-expressed genes in the Pdn/Pdn mouse embryos on day 9 of
gestation. In these genes, six signaling pathway and 20 transcription factor
genes were included. From these genes, we further investigated Gli3, Emx2, Wnt8b 
and Wnt7b gene expressions using real-time PCR and WISH, and depression of these 
gene expression amounts and altered expression patterns were confirmed. Although 
alterations of Shh and Fgf8 gene expressions were not detected in the DNA
microarray, as these genes have been closed up in the telencephalic
morphogenesis, we investigated these gene expressions by real-time PCR and WISH. 
Shh gene expression amount and pattern were not changed. Alteration of Fgf8 gene 
expression amount was not detected also in the real-time PCR, but altered
expression pattern was detected in the Pdn/Pdn embryos by WISH. From the present 
data, we suggested that Emx2, Wnt8b, Wnt7b and Fgf8 are the important Gli3
signaling pathway in the morphogenesis of telencephalon.

PMID: 18452488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Dev Biol. 2008 Jun 1;318(1):203-14. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.03.032. Epub 2008
Mar 28.

Lamination of the cerebral cortex is disturbed in Gli3 mutant mice.

Friedrichs M(1), Larralde O, Skutella T, Theil T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Animal Developmental and Molecular Biology,
Heinrich-Heine-University, D-40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.

The layered organization of the cerebral cortex develops in an inside-out
pattern, a process which is controlled by the secreted protein reelin. Here we
report on cortical lamination in the Gli3 hypomorphic mouse mutant Xt(J)/Pdn
which lacks the cortical hem, a major source of reelin(+) Cajal Retzius cells in 
the cerebral cortex. Unlike other previously described mouse mutants with hem
defects, cortical lamination is disturbed in Xt(J)/Pdn animals. Surprisingly,
these layering defects occur in the presence of reelin(+) cells which are
probably derived from an expanded Dbx1(+) progenitor pool in the mutant. However,
while these reelin(+) neurons and also Calretinin(+) cells are initially evenly
distributed over the cortical surface they form clusters later during development
suggesting a novel role for Gli3 in maintaining the proper arrangement of these
cells in the marginal zone. Moreover, the radial glial network is disturbed in
the regions of these clusters. In addition, the differentiation of subplate cells
is affected which serve as a framework for developing a properly laminated
cortex.

PMID: 18448089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2008 Apr 24;3:10. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-3-10.

The Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome.

Biesecker LG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Disease Research Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. leslieb@helix.nih.gov

The Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS) is a pleiotropic, multiple
congenital anomaly syndrome. It is rare, but precise estimates of incidence are
difficult to determine, as ascertainment is erratic (estimated range
1-9/1,000,000). The primary findings include hypertelorism, macrocephaly with
frontal bossing, and polysyndactyly. The polydactyly is most commonly preaxial of
the feet and postaxial in the hands, with variable cutaneous syndactyly, but the 
limb findings vary significantly. Other low frequency findings include central
nervous system (CNS) anomalies, hernias, and cognitive impairment. GCPS is caused
by loss of function mutations in the GLI3 transcription factor gene and is
inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern. The disorder is allelic to the
Pallister-Hall syndrome and one form of the acrocallosal syndrome. Clinical
diagnosis is challenging because the findings of GCPS are relatively
non-specific, and no specific and sensitive clinical have been delineated. For
this reason, we have proposed a combined clinical-molecular definition for the
syndrome. A presumptive diagnosis of GCPS can be made if the patient has the
classic triad of preaxial polydactyly with cutaneous syndactyly of at least one
limb, hypertelorism, and macrocephaly. Patients with a phenotype consistent with 
GCPS (but which may not manifest all three attributes listed above) and a GLI3
mutation may be diagnosed definitively with GCPS. In addition, persons with a
GCPS-consistent phenotype who are related to a definitively diagnosed family
member in a pattern consistent with autosomal dominant inheritance may be
diagnosed definitively as well. Antenatal molecular diagnosis is technically
straightforward to perform. Differential diagnoses include preaxial polydactyly
type 4, the GCPS contiguous gene syndrome, acrocallosal syndrome, Gorlin
syndrome, Carpenter syndrome, and Teebi syndrome. Treatment of the disorder is
symptomatic, with plastic or orthopedic surgery indicated for significant limb
malformations. The prognosis for typically affected patients is excellent. There 
may be a slight increase in the incidence of developmental delay or cognitive
impairment. Patients with large deletions that include GLI3 may have a worse
prognosis. The Article is a work of the United States Government. Title 17 U.S.C 
5 105 provides that copyright protection is not available for any work of the
United States Government in the United States. The United States hereby grants to
anyone a paid-up, nonexclusive, irrevocable worldwide license to reproduce,
prepare derivative works, distribute copies to the public and perform publicly
and display publicly the work, and also retains the nonexclusive right to do all 
of the above for or on behalf of the United States.

PMCID: PMC2397380
PMID: 18435847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 Jul 15;17(14):2118-31. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn110. Epub 2008 Apr
7.

A sensitized mutagenesis screen identifies Gli3 as a modifier of Sox10
neurocristopathy.

Matera I(1), Watkins-Chow DE, Loftus SK, Hou L, Incao A, Silver DL, Rivas C,
Elliott EC, Baxter LL, Pavan WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Disease Research Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Haploinsufficiency for the transcription factor SOX10 is associated with the
pigmentary deficiencies of Waardenburg syndrome (WS) and is modeled in Sox10
haploinsufficient mice (Sox10(LacZ/+)). As genetic background affects WS severity
in both humans and mice, we established an N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea (ENU)
mutagenesis screen to identify modifiers that increase the phenotypic severity of
Sox10(LacZ/+) mice. Analysis of 230 pedigrees identified three modifiers, named
modifier of Sox10 neurocristopathies (Mos1, Mos2 and Mos3). Linkage analysis
confirmed their locations on mouse chromosomes 13, 4 and 3, respectively, within 
regions distinct from previously identified WS loci. Positional candidate
analysis of Mos1 identified a truncation mutation in a hedgehog(HH)-signaling
mediator, GLI-Kruppel family member 3 (Gli3). Complementation tests using a
second allele of Gli3 (Gli3(Xt-J)) confirmed that a null mutation of Gli3 causes 
the increased hypopigmentation in Sox10(LacZ/+);Gli3(Mos1/)(+) double
heterozygotes. Early melanoblast markers (Mitf, Sox10, Dct, and Si) are reduced
in Gli3(Mos1/)(Mos1) embryos, indicating that loss of GLI3 signaling disrupts
melanoblast specification. In contrast, mice expressing only the GLI3 repressor
have normal melanoblast specification, indicating that the full-length GLI3
activator is not required for specification of neural crest to the melanocyte
lineage. This study demonstrates the feasibility of sensitized screens to
identify disease modifier loci and implicates GLI3 and other HH signaling
components as modifiers of human neurocristopathies.

PMCID: PMC2902284
PMID: 18397875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Dev Biol. 2008 May 1;317(1):121-31. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.02.014. Epub 2008
Feb 21.

Terminal end bud maintenance in mammary gland is dependent upon FGFR2b signaling.

Parsa S(1), Ramasamy SK, De Langhe S, Gupte VV, Haigh JJ, Medina D, Bellusci S.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Saban Research Institute of Childrens Hospital 
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90027, USA.

We previously demonstrated that Fibroblast Growth Factor 10 (FGF10) and its
receptor FGFR2b play a key role in controlling the very early stages of mammary
gland development during embryogenesis [Mailleux, A.A., Spencer-Dene, B., Dillon,
C., Ndiaye, D., Savona-Baron, C., Itoh, N., Kato, S., Dickson, C., Thiery, J.P., 
and Bellusci, S. (2002). Role of FGF10/FGFR2b signaling during mammary gland
development in the mouse embryo. Development 129, 53-60. Veltmaat, J. M., Relaix,
F., Le, L.T., Kratochwil, K., Sala, F.G., van Veelen, W., Rice, R., Spencer-Dene,
B., Mailleux, A.A., Rice, D.P., Thiery, J.P., and Bellusci, S. (2006).
Gli3-mediated somitic Fgf10 expression gradients are required for the induction
and patterning of mammary epithelium along the embryonic axes. Development 133,
2325-35.]. However, the role of FGFR2b signaling in postnatal mammary gland
development is still elusive. We show that FGF10 is expressed at high level
throughout the adipose tissue in the mammary gland of young virgin female mice
whereas its main receptor FGFR2 is found mostly in the epithelium. Using a rtTA
transactivator/tetracycline promoter approach allowing inducible and reversible
attenuation of the FGFR2b signaling throughout the adult mouse, we are now
reporting that FGFR2b signaling is also critical during postnatal mammary gland
development. Ubiquitous attenuation of FGFR2b signaling in the postnatal mouse
for 6 weeks starting immediately after birth is not lethal and leads to minor
defects in the animal. Upon dissection of the mammary glands, a 40% reduction in 
size compared to the WT control is observed. Further examination shows a
rudimentary mammary epithelial tree with completely absent terminal end buds
(TEBs), compared to a well-branched structure observed in wild type.
Transplantation of mammary gland explants into cleared fat pad of wild type mouse
recipients indicates that the observed abnormal branching results from defective 
FGFR2b signaling in the epithelium. We also demonstrate that this rudimentary
tree reforms TEBs and resumes branching upon removal of doxycycline suggesting
that the regenerative capacities of the mammary epithelial progenitor cells were 
still functional despite long-term inactivation of the FGFR2b pathway. At the
cellular level, upon FGFR2b attenuation, we show an increase in apoptosis
associated with a decrease in the proliferation of the mammary luminal
epithelium. We conclude that during puberty, there is a differential requirement 
for FGFR2b signaling in ductal vs. TEBs epithelium. FGFR2b signaling is crucial
for the survival and proliferation of the mammary luminal epithelial cells, but
does not affect the regenerative potential of the mammary epithelial progenitor
cells.

PMID: 18381212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Pediatr Int. 2008 Apr;50(2):248-50. doi: 10.1111/j.1442-200X.2008.02550.x.

Greig syndrome based on a de novo translocation.

Yilmaz Z(1), Gokdemir M, Derbent M, Sahin FI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Baskent University,
Ankara, Turkey. zerriny@baskent.edu.tr

PMID: 18353071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Dev Dyn. 2008 Apr;237(4):1172-82. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21508.

Expression of the NET family member Zfp503 is regulated by hedgehog and BMP
signaling in the limb.

McGlinn E(1), Richman JM, Metzis V, Town L, Butterfield NC, Wainwright BJ,
Wicking C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Queensland, Australia.

The NET/Nlz family of zinc finger transcription factors contribute to aspects of 
developmental growth and patterning across evolutionarily diverse species. To
date, however, these molecules remain largely uncharacterized in mouse and chick.
We previously reported that limb bud expression of Zfp503, the mouse orthologue
of zebrafish nlz2/znf503, is dependent on Gli3. Here, we show that Zfp503/Znf503 
is expressed in a restricted pattern during mouse and chick embryogenesis, with
particularly dynamic expression in the developing limbs, face, somites, and
brain. We also add to our previous data on Gli3 regulation by showing that the
anterior domain of Zfp503 expression in the mouse limb is responsive to genetic
and nongenetic manipulation of hedgehog signaling. Finally, we demonstrate that
posterior expression of Znf503 in the chick limb is responsive to bone
morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling, indicating that Zfp503/Znf503 may act at
the nexus of multiple signaling pathways in development.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18351672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. J Leukoc Biol. 2008 Jun;83(6):1476-83. doi: 10.1189/jlb.1107792. Epub 2008 Mar
11.

Survival and function of human thymic dendritic cells are dependent on autocrine 
Hedgehog signaling.

Varas A(1), Hernández-López C, Valencia J, Mattavelli S, Martínez VG, Hidalgo L, 
Gutiérrez-Frías C, Zapata AG, Sacedón R, Vicente A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Ciudad Universitaria,
Complutense University, Madrid, Spain. avaras@bio.ucm.es

The Hedgehog (Hh) family of signaling molecules functions in the development of
numerous tissues during embryogenesis and has also been involved in adult
self-renewing tissues. Recent results have demonstrated that the different
components of the Hh signaling pathway are expressed in the human thymus. In this
study, we investigate whether thymic dendritic cells (DCs) are cell targets for
Hh signaling. Both components of the Hh receptor, Patched and Smoothened, as well
as other Hh-binding proteins with modulating functions, are expressed by human
thymic DCs. The expression of Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3 transcription factors suggests
that the Hh signaling pathway is active in thymic DCs, and approximately one-half
of thymic DCs produces Sonic Hh (Shh). The culture of thymic DCs with Shh
protects them from apoptosis [similarly to CD40 ligand (CD40L)], and these
antiapoptotic effects are related to an up-regulation of Bcl-2 and Bcl-X(L)
protein expression. The addition of the Hh pathway inhibitor, cyclopamine,
decreases DC viability and impairs their allostimulatory function in vitro. In
addition, the blockade of the Hh signaling pathway by cyclopamine treatment
abrogates the up-regulation of HLA-DR, CD86, CD80, and CD83 expression induced by
CD40L on thymic DCs. Finally, we also show that after activation with CD40L
thymic DCs down-regulate the expression of Hh receptor components as well as Shh 
production. Taken together, these results suggest that the survival and function 
of thymic DCs are regulated by an autocrine Hh signaling.

PMID: 18334540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. J Biol Chem. 2008 May 2;283(18):12426-37. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M707117200. Epub 2008 
Mar 3.

GLI2-specific transcriptional activation of the bone morphogenetic
protein/activin antagonist follistatin in human epidermal cells.

Eichberger T(1), Kaser A, Pixner C, Schmid C, Klingler S, Winklmayr M,
Hauser-Kronberger C, Aberger F, Frischauf AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Salzburg, Hellbrunnerstrasse
34, Austria.

Hedgehog (HH) signaling in the epidermis is primarily mediated by the zinc finger
transcription factors GLI1 and GLI2. Exquisite regulation of HH/GLI signaling is 
crucial for proper specification of the epidermal lineage and development of its 
derivatives, whereas dysregulation of HH/GLI signaling disrupts tissue
homeostasis and causes basal cell carcinoma (BCC). Similarly, bone morphogenetic 
proteins (BMPs) and activins have been described as key signaling factors in the 
complex regulation of epidermal fate decisions, although their precise interplay 
with HH/GLI is largely elusive. Here we show that, in human epidermal cells,
expression of the activin/BMP antagonist follistatin (FST) is predominantly
up-regulated by the HH effector GLI2. Consistently, we found strong FST
expression in the outer root sheath of human hair follicles and BCC. Detailed
promoter analysis showed that two sequences with homology to the GLI consensus
binding site are required for GLI2-mediated activation. Interestingly, activation
of the FST promoter is highly GLI2-specific, because neither GLI1 nor GLI3 can
significantly increase FST transcription. GLI2 specificity requires the presence 
of a 518-bp fragment in the proximal FST promoter region. On the protein level,
sequences C-terminal to the zinc finger are responsible for GLI2-specific
activation of FST transcription, pointing to the existence of GLI-interacting
cofactors that modulate GLI target specificity. Our results reveal a key role of 
GLI2 in activation of the activin/BMP antagonist FST in response to HH signaling 
and provide new evidence for a regulatory interaction between HH and activin/BMP 
signaling in hair follicle development and BCC.

PMCID: PMC2430996
PMID: 18319260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Stem Cells. 2008 May;26(5):1253-64. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2007-0691. Epub 2008
Feb 21.

Reciprocal intraepithelial interactions between TP63 and hedgehog signaling
regulate quiescence and activation of progenitor elaboration by mammary stem
cells.

Li N(1), Singh S, Cherukuri P, Li H, Yuan Z, Ellisen LW, Wang B, Robbins D,
DiRenzo J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Dartmouth Medical School, 7650
Remsen, Hanover, New Hampshire 03755, USA.

TP63 is required for preservation of epithelial regenerative stasis and regulates
the activity of diverse genetic pathways; however, specific effector pathways are
poorly understood. Data presented here indicate that reciprocal regulatory
interactions between hedgehog signaling and TP63 mediate stage-specific effects
on proliferation and clonigenicity of separable enriched mammary stem and
progenitor fractions. Analysis of DeltaN-p63 and TA-p63 indicates segregated
expression in mammary stem and progenitor fractions, respectively, demonstrating 
that differential TP63 promoter selection occurs during elaboration of mammary
progenitors by mammary stem cells. This segregation underlies mammary
progenitor-specific expression of Indian Hedgehog, identifying it as a binary
transcriptional target of TP63. Hedgehog activation in vivo enhances elaboration 
of mammary progenitors and decreases label retention within mammary stem
cell-enriched fractions, suggesting that hedgehog exerts a mitogenic effect on
mammary stem cells. Hedgehog signaling promotes differential TP63 promoter usage 
via disruption of Gli3 or Gli3(R) accumulation, and shRNA-mediated disruption of 
Gli3 expression was sufficient to alter TP63 promoter usage and enhance
clonigenicity of mammary stem cells. Finally, hedgehog signaling is enhanced
during pregnancy, where it contributes to expansion of the mammary progenitor
compartment. These studies support a model in which hedgehog activates
elaboration and differentiation of mammary progenitors via differential TP63
promoter selection and forfeiture of self-renewing capacity.

PMCID: PMC3778935
PMID: 18292212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Oncol Rep. 2008 Mar;19(3):681-8.

Hedgehog signalling in medulloblastoma, glioblastoma and neuroblastoma.

Shahi MH(1), Lorente A, Castresana JS.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Biología de Tumores Cerebrales, Universidad de Navarra, 31008
Pamplona, Spain.

We investigated a role for Hedgehog signalling in glioblastoma, neuroblastoma and
medulloblastoma by studying the transcription of PTCH, SMO, GLI1 and GLI3 in a
total of 25 cell lines by standard RT-PCR and qRT-PCR, before and after
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine and trichostatin A (TSA) treatments. Also 25 glioblastoma 
samples were tested by qRT-PCR. We also performed real-time methylated specific
PCR (qMSP) of the SMO promoter region in DNA from 80 tumor samples (40
glioblastomas and 40 neuroblastomas) and from the 25 cell lines. We detected SMO 
promoter methylation in more than half of the cell lines and tumor samples. PTCH 
expression in cell lines was lower than in normal controls, just the opposite to 
GLI1. SMO and GLI3 expression were high and fully correlated in glioblastoma and 
medulloblastoma, although partially in neuroblastoma. Our results support the
existence of Hedgehog signalling in glioblastoma and medulloblastoma, and to a
lesser extent, in neuroblastoma.

PMID: 18288402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Neurology. 2008 Feb 19;70(8):588-9. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000299906.22907.99.

Hypothalamic hamartomas and hedgehogs: not a laughing matter.

Pleasure SJ, Guerrini R.

Comment on
    Neurology. 2008 Feb 19;70(8):653-5.

PMID: 18285533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. BMC Dev Biol. 2008 Feb 19;8:15. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-8-15.

Genetic analysis of the two zebrafish patched homologues identifies novel roles
for the hedgehog signaling pathway.

Koudijs MJ(1), den Broeder MJ, Groot E, van Eeden FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute, Developmental Biology and Stem Cell Research, Uppsalalaan 
8, 3584CT, Utrecht, The Netherlands. m.koudijs@nki.nl

BACKGROUND: Aberrant activation of the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway in
different organisms has shown the importance of this family of morphogens during 
development. Genetic screens in zebrafish have assigned specific roles for Hh in 
proliferation, differentiation and patterning, but mainly as a result of a loss
of its activity. We attempted to fully activate the Hh pathway by removing both
receptors for the Hh proteins, called Patched1 and 2, which are functioning as
negative regulators in this pathway.
RESULTS: Here we describe a splice-donor mutation in Ptc1, called ptc1hu1602,
which in a homozygous state results in a subtle eye and somite phenotype. Since
we recently positionally cloned a ptc2 mutant, a ptc1;ptc2 double mutant was
generated, showing severely increased levels of ptc1, gli1 and nkx2.2a,
confirming an aberrant activation of Hh signaling. As a consequence, a number of 
phenotypes were observed that have not been reported previously using Shh mRNA
overexpression. Somites of ptc1;ptc2 double mutants do not express
anteroposterior polarity markers, however initial segmentation of the somites
itself is not affected. This is the first evidence that segmentation and
anterior/posterior (A/P) patterning of the somites are genetically uncoupled
processes. Furthermore, a novel negative function of Hh signaling is observed in 
the induction of the fin field, acting well before any of the previously reported
function of Shh in fin formation and in a way that is different from the proposed
early role of Gli3 in limb/fin bud patterning.
CONCLUSION: The generation and characterization of the ptc1;ptc2 double mutant
assigned novel and unexpected functions to the Hh signaling pathway.
Additionally, these mutants will provide a useful system to further investigate
the consequences of constitutively activated Hh signaling during vertebrate
development.

PMCID: PMC2275722
PMID: 18284698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Feb;22(1):77-93. doi:
10.1016/j.beem.2007.07.008.

Adrenal gland development and defects.

Kempná P(1), Flück CE.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetology, University Children's Hospital,
University of Berne, Freiburgstrasse 15, 3010 Bern, Switzerland.

The network regulating human adrenal development is complex. Studies of patients 
with adrenal insufficiency due to gene mutations established a central role for
transcription factors GLI3, SF1 and DAX1 in the initial steps of adrenal
formation. Adrenal differentiation seems to depend on adrenocorticotropic hormone
(ACTH) stimulation and signalling, including biosynthesis and action of POMC,
PC1, TPIT, MC2R, MRAP and ALADIN, all of which cause adrenocortical hypoplasia
when mutated in humans. Studies of knockout mice revealed many more factors
involved in adrenal development; however, in contrast to rodents, in humans
several of those factors had no adrenal phenotype when mutated (e.g. WT1, WNT4)
or, alternatively, human mutations have not (yet) been identified. Tissue
profiling of fetal and adult adrenals suggested 69 genes involved in adrenal
development. Among them were genes coding for steroidogenic enzymes,
transcription and growth factors, signalling molecules, regulators of cell cycle 
and angiogenesis, and extracellular matrix proteins; however, the exact role of
most of them remains to be elucidated.

PMID: 18279781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Stem Cells. 2008 Apr;26(4):1027-36. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2007-0879. Epub 2008
Feb 14.

Gli1 induces G2/M arrest and apoptosis in hippocampal but not tumor-derived
neural stem cells.

Galvin KE(1), Ye H, Erstad DJ, Feddersen R, Wetmore C.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Neuroscience, The College of Idaho, Caldwell, Idaho, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is necessary for sustaining the proliferation of neural stem
cells (NSCs), yet little is known about its mechanisms. Whereas Gli1, Gli2, and
Gli3, the primary mediators of Shh signaling, were all expressed in hippocampal
neural progenitors, Shh treatment of NSCs induced only Gli1 expression. Acute
depletion of Gli1 in postnatal NSCs by short-hairpin RNA decreased proliferation,
whereas germline deletion of Gli1 did not affect NSC proliferation, suggesting a 
difference in mechanisms of Gli1 compensation that may be developmentally
dependent. To determine whether Gli1 was sufficient to enhance NSC proliferation,
we overexpressed this mitogen and were surprised to find that Gli1 resulted in
decreased proliferation, accumulation of NSCs in the G2/M phase of cell cycle,
and apoptosis. In contrast, Gli1-expressing lineage-restricted neural precursors 
demonstrated a 4.5-fold proliferation enhancement. Expression analyses of
Gli1-expressing NSCs identified significant induction of Gadd45a and decreased
cyclin A2 and Stag1 mRNA, genes involved in the G2-M transition and apoptosis.
Furthermore, Gadd45a overexpression was sufficient to partially recapitulate the 
Gli1-induced G2/M accumulation and cell death of NSCs. In contrast to normal stem
cells, tumor-derived stem cells had markedly higher basal Gli1 expression and did
not undergo apoptosis with further elevation of Gli1. Our data suggest that
Gli1-induced apoptosis may serve as a protective mechanism against premature
mitosis and may give insight into mechanisms by which nonmalignant stem cells
restrain hyperproliferation in the context of potentially transforming mitogenic 
signals. Tumor-derived stem cells apparently lack these mechanisms, which may
contribute to their unrestrained proliferation and malignant potential.

PMID: 18276799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Mech Dev. 2008 May-Jun;125(5-6):517-26. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2008.01.001. Epub 2008
Jan 11.

Polydactyly in the mouse mutant Doublefoot involves altered Gli3 processing and
is caused by a large deletion in cis to Indian hedgehog.

Babbs C(1), Furniss D, Morriss-Kay GM, Wilkie AO.

Author information: 
(1)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, OX3 9DS, UK.

The mouse mutant Doublefoot (Dbf) shows preaxial polydactyly with 6-9
triphalangeal digits in all four limbs and additional abnormalities including a
broadened skull, hydrocephalus, and a thickened, kinked tail. The autopod
undergoes a characteristic expansion between late embryonic day (E) 10.5 and
E11.5, following the onset of ectopic Indian hedgehog (Ihh) expression in the
entire distal mesenchyme, except for the zone of polarising activity (ZPA), at
E10.5. We show here that limb prepattern, as indicated by expression of Gli3 and 
Hand2 at E9.5 is unaffected by the mutation. As both Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and Ihh
expression are present in Dbf limb buds at E10.5, we generated Dbf/(+);Shh(-/-)
mutants to analyse the effects of different patterns of Hedgehog activity on the 
limb phenotype and molecular differentiation. Dbf/(+) embryos lacking Shh showed 
postaxial as well as preaxial polydactyly, and the Ihh expression domain extended
posteriorly into the domain in which Shh is normally expressed, indicating loss
of ZPA identity. Differences in gene expression patterns in wild type, single and
compound mutants were associated with differences in Gli3 processing: an
increased ratio of Gli3 activator to Gli3 repressor was observed in the anterior 
half of Dbf/(+) limb buds and in both anterior and posterior halves of compound
mutant limb buds at E10.5. To identify the cause of Ihh misregulation in Dbf/(+) 
mutants, we sequenced approximately 20 kb of genomic DNA around Ihh but found no 
pathogenic changes. However, Southern blot analysis revealed a approximately 600 
kb deletion disrupting or deleting 25 transcripts, starting 50 kb 5' of Ihh and
extending away from the gene. The large deletion interval may explain the wide
range of abnormalities in Dbf/(+) mutants. However, we did not detect anologous
deletions in cases of Laurin-Sandrow syndrome, a human disorder that shows
phenotypic similarities to Dbf.

PMCID: PMC2428104
PMID: 18272352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Feb;82(2):366-74. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2007.10.006. Epub 2008
Jan 31.

Identification of somatic chromosomal abnormalities in hypothalamic hamartoma
tissue at the GLI3 locus.

Craig DW(1), Itty A, Panganiban C, Szelinger S, Kruer MC, Sekar A, Reiman D,
Narayanan V, Stephan DA, Kerrigan JF.

Author information: 
(1)The Translational Genomics Research Institute, Neurogenomics Division,
Phoenix, AZ 85004, USA. dcraig@tgen.org

Hypothalamic hamartomas (HH) are rare, benign congenital tumors associated with
intractable epilepsy. Most cases are sporadic and nonsyndromic. Approximately 5% 
of HH cases are associated with Pallister-Hall syndrome (PHS), which is caused by
haploinsufficiency of GLI3. We have investigated the possibility that HH
pathogenesis in sporadic cases is due to a somatic (tumor-only) mutation in GLI3.
We isolated genomic DNA from peripheral blood and surgically resected HH tissue
in 55 patients with sporadic HH and intractable epilepsy. A genome-wide screen
for loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and chromosomal abnormalities was performed with
parallel analysis of blood and HH tissue with Affymetrix 10K SNP microarrays.
Additionally, resequencing and fine mapping with SNP genotyping were completed
for the GLI3 gene with comparisons between peripheral blood and HH tissue pairs. 
By analyzing chromosomal copy-number data for paired samples on the Affymetrix
10K array, we identified a somatic chromosomal abnormality on chromosome 7p in
one HH tissue sample. Resequencing of GLI3 did not identify causative germline
mutations but did identify LOH within the GLI3 gene in the HH tissue samples of
three patients. Further genotyping of 28 SNPs within and surrounding GLI3
identified five additional patients exhibiting LOH. Together, these data provide 
evidence that the development of chromosomal abnormalities within GLI3 is
associated with the pathogenesis of HH lesions in sporadic, nonsyndromic patients
with HH and intractable epilepsy. Chromosomal abnormalities including the GLI3
locus were seen in 8 of 55 (15%) of the resected HH tissue samples. These somatic
mutations appear to be highly variable.

PMCID: PMC2427231
PMID: 18252217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Am J Med Genet A. 2008 Mar 1;146A(5):548-57. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32167.

The clinical atlas of Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome.

Balk K(1), Biesecker LG.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Nursing Research, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4472, USA.

Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS) is a rare multiple congenital anomaly
syndrome that is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern and is caused by
haploinsufficiency of the GLI3 gene. The syndrome typically includes preaxial or 
mixed pre- and postaxial polydactyly and cutaneous syndactyly, ocular
hypertelorism, and macrocephaly in its typical forms, but sometimes includes
hydrocephalus, seizures, mental retardation, and developmental delay in more
severe cases. Patients with milder forms of GCPS can have subtle craniofacial
dysmorphic features that are difficult to distinguish from normal variation. This
article presents the spectrum of dysmorphic findings in GCPS highlighting some of
its key presenting features to familiarize clinicians with the variable
expressivity of the condition.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18241058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Eur J Med Genet. 2008 Mar-Apr;51(2):106-12. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2007.08.004. Epub
2007 Sep 15.

Holoprosencephaly-Polydactyly syndrome: in search of an etiology.

Cordero DR(1), Bendavid C, Shanske AL, Haddad BR, Muenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Biology, Brigham and
Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

Holoprosencephaly-Polydactyly (HPS) or Pseudotrisomy 13 syndrome are names
conferred to clinically categorize patients whose phenotype is congruent with
Trisomy 13 in the context of a normal karyotype. The literature suggests that
this entity may be secondary to submicroscopic deletions in holoprosencephaly
(HPE) genes; however, a limited number of investigations have been undertaken to 
evaluate this hypothesis. To test this hypothesis we studied a patient with HPE, 
polydactyly, and craniofacial dysmorphologies consistent with the diagnosis of
Trisomy 13 whose karyotype was normal. We performed mutational analysis in the
four main HPE causing genes (SHH, SIX3, TGIF, and ZIC2) and GLI3, a gene
associated with polydactyly as well as fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH)
to search for microdeletions in these genes and two candidate HPE genes (DISP1
and FOXA2). No mutations or deletions were detected. A whole genome approach
utilizing array Comparative Genomic Hybridization (aCGH) to screen for copy
number abnormalities was then taken. No loss or gain of DNA was noted. Although a
single case, our results suggest that coding mutations in these HPE genes and
copy number anomalies may not be causative in this disorder. Instead, HPS likely 
involves mutations in other genes integral in embryonic development of the
forebrain, face and limbs. Our systematic analysis sets the framework to study
other affected children and delineate the molecular etiology of this disorder.

PMCID: PMC2441840
PMID: 18178536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Appl Clin Genet. 2008 Nov 18;1:19-22. Print 2008.

Greig cephalopolysyndactyly (GCPS) contiguous gene syndrome in a boy with a 14 Mb
deletion in region 7p13-14 caused by a paternal balanced insertion (5; 7).

Schulz S(1), Volleth M, Muschke P, Wieland I, Wieacker P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg, Germany.

We report on a six years old boy with several features of Greig
cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS) including craniofacial dysmorphism,
hypertelorism, heart defect, preaxial hexadactyly of toes, partial agenesis of
corpus callosum, and severe developmental delay. Greig cephalopolysyndactyly
(GCPS) can be caused by GLI3 deletions. In patients with large deletions which
include additional genes, it is termed Greig cephalopolysyndactyly-contiguous
gene syndrome (GCPS-CGS). It is generally believed that the deletion size
correlates with disease severity. Nearly all cases appear to be a result of GLI3 
de novo deletions. Chromosome analysis of our patient revealed a large deletion
in chromosome 7(p13-p14). Unlike most previously described cases, we found that
this deletion resulted from a paternal balanced insertional translocation of
7p13-14 into the long arm of chromosome 5.

PMCID: PMC3681123
PMID: 23776344  [PubMed]


442. J Neurosurg. 2007 Dec;107(6 Suppl):495-9.

A novel syndrome of cerebral cavernous malformation and Greig
cephalopolysyndactyly. Laboratory investigation.

Bilguvar K(1), Bydon M, Bayrakli F, Ercan-Sencicek AG, Bayri Y, Mason C, DiLuna
ML, Seashore M, Bronen R, Lifton RP, State M, Gunel M.

Author information: 
(1)Program on Neurogenetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06510, USA.

OBJECT: Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS) is one of a spectrum of
overlapping clinical syndromes resulting from mutations in the gene GLI3 on
chromosome 7p. Cerebral cavernous malformation (CCM) is caused by mutations in
three distinct genes, including Malcavernin (CCM2), which also maps to chromosome
7p and is located 2.8 Mbp from GLI3. The authors describe a new syndrome that
combines the vascular lesions characteristic of CCM with the hallmarks of GCPS,
including polydactyly, hypertelorism, and developmental delay.
METHODS: The authors used high-resolution array-based comparative genome
hybridization (CGH) analysis to characterize the 3 million-bp deletion on
chromosome 7 that accounts for this novel clinical presentation. A 4-year-old
girl presented with polydactyly, hypertelorism, and developmental delay and was
also found to have multiple CCMs after suffering a seizure. RESULTS. Genetic
analysis using array-based CGH revealed a deletion affecting multiple genes in
the 7p14-13 locus, the interval that includes both CCM2 and GLI3. Quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) on genomic DNA confirmed this
genomic lesion.
CONCLUSIONS: A novel syndrome, combining features of CCM and GCPS, can be added
to the group of entities that result from deleterious genetic variants involving 
GLI3, including GCPS, acrocallosal syndrome, Pallister-Hall syndrome, and
contiguous gene syndrome. The deletion responsible for this new entity can be
easily detected using either array-based chromosomal analysis or quantitative
RT-PCR.

PMID: 18154020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Dev Biol. 2008 Jan 15;313(2):501-18. Epub 2007 Sep 26.

The Hedgehog gene family of the cnidarian, Nematostella vectensis, and
implications for understanding metazoan Hedgehog pathway evolution.

Matus DQ(1), Magie CR, Pang K, Martindale MQ, Thomsen GH.

Author information: 
(1)Kewalo Marine Lab University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI 76813, USA.

Hedgehog signaling is an important component of cell-cell communication during
bilaterian development, and abnormal Hedgehog signaling contributes to disease
and birth defects. Hedgehog genes are composed of a ligand ("hedge") domain and
an autocatalytic intein ("hog") domain. Hedgehog (hh) ligands bind to a conserved
set of receptors and activate downstream signal transduction pathways terminating
with Gli/Ci transcription factors. We have identified five intein-containing
genes in the anthozoan cnidarian Nematostella vectensis, two of which (NvHh1 and 
NvHh2) contain definitive hedgehog ligand domains, suggesting that to date,
cnidarians are the earliest branching metazoan phylum to possess definitive Hh
orthologs. Expression analysis of NvHh1 and NvHh2, the receptor NvPatched, and a 
downstream transcription factor NvGli (a Gli3/Ci ortholog) indicate that these
genes may have conserved roles in planar and trans-epithelial signaling during
gut and germline development, while the three remaining intein-containing genes
(NvHint1,2,3) are expressed in a cell-type-specific manner in putative neural
precursors. Metazoan intein-containing genes that lack a hh ligand domain have
previously only been identified within nematodes. However, we have identified
intein-containing genes from both Nematostella and in two newly annotated
lophotrochozoan genomes. Phylogenetic analyses suggest that while nematode
inteins may be derived from an ancestral true hedgehog gene, the newly identified
cnidarian and lophotrochozoan inteins may be orthologous, suggesting that both
true hedgehog and hint genes may have been present in the cnidarian-bilaterian
ancestor. Genomic surveys of N. vectensis suggest that most of the components of 
both protostome and deuterostome Hh signaling pathways are present in anthozoans 
and that some appear to have been lost in ecdysozoan lineages. Cnidarians possess
many bilaterian cell-cell signaling pathways (Wnt, TGFbeta, FGF, and Hh) that
appear to act in concert to pattern tissues along the oral-aboral axis of the
polyp. Cnidarians represent a diverse group of animals with a predominantly
epithelial body plan, and perhaps selective pressures to pattern epithelia
resulted in the ontogeny of the hedgehog pathway in the common ancestor of the
Cnidaria and Bilateria.

PMCID: PMC2288667
PMID: 18068698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Neurology. 2008 Feb 19;70(8):653-5. Epub 2007 Dec 5.

Somatic mutations in GLI3 can cause hypothalamic hamartoma and gelastic seizures.

Wallace RH(1), Freeman JL, Shouri MR, Izzillo PA, Rosenfeld JV, Mulley JC, Harvey
AS, Berkovic SF.

Author information: 
(1)Queensland Brain Institute, University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, 4072
Australia. r.wallace2@uq.edu.au

Comment in
    Neurology. 2008 Feb 19;70(8):588-9.

PMID: 18057317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Development. 2008 Jan;135(2):237-47. Epub 2007 Dec 5.

Wnt canonical pathway restricts graded Shh/Gli patterning activity through the
regulation of Gli3 expression.

Alvarez-Medina R(1), Cayuso J, Okubo T, Takada S, Martí E.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología Molecular de Barcelona, CSIC, Parc Cientific de
Barcelona, C/Josep Samitier 1-5, Barcelona 08028, Spain.

Dorsoventral patterning of the vertebrate nervous system is achieved by the
combined activity of morphogenetic signals secreted from dorsal and ventral
signalling centres. The Shh/Gli pathway plays a major role in patterning the
ventral neural tube; however, the molecular mechanisms that limit target gene
responses to specific progenitor domains remain unclear. Here, we show that
Wnt1/Wnt3a, by signalling through the canonical beta-catenin/Tcf pathway, control
expression of dorsal genes and suppression of the ventral programme, and that
this role in DV patterning depends on Gli activity. Additionally, we show that
Gli3 expression is controlled by Wnt activity. Identification and
characterization of highly conserved non-coding DNA regions around the human Gli3
gene revealed the presence of transcriptionally active Tcf-binding sequences.
These indicated that dorsal Gli3 expression might be directly regulated by
canonical Wnt activity. In turn, Gli3, by acting as a transcriptional repressor, 
restricted graded Shh/Gli ventral activity to properly pattern the spinal cord.

PMID: 18057099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Rev Neurosci. 2007;18(3-4):311-42.

Co-option of signaling mechanisms from neural induction to telencephalic
patterning.

Aboitiz F(1), Montiel J.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Psiquiatría y Centro de Investigaciones Médicas, Escuela de
Medicina, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile. faboitiz@puc.cl

This article provides an overview of signaling processes during early
specification of the anterior neural tube, with special emphasis on the
telencephalon. A series of signaling systems based on the action of distinct
morphogens acts at different developmental stages, specifying interacting
developmental fields that define axes of differentiation in the rostrocaudal and 
the dorsoventral domains. Interestingly, many of these signaling systems are
co-opted for several differentiation processes. This strategy provides a simple
and efficient mechanism to generate novel structures in evolution, and may have
been especially important in the origin of the telencephalon and the mammalian
cerebral cortex. For example, the action of fibroblast growth factor (FGF)
secreted in early stages from the anterior neural ridge, but in later stages from
the dorsal anterior forebrain, may have been a key factor in the early
differentiation of the ventral telencephalon and in the eventual expansion of the
mammalian neocortex. Likewise, bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) participate at 
several stages in neural patterning, even if early neural induction consists of
the inhibition of the BMP pathway. BMPs, secreted dorsally, interact with FGFs in
the frontal aspect of the hemispheres, and with PAX6-dependent signaling sources 
located laterally, to pattern the dorsal telencephalon. The actions of other
morphogens are also described in this context, such as the ventralizing factor
SHH, the dorsalizing element GLI3, and other factors related to the dorsomedial
telencephalon such as WNTs and EMXs. The main conclusion we draw from this review
is the well-known phylogenetic and developmental conservatism of signaling
pathways, which in evolution have been applied in different embryological
contexts, generating novel interactions between morphogenetic fields and leading 
to the generation of new morphological structures.

PMID: 18019612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Am J Med Genet A. 2007 Dec 15;143A(24):3150-60.

Nonsense-mediated decay and the molecular pathogenesis of mutations in SALL1 and 
GLI3.

Furniss D(1), Critchley P, Giele H, Wilkie AO.

Author information: 
(1)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Mutations in SALL1 and GLI3 are responsible for human limb malformation
syndromes. The molecular pathophysiology of these mutations is incompletely
understood, and many conclusions have been drawn from studies performed in the
mouse. We identified truncating mutations in SALL1 and GLI3 in patients with limb
malformation and studied the contribution of nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) to the
expression of mutant mRNA in patient-derived fibroblasts. Quantification of the
relative proportions of mutant and wild-type alleles was performed by
pyrosequencing. In SALL1, a mutant allele causing Townes-Brocks syndrome was
unexpectedly resistant to NMD, whereas a different mutation causing a much milder
phenotype was susceptible to NMD. In GLI3, all three mutant alleles tested were
susceptible to NMD. This work provides novel insights into the molecular
pathophysiology of SALL1 and GLI3 mutations, extends the phenotypic spectrum of
SALL1 mutations, and provides an example of a human mutation which does not
follow the usual accepted positional rules governing mammalian NMD. (c) 2007
Wiley-Liss, Inc.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18000979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. J Neurosci. 2007 Oct 24;27(43):11595-603.

Patterning the dorsal telencephalon: a role for sonic hedgehog?

Rash BG(1), Grove EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637,
USA.

Division of the telencephalic vesicle into hemispheres and specification of the
cerebral cortex are key stages in forebrain development. We investigate the
interplay in these processes of Sonic hedgehog (Shh), fibroblast growth factors
(Fgfs), and the transcription factor Gli3, which in its repressor form (Gli3R)
antagonizes Shh signaling and downregulates expression of several Fgf genes.
Contrary to previous reports, Shh is not required for dorsal hemisphere
separation. Mice lacking Shh develop a dorsal telencephalic midline, a cortical
hem, and two cortical hemispheres. The hemispheres do not divide rostrally,
probably because of reduced local Fgf gene expression, resulting from the loss of
Shh inhibition of Gli3R. Removing one functional copy of Gli3 substantially
rescues Fgf expression and rostral telencephalic morphology. In mice lacking Gli3
function, cortical development is arrested, and ventral gene expression invades
the dorsal telencephalon. These defects are potentially explained by
disinhibition of Shh activity. However, when both copies of Shh are removed from 
Gli3-null mice, dorsal telencephalic defects persist. One such defect is a large 
dorsal expansion of the expression of Fgf genes. Fgf15 expression, for example,
expands from a discrete ventral domain throughout the dorsal telencephalon. We
propose that Fgf signaling, known to ventralize the telencephalon in a
Shh-independent manner, suppresses cortical fate in the absence of Gli3. Our
findings point away from Shh involvement in dorsal telencephalic patterning and
encourage additional exploration of Fgf signaling and Gli3 repression in
corticogenesis.

PMID: 17959802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Lab Invest. 2007 Dec;87(12):1227-39. Epub 2007 Oct 22.

Hepatic accumulation of Hedgehog-reactive progenitors increases with severity of 
fatty liver damage in mice.

Fleig SV(1), Choi SS, Yang L, Jung Y, Omenetti A, VanDongen HM, Huang J, Sicklick
JK, Diehl AM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Duke University, Durham,
NC, USA.

Progenitors regenerate fatty livers but the mechanisms involved are uncertain.
The Hedgehog pathway regulates mesendodermal progenitors and modulates
mesenchymal-epithelial interactions during tissue remodeling. To determine if
Hedgehog signaling increases in liver progenitors during fatty liver injury, we
compared expression of Hedgehog ligands and target genes across a spectrum of
injury. Leptin-deficient ob/ob mice with fatty livers and their healthy lean
littermates were studied before and after exposure to the hepatotoxin, ethionine.
At baseline, ob/ob mice had greater liver damage than controls. Ethionine induced
liver injury in both ob/ob and lean mice, with greater injury occurring in ob/ob 
mice. After ethionine, the ob/ob mice developed liver atrophy and fibrosis. Liver
injury increased hepatic accumulation of progenitors, including ductular cells
that produced and responded to Hedgehog ligands. A dose-response relationship was
demonstrated between liver injury and expansion of Hedgehog-responsive
progenitors. In severely damaged, atrophic livers, nuclei in mature-appearing
hepatocytes accumulated the Hedgehog-regulated mesenchymal transcription factor, 
Gli2 and lost expression of the liver epithelial transcription factor, hepatocyte
nuclear factor 6 (HNF-6). Hepatic levels of collagen mRNA and pericellular
collagen fibrils increased concomitantly. Hence, fatty liver injury increases
Hedgehog activity in liver progenitors, and this might promote
epithelial-mesenchymal transitions that result in liver fibrosis.

PMID: 17952094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Am J Med Genet A. 2007 Nov 15;143A(22):2738-43.

Complex balanced translocation t(1;5;7)(p32.1;q14.3;p21.3) and two microdeletions
del(1)(p31.1p31.1) and del(7)(p14.1p14.1) in a patient with features of Greig
cephalopolysyndactyly and mental retardation.

Borg K(1), Nowakowska B, Obersztyn E, Cheung SW, Brycz-Witkowska J, Korniszewski 
L, Mazurczak T, Stankiewicz P, Bocian E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland.

Complex chromosome rearrangements (CCRs) are rare structural abnormalities that
involve at least two chromosomes and more than two breakpoints and are often
associated with developmental delay, mental retardation, and congenital
anomalies. We report on a de novo, apparently balanced translocation
t(1;5;7)(p32.1;q14.3;p21.3) involving three chromosomes in a 7-year-old boy with 
severe psychomotor retardation, neonatal muscular hypertonia, congenital heart
defect, polysyndactyly of hands and feet, and dysmorphic features resembling
Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome. Analysis of the chromosome breakpoints
using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) with locus-specific BAC clones
and long-range PCR products did not identify chromosome imbalance at any of the
interrogated regions. High-resolution comparative genomic hybridization (HR-CGH) 
and array CGH (aCGH) revealed two additional cryptic de novo deletions,
del(1)(p31.1p31.1) and del(7)(p14.1p14.1), respectively, that are not associated 
with the translocation breakpoints. FISH and polymorphic marker analyses showed
that the deletion on derivative chromosome 1 is between 4.2 and 6.1 Mb, and the
deletion on derivative chromosome 7 is approximately 5.1 Mb, and that both are
paternal in origin. The deletion on chromosome 7p encompasses the GLI3 gene that 
is causative for the Greig cephalopolysyndactyly, Pallister-Hall and some cases
of Acrocallosal syndromes. We discuss the potential mechanisms of formation of
the described CCR.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17937435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. J Neurosci. 2007 Oct 10;27(41):11103-11.

The role of Foxg1 and dorsal midline signaling in the generation of Cajal-Retzius
subtypes.

Hanashima C(1), Fernandes M, Hebert JM, Fishell G.

Author information: 
(1)Smilow Neuroscience Program and Department of Cell Biology, Smilow Research
Center, New York University, New York, New York 10016, USA.

Cajal-Retzius (CR) cells, the earliest-born neurons in the neocortex, arise from 
discrete sources within the telencephalon, including the dorsal midline and the
pallial-subpallial boundary (PSB). In particular, the cortical hem, a region of
high bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) and Wnt (wingless-type MMTV integration
site family) expression but lacking in Foxg1 (forkhead box G1) is a major source 
of CR neurons. Whether CR cells from distinct origins arise from disparate
developmental processes or share a common mechanism is unclear. To elucidate the 
molecular basis of CR cell development, we assessed the role of both Foxg1 and
dorsal midline signaling in the production of cortical hem- and PSB-derived CR
cells. We demonstrate that the loss of Foxg1 results in the overproduction of
both of these CR populations. However, removal of Foxg1 at embryonic day 13,
although expanding the number of CR cells with a PSB phenotype, does not result
in an expansion of BMPs or Wnts in the dorsomedial signaling center. Conversely, 
loss of the dorsal midline ligands as observed in Gli3 (glioma-associated
oncogene homolog 3) mutants results in the loss of the cortical hem-derived CR
character but does not affect the specification of PSB-derived CR cells. Hence,
our findings demonstrate that, although the specification of cortical hem-derived
CR cells is dependent on signaling from the dorsal midline, Foxg1 functions to
repress the generation of both cortical hem- and PSB-derived CR cells.

PMID: 17928452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Cell Cycle. 2007 Nov 1;6(21):2640-9. Epub 2007 Aug 1.

Morphogens and the control of cell proliferation and patterning in the spinal
cord.

Ulloa F(1), Briscoe J.

Author information: 
(1)Unitat de Biologia Cellular i Molecular, Institut d' Investigaciò Médica, Parc
de Recerca Biomedica, Barcelona, Spain. fulloa@imim.es

The development of animal embryos depends on accurate coordination of the growth 
and specification of precursor cells. Morphogens, extracellular signals that act 
at a distance to control cell fate, are crucial in the patterning of embryonic
tissues. One of the most extensively studied examples of a morphogen patterned
tissue is the developing vertebrate spinal cord. The distribution of distinct
neuronal subtypes along the dorsoventral (DV) axis of the spinal cord is
determined by counteracting gradients of long-range signals. Wnt and BMP signals 
promote dorsal identities, while Shh signaling induces ventral identities.
Simultaneous to their specification, neural progenitors proliferate, facilitating
the growth of the neural tube. In this review we discuss evidence indicating that
the signals governing progenitor specification also control proliferation and
survival of progenitor cells. Moreover, evidence of reciprocal transcriptional
interactions and cross-talk between the signaling pathways has emerged from
recent studies. Together these studies suggest ways in which patterning and
growth may be coordinated in the spinal cord. One level of interaction is an
inhibitory regulation of repressor forms of the transcription factor Gli3 -
generated in the absence of Shh - on beta-catenin activity, the transcription
factor activated by Wnt signaling. This interaction may also be relevant in other
tissues and situations in which the two signaling pathways are known to
participate.

PMID: 17912034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. PLoS One. 2007 Sep 12;2(9):e864.

An amphioxus Gli gene reveals conservation of midline patterning and the
evolution of hedgehog signalling diversity in chordates.

Shimeld SM(1), van den Heuvel M, Dawber R, Briscoe J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
sebastian.shimeld@zoo.ox.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Hedgehog signalling, interpreted in receiving cells by Gli
transcription factors, plays a central role in the development of vertebrate and 
Drosophila embryos. Many aspects of the signalling pathway are conserved between 
these lineages, however vertebrates have diverged in at least one key aspect:
they have evolved multiple Gli genes encoding functionally-distinct proteins,
increasing the complexity of the hedgehog-dependent transcriptional response.
Amphioxus is one of the closest living relatives of the vertebrates, having split
from the vertebrate lineage prior to the widespread gene duplication prominent in
early vertebrate evolution.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We show that amphioxus has a single Gli gene, which is
deployed in tissues adjacent to sources of hedgehog signalling derived from the
midline and anterior endoderm. This shows the duplication and divergence of the
Gli gene family, and hence the origin of vertebrate Gli functional diversity, was
specific to the vertebrate lineage. However we also show that the single
amphioxus Gli gene produces two distinct transcripts encoding different proteins.
We utilise three tests of Gli function to examine the transcription regulatory
capacities of these different proteins, demonstrating one has activating activity
similar to Gli2, while the other acts as a weak repressor, similar to Gli3.
CONCLUSIONS: These data show that vertebrates and amphioxus have evolved
functionally-similar repertoires of Gli proteins using parallel molecular routes;
vertebrates via gene duplication and divergence, and amphioxus via alternate
splicing of a single gene. Our results demonstrate that similar functional
complexity of intercellular signalling can be achieved via different evolutionary
pathways.

PMCID: PMC1955834
PMID: 17848995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Hum Mutat. 2008 Jan;29(1):99-105.

Characterization of the interactions of human ZIC3 mutants with GLI3.

Zhu L(1), Zhou G, Poole S, Belmont JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

ZIC3, a GLI superfamily transcription factor, is involved in establishing normal 
embryonic left-right patterning. Multiple abnormalities in the central nervous
system (CNS) and axial skeleton have also been observed in mice bearing a Zic3
null allele, mice with a Zic3 overexpression allele, and the majority of patients
carrying ZIC3 mutations. Previous studies indicate that ZIC3 protein can bind to 
the GLI consensus binding site (GLIBS) and physically interact with GLI3, a
transcription factor involved in multiple aspects of neural and skeletal
development. We investigated in vitro interactions of ZIC3 with GLI3 and the
effect of ZIC3 mutations identified in patients with either heterotaxy or
isolated cardiovascular malformations. Electrophoresis mobility shift assay
(EMSA) revealed that all five intact zinc finger (ZF) domains were necessary for 
binding of ZIC3 to GLIBS. Inclusion of GLIBS upstream of a basal TK promoter had 
no effect on the activation of the promoter by ZIC3 alone, but it enhanced the
synergistic activation of ZIC3 and GLI3. Wild-type (WT) ZIC3 showed specific
binding to GLI3 in GST-pull-down assays. Nonsense and frameshift ZIC3 mutants
lacking one or more of the zinc finger domains did not physically interact with
GST-GLI3; however, two missense mutants c.1213A>G (p.K405E, fifth ZF domain), and
c.649C>G (p.P217A, conserved N-terminal domain) retained binding. Luciferase
reporter assays indicated that both p.P217A and p.K405E mutants also retained
coactivation with GLI3 of reporter gene expression activity, while all the
GLI3-nonbinding ZIC3 mutants lacked this activity. Interestingly, no CNS or
skeletal abnormalities were observed in patients bearing the p.P217A or p.K405E
mutations.

Published 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17764085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Hybridoma (Larchmt). 2007 Aug;26(4):231-40.

Generation and characterization of mouse monoclonal antibody 5E1 against human
transcription factor GLI3.

Hunt R(1), Bragina O, Drews M, Kasak L, Timmusk S, Valkna A, Kogerman P,
Järvekülg L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Gene Technology, Tallinn University of Technology, Akadeemia tee 
15, Tallinn, Estonia.

GLI3 is a transcriptional effector of the developmentally important hedgehog (Hh)
signaling pathway. Here we report the production of mouse monoclonal antibody
(MAb) against putative repressive motif in GLI3 (GLI3pRM). BALB/c mice were
immunized with purified recombinant human GLI3pRM protein, and the splenocytes
from these mice were fused with myeloma cell line (SP2/0) by using standard
hybridoma production techniques. Resulting hybridomas producing anti-GLI3pRM
antibodies were screened by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and
isotyped. The specificity of MAb 5E1 was determined based on its activity in
Western blot and immunofluorescence analyses of the human NT2/D1 cell line. The
results showed that MAb 5E1 was immunoglobulin IgM/kappa, recognizing recombinant
human GLI3pRM specifically. In addition, MAb 5E1 bound to the full-length
(FL-GLI3) as well as a short protein (GLI3R) and did not cross-react with a
similar region in GLI2. MAb 5E1 could also be used to detect the expression of
Gli3 in mouse cell lines and embryonic tissues.

PMID: 17725385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Dev Biol. 2007 Oct 15;310(2):430-41. Epub 2007 Jul 27.

Hoxd and Gli3 interactions modulate digit number in the amniote limb.

Sheth R(1), Bastida MF, Ros M.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Anatomía y Biología Celular, Universidad de Cantabria, 39011, 
Santander, Spain.

During limb development, Sonic hedgehog (SHH) and HOX proteins are considered
among the most important factors regulating digit number and identity. SHH
signaling prevents the processing of GLI3 into a short form that functions as a
strong transcriptional repressor. Gli3 mutant limbs are characterized by a severe
polydactyly and associated ectopic anterior expression of 5'Hoxd genes. To
genetically determine the involvement of 5'Hoxd genes in the polydactyly of Gli3 
mutants, we have generated a compound mutant that simultaneously removes the
three most 5'-located Hoxd genes and Gli3. Remarkably, the limbs that form in the
absence of all four of these genes show the most severe polydactyly so far
reported in the mouse. The analysis of gene expression performed in compound
mutants allows us to propose that the increase in the number of digits is
mediated by the gain in function of Hoxd10 and Hoxd9. Our results also support
the notion that an adequate balance between positive and negative effects of
different Hoxd genes is required for pentadactyly.

PMID: 17714700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Matrix Biol. 2008 Jan;27(1):3-11. Epub 2007 Jul 13.

Ucma--A novel secreted factor represents a highly specific marker for distal
chondrocytes.

Tagariello A(1), Luther J, Streiter M, Didt-Koziel L, Wuelling M, Surmann-Schmitt
C, Stock M, Adam N, Vortkamp A, Winterpacht A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Erlangen, Schwabachanlage 10,
D-91054 Erlangen, Germany.

Growth and development of most parts of the vertebrate skeleton takes place by
endochondral ossification, a process during which chondrocytes undergo distinct
stages of differentiation resulting in a successive replacement of the cartilage 
anlagen by bone. In the context of an EST project we isolated a novel transcript 
from a human fetal growth plate cartilage cDNA library. The transcript which we
called Ucma (unique cartilage matrix-associated protein) encodes a short protein 
of 138 amino acids. The protein sequence is evolutionary conserved throughout
vertebrates and comprises a signal peptide, a coiled-coil domain, and a putative 
dibasic cleavage site for proprotein convertases. Using RNA in situ hybridization
and immunohistochemistry with a polyclonal anti-Ucma antibody we found high
expression of Ucma uniquely in distal (resting) chondrocytes in developing long
bones of wildtype mice. This restricted expression could also be observed in
Ihh(-/-), Ihh(-/-); Gli3(-/-), Gli3(-/-) mice, and in mice that overexpress Ihh
under the control of the Col2a1 promoter indicating that expression of Ucma is
regulated independent of hedgehog signaling. During insulin-induced
differentiation of ATDC5 cells we found gradual increase of Ucma expression at
day 21 with a maximum at day 24 and a decrease correlating with a simultaneous
increase in the expression of cartilage link protein (Crtl1), a protein with
maximum expression in column-forming proliferating chondrocytes. The present data
strongly suggest an important function of Ucma in the early phase of chondrocyte 
differentiation.

PMID: 17707622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Dev Biol. 2007 Sep 15;309(2):273-84. Epub 2007 Jul 24.

Kinesin-2 controls development and patterning of the vertebrate skeleton by
Hedgehog- and Gli3-dependent mechanisms.

Kolpakova-Hart E(1), Jinnin M, Hou B, Fukai N, Olsen BR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Harvard School of Dental Medicine,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Hedgehog signaling plays an essential role in patterning of the vertebrate
skeleton. Here we demonstrate that conditional inactivation of the Kif3a subunit 
of the kinesin-2 intraflagellar transport motor in mesenchymal skeletal
progenitor cells results in severe patterning defects in the craniofacial area,
the formation of split sternum and the development of polydactyly. These
deformities are reminiscent of those previously described in mice with
deregulated hedgehog signaling. We show that in Kif3a-deficient mesenchymal
tissues both the repressor function of Gli3 transcription factor and the
activation of the Shh transcriptional targets Ptch and Gli1 are compromised.
Quantitative analysis of gene expression demonstrates that the Gli1 transcript
level is dramatically reduced, whereas Gli3 expression is not significantly
affected by kinesin-2 depletion. However, the motor appears to be required for
the efficient cleavage of the full-length Gli3 transcription factor into a
repressor form.

PMCID: PMC2062520
PMID: 17698054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Congenit Anom (Kyoto). 2007 Sep;47(3):90-6.

Prevention of ochratoxin A-induced neural tube defects by folic acid in the
genetic polydactyly/arhinencephaly mouse, Pdn/Pdn.

Katagiri R(1), Kurome M, Teshima Y, Ueta E, Naruse I.

Author information: 
(1)School of Health Science, Faculty of Medicine, Tottori University, Yonago,
Tottori, Japan.

The gene responsible for the polydactyly/arhinencephaly (Pdn/Pdn) mouse, which
exhibits polysyndactyly and arhinencephaly and has a 13.2% risk of neural tube
defects (NTD), has been identified as Gli3. Ochratoxin A (OTA) is a teratogen
causing NTD in mice. When Pdn/Pdn embryos were exposed to 2 mg/kg of OTA on day
7.5, the incidence of NTD in Pdn/Pdn fetuses increased to 51.6%. Pre-treatment
with folinic acid (FA), metabolically the most active form of folic acid, before 
OTA-treatment decreased the incidence of NTD to 20.8%. We investigated the effect
of OTA and FA on gene expression in day 9 embryos using whole-mount in situ
hybridization and real-time PCR. Over-expression of Fgf8 was observed at the
anterior neural ridge (ANR) in the non-treated Pdn/Pdn. Over-expression at the
ANR expanded in the OTA-treated Pdn/Pdn, and it was ameliorated by pretreatment
with FA. Emx2 signal was observed in the dorsal forebrain in the non-treated +/+,
but disappeared in the OTA-treated +/+, and was recovered by FA. The Emx2 signal 
was pale and the expression amount was depressed in the non-treated and
OTA-treated Pdn/Pdn embryos. It was suggested that down-regulation of Gli3
induced the over-expression of Fgf8 at the ANR, that OTA treatment accelerated
the over-expression, and that pretreatment with FA ameliorated the OTA-induced
over-expression of Fgf8 in the Pdn/Pdn. It was also suggested that
down-regulation of Gli3 induced the down-regulation of Emx2 in the Pdn/Pdn. It
was further speculated that the over-expression of Fgf8 at the ANR and
down-regulation of Emx2 in the dorsal forebrain may contribute to NTD induction.

PMID: 17688467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Int J Cancer. 2007 Dec 15;121(12):2622-7.

Hedgehog signaling pathway is inactive in colorectal cancer cell lines.

Chatel G(1), Ganeff C, Boussif N, Delacroix L, Briquet A, Nolens G, Winkler R.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Laboratory, Experimental Cancer Research Center, Center of 
Biomedical Integrative Genoproteomics, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway plays an important role in human development.
Abnormal activation of this pathway has been observed in several types of human
cancers, such as the upper gastro-intestinal tract cancers. However, activation
of the Hh pathway in colorectal cancers is controversial. We analyzed the
expression of the main key members of the Hh pathway in 7 colon cancer cell lines
in order to discover whether the pathway is constitutively active in these cells.
We estimated the expression of SHH, IHH, PTCH, SMO, GLI1, GLI2, GLI3, SUFU and
HHIP genes by RT-PCR. Moreover, Hh ligand, Gli3 and Sufu protein levels were
quantified by western blotting. None of the cell lines expressed the complete set
of Hh pathway members. The ligands were absent from Colo320 and HCT116 cells, Smo
from Colo205, HT29 and WiDr. GLI1 gene was not expressed in SW480 cells nor were 
GLI2/GLI3 in Colo205 or Caco-2 cells. Furthermore the repressive form of Gli3,
characteristic of an inactive pathway, was detected in SW480 and Colo320 cells.
Finally treatment of colon cancer cells with cyclopamine, a specific inhibitor of
the Hh pathway, did not downregulate PTCH and GLI1 genes expression in the
colorectal cells, whereas it did so in PANC1 control cells. Taken together, these
results indicate that the aberrant activation of the Hh signaling pathway is not 
common in colorectal cancer cell lines.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17683069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Dev Growth Differ. 2007 Aug;49(6):543-53.

Ultraconserved non-coding sequence element controls a subset of spatiotemporal
GLI3 expression.

Paparidis Z(1), Abbasi AA, Malik S, Goode DK, Callaway H, Elgar G, deGraaff E,
Lopez-Rios J, Zeller R, Grzeschik KH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Philipps-University, Bahnhofstrasse 7, D35037
Marburg, Germany.

The zinc-finger transcription factor GLI3 acts during vertebrate development in a
combinatorial, context-dependent fashion as a primary transducer of sonic
hedgehog (SHH) signaling. In humans, mutations affecting this key regulator of
development are associated with GLI3-morphopathies, a group of congenital
malformations in which forebrain and limb development are preferentially
affected. We show that a non-coding element from intron two of GLI3,
ultraconserved in mammals and highly conserved in the pufferfish Fugu, is a
transcriptional enhancer. In transient transfection assays, it activates reporter
gene transcription in human cell cultures expressing endogenous GLI3 but not in
GLI3 negative cells. The identified enhancer element is predicted to contain
conserved binding sites for transcription factors crucial for developmental steps
in which GLI3 is involved. The regulatory potential of this element is conserved 
and was used to direct tissue-specific expression of a green fluorescent protein 
reporter gene in zebrafish embryos and of a beta-galactosidase reporter in
transgenic mouse embryos. Time, location, and quantity of reporter gene
expression are congruent with part of the pattern previously reported for
endogenous GLI3 transcription.

PMID: 17661744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Development. 2007 Aug;134(16):2903-12.

Evc is a positive mediator of Ihh-regulated bone growth that localises at the
base of chondrocyte cilia.

Ruiz-Perez VL(1), Blair HJ, Rodriguez-Andres ME, Blanco MJ, Wilson A, Liu YN,
Miles C, Peters H, Goodship JA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle University, Central Parkway, Newcastle 
upon Tyne NE1 3BZ, UK. vlruiz@iib.uam.es

EVC is a novel protein mutated in the human chondroectodermal dysplasia Ellis-van
Creveld syndrome (EvC; OMIM: 225500). We have inactivated Evc in the mouse and
show that Evc(-/-) mice develop an EvC-like syndrome, including short ribs, short
limbs and dental abnormalities. lacZ driven by the Evc promoter revealed that Evc
is expressed in the developing bones and the orofacial region. Antibodies
developed against Evc locate the protein at the base of the primary cilium. The
growth plate of Evc(-/-) mice shows delayed bone collar formation and advanced
maturation of chondrocytes. Indian hedgehog (Ihh) is expressed normally in the
growth plates of Evc(-/-) mice, but expression of the Ihh downstream genes Ptch1 
and Gli1 was markedly decreased. Recent studies have shown that Smo localises to 
primary cilia and that Gli3 processing is defective in intraflagellar transport
mutants. In vitro studies using Evc(-/-) cells demonstrate that the defect lies
downstream of Smo. Chondrocyte cilia are present in Evc(-/-) mice and Gli3
processing appears normal by western blot analysis. We conclude that Evc is an
intracellular component of the hedgehog signal transduction pathway that is
required for normal transcriptional activation of Ihh target genes.

PMID: 17660199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. J Child Orthop. 2007 Jul;1(2):143-50. doi: 10.1007/s11832-007-0022-8. Epub 2007
May 10.

The spectrum of hand and foot malformations in patients with Greig
cephalopolysyndactyly.

Debeer P(1), Devriendt K, De Smet L, Deravel T, Gonzalez-Meneses A, Grzeschik KH,
Fryns JP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Orthopaedics, Department of Musculoskeletal Science, University
Hospital Pellenberg, Weligerveld 1, 3212, Pellenberg, Belgium,
philippe.debeer@uz.kuleuven.ac.be.

PURPOSE: Greig cephalopolysyndactyly (GCPS) (OMIM 175700), a rare autosomal
dominant disorder, is characterized by a distinct combination of craniofacial,
hand and foot malformations. The hand and foot malformations often require
orthopedic assessment and treatment. The disorder is caused by point mutations or
deletions in the GLI3 gene, located on chromosome 7p14.3. Herewith, we review the
hand and foot malformations in a cohort of 13 patients referred for genetic
testing.
METHODS: We reviewed the medical files of 13 patients with GCPS seen at the
Center for Human Genetics in Leuven between 2003 and 2005. Clinical, molecular
and radiological findings, when available, were recorded.
RESULTS: We identified six different point mutations in the GLI3 gene, two
microdeletions and three larger chromosomal deletions. In the hands, preaxial
polydactyly was never observed, but the malformations included postaxial
polydactyly, broad thumbs, clinodactyly of the thumbs and various degrees of
syndactyly. In the feet the spectrum of malformations included preaxial
polydactyly, postaxial polydactyly, different degrees of syndactyly and broad
halluces. Syndactyly of the toes and hallux abnormalities were present in all
patients. Most frequently, syndactyly was present between toes 1-2-3. The
broadening of the hallux was either due to a complete or partial duplication of
the first toe or to broadening of the distal phalanx. Mental retardation was
found in three cases and was associated with a large chromosomal deletion of the 
GLI3 region.
CONCLUSION: We found the classic hand and foot malformations associated with GCPS
in our cohort of patients. Patients with a large chromosomal deletion had mental 
retardation, but no structural brain anomalies were found.

PMCID: PMC2656707
PMID: 19308487  [PubMed]


464. Hybridoma (Larchmt). 2007 Jun;26(3):131-9.

Generation and characterization of mouse monoclonal antibody 5E1 against human
transcription factor GLI3.

Hunt R(1), Bragina O, Drews M, Kasak L, Timmusk S, Valkna A, Kogerman P,
Järvekülg L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Gene Technology, Tallinn University of Technology, Akadeemia tee,
Tallinn, Estonia.

GLI3 is a transcriptional effector of the developmentally important hedgehog (Hh)
signaling pathway. Here we report the production of mouse monoclonal antibody
(MAb) against putative repressive motif in GLI3 (GLI3pRM). BALB/c mice were
immunized with purified recombinant human GLI3pRM protein; the splenocytes from
these mice were fused with myeloma cell line (SP2/0) by using standard hybridoma 
production techniques. Resulting hybridomas producing anti-GLI3pRM antibodies
were screened by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and isotyped. The
specificity of MAb 5E1 was determined based on its activity in Western blot and
immunofluorescence analysis of human NT2/D1 cell line. The results showed that
MAb 5E1 was immunoglobulin IgM/ê and it recognized recombinant human GLI3pRM
specifically. In addition, MAb 5E1 bound to the full-length (FL-GLI3) as well as 
a short protein (GLI3R) and did not cross-react with a similar region in GLI2.
MAb 5E1 could also be used to detect the expression of GLI3 in mouse cell lines
and embryonic tissues.

PMID: 17600494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Hum Mol Genet. 2007 Sep 1;16(17):2089-96. Epub 2007 Jun 22.

The molecular basis of Pallister Hall associated polydactyly.

Hill P(1), Wang B, Rüther U.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Entwicklungs- und Molekularbiologie der Tiere,
Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.

Mutations in GLI3 manifest in several distinct clinical phenotypes including
Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome and Pallister-Hall syndrome (PHS). GLI3
belongs to the GLI family of transcription factors that mediates extracellular
Sonic hedgehog (SHH) signals. In the absence of SHH signals, GLI3 is processed to
form a transcriptional repressor termed GLI3R. During early limb development, the
regulation of GLI3 processing by SHH is decisive in determining the correct
number and identity of digits. Analyses of mouse embryos have produced evidence
that elevated levels of GLI3R reduce the number of developing digits. Remarkably,
PHS causative mutations are predicted to produce a truncated protein similar to
the endogenous GLI3R. Nevertheless, polydactyly is frequently observed in PHS
patients and it even represents a criterion for the clinical diagnosis of PHS. In
order to detect the underlying cause of this obvious discrepancy, we made use of 
the Gli3(Delta699) mouse mutant, which represents the mouse model of PHS. We show
that the mutant murine allele gives rise to a truncated version of GLI3 that
mimicks both the processed GLI3R isoform and the proposed pathogenic GLI3(PHS)
protein. We analyzed how the mutant GLI3 protein interferes with the
anteroposterior patterning of early limb development, whereas processes that are 
associated with the outgrowth of the limb bud remain remarkably unimpaired. The
presented findings help to understand the previously enigmatic emergence of
Pallister-Hall associated polydactyly and thus add to the understanding of the
pathogenic mode of the action of GLI3(PHS).

PMID: 17588959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Development. 2007 Jul;134(14):2569-77. Epub 2007 Jun 6.

Ftm is a novel basal body protein of cilia involved in Shh signalling.

Vierkotten J(1), Dildrop R, Peters T, Wang B, Rüther U.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Entwicklungs- und Molekularbiologie der Tiere EMT,
Heinrich-Heine-Universität, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.

In this study we show in mice that Ftm (Rpgrip1l) is located at the ciliary basal
body. Our data reveal that Ftm is necessary for developmental processes such as
the establishment of left-right asymmetry and patterning of the neural tube and
the limbs. The loss of Ftm affects the ratio of Gli3 activator to Gli3 repressor,
suggesting an involvement of Ftm in Shh signalling. As Ftm is not essential for
cilia assembly but for full Shh response, Ftm can be considered as a novel
component for cilium-related Hh signalling. Furthermore, the absence of Ftm in
arthropods underlines the divergence between vertebrate and Drosophila Hh
pathways.

PMID: 17553904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Dev Cell. 2007 May;12(5):767-78.

The graded response to Sonic Hedgehog depends on cilia architecture.

Caspary T(1), Larkins CE, Anderson KV.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, 1275 York Avenue,
New York, NY 10021, USA.

Several studies have linked cilia and Hedgehog signaling, but the precise roles
of ciliary proteins in signal transduction remain enigmatic. Here we describe a
mouse mutation, hennin (hnn), that causes coupled defects in cilia structure and 
Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling. The hnn mutant cilia are short with a specific
defect in the structure of the ciliary axoneme, and the hnn neural tube shows a
Shh-independent expansion of the domain of motor neuron progenitors. The hnn
mutation is a null allele of Arl13b, a small GTPase of the Arf/Arl family, and
the Arl13b protein is localized to cilia. Double mutant analysis indicates that
Gli3 repressor activity is normal in hnn embryos, but Gli activators are
constitutively active at low levels. Thus, normal structure of the ciliary
axoneme is required for the cell to translate different levels of Shh ligand into
differential regulation of the Gli transcription factors that implement Hedgehog 
signals.

PMID: 17488627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Dev Biol. 2007 Jun 15;306(2):883-93. Epub 2007 Apr 1.

Interactions between HOXD and Gli3 genes control the limb apical ectodermal ridge
via Fgf10.

Zakany J(1), Zacchetti G, Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Animal Biology and National Research
Centre/Frontiers in Genetics, University of Geneva, Sciences III, Quai Ernest
Ansermet 30, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

The development of the vertebrate limb is dependent upon two signaling centers,
the apical ectodermal ridge (AER), which provides the underlying mesenchyme with 
essential growth factors, and the zone of polarizing activity (ZPA), the source
of the Sonic hedgehog (SHH) product. Recent work involving gain and loss of
function of Hox genes has emphasized their impact both on AER maintenance and Shh
transcriptional activation. Here, we describe antagonistic interactions between
posterior Hoxd genes and Gli3, suggesting that the latter product protects the
AER from the deleterious effect of the formers, and we present evidence that
Fgf10 is the mediator of HOX-dependent AER expansion. Furthermore, the striking
similarity between some of the hereby observed Hox/Gli3-dependent morphogenetic
defects and those displayed by fetuses with severely altered retinoic acid
metabolism suggests a tight connection between these various pathways. The nature
of these potential interactions is discussed in the context of proximal-distal
growth and patterning.

PMID: 17467687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Jun 15;357(4):1084-9. Epub 2007 Apr 20.

Hedgehog is involved in prostate basal cell hyperplasia formation and its
progressing towards tumorigenesis.

Chen BY(1), Liu JY, Chang HH, Chang CP, Lo WY, Kuo WH, Yang CR, Lin DP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Chung Shan Medical University,
Taichung 402, Taiwan.

The role of Hedgehog signaling in human basal cell hyperplasia formation and its 
progressing towards tumorigenesis was investigated. Hedgehog signaling members
including PTCH1, GLI1, GLI2, and GLI3 were found co-localized with p63 expression
in most hyperplastic basal cells, but rarely in normal basal cells, suggesting
Hedgehog involvement in basal cell hyperplasia formation. Both CK-14 and CK-8
markers were found co-localized in the majority of hyperplastic basal cells, but 
relatively few in the normal basal cells, indicating a Hedgehog-promoted
transitory differentiation. Furthermore, CK-14 and PTCH1 were found co-localized 
with CD44 in the hyerplastic basal cells, in a way similar to the CD44
co-localization with PTCH1 and GLI1 in the cancer cells. Together, the present
study indicated Hedgehog involvement in forming basal cell hyperplasia and its
progressing towards cancer, presumably by transforming the normal basal stem
cells into the cancer stem cells where persistent Hedgehog activation might be
mandatory for tumorigenesis.

PMID: 17466949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. World J Gastroenterol. 2007 Mar 21;13(11):1659-65.

Sonic hedgehog-Gli1 pathway in colorectal adenocarcinomas.

Bian YH(1), Huang SH, Yang L, Ma XL, Xie JW, Zhang HW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Developmental Biology, College of Life Science, Shandong
University, Jinan 250010, Shandong Province, China.

AIM: To determine the role of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway in colorectal
adenocarcinomas through analysis of the expression of Shh pathway-related
molecules, Shh, Ptch1, hedgehog-interacting protein (Hip), Gli1, Gli3 and
PDGFRalpha.
METHODS: Expression of Shh in 25 colorectal adeno-carcinomas was detected by
RT-PCR, in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry. Expression of Ptch1 was
observed by in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry. Expression of Hip,
Gli1, Gli3 and PDGFRalpha was analyzed by in situ hybridization.
RESULTS: Expression of cytokeratin AE1/AE3 was observed in the cytoplasm of
colorectal crypts. Members of the Hh signaling pathway were expressed in
colorectal epithelium. Shh was expressed in cytoplasm of dysplastic epithelial
cells, while expression of Ptch1, Hip and Gli1 were mainly detected in the
malignant crypts of adenocarcinomas. In contrast, PDGFRalpha was expressed highly
in aberrant crypts and moderately in the stroma. Expression of Gli3 could not be 
detected in colorectal adenocarcinomas.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that Shh-Ptch1-Gli1 signaling pathway may play a
role in the progression of colorectal tumor.

PMCID: PMC4146943
PMID: 17461467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Mol Biol Cell. 2007 Jul;18(7):2411-8. Epub 2007 Apr 18.

Ihh/Gli2 signaling promotes osteoblast differentiation by regulating Runx2
expression and function.

Shimoyama A(1), Wada M, Ikeda F, Hata K, Matsubara T, Nifuji A, Noda M, Amano K, 
Yamaguchi A, Nishimura R, Yoneda T.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Graduate School of
Dentistry, Osaka University, 1-8 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Genetic and cell biological studies have indicated that Indian hedgehog (Ihh)
plays an important role in bone development and osteoblast differentiation.
However, the molecular mechanism by which Ihh regulates osteoblast
differentiation is complex and remains to be fully elucidated. In this study, we 
investigated the role of Ihh signaling in osteoblast differentiation using
mesenchymal cells and primary osteoblasts. We observed that Ihh stimulated
alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, osteocalcin expression, and calcification.
Overexpression of Gli2- but not Gli3-induced ALP, osteocalcin expression, and
calcification of these cells. In contrast, dominant-negative Gli2 markedly
inhibited Ihh-dependent osteoblast differentiation. Ihh treatment or Gli2
overexpression also up-regulated the expression of Runx2, an essential
transcription factor for osteoblastogenesis, and enhanced the transcriptional
activity and osteogenic action of Runx2. Coimmunoprecipitation analysis
demonstrated a physical interaction between Gli2 and Runx2. Moreover, Ihh or Gli2
overexpression failed to increase ALP activity in Runx2-deficient mesenchymal
cells. Collectively, these results suggest that Ihh regulates osteoblast
differentiation of mesenchymal cells through up-regulation of the expression and 
function of Runx2 by Gli2.

PMCID: PMC1924839
PMID: 17442891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Cancer Res. 2007 Apr 15;67(8):3583-93.

Selective down-regulation of glioma-associated oncogene 2 inhibits the
proliferation of hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Kim Y(1), Yoon JW, Xiao X, Dean NM, Monia BP, Marcusson EG.

Author information: 
(1)Isis Pharmaceuticals Inc., 1896 Rutherford Road, Carlsbad, CA 92008, USA.
ykim@isisph.com

The sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway contributes to the initiation and progression of
tumors with various origins when aberrantly activated. In this study, we
investigated if the Shh pathway is important for the proliferation of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells and also began to identify which components 
of the pathway play a pivotal role in the biology of HCC. Expression levels of
components in the pathway were measured, and glioma-associated oncogene (Gli) 2
levels were found to be considerably higher in human HCC lines compared with
normal liver. Gli2 levels were also higher in tumor tissue from HCC patients
compared with normal liver. Antisense oligonucleotides (ASO) were used to
specifically down-regulate Gli2, and this led to decreased proliferation of
various HCC cell lines. However, inhibition of Gli1 and Gli3 with ASOs did not
decrease proliferation in most HCC cell lines and inhibitors targeting the
upstream components of the pathway, including smoothened (Smo), displayed
antiproliferative effects in only a subset of HCC cell lines. Moreover, in cancer
cells harboring Smo mutations or unresponsive to the Smo inhibitor
3-keto-N-aminoethylaminoethylcaproyldihydrocinnamoyl cyclopamine, the Gli2 ASO
was still able to inhibit proliferation. The importance of Gli2 in HCC
proliferation was further confirmed by the changes in expression levels of genes,
such as Bcl-2, c-Myc, and p27, following suppression of Gli2 expression. Taken
together, these results suggest that, among the Gli transcription factors, Gli2
plays a predominant role in the proliferation of HCC cells and the suppression of
Gli2 expression may provide a useful therapeutic option for the treatment of HCC.

PMID: 17440069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. PLoS One. 2007 Apr 11;2(4):e366.

Human GLI3 intragenic conserved non-coding sequences are tissue-specific
enhancers.

Abbasi AA(1), Paparidis Z, Malik S, Goode DK, Callaway H, Elgar G, Grzeschik KH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Philipps-University, Marburg, Germany.

The zinc-finger transcription factor GLI3 is a key regulator of development,
acting as a primary transducer of Sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling in a
combinatorial context dependent fashion controlling multiple patterning steps in 
different tissues/organs. A tight temporal and spatial control of gene expression
is indispensable, however, cis-acting sequence elements regulating GLI3
expression have not yet been reported. We show that 11 ancient genomic DNA
signatures, conserved from the pufferfish Takifugu (Fugu) rubripes to man, are
distributed throughout the introns of human GLI3. They map within larger
conserved non-coding elements (CNEs) that are found in the tetrapod lineage. Full
length CNEs transiently transfected into human cell cultures acted as cell type
specific enhancers of gene transcription. The regulatory potential of these
elements is conserved and was exploited to direct tissue specific expression of a
reporter gene in zebrafish embryos. Assays of deletion constructs revealed that
the human-Fugu conserved sequences within the GLI3 intronic CNEs were essential
but not sufficient for full-scale transcriptional activation. The enhancer
activity of the CNEs is determined by a combinatorial effect of a core sequence
conserved between human and teleosts (Fugu) and flanking tetrapod-specific
sequences, suggesting that successive clustering of sequences with regulatory
potential around an ancient, highly conserved nucleus might be a possible
mechanism for the evolution of cis-acting regulatory elements.

PMCID: PMC1838922
PMID: 17426814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Biochem J. 2007 May 1;403(3):369-79.

Pathways of signal transduction employed by vertebrate Hedgehogs.

Riobo NA(1), Manning DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Signalling by Hh (Hedgehog) proteins is among the most actively studied
receptor-mediated phenomena relevant to development and post-embryonic
homoeostatic events. The impact of signalling by the Hh proteins is profound, and
work pertaining to the presentation of these proteins and the pathways engaged by
them continues to yield unique insights into basic aspects of morphogenic
signalling. We review here the mechanisms of signalling relevant to the actions
of Hh proteins in vertebrates. We emphasize findings within the past several
years on the recognition of, in particular, Sonic hedgehog by target cells,
pathways of transduction employed by the seven-pass transmembrane protein
Smoothened and end points of action, as manifest in the regulation of the Gli
transcription factors. Topics of extended interest are those regarding the
employment of heterotrimeric G-proteins and G-protein-coupled receptor kinases by
Smoothened. We also address the pathways, insofar as known, linking Smoothened to
the expression and stability of Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3. The mechanisms by which Hh
proteins signal have few, if any, parallels. It is becoming clear in vertebrates,
however, that several facets of signalling are shared in common with other venues
of signalling. The challenge in understanding both the actions of Hh proteins and
the overlapping forms of regulation will be in understanding, in molecular terms,
both common and divergent signalling events.

PMID: 17419683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Dev Biol. 2007 May 15;305(2):460-9. Epub 2007 Feb 28.

The Shh-independent activator function of the full-length Gli3 protein and its
role in vertebrate limb digit patterning.

Wang C(1), Rüther U, Wang B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine, Weill Medical College of Cornell University,
1300 York Avenue, W404, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Anterior-posterior (A/P) limb patterning in vertebrates is determined by the
counteraction between the Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) and the Gli3 transcription factor.
Shh exerts its effect on Gli3 by regulating the full-length Gli3 protein
processing to generate a Gli3 repressor gradient along the A/P axis of the limb. 
However, it is not clear whether the full-length Gli3 is an activator in vivo and
plays any role in the limb patterning. Here we show that mouse limbs expressing
only a Gli3 repressor form exhibit mild polysyndactyly and a partial loss of
digit identity, while limbs expressing only a full-length Gli3 protein display
severe polysyndactyly and a complete loss of digit identity. Interestingly, when 
the full-length Gli3 and the repressor are equally expressed in the limb, the
digit patterning is overall normal except for an extra anterior digit.
Furthermore, in the presence of one Gli3 wild type allele, a Gli3 mutant allele
that expresses only the full-length form can rescue the Shh mutant digit
phenotype to a great extent. The full-length Gli3 protein can also activate Shh
target gene expression without Shh. Thus, our data indicate that the full-length 
Gli3 protein is an activator in vivo and that the ratio of the Gli3 activator to 
repressor, but neither the Gli3 repressor gradient nor the Gli3
activator/repressor ratio gradient, determines limb digit patterning.

PMCID: PMC1952533
PMID: 17400206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Development. 2007 May;134(9):1713-22. Epub 2007 Mar 29.

Opposing gradients of Gli repressor and activators mediate Shh signaling along
the dorsoventral axis of the inner ear.

Bok J(1), Dolson DK, Hill P, Rüther U, Epstein DJ, Wu DK.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, Rockville,
MD 20850, USA.

Organization of the vertebrate inner ear is mainly dependent on localized signals
from surrounding tissues. Previous studies demonstrated that sonic hedgehog (Shh)
secreted from the floor plate and notochord is required for specification of
ventral (auditory) and dorsal (vestibular) inner ear structures, yet it was not
clear how this signaling activity is propagated. To elucidate the molecular
mechanisms by which Shh regulates inner ear development, we examined embryos with
various combinations of mutant alleles for Shh, Gli2 and Gli3. Our study shows
that Gli3 repressor (R) is required for patterning dorsal inner ear structures,
whereas Gli activator (A) proteins are essential for ventral inner ear
structures. A proper balance of Gli3R and Gli2/3A is required along the length of
the dorsoventral axis of the inner ear to mediate graded levels of Shh signaling,
emanating from ventral midline tissues. Formation of the ventral-most otic
region, the distal cochlear duct, requires robust Gli2/3A function. By contrast, 
the formation of the proximal cochlear duct and saccule, which requires less Shh 
signaling, is achieved by antagonizing Gli3R. The dorsal vestibular region
requires the least amount of Shh signaling in order to generate the correct dose 
of Gli3R required for the development of this otic region. Taken together, our
data suggest that reciprocal gradients of GliA and GliR mediate the responses to 
Shh signaling along the dorsoventral axis of the inner ear.

PMID: 17395647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Bone. 2007 Jun;40(6):1462-74. Epub 2007 Feb 15.

NDST-1 modulates BMPR and PTHrP signaling during endochondral bone formation in a
gene knockout model.

Hu Z(1), Yu M, Hu G.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell 
Biology, Shanghai Institute of Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
320 Yueyang Road, Shanghai 200031, China.

GlcNAc N-deacetylase/N-sulfotransferase-1 (NDST-1), a member of the enzyme family
catalyzing the first modification step in the biosynthesis of heparan sulfate
(HS), was knocked out in mice to investigate its role in embryonic development.
NDST-1 null mice exhibited delayed endochondral bone formation including
shortened calcified zones in limbs, delayed chondrocyte and osteogenetic
differentiation, and increased chondrocyte proliferation. In situ HS binding
assay revealed that the binding ability of bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) -2,
-4, and -6 to endogenous HS was decreased in mutant phalanges, while that of
fibroblast growth factor-1 (FGF-1) was not affected. Up-regulation of BMPR-IA,
Phospho-Smad1 (P-Smad1) and parathyroid-hormone related protein (PTHrP), but not 
the Indian hedgehog, Gli1, Gli3, Patched, and FGFR-3, was observed. Furthermore, 
block of BMPR signaling with noggin rescued the delayed chondrocyte hypertrophic 
differentiation in NDST-1 (-/-) mice and recovered the expression of both P-Smad1
and PTHrP proteins. These results suggested that NDST-1-dependent heparan sulfate
might negatively modulate BMP and its downstream PTHrP signaling, and thus affect
endochondral bone development.

PMID: 17376755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Dev Biol. 2007 May 1;305(1):312-24. Epub 2007 Feb 21.

Manipulations of PKA in chick limb development reveal roles in digit patterning
including a positive role in Sonic Hedgehog signaling.

Tiecke E(1), Turner R, Sanz-Ezquerro JJ, Warner A, Tickle C.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Developmental Biology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee,
Dow Street, Dundee, DD1 5EH, UK. c.a.tickle@dundee.ac.uk

Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signaling by the polarizing region, at the posterior of the 
vertebrate limb bud, is pivotal in determining digit number and identity. Shh
establishes a gradient of the bifunctional transcriptional effector, Gli3, with
high levels of full-length activator (Gli3A) in the posterior bud, where digits
form, and high levels of shorter repressor (Gli3R) in the anterior. Repressor
formation depends on protein kinase A (PKA), but in Drosophila, PKA also plays a 
role in activator function. Increasing PKA levels in chick limb development using
Forskolin had no effect on posterior polarizing activity but weak polarizing
activity, based on ligand-independent Shh signaling, was induced in anterior limb
bud cells resulting in extra digits. Manipulating PKA activity levels directly
with a retrovirus expressing activated PKA induced extra digits similar to those 
induced by Forskolin treatment suggesting that PKA may have a previously
unrecognized positive role in Shh signaling in vertebrate limbs. Expressing
dominant negative PKA also induced extra, sometimes multiple digits, from
anterior limb bud demonstrating the negative role in Shh signaling. PKA levels in
the limb bud are high posteriorly and low anteriorly, suggesting that PKA
activity may influence the outcome of Shh signaling in normal development.

PMID: 17376427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Leukemia. 2007 May;21(5):949-55. Epub 2007 Mar 15.

Deregulation and cross talk among Sonic hedgehog, Wnt, Hox and Notch signaling in
chronic myeloid leukemia progression.

Sengupta A(1), Banerjee D, Chandra S, Banerji SK, Ghosh R, Roy R, Banerjee S.

Author information: 
(1)Structural Genomics Section and Biophysics Division, Saha Institute of Nuclear
Physics, Kolkata, West Bengal, India.

Deciphering the BCR-ABL-independent signaling exploited in chronic myeloid
leukemia (CML) progression is an important aspect in cancer stem-cell biology.
CML stem-cell compartment is dynamic as it progresses to terminal blast crisis
where myeloid and lymphoid blasts fail to differentiate. We demonstrate
cross-regulation of signaling network involving Sonic hedgehog (Shh), Wnt, Notch 
and Hox for the inexorable blastic transformation of CD34(+) CML cells.
Significant upregulation in Patched1, Frizzled2, Lef1, CyclinD1, p21 (P < or
=0.0002) and downregulation of HoxA10 and HoxB4 (P< or =0.0001) transcripts in
CD34(+) cells distinguish blast crisis from chronic CML. We report Shh-dependent 
Stat3 activation orchestrates these mutually interconnected signaling pathways.
Stimulation of CD34(+) CML cells with either soluble Shh or Wnt3a did not
activate Akt or p44/42-mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways.
Interestingly, unlike dominant negative Stat3beta, introduction of constitutive
active Stat3 in CD34(+) CML cells induces cross-regulation in gene expression.
Additionally, Shh and Wnt3a-dependent regulation of cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitors (CDKI) in CML suggests their role in the network. Taken together, our 
findings propose that deregulation in the form of hyperactive Shh and Wnt with
repressed Notch and Hox pathways involving Stat3, Gli3, beta-catenin, CyclinD1,
Hes1, HoxA10 and p21 might act synergistically to form an important hub in CML
progression.

PMID: 17361218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. ScientificWorldJournal. 2007 Jan 26;7:83-6.

Involvement of the Gli3 (extra-toes) gene region in body weight in mice.

Martin B(1), Lapouble E, Chaix Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Neurobiologie, Université d'Orléans, Orléans Cedex 2, France.
bmartin@cnrs-orleans.fr

The mutation extra-toes (Gli3Xt-J) on chromosome (Chr) 13 of the mouse is known
to be involved in the development of the skeleton. The only visible manifestation
is the presence of an extra digit on each hind foot. Here we report evidence from
several experiments that Gli3XtJ/+ mice weigh more than littermate Gli3+/+ mice, 
suggesting an effect on body weight of Gli3 or of a gene tightly linked to it on 
Chr 13. Four independent experiments in different environments were conducted on 
mice with different genetic backgrounds derived from the C3XtEso Gli3Xt-J/+ Eso/+
linkage testing strain and the JE/Le strain at adult age. The analyses have shown
an association between the Gli3Xt-J allele and a body weight increase of about
6.5%. This effect is genetically dominant. It would appear that if the gene of
interest is not Gli3 itself, it must be very close to this locus. Indeed, the
expected size for this fragment is 7.9 +/- 5.3 cM. The manifestation of this
gene, observed in two animal facilities and on different genetic backgrounds, is 
consistent with the idea that the effect of the gene(s) is displayed in a stable 
manner. It accounts for a variation of 6.5% of body weight.

PMID: 17334602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Curr Biol. 2007 Mar 20;17(6):545-50. Epub 2007 Mar 1.

Inhibitory Gli3 activity negatively regulates Wnt/beta-catenin signaling.

Ulloa F(1), Itasaki N, Briscoe J.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Neurobiology, National Institute for Medical Research, Mill
Hill, London, United Kingdom.

The Hedgehog (Hh) and Wingless (Wnt) families of secreted signaling molecules
have key roles in embryonic development and adult tissue homeostasis [1-3]. In
the developing neural tube, Wnt and Shh, emanating from dorsal and ventral
regions, respectively, have been proposed to govern the proliferation and
survival of neural progenitors [4-10]. Surprisingly, Shh is required for the
growth and survival of cells in both ventral and dorsal neural tube [11]. Here we
demonstrate that inhibition of Shh signaling causes a reduction in Wnt-mediated
transcriptional activation. This reduction requires Gli3. Assays in embryos and
cell lines indicate that repressor forms of the Hh-regulated transcription
factor, Gli3 (Gli3R), which are generated in the absence of Hh signaling, inhibit
canonical Wnt signaling. Gli3R acts by antagonizing active forms of the Wnt
transcriptional effector, beta-catenin. Consistent with this, Gli3R appears to
physically interact with the carboxy-terminal domain of beta-catenin, a region
that includes the transactivation domain. These data offer an explanation for the
proliferative defects in Shh null embryos and suggest a novel mechanism for
crosstalk between the Hh and Wnt pathways.

PMID: 17331723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Dev Biol. 2007 May 1;305(1):28-39. Epub 2007 Jan 27.

PTHrP regulates growth plate chondrocyte differentiation and proliferation in a
Gli3 dependent manner utilizing hedgehog ligand dependent and independent
mechanisms.

Mau E(1), Whetstone H, Yu C, Hopyan S, Wunder JS, Alman BA.

Author information: 
(1)The Program in Developmental Biology of the Hospital for Sick Children,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Growth plate chondrocytes undergo a tightly regulated process of differentiation,
allowing for the longitudinal growth of bones. Although it is known that
parathyroid hormone related protein (PTHrP) and Indian hedgehog regulate the
differentiation of growth plate chondrocytes, how these pathways interact to
regulate chondrocyte development is not fully elucidated. We examined how the
interaction between PTHrP and the hedgehog activated transcription factors, Gli2 
and Gli3, regulates growth plate chondrocyte differentiation and proliferation.
Analysis of fetal limbs showed that Gli2 is a negative regulator and Gli3 a
positive regulator of type X collagen expression. Limb explant cultures showed
that PTHrP treatment inhibited type X collagen expression and increased
chondrocyte proliferation. This effect was substantially enhanced in Gli2-/-
limbs, was blocked in Gli3-/- limbs, and was only partially inhibited by hedgehog
ligand blockade. PTHrP negatively regulated Gli mediated transcription in cell
cultures, and regulated the level of the repressor form of Gli3 in a PKA
dependent manner. These results show that PTHrP regulates growth plate
chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation in part through the activity of
Gli3, suggesting a crucial role for Gli3 in growth plate chondrocyte development.

PMID: 17328886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Genesis. 2007 Mar;45(3):107-12.

High-resolution mapping of the Gli3 deletion in the mouse extra-toesH mutant.

Genestine M, Robert B, Lallemand Y.

Extra-toes is a semidominant mutation that affects the Gli3 gene and provokes
limb and brain abnormalities. Among the different alleles of this mutation, Xt(H)
is due to a deletion that has not yet been fully characterized. Using a PCR-based
strategy, we undertook a high-resolution mapping of this deletion and confirmed
that Xt(H) is a null allele of Gli3. We further designed a PCR test to identify
unequivocally heterozygous and homozygous embryos from their wild-type
littermates. Despite the length of the Xt(H) deletion, available data on the
mouse genome indicate that no genes other than Gli3 are deleted in Xt(H) mutants.
Thus, the Xt(H) mutation can be used as a model for studying the effects that
absence of Gli3 function has during development.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17304534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. J Biol Chem. 2007 Apr 13;282(15):10846-52. Epub 2007 Feb 5.

A novel protein-processing domain in Gli2 and Gli3 differentially blocks complete
protein degradation by the proteasome.

Pan Y(1), Wang B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine, Weill Medical College of Cornell University,
New York, New York 10021, USA.

The proteasome usually completely degrades its target proteins, but it can also
degrade a handful of proteins in a limited and site-specific manner. The
molecular mechanism for such limited degradation is unknown. The repressor forms 
of Gli2 and Gli3 transcription factors are generated from their full-length
proteins through limited proteasome-mediated protein degradation. In this study, 
we have taken advantage of the fact that Gli3 is efficiently processed, whereas
Gli2 is not, and identified a region of approximately 200 residues in their C
termini that determine differential processing of the two proteins. This region, 
named processing determinant domain, functions as a signal for protein processing
in the context of not only Gli2 and Gli3 protein sequences but also a
heterologous hybrid protein, which would otherwise be completely degraded by the 
proteasome. Thus, the processing determinant domain constitutes a novel domain
that functions independently. Our findings explain, at the molecular level, why
Gli2 and Gli3 are differentially processed and, more importantly, may help
understand a probably general mechanism by which the proteasome degrades some of 
its target proteins partially rather than completely.

PMID: 17283082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Dev Dyn. 2007 Mar;236(3):769-76.

A hypermorphic mouse Gli3 allele results in a polydactylous limb phenotype.

Wang C(1), Pan Y, Wang B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine, Weill Medical College of Cornell University,
New York, NY, USA.

Gli3 protein processing to generate the Gli3 repressor is mediated by proteasome 
and inhibited by Hedgehog signaling. The Gli3 repressor concentration is graded
along the anterior-posterior axis of the developing vertebrate limb due to
posteriorly restricted Sonic hedgehog expression. In this study, we created a
small deletion at the Gli3 locus (Gli3(Delta68)), which causes a half reduction
in the Gli3 repressor levels and a slightly increased activity of full-length
mutant protein in the limb. Mice homozygous for Gli3(Delta68) develop one to two 
extra partial digits in the anterior of the limb, while mice carrying one copy of
the Gli3(Delta68) allele die soon after birth and display seven digits. These
phenotypes are more severe than those found in mice lacking one wild-type Gli3
allele. The expression of dHand, Hoxd12, and Hoxd13 is anteriorly expanded in the
limb, even though no up-regulation of Gli1 and Ptc RNA expression is detected.
These findings suggest that a decrease in the Gli3 repressor level in combination
with an increase in Gli3 full-length activity results in more severe digit
patterning abnormalities than those caused by a loss of one wild-type Gli3
allele.

PMID: 17266131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Pediatr Surg Int. 2007 May;23(5):419-24.

Expression of homeotic genes Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxd3 and Hoxc4 is decreased in the
lungs but not in the hearts of adriamycin-exposed mice.

Calonge WM(1), Martinez L, Lacadena J, Fernandez-Dumont V, Matesanz R, Tovar JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Hospital Universitario La Paz, P. de la
Castellana 261, 28046 Madrid, Spain.

Exposure of rat and mouse embryos to adriamycin (doxorubicin chlorhydrate)
induces esophageal atresia (EA) and VACTERL association. Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and
Gli2/Gli3 pathways are involved in these conditions and knockout mice for
homeotic Hox genes Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxc3, Hoxc4 and Hoxa5 show phenotypes with some
of the associated VACTERL features. This study aims at evaluating the possible
influence of Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxd3 and Hoxc4 as upstream regulators of this complex
signalling. Pregnant mice were exposed either to 4 mg/kg of adriamycin (EA group)
or vehicle (controls) on embryonic days 7.5 and 8.5. Embryos were recovered at
four endpoints (E12.5-E15.5) and randomly assigned for immunohistochemical or
molecular biology studies. Lungs and hearts were separately harvested and
processed for Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxd3 and Hoxc4 quantitative RT-PCR measurements.
Antibodies for Hoxa3, Hoxb3 and Hoxd3 proteins were used for immunohistochemical 
studies. RT-PCR studies showed a drastic and statistically significant decrease
of the four genes in the lungs of EA mice when compared to controls, with a
slight recovery from E15.5. Hearts of both groups showed a similar expression of 
all the genes throughout gestation. Control embryos expressed the hox3 paralogous
genes in heart, skin, foregut derivatives and their surrounding mesoderm through 
E12.5-E15.5 whereas adriamycin-exposed embryos showed a severe decrease in
expression of these three proteins in the same tissues but not in the heart.
Adriamycin drastically reduced the expression of Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxd3 and Hoxc4 in
mice embryonic lungs. Their expression in the heart did not seem to be influenced
by adriamycin in this experimental setting.

PMID: 17211587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Dev Dyn. 2007 Feb;236(2):426-34.

Temporomandibular joint formation and condyle growth require Indian hedgehog
signaling.

Shibukawa Y(1), Young B, Wu C, Yamada S, Long F, Pacifici M, Koyama E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Thomas Jefferson University College of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

The temporomandibular joint (TMJ) is essential for jaw function, but the
mechanisms regulating its development remain poorly understood. Because Indian
hedgehog (Ihh) regulates trunk and limb skeletogenesis, we studied its possible
roles in TMJ development. In wild-type mouse embryos, Ihh expression was already 
strong in condylar cartilage by embryonic day (E) 15.5, and expression of Ihh
receptors and effector genes (Gli1, Gli2, Gli3, and PTHrP) indicated that Ihh
range of action normally reached apical condylar tissue layers, including
polymorphic chondroprogenitor layer and articular disc primordia. In Ihh(-/-)
embryos, TMJ development was severely compromised. Condylar cartilage growth,
polymorphic cell proliferation, and PTHrP expression were all inhibited, and
growth plate organization and chondrocyte gene expression patterns were abnormal.
These severe defects were partially corrected in double Ihh(-/-)/Gli3(-/-)
mutants, signifying that Ihh action is normally modulated and delimited by Gli3
and Gli3(R) in particular. Both single and double mutants, however, failed to
form an articular disc primordium, normally appreciable as an independent
condensation between condylar apex and neighboring developing temporal bone in
wild-type. This failure persisted at later stages, leading to complete absence of
a normal functional disc and lubricin-expressing joint cavities. In summary, Ihh 
is very important for TMJ development, where it appears to regulate growth and
elongation events, condylar cartilage phenotype, and chondroprogenitor cell
function. Absence of articular disc and joint cavities in single and double
mutants points to irreplaceable Ihh roles in formation of those critical TMJ
components.

PMID: 17191253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. J Med Genet. 2007 Jan;44(1):e59. Epub 2006 Nov 10.

Zoom-in comparative genomic hybridisation arrays for the characterisation of
variable breakpoint contiguous gene syndromes.

Johnston JJ, Walker RL, Davis S, Facio F, Turner JT, Bick DP, Daentl DL, Ellison 
JW, Meltzer PS, Biesecker LG.

Contiguous gene syndromes cause disorders via haploinsufficiency for adjacent
genes. Some contiguous gene syndromes (CGS) have stereotypical breakpoints, but
others have variable breakpoints. In CGS that have variable breakpoints, the
extent of the deletions may be correlated with severity. The Greig
cephalopolysyndactyly contiguous gene syndrome (GCPS-CGS) is a multiple
malformation syndrome caused by haploinsufficiency of GLI3 and adjacent genes. In
addition, non-CGS GCPS can be caused by deletions or duplications in GLI3.
Although fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) can identify large deletion
mutations in patients with GCPS or GCPS-CGS, it is not practical for
identification of small intragenic deletions or insertions, and it is difficult
to accurately characterise the extent of the large deletions using this
technique. We have designed a custom comparative genomic hybridisation (CGH)
array that allows identification of deletions and duplications at kilobase
resolution in the vicinity of GLI3. The array averages one probe every 730 bp for
a total of about 14,000 probes over 10 Mb. We have analysed 16 individuals with
known or suspected deletions or duplications. In 15 of 16 individuals (14
deletions and 1 duplication), the array confirmed the prior results. In the
remaining patient, the normal CGH array result was correct, and the prior
assessment was a false positive quantitative polymerase chain reaction result. We
conclude that high-density CGH array analysis is more sensitive than FISH
analysis for detecting deletions and provides clinically useful results on the
extent of the deletion. We suggest that high-density CGH array analysis should
replace FISH analysis for assessment of deletions and duplications in patients
with contiguous gene syndromes caused by variable deletions.

PMCID: PMC2597909
PMID: 17098889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. BMC Dev Biol. 2006 Oct 9;6:46.

Penetrance of eye defects in mice heterozygous for mutation of Gli3 is enhanced
by heterozygous mutation of Pax6.

Zaki PA(1), Collinson JM, Toraiwa J, Simpson TI, Price DJ, Quinn JC.

Author information: 
(1)Genes and Development Group, University of Edinburgh, Hugh Robson Building,
George Square, Edinburgh, EH8 9XD, UK. paulettezaki@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: Knowledge of the consequences of heterozygous mutations of
developmentally important genes is important for understanding human genetic
disorders. The Gli3 gene encodes a zinc finger transcription factor and
homozygous loss-of-function mutations of Gli3 are lethal. Humans heterozygous for
mutations in this gene suffer Greig cephalopolysyndactyly or Pallister-Hall
syndromes, in which limb defects are prominent, and mice heterozygous for similar
mutations have extra digits. Here we examined whether eye development, which is
abnormal in mice lacking functional Gli3, is defective in Gli3+/- mice.
RESULTS: We showed that Gli3 is expressed in the developing eye but that Gli3+/- 
mice have only very subtle eye defects. We then generated mice compound
heterozygous for mutations in both Gli3 and Pax6, which encodes another
developmentally important transcription factor known to be crucial for eye
development. Pax6+/-; Gli3+/- eyes were compared to the eyes of wild-type,
Pax6+/- or Gli3+/- siblings. They exhibited a range of abnormalities of the
retina, iris, lens and cornea that was more extensive than in single Gli3+/- or
Pax6+/- mutants or than would be predicted by addition of their phenotypes.
CONCLUSION: These findings indicate that heterozygous mutations of Gli3 can
impact on eye development. The importance of a normal Gli3 gene dosage becomes
greater in the absence of a normal Pax6 gene dosage, suggesting that the two
genes co-operate during eye morphogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1618390
PMID: 17029624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Oct;23(5):551-4.

[Association and mutation analysis of GLI3 gene in idiopathic congenital talipes 
equinovarus].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang X(1), Jin CL, Liu LY, Zhao N, Zhang LJ, Ji SJ, Sun KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning, 
110001 PR China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the association and mutation of GLI3 gene in idiopathic
congenital talipes equinovarus(ICTEV).
METHODS: (1) Genotype of 2 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in 84 idiopathic 
congenital talipes equinovarus nuclear pedigree were analyzed by restriction
fragment length polymorphism. Association analysis was directed between single
SNP locus and ICTEV through ETDT software, respectively.(2) Mutation sites in
exon 9,10,11,12 of GLI3 gene were detected in 103 patients with ICTEV by
denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis technique.
RESULTS: rs929387ls located in exon 14 of GLI3 gene have transmission
disequilibrium in 84 nuclear pedigrees (P<0.05), and rs846266 located in exon 4
have no transmission disequilibrium (P>0.05). A synonymous mutation in exon 9 was
detected in one patient and his mother.
CONCLUSION: There is an association between GLI3 gene and ICTEV, and exons
9,10,11,12 are not its mutation hot spots.

PMID: 17029207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Dev Biol. 2007 Feb 1;302(1):345-55. Epub 2006 Aug 9.

Gli2 and Gli3 play distinct roles in the dorsoventral patterning of the mouse
hindbrain.

Lebel M(1), Mo R, Shimamura K, Hui CC.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Room 13-314,
Toronto Medical Discovery Tower, Ontario, Canada.

Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signaling plays a critical role during dorsoventral (DV)
patterning of the developing neural tube by modulating the expression of neural
patterning genes. Overlapping activator functions of Gli2 and Gli3 have been
shown to be required for motoneuron development and correct neural patterning in 
the ventral spinal cord. However, the role of Gli2 and Gli3 in ventral hindbrain 
development is unclear. In this paper, we have examined DV patterning of the
hindbrain of Shh(-/-), Gli2(-/-) and Gli3(-/-) embryos, and found that the
respective role of Gli2 and Gli3 is not only different between the hindbrain and 
spinal cord, but also at distinct rostrocaudal levels of the hindbrain.
Remarkably, the anterior hindbrain of Gli2(-/-) embryos displays ventral
patterning defects as severe as those observed in Shh(-/-) embryos suggesting
that, unlike in the spinal cord and posterior hindbrain, Gli3 cannot compensate
for the loss of Gli2 activator function in Shh-dependent ventral patterning of
the anterior hindbrain. Loss of Gli3 also results in a distinct patterning defect
in the anterior hindbrain, including dorsal expansion of Nkx6.1 expression.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that ventral patterning of rhombomere 4 is less
affected by loss of Gli2 function revealing a different requirement for Gli
proteins in this rhombomere. Taken together, these observations indicate that
Gli2 and Gli3 perform rhombomere-specific function during DV patterning of the
hindbrain.

PMID: 17026983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Nihon Rinsho. 2006 Sep 28;Suppl 3:591-3.

[Hall syndrome (Pallister-Hall syndrome)].

[Article in Japanese]

Kuniba H(1), Egashira M, Motomura H, Motomura K, Kondoh T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Nagasaki University School of Medicine.

PMID: 17022615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Dec;26(23):8667-82. Epub 2006 Sep 25.

Mediator modulates Gli3-dependent Sonic hedgehog signaling.

Zhou H(1), Kim S, Ishii S, Boyer TG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Institute of Biotechnology, The University
of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, 15355 Lambda Drive, San Antonio,
TX 78245-3207, USA.

The physiological and pathological manifestations of Sonic hedgehog (Shh)
signaling arise from the specification of unique transcriptional programs
dependent upon key nuclear effectors of the Ci/Gli family of transcription
factors. However, the underlying mechanism by which Gli proteins regulate target 
gene transcription in the nucleus remains poorly understood. Here, we identify
and characterize a physical and functional interaction between Gli3 and the MED12
subunit within the RNA polymerase II transcriptional Mediator. We show that Gli3 
binds to MED12 and intact Mediator both in vitro and in vivo through a Gli3
transactivation domain (MBD; MED12/Mediator-binding domain) whose activity
derives from concerted functional interactions with both Mediator and the histone
acetyltransferase CBP. Analysis of MBD truncation mutants revealed an excellent
correlation between the in vivo activation strength of an MBD derivative and its 
ability to bind MED12 and intact Mediator in vitro, indicative of a critical
functional interaction between the Gli3 MBD and the MED12 interface in Mediator. 
Disruption of the Gli3-MED12 interaction through dominant-negative interference
inhibited, while RNA interference-mediated MED12 depletion enhanced, both MBD
transactivation function and Gli3 target gene induction in response to Shh
signaling. We propose that activated Gli3 physically targets the MED12 interface 
within Mediator in order to functionally reverse Mediator-dependent suppression
of Shh target gene transcription. These findings thus link MED12 to the
modulation of Gli3-dependent Shh signaling and further implicate Mediator in a
broad range of developmental and pathological processes driven by Shh signal
transduction.

PMCID: PMC1636813
PMID: 17000779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Dev Biol. 2006 Nov 1;299(1):22-34. Epub 2006 Jul 14.

Pitx1 determines the morphology of muscle, tendon, and bones of the hindlimb.

DeLaurier A(1), Schweitzer R, Logan M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, National Institute for Medical Research,
Mill Hill, London, NW7 1AA, UK.

The vertebrate forelimb and hindlimb are serially homologous structures; however,
their distinctive morphologies suggest that different mechanisms are associated
with each limb type to give rise to limb-type identity. Three genes have been
implicated in this process; T-box transcription factors Tbx5 and Tbx4, which are 
expressed in the forelimb and hindlimb, respectively, and a paired-type
homeodomain transcription factor Pitx1, expressed in the hindlimb. To explore the
roles of Pitx1 and Tbx4 in patterning the hindlimb, we have ectopically
misexpressed these genes in the mouse forelimb using transgenic methods. We have 
developed a novel technique for visualising the structure and organisation of
tissues in limbs in 3D using optical projection tomography (OPT). This approach
provides unparalleled access to understanding the relationships between
connective tissues during development of the limb. Misexpression of Pitx1 in the 
forelimb results in the transformation and translocation of specific muscles,
tendons, and bones of the forelimb so that they acquire a hindlimb-like
morphology. Pitx1 also upregulates hindlimb-specific factors in the forelimb,
including Hoxc10 and Tbx4. In contrast, misexpression of Tbx4 in the forelimb
does not result in a transformation of limb-type morphology. These results
demonstrate that Pitx1, but not Tbx4, determines the morphological identity of
hindlimb tissues.

PMID: 16989801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Dev Dyn. 2006 Nov;235(11):3063-70.

Expression of hedgehog signalling components in adult mouse testis.

Szczepny A(1), Hime GR, Loveland KL.

Author information: 
(1)Monash Institute of Medical Research, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria,
Australia.

Hedgehog (Hh) signalling is known to regulate many aspects of normal development 
as well as being upregulated in various cancers. Signalling is mediated by the
Gli family of zinc finger transcription factors. Based on observations that
deletion of one of the three Hh genes, Dhh, leads to male infertility, we
hypothesized that regulated expression of Hh signalling components would be a
feature of adult spermatogenesis. We used in situ hybridization to characterise
Gli gene expression in juvenile and adult mouse testes. In the first wave of
spermatogenesis, mRNAs encoding all three Glis are detected in spermatogonia and 
Sertoli cells. In adult mouse testes, these transcripts are observed in
spermatogonia and spermatocytes, with reduced signal intensity in round
spermatids. The mRNAs encoding key effectors of Hh signalling, Ptc2, Smo, and Fu,
are also most apparent in spermatogonia, spermatocytes, and to a lower extent in 
round spermatids. In contrast, mRNA encoding SuFu, a negative regulator of Hh
signalling, was most predominant in round spermatids and the protein is evident
in round and elongating spermatids, suggesting that SuFu protein may switch off
Hh signalling in haploid germ cells. Overall, the coordinated expression pattern 
of these genes in adult mouse testis indicates a role for Hh signalling in
spermatogenesis.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16958114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. J Neurosci. 2006 Sep 6;26(36):9282-92.

Abnormal positioning of diencephalic cell types in neocortical tissue in the
dorsal telencephalon of mice lacking functional Gli3.

Fotaki V(1), Yu T, Zaki PA, Mason JO, Price DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genes and Development Group, Biomedical Sciences, The University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh EH8 9XD, United Kingdom. vfotaki@ed.ac.uk

The transcription factor Gli3 (glioma-associated oncogene homolog) is essential
for normal development of the mammalian forebrain. One extreme requirement for
Gli3 is at the dorsomedial telencephalon, which does not form in Gli3(Xt/Xt)
mutant mice lacking functional Gli3. In this study, we analyzed expression of
Gli3 in the wild-type telencephalon and observed a (high)dorsal-to-(low)ventral
gradient of Gli3 expression and predominance of the cleaved form of the Gli3
protein dorsally. This graded expression correlates with the
(severe)dorsal-to-(mild)ventral telencephalic phenotype observed in Gli3(Xt/Xt)
mice. We characterized the abnormal joining of the telencephalon to the
diencephalon and defined the medial limit of the dorsal telencephalon in
Gli3(Xt/Xt) mice early in corticogenesis. Based on this analysis, we concluded
that some of the abnormal expression of ventral telencephalic markers previously 
described as being in the dorsal telencephalon is, in fact, expression in
adjacent diencephalic tissue, which expresses many of the same genes that mark
the ventral telencephalon. We observed occasional cells with diencephalic
character in the Foxg1 (forkhead box)-expressing Gli3(Xt/Xt) telencephalon at
embryonic day 10.5, a day after the anatomical subdivision of the forebrain
vesicle. Large clusters of such cells appear in the Gli3(Xt/Xt) neocortical
region at later ages, when the neocortex becomes highly disorganized, forming
rosettes comprising mainly neural progenitors. We propose that Gli3 is
indispensable for formation of an intact telencephalic-diencephalic boundary and 
for preventing the abnormal positioning of diencephalic cells in the dorsal
telencephalon.

PMCID: PMC2386580
PMID: 16957084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Congenit Anom (Kyoto). 2006 Sep;46(3):144-8.

Genetic susceptibility in the neural tube defects induced by ochratoxin A in the 
genetic arhinencephaly mouse, Pdn/Pdn.

Ohta K(1), Maekawa M, Katagiri R, Ueta E, Naruse I.

Author information: 
(1)School of Health Science, Faculty of Medicine, Tottori University, Yonago,
Japan.

It is well known that ochratoxin A (OTA) induces neural tube defects (NTDs) in
mice. In the present study, OTA was administered to the genetic
polydactyly/arhinencephaly mouse (Pdn/Pdn) to investigate the synergistic effect 
between gene and environmental toxin. OTA treatment on day 7.5 of gestation
increased NTDs in the Pdn/Pdn mouse. The responsible gene for Pdn/Pdn is Gli3.
So, it was speculated that specific susceptibility for OTA in the Pdn/Pdn mouse
embryo may be due to the severe depression of Gli3 gene expression. As correlated
genes, Gli3, Shh and Fgf8 gene expressions were examined in the Pdn mouse embryo 
on day 9 of gestation after administration of OTA on day 7.5. No alteration of
Shh expression was observed in the non-treated Pdn/Pdn, and OTA-treated +/+ and
Pdn/Pdn. Fgf8 signal was observed at the anterior neural ridge (ANR) in the
non-treated +/+, and that was elongated in the non-treated Pdn/Pdn, and further
elongated and more intensive in the OTA-treated Pdn/Pdn. It was suggested that
Fgf8 gene expression was affected by the depression of Gli3, and alteration of
Fgf8 gene expression was accelerated by the toxicity of OTA in the Pdn/Pdn.

PMID: 16922921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Congenit Anom (Kyoto). 2006 Sep;46(3):123-8.

Essential roles of Gli3 and sonic hedgehog in pattern formation and developmental
anomalies caused by their dysfunction.

Motoyama J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuropathology Group, Brain Science Institute, RIKEN, Saitama,
Japan. jun@brain.riken.jp

Pattern formation along the body axis directs the proportion of different types
of cells required for functional tissue structures. The secreted protein sonic
hedgehog (Shh) and zinc finger transcription factor Gli3 are key players in
pattern formation during brain and limb development; the antagonistic action of
Shh towards Gli3 may be crucial for pattern formation. Recent findings from
Shh/Gli3 double homozygous mutants suggest that a balance of both activities is
required for the production of the normal proportion of different cell types
during organogenesis. This conclusion contrasts with the alternative hypothesis
that a Shh gradient directs the specification of several different cell types.
The observations reviewed here offer a new perspective on understanding the
pathogenesis of human birth defects caused by mutations of the Shh and Gli3
genes.

PMID: 16922918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Development. 2006 Sep;133(18):3661-70. Epub 2006 Aug 16.

Gli3-mediated repression of Hedgehog targets is required for normal mammary
development.

Hatsell SJ(1), Cowin P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, 
NY 10016, USA.

The Hedgehog pathway is vital for the development of many epidermal appendages,
but its role in mammary development has been unclear. Here, we show that although
Gli2 and Gli3 are expressed during embryonic mammary development, transcriptional
reporters of positive Hedgehog signaling are absent. Nevertheless, Gli3(xt/xt)
embryos show aberrant early mammary marker expression and lack two pairs of
mammary buds, demonstrating that Gli3 is essential for mammary bud formation and 
preceding patterning events. Misactivation of the Hedgehog pathway by targeted
expression of the constitutive activator Gli1, from the Gli2 promoter in
Gli3(xt/+) mice, also induces mammary bud loss. Moreover, loss of Gli3 expression
induces Gli1 misexpression in mammary mesenchyme. These results establish that
the essential function of Gli3 during embryonic mammary development is to repress
Hedgehog/Gli1-inducible targets. During postnatal mammary development, Gli2 and
Gli3 are expressed in stromal and myoepithelial cells, and Gli3 is also found
within the lumenal epithelium. Again, transcriptional reporters of positive
Hedgehog signaling are absent from these cell types, yet are expressed robustly
within mammary lymphatics. Thus, positive Hedgehog signaling is absent throughout
mammary development, distinguishing the mammary gland from other epidermal
appendages, such as hair follicles, which require Hedgehog pathway activity.

PMID: 16914490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Dev Dyn. 2006 Sep;235(9):2337-52.

Anteroposterior patterning in the limb and digit specification: contribution of
mouse genetics.

Robert B(1), Lallemand Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, CNRS URA 2578, Pasteur Institute, Paris, 
France. brobert@pasteur.fr

The limb has been a privileged object of investigation and reflection for
scientists over the past two centuries and continues to provide a heuristic
framework to analyze vertebrate development. Recently, accumulation of new data
has significantly changed our view on the mechanisms of limb patterning, in
particular along the anterior-posterior axis. These data have led us to revisit
the mode of action of the zone of polarizing activity. They shed light on the
molecular and cellular mechanisms of patterning linked to the Shh-Gli3 signaling 
pathway and give insights into the mechanism of activation of these cardinal
factors, as well as the consequences of their activity. These new data are in
good part the result of systematic Application of tools used in contemporary
mouse molecular genetics. These have extended the power of mouse genetics by
introducing mutational strategies that allow fine-tuned modulation of gene
expression, interchromosomal deletions and duplication. They have even made the
mouse embryo amenable to cell lineage analysis that used to be the realm of chick
embryos. In this review, we focus on the data acquired over the last five years
from the analysis of mouse limb development and discuss new perspectives opened
by these results.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16894622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. J Clin Lab Anal. 2006;20(4):133-8.

Crossed polydactyly type I caused by a point mutation in the GLI3 gene in a large
Chinese pedigree.

Cheng B(1), Dong Y, He L, Tang W, Yu H, Lu J, Xu L, Zheng B, Li K, Xiao C.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Bioresources Conservation and Utilization, Human Genetics
Center of Yunnan University, Yunnan, P. R. China.

Polydactyly is one of the most common forms of congenital malformation in humans,
and is displayed by 119 disorders. Crossed polydactyly (CP) is defined as the
coexistence of preaxial and postaxial polydactyly with a difference in the axes
of polydactyly between the hands and feet. In an effort to map the gene
responsible for CP, we studied a seven-generation Chinese family of 56
individuals, 28 of whom were affected. A thorough search with highly informative 
polymorphic markers showed no recombination among the affected members with the
markers on chromosome 7p15-q11.23, but no linkage with chromosomes 2q31, 7q36,
13q, and 19p. Mutation analysis showed a substitution mutation of 1927C --> T in 
exon 12 of the GLI3 gene, which is predicted to pretruncate the GLI3 protein.
This mutation has variable phenotypes of polydactyly, indicating that other
genetic factors also contribute to the diversity of polydactyly phenotypes. Our
results increase the phenotypic spectrum caused by GLI3 mutations and are
important for the analysis and understanding of the etiology of these limb
malformations.

PMID: 16874813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Hum Genet. 2006;51(8):721-6. Epub 2006 Jul 25.

Holoprosencephaly and preaxial polydactyly associated with a 1.24 Mb duplication 
encompassing FBXW11 at 5q35.1.

Koolen DA(1), Herbergs J, Veltman JA, Pfundt R, van Bokhoven H, Stroink H,
Sistermans EA, Brunner HG, Geurts van Kessel A, de Vries BB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre,
9101, 6500 HB, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is the most common developmental defect affecting the
forebrain and midface in humans. The aetiology of HPE is highly heterogeneous and
includes both environmental and genetic factors. Here we report on a boy with
mild mental retardation, lobar HPE, epilepsy, mild pyramidal syndrome of the
legs, ventricular septal defect, vesicoureteral reflux, preaxial polydactyly, and
facial dysmorphisms. Genome-wide tiling path resolution array based comparative
genomic hybridisation (array CGH) revealed a de novo copy-number gain at 5q35.1
of 1.24 Mb. Additional multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification screening
of a cohort of 31 patients with HPE for copy-number changes at the 5q35.1 locus
did not reveal any additional genomic anomalies. This report defines a novel 1.24
Mb critical interval for HPE and preaxial polydactyly at 5q35.1. The duplicated
region encompasses seven genes: RANBP17, TLX3, NPM1, FGF18, FBXW11, STK10, and
DC-UbP. Since FBXW11 is relatively highly expressed in fetal brain and is
directly involved in proteolytic processing of GLI3, we propose FBXW11 as the
most likely candidate gene for the HPE and prexial polydactyly phenotype.
Additional research is needed to further establish the role of genes from the
5q35.1 region in brain and limb development and to determine the prevalence of
copy number gain in the 5q35.1 region among HPE patients.

PMID: 16865294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Eur J Med Genet. 2006 Jul-Aug;49(4):338-45. Epub 2005 Nov 28.

Genomic analysis of five chromosome 7p deletion patients with Greig
cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS).

Schwarzbraun T(1), Windpassinger C, Ofner L, Vincent JB, Cheung J, Scherer SW,
Wagner K, Kroisel PM, Petek E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Biology and Human Genetics, Medical University of Graz,
Graz 8010, Austria.

Chromosomal deletions on chromosome 7p are associated with Greig
cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS, OMIM 175700) a syndrome affecting the
development of the skull, face, and limbs. We have compared data from molecular
cytogenetic and genetic analyses with clinical symptoms from five previously
published GCPS deletion patients, including a pair of monozygotic twins. The
genomic DNA of the probands and their parents, as well as the DNA from
monoallelic cell lines of two patients, was analyzed using microsatellite
markers. In some cases (e.g. where the microsatellite studies were uninformative)
we also used fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) with bacterial artificial 
chromosomes (BAC) probes. The fine mapping results of the deletions and genomic
data from chromosome 7, were compared to the clinical symptoms. Common breakpoint
sequences or mutation hotspots were not observed. Mutation screening for PGAM2,
which is responsible for a form of myopathy with recessive inheritance, was
performed in all patients. Loss of heterozygosity for known genes with dominant
inheritance, such as the glucokinase gene (GCK), which, when mutated or
haploinsufficient, is responsible for maturity-onset diabetes of the young, type 
II (MODY2, OMIM 125851), was identified and included in a genetic counseling of
the patients' families.

PMID: 16829355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Am Chem Soc. 2006 Jul 12;128(27):8939-46.

Control of transcription factor activity and osteoblast differentiation in
mammalian cells using an evolved small-molecule-dependent intein.

Yuen CM(1), Rodda SJ, Vokes SA, McMahon AP, Liu DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA.

Inteins are naturally occurring protein elements that catalyze their own excision
from within a larger protein together with the ligation of the flanking "extein" 
sequences. Previously we reported the directed evolution of an intein-based
molecular switch in which intein splicing in yeast cells was made dependent on
the cell-permeable small molecule 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-HT). Here we show that
these evolved inteins are effective means of rendering protein function and
biological signaling pathway activation dependent on 4-HT in mammalian cells. We 
have characterized the generality, speed, and dose dependence of ligand-induced
protein splicing in murine NIH3T3 cells and in human HEK293 cells. Evolved
inteins were used to control in mammalian cells the function of Gli1 and a
truncated form of Gli3, two transcriptional mediators of the Hedgehog signaling
pathway. Finally, we show that a complex biological process such as osteoblast
differentiation can be made dependent on 4-HT using the evolved intein system.
Our findings suggest that evolved small-molecule-dependent inteins may serve as a
general means of achieving gene-specific, dose-dependent, post-translational, and
small-molecule-induced control over protein activity in mammalian systems.

PMCID: PMC2519127
PMID: 16819890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Development. 2006 Aug;133(15):2937-46. Epub 2006 Jul 3.

FGF signalling generates ventral telencephalic cells independently of SHH.

Gutin G(1), Fernandes M, Palazzolo L, Paek H, Yu K, Ornitz DM, McConnell SK,
Hébert JM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neuroscience and Molecular Genetics, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, 1410 Pelham Parkway South, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (SHH) is required to generate ventral cell types throughout the
central nervous system. Its role in directly specifying ventral cells, however,
has recently been questioned because loss of the Shh gene has little effect on
ventral development if the Gli3 gene is also mutant. Consequently, another
ventral determinant must exist. Here, genetic evidence establishes that FGFs are 
required for ventral telencephalon development. First, simultaneous deletion of
Fgfr1 and Fgfr3 specifically in the telencephalon results in the loss of
differentiated ventromedial cells; and second, in the Fgfr1;Fgfr2 double mutant, 
ventral precursor cells are lost, mimicking the phenotype obtained previously
with a loss of SHH signalling. Yet, in the Fgfr1;Fgfr2 mutant, Shh remains
expressed, as does Gli1, the transcription of which depends on SHH activity,
suggesting that FGF signalling acts independently of SHH to generate ventral
precursors. Moreover, the Fgfr1;Fgfr2 phenotype, unlike the Shh phenotype, is not
rescued by loss of Gli3, further indicating that FGFs act downstream of Shh and
Gli3 to generate ventral telencephalic cell types.

PMID: 16818446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Dev Biol. 2006 Aug 1;296(1):239-52. Epub 2006 May 5.

The transcription factors Emx1 and Emx2 suppress choroid plexus development and
promote neuroepithelial cell fate.

von Frowein J(1), Wizenmann A, Götz M.

Author information: 
(1)GSF-National Research Center for Environment and Health, Institute for Stem
Cell Research, Ingolstädter Landstrasse 1, 85764 Neuherberg/Munich, Germany.

The transcription factors Emx1 and Emx2 exert important functions during
development of the cerebral cortex, including its arealization. Here, we
addressed their role in development of the derivatives of the midline region in
the telencephalon. The center of the midline region differentiates into the
choroid plexus, but little is known about its molecular specification. As we
noted a lack of Emx1 or 2 expression in the midline region early in development, 
we interfered by misexpressing Emx1 and/or Emx2 in this region of the chick
telencephalon. Ectopic expression of either Emx1 or Emx2 prior to HH 13
instructed a neuroepithelial identity in the previous midline region instead of a
choroidal fate. Thus, Gli3 and Lhx2 normally restricted to the neuroepithelium
expanded into the Emx misexpressing region. This was accompanied by
down-regulation of Otx2 and BMP7, which implicates that these factors are
essential for choroid plexus specification and differentiation. Interestingly,
the region next to the ectopic Emx-misexpression then acquired a hybrid identity 
with some choroidal features such as Bmp7, Otx2 and Ttr gene expression, as well 
as some neuroepithelial features. These observations indicate that the expression
levels of Emx1 and/or Emx2 restrict the prospective choroid plexus territory, a
novel role of these transcription factors.

PMID: 16793035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Orthop Res. 2006 Aug;24(8):1773-81.

Age-related expression of molecular regulators of hypertrophy and maturation in
articular cartilage.

Semevolos SA(1), Nixon AJ, Fortier LA, Strassheim ML, Haupt J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Oregon State 
University, Corvallis, Oregon, USA. stacy.semevolos@oregonstate.edu

The purpose of this study was to determine changes in the expression of
regulatory molecules in normal equine articular cartilage throughout development 
up to 18 months of age. The hypothesis was that expression of these regulatory
molecules would decrease from birth to postpubescence. Cartilage was harvested
from normal femoropatellar or scapulohumeral joints from 34 fresh horse cadavers.
Horses were placed in four age groups [prenatal (n = 5); prepubertal, 0-6 months 
(n = 11); pubertal, 7-14 months (n = 13); and postpubertal, 15-18 months (n =
5)]. Indian hedgehog (Ihh), Gli1, Gli3, Patched1 (Ptc1), Smoothened (Smo),
Noggin, bone morphogenetic protein-6 (BMP-6), BMP-2, parathyroid hormone-related 
peptide (PTHrP), and PTH/PTHrP receptor mRNA expression levels were evaluated by 
real-time quantitative PCR. Spatial tissue mRNA and protein expression was
determined by in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry. The expression of
PTHrP decreased (p = 0.002) in the pubertal group, while PTH/PTHrP receptor
expression significantly increased (p = 0.001). No significant difference was
found between groups for Ihh (p = 0.6) or Smo (p = 0.3) expression. In contrast, 
there was significantly increased expression of Ptc1 (p = 0.006), Gli1 (p =
0.04), and Gli3 (p = 0.007) in the pubertal group, and Gli3 (p = 0.007) remained 
elevated in the postpubertal group. The expression of BMP-6 significantly
increased from prenatal to postnatal groups (p = 0.03) while BMP-2 expression
increased during puberty and postpuberty (p = 0.03). The changes in expression of
hedgehog and BMP signaling molecules in articular cartilage during postnatal
development have not been shown previously. The increased expression of hedgehog 
receptor and transcription factors during puberty may indicate maturation of the 
deep articular layer during this time period.

PMID: 16788989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Cereb Cortex. 2006 Jul;16 Suppl 1:i96-102.

Removal of Pax6 partially rescues the loss of ventral structures in Shh null
mice.

Fuccillo M(1), Rutlin M, Fishell G.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Program and the Department of Cell Biology, The
Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, New York University Medical Center, 
New York, NY 10016, USA.

Pax6 and Gli3 are dorsally expressed genes that are known to antagonize sonic
hedgehog (Shh) activity. We have previously shown that dorsoventral patterning
defects seen in Shh(-/-) mutants are rescued in Shh(-/-);Gli3(-/-) compound
mutants. Here we investigate if the loss of Pax6 can also ameliorate defects seen
in Shh(-/-) mutants. In support of this notion, we observe that the fusion of the
cerebral vesicles seen in Shh(-/-) mutants is partially corrected in E12.5
Shh(-/-);Pax6(-/-) compound mutants. Investigation of pan-ventral markers such as
Dlx2 also shows that, unlike Shh(-/-), a broad domain of expression of this gene 
is observed in Shh(-/-);Pax6(-/-) mice. Interestingly, we observe that while the 
expression of ER81 in the ventral telencephalon is expanded, the expression of
Ebf1 is lost. This suggests that the rescued ventral domain observed in
Shh(-/-);Pax6(-/-) mice is the dorsal lateral ganglionic eminence region. With
regard to dorsal telencephalic patterning, we also observe rescue of the
pallial-subpallial boundary, as well as a partial rescue of the dorsal midline.
Together, our findings are consistent with Pax6 function being required for
aspects of Gli3-mediated telencephalic patterning.

PMID: 16766714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Cereb Cortex. 2006 Jul;16 Suppl 1:i89-95.

Shh maintains Nkx2.1 in the MGE by a Gli3-independent mechanism.

Gulacsi A(1), Anderson SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New
York, NY 10021, USA.

Gamma-aminobutyric acidergic (GABAergic) interneurons perform crucial roles in
cortical development and function. These roles are executed by diverse subgroups 
of interneurons, and dysfunction of particular subgroups may contribute to a
variety of neuropsychiatric diseases. In rodents, most cortical interneurons
originate in the pallidal telencephalon that also gives rise to the GABAergic
neurons of the striatum and other ventral structures. In this paper, we examine
the evidence for distinct origins of interneuron subgroups and then discuss the
role of the homeobox gene thyroid transcription factor1 (Ttf-1 or Nkx2.1) in the 
specification of interneurons from the medial ganglionic eminence (MGE). Nkx2.1
is induced in the pallidal telencephalon by the action of sonic hedgehog (Shh)
that antagonizes formation of the dorsalizing Gli3 repressor (Gli3R) protein.
Recent evidence suggests that Shh is also required to maintain Nkx2.1 expression,
and thus MGE interneuron specification, during embryonic neurogenesis. Here we
provide evidence that, in contrast to the initial induction of Nkx2.1 during
telencephalic patterning, the Nkx2.1 maintenance function of Shh does not require
blocking the formation of the Gli3R. The plastic nature of Nkx2.1 expression
during the age range of interneuron genesis suggests that factors regulating this
gene can be critical determinants of the balance of excitation and inhibition in 
the postnatal cerebral cortex.

PMID: 16766713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Med Genet. 2006 Jun;43(6):465-9.

What you can learn from one gene: GLI3.

Biesecker LG(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Human Genome Research Institute, 49 Convent Drive Room 4A80,
Bethesda, MD 20892-4472, USA. leslieb@helix.nih.gov

The study of patients with rare multiple congenital anomaly syndromes can provide
illuminating insights into normal development and the pathogenesis of congenital 
anomalies. The GLI3 gene is a particularly good example as it illuminates the
phenomena of pleiotropy, phenocopies, syndrome families, and evolutionary
conservation of pathogenesis, and raises questions about how diagnoses are
conceptualised. These topics are reviewed in turn, in the context of the clinical
and biological data derived from patients with mutations in GLI3 and experimental
work in model systems.

PMCID: PMC2564530
PMID: 16740916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Development. 2006 Jun;133(12):2325-35.

Gli3-mediated somitic Fgf10 expression gradients are required for the induction
and patterning of mammary epithelium along the embryonic axes.

Veltmaat JM(1), Relaix F, Le LT, Kratochwil K, Sala FG, van Veelen W, Rice R,
Spencer-Dene B, Mailleux AA, Rice DP, Thiery JP, Bellusci S.

Author information: 
(1)The Saban Research Institute of Childrens Hospital Los Angeles/University of
Southern California, Developmental Biology Program, Los Angeles, CA 90027, USA.
jveltmaat@chla.usc.edu

Little is known about the regulation of cell fate decisions that lead to the
formation of five pairs of mammary placodes in the surface ectoderm of the mouse 
embryo. We have previously shown that fibroblast growth factor 10 (FGF10) is
required for the formation of mammary placodes 1, 2, 3 and 5. Here, we have found
that Fgf10 is expressed only in the somites underlying placodes 2 and 3, in
gradients across and within these somites. To test whether somitic FGF10 is
required for the formation of these two placodes, we analyzed a number of mutants
with different perturbations of somitic Fgf10 gradients for the presence of WNT
signals and ectodermal multilayering, markers for mammary line and placode
formation. The mammary line is displaced dorsally, and formation of placode 3 is 
impaired in Pax3ILZ/ILZ mutants, which do not form ventral somitic buds. Mammary 
line formation is impaired and placode 3 is absent in Gli3Xt-J/Xt-J and
hypomorphic Fgf10 mutants, in which the somitic Fgf10 gradient is shortened
dorsally and less overall Fgf10 is expressed, respectively. Recombinant FGF10
rescued mammogenesis in Fgf10(-/-) and Gli3Xt-J/Xt-J flanks. We correlate
increasing levels of somitic FGF10 with progressive maturation of the surface
ectoderm, and show that full expression of somitic Fgf10, co-regulated by GLI3,
is required for the anteroposterior pattern in which the flank ectoderm acquires 
a mammary epithelial identity. We propose that the intra-somitic Fgf10 gradient, 
together with ventral elongation of the somites, determines the correct
dorsoventral position of mammary epithelium along the flank.

PMID: 16720875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Dev Biol. 2006 Jul 1;295(1):13-25. Epub 2006 May 16.

Functional compensation in Hedgehog signaling during mouse prostate development.

Doles J(1), Cook C, Shi X, Valosky J, Lipinski R, Bushman W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Box 3236 Clinical
Science Center-G5, 600 Highland Avenue, Madison, WI 53792, USA.

Studies of hedgehog signaling in prostate development using anti-Shh antibodies, 
chemical inhibitors of hedgehog signaling and Shh(-/-) mutant mice have yielded
conflicting data regarding the requirements of hedgehog signaling for normal
ductal budding and glandular morphogenesis. We used transgenic mouse models in
combination with chemical inhibitors and renal grafting to clarify the role of Hh
signaling in prostate development. These studies showed that genetic loss of Shh 
is accompanied by an up-regulation of Indian Hedgehog (Ihh) and maintenance of Hh
pathway activity. We found that while neither Gli1 nor Gli3 are required for
normal prostate ductal budding, the urogenital sinus (UGS) of the Gli2(-/-)
mutant mouse displays aberrant ductal budding in utero. When grown as a
subcapsular graft, the Gli2(-/-) UGS exhibited prostatic differentiation but also
displayed areas of focal epithelial hyperplasia. Functional redundancy between
the three Gli transcription factors appears to mitigate the effect of Gli2 LOF as
evidenced by residual Hh pathway activity in the E14 Gli2(-/-) UGS that could be 
inhibited by cyclopamine treatment. Together, these studies reveal a surprising
degree of functional redundancy operating both at the level of the ligand and at 
the level of transcriptional regulation that effectively mitigates phenotypes
associated with Hh-signaling perturbations.

PMID: 16707121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Jun;26(11):4316-26.

Multisite protein kinase A and glycogen synthase kinase 3beta phosphorylation
leads to Gli3 ubiquitination by SCFbetaTrCP.

Tempé D(1), Casas M, Karaz S, Blanchet-Tournier MF, Concordet JP.

Author information: 
(1)Département Génétique et Développement, Institut Cochin, 24 rue du Faubourg
St-Jacques, 75014 Paris, France.

Gli3 is a zinc finger transcription factor proteolytically processed into a
truncated repressor lacking C-terminal activation domains. Gli3 processing is
stimulated by protein kinase A (PKA) and inhibited by Hedgehog signaling, a major
signaling pathway in vertebrate development and disease. We show here that
multisite glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK3beta) phosphorylation and
ubiquitination by SCFbetaTrCP are required for Gli3 processing. We identified
multiple betaTrCP-binding sites related to the DSGX2-4S motif in Gli3, which are 
intertwined with PKA and GSK3beta sites, and SCFbetaTrCP target lysines that are 
essential for processing. Our results support a simple model whereby PKA triggers
a cascade of Gli3 phosphorylation by GSK3beta and CK1 that leads to direct
betaTrCP binding and ubiquitination by SCFbetaTrCP. Binding of betaTrCP to Gli3
N- and C-terminal domains lacking DSGX2-4S-related motifs was also observed,
which could reflect indirect interaction via other components of Hedgehog
signaling, such as the tumor suppressor Sufu. Gli3 therefore joins a small set of
transcription factors whose processing is regulated by the ubiquitin-proteasome
pathway. Our study sheds light on the role of PKA phosphorylation in Gli3
processing and will help to analyze how dose-dependent tuning of Gli3 processing 
is achieved by Hedgehog signaling.

PMCID: PMC1489100
PMID: 16705181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Genes Dev. 2006 May 15;20(10):1365-77.

The chicken talpid3 gene encodes a novel protein essential for Hedgehog
signaling.

Davey MG(1), Paton IR, Yin Y, Schmidt M, Bangs FK, Morrice DR, Smith TG, Buxton
P, Stamataki D, Tanaka M, Münsterberg AE, Briscoe J, Tickle C, Burt DW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Developmental Biology, Wellcome Trust Biocentre (WTB),
University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, United Kingdom.

Talpid3 is a classical chicken mutant with abnormal limb patterning and
malformations in other regions of the embryo known to depend on Hedgehog
signaling. We combined the ease of manipulating chicken embryos with emerging
knowledge of the chicken genome to reveal directly the basis of defective
Hedgehog signal transduction in talpid3 embryos and to identify the talpid3 gene.
We show in several regions of the embryo that the talpid3 phenotype is completely
ligand independent and demonstrate for the first time that talpid3 is absolutely 
required for the function of both Gli repressor and activator in the
intracellular Hedgehog pathway. We map the talpid3 locus to chromosome 5 and find
a frameshift mutation in a KIAA0586 ortholog (ENSGALG00000012025), a gene not
previously attributed with any known function. We show a direct causal link
between KIAA0586 and the mutant phenotype by rescue experiments. KIAA0586 encodes
a novel protein, apparently specific to vertebrates, that localizes to the
cytoplasm. We show that Gli3 processing is abnormal in talpid3 mutant cells but
that Gli3 can still translocate to the nucleus. These results suggest that the
talpid3 protein operates in the cytoplasm to regulate the activity of both Gli
repressor and activator proteins.

PMCID: PMC1472910
PMID: 16702409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Am J Med Genet A. 2006 Jul 1;140(13):1440-6.

Ectrodactyly with aplasia of long bones (OMIM; 119100) in a large inbred Arab
family with an apparent autosomal dominant inheritance and reduced penetrance:
clinical and genetic analysis.

Naveed M(1), Al-Ali MT, Murthy SK, Al-Hajali S, Al-Khaja N, Deutsch S, Bottani A,
Antonarakis SE, Nath SK, Radhakrishna U.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Arab Genomic Studies (CAGS), Dubai, United Arab Emirates.

Ectrodactyly with aplasia of long bones syndrome is one of the most recognizable 
defects involving the extremities. We have studied a very large eight-generation 
consanguineous Arab family from the United Arab Emirates (UAE) with multiple
severe limb anomalies resembling this condition (OMIM; 119100), for which the
affected gene is unknown. The pedigree consists of 145 individuals including 23
affected (14 males/9 females) with limb anomalies. Of these, 18 had tibial
aplasia (TA) usually on the right side. The expression of the phenotype was
variable and ranged from bilateral to unilateral TA with ectrodactyly and other
defects of the extremities. The mode of inheritance appears to be autosomal
dominant with reduced penetrance. There were 10 consanguineous marriages observed
in this pedigree. This could suggest possible pseudodominance due to high
frequency of the mutant allele. Candidate loci for the described syndrome include
GLI3 (OMIM: 165240) on 7p13, sonic hedgehog; (OMIM: 600725) on 7q36,
Langer-Giedion syndrome (OMIM: 150230) on 8q24.1 and split-hand/foot malformation
3 (OMIM: 600095) on 10q24. In addition, bilateral tibial hemimelia and unilateral
absence of the ulna was previously observed to co-segregate with deletion of
8q24.1. Two-point linkage and haplotype analyses did not show the involvement of 
the above regions in this family.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16688753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 May;26(9):3365-77.

Sonic hedgehog signaling regulates Gli2 transcriptional activity by suppressing
its processing and degradation.

Pan Y(1), Bai CB, Joyner AL, Wang B.

Author information: 
(1)Weill Medical College of Cornell University, 1300 York Avenue, Room W404, New 
York, NY 10021, USA.

Gli2 and Gli3 are the primary transcription factors that mediate Sonic hedgehog
(Shh) signals in the mouse. Gli3 mainly acts as a transcriptional repressor,
because the majority of full-length Gli3 protein is proteolytically processed.
Gli2 is mostly regarded as a transcriptional activator, even though it is also
suggested to have a weak repressing activity. What the molecular basis for its
possible dual function is and how its activity is regulated by Shh signaling are 
largely unknown. Here we demonstrate that unlike the results seen with Gli3 and
Cubitus Interruptus, the fly homolog of Gli, only a minor fraction of Gli2 is
proteolytically processed to form a transcriptional repressor in vivo and that in
addition to being processed, Gli2 full-length protein is readily degraded. The
degradation of Gli2 requires the phosphorylation of a cluster of numerous serine 
residues in its carboxyl terminus by protein kinase A and subsequently by casein 
kinase 1 and glycogen synthase kinase 3. The phosphorylated Gli2 interacts
directly with betaTrCP in the SCF ubiquitin-ligase complex through two binding
sites, which results in Gli2 ubiquitination and subsequent degradation by the
proteasome. Both processing and degradation of Gli2 are suppressed by Shh
signaling in vivo. Our findings provide the first demonstration of a molecular
mechanism by which the Gli2 transcriptional activity is regulated by Shh
signaling.

PMCID: PMC1447407
PMID: 16611981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Apr 25;103(17):6548-53. Epub 2006 Apr 12.

Cholesterol modification restricts the spread of Shh gradient in the limb bud.

Li Y(1), Zhang H, Litingtung Y, Chiang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) produced in the zone of polarizing activity is the major
determinant of anteroposterior development of the amniote limb. The mature and
active Shh protein is cholesterol-modified at its C terminus, and the hydrophobic
nature of the modification requires the function of Dispatched (mDispA), a
seven-pass transmembrane protein, for Shh release from its source. The current
model suggests that the cholesterol moiety promotes the spread of Shh gradient in
the limb bud. However, this model is inconsistent with findings in Drosophila and
not in line with current thoughts on the role of the cholesterol moiety in Shh
multimerization. Therefore, it remains unclear how the cholesterol moiety affects
the postrelease extracellular behavior of Shh that relates to the shape of its
activity gradient in responsive tissues. Here, we report functional analyses in
mice showing that Shh lacking cholesterol modification (ShhN) has an increased
propensity to spread long-distance, eliciting ectopic Shh pathway activation
consistent with target gene expressions and modulating the level of Gli3
processing in the anterior limb mesoderm. These molecular alterations are
reflected in the mispatterning of digits in ShhN mutants. Additionally, we
provide direct evidence for the long-distance movement of ShhN across the
anteroposterior axis of the limb bud. Our findings suggest that the cholesterol
moiety regulates the range and shape of the Shh morphogen gradient by restricting
rather than promoting the postrelease spread of Shh across the limb bud during
early development.

PMCID: PMC1458921
PMID: 16611729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Development. 2006 May;133(9):1799-809. Epub 2006 Mar 29.

Sonic hedgehog regulates Gli activator and repressor functions with spatial and
temporal precision in the mid/hindbrain region.

Blaess S(1), Corrales JD, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, 540 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

The midbrain and anterior hindbrain offer an ideal system in which to study the
coordination of tissue growth and patterning in three dimensions. Two organizers 
that control anteroposterior (AP) and dorsoventral (DV) development are known,
and the regulation of AP patterning by Fgf8 has been studied in detail. Much less
is known about the mechanisms that control mid/hindbrain development along the DV
axis. Using a conditional mutagenesis approach, we have determined how the
ventrally expressed morphogen sonic hedgehog (Shh) directs mid/hindbrain
development over time and space through positive regulation of the Gli activators
(GliA) and inhibition of the Gli3 repressor (Gli3R). We have discovered that
Gli2A-mediated Shh signaling sequentially induces ventral neurons along the
medial to lateral axis, and only before midgestation. Unlike in the spinal cord, 
Shh signaling plays a major role in patterning of dorsal structures (tectum and
cerebellum). This function of Shh signaling involves inhibition of Gli3R and
continues after midgestation. Gli3R levels also regulate overall growth of the
mid/hindbrain region, and this largely involves the suppression of cell death.
Furthermore, inhibition of Gli3R by Shh signaling is required to sustain
expression of the AP organizer gene Fgf8. Thus, the precise spatial and temporal 
regulation of Gli2A and Gli3R by Shh is instrumental in coordinating
mid/hindbrain development in three dimensions.

PMID: 16571630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Exp Cell Res. 2006 Jul 1;312(11):1925-38. Epub 2006 Mar 29.

Unique and complimentary activities of the Gli transcription factors in Hedgehog 
signaling.

Lipinski RJ(1), Gipp JJ, Zhang J, Doles JD, Bushman W.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Environmental Toxicology Center, Madison, WI 53705-222, USA.

The Gli family of transcription factors (Gli1, 2 and 3) mediate the Hedgehog
morphogenetic signal by regulating the expression of downstream target genes.
Aberrations in Hedgehog signaling seriously affect vertebrate development.
Postnatally, Hedgehog signaling has been postulated to play a pivotal role in
healing and repair processes and inappropriate pathway activation has been
implicated in several types of cancers. To better understand both the upstream
regulation of the Gli transcription factors, as well as their unique and
combinatorial roles in regulating the expression of Hedgehog target genes, we
have characterized embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) from Gli mutant mice. Stimulation
of wild-type MEFs by Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) peptide elicited unique profiles of
induction of Hedgehog target genes Gli1, Ptc1, and Hip1. Gli2 loss-of-function
was associated with diminished Shh-induced target gene expression, while Gli3
loss-of-function was associated with increased basal and Shh-induced target gene 
expression. The loss of Gli1 alone had no effect on target gene induction but did
diminish Shh-induced target gene expression when combined with the loss of Gli2
or Gli3. Additionally, overexpression of Gli1 induced target gene expression in
Gli2(-/-)3(-/-) MEFs, while Shh stimulation did not. Using MEFs expressing only
Gli2 or Gli3, we found that both cyclopamine and the PKA activator forskolin
inhibited target gene induction mediated by Gli2 and Gli3. These results
demonstrate that Gli2 and Gli3 share common regulatory mechanisms and modulate
Hedgehog target gene expression directly and independently while also regulating 
Gli1 expression, which in specific contexts, coordinately contributes to target
gene activation.

PMID: 16571352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Clin Dysmorphol. 2006 Apr;15(2):75-9.

Genitourinary malformations as a feature of the Pallister-Hall syndrome.

McCann E(1), Fryer AE, Craigie R, Baillie C, Ba'ath ME, Selby A, Biesecker LG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Royal Liverpool Children's Hospital,
Liverpool, UK. emma.mccann@rlc.nhs.uk

Pallister-Hall and McKusick-Kaufman syndromes are developmental disorders with
well defined phenotypes, distinct loci and different patterns of inheritance. The
clinical features can overlap and may cause diagnostic difficulty, particularly
if complex genitourinary malformations are present. A case is presented with
features of both syndromes but in which a GLI3 mutation has been identified. A
literature review of similar cases is presented and it is proposed that these
cases probably represent the Pallister-Hall syndrome. A detailed abdominal and
perineal examination should be considered in all female patients with the
Pallister-Hall syndrome, looking for associated genitourinary anomalies.
Conversely, all girls with features suggestive of McKusick-Kaufman syndrome
require neuroimaging to look for features of the Pallister-Hall syndrome. The
correct diagnosis is important so that the patient and the family may receive
appropriate management. It also allows provision for an accurate recurrence risk.

PMID: 16531732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Development. 2006 Mar;133(5):845-53. Epub 2006 Jan 26.

Netrin 1 regulates ventral tangential migration of guidepost neurons in the
lateral olfactory tract.

Kawasaki T(1), Ito K, Hirata T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Brain Function, National Institute of Genetics, Graduate
University for Advanced Studies, SOKENDAI, Yata 1111, Mishima 411-8540, Japan.

In the developing nervous system, functional neural networks are constructed with
intricate coordination of neuronal migrations and axonal projections. We have
previously reported a ventral tangential migration of a special type of cortical 
neurons, lot cells, in the mouse embryo. These neurons originate from the
ventricular zone of the entire neocortex, tangentially migrate in the surface
layer of the neocortex into the ventral direction, align in the future pathway of
the lateral olfactory tract (LOT) and eventually guide the projection of LOT
axons. In this study, we developed an organotypic culture system to investigate
the regulation of this cell migration in the developing telencephalon. Our data
show that the neocortex contains the signals that direct lot cells ventrally,
that the ganglionic eminence excludes lot cells by repelling the migration and
that lot cells are attracted to netrin 1, an axon guidance factor. Furthermore,
we demonstrate that mutations in the genes encoding netrin 1 and its functional
receptor Dcc lead to inappropriate distribution of lot cells and subsequent
partial disruption of LOT projection. These results suggest that netrin 1
regulates the migration of lot cells and LOT projections, possibly by ensuring
the correct distribution of these guidepost neurons.

PMID: 16439477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2006 Jun;290(6):G1280-8. Epub 2006 Jan
26.

Increased apoptosis and accelerated epithelial migration following inhibition of 
hedgehog signaling in adaptive small bowel postresection.

Tang Y(1), Swietlicki EA, Jiang S, Buhman KK, Davidson NO, Burkly LC, Levin MS,
Rubin DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis Veterans Affairs Medical Center, MO 63110, USA.

The intestinal epithelium undergoes a marked adaptive response following loss of 
functional small bowel surface area characterized by increased crypt cell
proliferation and increased enterocyte migration from crypt to villus tip,
resulting in villus hyperplasia and enhanced nutrient absorption. Hedgehog (Hh)
signaling plays a critical role in regulating epithelial-mesenchymal interactions
during morphogenesis of the embryonic intestine. Our previous studies showed that
blocking Hh signaling in neonatal mice results in increased small intestinal
epithelial crypt cell proliferation and altered enterocyte fat absorption and
morphology. Hh family members are also expressed in the adult intestine, but
their role in the mature small bowel is unclear. With the use of a model of
intestinal adaptation following partial small bowel resection, the role of Hh
signaling in the adult gut was examined by determining the effects of blocking Hh
signaling on the regenerative response following loss of functional surface area.
Hh-inactivating monoclonal antibodies or control antibodies were administered to 
mice that sustained a 50% intestinal resection. mRNA analyses of the preoperative
ileum by quantitative real-time PCR revealed that Indian hedgehog was the most
abundant Hh family member. The Hh receptor Patched was more abundant than Patched
2. Analyses of downstream targets of Hh signaling demonstrated that Gli3 was
twofold more abundant than Gli1 and Gli2 and that bone morphogenetic protein
(BMP)2 was most highly expressed compared with BMP1, -4, and -7. Following
intestinal resection, the expression of Hh, Patched, Gli, and most BMP genes was 
markedly downregulated in the remnant ileum, and, in anti-Hh antibody-treated
mice, expression of Patched 2 and Gli 1 was further suppressed. In Hh
antibody-treated mice following resection, the enterocyte migration rate from
crypt to villus tip was increased, and by 2 wk postoperation, apoptosis was
increased in the adaptive gut. However, crypt cell proliferation, villus height, 
and crypt depth were not augmented. These data indicate that Hh signaling plays a
role in adult gut epithelial homeostasis by regulating epithelial cell migration 
from crypt to villus tip and by enhancing apoptosis.

PMID: 16439469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Dev Biol. 2006 Mar 15;291(2):368-81. Epub 2006 Jan 18.

Regulation of the Drosophila transcription factor, Cubitus interruptus, by two
conserved domains.

Croker JA(1), Ziegenhorn SL, Holmgren RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, and Cell Biology, Robert H.
Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208,
USA.

Hedgehog signaling is required for the development of many organisms, including
Drosophila. In flies, Hh patterns the embryonic epidermis and larval imaginal
discs by regulating the transcription factor, Cubitus interruptus (Ci). To date, 
three levels of regulation have been identified: proteolytic processing into a
repressor, nuclear import, and activation. In this report, we characterize the
function of two Ci domains that are conserved in the vertebrate homologues, GLI1,
GLI2, and GLI3. One domain includes the first two of five C(2)-H(2) zinc-fingers.
While conserved in all members of the GLI/Ci family, the first two fingers do not
appear to make significant contacts with the DNA target sequence. Ci protein
lacking this region is still able to interact with the cytoplasmic complex and
activate transcription in embryos and wing imaginal discs, but it is no longer
processed into the repressor form. The second domain, termed NR for "N-terminal
Regulatory", binds Suppressor of Fused. Deletion of this region has little effect
on embryonic patterning, but compromises cytoplasmic retention of Ci. Analysis of
the amino acid sequence of this domain identifies 11 perfectly conserved serines 
and one tyrosine. We propose that this region may be modified, possibly by
phosphorylation, to regulate Ci nuclear import.

PMID: 16413529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Development. 2006 Feb;133(3):569-78. Epub 2006 Jan 5.

GLI3-dependent transcriptional repression of Gli1, Gli2 and kidney patterning
genes disrupts renal morphogenesis.

Hu MC(1), Mo R, Bhella S, Wilson CW, Chuang PT, Hui CC, Rosenblum ND.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology, Hospital for Sick Children, University of
Toronto, Canada.

Truncating mutations in Gli3, an intracellular effector in the SHH-SMO-GLI
signaling pathway, cause renal aplasia/dysplasia in humans and mice. Yet, the
pathogenic mechanisms are undefined. Here, we report the effect of decreased
SHH-SMO signaling on renal morphogenesis, the expression of SHH target genes and 
GLI binding to Shh target genes. Shh deficiency or cyclopamine-mediated SMO
inhibition disrupted renal organogenesis, decreased expression of GLI1 and GLI2
proteins, but increased expression of GLI3 repressor relative to GLI3 activator. 
Shh deficiency decreased expression of kidney patterning genes (Pax2 and Sall1)
and cell cycle regulators (cyclin D1 and MYCN). Elimination of Gli3 in Shh(-/-)
mice rescued kidney malformation and restored expression of Pax2, Sall1, cyclin
D1, MYCN, Gli1 and Gli2. To define mechanisms by which SHH-SMO signaling controls
gene expression, we determined the binding of GLI proteins to 5' flanking regions
containing GLI consensus binding sequences in Shh target genes using chromatin
immunoprecipitation. In normal embryonic kidney tissue, GLI1 and/or GLI2 were
bound to each target gene. By contrast, treatment of embryonic kidney explants
with cyclopamine decreased GLI1 and/or GLI2 binding, and induced binding of GLI3.
However, cyclopamine failed to decrease Gli1 and Gli2 expression and branching
morphogenesis in Gli3-deficient embryonic kidney tissue. Together, these results 
demonstrate that SHH-SMO signaling controls renal morphogenesis via
transcriptional control of Gli, renal patterning and cell cycle regulator genes
in a manner that is opposed by GLI3.

PMID: 16396903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Jan 3;103(1):33-8. Epub 2005 Dec 21.

Evidence for the direct involvement of {beta}TrCP in Gli3 protein processing.

Wang B(1), Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine, Weill Medical College of Cornell University,
1300 York Avenue, W404, New York, NY 10021, USA. baw2001@med.cornell.edu

Hedgehog-regulated processing of the transcription factor cubitus interruptus
(Ci) in Drosophila depends on phosphorylation of the C-terminal region of Ci by
cAMP-dependent protein kinase and subsequently by casein kinase 1 and glycogen
synthase kinase 3. Ci processing also requires Slimb, an F-box protein of SCF
(Skp1/Cullin/F-box proteins) complex, and the proteasome, but the interplay
between phosphorylation and the activity of Slimb and the proteasome remains
unclear. Here we show that processing of the Gli3 protein, a homolog of Ci, also 
depends on phosphorylation of a set of four cAMP-dependent protein kinase sites
that primes subsequent phosphorylation of adjacent casein kinase 1 and glycogen
synthase kinase 3. Our gain- and loss-of-function analyses in cultured cells
further reveal that betaTrCP, the vertebrate homolog of Slimb, is required for
Gli3 processing, and we demonstrate that betaTrCP can bind phosphorylated Gli3
both in vitro and in vivo. We also find that the Gli3 protein is
polyubiquitinated in the cell and that its processing depends on proteasome
activity. Our findings provide evidence for a direct link between phosphorylation
of Gli3/Ci proteins and betaTrCP/Slimb action, thus supporting the hypothesis
that the processing of Gli3/Ci is affected by the proteasome.

PMCID: PMC1325010
PMID: 16371461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Dev Biol. 2006 Feb 1;290(1):1-12. Epub 2005 Dec 20.

Mouse Rab23 regulates hedgehog signaling from smoothened to Gli proteins.

Eggenschwiler JT(1), Bulgakov OV, Qin J, Li T, Anderson KV.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, New York, NY 10021, 
USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling is required for the growth and patterning of many 
tissues in vertebrate embryos, but important aspects of the Shh signal
transduction pathway are poorly understood. For example, the vesicle transport
protein Rab23 is a cell autonomous negative regulator of Shh signaling, but the
process affected by Rab23 has not been defined. Here, we demonstrate that Rab23
acts upstream of Gli transcription factors in patterning neural cell types in the
spinal cord. Double mutant analysis indicates that the primary target of Rab23 is
the Gli2 activator and that Rab23 and Gli3 repressor have additive effects on
patterning. Analysis of Gli3 protein suggests that Rab23 also has a role in
promoting the production of Gli3 repressor. Although the membrane proteins
Patched and Smoothened change subcellular localization in response to Shh, double
mutant analysis demonstrates that Rab23 does not work through either Patched or
Smoothened. Instead, Rab23 appears to regulate subcellular localization of
essential components of the Hedgehog pathway that act downstream of Smoothened
and upstream of Gli proteins.

PMID: 16364285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Congenit Anom (Kyoto). 2005 Dec;45(4):132-6.

Exencephaly induction by valproic acid in the genetic polydactyly/arhinencephaly 
mouse, Pdn/Pdn.

Maekawa M(1), Ohta K, Katagiri R, Ueta E, Naruse I.

Author information: 
(1)School of Health Science, Faculty of Medicine, Tottori University, Yonago,
Japan.

Non-treated homozygous polydactyly/arhinencephaly (Pdn/Pdn) mouse fetuses
exhibited exencephaly in 16.7% of cases. Treatment of Pdn/Pdn mice with 350 mg/kg
of valproic acid (VPA) on days 8.5 and 9.5 of gestation increased the rate of
exencephaly to 66.7%. The responsible gene for the Pdn mouse phenotype has been
determined to be Gli3, and the suppression of Gli3 gene expression has been
documented in Pdn/Pdn embryos. We investigated how the sonic hedgehog (Shh) and
Fgf8 genes, the correlated genes of Gli3, are expressed in the VPA-treated
exencephalic Pdn/Pdn embryos on day 10 of gestation, using whole mount in situ
hybridization (WISH) and real-time PCR methods. We could not detect any
alterations in Shh expression by real-time PCR, or WISH in the non-treated
Pdn/Pdn and VPA-treated exencephalic Pdn/Pdn embryos. Altered Fgf8 expression
patterns were observed in the commissural plate and dorsal isthmal
neuroepithelium in the non-treated Pdn/Pdn embryos. We speculated that the
altered expression of Fgf8 might be the result of down-regulation of Gli3 in
Pdn/Pdn embryos. Fgf8 gene expression in the commissural plate and dorsal isthmal
neuroepithelium exhibits wide or altered signal patterns in the VPA-treated
exencephalic Pdn/Pdn embryo. From these findings, it was suggested that
down-regulation of Gli3 gene expression induced the altered expression of Fgf8 in
the Pdn/Pdn embryos, and that VPA treatment accelerated the alterations of Fgf8
gene expression in the Pdn/Pdn embryos. It was further speculated that altered
expression of Fgf8 in the commissural plate may be the fundamental cause of
exencephaly, and that the synergistic effect between gene and drug shown in this 
experiment may explain the differences of sensitivity in the side-effects of the 
drug.

PMID: 16359493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Dev Dyn. 2006 Mar;235(3):594-605.

Complementary Gli activity mediates early patterning of the mouse visual system.

Furimsky M(1), Wallace VA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Program, Ottawa Health Research Institute and University of
Ottawa Eye Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. mfurimsky@ohri.ca

The Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway plays a key role in the development of
the vertebrate central nervous system, including the eye. This pathway is
mediated by the Gli transcription factors (Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3) that
differentially activate and repress the expression of specific downstream target 
genes. In this study, we investigated the roles of the three vertebrate Glis in
mediating midline Shh signaling in early ocular development. We examined the
ocular phenotypes of Shh and Gli combination mutant mouse embryos and monitored
proximodistal and dorsoventral patterning by the expression of specific eye
development regulatory genes using in situ hybridization. We show that midline
Shh signaling relieves the repressor activity of Gli3 adjacent to the midline and
then promotes eye pattern formation through the nonredundant activities of all
three Gli proteins. Gli3, in particular, is required to specify the dorsal optic 
stalk and to define the boundary between the optic stalk and the optic cup.

PMID: 16342201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Brain Res. 2006 Jan 5;1067(1):158-63. Epub 2005 Dec 5.

Gli3 mutation rescues the generation, but not the differentiation, of
oligodendrocytes in Shh mutants.

Tan M(1), Hu X, Qi Y, Park J, Cai J, Qiu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical Sciences and Neurobiology, School of Medicine,
University of Louisville, Louisville, KY 40292, USA.

In the developing spinal cord, early oligodendrocyte progenitor cells are induced
from the ventral neural tube by the Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signal. Previous studies
suggested that the Gli3 zinc finger transcription factor is an important signal
transducer of Shh signaling during animal development. Here, we demonstrated that
Gli3 plays a non-essential role in ventral oligodendrogenesis during normal
development. However, in the absence of Shh signaling, Gli3 functions as a
repressor of ventral oligodendrogenesis and ventral oligodendrogenesis is
restored in Shh-/-Gli3-/- mutants. Interestingly, despite a normal production of 
oligodendrocyte precursor cells in the double mutants, oligodendrocyte
differentiation is completely suppressed, implying that Shh signaling plays an
important role in the terminal differentiation of oligodendrocytes.

PMID: 16336945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Development. 2005 Dec;132(23):5249-60.

Gli3 acts as a repressor downstream of Ihh in regulating two distinct steps of
chondrocyte differentiation.

Koziel L(1), Wuelling M, Schneider S, Vortkamp A.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.

During endochondral ossification, the secreted growth factor Indian hedgehog
(Ihh) regulates several differentiation steps. It interacts with a second
secreted factor, parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP), to regulate the
onset of hypertrophic differentiation, and it regulates chondrocyte proliferation
and ossification of the perichondrium independently of PTHrP. To investigate how 
the Ihh signal is translated in the different target tissues, we analyzed the
role of the zinc-finger transcription factor Gli3, which acts downstream of
hedgehog signals in other organs. Loss of Gli3 in Ihh mutants restores
chondrocyte proliferation and delays the accelerated onset of hypertrophic
differentiation observed in Ihh-/- mutants. Furthermore the expression of the Ihh
target genes patched (Ptch) and PTHrP is reactivated in Ihh-/-;Gli3-/- mutants.
Gli3 seems thus to act as a strong repressor of Ihh signals in regulating
chondrocyte differentiation. In addition, loss of Gli3 in mice that overexpress
Ihh in chondrocytes accelerates the onset of hypertrophic differentiation by
reducing the domain and possibly the level of PTHrP expression. Careful analysis 
of chondrocyte differentiation in Gli3-/- mutants revealed that Gli3 negatively
regulates the differentiation of distal, low proliferating chondrocytes into
columnar, high proliferating cells. Our results suggest a model in which the
Ihh/Gli3 system regulates two distinct steps of chondrocyte differentiation: (1) 
the switch from distal into columnar chondrocytes is repressed by Gli3 in a
PTHrP-independent mechanism; (2) the transition from proliferating into
hypertrophic chondrocytes is regulated by Gli3-dependent expression of PTHrP.
Furthermore, by regulating distal chondrocyte differentiation, Gli3 seems to
position the domain of PTHrP expression.

PMID: 16284117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Androl. 2006 Mar-Apr;27(2):225-32. Epub 2005 Nov 8.

Sonic hedgehog pathway inhibition alters epididymal function as assessed by the
development of sperm motility.

Turner TT(1), Bang HJ, Attipoe SA, Johnston DS, Tomsig JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Virginia School of Medicine, PO Box
800422, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA. ttt@virginia.edu

The sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway plays a role in pattern orientation in
the developing embryo and has been shown to be required for development of the
prostate and external genitalia. Recent evidence has shown that important
elements of the Shh pathway are also expressed in the adult mouse epididymis at
both the gene and protein levels. The objective of the present investigation was 
to refine the expression pattern of Shh in the mouse epididymis and to determine 
if the Shh pathway is important for epididymal function vis-à-vis sperm
maturation. The former was achieved by microarray analysis of Shh expression in
all segments of the mouse epididymis, and the latter was determined by 14-day
administration of cyclopamine, a Shh pathway inhibitor, followed by a microassay 
for the activation and duration of cauda epididymal sperm motility. Shh pathway
inhibition was monitored by semiquantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction for expression of epididymal Gli1 and Gli3. The Gli family of
transcription factors is commonly activated and regulated by Shh pathway
activation. Cyclopamine treatment reduced Gli1 expression by 61% and initiation
of cauda sperm motility by 50%. Gli3 expression was reduced by approximately 50%.
Subsequent cluster analysis using the microarray data on epididymal gene
expression highlighted several potential target genes for the Shh pathway, the
most prominent of which is prostaglandin D2 synthase. These results indicate that
an operating Shh pathway is important in the murine epididymis for the
development of sperm motility and implies a role for Shh signaling in adult
epididymal function.

PMID: 16278368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Cancer Biol Ther. 2005 Oct;4(10):1050-4. Epub 2005 Oct 18.

Hedgehog signaling pathway and gastric cancer.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M & M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo, Japan.

Hedgehog, WNT, FGF and BMP signaling pathways network together during
embryogenesis, tissue regeneration, and carcinogenesis. Aberrant activation of
Hedgehog signaling pathway leads to pathological consequences in a variety of
human tumors, such as gastric cancer and pancreatic cancer. Endoscopic mucosal
resection (EMR), endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD), surgical gastrectomy and
chemotherapy are therapeutic options for gastric cancer; however, prognosis of
advanced gastric cancer patient is still poor. Here, Hedgehog signaling pathway
in human gastric cancer and its clinical applications will be reviewed. Human
SHH, IHH, DHH (Hedgehog homologs), HHAT (Hedgehog acyltransferase), HHIP
(Hedgehog-interacting protein), DISP1, DISP2, DISP3 (Dispatched homologs), PTCH1,
PTCH2 (Patched homologs), SMO (Smoothened homolog), KIF27, KIF7 (Costal-2
homologs), STK36 (Fused homolog), SUFU (SuFu homolog), DZIP1 (Iguana homolog),
GLI1, GLI2 and GLI3 (Cubitus interruptus homologs) are implicated in the Hedgehog
signaling. PTCH1, FOXM1 and CCND2 are direct transcriptional targets of Hedgehog 
signaling. Hedgehog signaling activation leads to cell proliferation through cell
cycle regulation. SHH regulates growth and differentiation within gastric mucosa 
through autocrine loop and FOXL1-mediated epithelial-mesenchymal interaction. SHH
is implicated in stem/progenitor cell restitution of damaged gastric mucosa
during chronic infection with Helicobacter pylori. SHH up-regulation, IHH
upregulation and HHIP down-regulation lead to aberrant activation of Hedgehog
signaling through PTCH1 to GLI1 in gastric cancer. Small molecule compounds
targeted to SMO (KADD-cyclopamine, SANT1-4, Cur61414) as well as humanized
anti-SHH antibodies are potent anti-cancer drugs for gastric cancer. Cocktail of 
Hedgehog inhibitors would be developed as novel therapeutics for gastric cancer. 
Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) and copy number polymorphism (CNP) of
Hedgehog signaling genes would be utilized for genetic screening of gastric
cancer, while cDNA-PCR, microarray and ELISA detecting aberrant Hedgehog
signaling activation would be utilized for therapeutic optional choice. Genetic
screening and precise selection of therapeutic options would contribute to the
realization of personalized medicine.

PMID: 16258256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. PLoS Genet. 2005 Oct;1(4):e53. Epub 2005 Oct 28.

Gli2 and Gli3 localize to cilia and require the intraflagellar transport protein 
polaris for processing and function.

Haycraft CJ(1), Banizs B, Aydin-Son Y, Zhang Q, Michaud EJ, Yoder BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alabama, Birmingham, Alabama, USA.

Intraflagellar transport (IFT) proteins are essential for cilia assembly and have
recently been associated with a number of developmental processes, such as
left-right axis specification and limb and neural tube patterning. Genetic
studies indicate that IFT proteins are required for Sonic hedgehog (Shh)
signaling downstream of the Smoothened and Patched membrane proteins but upstream
of the Glioma (Gli) transcription factors. However, the role that IFT proteins
play in transduction of Shh signaling and the importance of cilia in this process
remain unknown. Here we provide insights into the mechanism by which defects in
an IFT protein, Tg737/Polaris, affect Shh signaling in the murine limb bud. Our
data show that loss of Tg737 results in altered Gli3 processing that abrogates
Gli3-mediated repression of Gli1 transcriptional activity. In contrast to the
conclusions drawn from genetic analysis, the activity of Gli1 and truncated forms
of Gli3 (Gli3R) are unaffected in Tg737 mutants at the molecular level,
indicating that Tg737/Polaris is differentially involved in specific activities
of the Gli proteins. Most important, a negative regulator of Shh signaling,
Suppressor of fused, and the three full-length Gli transcription factors localize
to the distal tip of cilia in addition to the nucleus. Thus, our data support a
model where cilia have a direct role in Gli processing and Shh signal
transduction.

PMCID: PMC1270009
PMID: 16254602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Dev Dyn. 2005 Dec;234(4):984-91.

Gli3 null mice display glandular overgrowth of the developing stomach.

Kim JH(1), Huang Z, Mo R.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Integrative Biology, The Research Institute, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, Canada. jae.kim@sickkids.ca

The role of the Hedgehog signaling pathway in various aspects of gut development 
is still poorly understood. In the developing stomach, Sonic (Shh) and Indian
(Ihh) hedgehog are expressed in both distinct and overlapping regions. Loss of
Sonic hedgehog function in the stomach results in a glandular phenotype of
intestinal transformation and overgrowth. These changes are reminiscent of the
pre-malignant lesion, intestinal metaplasia. To determine the role of
Hedgehog-related transcription factors, Gli2 and Gli3, in Shh signaling during
stomach development, we conducted a mutant analysis of glandular stomach from
Shh, Gli2, and Gli3 mutant mice. Although Gli2 principally mediates the activator
function of Shh, surprisingly we observed minimal changes in glandular
development in the Gli2 mutant stomach. Furthermore, Gli3, which typically
functions as a repressor of Hedgehog signal, showed a striking phenocopy of the
glandular expansion and intestinal transformation found in Shh mutant stomach. A 
reduction in apoptotic events was seen in all mutant stomachs with no appreciable
changes in proliferation. Both Shh and Gli3 mutant stomachs displayed early
changes of intestinal transformation but these did not impact on the overall
differentiation of the gastric epithelium. Interestingly, the observation that
Gli3 shares a similar glandular phenotype to Shh mutant stomach reveals a
possible novel role of Gli3 activator in the developing stomach. The embryonic
stomach is a unique model of the Hedgehog pathway function and one that may help 
to uncover some of the mechanisms underlying the development of intestinal
metaplasia.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16247775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Dev Biol. 2005 Dec 1;288(1):206-20. Epub 2005 Oct 21.

Differential susceptibility of midbrain and spinal cord patterning to floor plate
defects in the talpid2 mutant.

Agarwala S(1), Aglyamova GV, Marma AK, Fallon JF, Ragsdale CW.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Neurobiology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712-0248,
USA. agarwala@mail.utexas.edu

The chick talpid2 mutant displays polydactylous digits attributed to defects of
the Hedgehog (HH) signaling pathway. We examined the talpid2 neural tube and show
that patterning defects in the spinal cord and the midbrain are distinct from
each other and from the limb. Unlike the Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) source in the limb,
the SHH-rich floor plate (FP) is reduced in the talpid2 midbrain. This is
accompanied by a severe depletion of medial cell populations that encounter high 
concentrations of SHH, an expansion of lateral cell populations that experience
low concentrations of SHH and a broad deregulation of HH's principal effectors
(PTC1, GLI1, GLI2, GLI3). Together with the failure of SHH misexpression to
rescue the talpid2 phenotype, these results suggest that talpid2 is likely to
have a tissue-autonomous, bidirectional (positive and negative) role in HH
signaling that cannot be attributed to the altered expression of several newly
cloned HH pathway genes (SUFU, DZIP1, DISP1, BTRC). Strikingly, FP defects in the
spinal cord are accompanied by relatively normal patterning in the talpid2
mutant. We propose that this differential FP dependence may be due to the
prolonged apposition of the notochord to the spinal cord, but not the midbrain
during development.

PMID: 16246323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Dev Biol. 2005 Nov 15;287(2):378-89. Epub 2005 Oct 17.

Loss of the retrograde motor for IFT disrupts localization of Smo to cilia and
prevents the expression of both activator and repressor functions of Gli.

May SR(1), Ashique AM, Karlen M, Wang B, Shen Y, Zarbalis K, Reiter J, Ericson J,
Peterson AS.

Author information: 
(1)Ernest Gallo Clinic and Research Center, Emeryville, CA 94608, USA.

Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signals are transduced into nuclear ratios of Gli
transcriptional activator versus repressor. The initial part of this process is
accomplished by Shh acting through Patched (Ptc) to regulate Smoothened (Smo)
activity. The mechanisms by which Ptc regulates Smo, and Smo activity is
transduced to processing of Gli proteins remain unclear. Recently, a forward
genetic approach in mice identified a role for intraflagellar transport (IFT)
genes in Shh signal transduction, downstream of Patched (Ptc) and Rab23. Here, we
show that the retrograde motor for IFT is required in the mouse for the
phenotypic expression of both Gli activator and repressor function and for
effective proteolytic processing of Gli3. Furthermore, we show that the
localization of Smo to primary cilia is disrupted in mutants. These data indicate
that primary cilia act as specialized signal transduction organelles required for
coupling Smo activity to the biochemical processing of Gli3 protein.

PMID: 16229832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Eur J Neurosci. 2005 Sep;22(6):1547-51.

Loss of Gli3 enhances the viability of embryonic telencephalic cells in vitro.

Zaki PA(1), Martynoga B, Delafield-Butt JT, Fotaki V, Yu T, Price DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genes and Development Group, University of Edinburgh, Hugh Robson Building,
George Square, Edinburgh, EH8 9XD, UK.

The transcription factor Gli3 is important for brain and limb development. Mice
homozygous for a mutation in Gli3 (Gli3Xt/Xt) have severe abnormalities of
telencephalic development and previous studies have suggested that aberrant cell 
death may contribute to the Gli3Xt/Xt phenotype. We demonstrate that
telencephalic cells from embryonic Gli3Xt/Xt embryos survive better and are more 
resistant to death induced by cytosine arabinoside, a nucleoside analogue that
induces death in neuronal progenitors and neurons, than are control counterparts 
in vitro. Culture medium conditioned by Gli3Xt/Xt cells is more effective at
enhancing the viability of control telencephalic cells than medium conditioned by
control cells, indicating that Gli3Xt/Xt cells release a factor or factors which 
enhance telencephalic cell viability. Gli3(Xt/Xt) cells are also more sensitive
to released factors present in conditioned media. These data suggest that Gli3
plays both cell-autonomous and cell-nonautonomous roles in mediating
telencephalic cell viability.

PMCID: PMC2384162
PMID: 16190908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Mech Dev. 2005 Nov;122(11):1218-33. Epub 2005 Aug 1.

Pax9 and Jagged1 act downstream of Gli3 in vertebrate limb development.

McGlinn E(1), van Bueren KL, Fiorenza S, Mo R, Poh AM, Forrest A, Soares MB,
Bonaldo Mde F, Grimmond S, Hui CC, Wainwright B, Wicking C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Qld 4072, Australia.

From early in limb development the transcription factor Gli3 acts to define
boundaries of gene expression along the anterior-posterior (AP) axis,
establishing asymmetric patterns required to provide positional information. As
limb development proceeds, posterior mesenchyme expression of Sonic hedgehog
(Shh) regulates Gli3 transcription and post-translational processing to specify
digit number and identity. The molecular cascades dependent on Gli3 at later
stages of limb development, which link early patterning events with final digit
morphogenesis, remain poorly characterised. By analysing the transcriptional
consequences of loss of Gli3 in the anterior margin of the E11.5 and E12.5 limb
bud in the polydactylous mouse mutant extra-toes (Gli3(Xt/Xt)), we have
identified a number of known and novel transcripts dependent on Gli3 in the limb.
In particular, we demonstrated that the genes encoding the paired box
transcription factor Pax9, the Notch ligand Jagged1 and the cell surface receptor
Cdo are dependent on Gli3 for correct expression in the anterior limb mesenchyme.
Analysis of expression in compound Shh;Gli3 mutant mouse embryos and in both in
vitro and in vivo Shh signaling assays, further defined the importance of Shh
regulated processing of Gli3 in controlling gene expression. In particular Pax9
regulation by Shh and Gli3 was shown to be context dependent, with major
differences between the limb and somite revealed by Shh bead implantation
experiments in the chick. Jagged1 was shown to be induced by Shh in the chick
limb and in a C3H10T1/2 cell based signaling assay, with Shh;Gli3 mutant analysis
indicating that expression is dependent on Gli3 derepression. Our data have also 
revealed that perturbation of early patterning events within the Gli3(Xt/Xt) limb
culminates in a specific delay of anterior chondrogenesis which is subsequently
realised as extra digits.

PMID: 16169709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Gene Expr Patterns. 2006 Jan;6(2):206-12. Epub 2005 Sep 15.

Expression patterns of Hedgehog signalling pathway members during mouse palate
development.

Rice R(1), Connor E, Rice DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, King's College London, Floor 28 Guy's 
Tower, St Thomas Street, London SE1 9RT, UK.

Hedgehog signalling regulates morphogenesis of many developing organs. Sonic
hedgehog (Shh) signalling has been shown to regulate the growth and morphogenesis
of the palatal shelves prior to their elevation and fusion. Here, we show that
Shh expression is limited to a thickened palatal oral epithelium prior to palatal
shelf elevation. After palatal shelf elevation above the tongue, Shh is expressed
only in small areas of thickened palatal oral epithelium that corresponded to
developing rugae. The receptor Ptc1 and a regulator of Hh signalling Hhip1 are
expressed in the mesenchyme adjacent to the palatal oral epithelium so that the
highest level of transcripts localize to the palatal mesenchyme surrounding the
Shh-expressing thickened epithelium. Smoothened and transcriptional effectors
Gli1-3, and Hh regulator Gas1 are expressed widely in the palatal mesenchyme. No 
differences were found in the expression patterns of Hh pathway members along the
anterior-posterior axis of the developing palate.

PMID: 16168717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Dev Biol. 2005 Oct 15;286(2):559-71. Epub 2005 Sep 15.

Gli3 is required for the specification and differentiation of preplate neurons.

Theil T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Animal Developmental and Molecular Biology,
Heinrich-Heine-University, D-40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.
ttheil@anatom.uni-tuebingen.de

During corticogenesis, the cerebral cortex develops a laminated structure which
is essential for its function. Early born neurons of the preplate and its
derivatives, the marginal zone (MZ) and the subplate (SP), serve as a framework
during the cortical lamination process. Here, I report on defects in the
generation and specification of these early born cortical neurons in extra-toes
(Xt(J)) mice which are defective for the Gli3 zinc finger transcription factor.
The Gli3 mutation dramatically disrupts early steps in the cortical lamination
process. The MZ, SP and the cortical plate (CP) do not form layers but cortical
neurons are arranged in clusters. These defects start to become evident at E12.5 
when the cortex forms several protrusions and the ventricular zone becomes
undulated. At this stage, cortical progenitor cells start to loose their
apical/basal cell polarity correlating with an ectopic expression of Wnt7b in the
ventricular zone. In addition, the cellular composition of the preplate is
severely altered. Cajal-Retzius cells are reduced in numbers while early born
Calretinin(+) neurons are overproduced. These results show that multiple aspects 
of corticogenesis including the organization of the venticular zone, the
apical/basal cell polarity of cortical progenitors and the differentiation of
early born cortical neurons are affected in the Gli3 mutant.

PMID: 16168404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Oncol Rep. 2005 Oct;14(4):1087-90.

Comparative genomics on Sonic hedgehog orthologs.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

Sonic hedgehog (SHH), Indian hedgehog (IHH), and Desert hedgehog (DHH) are key
molecules for the integrome network in oncology and regenerative medicine.
Soluble Hedgehog ligands bind to Patched receptor to activate Smoothened
seven-transmembrane receptor with Frizzled domain. KIF27 and KIF7 are human
homologs of Drosophila Costal-2 (Cos2), associating with Smoothened, GLI homolog,
Fused, and microtubule. Smoothened activation leads to GLI1, GLI2, or
GLI3-dependent transcription of Hedgehog target genes. Here, comparative
proteomics analyses and comparative genomics analyses on SHH orthologs were
performed by using bioinformatics. Human SHH representative transcript was
assembled by using BX461534 EST, NM_000193.2 RefSeq, AA503654 EST, and AC078834.5
genome sequence. Human SHH mRNA was expressed in fetal brain, infant brain, and
also in colorectal cancer. Chimpanzee SHH gene, consisting of three exons, was
located within AC147335.2 genome sequence. Human SHH and chimpanzee SHH (462 aa) 
showed E284G and T416P amino-acid substitutions. Vertebrate SHH orthologs shared 
the common domain architecture, consisting of N-terminal signal peptide, Hedgehog
signaling domain, Hint domain, and C-terminal HPLGMxxxxS motif. Evolutionarily
conserved SHH promoter region (nucleotide position 104429-104083 of human genome 
sequence AC078834.5) was identified. Double bHLH binding sites, CCAAT box, and
TATA box were conserved among human SHH promoter, chimpanzee SHH promoter, rat
Shh promoter, and mouse Shh promoter.

PMID: 16142377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Development. 2005 Oct;132(19):4339-51. Epub 2005 Sep 1.

Ihh controls cartilage development by antagonizing Gli3, but requires additional 
effectors to regulate osteoblast and vascular development.

Hilton MJ(1), Tu X, Cook J, Hu H, Long F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University Medical School, St Louis, MO
63110, USA.

Indian hedgehog (Ihh) controls multiple aspects of endochondral skeletal
development, including proliferation and maturation of chondrocytes, osteoblast
development and cartilage vascularization. Although it is known that Gli
transcription factors are key effectors of hedgehog signaling, it has not been
established which Gli protein mediates Ihh activity in skeletal development.
Here, we show that removal of Gli3 in Ihh-null mouse embryos restored normal
proliferation and maturation of chondrocytes, but only partially rescued the
defects in osteoblast development and cartilage vascularization. Remarkably, in
both Ihh-/- and Ihh-/-; Gli3-/- embryos, vascularization promoted osteoblast
development in perichondrial progenitor cells. Our results not only establish
Gli3 as a critical effector for Ihh activity in the developing skeleton, but also
identify an osteogenic role for a vasculature-derived signal, which integrates
with Ihh and Wnt signals to determine the osteoblast versus chondrocyte fate in
the mesenchymal progenitors.

PMID: 16141219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Orthop Res. 2005 Sep;23(5):1152-9. Epub 2005 Apr 18.

Expression patterns of hedgehog signaling peptides in naturally acquired equine
osteochondrosis.

Semevolos SA(1), Strassheim ML, Haupt JL, Nixon AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Comparative Orthopaedics Laboratory, Department of Clinical Sciences, College 
of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.

Hypertrophic differentiation and endochondral ossification of growth cartilage
are regulated by a complex array of signaling peptides, including parathyroid
hormone-related protein (PTH-rP), Indian hedgehog (Ihh), and bone morphogenetic
proteins (BMPs). This study investigated the expression of Ihh, Patched1 and 2
(Ptc1, Ptc2), Smoothened (Smo), Gli1, and Gli3, in naturally acquired articular
osteochondrosis, using an equine model. Cartilage was harvested from
osteochondrosis (OC) affected femoropatellar or scapulohumeral joints from
immature horses and normal control horses of similar age. Ihh, Ptc1, Smo, Gli1,
and Gli3 mRNA expression levels were evaluated by real-time quantitative PCR.
Spatial tissue expression was determined by in situ hybridization for Ihh and Smo
and immunohistochemistry for Ptc1 and Ptc2. The expression of Ihh was
significantly increased in OC cartilage compared to normal control cartilage and 
was localized mainly to the deep layer of articular cartilage, just above the
calcified zone, with some mild expression also present in the middle cartilage
layer. The expression of Gli1 was significantly decreased in OC samples, but
there was no significant difference in expression of Gli3, Ptc1 and Smo in OC
cartilage compared to normal cartilage. The expression of Ptc1 protein was
present at the junction of deep and calcified layers, while Ptc2 protein was
expressed throughout the middle, deep, and calcified cartilage layers. Spatial
expression of Smo was variable between animals and confined mainly to the middle 
and deep layers when present. Half of the OC samples displayed areas of moderate 
to strong Smo expression compared to mild or minimal expression in normal
controls. The increased Ihh expression in OC suggests a role of Ihh in diseased
cartilage, although it is not known if a PTH-rP/Ihh feedback cycle exists in
articular cartilage. The disparity between increased Ihh expression and decreased
Gli1 expression in OC cartilage suggests a different primary transcription factor
for Ihh or the presence of an elevated Ihh inhibitor in these tissues.

PMID: 16140195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Clin Genet. 2005 Sep;68(3):284; author reply 285.

Syndromic and non-syndromic GLI3 phenotypes.

Biesecker LG, Johnston J.

Comment on
    Clin Genet. 2005 May;67(5):429-33.

PMID: 16098019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Aug 9;102(32):11325-30. Epub 2005 Aug 1.

Cilia and Hedgehog responsiveness in the mouse.

Huangfu D(1), Anderson KV.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, 1275 York Avenue,
New York, NY 10021, USA.

The intraflagellar transport (IFT) proteins Ift172/Wimple and Polaris/Ift88 and
the anterograde IFT motor kinesin-II are required for the production and
maintenance of cilia. These proteins are also required for the activation of
targets of the mouse Hedgehog (Hh) pathway by Gli transcription factors. The
phenotypes of the IFT mutants, however, are not identical to mutants that lack
Smoothened (Smo), an essential activator of the Hh pathway. We show here that
mouse embryos that lack both Ift172 and Smo are identical to Ift172 single
mutants, which indicates that Ift172 acts downstream of Smo. Ift172 mutants have 
a weaker neural patterning phenotype than Smo mutants, because Ift172, but not
Smo, is required for proteolytic processing of Gli3 to its repressor form. Dnchc2
and Kif3a, essential subunits of the retrograde and anterograde IFT motors, are
also required for both formation of Gli activator and proteolytic processing of
Gli3. As a result, IFT mutants display a loss of Hh signaling phenotype in the
neural tube, where Gli activators play the major role in pattern formation, and a
gain of Hh signaling phenotype in the limb, where Gli3 repressor plays the major 
role. Because both anterograde and retrograde IFT are essential for positive and 
negative responses to Hh, and because cilia are present on Hh responsive cells,
it is likely that cilia act as organelles that are required for all activity of
the mouse Hh pathway.

PMCID: PMC1183606
PMID: 16061793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Dev Cell. 2005 Aug;9(2):293-303.

Shh controls epithelial proliferation via independent pathways that converge on
N-Myc.

Mill P(1), Mo R, Hu MC, Dagnino L, Rosenblum ND, Hui CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada.

Shh signaling induces proliferation of many cell types during development and
disease, but how Gli transcription factors regulate these mitogenic responses
remains unclear. By genetically altering levels of Gli activator and repressor
functions in mice, we have demonstrated that both Gli functions are involved in
the transcriptional control of N-myc and Cyclin D2 during embryonic hair follicle
development. Our results also indicate that additional Gli-activator-dependent
functions are required for robust mitogenic responses in regions of high Shh
signaling. Through posttranscriptional mechanisms, including inhibition of
GSK3-beta activity, Shh signaling leads to spatially restricted accumulation of
N-myc and coordinated cell cycle progression. Furthermore, a temporal shift in
the regulation of GSK3-beta activity occurs during embryonic hair follicle
development, resulting in a synergy with beta-catenin signaling to promote
coordinated proliferation. These findings demonstrate that Shh signaling controls
the rapid and patterned expansion of epithelial progenitors through convergent
Gli-mediated regulation.

PMID: 16054035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Dev Biol. 2005 Sep 15;285(2):533-44. Epub 2005 Jul 21.

Function and regulation of Alx4 in limb development: complex genetic interactions
with Gli3 and Shh.

Kuijper S(1), Feitsma H, Sheth R, Korving J, Reijnen M, Meijlink F.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, The Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology,
Uppsalalaan 8, 3584CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The role of the aristaless-related homeobox gene Alx4 in antero-posterior (AP-)
patterning of the developing vertebrate limb has remained somewhat elusive.
Polydactyly of Alx4 mutant mice is known to be accompanied by ectopic anterior
expression of genes like Shh, Fgf4 and 5'Hoxd. We reported previously that
polydactyly in Alx4 mutant mice requires SHH signaling, but we now show that in
early Alx4-/- limb buds the anterior ectopic expression of Fgf4 and Hoxd13, and
therefore disruption of AP-patterning, occurs independently of SHH signaling. To 
better understand how Alx4 functions in the pathways that regulate AP-patterning,
we also studied genomic regulatory sequences that are capable of directing
expression of a reporter gene in a pattern corresponding to endogenous Alx4
expression in anterior limb bud mesenchyme. We observed, as expected for
authentic Alx4 expression, expansion of reporter construct expression in a Shh-/-
background. Total lack of reporter expression in a Gli3-/- background confirms
the existence of Gli3-dependent and -independent Alx4 expression in the limb bud.
Apparently, these two modules of Alx4 expression are linked to dissimilar
functions.

PMID: 16039644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Nature. 2005 Jul 14;436(7048):277-81.

Gli3 and Plzf cooperate in proximal limb patterning at early stages of limb
development.

Barna M(1), Pandolfi PP, Niswander L.

Author information: 
(1)Weill Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Cornell University, New York, New
York 10021, USA.

The vertebrate limb initially develops as a bud of mesenchymal cells that
subsequently aggregate in a proximal to distal (P-D) sequence to give rise to
cartilage condensations that prefigure all limb skeletal components. Of the three
cardinal limb axes, the mechanisms that lead to establishment and patterning of
skeletal elements along the P-D axis are the least understood. Here we identify a
genetic interaction between Gli3 (GLI-Kruppel family member 3) and Plzf
(promyelocytic leukaemia zinc finger, also known as Zbtb16 and Zfp145), which is 
required specifically at very early stages of limb development for all proximal
cartilage condensations in the hindlimb (femur, tibia, fibula). Notably, distal
condensations comprising the foot are relatively unperturbed in
Gli3(-/-);Plzf(-/-) mouse embryos. We demonstrate that the cooperative activity
of Gli3 and Plzf establishes the correct temporal and spatial distribution of
chondrocyte progenitors in the proximal limb-bud independently of known P-D
patterning markers and overall limb-bud size. Moreover, the limb defects in
Gli3(-/-);Plzf(-/-) embryos correlate with the transient death of a specific
subset of proximal mesenchymal cells that express bone morphogenetic protein
receptor, type 1B (Bmpr1b) at the onset of limb development. These findings
suggest that the development of proximal and distal skeletal elements is
distinctly regulated early during limb-bud formation. The initial division of the
vertebrate limb into two distinct molecular domains is consistent with fossil
evidence indicating that the upper and lower extremities of the limb have
different evolutionary origins.

PMID: 16015334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Am J Med Genet A. 2005 Aug 1;136A(4):390-4.

Pallister-Hall syndrome: unreported skeletal features of a GLI3 mutation.

Roscioli T(1), Kennedy D, Cui J, Fonseca B, Watson GF, Pereira J, Xie YG, Mowat
D.

Author information: 
(1)South Eastern Sydney Genetics Service, Sydney Children's Hospital, Sydney,
Australia.

We describe two patients with Pallister-Hall syndrome (PHS), both with evidence
of a generalized skeletal dysplasia as typified by upper and lower acromesomelic 
limb shortening and the previously unreported fibular hypoplasia, radio-ulnar
bowing, and proximal epiphyseal hypoplasia. Genomic DNA was only available for
sequencing analysis in patient 2 and the mutation, c.3386_3387delTT was detected 
in exon 14 of the GL13 gene. It is also possible that the findings in patient 1
represent the phenotypic expression of a novel GLI3 mutation. This report further
expands the PHS phenotype and raises the possibility of specific GLI3 mutations
resulting in more severe skeletal features. It also suggests that PHS should be
included in the differential diagnosis of antenatally ascertained acromesomelic
limb shortening and bowing with fibular hypoplasia particularly in the presence
of polysyndactyly.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16007608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2004 Sep;20(5):750-3.

[Screening of proteins interacting with Dishevelled2 in mouse 11.5dpc embryo
library].

[Article in Chinese]

Ng SS(1), Zhai YG, Han L, Zhang XJ, Wang YY, Chang ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Tsinghua Institute of Genome Research, Department of Biological Sciences and
Biotechnology, Institute of Biomedicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084,
China.

Dishevelled proteins are multifunctional and highly conserved. These proteins are
also required for the specification of cell fate and polarity by secreted Wnt
proteins. To investigate the molecular mechanism of Dishevelled in mediating Wnt 
signal transduction, a mouse 11.5dpc embryo library was screened by
yeast-two-hybrid system to find mouse Dishevelled2 DEP domain and C-terminal
interacting proteins. 15 possitive clones were identified from 4.1 x 10(6)
transformants. The DNA sequences of the positive AD/library plasmids were
determined. The BLAST results revealed that one of the positive clones contained 
N-terminus cDNA fragments (amino acids 6-122) of Gli3 protein. The interaction
between Dv12 and Gli3 detected by yeast two-hybrid system suggests that Gli3
might play a role in some biological processes with Dishevelled.

PMID: 15974003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Int J Dev Biol. 2005;49(4):443-8.

Genetic interaction of Gli3 and Alx4 during limb development.

Panman L(1), Drenth T, Tewelscher P, Zuniga A, Zeller R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. lia.panman@licr.ki.se

The Gli3 and Alx4 transcriptional regulators are expressed in the anterior limb
bud mesenchyme and their disruption in mice results in preaxial polydactyly.
While the polydactylous phenotype of Alx4 deficient limb buds depends on SHH, the
one of Gli3 deficient limb buds is completely independent of SHH signalling,
suggesting that these genes act in parallel pathways. Analysis of limb buds
lacking both Gli3 and Alx4 now shows that these two genes interact during limb
skeletal morphogenesis. In addition to the defects in single mutants, the
stylopod is severely malformed and the anterior element of the zeugopod is lost
in double mutant limbs. However, limb bud patterning in Gli3-/-; Alx4-/- double
mutant embryos is not affected more than in single mutants as the expression
domains of key regulators remain the same. Most interestingly, the loss of the
severe preaxial polydactyly characteristic of Gli3-/- limbs in double mutant
embryos establishes that this type of polydactyly requires Alx4 function.

PMID: 15968591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Development. 2005 Jul;132(13):3103-11. Epub 2005 Jun 1.

Mouse intraflagellar transport proteins regulate both the activator and repressor
functions of Gli transcription factors.

Liu A(1), Wang B, Niswander LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado at Denver and Health Sciences
Center, Mailstop 8322, Box 6511, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

Intraflagellar transport (IFT) is an active event in which cargo is transported
along microtubules by motor proteins such as kinesin and dynein. IFT proteins are
required for the formation and maintenance of flagella and cilia. We have
previously shown that mouse mutants for two IFT proteins, IFT88 and IFT172, as
well as Kif3a, a subunit of mouse kinesin 2, exhibit ventral spinal cord
patterning defects that appear to result from reduced hedgehog (Hh) signaling.
Although genetic epistasis experiments place IFT proteins downstream of the Hh
receptor and upstream of the Gli transcription factors, the mechanism by which
IFT regulates Gli function is unknown. The developing limb provides an excellent 
system to study Hh signaling, in particular as it allows a biological and
molecular readout of both Gli activator and repressor function. Here we report
that homozygous mutants for flexo (Fxo), a hypomorphic allele of mouse IFT88
generated in our ENU mutagenesis screen, exhibit polydactyly in all four limbs.
Molecular analysis indicates that expression domains of multiple posteriorly
restricted genes are expanded anteriorly in the mutant limbs, similar to loss of 
Gli3 transcriptional repressor function. Sonic hedgehog (Shh) expression is
normal, yet Ptch1 and Gli1, two known targets of Hh signaling, are greatly
reduced, consistent with loss of Shh signaling. Expression of Gli3 and Hand2 in
the mutant limb indicates that the limb prepattern is abnormal. In addition, we
show that partial loss-of-function mutations in another mouse IFT gene, Ift52
(Ngd5), result in similar phenotypes and abnormal Hh signaling as Fxo, indicating
a general requirement for IFT proteins in Hh signaling and patterning of multiple
organs. Analysis of Ift88 and Shh double mutants indicates that, in mouse, IFT
proteins are required for both Gli activator and repressor functions, and Gli
proteins are insensitive to Hh ligand in the absence of IFT proteins. Finally,
our biochemical studies demonstrate that IFT proteins are required for
proteolytic processing of Gli3 in mouse embryos. In summary, our results indicate
that IFT function is crucial in the control of both the positive and negative
transcriptional activities of Gli proteins, and essential for Hh ligand-induced
signaling cascade.

PMID: 15930098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Dev Biol. 2005 Jun 15;282(2):550-70.

Gli function is essential for motor neuron induction in zebrafish.

Vanderlaan G(1), Tyurina OV, Karlstrom RO, Chandrasekhar A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211,
USA.

The Gli family of zinc-finger transcription factors mediates Hedgehog (Hh)
signaling in all vertebrates. However, their roles in ventral neural tube
patterning, in particular motor neuron induction, appear to have diverged across 
species. For instance, cranial motor neurons are essentially lost in zebrafish
detour (gli1(-)) mutants, whereas motor neuron development is unaffected in mouse
single gli and some double gli knockouts. Interestingly, the expression of some
Hh-regulated genes (ptc1, net1a, gli1) is mostly unaffected in the detour mutant 
hindbrain, suggesting that other Gli transcriptional activators may be involved. 
To better define the roles of the zebrafish gli genes in motor neuron induction
and in Hh-regulated gene expression, we examined these processes in you-too (yot)
mutants, which encode dominant repressor forms of Gli2 (Gli2(DR)), and following 
morpholino-mediated knockdown of gli1, gli2, and gli3 function. Motor neuron
induction at all axial levels was reduced in yot (gli2(DR)) mutant embryos. In
addition, Hh target gene expression at all axial levels except in rhombomere 4
was also reduced, suggesting an interference with the function of other Glis.
Indeed, morpholino-mediated knockdown of Gli2(DR) protein in yot mutants led to a
suppression of the defective motor neuron phenotype. However, gli2 knockdown in
wild-type embryos generated no discernable motor neuron phenotype, while gli3
knockdown reduced motor neuron induction in the hindbrain and spinal cord.
Significantly, gli2 or gli3 knockdown in detour (gli1(-)) mutants revealed roles 
for Gli2 and Gli3 activator functions in ptc1 expression and spinal motor neuron 
induction. Similarly, gli1 or gli3 knockdown in yot (gli2(DR)) mutants resulted
in severe or complete loss of motor neurons, and of ptc1 and net1a expression, in
the hindbrain and spinal cord. In addition, gli1 expression was greatly reduced
in yot mutants following gli3, but not gli1, knockdown, suggesting that Gli3
activator function is specifically required for gli1 expression. These
observations demonstrate that Gli activator function (encoded by gli1, gli2, and 
gli3) is essential for motor neuron induction and Hh-regulated gene expression in
zebrafish.

PMCID: PMC2219918
PMID: 15890329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Dev Dyn. 2005 Nov;234(3):489-96.

Specific requirements of sonic hedgehog signaling during oligodendrocyte
development.

Oh S(1), Huang X, Chiang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

Oligodendrocyte precursors (OLPs) in the developing spinal cord are generated
from the same part of the ventral neuroepithelium as motor neurons, by inductive 
processes that include a temporal switch from neuronal to glial cell fate. Recent
studies have implicated Shh as a key signal in the generation of both OLPs and
ventral neurons. In this study, we used Shh(-/-), Gli3(-/-), and
Shh(-/-);Gli3(-/-) mutants to address the role of Shh signaling during
oligodendrocyte development. We find that, in the absence of Gli3, Shh signaling 
is dispensable for the generation and maintenance of OLPs. However, Shh is
required for OLPs to emerge at the appropriate developmental stages and for
subsequent differentiation of OLPs into mature oligodendrocytes. The initial
delay and reduction in OLP generation in Shh(-/-);Gli3(-/-) mutants are
accompanied by extended neurogenesis and persistent expression of Neurogenin 2 in
the Olig2 progenitor domain, suggesting that Shh signaling influences the timing 
of neuron-glia fate switching. Thus, our studies suggest that Shh signaling plays
multiple roles during development of oligodendrocytes.

Developmental Dynamics 234:489-496, 2005. (c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15880651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Dev Dyn. 2005 Jun;233(2):313-25.

Shh signaling in limb bud ectoderm: potential role in teratogen-induced postaxial
ectrodactyly.

Bell SM(1), Schreiner CM, Goetz JA, Robbins DJ, Scott WJ Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA. sheila.belle@cchmc.org

A variety of teratogens induce the loss of postaxial forelimb structures when
administered during mid-gestation to the mouse. Previous studies demonstrated
that teratogen exposure is associated with a reduction in zone of polarizing
activity (ZPA) -related polarizing activity without a noticeable loss of Shh
expression. Herein, we quantitatively confirm that expression of Shh, Ptch1, and 
Gli3 are unaltered by teratogen exposure and demonstrate that sonic hedgehog
(Shh) translation is unaffected. Examination of the polarizing response of host
chick wings to teratogen-exposed ZPA tissue revealed an induced growth response
and ectopic induction of Fgf4, Bmp2, Ptch1, and Gli1 expression similar to
control ZPA tissue. Control ZPA tissue altered the fate of cells destined to die 
in the anterior necrotic zone, whereas cell death ensued in hosts receiving
teratogen-exposed grafts. Immunohistochemical studies localized Shh protein in
the mouse limb to the posterior mesoderm and overlying ectoderm. We postulate
that teratogen exposure alters the ability of Shh to signal to the ectoderm and
present microarray and reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction data,
indicating that Shh signaling could occur in the limb bud ectoderm.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc

PMID: 15858818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Blood. 2005 Aug 15;106(4):1296-304. Epub 2005 Apr 26.

The transcription factor Gli3 regulates differentiation of fetal CD4- CD8-
double-negative thymocytes.

Hager-Theodorides AL(1), Dessens JT, Outram SV, Crompton T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Life Sciences, Imperial
College London, Sir Alexander Fleming Bldg, South Kensington Campus, London SW7
2AZ, United Kingdom.

Glioblastoma 3 (Gli3) is a transcription factor involved in patterning and
oncogenesis. Here, we demonstrate a role for Gli3 in thymocyte development. Gli3 
is differentially expressed in fetal CD4- CD8- double-negative (DN) thymocytes
and is most highly expressed at the CD44+ CD25- DN (DN1) and CD44- CD25- (DN4)
stages of development but was not detected in adult thymocytes. Analysis of null 
mutants showed that Gli3 is involved at the transitions from DN1 to CD44+ CD25+
DN (DN2) cell and from DN to CD4+ CD8+ double-positive (DP) cell. Gli3 is
required for differentiation from DN to DP thymocyte, after pre-T-cell receptor
(TCR) signaling but is not necessary for pre-TCR-induced proliferation or
survival. The effect of Gli3 was dose dependent, suggesting its direct
involvement in the transcriptional regulation of genes controlling T-cell
differentiation during fetal development.

PMCID: PMC1274277
PMID: 15855276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Pathol. 2005 Jun;206(2):143-50.

Dysregulation of hedgehog signalling predisposes to synovial chondromatosis.

Hopyan S(1), Nadesan P, Yu C, Wunder J, Alman BA.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology, Research Institute, The Hospital for Sick
Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.

Synovial chondromatosis is a condition affecting joints in which metaplastic
cartilage nodules arise from the synovium, causing pain, joint dysfunction, and
ultimately joint destruction. Because dysregulation of hedgehog signalling is a
feature of several benign cartilaginous tumours, expression of the hedgehog
target genes PTC1 and GLI1 was examined in this study in samples from human
synovial chondromatosis. Significantly higher expression levels were found in
synovial chondromatosis than in the synovium, from which it arises. To determine 
if hedgehog-mediated transcription predisposes to synovial chondromatosis, the
extra-toes mutant mouse, which harbours a heterozygous mutation in the hedgehog
transcriptional repressor, Gli3, resulting in decreased expression of Gli3
protein, was studied. The extra-toes mutant mouse has a phenotype consistent with
overactive hedgehog signalling, suggesting that Gli3 acts as a transcriptional
repressor of limb development. Eighty-five per cent of Gli3 mutant mice developed
synovial chondromatosis at 18 months of age, compared with 30% of wild-type
littermates (p < 0.05). Three of the ten Gli3 mutant mice treated with
triparanol, which blocks hedgehog signalling upstream of the Gli transcription
factors, developed synovial chondromatosis, compared with eight of ten control
mice. These data demonstrate that hedgehog signalling plays an important role in 
the development of synovial chondromatosis and suggest that blockade of hedgehog 
signalling may be a potential treatment for this disorder.

Copyright 2005 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland

PMID: 15834844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Clin Genet. 2005 May;67(5):429-33.

Molecular analysis of non-syndromic preaxial polydactyly: preaxial polydactyly
type-IV and preaxial polydactyly type-I.

Fujioka H(1), Ariga T, Horiuchi K, Otsu M, Igawa H, Kawashima K, Yamamoto Y,
Sugihara T, Sakiyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic Surgery, Hokkaido University Graduate School of
Medicine, Hokkaido 060-8638, Japan. fujioka@bibaih.rofuku.go.jp

Comment in
    Clin Genet. 2005 Sep;68(3):284; author reply 285.

Human GLI3 gene mutations have been identified in several phenotypes of digital
abnormality such as Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome, Pallister-Hall
syndrome, preaxial polydactyly type-IV (PPD-IV) and postaxial polydactyly.
However, the different phenotypes resulting from GLI3 mutations have not yet been
properly defined. We have experienced two types of digital abnormality without
other complicating developmental defects; a family with foot PPD-IV with
syndactyly of the third and fourth fingers, and four sporadic cases with
biphalangeal thumb polydactyly (PPD-I). The genes responsible for syndactyly of
the third and fourth fingers (syndactyly type-I) and PPD-I have not yet been
identified; we therefore examined the involvement of the GLI3 gene in these
subtypes of digital abnormality. We found a non-sense mutation in the GLI3 gene
in the family with foot PPD-IV accompanied with hand syndactyly of the third and 
fourth fingers, but no mutations were detected in the GLI3 gene in the four other
cases with PPD-I alone. Thus, the phenotype of foot PPD-IV accompanied with hand 
syndactyly of the third and fourth fingers may result from a GLI3 mutation,
whereas the PPD-I phenotype alone is not caused by GLI3 gene defect. These
results will help to define the phenotypic spectrum of GLI3 morphopathies, which 
have been recently proposed.

PMID: 15811011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Oncogene. 2005 Jun 9;24(25):4026-36.

Gli1 is important for medulloblastoma formation in Ptc1+/- mice.

Kimura H(1), Stephen D, Joyner A, Curran T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St Jude Children's Research
Hospital, 332 North Lauderdale, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

Germline mutations in the human homolog of the patched1 (PTCH1) are associated
with basal cell nevus carcinoma syndrome (BCNS or Gorlin syndrome), which is
characterized by developmental anomalies, radiation hypersensitivity and a
predisposition to medulloblastomas and skin tumors. Patched1 (Ptc1) functions as 
a receptor for Sonic hedgehog (Shh) in a wide range of biological processes.
Binding of Shh to Ptc1 results in activation of Smoothened (Smo), which in turn
stimulates expression of downstream target genes including Ptc1 and Gli1. Gli1 is
a member of a family of DNA-binding zinc-finger proteins, including Gli2 and
Gli3, that function in transcription control. Here, we report that inactivation
of both Gli1 alleles in Ptc1+/- mice significantly reduces spontaneous
medulloblastoma formation. Therefore, Gli1 is not only a marker of pathway
activation but also plays a functional role in medulloblastoma formation.
Interestingly, Gli2 levels were elevated in medulloblastoma cells but not in
normal granule neuron precursors during cerebellar development in mice lacking
Gli1. In cultured fibroblasts, Gli1 was more potent than Gli2 at inducing cell
transformation. These results demonstrate that Gli1 plays a central role in
medulloblastoma formation in Ptc1+/- mice and that Gli2 may also contribute to
oncogenesis.

PMID: 15806168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Development. 2005 Apr;132(8):1961-70.

Tbx3 can alter limb position along the rostrocaudal axis of the developing
embryo.

Rallis C(1), Del Buono J, Logan MP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, National Institute for Medical Research,
Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

The limbs of the vertebrate embryo form at precise locations along the body and
these positions are fixed across different species. The mechanisms that control
this process are not understood. Ectopic expression of Tbx3, a transcriptional
repressor that belongs to the Tbx2/3/4/5 subfamily of T-box transcriptional
regulators, in the forelimb results in a rostral shift in the position of the
limb along the main body axis. By contrast, a transcriptional activator form of
Tbx3 shifts the limb to more caudal locations. We also show that dHand and Gli3, 
genes previously implicated in anteroposterior pre-patterning of the limb-forming
region, are also involved in refining the position of the limbs. Our data suggest
a new role for Tbx3 in positioning the limb along the main body axis through a
genetic interplay between dHand and Gli3.

PMID: 15790970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Dev Dyn. 2005 Jun;233(2):288-300.

Studies on epidermal growth factor receptor signaling in vertebrate limb
patterning.

Omi M(1), Fisher M, Maihle NJ, Dealy CN.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Limb and Skeletal Development, Department of BioStructure and
Function, School of Dental Medicine, University of Connecticut Health Center,
Farmington, Connecticut 06030, USA.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) regulates multiple patterning events 
in Drosophila limb development, but its role in vertebrate limb morphogenesis has
received little attention. The EGFR and several of its ligands are expressed in
developing vertebrate limbs in manners consistent with potential patterning
roles. To gain insight into functions of EGFR signaling in vertebrate limb
development, we expressed a constitutively active EGFR in developing chick limbs 
in ovo. Expression of activated EGFR causes pre- and postaxial polydactyly,
including mirror-image-type digit duplication, likely due to induction of ectopic
expression and/or modulation of genes involved in anterior-posterior (AP)
patterning such as Sonic hedgehog (Shh), dHand, Patched (Ptc), Gli3, Hoxd13,
Hoxd11, bone morphogenetic protein 2 (Bmp2), Gremlin, and FGF4. Activation of
EGFR signaling dorsalizes the limb and alters expression of the dorsal-ventral
(DV) patterning genes Wnt7a, Lmx, and En1. Ectopic and/or extended FGF8
expressing apical ectodermal ridges (AERs) are also seen. Interdigital regression
is inhibited and the digits fail to separate, leading to syndactyly, likely due
to antiapoptotic and pro-proliferative effects of activated EGFR signaling on
limb mesoderm, and/or attenuation of interdigital Bmp4 expression. These findings
suggest potential roles for EGFR signaling in AP and DV patterning, AER
formation, and cell survival during limb morphogenesis.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc

PMID: 15778992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Am J Med Genet A. 2005 May 1;134(4):399-403.

Retrospective family study of childhood medulloblastoma.

Ng D(1), Stavrou T, Liu L, Taylor MD, Gold B, Dean M, Kelley MJ, Dubovsky EC,
Vezina G, Nicholson HS, Byrne J, Rutka JT, Hogg D, Reaman GH, Goldstein AM.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Epidemiology Branch, DCEG, NCI, NIH, DHHS, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
davidng@mail.nih.gov

Erratum in
    Am J Med Genet A. 2005 Jul 15;136(2):226.

Medulloblastoma is the most common malignant central nervous system tumor of
childhood and can occur sporadically or in association with inherited cancer
susceptibility syndromes such as the nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome
(NBCCS). To determine whether an association existed between the risk of
developing medulloblastoma and undiagnosed syndromes, we retrospectively reviewed
clinical data on 33 patients with medulloblastoma from a single institution and
compared them with their unaffected relatives (n = 46). Six patients had tumors
showing desmoplastic histology. Two of the six met diagnostic criteria for NBCCS.
One NBCCS patient had a missense mutation of patched-1 (PTCH1); the other had no 
identifiable PTCH1 mutation. Two patients with isolated desmoplastic
medulloblastoma had an insertion and splice site mutation, respectively, in
suppressor of fused (SUFU). All patients with nondesmoplastic medulloblastoma
histology received molecular testing for SUFU. None of these patients had an
identifiable mutation in PTCH1 or SUFU. We performed a clinical evaluation for
Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS) in four medulloblastoma families, who
exhibited macrocephaly as the only finding consistent with the diagnosis of GCPS.
Molecular analysis of GLI3 in these four families was negative. There was a
paucity of clinical findings among the majority of medulloblastoma patients in
this study group to suggest a definable cancer genetic syndrome. We conclude that
clinically recognizable syndromes are uncommon among patients with
medulloblastoma, however, PTCH1 and SUFU mutations are present at a low but
significant frequency.

2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15759260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Gene Expr Patterns. 2005 Apr;5(4):529-31. Epub 2004 Dec 15.

Asymmetric expression of Gli transcription factors in Hensen's node.

Granata A(1), Quaderi NA.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, King's College London, 4th Floor
New Hunt's House, Guy's Hospital Campus, London SE1 1UL, UK.

Avian left-right (L/R) axis determination involves the establishment of
asymmetric gene expression in Hensen's node, resulting in two discrete signalling
pathways on the left and right sides of the embryo. The extracellular signalling 
molecule Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) is known to be an important left-side determinant. 
Transcription of Shh is initially bilateral in Hensen's node (stage 4), but is
restricted to the left side by stage 5. The Gli genes (Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3) are
the main transcriptional mediators of the Hedgehog pathway in vertebrates. GLI1
and GLI2 are primarily transcriptional activators of Hedgehog target genes, while
GLI3 is primarily a transcriptional repressor of Hedgehog targets. In order to
gain insight into the mechanisms of asymmetrical Hedgehog signal transduction in 
the node, we have analysed the expression patterns of the Gli genes in Hensen's
node from stage 4 to stage 8. Here, we reveal that the Gli genes are
asymmetrically expressed in Hensen's node: Gli1 and Gli2, are expressed on the
left side, while Gli3 is expressed on the right side.

PMID: 15749082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Am J Hum Genet. 2005 Apr;76(4):609-22. Epub 2005 Feb 28.

Molecular and clinical analyses of Greig cephalopolysyndactyly and Pallister-Hall
syndromes: robust phenotype prediction from the type and position of GLI3
mutations.

Johnston JJ(1), Olivos-Glander I, Killoran C, Elson E, Turner JT, Peters KF,
Abbott MH, Aughton DJ, Aylsworth AS, Bamshad MJ, Booth C, Curry CJ, David A,
Dinulos MB, Flannery DB, Fox MA, Graham JM, Grange DK, Guttmacher AE, Hannibal
MC, Henn W, Hennekam RC, Holmes LB, Hoyme HE, Leppig KA, Lin AE, Macleod P,
Manchester DK, Marcelis C, Mazzanti L, McCann E, McDonald MT, Mendelsohn NJ,
Moeschler JB, Moghaddam B, Neri G, Newbury-Ecob R, Pagon RA, Phillips JA, Sadler 
LS, Stoler JM, Tilstra D, Walsh Vockley CM, Zackai EH, Zadeh TM, Brueton L, Black
GC, Biesecker LG.

Author information: 
(1)National Institutes of Health, National Human Genome Research Institute,
Bethesda, MD 20892-4472, USA. jjohnsto@mail.nih.gov

Mutations in the GLI3 zinc-finger transcription factor gene cause Greig
cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS) and Pallister-Hall syndrome (PHS), which
are variable but distinct clinical entities. We hypothesized that GLI3 mutations 
that predict a truncated functional repressor protein cause PHS and that
functional haploinsufficiency of GLI3 causes GCPS. To test these hypotheses, we
screened patients with PHS and GCPS for GLI3 mutations. The patient group
consisted of 135 individuals: 89 patients with GCPS and 46 patients with PHS. We 
detected 47 pathological mutations (among 60 probands); when these were combined 
with previously published mutations, two genotype-phenotype correlations were
evident. First, GCPS was caused by many types of alterations, including
translocations, large deletions, exonic deletions and duplications, small
in-frame deletions, and missense, frameshift/nonsense, and splicing mutations. In
contrast, PHS was caused only by frameshift/nonsense and splicing mutations.
Second, among the frameshift/nonsense mutations, there was a clear
genotype-phenotype correlation. Mutations in the first third of the gene (from
open reading frame [ORF] nucleotides [nt] 1-1997) caused GCPS, and mutations in
the second third of the gene (from ORF nt 1998-3481) caused primarily PHS.
Surprisingly, there were 12 mutations in patients with GCPS in the 3' third of
the gene (after ORF nt 3481), and no patients with PHS had mutations in this
region. These results demonstrate a robust correlation of genotype and phenotype 
for GLI3 mutations and strongly support the hypothesis that these two allelic
disorders have distinct modes of pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1199298
PMID: 15739154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Development. 2005 Apr;132(7):1601-10. Epub 2005 Feb 23.

Genetics of shoulder girdle formation: roles of Tbx15 and aristaless-like genes.

Kuijper S(1), Beverdam A, Kroon C, Brouwer A, Candille S, Barsh G, Meijlink F.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, The Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology,
Uppsalalaan 8, 3584CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The diverse cellular contributions to the skeletal elements of the vertebrate
shoulder and pelvic girdles during embryonic development complicate the study of 
their patterning. Research in avian embryos has recently clarified part of the
embryological basis of shoulder formation. Although dermomyotomal cells provide
the progenitors of the scapular blade, local signals appear to have an essential 
guiding role in this process. These signals differ from those that are known to
pattern the more distal appendicular skeleton. We have studied the impact of
Tbx15, Gli3, Alx4 and related genes on formation of the skeletal elements of the 
mouse shoulder and pelvic girdles. We observed severe reduction of the scapula in
double and triple mutants of these genes. Analyses of a range of complex
genotypes revealed aspects of their genetic relationship, as well as functions
that had been previously masked due to functional redundancy. Tbx15 and Gli3
appear to have synergistic functions in formation of the scapular blade. Scapular
truncation in triple mutants of Tbx15, Alx4 and Cart1 indicates essential
functions for Alx4 and Cart1 in the anterior part of the scapula, as opposed to
Gli3 function being linked to the posterior part. Especially in Alx4/Cart1
mutants, the expression of markers such as Pax1, Pax3 and Scleraxis is altered
prior to stages when anatomical aberrations are visible in the shoulder region.
This suggests a disorganization of the proximal limb bud and adjacent flank
mesoderm, and is likely to reflect the disruption of a mechanism providing
positional cues to guide progenitor cells to their destination in the pectoral
girdle.

PMID: 15728667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Int J Oncol. 2005 Feb;26(2):545-9.

Identification and characterization of rat Desert hedgehog and Indian hedgehog
genes in silico.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M and M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

Sonic hedgehog (SHH), Desert hedgehog (DHH) and Indian hedgehog (IHH) bind to
Patched family receptors (PTCH1 and PTCH2) to transduce signals to GLI1, GLI2 and
GLI3. GLI family transcription factors then activate transcription of Hedgehog
target genes, such as FOXE1 and FOXM1 encoding Forkhead-box transcription
factors. Hedgehog signaling pathway plays a pivotal role in a variety of human
tumors, such as gastric cancer, pancreatic cancer, colorectal cancer, breast
cancer, prostate cancer, basal cell carcinoma and brain tumors. Rat orthologs for
human DHH and IHH remain to be identified. Here, we identified and characterized 
rat Dhh and Ihh genes by using bioinformatics. Rat Dhh complete coding sequence
(CDS) was determined by assembling nucleotide positions 426397-426963,
429715-429976 and 430244-430898 of the AC114446.3 genome sequence. Rat Ihh
complete CDS was determined by assembling nucleotide positions 63433-64033,
66432-66693 and 68242-69169 of AC095777.6 genome sequence. Rat Dhh mRNA was
expressed in prostate, duodenum and dorsal root ganglia, while rat Ihh mRNA was
expressed in cartilage. Rat Dhh showed 99.7% total-amino-acid identity with mouse
Dhh, and 96.5% total-amino-acid identity with human DHH. Rat Ihh and human IHH
were shorter than mouse Ihh by 38 amino acids. Rat Ihh showed 97.6%
total-amino-acid identity with mouse Ihh and 94.4% total-amino-acid identity with
human IHH. Hedgehog family proteins consist of signal peptide, Hedgehog ligand
peptide and C-terminal peptide. Hedgehog ligand peptides derived from mammalian
Hedgehog family proteins were conserved well, while C-terminal peptides were
relatively divergent. The HPLGMXXXXS motif in the C-terminus was conserved in Shh
orthologs and Ihh orthologs, but not in Dhh orthologs.

PMID: 15645142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Yi Chuan. 2004 May;26(3):387-93.

[Progress on polydactyly character of vertebrate].

[Article in Chinese]

Huang YQ(1), Deng XM, Li N, Qiu XP.

Author information: 
(1)State Key National Laboratory of Biotechnology, China Agricultural University,
Beijing 100 094, China. hyanqun@yahoo.com.cn

Polydactyly is a common abnormal limb phenotype in vertebrate and there is
similar limb phenotype among different species. Research shows that polydactyly
has a similar development mechanism, and this kind of polydactyly character seems
to be controlled by homologous genes among species. The latest research results
on human and mouse further shows that PPD should be caused by the disruption of a
long range cis-acting regulator for Shh within Lmbr1 intron. Here the development
mechanism and related genes controlling polydactyly character of vertebrate are
reviewed.

PMID: 15640026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Dev Biol. 2005 Jan 15;277(2):537-56.

Zebrafish Gli3 functions as both an activator and a repressor in Hedgehog
signaling.

Tyurina OV(1), Guner B, Popova E, Feng J, Schier AF, Kohtz JD, Karlstrom RO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003-9297,
USA.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling regulates cell differentiation and patterning in a wide
variety of embryonic tissues. In vertebrates, at least three Gli transcription
factors (Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3) are involved in Hh signal transduction.
Comparative studies have revealed divergent requirements for Gli1 and Gli2 in
zebrafish and mouse. Here, we address the question of whether Gli3 function has
also diverged in zebrafish and analyze the regulatory interactions between Hh
signaling and Gli activity. We find that zebrafish Gli3 has an early function as 
an activator of Hh target genes that overlaps with Gli1 activator function in the
ventral neural tube. In vitro reporter analysis shows that Gli3 cooperates with
Gli1 to activate transcription in the presence of high concentrations of Hh.
During late somitogenesis stages, Gli3 is required as a repressor of the Hh
response. Gli3 shares this repressor activity with Gli2 in the dorsal spinal
cord, hindbrain, and midbrain, but not in the forebrain. Consistently, zebrafish 
Gli3 blocks Gli1-mediated activation of a reporter gene in the absence of Hh in
vitro. In the eye, Gli3 is also required for proper ath5 expression and the
differentiation of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs). These results reveal a
conserved role for Gli3 in vertebrate development and uncover novel regional
functions and regulatory interactions among gli genes.

PMID: 15617692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Development. 2005 Jan;132(2):345-57. Epub 2004 Dec 16.

Gli2 and Gli3 have redundant and context-dependent function in skeletal muscle
formation.

McDermott A(1), Gustafsson M, Elsam T, Hui CC, Emerson CP Jr, Borycki AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, University of Sheffield, Firth Court,
Western Bank, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK.

The Gli family of zinc finger transcription factors are mediators of Shh
signalling in vertebrates. In previous studies, we showed that Shh signalling,
via an essential Gli-binding site in the Myf5 epaxial somite (ES) enhancer, is
required for the specification of epaxial muscle progenitor cells. Shh signalling
is also required for the normal mediolateral patterning of myogenic cells within 
the somite. In this study, we investigate the role and the transcriptional
activities of Gli proteins during somite myogenesis in the mouse embryo. We
report that Gli genes are differentially expressed in the mouse somite. Gli2 and 
Gli3 are essential for Gli1 expression in somites, establishing Gli2 and Gli3 as 
primary mediators and Gli1 as a secondary mediator of Shh signalling. Combining
genetic studies with the use of a transgenic mouse line expressing a reporter
gene under the control of the Myf5 epaxial somite enhancer, we show that Gli2 or 
Gli3 is required for Myf5 activation in the epaxial muscle progenitor cells.
Furthermore, Gli3, but not Gli2 represses Myf5 transcription in a dose-dependent 
manner in the absence of Shh. Finally, we provide evidence that hypaxial and
myotomal gene expression is mispatterned in Gli2-/-Gli3-/- and Gli3-/-Shh-/-
somites. Together, our data demonstrate both positive and negative regulatory
functions for Gli2 and Gli3 in the control of Myf5 activation in the epaxial
muscle progenitor cells and in dorsoventral and mediolateral patterning of the
somite.

PMID: 15604102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Int J Oncol. 2004 Dec;25(6):1875-80.

KIF27 is one of orthologs for Drosophila Costal-2.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

Signals of Hedgehog family proteins (SHH, IHH and DHH) are transduced through
Patched family receptors (PTCH1 and PTCH2) and Smoothened (SMO) to GLI family
transcription factors (GLI1, GLI2 and GLI3). SHH plays a key role in development 
and progression of pancreatic cancer, gastric cancer, basal cell carcinoma, and
brain tumors. Drosophila Costal-2 (Cos2) is implicated in the Hedgehog pathway
through the interaction with Smoothened (Smo), Cubitus interruptus (Ci), Fused
(Fu), and microtubule; however, mammalian ortholog of Drosophila Cos2 remained to
be identified. Here we identified and characterized human ortholog of Drosophila 
Cos2 by using bioinformatics. Full-length Drosophila Cos2 was most homologous to 
human KIF27, followed by mouse Kif7, and other KIF family members. KIF27 gene at 
human chromosome 9q22.1 and KIF7 gene at human chromosome 15q26.1 were paralogs
within the human genome. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that KIF27, Kif7, KIF4A, 
KIF4B and KIF21A constitute the KIF27 subfamily among mammalian Kinesin family.
Drosophila Cos2 protein consists of Kinesin motor (KISc) domain, Ci-binding
domain, and Smo-binding domain. KIF27 itself shared the common domain structure
with Drosophila Cos2, while other members of KIF27 subfamily shared partial
domain structure with Drosophila Cos2. These facts indicate that KIF27 is one of 
mammalian orthologs for Drosophila Cos2.

PMID: 15547729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Development. 2004 Nov;131(22):5581-90. Epub 2004 Oct 20.

Spatial pattern of sonic hedgehog signaling through Gli genes during cerebellum
development.

Corrales JD(1), Rocco GL, Blaess S, Guo Q, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, 540 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

The cerebellum consists of a highly organized set of folia that are largely
generated postnatally during expansion of the granule cell precursor (GCP) pool. 
Since the secreted factor sonic hedgehog (Shh) is expressed in Purkinje cells and
functions as a GCP mitogen in vitro, it is possible that Shh influences foliation
during cerebellum development by regulating the position and/or size of lobes. We
studied how Shh and its transcriptional mediators, the Gli proteins, regulate GCP
proliferation in vivo, and tested whether they influence foliation. We
demonstrate that Shh expression correlates spatially and temporally with
foliation. Expression of the Shh target gene Gli1 is also highest in the anterior
medial cerebellum, but is restricted to proliferating GCPs and Bergmann glia. By 
contrast, Gli2 is expressed uniformly in all cells in the developing cerebellum
except Purkinje cells and Gli3 is broadly expressed along the anteroposterior
axis. Whereas Gli mutants have a normal cerebellum, Gli2 mutants have greatly
reduced foliation at birth and a decrease in GCPs. In a complementary study using
transgenic mice, we show that overexpressing Shh in the normal domain does not
grossly alter the basic foliation pattern, but does lead to prolonged
proliferation of GCPs and an increase in the overall size of the cerebellum.
Taken together, these studies demonstrate that positive Shh signaling through
Gli2 is required to generate a sufficient number of GCPs for proper lobe growth.

PMID: 15496441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2005 Jan;42(1):82-6.

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia in a patient with Greig cephalopolysyndactyly and
interstitial deletion of chromosome 7 del(7)(p11.2 p14) involving the GLI3 and
ZNFN1A1 genes.

Mendoza-Londono R(1), Kashork CD, Shaffer LG, Krance R, Plon SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, USA.

Greig cephalopolysyndactyly (GCPS; OMIM 175700) is an autosomal dominant
condition caused by mutations of the gene GLI3, located on 7p13. To date, several
cases of deletions and/or translocations involving this locus have been reported 
in patients with GCPS. GLI3 is a transcription factor from the GLI-Kruppel gene
family that has been implicated in three distinct entities: GCPS, Pallister-Hall 
syndrome, and postaxial polydactyly type A. The zinc finger protein, subfamily 1,
member 1 gene (ZNFN1A1; OMIM 603023), on 7p12, codes for a lymphoid-restricted
zinc finger transcription factor, ZNFN1A1, also called IKAROS, that regulates
lymphocyte differentiation and has been associated with the development of
childhood leukemia. We present the case of a 9-year-old Latin-American boy who
was referred for stem cell transplantation because of recurrent acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). On evaluation, he was found to have dysmorphic
features consistent with GCPS, including a prominent forehead, down-slanting
palpebral fissures, 1-2-3 toe syndactyly, broad thumbs and first toes, and mild
developmental delay. He had developed ALL at 5 years of age. Chromosome analysis 
of bone marrow and fibroblastic cells showed an interstitial deletion of
chromosome arm 7p, del(7)(p11.2p14), in 74% and 44% of the cells, respectively.
We performed FISH analysis with a BAC clone containing the ZNFN1A1 gene and
demonstrated that it is contained in the deleted segment. To our knowledge, this 
is the first report of a patient with GCPS and leukemia. We hypothesize that
constitutional deletion of the ZNFN1A1 gene in this patient may have resulted in 
an increased risk of lymphoid malignancy.

PMID: 15390181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Dev Biol. 2004 Sep 15;273(2):257-75.

Sonic hedgehog-patched Gli signaling in the developing rat prostate gland:
lobe-specific suppression by neonatal estrogens reduces ductal growth and
branching.

Pu Y(1), Huang L, Prins GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, College of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

While prostate gland development is dependent on androgens, other hormones
including retinoids and estrogens can influence this process. Brief exposure to
high-dose estrogen during the neonatal period in rats leads to permanent,
lobe-specific aberrations in the prostate gland, a phenomenon referred to as
developmental estrogenization. We have previously shown that this response is
mediated through alterations in steroid receptor expression; however, further
downstream mechanisms remain unclear. Herein, we examined Sonic hedgehog
(Shh)-patched (ptc)-gli in the developing rat prostate gland, its role in
branching morphogenesis, and the effects of neonatal estrogens on its expression 
and localization to determine whether a disturbance in this signaling pathway is 
involved in mediating the estrogenized phenotype. Shh was expressed in epithelial
cells at the distal tips of elongating ducts in discreet, heterogeneous foci,
while ptc and gli1-3 were expressed in the adjacent mesenchymal cells in the
developing gland. The addition of Shh protein to cultured neonatal prostates
reduced ductal growth and branching, decreased Fgf10 transcript, and increased
Bmp4 expression in the adjacent mesenchyme. Shh-induced growth suppression was
reversed by exogenous Fgf10, but not noggin, indicating that Fgf10 suppression is
the proximate cause of the growth inhibition. A model is proposed to show how
highly localized Shh expression along with regulation of downstream morphogens
participates in dichotomous branching during prostate morphogenesis. Neonatal
exposure to high-dose estradiol suppressed Shh, ptc, gli1, and gli3 expressions
and concomitantly blocked ductal branching in the dorsal and lateral prostate
lobes specifically. In contrast, ventral lobe branching and Shh-ptc-gli
expression were minimally affected by estrogen exposure. Organ culture studies
with lateral prostates confirmed that estradiol suppressed Shh-ptc-gli expression
directly at the prostatic level. Taken together, the present findings indicate
that lobe-specific decreases in Shh-ptc-gli expression are involved in mediating 
estradiol-induced suppression of dorsal and lateral lobe ductal growth and
branching during prostate morphogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2978068
PMID: 15328011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Cell. 2004 Aug 20;118(4):517-28.

Evidence for an expansion-based temporal Shh gradient in specifying vertebrate
digit identities.

Harfe BD(1), Scherz PJ, Nissim S, Tian H, McMahon AP, Tabin CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Florida
College of Medicine, 1600 SW Archer Road, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

The zone of polarizing activity (ZPA) in the posterior limb bud produces Sonic
Hedgehog (Shh) protein, which plays a critical role in establishing distinct
fates along the anterior-posterior axis. This activity has been modeled as a
concentration-dependent response to a diffusible morphogen. Using recombinase
base mapping in the mouse, we determine the ultimate fate of the Shh-producing
cells. Strikingly, the descendants of the Shh-producing cells encompass all cells
in the two most posterior digits and also contribute to the middle digit. Our
analysis suggests that, while specification of the anterior digits depends upon
differential concentrations of Shh, the length of time of exposure to Shh is
critical in the specification of the differences between the most posterior
digits. Genetic studies of the effects of limiting accessibility of Shh within
the limb support this model, in which the effect of the Shh morphogen is dictated
by a temporal as well as a spatial gradient.

PMID: 15315763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Cell. 2004 Aug 20;118(4):505-16.

Dynamic changes in the response of cells to positive hedgehog signaling during
mouse limb patterning.

Ahn S(1), Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.

In the vertebrate limb, the posteriorly located zone of polarizing activity (ZPA)
regulates digit identity through the morphogen Sonic Hedgehog (Shh). By
genetically marking Shh-responding cells in mice, we have addressed whether the
cumulative influence of positive Shh signaling over time and space reflects a
linear gradient of Shh responsiveness and whether Shh could play additional roles
in limb patterning. Our results show that all posterior limb mesenchyme cells, as
well as the ectoderm, respond to Shh from the ZPA and become the bone, muscle,
and skin of the posterior limb. Further, the readout of Shh activator function
integrated over time and space does not display a stable and linear gradient
along the A-P axis, as in a classical morphogen view. Finally, by fate mapping
Shh-responding cells in Gli2 and Gli3 mutant limbs, we demonstrate that a
specific level of positive Hh signaling is not required to specify digit
identities.

PMID: 15315762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Aug 24;101(34):12561-6. Epub 2004 Aug 16.

Inhibition of prostate cancer proliferation by interference with SONIC
HEDGEHOG-GLI1 signaling.

Sanchez P(1), Hernández AM, Stecca B, Kahler AJ, DeGueme AM, Barrett A, Beyna M, 
Datta MW, Datta S, Ruiz i Altaba A.

Author information: 
(1)Skirball Institute and Department of Cell Biology, New York University School 
of Medicine, 540 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Prostate cancer is the most common solid tumor in men, and it shares with all
cancers the hallmark of elevated, nonhomeostatic cell proliferation. Here we have
tested the hypothesis that the SONIC HEDGEHOG (SHH)-GLI signaling pathway is
implicated in prostate cancer. We report expression of SHH-GLI pathway components
in adult human prostate cancer, often with enhanced levels in tumors versus
normal prostatic epithelia. Blocking the pathway with cyclopamine or anti-SHH
antibodies inhibits the proliferation of GLI1+/PSA+ primary prostate tumor
cultures. Inversely, SHH can potentiate tumor cell proliferation, suggesting that
autocrine signaling may often sustain tumor growth. In addition, pathway blockade
in three metastatic prostate cancer cell lines with cyclopamine or through GLI1
RNA interference leads to inhibition of cell proliferation, suggesting
cell-autonomous pathway activation at different levels and showing an essential
role for GLI1 in human cells. Our data demonstrate the dependence of prostate
cancer on SHH-GLI function and suggest a novel therapeutic approach.

PMCID: PMC514658
PMID: 15314219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Dev Dyn. 2004 Sep;231(1):148-60.

Levels of Gli3 repressor correlate with Bmp4 expression and apoptosis during limb
development.

Bastida MF(1), Delgado MD, Wang B, Fallon JF, Fernandez-Teran M, Ros MA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Anatomía y Biología Celular, Universidad de Cantabria,
Santander, Spain.

Erratum in
    Dev Dyn. 2005 Aug;233(4):1613.

Removal of the posterior wing bud leads to massive apoptosis of the remaining
anterior wing bud mesoderm. We show here that this finding correlates with an
increase in the level of the repressor form of the Gli3 protein, due to the
absence of the Sonic hedgehog (Shh) protein signaling. Therefore, we used the
anterior wing bud mesoderm as a model system to analyze the relationship between 
the repressor form of Gli3 and apoptosis in the developing limb. With increased
Gli3R levels, we demonstrate a concomitant increase in Bmp4 expression and
signaling in the anterior mesoderm deprived of Shh signaling. Several
experimental approaches show that the apoptosis can be prevented by exogenous
Noggin, indicating that Bmp signaling mediates it. The analysis of Bmp4
expression in several mouse and chick mutations with defects in either expression
or processing of Gli3 indicates a correlation between the level of the repressor 
form of Gli3 and Bmp4 expression in the distal mesoderm. Our analysis adds new
insights into the way Shh differentially controls the processing of Gli3 and how,
subsequently, BMP4 expression may mediate cell survival or cell death in the
developing limb bud in a position-dependent manner.

PMID: 15305295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2004 Aug;45(8):2577-85.

Sonic hedgehog expression and role in healing corneal epithelium.

Saika S(1), Muragaki Y, Okada Y, Miyamoto T, Ohnishi Y, Ooshima A, Kao WW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Wakayama Medical University, Kimiidera, Japan.
shiyuza@wakayama-med.ac.jp

PURPOSE: To examine the expression pattern and roles of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) in
healing corneal epithelium.
METHODS: Immunofluorescent staining and Western blot analysis were used to detect
Shh, patched 1 (Ptc 1) receptors, and Gli transcription factors in corneal
epithelium of Wistar rats (n = 44) at various intervals after an epithelial
defect. Effects of exogenous Shh on cell proliferation and cyclin D1 expression
were determined in healing corneal epithelium of organ-cultured mouse eyes.
RESULTS: Uninjured rat corneal epithelium was not labeled by anti-Shh antibody,
but weakly positive for Ptc 1. Basal cells of limbal and conjunctival epithelia
were labeled by antibodies against Shh and Ptc 1. Shh protein was transiently
upregulated in limbal epithelium in 2 hours and was also transiently expressed in
the migrating corneal epithelium with its peak at 12 hours postdebridement. Such 
upregulation of Shh expression was associated with a transient nuclear
translocation of Gli-3 without lifting the suppression of cell proliferation in
migrating epithelium postdebridement in vivo. However, an addition of Shh protein
to culture medium resulted in nuclear accumulation of cyclin D1 and marked
acceleration of epithelial cell proliferation in migrating corneal epithelium of 
an organ-cultured mouse eye.
CONCLUSIONS: Corneal epithelial debridement causes a transient upregulation of
Shh expression and activation of Shh/Gli-3 signaling cascade in healing corneal
and limbal epithelia. Although exogenous Shh promotes epithelial cell
proliferation in corneal organ culture, its expression in migrating epithelium in
vivo does not counteract the suppression of cell proliferation at the early
healing phase of epithelium debridement.

PMID: 15277480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Development. 2004 Aug;131(15):3593-604. Epub 2004 Jun 23.

Transduction of graded Hedgehog signaling by a combination of Gli2 and Gli3
activator functions in the developing spinal cord.

Lei Q(1), Zelman AK, Kuang E, Li S, Matise MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Cell Biology, UMDNJ/Robert Wood Johnson Medical
School, 675 Hoes Lane, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

The three vertebrate Gli proteins play a central role in mediating Hedgehog
(Hh)-dependent cell fate specification in the developing spinal cord; however,
their individual contributions to this process have not been fully characterized.
In this paper, we have addressed this issue by examining patterning in the spinal
cord of Gli2;Gli3 double mutant embryos, and in chick embryos transfected with
dominant activator forms of Gli2 and Gli3. In double homozygotes, Gli1 is also
not expressed; thus, all Gli protein activities are absent in these mice. We show
that Gli3 contributes activator functions to ventral neuronal patterning, and
plays a redundant role with Gli2 in the generation of V3 interneurons. We also
show that motoneurons and three classes of ventral neurons are generated in the
ventral spinal cord in double mutants, but develop as intermingled rather than
discrete populations. Finally, we provide evidence that Gli2 and Gli3 activators 
control ventral neuronal patterning by regulating progenitor segregation. Thus,
multiple ventral neuronal types can develop in the absence of Gli function, but
require balanced Gli protein activities for their correct patterning and
differentiation.

PMID: 15215207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Science. 2004 Jun 11;304(5677):1669-72.

A dual role for Hox genes in limb anterior-posterior asymmetry.

Zákány J(1), Kmita M, Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Animal Biology and National Program Frontiers in
Genetics, University of Geneva, Sciences III, Quai Ernest Ansermet 30, 1211
Geneva 4, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Science. 2004 Jun 11;304(5677):1610-1.

Anterior-to-posterior patterning, the process whereby our digits are differently 
shaped, is a key aspect of limb development. It depends on the localized
expression in posterior limb bud of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and the morphogenetic
potential of its diffusing product. By using an inversion of and a large
deficiency in the mouse HoxD cluster, we found that a perturbation in the early
collinear expression of Hoxd11, Hoxd12, and Hoxd13 in limb buds led to a loss of 
asymmetry. Ectopic Hox gene expression triggered abnormal Shh transcription,
which in turn induced symmetrical expression of Hox genes in digits, thereby
generating double posterior limbs. We conclude that early posterior restriction
of Hox gene products sets up an anterior-posterior prepattern, which determines
the localized activation of Shh. This signal is subsequently translated into
digit morphological asymmetry by promoting the late expression of Hoxd genes, two
collinear processes relying on opposite genomic topographies, upstream and
downstream Shh signaling.

PMID: 15192229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Science. 2004 Jun 11;304(5677):1610-1.

Developmental biology. Hox genes in the limb: a play in two acts.

Deschamps J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, Uppsalalaan 8, 3584CT Utrecht, Netherlands.
jacqueli@niob.knaw.nl

Comment on
    Science. 2004 Jun 11;304(5677):1669-72.

PMID: 15192209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Dev Biol. 2004 Jun 1;270(1):214-31.

Sonic hedgehog signaling regulates Gli3 processing, mesenchymal proliferation,
and differentiation during mouse lung organogenesis.

Li Y(1), Zhang H, Choi SC, Litingtung Y, Chiang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, TN 37232-8240, USA.

Lack of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling, mediated by the Gli proteins, leads to
severe pulmonary hypoplasia. However, the precise role of Gli genes in lung
development is not well established. We show Shh signaling prevents Gli3
proteolysis to generate its repressor forms (Gli3R) in the developing murine
lung. In Shh(-/-) or cyclopamine-treated wild-type (WT) lung, we found that Gli3R
level is elevated, and this upregulation appears to contribute to defects in
proliferation and differentiation observed in the Shh(-/-) mesenchyme, where Gli3
is normally expressed. In agreement, we found Shh(-/-);Gli3(-/-) lungs exhibit
enhanced growth potential. Vasculogenesis is also enhanced; in contrast,
bronchial myogenesis remains absent in Shh(-/-);Gli3(-/-) compared with Shh(-/-) 
lungs. Genes upregulated in Shh(-/-);Gli3(-/-) relative to Shh(-/-) lung include 
Wnt2 and, surprisingly, Foxf1 whose expression has been reported to be
Shh-dependent. Cyclins D1, D2, and D3 antibody labelings also reveal distinct
expression patterns in the normal and mutant lungs. We found significant
repression of Tbx2 and Tbx3, both linked to inhibition of cellular senescence, in
Shh(-/-) and partial derepression in Shh(-/-); Gli3(-/-) lungs, while Tbx4 and
Tbx5 expressions are less affected in the mutants. Our findings shed light on the
role of Shh signaling on Gli3 processing in lung growth and differentiation by
regulating several critical genes.

PMID: 15136151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Development. 2004 May;131(10):2339-47. Epub 2004 Apr 21.

Direct interaction with Hoxd proteins reverses Gli3-repressor function to promote
digit formation downstream of Shh.

Chen Y(1), Knezevic V, Ervin V, Hutson R, Ward Y, Mackem S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pathology, Center for Cancer Research, NCI, NIH, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling regulates both digit number and identity, but how 
different distinct digit types (identities) are specified remains unclear. Shh
regulates digit formation largely by preventing cleavage of the Gli3
transcription factor to a repressor form that shuts off expression of Shh target 
genes. The functionally redundant 5'Hoxd genes regulate digit pattern downstream 
of Shh and Gli3, through as yet unknown targets. Enforced expression of any of
several 5'Hoxd genes causes polydactyly of different distinct digit types with
posterior transformations in a Gli3(+) background, whereas, in Gli3 null limbs,
polydactylous digits are all similar, short and dysmorphic, even though
endogenous 5'Hoxd genes are broadly misexpressed. We show that Hoxd12 interacts
genetically and physically with Gli3, and can convert the Gli3 repressor into an 
activator of Shh target genes. Several 5'Hoxd genes, expressed differentially
across the limb bud, interact physically with Gli3. We propose that a varying
[Gli3]:[total Hoxd] ratio across the limb bud leads to differential activation of
Gli3 target genes and contributes to the regulation of digit pattern. The
resulting altered balance between 'effective' Gli3 activating and repressing
functions may also serve to extend the Shh activity gradient spatially or
temporally.

PMID: 15102708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Gene. 2004 Apr 14;330:101-14.

Expression of the PTCH1 tumor suppressor gene is regulated by alternative
promoters and a single functional Gli-binding site.

Agren M(1), Kogerman P, Kleman MI, Wessling M, Toftgård R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience at NOVUM, Center for Nutrition and Toxicology,
Karolinska Institute, Huddinge 141 57, Sweden.

The PTCH1 tumor suppressor gene encodes a receptor for secreted hedgehog (HH)
ligands and is important for proper proliferation, differentiation and patterning
in almost every tissue and organ during embryogenesis. The PTCH1 protein works as
a negative regulator of the HH-signaling pathway by repressing downstream
signaling by the coreceptor smoothened (SMOH). Mutations in PTCH1 lead to
constitutive expression of HH target genes and a relationship between mutated
PTCH1 and the most common tumor form in the Western world, Basal Cell Carcinoma
(BCC) has been clearly established. We here show that PTCH1 is transcriptionally 
regulated by three independent promoters generating transcripts with alternative 
first exons. We demonstrate that only one of two putative Gli-binding sites that 
were identified in the promoter region of PTCH1 is functional, and that the
transactivating Gli proteins, GLI1, Gli2 and GLI3, bind and enhance transcription
through this site. Moreover, a strong repression of both basal and induced PTCH1 
transcription was observed following expression of a truncated version of GLI3.
Most interestingly, the upstream components in the HH-signaling cascade, Sonic HH
(SHH) and SMOH, solely operate through the functional Gli-binding site because
mutation of the Gli-binding site resulted in the disappearance of the enhanced
transcription induced by the Gli proteins, as well as by SHH or SMOH. This
finding suggests that transcriptional activation of the PTCH1 gene mediated via
the HH-signaling pathway is dependent on the single functional Gli-binding site.

PMID: 15087129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Cancer Lett. 2004 Apr 30;207(2):205-14.

Functional Smoothened is required for expression of GLI3 in colorectal carcinoma 
cells.

Zhu Y(1), James RM, Peter A, Lomas C, Cheung F, Harrison DJ, Bader SA.

Author information: 
(1)Sir Alastair Currie Cancer Research UK Laboratories, Division of Pathology,
Molecular Medicine Centre, University of Edinburgh, Western General Hospital,
Edinburgh EH4 2XU, UK.

We investigated a role for Hedgehog signalling in colon cancer by studying
transcription of members of the pathway in human colorectal carcinoma cell lines.
We determined the methylation status and screened the gene encoding the Hedgehog 
receptor-associated protein Smoothened (SMO) for putative mutations. In three
cell lines lacking SMO expression the SMO promoter was fully methylated and the
transcription factor GLI3 was not expressed. Two additional cell lines both
having one methylated SMO allele and expressing mutant SMO did not express GLI3. 
Our results suggest that expression of wild-type SMO is required for expression
of GLI3 by a mechanism that is independent of conventional Hedgehog signalling.

PMID: 15072830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Comp Neurol. 2004 May 3;472(3):292-307.

Loss of Gli3 and Shh function disrupts olfactory axon trajectories.

Balmer CW(1), LaMantia AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell & Molecular Physiology, Curriculum in Neurobiology and
University of North Carolina Neuroscience Center, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

The transcriptional regulator Gli3 and the secreted signal Shh influence
induction, patterning, and differentiation at several sites of
mesenchymal/epithelial (M/E) interaction including the limbs, heart, face, and
forebrain. We asked whether loss of function of these two genes has specific
consequences for early differentiation of the primary olfactory pathway-which
comprises both craniofacial and forebrain structures and depends on M/E induction
during initial stages of development. Loss of Gli3 or Shh function does not
compromise several aspects of olfactory receptor neuron (ORN) and olfactory
ensheathing cell maturation; however, directed outgrowth of ORN axons and their
initial targeting to the telencephalon is altered. In Gli3 mutant extra
toes-Jackson (Xt(J)Xt(J)) embryos, ORN axons defasciculate and project aberrantly
near the forebrain. They rarely enter the central nervous system, and their
association with mesenchymal laminin is disrupted. In Shh-/-embryos, ORN axons
exit a single olfactory epithelium (OE) that develops centrally within an altered
mesenchymal environment in a dysmorphic proboscis. These axons project as a
single nerve toward the mutant forebrain; however, their trajectory varies
according to the position of the proboscis relative to the forebrain. These
alterations in axon outgrowth probably reflect compromised inductive interactions
in the olfactory primordia because neither Gli3 nor Shh are expressed in
olfactory neurons. Thus, two genes that influence induction and subsequent
differentiation of craniofacial structures and the forebrain have distinct
consequences for ORN axon growth during the initial genesis of the olfactory
pathway.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15065125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Hum Genet. 2004 Mar;114(4):403.

Gene symbol: GLI3. Disease: Pallister-Hall syndrome.

Kalff-Suske M(1), Paparidis Z, Bornholdt D, Cole T, Kalff-Suske M, Grzeschik KH.

Author information: 
(1)Philipps-Universitaet Marburg, Institut fuer Humangenetik, Germany.
kalffsus@staff.uni-marburg.de

PMID: 15046066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Dev Dyn. 2004 Apr;229(4):722-32.

Sonic hedgehog signaling plays an essential role during embryonic salivary gland 
epithelial branching morphogenesis.

Jaskoll T(1), Leo T, Witcher D, Ormestad M, Astorga J, Bringas P Jr, Carlsson P, 
Melnick M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Developmental Genetics, USC, Los Angeles, California
90089-0641, USA. tjaskoll@usc.edu

Gene targeting studies indicate that sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling plays an
essential role during craniofacial development. Because numerous mandibular
derivatives (e.g., teeth, tongue, Meckel's cartilage) are absent in Shh null mice
and the embryonic submandibular salivary gland (SMG) develops from the mandibular
arch, we postulated that Shh signaling is important for embryonic SMG
development. To address this question, we first determined the spatiotemporal
distribution of Shh; two transmembrane proteins, patched 1 (Ptc) and Smoothened
(Smo), which act as a negative or a positive regulator of the Shh signal,
respectively; and the Gli 3 transcription factor, which is downstream of the Shh 
signal. The epithelial localization of Shh, Ptc, Smo, and Gli 3 suggests that Shh
signaling may act within the epithelium in a juxtacrine manner. The SMG phenotype
in our embryonic day (E) 18.5 Shh null mice can be characterized as
"paedomorphic," that is, it fails to progress to ontogenic stages beyond the
Early Pseudoglandular ( approximately E14). In a complementary set of
experiments, we used organ culture to evaluate the effect of enhanced or
abrogated Shh signaling on embryonic SMG development in vitro. Paired E13 (Late
Initial Bud stage) or E14 (Pseudoglandular stage) SMGs were cultured in the
presence or absence of exogenous Shh peptide supplementation; Shh-supplemented
explants exhibit a significant stage-dependent increase in branching
morphogenesis compared with control explants. Furthermore, by using cyclopamine, 
a steroidal alkaloid that specifically disrupts the Shh pathway, to abrogate
endogenous Shh signaling in vitro, we found a significant decrease in branching
in cyclopamine-treated explants compared with controls, as well as a significant 
decrease in epithelial cell proliferation. Our results indicate that Shh
signaling plays an essential role during embryonic SMG branching morphogenesis.
Exogenous FGF8 peptide supplementation in vitro rescues the abnormal SMG
phenotype seen in cyclopamine-treated explants, demonstrating that overexpression
of a parallel, but related, downstream signaling pathway can compensate for
diminished Shh signaling and restore embryonic SMG branching morphogenesis.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15042696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Congenit Anom (Kyoto). 2004 Mar;44(1):27-32.

Sonic hedgehog expression in Gli3 depressed mouse embryo, Pdn/Pdn.

Ueta E(1), Maekawa M, Morimoto I, Nanba E, Naruse I.

Author information: 
(1)School of Health Science, Faculty of Medicine, Tottori University, Yonago,
Japan.

The phenotype of the genetic polydactyly/arhinencephaly mouse (Pdn/Pdn) is
similar to Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS), which is induced by
mutation of GLI3. Suppression of Gli3 gene expression has been observed in
Pdn/Pdn. Thus, the gene responsible for Pdn/Pdn has been considered to be Gli3.
Recently, the mutation point was demarcated, that is, a transposon was inserted
into intron 3 of the Gli3 gene in the Pdn mouse. Forward and reverse primers were
constructed in intron 3 near the insertion point. A forward primer in the long
terminal repeat region of the transposon was also constructed. Now we can
discriminate +/+, Pdn/+, Pdn/Pdn embryos from the PCR products. After genotyping 
of the Pdn embryos, Gli3 and other correlated gene expressions, such as sonic
hedgehog (Shh), Bmp-2, Bmp-4, ptc-1, were analyzed by real-time PCR method. Gli3 
gene expression in Pdn/Pdn was suppressed to 20-30% of +/+, and that in Pdn/+ was
about 60% of +/+ through all the embryonic and neonatal periods examined. As Shh 
has been considered to be an antagonist of Gli3, Shh expression was analyzed, and
a difference among genotypes was observed only on day 9 of gestation. We could
not detect any alterations among genotypes in other gene expressions examined.
Gli3 and Shh gene expression were also analyzed on day 9 by whole-mount in situ
hybridization in the +/+ and Pdn/Pdn embryos. Neuroectoderm was positive by Gli3 
probe in +/+ but not in Pdn/Pdn. Notochord, floor plate and prechordal mesoderm
were positive by Shh probe both in +/+ and Pdn/Pdn embryos, but ectopic and/or
over-expression of Shh were not observed in Pdn/Pdn embryos.

PMID: 15008897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Plant J. 2004 Feb;37(4):617-25.

Glycerol-insensitive Arabidopsis mutants: gli1 seedlings lack glycerol kinase,
accumulate glycerol and are more resistant to abiotic stress.

Eastmond PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)CNAP, Department of Biology, University of York, York YO10 5YW, UK.
pje4@york.ac.uk

The aim of this study was to investigate the process of glycerol catabolism in
germinating Arabidopsis seed. A genetic screen was performed to isolate
glycerol-insensitive (gli) mutant seedlings. Three separate mutant loci were
identified (gli1, gli2 and gli3). Of these, only gli1 is unable to utilise
glycerol. Following germination, gli1 seedlings transiently accumulate glycerol
derived from the breakdown of storage oil and are more resistant to hyperosmotic 
stress, salt stress, oxidative stress, freezing and desiccation. Enzyme assays
revealed that gli1 lacks glycerol kinase activity. GLI1 mapped to chromosome 1
near the putative glycerol kinase gene NHO1. Mutations in this gene were
identified in three independent gli1 alleles. A cDNA encoding GLI1 was cloned and
its function was proven by complementation of an Escherichia coli glycerol kinase
(glpK) deletion strain. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis showed that GLI1 is
expressed in all tissues, but is transiently upregulated during early
post-germinative growth and leaf senescence. These data show that glycerol kinase
is required for glycerol catabolism in Arabidopsis and that the accumulation of
glycerol can enhance resistance to a variety of abiotic stresses associated with 
dehydration.

PMID: 14756771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Dev Cell. 2004 Jan;6(1):103-15.

All mouse ventral spinal cord patterning by hedgehog is Gli dependent and
involves an activator function of Gli3.

Bai CB(1), Stephen D, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, and Department of Cell Biology, New York
University School of Medicine, 540 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

An important question is how the gradient of Hedgehog is interpreted by cells at 
the level of the Gli transcription factors. The full range of Gli activity and
its dependence on Hh have not been determined, although the Gli2 activator and
Gli3 repressor have been implicated. Using the spinal cord as a model system, we 
demonstrate that Gli3 can transduce Hedgehog signaling as an activator. All
expression of the Hh target gene Gli1 is dependent on both Gli2 and Gli3. Unlike 
Gli2, however, Gli3 requires endogenous Gli1 for induction of floor plate and V3 
interneurons. Strikingly, embryos lacking all Gli function develop motor neurons 
and three ventral interneuron subtypes, similar to embryos lacking Hh signaling
and Gli3. Therefore, in the spinal cord all Hh signaling is Gli dependent.
Furthermore, a combination of Gli2 and Gli3 is required to regulate motor neuron 
development and spatial patterning of ventral spinal cord progenitors.

PMID: 14723851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Genes Cells. 2004 Jan;9(1):49-58.

The G12 family of heterotrimeric G proteins and Rho GTPase mediate Sonic hedgehog
signalling.

Kasai K(1), Takahashi M, Osumi N, Sinnarajah S, Takeo T, Ikeda H, Kehrl JH, Itoh 
G, Arnheiter H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Aichi Medical University School of Medicine,
Nagakute, Aichi 480-1195, Japan. kkasai@amugw.aichi-med-u.ac.jp

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is a secreted morphogen crucial for cell fate decision,
cellular proliferation, and patterning during vertebrate development. The
intracellular Shh signalling is transduced by Smoothened (Smo), a
seven-transmembrane spanning protein that belongs to the G-protein coupled
receptor family. Among four families of Galpha subunits, Galphai has been thought
to be responsible for transducing Shh signalling, while several lines of evidence
indicated that other signalling pathways may be involved. We found that the G12
family of heterotrimeric G proteins and the small GTPase RhoA are involved in
Shh/Smo-mediated cellular responses, including stimulation of target gene
promoter and inhibition of neurite outgrowth of neuroblastoma cells. We also
found that the G12/RhoA pathway is responsible for Smo-induced nuclear import of 
GLI3 which is thought to transduce Shh signals to nucleus. Furthermore,
misexpression of a G12-specific GTPase-activating protein in rat neural tubes
leads to pertubation of motor neurone and interneurone development, mimicking the
effects of decreased Shh signalling. These results show that Shh signalling is
mediated in part by activating G12 family coupled signalling pathways. The
participation of RhoA, a pivotal molecular switch in many signal transduction
pathways, may help explain how Shh can trigger a variety of cellular responses.

PMID: 14723707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Am J Med Genet A. 2004 Jan 30;124A(3):296-302.

Gonadal mosaicism in severe Pallister-Hall syndrome.

Ng D(1), Johnston JJ, Turner JT, Boudreau EA, Wiggs EA, Theodore WH, Biesecker
LG.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Disease Research Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute,
NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4472, USA. davidng@nhgri.nih.gov

Erratum in
    Am J Med Genet A. 2005 Jul 15;136(2):225.

Pallister-Hall syndrome (PHS, MIM #146510) is characterized by central and
postaxial polydactyly, hypothalamic hamartoma (HH), bifid epiglottis, imperforate
anus, renal abnormalities, and pulmonary segmentation anomalies. It is inherited 
in an autosomal dominant pattern. Here, we describe a family with two affected
children manifesting severe PHS with mental retardation, behavioral problems, and
intractable seizures. Both parents are healthy, with normal intelligence, and
have no malformations on physical, laryngoscopic, and cranial MRI exam. The
atypical presentation of these children and the absence of parental
manifestations suggested an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance or gonadal
mosaicism. Sequencing of GLI3 revealed a two nucleotide deletion in exon 15
(c.3385_3386delTT) predicting a frameshift and premature stop at codon 1129
(p.F1129X) in the children while both parents have wild type alleles. Genotyping 
with GLI3 intragenic markers revealed that both children inherited the abnormal
allele from their mother thus supporting gonadal mosaicism as the underlying
mechanism of inheritance (paternity was confirmed). This is the first reported
case of gonadal mosaicism in PHS. The severe CNS manifestations of these children
are reminiscent of children with non-syndromic HH who often have progressive
mental retardation with behavioral problems and intractable seizures. We conclude
that the phenotypic spectrum of PHS can include severe CNS manifestations and
that recurrence risks for PHS should include a proviso for gonadal mosaicism,
though the frequency cannot be calculated from a single case report. Published
2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14708104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Development. 2004 Jan;131(2):337-45. Epub 2003 Dec 17.

Hedgehog-GLI signaling regulates the behavior of cells with stem cell properties 
in the developing neocortex.

Palma V(1), Ruiz i Altaba A.

Author information: 
(1)The Skirball Institute and Department of Cell Biology, NYU School of Medicine,
540 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Stem cells are crucial for normal development and homeostasis, and their
misbehavior may be related to the origin of cancer. Progress in these areas has
been difficult because the mechanisms regulating stem cell lineages are not well 
understood. Here, we have investigated the role of the SHH-GLI pathway in the
developing mouse neocortex. The results show that SHH signaling endogenously
regulates the number of embryonic and postnatal mouse neocortical cells with stem
cell properties, and controls precursor proliferation in a
concentration-dependent manner in cooperation with EGF signaling. These findings 
identify a crucial mechanism for the regulation of the number of cells with stem 
cell properties that is unexpectedly conserved in different stem cell niches.

PMID: 14681189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Am J Med Genet A. 2003 Dec 15;123A(3):236-42.

Clinical and molecular delineation of the Greig cephalopolysyndactyly contiguous 
gene deletion syndrome and its distinction from acrocallosal syndrome.

Johnston JJ(1), Olivos-Glander I, Turner J, Aleck K, Bird LM, Mehta L, Schimke
RN, Heilstedt H, Spence JE, Blancato J, Biesecker LG.

Author information: 
(1)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS) is caused by haploinsufficiency of
GLI3 on 7p13. Features of GCPS include polydactyly, macrocephaly, and
hypertelorism, and may be associated with cognitive deficits and abnormalities of
the corpus callosum. GLI3 mutations in GCPS patients include point, frameshift,
translocation, and gross deletion mutations. FISH and STRP analyses were applied 
to 34 patients with characteristics of GCPS. Deletions were identified in 11
patients and the extent of their deletion was determined. Nine patients with
deletions had mental retardation (MR) or developmental delay (DD) and were
classified as severe GCPS. These severe GCPS patients have manifestations that
overlap with the acrocallosal syndrome (ACLS). The deletion breakpoints were
analyzed in six patients whose deletions ranged in size from 151 kb to 10.6 Mb.
Junction fragments were found to be distinct with no common sequences flanking
the breakpoints. We conclude that patients with GCPS caused by large deletions
that include GLI3 are likely to have cognitive deficits, and we hypothesize that 
this severe GCPS phenotype is caused by deletion of contiguous genes.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14608643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Development. 2003 Dec;130(25):6233-43. Epub 2003 Nov 5.

Interplays of Gli2 and Gli3 and their requirement in mediating Shh-dependent
sclerotome induction.

Buttitta L(1), Mo R, Hui CC, Fan CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Embryology, Carnegie Institution of Washington, 115 West
University Parkway, Baltimore, MD 21210, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling is essential for sclerotome development in the
mouse. Gli2 and Gli3 are thought to be the primary transcriptional mediators of
Shh signaling; however, their roles in Shh induction of sclerotomal genes have
not been investigated. Using a combination of mutant analysis and in vitro
explant assays, we demonstrate that Gli2 and Gli3 are required for Shh-dependent 
sclerotome induction. Gli2(-/-)Gli3(-/-) embryos exhibit a severe loss of
sclerotomal gene expression, and somitic mesoderm from these embryos cannot
activate sclerotomal genes in response to exogenous Shh. We find that one copy of
either Gli2 or Gli3 is required to mediate Shh induction of sclerotomal markers
Pax1 and Pax9 in vivo and in vitro. Although Gli2 is generally considered an
activator and Gli3 a repressor, our results also reveal a repressor function for 
Gli2 and an activator function for Gli3 in the developing somite. To further
dissect the function of each Gli, we used adenovirus to overexpress Gli1, Gli2
and Gli3 in presomitic mesoderm explants. We find that each Gli preferentially
activates a distinct set of Shh target genes, suggesting that the functions of
Shh in patterning, growth and negative feedback are divided preferentially
between different Gli proteins in the somite.

PMID: 14602680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Development. 2003 Dec;130(24):6037-47.

Replicated anterior zeugopod (raz): a polydactylous mouse mutant with lowered Shh
signaling in the limb bud.

Krebs O(1), Schreiner CM, Scott WJ Jr, Bell SM, Robbins DJ, Goetz JA, Alt H,
Hawes N, Wolf E, Favor J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Animal Breeding and Biotechnology, Gene Center,
Ludwig-Maximilian University, Munich, Germany. krebs@lmb.uni-muenchen.de

A unique limb phenotype is described in a radiation-induced mutant mouse
resulting from an inversion of a proximal segment of chromosome 5. The limb
phenotype in the homozygous mutant presents with two anterior skeletal elements
in the zeugopod but no posterior bone, hence the name replicated anterior
zeugopod, raz. The zeugopod phenotype is accompanied by symmetrical central
polydactyly of hand and foot. The chromosomal inversion includes the Shh gene and
the regulatory locus, located approximately 1 Mb away, within the Lmbr1 gene. In 
homozygous mutants, the expression of Shh mRNA and Shh protein is severely
downregulated to about 20% of wild-type limb buds, but Shh expression appears
normal throughout the remainder of the embryo. Correspondingly, Gli3 expression
is upregulated and posteriorly expanded in the raz/raz limb bud. We propose that 
the double anterior zeugopod and symmetrical central polydactyly are due to an
increased and uniform concentration of the Gli3 repressor form because of lowered
Shh signaling.

PMID: 14597572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Comp Neurol. 2003 Nov 24;466(4):545-53.

Paleocortex is specified in mice in which dorsal telencephalic patterning is
severely disrupted.

Vyas A(1), Saha B, Lai E, Tole S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research,
Mumbai 400005, India.

The patterning of the telencephalon is regulated by the concerted action of
distinct mechanisms operating in different portions of this structure. Although
much progress has been made in understanding the mechanisms underlying the
specification of dorsal and ventral structures, little is known about the
specification of the paleocortex, the olfactory cortex located at the interface
of the dorsal and ventral telencephalon. The paleocortex is thought to be a
dorsal, cortical structure, derived from the lateral extreme of the dorsal
telencephalon. We examined mutant mice in which dorsal telencephalic patterning
is severely disrupted, to ask how these perturbations affect the paleocortex. In 
the Lhx2-/- telencephalon, where the cortex is greatly shrunken such that medial 
and dorsal cortical tissue is undetectable, normal expression of several
paleocortical markers is observed. The Gli3-/- telencephalon, where the dorsal
telencephalon is ventralized, also displays paleocortical markers. In contrast,
when the ventral telencephalon is almost completely deleted, such as in the
BF1-/- brain, paleocortical markers are undetectable. These results indicate that
the specification of the paleocortex can occur in spite of drastic perturbations 
of dorsal patterning. Furthermore, in the Lhx2 mutant, the paleocortex is
juxtaposed to an expanded and mislocated source of Wnt and Bmp signaling, the
cortical hem, whereas, in the Gli3 mutant, paleocortical markers arise even
though the cortical hem is missing. This indicates that an increase or decrease
in cues from this dorsal signaling center does not disrupt the specification of
the paleocortex. Finally, by using an in vitro assay, we found that isolated
explants of lateral telencephalon up-regulate normal expression of paleocortical 
markers when maintained in vitro, from as early as embryonic day (E) 10.5.
Together, the results reveal that, although the paleocortex is considered to be a
cortical structure, it is specified even when dorsal telencephalic patterning is 
grossly perturbed. Furthermore, our in vitro data reveal that, if mechanisms
outside the lateral telencephalon are involved in the specification of the
paleocortex, they must act extremely early, prior to E10.5.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14566948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2003 Oct;13(5):513-21.

The emergent design of the neural tube: prepattern, SHH morphogen and GLI code.

Ruiz i Altaba A(1), Nguyên V, Palma V.

Author information: 
(1)The Skirball Institute, New York University School of Medicine, New York, New 
York 10016, USA. ria@saturn.med.nyu.edu

The Sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway plays an important role in the development of
many tissues and organs. The secreted ligand Shh has been shown to act as a
mitogen, morphogen and survival factor in different contexts whereas the three
Gli transcription factors act as Shh mediators in a context-dependent
combinatorial fashion. The common wisdom has been that Gli protein function is
subject to Shh signaling. One can ask how Gli proteins act and what the nature of
Shh signaling during CNS dorsal-ventral patterning is. Is it possible that
Hedgehog signals are only one of several ways to regulate Gli activity? Moreover,
in light of the partial rescue of the neural tube phenotype of Shh or Smoothened 
mutant embryos in Shh(-/-);Gli3(-/-), Smoothened(-/-);Gli3(-/-), and
Shh(-/-);Rab23(-/-) double null embryos, one can consider the roles that the
Shh-Gli pathway may have taken to orchestrate congruent prepattern and growth,
and the importance of creating the correct number of precursors in patterning
mechanisms.

PMID: 14550418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today. 2003 May;69(2):102-22.

Morphogenesis and dysmorphogenesis of the appendicular skeleton.

Shum L(1), Coleman CM, Hatakeyama Y, Tuan RS.

Author information: 
(1)Cartilage Biology and Orthopaedics Branch, National Institute of Arthritis and
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Building 50,
Room 1503, MSC 8022, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Cartilage patterning and differentiation are prerequisites for skeletal
development through endochondral ossification (EO). Multipotential mesenchymal
cells undergo a complex process of cell fate determination to become
chondroprogenitors and eventually differentiate into chondrocytes. These
developmental processes require the orchestration of cell-cell and cell-matrix
interactions. In this review, we present limb bud development as a model for
cartilage patterning and differentiation. We summarize the molecular and cellular
events and signaling pathways for axis patterning, cell condensation, cell fate
determination, digit formation, interdigital apoptosis, EO, and joint formation. 
The interconnected nature of these pathways underscores the effects of genetic
and teratogenic perturbations that result in skeletal birth defects. The topics
reviewed also include limb dysmorphogenesis as a result of genetic disorders and 
environmental factors, including FGFR, GLI3, GDF5/CDMP1, Sox9, and Cbfa1
mutations, as well as thalidomide- and alcohol-induced malformations.
Understanding the complex interactions involved in cartilage development and EO
provides insight into mechanisms underlying the biology of normal cartilage,
congenital disorders, and pathologic adult cartilage.

PMID: 12955856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Dev Biol. 2003 Aug 15;260(2):484-95.

A disrupted balance between Bmp/Wnt and Fgf signaling underlies the
ventralization of the Gli3 mutant telencephalon.

Kuschel S(1), Rüther U, Theil T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Animal Developmental and Molecular Biology,
Heinrich-Heine-University, D-40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.

Regionalization of the neural plate and the early neural tube is controlled by
several signaling centers that direct the generation of molecularly distinct
domains. In the developing telencephalon, the anterior neural ridge (ANR) and the
roof and floor plate act as such organizing centers via the production of Fgfs,
Bmps/Wnts, and Shh, respectively. It remains largely unknown, however, how the
combination of these different signals is used to coordinate the generation of
different telencephalic territories. In the present study, we report on
telencephalic development in Pdn mutant mice, which carry an integration of a
retrotransposon in the Gli3 locus. Homozygous mutant animals are characterized by
a partial dorsal-to-ventral transformation of the telencephalon and by an
increased size of the septum. On a molecular level, these alterations correlate
with a reduction and/or loss of Bmp/Wnt expression and a concomitant expansion of
Fgf8 transcription. Finally, we provide evidence that the ectopic activation of
Fgf signaling in the dorsal telencephalon provides an explanation for the
ventralization of the Gli3 mutant telencephalon as application of Fgf8-soaked
beads to dorsal telencephalic explants led to the specific induction and
repression of ventral marker and dorsal marker genes, respectively.

PMID: 12921747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. EMBO Rep. 2003 Aug;4(8):761-5.

Gli proteins and the control of spinal-cord patterning.

Jacob J(1), Briscoe J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, National Institute for Medical
Research, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

The secreted protein sonic hedgehog (Shh) is crucial for the specification of
neuronal subtype identity in the vertebrate neural tube. Zinc-finger proteins of 
the Gli family are known to be transcriptional mediators of Shh signalling, and
to coordinately pattern the dorsal-ventral axis of the spinal cord. Recent
studies indicate that additional signals may provide positional information in
parallel to Shh to specify neuronal fate in this tissue. We review the role of
Gli proteins in spinal-cord development and propose that various upstream
patterning signals may be integrated by the Gli proteins to direct a coherent
programme of neurogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1326336
PMID: 12897799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Dev Biol. 2003 Jul 1;259(1):150-61.

Differential requirement for Gli2 and Gli3 in ventral neural cell fate
specification.

Motoyama J(1), Milenkovic L, Iwama M, Shikata Y, Scott MP, Hui CC.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuropathology Group, Brain Research Institute, RIKEN, 2-1 Hirosawa,
Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan. jun@brain.riken.go.jp

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) directs the development of ventral cell fates, including
floor plate and V3 interneurons, in the mouse neural tube. Here, we show that the
transcription factors Gli2 and Gli3, mediators of Shh signaling, are required for
the development of the ventral cell fates but make distinct contributions to
controlling cell fates at different locations along the rostral-caudal axis.
Mutants lacking Patched1 (Ptc1), the putative receptor of Shh, were used to
analyze Gli functions. Ptc1(-/-) mutants develop floor plate, motor neuron, and
V3 interneuron progenitors in lateral and dorsal regions, suggesting that the
normal role of Ptc1 is to suppress ventral cell development in dorsal neural
tube. The Ptc1(-/-) phenotype is rescued, with restoration of dorsal cell types, 
by the lack of Gli2, but only in the caudal neural tube. In triple mutants of
Gli2, Gli3, and Ptc1, dorsal and lateral cell fates are restored in the entire
neural tube. These observations suggest that Gli2 is essential for ventral
specification in the caudal neural tube, and that in more rostral regions, only
Gli3 can promote development of ventral cells if Gli2 is absent. Thus, Shh
signaling is mediated by overlapping but distinct functions of Gli2 and Gli3, and
their relative contributions vary along the rostral-caudal axis.

PMID: 12812795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Am J Med Genet A. 2003 Jul 1;120A(1):49-58.

Variable phenotype in Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome: clinical and
radiological findings in 4 independent families and 3 sporadic cases with
identified GLI3 mutations.

Debeer P(1), Peeters H, Driess S, De Smet L, Freese K, Matthijs G, Bornholdt D,
Devriendt K, Grzeschik KH, Fryns JP, Kalff-Suske M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Human Genetics, Herestraat 49, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium.
philippe.debeer@med.kuleuven.ac.be

Greig cephalopolysyndactyly (GCPS) (OMIM 175700) is an autosomal dominant
disorder characterized by a distinct combination of craniofacial, hand and foot
malformations. In this report, clinical and radiological findings of 12 patients 
with GCPS derived from 4 independent families and 3 sporadic cases with
documented GLI3 mutations are presented with particular emphasis on inter- and
intrafamilial variability. In a particularly instructive family in which 9
members of 4 generations could be studied clinically and molecularly, a missense 
mutation (R625W) is transmitted and shows a partially penetrant pattern. In a
branch of the family, the GCPS phenotype skips a generation via a normal female
carrier without clinical signs providing evidence that GCPS does not always
manifest full penetrance as generally supposed.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12794692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Br J Dermatol. 2003 May;148(5):892-7.

Expression of the GLI2 oncogene and its isoforms in human basal cell carcinoma.

Tojo M(1), Kiyosawa H, Iwatsuki K, Nakamura K, Kaneko F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Fukushima Medical University School of Medicine, 1 
Hikarigaoka, Fukushima 960-1295, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Mutations of the patched (Ptc) gene, a developmental regulator
implicated in the signalling pathway via sonic hedgehog (Shh) and smoothened
(Smo), play an essential pathogenic role in the development of basal cell
carcinomas (BCCs). We previously reported the upregulation of Shh signal
transducers, including Ptc, Smo and hedgehog-interacting protein, in BCCs. In
vertebrates, specific downstream effectors in the Shh signalling pathway include 
three zinc-finger transcription factors, Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3. Gli1 possesses only
an activation domain, while Gli2 and Gli3 contain both activation and repression 
domains. It remains unclear which of these transcription factors are responsible 
for the development of BCCs.
OBJECTIVES: To examine the expression pattern of Gli2 mRNA by human BCCs in
comparison with those by normal human skin and various skin tumours.
METHODS: We performed quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction analyses with a series of samples from BCCs, other skin tumours and
normal skin.
RESULTS: We found that Gli2 mRNA expression was enhanced in the BCCs we examined,
whereas there was no significant increase in other skin tumours or normal skin.
Of four spliced Gli2 isoforms designated Gli2alpha, beta, gamma and delta, the
expression of Gli2beta mRNA was increased the most in BCCs.
CONCLUSIONS: As Gli2beta is an isoform spliced at the first splicing site
containing a repression domain and consists of an intact activation domain, its
overexpression may lead to the upregulation of the Shh signalling pathway,
thereby inducing BCCs.

PMID: 12786818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Clin Invest. 2003 Jun;111(11):1771-82.

Selective inhibitors of the osteoblast proteasome stimulate bone formation in
vivo and in vitro.

Garrett IR(1), Chen D, Gutierrez G, Zhao M, Escobedo A, Rossini G, Harris SE,
Gallwitz W, Kim KB, Hu S, Crews CM, Mundy GR.

Author information: 
(1)OsteoScreen Inc, San Antonio, Texas 78229, USA. garrett@osteoscreen.com

We have found that the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway exerts exquisite control of
osteoblast differentiation and bone formation in vitro and in vivo in rodents.
Structurally different inhibitors that bind to specific catalytic beta subunits
of the 20S proteasome stimulated bone formation in bone organ cultures in
concentrations as low as 10 nM. When administered systemically to mice, the
proteasome inhibitors epoxomicin and proteasome inhibitor-1 increased bone volume
and bone formation rates over 70% after only 5 days of treatment. Since the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway has been shown to modulate expression of the
Drosophila homologue of the bone morphogenetic protein-2 and -4 (BMP-2 and BMP-4)
genes, we examined the effects of noggin, an endogenous inhibitor of BMP-2 and
BMP-4 on bone formation stimulated by these compounds and found that it was
abrogated. These compounds increased BMP-2 but not BMP-4 or BMP-6 mRNA expression
in osteoblastic cells, suggesting that BMP-2 was responsible for the observed
bone formation that was inhibited by noggin. We show proteasome inhibitors
regulate BMP-2 gene expression at least in part through inhibiting the
proteolytic processing of Gli3 protein. Our results suggest that the
ubiquitin-proteasome machinery regulates osteoblast differentiation and bone
formation and that inhibition of specific components of this system may be useful
therapeutically in common diseases of bone loss.

PMCID: PMC156102
PMID: 12782679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Epileptic Disord. 2003 Mar;5(1):27-30.

Epilepsy and hypothalamic hamartoma: look at the hand Pallister-Hall syndrome.

Kremer S(1), Minotti L, Thiriaux A, Grand S, Satre V, Le Bas JF, Kahane P.

Author information: 
(1)Magnetic Resonance Imaging Unit, Michallon University Hospital, Grenoble,
France.

We report the case of a 29-year-old patient, who suffered from drug resistant
laughing seizures since childhood. The clinical examination was normal, except
for sequelae of hand and feet surgery during infancy for post-axial polydactyly. 
Cerebral MRI showed a hypothalamic hamartoma. The association of complex limb
abnormalities with hypothalamic hamartoma lead to the diagnosis of Pallister-Hall
syndrome. This syndrome is related to a mutation of gene GLI3, located on
chromosome 7p13, and its inheritance is autosomal dominant. In the case of
laughing seizures, a cerebral MRI should be performed to look for a hypothalamic 
hamartoma. The observation of such lesions indicates the necessity of standard
radiographies of the hands and feet, to search for associated abnormalities.
These findings might help to recognize a Pallister-Hall syndrome, thus allowing
genetic counseling.

PMID: 12773293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Eur J Hum Genet. 2003 May;11(5):409-15.

A new locus for postaxial polydactyly type A/B on chromosome 7q21-q34.

Galjaard RJ(1), Smits AP, Tuerlings JH, Bais AG, Bertoli Avella AM, Breedveld G, 
de Graaff E, Oostra BA, Heutink P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. r.galijaard@erasmusmc.nl

Postaxial polydactyly (PAP) is the occurrence of one or more extra ulnar or
fibular digits or parts of it. In PAP-A, the extra digit is fully developed and
articulates with the fifth or an additional metacarpal/metatarsal, while it is
rudimentary in PAP-B. Isolated PAP usually segregates as an autosomal dominant
trait, with variable expression. Three loci are known for PAP in humans. PAPA1
(including PAP-A/B in one patient) on 7p13 caused by mutations in the GLI3 gene, 
PAPA2 on 13q21-q32 in a Turkish kindred with PAP-A only, and a third one (PAPA3) 
in a Chinese family with PAP-A/B on 19p13.1-13.2. We identified a fourth locus in
a large Dutch six-generation family with 31 individuals including 11 affecteds.
Their phenotype varied from either PAP-A, or PAP-B to PAP-A/B with or without the
co-occurence of partial cutaneous syndactyly. We performed a whole-genome search 
and found linkage between PAP and markers on chromosome 7q. The highest LOD score
was 3.34 obtained at D7S1799 and D7S500 with multipoint analysis.

PMID: 12734547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Dev Biol. 2003 May 15;257(2):343-55.

The amino-terminal region of Gli3 antagonizes the Shh response and acts in
dorsoventral fate specification in the developing spinal cord.

Meyer NP(1), Roelink H.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, Department of Biological Structure,
Center for Developmental Biology, University of Washington, Box 357420, Seattle, 
WA 98195, USA.

A concentration gradient of Shh is thought to pattern the ventral neural tube,
and these ventral cell types are absent in shh-/- mice. Based on in vitro and
genetic studies, the zinc finger-containing transcription factors Gli 1, 2, and 3
are mediators of the Shh intracellular response. The floorplate and adjacent cell
types are absent in gli1-/-;gli2-/- mice, but part of the Shh-/- phenotype in the
neural tube is alleviated in the Shh-/-;gli3-/- double mutant. This is consistent
with the predicted role of Gli3 as a repressor of the Shh response. Gli3
repressor activity is blocked by Shh. In order to test the role of the repressor 
form of Gli3 in the neural tube, a truncated version of Gli3 (Gli3R*) was
designed to mimic a Pallister Hall allele. Gli3R* acts as a constitutive
repressor independent of Shh signaling. Misexpression of Gli3R* in the chick
neural tube caused a ventral expansion of class-I, dorsal progenitor proteins and
a loss of class-II, ventral progenitor proteins consistent with expected activity
as a repressor of the Shh response. Activation of the BMP response is sufficient 
to maintain gli3 expression in neural plate explants, which might be a mechanism 
by which BMPs antagonize the Shh response.

PMID: 12729563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Congenit Anom (Kyoto). 2002 Dec;42(4):318-22.

Integration of a transposon into the Gli3 gene in the Pdn mouse.

Ueta E(1), Nanba E, Naruse I.

Author information: 
(1)School of Health Science, Faculty of Medicine, Tottori University, Yonago
683-8503, Japan.

The phenotype of the genetic polydactyly/ arhinencephaly mouse (Pdn/Pdn) is
similar to Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS), whose responsible gene is
GLI3. Suppression of Gli3 gene expression has been observed in the Pdn/Pdn and
integration of retrotransposon in Gli3 gene in the Pdn mouse has been reported.
Thus, the responsible gene for Pdn/Pdn is thought to be Gli3, but the site of
mutation within the gene has not been demarcated. In the present study, we
demonstrated that 5442 bp of early retrotransposon was inserted into intron 3 of 
Gli3 gene in the Pdn mouse (Gli3 (Pdn) ). This transposon had almost the same
sequence as MMY17106 (EMBL). It had 317-bp long terminal repeat at both ends
followed by the identical 6-bp target duplication sequence, GAGACT. Forward and
reverse PCR primers were constructed in intron 3 near the insertion point, and a 
forward primer in the transposon was also constructed. These primers allowed us
to discriminate +/+, Pdn/+ and Pdn/Pdn embryos by the PCR products. Morphological
determination of the genotypes in the Pdn mouse embryos is impossible before day 
12 of gestation. Quick discrimination method of genotypes developed in the
present study allows us to investigate the early dysmorphogenetic mechanisms in
the brain and limbs in the Pdn/Pdn embryos. Then, the dysmorphogenetic mechanisms
in the Pdn/Pdn may be extrapolated to those in GCPS.

PMID: 12634451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Pediatr Surg. 2003 Mar;38(3):465-8.

A role for sonic hedgehog signaling in the pathogenesis of human
tracheoesophageal fistula.

Spilde T(1), Bhatia A, Ostlie D, Marosky J, Holcomb G 3rd, Snyder C, Gittes G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The Laboratory for Surgical Organogenesis, Children's
Mercy Hospital, Kansas City, Missouri 64108, USA.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: Many theories of the pathogenesis of esophageal atresia with 
tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) have been proposed, but no specific mechanism 
has been demonstrated. The authors previously reported data suggesting a
respiratory origin of the fistula tract in the rat model and in humans. Sonic
hedgehog (Shh) "knockout" mice have the VACTERL association, and thus it was
hypothesized that defects in Shh signaling may exist in the human neonatal EA/TEF
fistula tract.
METHODS: With IRB approval, human proximal esophageal pouch and distal fistula
samples were removed at the time of standard repair of EA/TEF in accordance with 
what the surgeons deemed appropriate in preparation for anastomosis. Tissues were
processed for HE, reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), and
immunohistochemistry. Normal embryonic lung cDNA was used as a positive control
for the RT-PCR reactions.
RESULTS: As expected, Shh was present by immunohistochemistry in the proximal
esophageal pouch, but was specifically absent in the distal fistula tract. Gli-1,
-2, and -3 (all intracellular mediators of Shh signaling) were present in the
proximal pouch and distal esophagus by RT-PCR.
CONCLUSIONS: The absence of Shh signaling in the developing fistula tract of the 
human neonate was surprising given that Shh normally is present in esophagus and 
other gut components. These results support the conclusion that the fistula tract
is not an esophaguslike structure, despite both its histologic appearance and its
use as an esophageal replacement. Also, like in Shh-null mutant mice, aberrant
Shh signaling may play a critical role in the pathogenesis of EA/TEF in humans.

Copyright 2003, Elsevier Science (USA). All rights reserved.

PMID: 12632368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Development. 2003 Apr;130(8):1565-77.

A novel function for Hedgehog signalling in retinal pigment epithelium
differentiation.

Perron M(1), Boy S, Amato MA, Viczian A, Koebernick K, Pieler T, Harris WA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Embryologie Moléculaire, Bat. 445 Université Paris XI, 91405
Orsay, France. muriel.perron@emex.u-psud.fr

Sonic hedgehog is involved in eye field separation along the proximodistal axis. 
We show that Hh signalling continues to be important in defining aspects of the
proximodistal axis as the optic vesicle and optic cup mature. We show that two
other Hedgehog proteins, Banded hedgehog and Cephalic hedgehog, related to the
mouse Indian hedgehog and Desert hedgehog, respectively, are strongly expressed
in the central retinal pigment epithelium but excluded from the peripheral
pigment epithelium surrounding the ciliary marginal zone. By contrast, downstream
components of the Hedgehog signalling pathway, Gli2, Gli3 and X-Smoothened, are
expressed in this narrow peripheral epithelium. We show that this zone contains
cells that are in the proliferative state. This equivalent region in the adult
mammalian eye, the pigmented ciliary epithelium, has been identified as a zone in
which retinal stem cells reside. These data, combined with double labelling and
the use of other retinal pigment epithelium markers, show that the retinal
pigment epithelium of tadpole embryos has a molecularly distinct peripheral to
central axis. In addition, Gli2, Gli3 and X-Smoothened are also expressed in the 
neural retina, in the most peripheral region of the ciliary marginal zone, where 
retinal stem cells are found in Xenopus, suggesting that they are good markers
for retinal stem cells. To test the role of the Hedgehog pathway at different
stages of retinogenesis, we activated the pathway by injecting a
dominant-negative form of PKA or blocking it by treating embryos with
cyclopamine. Embryos injected or treated at early stages display clear
proximodistal defects in the retina. Interestingly, the main phenotype of embryos
treated with cyclopamine at late stages is a severe defect in RPE
differentiation. This study thus provides new insights into the role of Hedgehog 
signalling in the formation of the proximodistal axis of the eye and the
differentiation of retinal pigment epithelium.

PMID: 12620982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Hum Genet. 2003 Jan;112(1):103.

Gene symbol: GLI3. Disease: Pallister-Hall syndrome.

Freese K, Driess S, Bornholdt D, Shoenle EJ, Seidel H, Tinschert S, Grzeschik KH,
Kalff-Suske M.

PMID: 12575661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Hum Genet. 2003 Jan;112(1):103.

Gene symbol: GLI3. Disease: Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome.

Driess S(1), Freese K, Bornholdt D, Kobelt A, Kress W, Mortier G, Radhakrishna U,
Antonarakis SE, Rauch A, Suri M, Verheij JB, Woerle H, Grzeschik KH, Kalff-Suske 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinisches Zentrum für Humangenetik, Philipps-Universität Marburg, 35037,
Germany.

PMID: 12575660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Hum Genet. 2003 Mar;112(3):303-9. Epub 2003 Jan 25.

Human genetic disease caused by de novo mitochondrial-nuclear DNA transfer.

Turner C(1), Killoran C, Thomas NS, Rosenberg M, Chuzhanova NA, Johnston J, Kemel
Y, Cooper DN, Biesecker LG.

Author information: 
(1)Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences and Walter Reed Army
Medical Center, Washington, DC 20814, USA.

Transfer of nucleic acid from cytoplasmic organelles to the nuclear genome is a
well-established mechanism of evolutionary change in eukaryotes. Such transfers
have occurred throughout evolution, but so far, none has been shown unequivocally
to occur de novo to cause a heritable human disease. We have characterized a
patient with a de novo nucleic acid transfer from the mitochondrial to the
nuclear genome, a transfer that is responsible for a sporadic case of
Pallister-Hall syndrome, a condition usually inherited in an autosomal dominant
fashion. This mutation, a 72-bp insertion into exon 14 of the GLI3 gene, creates 
a premature stop codon and predicts a truncated protein product. Both the
mechanism and the cause of the mitochondrial-nuclear transfer are unknown.
Although the conception of this patient was temporally and geographically
associated with high-level radioactive contamination following the Chernobyl
accident, this case cannot, on its own, be used to establish a causal
relationship between radiation exposure and this rare type of mutation. Thus, for
the time being, it must be considered as an intriguing coincidence. Nevertheless,
these data serve to demonstrate that de novo mitochondrial-nuclear transfer of
nucleic acid is a novel mechanism of human inherited disease.

PMID: 12545275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Genet Med. 2002 Nov-Dec;4(6 Suppl):39S-42S.

Coupling genomics and human genetics to delineate basic mechanisms of
development.

Biesecker LG(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

This article, based on a presentation given by the author at the third
Asan-Harvard Medical International Symposium on "Genomics and Proteomics: Impact 
on Medicine and Health" in Seoul, Korea, July 3-4, 2001, discusses an iterative
translational research approach to delineate the basic mechanism of human
development. The study of humans to increase the understanding of mammalian
development has critical advantages that make its limitations acceptable for
certain types of studies. For instance, by looking at families affected by birth 
defects, researchers can gain insight into the basic mechanisms of development
and how genes program organisms to assume their permanent, or adult,
morphological shapes. A number of malformation syndromes have some overlapping
manifestations, despite being phenotypically and, in some cases, genetically
distinct. What can researchers learn from this? The author's research group
clinically and genetically analyzed families affected with the Pallister-Hall
syndrome. The researchers then went on to look at the McKusick-Kaufman syndrome, 
a disorder that is more common among the Old Order Amish of Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania, in an attempt to understand more about genes, genetic pathways, and
syndrome families.

PMID: 12544486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2002 Dec;47(15):1989-93.

[Development and migration of lot cell, the guidepost neuron of the lateral
olfactory tract].

[Article in Japanese]

Kawasaki T(1), Hirata T.

Author information: 
(1)takawasa@lab.nig.ac.jp

PMID: 12486929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Int J Dev Biol. 2002;46(7):975-82.

The mouse polydactylous mutation, luxate (lx), causes anterior shift of the
anteroposterior border in the developing hindlimb bud.

Yada Y(1), Makino S, Chigusa-Ishiwa S, Shiroishi T.

Author information: 
(1)Ochanomizu University, Tokyo, Japan.

Pattern formation along the anterior-posterior axis of the vertebrate limb is
established upon activation of Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) in the zone of polarizing
activity (ZPA). Since many mouse mutants with preaxial polydactyly show ectopic
expression of Shh at the anterior margin of the limb buds, it has been thought to
be a primary defect caused by these mutations. We show here that the mouse
mutation luxate (lx) exhibits dose-dependent reduction in the size of the Fgf8
expression domain in the ectoderm from the initial stage of limb development.
This aberration was independent of Fgf10 expression in the limb mesenchyme. Shh
was induced in the mesenchyme underlying the posterior end of the Fgf8 expression
domain, indicating an anterior shift of Shh expression in lx hindlimb buds. Prior
to the ectopic induction of Shh, the expression domains of genes downstream from 
Shh, namely dHAND, Gli1, Ptc and Gre, which are normally expressed in posterior
mesenchyme of limb buds, expanded anteriorly on the lx hindlimb buds. Conversely,
the expression domains of anterior mesenchymal markers such as Gli3and Alx4
decreased in size. Thus, ectopic Shh is not a primary defect of the lx mutation. 
Rather, our results indicate that the lx mutation affects the positioning of the 
anteroposterior border in developing hindlimb buds.

PMID: 12455637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Genes Dev. 2002 Nov 15;16(22):2865-78.

Dorsal-ventral patterning of the spinal cord requires Gli3 transcriptional
repressor activity.

Persson M(1), Stamataki D, te Welscher P, Andersson E, Böse J, Rüther U, Ericson 
J, Briscoe J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Medical Nobel Institute, Karolinska 
Institute, S-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) plays a critical role in organizing cell pattern in the
developing spinal cord. Gli proteins are thought to mediate Shh signaling, but
their role in directing neural tube patterning remains unclear. Here we identify 
a role for Gli3 transcriptional repressor activity in patterning the intermediate
region of the spinal cord that complements the requirement for Gli2 in ventral
regions. Moreover, blocking all Gli responses results in a complete dorsalization
of ventral spinal cord, indicating that in addition to the specific roles of Gli2
and Gli3 in the neural tube, there is functional redundancy between Gli proteins.
Finally, analysis of Shh/Gli3 compound mutant mice substantiates the idea that
ventral patterning may involve a mechanism independent, or parallel, to graded
Shh signaling. However, even in the absence of graded Shh signaling, Gli3 is
required for the dorsal-ventral patterning of the intermediate neural tube.
Together these data raise the possibility that Gli proteins act as common
mediators integrating Shh signals, and other sources of positional information,
to control patterning throughout the ventral neural tube.

PMCID: PMC187477
PMID: 12435629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Genes Dev. 2002 Nov 15;16(22):2849-64.

A direct requirement for Hedgehog signaling for normal specification of all
ventral progenitor domains in the presumptive mammalian spinal cord.

Wijgerde M(1), McMahon JA, Rule M, McMahon AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, The Biolabs, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA.

The hedgehog signaling pathway organizes the developing ventral neural tube by
establishing distinct neural progenitor fates along the dorsoventral axis.
Smoothened (Smo) is essential for all Hedgehog (Hh) signaling, and genetic
inactivation of Smo cells autonomously blocks the ability of cells to transduce
the Hh signal. Using a chimeric approach, we examined the behavior of Smo null
mutant neural progenitor cells in the developing vertebrate spinal cord, and we
show that direct Hh signaling is essential for the specification of all ventral
progenitor populations. Further, Hh signaling extends into the dorsal half of the
spinal cord including the intermediate Dbx expression domain. Surprisingly, in
the absence of Sonic hedgehog (Shh), we observe the presence of a Smo-dependent
Hh signaling activity operating in the ventral half of the spinal cord that most 
likely reflects Indian hedgehog (Ihh) signaling originating from the underlying
gut endoderm. Comparative studies of Shh, Smo, and Gli3 single and compound
mutants reveal that Hh signaling acts in part to specify neural cell identity by 
counteracting the repressive action of Gli3 on p0, p1, p2, and pMN formation.
However, whereas these cell identities are restored in Gli3/Smo compound mutants,
correct stratification of the rescued ventral cell types is lost. Thus, Hh
signaling is essential for organizing ventral cell pattern, possibly through the 
control of differential cell affinities.

PMCID: PMC187482
PMID: 12435628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Genes Dev. 2002 Nov 15;16(22):2843-8.

Ski is involved in transcriptional regulation by the repressor and full-length
forms of Gli3.

Dai P(1), Shinagawa T, Nomura T, Harada J, Kaul SC, Wadhwa R, Khan MM, Akimaru H,
Sasaki H, Colmenares C, Ishii S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, RIKEN Tsukuba Institute, Ibaraki, Japan.

Transcription factor Glioblastoma-3 (Gli3) is cleaved in the anterior region of
the limb bud to generate its repressor form. In contrast, Sonic hedgehog (Shh)
signaling from the posterior zone of polarizing activity blocks Gli3 processing
and then induces the expression of Gli3 target genes, including Gli1. Here we
report that the Ski corepressor binds to Gli3 and recruits the histone
deacetylase complex. The Gli3-mediated repression was impaired by anti-Ski
antibody and in Ski-deficient fibroblasts, and Shh-induced Gli1 gene
transcription mediated by full-length Gli3 was inhibited by Ski. Furthermore, a
Ski mutation enhanced the digit abnormalities caused by the Gli3 gene mutation.
Thus, Ski plays an important role in pattern formation.

PMCID: PMC187484
PMID: 12435627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Dev Biol. 2002 Nov 15;251(2):320-32.

Mouse GLI3 regulates Fgf8 expression and apoptosis in the developing neural tube,
face, and limb bud.

Aoto K(1), Nishimura T, Eto K, Motoyama J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuropathology Group, Brain Science Institute, The Institute of
Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN), 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0198,
Japan.

The zinc finger transcription factor GLI3 is considered a repressor of vertebrate
Hedgehog (Hh) signaling. In humans, the absence of GLI3 function causes Greig
cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome, affecting the development of the brain, eye,
face, and limb. Because the etiology of these malformations is not well
understood, we examined the phenotype of mouse Gli3-/- mutants as a model to
investigate this. We observed an up-regulation of Fgf8 in the anterior neural
ridge, isthmus, eye, facial primordia, and limb buds of mutant embryos, sites
coinciding with the human disease. Intriguingly, endogenous apoptosis was reduced
in Fgf8-positive areas in Gli3-/- mutants. Since SHH is thought to be involved in
Fgf8 regulation, we compared Fgf8 expression in Shh-/- and Gli3-/-;Shh-/- mutant 
embryos. Whereas Fgf8 expression was almost absent in Shh-/- mutants, it was
up-regulated in Gli3-/-;Shh-/- double mutants, suggesting that SHH is not
required for Fgf8 induction, and that GLI3 normally represses Fgf8 independently 
of SHH. In the limb bud, we provide evidence that ectopic expression of Gremlin
in Gli3-/- mutants might contribute to a decrease in apoptosis. Together, our
data reveal that GLI3 limits Fgf8-expression domains in multiple tissues, through
a mechanism that may include the induction or maintenance of apoptosis.

PMID: 12435361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Med Genet. 2002 Nov;39(11):804-6.

De novo GLI3 mutation in acrocallosal syndrome: broadening the phenotypic
spectrum of GLI3 defects and overlap with murine models.

Elson E(1), Perveen R, Donnai D, Wall S, Black GC.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Unit of Medical Genetics and Regional Genetics Service, St Mary's
Hospital, Hathersage Road, Manchester M13 0JH, UK.

Acrocallosal syndrome (ACS) is characterised by postaxial polydactyly, hallux
duplication, macrocephaly, and absence of the corpus callosum, usually with
severe developmental delay. The condition overlaps with Greig
cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS), an autosomal dominant disorder that
results from mutations in the GLI3 gene. Here we report a child with agenesis of 
the corpus callosum and severe retardation, both cardinal features of ACS and
rare in GCPS, who has a mutation in GLI3. Since others have excluded GLI3 in ACS,
we suggest that ACS may represent a heterogeneous group of disorders that, in
some cases, may result from a mutation in GLI3 and represent a severe, allelic
form of GCPS. The finding is important for counselling families with suspected
ACS.

PMCID: PMC1735022
PMID: 12414818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Development. 2002 Nov;129(21):4963-74.

Dorsoventral patterning is established in the telencephalon of mutants lacking
both Gli3 and Hedgehog signaling.

Rallu M(1), Machold R, Gaiano N, Corbin JG, McMahon AP, Fishell G.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Program and the Department of Cell Biology, The
Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, New York University Medical Center, 
540 First Avenue, New York 10016, USA.

Considerable data suggest that sonic hedgehog (Shh) is both necessary and
sufficient for the specification of ventral pattern throughout the nervous
system, including the telencephalon. We show that the regional markers induced by
Shh in the E9.0 telencephalon are dependent on the dorsoventral and
anteroposterior position of ectopic Shh expression. This suggests that by this
point in development regional character in the telencephalon is established. To
determine whether this prepattern is dependent on earlier Shh signaling, we
examined the telencephalon in mice carrying either Shh- or Gli3-null mutant
alleles. This analysis revealed that the expression of a subset of ventral
telencephalic markers, including Dlx2 and Gsh2, although greatly diminished,
persist in Shh(-/-) mutants, and that these same markers were expanded in
Gli3(-/-) mutants. To understand further the genetic interaction between Shh and 
Gli3, we examined Shh/Gli3 and Smoothened/Gli3 double homozygous mutants.
Notably, in animals carrying either of these genetic backgrounds, genes such as
Gsh2 and Dlx2, which are expressed pan-ventrally, as well as Nkx2.1, which
demarcates the ventral most aspect of the telencephalon, appear to be largely
restored to their wild-type patterns of expression. These results suggest that
normal patterning in the telencephalon depends on the ventral repression of Gli3 
function by Shh and, conversely, on the dorsal repression of Shh signaling by
Gli3. In addition these results support the idea that, in addition to hedgehog
signaling, a Shh-independent pathways must act during development to pattern the 
telencephalon.

PMID: 12397105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Mech Dev. 2002 Nov;119(1):21-34.

A novel gene, GliH1, with homology to the Gli zinc finger domain not required for
mouse development.

Nakashima M(1), Tanese N, Ito M, Auerbach W, Bai C, Furukawa T, Toyono T, Akamine
A, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Oral Molecular Biology, Division of Oral
Rehabilitation, Faculty of Dental Science, Kyushu University, Fukuoka 812-8582,
Japan. misako@dent.kyushu-u.ac.jp

The Sonic hedgehog (Shh)-Gli signaling pathway regulates development of many
organs, including teeth. We cloned a novel gene encoding a transcription factor
that contains a zinc finger domain with highest homology to the Gli family of
proteins (61-64% amino acid sequence identity) from incisor pulp. Consistent with
this sequence conservation, gel mobility shift assays demonstrated that this new 
Gli homologous protein, GliH1, could bind previously characterized Gli DNA
binding sites. Furthermore, transfection assays in dental pulp cells showed that 
whereas Gli1 induces a nearly 50-fold increase in activity of a luciferase
reporter containing Gli DNA binding sites, coexpression of Gli1 with Gli3 and/or 
GliH1 results in inhibition of the Gli1-stimulated luciferase activity. In situ
hybridization analysis of mouse embryos demonstrated that GliH1 expression is
initiated later than the three Gli genes and has a more restricted expression
pattern. GliH1 is first detected diffusely in the limb buds at 10.0 days post
coitus and later is expressed in the branchial arches, craniofacial interface,
ventral part of the tail, whisker follicles and hair, intervertebral discs,
teeth, eyes and kidney. LacZ was inserted into the GliH1 allele in embryonic stem
cells to produce mice lacking GliH1 function. While this produced indicator mice 
for GliH1-expression, analysis of mutant mice revealed no discernible phenotype
or required function for GliH1. A search of the Celera Genomics and associated
databases identified possible gene sequences encoding a zinc finger domain with
approximately 90% homology to that of GliH1, indicating there is a family of GliH
genes and raising the possibility of overlapping functions during development.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 12385751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Neurooncol. 2002 Sep;59(2):107-15.

Patched and smoothened mRNA expression in human astrocytic tumors inversely
correlates with histological malignancy.

Katayam M(1), Yoshida K, Ishimori H, Katayama M, Kawase T, Motoyama J, Kamiguchi 
H.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Brain Science Group, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Wako,
Saitama, Japan. mkatayama-nsu@umin.ac.jp

Patched (Ptc) is a transmembrane receptor for sonic hedgehog (Shh) and
functionally associated with another transmembrane protein, smoothened (Smo). Ptc
is a tumor suppressor gene whereas Smo serves as a proto-oncogene of
neuroectodermal tumors. Their downstream molecules, Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3, are
oncogenes of glioblastomas. We have analyzed mRNA expression of Ptc, Smo, and Gli
family members in human astrocytic tumors. The mRNA expression was quantified by 
real-time polymerase chain reactions in 40 tumors (diffuse astrocytomas; 6 cases:
anaplastic astrocytomas; 12 cases: glioblastomas; 22 cases) and four cell lines
derived from astrocytic tumors. The MIB-1 proliferating cell indices (PCIs) of
these tumors were analyzed by immunohistochemistry. In comparison with the World 
Health Organization (WHO) classification, the amount of Ptc and Smo mRNAs
decreased in proportion to the progression of histological maliganancy, and
similar results were obtained with astrocytic tumor-derived cell lines. However, 
there was no remarkable correlation between the mRNA expression level of each
gene and the MIB-1 PCIs. The mRNA expression level of Gli1 was variable and
highly elevated in two cases. No remarkable features were found clinically or
histologically in these two cases. In summary, our results indicate that Ptc and 
Smo mRNA levels have an inverse correlation with histological malignancy and
suggest that these gene products are implicated in the suppression of astrocytic 
tumors. In contrast, there was no significant correlation between the mRNA levels
of the Gli family members and histological malignancy, suggesting that Gli
proteins are not associated with the progression of astrocytic tumors.

PMID: 12241103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Dev Biol. 2002 Sep 15;249(2):349-66.

Sonic hedgehog activates mesenchymal Gli1 expression during prostate ductal bud
formation.

Lamm ML(1), Catbagan WS, Laciak RJ, Barnett DH, Hebner CM, Gaffield W,
Walterhouse D, Iannaccone P, Bushman W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Northwestern University Medical School, Chicago, IL
60611, USA.

Ductal budding in the developing prostate is a testosterone-dependent event that 
involves signaling between the urogenital sinus epithelium (UGE) and urogenital
sinus mesenchyme (UGM). We show here that ductal bud formation is associated with
focused expression of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) in the epithelium of nascent prostate 
buds and in the growing tips of elongating prostate ducts. This pattern of
localized Shh expression occurs in response to testosterone stimulation. The gene
for the Shh receptor, Ptc1, is expressed in the UGM, as are the members of the
Gli gene family of transcriptional regulators (Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3). Expression 
of Ptc1, Gli1, and Gli2 is localized primarily to mesenchyme surrounding prostate
buds, whereas Gli3 is expressed diffusely throughout the UGM. A strong dependence
of Gli1 (and Ptc1) expression on Shh signaling is demonstrated by induction of
expression in both the intact urogenital sinus and the isolated UGM by exogenous 
SHH peptide. A similar dependence of Gli2 and Gli3 expression on Shh is not
observed. Nonetheless, the chemical inhibitor of Shh signaling, cyclopamine,
produced a graded inhibition of Gli gene expression (Gli1>Gli2>Gli3) in
urogenital sinus explants that was paralleled by a severe inhibition of ductal
budding.

PMID: 12221011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Science. 2002 Oct 25;298(5594):827-30. Epub 2002 Sep 5.

Progression of vertebrate limb development through SHH-mediated counteraction of 
GLI3.

te Welscher P(1), Zuniga A, Kuijper S, Drenth T, Goedemans HJ, Meijlink F, Zeller
R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Faculty of Biology, Utrecht University,
Padualaan 8, NL-3584 CH Utrecht, Netherlands.

Distal limb development and specification of digit identities in tetrapods are
under the control of a mesenchymal organizer called the polarizing region. Sonic 
Hedgehog (SHH) is the morphogenetic signal produced by the polarizing region in
the posterior limb bud. Ectopic anterior SHH signaling induces digit duplications
and has been suspected as a major cause underlying congenital malformations that 
result in digit polydactyly. Here, we report that the polydactyly of
Gli3-deficient mice arises independently of SHH signaling. Disruption of one or
both Gli3 alleles in mouse embryos lacking Shh progressively restores limb distal
development and digit formation. Our genetic analysis indicates that SHH
signaling counteracts GLI3-mediated repression of key regulator genes, cell
survival, and distal progression of limb bud development.

PMID: 12215652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Nature. 2002 Aug 29;418(6901):979-83. Epub 2002 Aug 18.

Shh and Gli3 are dispensable for limb skeleton formation but regulate digit
number and identity.

Litingtung Y(1), Dahn RD, Li Y, Fallon JF, Chiang C.

Author information: 
(1)Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Department of Cell and Developmental
Biology, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

Most current models propose Sonic hedgehog (Shh) as the primary determinant of
anteroposterior development of amniote limbs. Shh protein is said to be required 
to direct the formation of skeletal elements and to specify digit identity
through dose-dependent activation of target gene expression. However, the
identity of genes targeted by Shh, and the regulatory mechanisms controlling
their expression, remain poorly understood. Gli3 (the gene implicated in human
Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome) is proposed to negatively regulate Shh by
restricting its expression and influence to the posterior mesoderm. Here we
report genetic analyses in mice showing that Shh and Gli3 are dispensable for
formation of limb skeletal elements: Shh(-/-) Gli3(-/-) limbs are distally
complete and polydactylous, but completely lack wild-type digit identities. We
show that the effects of Shh signalling on skeletal patterning and ridge
maintenance are necessarily mediated through Gli3. We propose that the function
of Shh and Gli3 in limb skeletal patterning is limited to refining autopodial
morphology, imposing pentadactyl constraint on the limb's polydactyl potential,
and organizing digit identity specification, by regulating the relative balance
of Gli3 transcriptional activator and repressor activities.

PMID: 12198547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Dev Biol. 2002 Aug 1;248(1):143-56.

Twist plays an essential role in FGF and SHH signal transduction during mouse
limb development.

O'Rourke MP(1), Soo K, Behringer RR, Hui CC, Tam PP.

Author information: 
(1)Embryology Unit, Children's Medical Research Institute, Wentworthville, NSW
2145, Australia.

Loss of Twist gene function arrests the growth of the limb bud shortly after its 
formation. In the Twist(-/-) forelimb bud, Fgf10 expression is reduced, Fgf4 is
not expressed, and the domain of Fgf8 and Fgfr2 expression is altered. This is
accompanied by disruption of the expression of genes (Shh, Gli1, Gli2, Gli3, and 
Ptch) associated with SHH signalling in the limb bud mesenchyme, the
down-regulation of Bmp4 in the apical ectoderm, the absence of Alx3, Alx4, Pax1, 
and Pax3 activity in the mesenchyme, and a reduced potency of the limb bud
tissues to differentiate into osteogenic and myogenic tissues. Development of the
hindlimb buds in Twist(-/-) embryos is also retarded. The overall activity of
genes involved in SHH signalling is reduced.Fgf4 and Fgf8 expression is lost or
reduced in the apical ectoderm, but other genes (Fgf10, Fgfr2) involved with FGF 
signalling are expressed in normal patterns. Twist(+/-);Gli3(+/XtJ) mice display 
more severe polydactyly than that seen in either Twist(+/-) or Gli3(+/XtJ) mice, 
suggesting that there is genetic interaction between Twist and Gli3 activity.
Twist activity is therefore essential for the growth and differentiation of the
limb bud tissues as well as regulation of tissue patterning via the modulation of
SHH and FGF signal transduction.

PMID: 12142027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Int J Dev Biol. 2002;46(4):401-13.

Twist functions in mouse development.

O'Rourke MP(1), Tam PP.

Author information: 
(1)Embryology Unit, Children's Medical Research Institute, University of Sydney, 
Wentworthville, NSW, Australia.

The remarkable similarity in the profile of genetic activity and the frequent
association of developmental defects of limb and craniofacial structures in mouse
mutant and hereditary disorders point to the possibility that the development of 
the head and limb involves common morphogenetic mechanisms. Our recent studies on
the impact of the loss of Twist function has highlighted the essential role of
the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor encoded by this gene on the
development of both body parts. We have summarized in this review our findings on
the molecular pathways that are disrupted in Twist mutant mouse embryos. Our
results revealed an evolutionarily conserved function for Twist in mesodermal
differentiation, and previously unrecognised effects of the loss-of-function
mutation of this gene in the outgrowth and patterning of the limb and branchial
arches,and neural crest cell migration. An important outcome of our study is the 
demonstration of a differential requirement for Twist in forelimb versus hindlimb
development, and its functional interaction with Gli3 in specifying anterior
digit formation. Further evidence of the conservation of the function of Twist in
different species is highlighted by similarity in the spectrum of potential
downstream targets and interacting genes of Twist that have been identified by
genetic, functional and microarray analysis.

PMID: 12141426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Aug 6;99(16):10476-81. Epub 2002 Jul 24.

Sonic hedgehog rescues cranial neural crest from cell death induced by ethanol
exposure.

Ahlgren SC(1), Thakur V, Bronner-Fraser M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology 139-74, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA
91125, USA. ahlgren@caltech.edu

Alcohol is a teratogen that induces a variety of abnormalities including brain
and facial defects [Jones, K. & Smith, D. (1973) Lancet 2, 999-1001], with the
exact nature of the deficit depending on the time and magnitude of the dose of
ethanol to which developing fetuses are exposed. In addition to abnormal facial
structures, ethanol-treated embryos exhibit a highly characteristic pattern of
cell death. Dying cells are observed in the premigratory and migratory neural
crest cells that normally populate most facial structures. The observation that
blocking Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling results in similar craniofacial
abnormalities prompted us to examine whether there was a link between this aspect
of fetal alcohol syndrome and loss of Shh. We demonstrate that administration of 
ethanol to chick embryos results in a dramatic loss of Shh, as well as a loss of 
transcripts involved in Shh signaling pathways. In contrast, other signaling
molecules examined do not demonstrate such dramatic changes. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that both the ethanol-induced cranial neural crest cell death and the
associated craniofacial growth defect can be rescued by application of Shh. These
data suggest that craniofacial anomalies resulting from fetal alcohol exposure
are caused at least partially by loss of Shh and subsequent neural crest cell
death.

PMCID: PMC124946
PMID: 12140368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Cancer. 2002 Jul 1;95(1):28-31.

GLI3 is not mutated commonly in sporadic medulloblastomas.

Erez A(1), Ilan T, Amariglio N, Muler I, Brok-Simoni F, Rechavi G, Izraeli S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hemato-Oncology and Institute of Hematology, The Chaim
Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel.

BACKGROUND: Medulloblastoma is a malignant, invasive embryonic tumor of the
cerebellum. Sonic hedgehog (SHH) is a secreted glycoprotein that has a major role
in the developing cerebellum. Activation of the SHH pathway resulting from
mutations in the PATCH gene, which is an inhibitor of the pathway, are associated
with hereditary and sporadic medulloblastomas. The GLI3 protein is another
negative regulator of SHH signaling. The authors hypothesized that mutations in
GLI3 may be associated with meduloblastomas.
METHODS: The authors describe a patient with hereditary Greig syndrome, which was
caused by mutations in GLI3, and medulloblastoma. Another such patient was
described in the literature. They also sequenced the GLI3 gene, including all
exon-intron boundaries, in an additional 12 sporadic medulloblastomas.
RESULTS: The authors detected a new nonsense germline mutation in a child with
Greig syndrome and medulloblastoma. This mutation generates a stop codon in
position 809 of GLI3 that has been predicted to result in massive truncation of
the protein. Several new polymorphisms, but no tumor-associated mutations, were
found in sporadic tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: Gli3 is mutated rarely in medulloblastoma.

Copyright 2002 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 12115313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Genesis. 2002 Jun;33(2):55-61.

A new allele of Gli3 and a new mutation, circletail (Crc), resulting from a
single transgenic experiment.

Rachel RA(1), Wellington SJ, Warburton D, Mason CA, Beermann F.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurobiology and Behavior, College of Physicians and Surgeons,
Columbia University, New York, New York, USA. rrachel@ncifcrf.gov

While generating transgenic lines, transgene-linked mutations can occur, which
are caused by an insertional mutation at a given locus. More rarely, mutations
unlinked to the transgene insertion site are observed. In the process of
generating a mouse overexpressing the enzyme tyrosinase, we have obtained one
transgenic line that appears to carry a semidominant insertional mutation at the 
Gli3 (extra toes) locus, characterized by polydactyly and skeletal malformations.
Additionally, the transgenic line contained a second mutation, Crc (circletail), 
which appears to be unlinked to the transgene insertion site. Heterozygous Crc
mice are incompletely penetrant for a circled-tail phenotype, while all
homozygous Crc/Crc mice die at birth of a severe neural tube defect
(craniorachischisis). Anatomical evidence from a Crc/Crc; Gli3/+ fetus indicates 
that these two genes may interact.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12112872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Development. 2002 Jul;129(13):3045-54.

Wnt and Bmp signalling cooperatively regulate graded Emx2 expression in the
dorsal telencephalon.

Theil T(1), Aydin S, Koch S, Grotewold L, Rüther U.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Animal Developmental and Molecular Biology,
Heinrich-Heine-University, D-40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.
thomas.theil@uni-duesseldorf.de

Pattern formation of the dorsal telencephalon is governed by a regionalisation
process that leads to the formation of distinct domains, including the future
hippocampus and neocortex. Recent studies have implicated signalling proteins of 
the Wnt and Bmp gene families as well as several transcription factors, including
Gli3 and the Emx homeobox genes, in the molecular control of this process. The
regulatory relationships between these genes, however, remain largely unknown. We
have used transgenic analysis to investigate the upstream mechanisms for
regulation of Emx2 in the dorsal telencephalon. We have identified an enhancer
from the mouse Emx2 gene that drives specific expression of a lacZ reporter gene 
in the dorsal telencephalon. This element contains binding sites for Tcf and Smad
proteins, transcriptional mediators of the Wnt and Bmp signalling pathway,
respectively. Mutations of these binding sites abolish telencephalic enhancer
activity, while ectopic expression of these signalling pathways leads to ectopic 
activation of the enhancer. These results establish Emx2 as a direct
transcriptional target of Wnt and Bmp signalling and provide insights into a
genetic hierarchy involving Gli3, Emx2 and Bmp and Wnt genes in the control of
dorsal telencephalic development.

PMID: 12070081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Genet Couns. 2002;13(1):69.

Gli 3 mutation in Pallister-Hall syndrome.

Stoll C, De Saint Martin A, Donato L, Alembik Y, Sauvage P, Messer J.

Erratum for
    Genet Couns. 2001;12(3):231-5.

Comment on
    Genet Couns. 2001;12(3):231-5.

PMID: 12017244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 12;277(28):25697-702. Epub 2002 Apr 30.

Expression of the human poliovirus receptor/CD155 gene is activated by sonic
hedgehog.

Solecki DJ(1), Gromeier M, Mueller S, Bernhardt G, Wimmer E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, School of Medicine, State
University of New York at Stony Brook, 11794, USA. soleckd@mail.rockefeller.edu

The human poliovirus receptor/CD155 is a transmembrane glycoprotein belonging to 
the immunoglobulin superfamily. The ectodomain of CD155 mediates cell attachment 
to the extracellular matrix molecule vitronectin, while its intracellular domain 
interacts with the dynein light chain Tctex-1. CD155 is a primate-restricted gene
that is expressed during development in mesenchymal tissues and ventrally derived
structures within the CNS. Its function in adults is as yet unknown, but
significantly, CD155 is aberrantly expressed in neuroectodermal tumors. We show
that the expression of CD155 mRNA is up-regulated when human Ntera2 cells are
treated with purified Sonic hedgehog (Shh) protein. Reporter gene expression
driven by the CD155 core promoter is activated by Shh in transient
co-transfection assays. Analysis of the CD155 core promoter indicates that an
intact GLI binding site is required for Shh activation. In addition,
overexpression of Gli1 or Gli3 potently activates reporter gene expression driven
by the CD155 core promoter. These data identify the CD155 gene as a
transcriptional target of Shh, a finding that has significance for the normal
function of CD155 during development and the expression of CD155 in
neuroectodermal tumors.

PMID: 11983699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Hum Mol Genet. 2002 May 1;11(9):1129-35.

Pallister-Hall syndrome phenotype in mice mutant for Gli3.

Böse J(1), Grotewold L, Rüther U.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Animal Developmental and Molecular Biology, Heinrich-Heine
University, Universitätsstrasse 1, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.

Mutations in the GLI3 gene have been identified in several human malformation
syndromes. One of these autosomal dominant developmental disorders is
Pallister-Hall syndrome (PHS; MIM146510), which is associated with central
polydactyly and other malformations. Interestingly, the mutations in the GLI3
transcription factor gene identified in patients with PHS are restricted to the
region 3' of the zinc finger-encoding domain, leaving this DNA-binding domain
intact. We have investigated the consequences of this mutation on the development
of multiple organ systems by introducing a targeted mutation in mice. We found
that mice homozygous for the mutation showed a central polydactyly, thus modeling
one of the major abnormalities of the human syndrome. Moreover, Gli3-mutant mice 
displayed a wide range of developmental abnormalities encompassing almost all of 
the common PHS features, including imperforate anus, gastrointestinal, epiglottis
and larynx defects, abnormal kidney development, and absence of adrenal glands.
Thus, our Gli3-mutant mice provide an excellent model for studies of both the
pathogenesis of PHS and Gli3 functions in the development of the affected organ
systems.

PMID: 11978771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Dev Biol. 2002 May 15;245(2):280-90.

Indian hedgehog as a progesterone-responsive factor mediating
epithelial-mesenchymal interactions in the mouse uterus.

Matsumoto H(1), Zhao X, Das SK, Hogan BL, Dey SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas 66160-7336, USA.

Genes encoding components of the hedgehog signaling pathway are dynamically
expressed in the mouse uterus preparing for implantation. Indian hedgehog (Ihh), 
patched (Ptc), and Gli3 are expressed at low levels in the endometrial epithelium
on day 1 of pregnancy. Transcription of Ihh increases dramatically in the luminal
epithelium and glands from day 3, reaching very high levels on day 4. Over the
same period, Ptc, Gli1, Gli2, and noggin are strongly upregulated in the
underlying mesenchymal stroma. Transcription of Ihh in ovariectomized mice is
induced by progesterone but not by estrogen. Lower induction of Ihh, Ptc, and
Hoxa10 is seen in response to progesterone in the uteri of Pgr(-/-) mutant mice
lacking progesterone nuclear steroid receptor. This finding suggests that the
hormone may regulate Ihh through both nuclear receptor-dependent and -independent
pathways. We describe a method for culturing uterine explants in the absence of
epithelium. Under these conditions, recombinant N-SHH protein promotes the
proliferation of mesenchyme cells and the expression of noggin. We propose that
IHH made by the epithelium normally functions as a paracrine growth factor for
stromal cells during the early stages of pregnancy.

PMID: 11977981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Eur J Hum Genet. 2002 Mar;10(3):162-6.

Postaxial polydactyly type A/B (PAP-A/B) is linked to chromosome 19p13.1-13.2 in 
a Chinese kindred.

Zhao H(1), Tian Y, Breedveld G, Huang S, Zou Y, Y J, Chai J, Li H, Li M, Oostra
BA, Lo WH, Heutink P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, WHO Collaboration
Center of Community Control for Inherited Diseases, Beijing, People's Republic of
China.

Postaxial polydactyly is characterised by fifth digit duplications in hands
and/or feet. Two phenotypic varieties have been described. In type A, the extra
digit is well formed and articulates with the fifth or an extra metacarpal. A
rudimentary extra fifth digit characterises type B. Mutations in the GLI3 gene
are associated with postaxial polydactyly in some families and a second locus has
been identified on chromosome 13 but the majority of cases remain unexplained. We
report here a third locus for postaxial polydactyly on chromosome 19p13.1-13.2 in
a large Chinese kindred with a combination of type A and B. Two-point linkage
analysis showed the highest LOD score (Z(max) = 5.85 at theta; = 0 cM) at marker 
D19S221. Recombination events with markers D19S1165 and D19S929 define the
critical region for this postaxial polydactyly locus to a region of 4.3 cM on the
genetic map.

PMID: 11973619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2002 May;282(5):L1012-22.

Fusion of lung lobes and vessels in mouse embryos heterozygous for the forkhead
box f1 targeted allele.

Lim L(1), Kalinichenko VV, Whitsett JA, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, College of Medicine, University of Illinois 
at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60607-7170, USA.

Previously, we showed that newborn forkhead box (Fox)f1(+/-) mice with diminished
pulmonary FoxF1 levels died of severe lung hemorrhage and exhibited abnormal
formation of alveolar sacs and capillaries. Another group recently reported that 
Foxf1(+/-) mouse embryos displayed a number of organ and skeletal defects
including fusion of lung lobes. However, identification of pulmonary genes whose 
altered expression was associated with the lobular fusion defect in Foxf1(+/-)
lungs remains uncharacterized. The present study was conducted to determine the
nature of the malformations leading to lung fusions in the FoxF1 embryos and to
identify potential signaling pathways influenced by FoxF1 haploinsufficiency. We 
show that Foxf1(+/-) embryos exhibit defects in formation and branching of
primary lung buds, which causes fusion of the right lung lobes and vessels. The
severity of the Foxf1(+/-) lung fusions was correlated with decreased levels of
FoxF1 mRNA. In situ hybridization studies demonstrated that the defective primary
lung-bud development in early Foxf1(+/-) embryos was associated with fewer
pulmonary mesenchymal-epithelial interfaces. Defects in branching morphogenesis
in the Foxf1(+/-) embryos were associated with altered expression of the
fibroblast growth factor-10, bone morphogenetic protein-4, and the Gli3
transcription factor, which are known to influence primary lung-bud development.

PMID: 11943666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Genes Dev. 2002 Feb 15;16(4):421-6.

Mutual genetic antagonism involving GLI3 and dHAND prepatterns the vertebrate
limb bud mesenchyme prior to SHH signaling.

te Welscher P(1), Fernandez-Teran M, Ros MA, Zeller R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Faculty of Biology, Utrecht University,
3584CH Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The bHLH transcription factor dHAND is required for establishment of SHH
signaling by the limb bud organizer in posterior mesenchyme, a step crucial to
development of vertebrate paired appendages. We show that the transcriptional
repressor GLI3 restricts dHAND expression to posterior mesenchyme prior to
activation of SHH signaling in mouse limb buds. dHAND, in turn, excludes anterior
genes such as Gli3 and Alx4 from posterior mesenchyme. Furthermore, genetic
interaction of GLI3 and dHAND directs establishment of the SHH/FGF signaling
feedback loop by restricting the BMP antagonist GREMLIN posteriorly. These
interactions polarize the nascent limb bud mesenchyme prior to SHH signaling.

PMCID: PMC155343
PMID: 11850405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Dev Biol. 2001 Oct 1;238(1):133-44.

The Gli2 transcription factor is required for normal mouse mammary gland
development.

Lewis MT(1), Ross S, Strickland PA, Sugnet CW, Jimenez E, Hui C, Daniel CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Sinsheimer Laboratories, University of California,
Santa Cruz, California 95064, USA. mike.lewis@uchsc.edu

The hedgehog signal transduction network performs critical roles in mediating
cell-cell interactions during embryogenesis and organogenesis. Loss-of-function
or misexpression mutation of hedgehog network components can cause birth defects,
skin cancer, and other tumors. The Gli gene family (Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3) encodes
zinc finger transcription factors that act as mediators of hedgehog signal
transduction. In this study, we investigate the role of Gli2 in mammary gland
development. Mammary expression of Gli2 is developmentally regulated in a tissue 
compartment-specific manner. Expression is exclusively stromal during virgin
stages of development but becomes both epithelial and stromal during pregnancy
and lactation. The null phenotype with respect to both ductal and alveolar
development was examined by transplantation rescue of embryonic mammary glands
into physiologically normal host females. Glands derived from both wild type and 
null embryo donors showed ductal outgrowths that developed to equivalent extents 
in virgin hosts. However, in null transplants, ducts were frequently distended or
irregularly shaped and showed a range of histological alterations similar to
micropapillary ductal hyperplasias in the human breast. Alveolar development
during pregnancy was not overtly affected by loss of Gli2 function. Ductal
defects were not observed when homozygous null epithelium was transplanted into a
wild type stromal background, indicating that Gli2 function is required primarily
in the stroma for proper ductal development. DeltaGli2 heterozygotes also
demonstrated an elevated frequency and severity of focal ductal dysplasia
relative to that of wild type littermate- and age-matched control animals.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11783999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Mamm Genome. 2002 Jan;13(1):58-61.

High-resolution mapping of the Gli3 mutation extra-toes reveals a 51.5-kb
deletion.

Maynard TM(1), Jain MD, Balmer CW, LaMantia AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Physiology, UNC Neuroscience Center, CB#7545,
School of Medicine, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina
27599, USA.

PMID: 11773971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Immunol. 2002 Jan 1;168(1):44-50.

Generation of diversity in the innate immune system: macrophage heterogeneity
arises from gene-autonomous transcriptional probability of individual inducible
genes.

Ravasi T(1), Wells C, Forest A, Underhill DM, Wainwright BJ, Aderem A, Grimmond
S, Hume DA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, and Cooperative Research Center for
Chronic Inflammatory Diseases, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland
4072, Australia.

Microbial products such as LPS stimulate macrophages to produce a wide diversity 
of inducible gene products needed for immediate host defense and priming of an
appropriate acquired immune response. In this study, we have examined
LPS-inducible gene expression in subclones of a mouse macrophage cell line,
RAW264, using cDNA microarrays. Even archetypal target genes such as TNF-alpha
were not induced in all subclones, and there was no absolute correlation between 
expression of pairs of genes. Nevertheless, the array analysis revealed clusters 
of genes that were more likely to be coexpressed. RAW264 cells stably transfected
with luciferase reporter genes driven by LPS-responsive promoters revealed the
same kind of clonal heterogeneity. The results indicate that each LPS-inducible
gene has its own inherent probability of activation in response to LPS.

PMID: 11751944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Development. 2001 Dec;128(24):5161-72.

Gli1 can rescue the in vivo function of Gli2.

Bai CB(1), Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, 540
First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

In mice, three Gli genes are thought to mediate sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling
collectively. Mis-expression studies and analysis of null mutants for each gene
have indicated that the Gli proteins have different functions. In particular,
Gli1 appears to be a constitutive activator, and Gli2 and Gli3 have repressor
functions. To determine the precise functional differences between Gli1 and Gli2,
we have expressed Gli1 in place of Gli2 from the endogenous Gli2 locus in mice.
Strikingly, a low level of Gli1 can rescue all the Shh signaling defects in Gli2 
mutants; however, only in the presence of a wild-type Shh gene. These studies
demonstrate that only the activator function of Gli2 is actually required, and
indicates that in specific situations, Shh can modulate the ability of Gli1 to
activate target genes. Furthermore, expression of both copies of Gli1 in place of
Gli2 does not disrupt spinal cord patterning, but does result in new
gain-of-function defects that lead to lethality. We show that the defects are
enhanced when Gli3 function is reduced, demonstrating that an important
difference between Gli1 and Gli2 is the ability of Gli1 to antagonize Gli3
function.

PMID: 11748151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Anim Genet. 2001 Dec;32(6):375-9.

An updated linkage and comparative map of porcine chromosome 18.

Campbell EM(1), Fahrenkrug SC, Vallet JL, Smith TP, Rohrer GA.

Author information: 
(1)USDA, ARS, US Meat Animal Research Center, PO Box 166, Spur 18D, Clay Center, 
NE 68933-0166, USA.

Swine chromosome 18 (SSC18) has the poorest marker density in the USDA-MARC
porcine linkage map. In order to increase the marker density, seven genes from
human chromosome 7 (HSA7) expected to map to SSC18 were selected for marker
development. The genes selected were: growth hormone releasing hormone receptor
(GHRHR), GLI-Kruppel family member (GLI3), leptin (LEP), capping protein muscle
Z-line alpha 2 subunit (CAPZA2), beta A inhibin (INHBA), T-cell receptor beta
(TCRB) and T-cell receptor gamma (TCRG). Large-insert clones (YACs, BACs and
cosmids) that contained these genes, as well as two previously mapped
microsatellite markers (SW1808 and SW1984), were identified and screened for
microsatellites. New microsatellite markers were developed from these clones and 
mapped. Selected clones were also physically assigned by fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH). Fifteen new microsatellite markers were added to the SSC18 
linkage map resulting in a map of 28 markers. Six genes have been included into
the genetic map improving the resolution of the SSC18 and HSA7 comparative map.
Assignment of TCRG to SSC9 has identified a break in conserved synteny between
SSC18 and HSA7.

PMID: 11736809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Mech Dev. 2001 Sep;107(1-2):119-31.

The Alzheimer-related gene presenilin-1 facilitates sonic hedgehog expression in 
Xenopus primary neurogenesis.

Paganelli AR(1), Ocaña OH, Prat MI, Franco PG, López SL, Morelli L, Adamo AM,
Riccomagno MM, Matsubara E, Shoji M, Affranchino JL, Castaño EM, Carrasco AE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Embriología Molecular, Instituto de Biología Celular y
Neurociencias, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Paraguay 2155, 
3 degrees piso (1121), Buenos Aires, Argentina.

We analyzed the influence of presenilins on the genetic cascades that control
neuronal differentiation in Xenopus embryos. Resembling sonic hedgehog (shh)
overexpression, presenilin mRNA injection reduced the number of N-tubulin+
primary neurons and modulated Gli3 and Zic2 according to their roles in
activating and repressing primary neurogenesis, respectively. Presenilin
increased shh expression within its normal domain, mainly in the floor plate,
whereas an antisense X-presenilin-alpha morpholino oligonucleotide reduced shh
expression. Both shh and presenilin promoted cell proliferation and apoptosis,
but the effects of shh were widely distributed, while those resulting from
presenilin injection coincided with the range of shh signaling. We suggest that
presenilin may modulate primary neurogenesis, proliferation, and apoptosis in the
neural plate, through the enhancement of shh signaling.

PMID: 11520668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Am J Pathol. 2001 Aug;159(2):765-74.

Anorectal malformations caused by defects in sonic hedgehog signaling.

Mo R(1), Kim JH, Zhang J, Chiang C, Hui CC, Kim PC.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

Anorectal malformations are a common clinical problem affecting the development
of the distal hindgut in infants. The spectrum of anorectal malformations ranges 
from the mildly stenotic anus to imperforate anus with a fistula between the
urinary and intestinal tracts to the most severe form, persistent cloaca. The
etiology, embryology, and pathogenesis of anorectal malformations are poorly
understood and controversial. Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is an endoderm-derived
signaling molecule that induces mesodermal gene expression in the chick hindgut. 
However, the role of Shh signaling in mammalian hindgut development is unknown.
Here, we show that mutant mice with various defects in the Shh signaling pathway 
exhibit a spectrum of distal hindgut defects mimicking human anorectal
malformations. Shh null-mutant mice display persistent cloaca. Mutant mice
lacking Gli2 or Gli3, two zinc finger transcription factors involved in Shh
signaling, respectively, exhibit imperforate anus with recto-urethral fistula and
anal stenosis. Furthermore, persistent cloaca is also observed in
Gli2(-/-);Gli3(+/-), Gli2(+/-);Gli3(-/-), and Gli2(-/-);Gli3(-/-) mice
demonstrating a gene dose-dependent effect. Therefore, Shh signaling is essential
for normal development of the distal hindgut in mice and mutations affecting Shh 
signaling produce a spectrum of anorectal malformations that may reveal new
insights into their human disease equivalents.

PMCID: PMC1850556
PMID: 11485934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Bone. 2001 Jul;29(1):54-61.

Characterization of human bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-4 and -7 gene
promoters: activation of BMP promoters by Gli, a sonic hedgehog mediator.

Kawai S(1), Sugiura T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Bone Research, Discovery Research Laboratories, Hoechst Marion 
Roussel, Ltd., Kawagoe, Saitama, Japan.

Among the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) family, which plays a crucial role not
only in bone formation but also in development, BMP-2, -4, and -7 participate
predominantly in various aspects. To undertake complex tasks, their expression is
strictly controlled. In this study we isolated and analyzed the 5'-flanking
regions of the human BMP-4 and -7 genes to elucidate the mechanism of their
temporally and spatially specific expression. As for BMP-4 expression, a reverse 
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay with specially designed
sets of primers demonstrated that osteoblastic SaOS-2 and Hos cells expressed two
types of transcripts comprising one of the 5'-untranslated first exons, whereas
MG63 cells displayed only the transcript with the BMP-4 proximal first exon.
Likewise, RT-PCR revealed that Hos and MG63 cells expressed BMP-7. Subsequent
5'-RACE confirmed an alternative usage of the BMP-4 first exons with clustered
multiple transcription start sites in the distal exon and the sole start site in 
the proximal exon. The transcription start site of the BMP-7 gene was found to be
far upstream (764 bp) of the initiation ATG codon. We constructed a series of
deletion mutants of fusions between these BMP promoters and the luciferase gene
and examined their activity by transient transfection into osteoblastic Hos and
renal COS-7 cells. The degree of distal and proximal BMP-4 promoter activity was 
in accordance with the expression level of the corresponding transcripts. Both
distal and proximal BMP-4 promoters possessed suppressor elements that are
operative only in Hos cells. The positive and negative elements identified in the
BMP-7 promoter were more remarkably effective in Hos cells. The activities of the
respective BMP-4 promoters and BMP-7 promoter were all stimulated upon the
cotransfection of a potential sonic hedgehog (SHH) mediator, Gli1 or Gli3 into
COS-7 cells, providing direct evidence that the Gli proteins are capable of
inducing the BMP expression. Our systems are helpful for assessment of the
complicated interactions of molecules involved in the skeletogenesis and
developmental processes.

PMID: 11472891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Mech Dev. 2001 Aug;106(1-2):159-62.

Expression pattern of Irx1 and Irx2 during mouse digit development.

Zülch A(1), Becker MB, Gruss P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Max-Planck-Institute of Biophysical
Chemistry, Am Fassberg 11, 37075, Göttingen, Germany.

Irx1 and Irx2 are members of the murine Iroquois homeobox (Irx) gene family. In
this study, we describe the dynamic expression pattern of these genes during limb
development with a focus on digit formation. We further present a comparative
expression analysis with Gli genes (Gli1, Gli2, Gli3). Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3 were 
suggested for candidate regulators of the Irx genes. The expression was studied
between E11.5 and E14.5 when the digits are being formed. Irx1 and Irx2 reproduce
the developmental program of the digits in time and space and the Irx1 provides
an early and excellent marker for this process. Our analysis also indicates that 
the expression of Irx1, Gli1 and Irx2, Gli2 are relative to each other. In
contrast, Gli3 exhibits a different expression pattern.

PMID: 11472848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Mech Dev. 2001 Aug;106(1-2):155-8.

Irx1 and Irx2 expression in early lung development.

Becker MB(1), Zülch A, Bosse A, Gruss P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Max Planck Institute of Biophysical
Chemistry, Am Fassberg, 37077, Göttingen, Germany.

We describe a comparative lung expression analysis of the murine Irx1 and Irx2
genes. At embryonic day 8.5 (E8.5), the Irx1 and Irx2 expression starts in the
foregut region, where the laryngo-tracheal groove will form. The expression is
prominent in the lung epithelium during glandular development. It declines at the
end of the canalicular phase. We further compare the Irx1 and Irx2 expression
domains to Gli1, 2, 3 and Mash1. Their homologues in Drosophila melanogaster are 
known as regulative partners of the iroquois complex. The Irx and Gli genes are
coexpressed in the developing lungs at the same time. Their transcripts are not
localised in the same cells but adjacent to each other in either mesenchymal or
epithelial structures. It is thought that the lung development is regulated by
the mesenchymal/epithelial interactions.

PMID: 11472847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Cell. 2001 Jun 1;105(5):599-612.

Cholesterol modification of sonic hedgehog is required for long-range signaling
activity and effective modulation of signaling by Ptc1.

Lewis PM(1), Dunn MP, McMahon JA, Logan M, Martin JF, St-Jacques B, McMahon AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, The Biolabs, Harvard University,
16 Divinity Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling from the posterior zone of polarizing activity
(ZPA) is the primary determinant of anterior-posterior polarity in the vertebrate
limb field. An active signal is produced by an autoprocessing reaction that
covalently links cholesterol to the N-terminal signaling moiety (N-Shh(p)),
tethering N-Shh(p) to the cell membrane. We have addressed the role played by
this lipophilic modification in Shh-mediated patterning of mouse digits. Both the
distribution and activity of N-Shh(p) indicate that N-Shh(p) acts directly over a
few hundred microns. In contrast, N-Shh, a form that lacks cholesterol, retains
similar biological activity to N-Shh(p), but signaling is posteriorly restricted.
Thus, cholesterol modification is essential for the normal range of signaling. It
also appears to be necessary for appropriate modulation of signaling by the Shh
receptor, Ptc1.

PMID: 11389830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Med Genet. 2001 Mar;38(3):178-82.

Pure partial 7p trisomy including the TWIST, HOXA, and GLI3 genes.

Mégarbané A, Le Lorc'H M, Elghezal H, Joly G, Gosset P, Souraty N, Samaras L,
Prieur M, Vekemans M, Turleau C, Romana SP.

PMCID: PMC1734838
PMID: 11303510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Orthop Res. 2001 Jan;19(1):78-84.

Molecular aspects of healing in stabilized and non-stabilized fractures.

Le AX(1), Miclau T, Hu D, Helms JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of California at San Francisco, 
94143-0514, USA.

Bone formation is a continuous process that is initiated during fetal development
and persists in adults in the form of bone regeneration and remodeling. These
latter two aspects of bone formation are clearly influenced by the mechanical
environment. In this study we tested the hypothesis that alterations in the
mechanical environment regulate the program of mesenchymal cell differentiation, 
and thus the formation of a cartilage or bony callus, at the site of injury. As a
first step in testing this hypothesis we produced stabilized and non-stabilized
tibial fractures in a mouse model, then used molecular and cellular methods to
examine the stage of healing. Using the "molecular map" of the fracture callus,
we divided our analyzes into three phases of fracture healing: the inflammatory
or initial phase of healing, the soft callus or intermediate stage, and the hard 
callus stage. Our results show that indian hedgehog(ihh), which regulates aspects
of chondrocyte maturation during fetal and early postnatal skeletogenesis, was
expressed earlier in an non-stabilized fracture callus as compared to a
stabilized callus. ihh persisted in the non-stabilized fracture whereas its
expression was down-regulated in the stabilized bone. IHH exerts its effects on
chondrocyte maturation through a feedback loop that may involve bone
morphogenetic protein 6 [bmp6; (S. Pathi, J.B. Rutenberg, R.L. Johnson, A.
Vortkamp, Developmental Biology 209 (1999) 239-253)] and the transcription factor
gli3. bmp6 and gli3 were re-induced in domain adjacent to the ihh-positive cells 
during the soft and hard callus stages of healing. Thus, stabilizing the
fracture, which circumvents or decreases the cartilaginous phase of bone repair, 
correlates with a decrease in ihh signaling in the fracture callus. Collectively,
our results illustrate that the ihh signaling pathway participates in fracture
repair, and that the mechanical environment affects the temporal induction of
ihh, bmp6 and gli3. These data support the hypothesis that mechanical influences 
affect mesenchymal cell differentiation to bone.

PMID: 11332624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Am J Med Genet. 2001 Mar 1;99(2):128-31.

Long-term treatment with growth hormone improves final height in a patient with
Pallister-Hall syndrome.

Galasso C(1), Scirè G, Fabbri F, Spadoni GL, Killoran CE, Biesecker LG,
Boscherini B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy.
spadoni@med.uniroma2,it

Pallister-Hall syndrome is a disorder of development consisting of hypothalamic
hamartoma, pituitary dysfunction, central polydactyly and visceral malformations.
This disorder is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait and is caused by
mutations of the GLI3 gene encoding a zinc finger transcription factor. We
describe a case of Pallister-Hall syndrome with growth hormone neurosecretory
dysfunction, successfully treated with growth hormone until attainment of final
height. We conclude that children with Pallister-Hall syndrome and short stature 
be evaluated carefully for spontaneous somatotropic function and, if necessary,
treated with growth hormone.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss. Inc.

PMID: 11241471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Pediatr Surg. 2001 Feb;36(2):381-4.

Murine models of VACTERL syndrome: Role of sonic hedgehog signaling pathway.

Kim PC(1), Mo R, Hui Cc C.

Author information: 
(1)Programs in Infection, Immunity, Injury and Repair and Developmental Biology, 
Research Institute, The Hospital for Sick Children, Department of Surgery,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: VACTERL syndrome is a common surgical condition affecting the
development of many midaxial organs. The etiology, embryology, and pathogenesis
of the VACTERL syndrome are not known. The authors report here new mouse models
of VACTERL syndrome involving the Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway.
METHODS: Mutant mice involving Shh signaling, the Shh transcription factors
Gli2-/- and Gli3-/-, Gli2-/-;Gli3+/- double heterozygotes, and Shh-/- were
analyzed.
RESULTS: In addition to reported vertebral, anal, tracheoesophageal, and limb
anomalies, mutant mice display cardiac, renal, and associated anomalies, namely
congenital diaphragmatic hernia and omphalocele, known to be associated in
VACTERL syndrome. The Shh transcription factors Gli2 and Gli3 have specific and
overlapping roles in the induction of VACTERL phenotypes in a gene-dose dependent
manner in these mutants.
CONCLUSION: To the authors' knowledge, these mutant mice represent the first
animal model that mimics the human VACTERL syndrome, and suggests that
aberrations in Shh signaling might be involved in the VACTERL syndrome.

PMID: 11172440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Ryoikibetsu Shokogun Shirizu. 2000;(30 Pt 5):184-6.

[Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome].

[Article in Japanese]

Satokata I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Niigata University School of Medicine.

PMID: 11057189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Ryoikibetsu Shokogun Shirizu. 2000;(30 Pt 5):23-5.

[Pallister-Hall syndrome].

[Article in Japanese]

Oho Y(1), Okuyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, National Children's Medical Research Center.

PMID: 11057130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jan 19;276(3):2180-8. Epub 2000 Oct 26.

Molecular properties of Zic proteins as transcriptional regulators and their
relationship to GLI proteins.

Mizugishi K(1), Aruga J, Nakata K, Mikoshiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Developmental Neurobiology, RIKEN Brain Science Institute,
Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

Zic family genes encode zinc finger proteins, which play important roles in
vertebrate development. The zinc finger domains are highly conserved between Zic 
proteins and show a notable homology to those of Gli family proteins. In this
study, we investigated the functional properties of Zic proteins and their
relationship to the GLI proteins. We first established an optimal binding
sequence for Zic1, Zic2, and Zic3 proteins by electrophoretic mobility shift
assay-based target selection and mutational analysis. The selected sequence was
almost identical to the GLI binding sequence. However, the binding affinity was
lower than that of GLI. Consistent results were obtained in reporter assays, in
which transcriptional activation by Zic proteins was less dependent on the GLI
binding sequence than GLI1. Moreover, Zic proteins activated a wide range of
promoters irrespective of the presence of a GLI binding sequence. When Zic and
GLI proteins were cotransfected into cultured cells, Zic proteins enhanced or
suppressed sequence-dependent, GLI-mediated transactivation depending on cell
type. Taken together, these results suggest that Zic proteins may act as
transcriptional coactivators and that their function may be modulated by the GLI 
proteins and possibly by other cell type-specific cofactors.

PMID: 11053430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Mech Dev. 2000 Nov;98(1-2):171-4.

Similar expression and regulation of Gli2 and Gli3 in the chick limb bud.

Schweitzer R(1), Vogan KJ, Tabin CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, 200 Longwood Avenue, Boston,
MA 02115, USA.

Gli genes encode a family of zinc finger transcription factors that mediate
signaling by Hedgehog proteins. We have cloned the chick Gli3 gene and studied
its expression in developing chick limbs. Gli3 expression is highly similar to
that of chick Gli2. Gli3 mRNA is evenly distributed in the early limb mesenchyme 
and subsequently downregulated in the posterior mesenchyme by the polarizing
activity of Sonic hedgehog. At later stages, Gli3 is expressed in the distal limb
mesenchyme.

PMID: 11044624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Cancer Res. 2000 Oct 1;60(19):5386-9.

Regulation of gli activity by all-trans retinoic acid in mouse keratinocytes.

Goyette P(1), Allan D, Peschard P, Chen CF, Wang W, Lohnes D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Université de Montréal, Quebec, Canada.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling is essential for many normal developmental
processes. The Shh signal is interpreted by the Gli transcription factors.
Elevated Gli-1 expression has been associated with several neoplasms, including
basal cell carcinoma. All-trans retinoic acid (RA) has strong effects on
epidermal growth and differentiation and has been used for the treatment of
various epithelial disorders. In this report, we show that RA can inhibit Gli
activity in immortalized murine keratinocytes in a RA receptor-specific manner.
This inhibition may occur, at least in part, through sequestration of the
transcriptional coactivator cyclic AMP-responsive element-binding protein-binding
protein and suggests a novel effect of retinoid excess on Shh signaling.

PMID: 11034076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Nat Neurosci. 2000 Oct;3(10):979-85.

Specification of ventral neuron types is mediated by an antagonistic interaction 
between Shh and Gli3.

Litingtung Y(1), Chiang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, B2120 MCN,
Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

Specification of distinct neuron types in the ventral spinal cord is thought to
be mediated by a graded concentration of Sonic hedgehog (Shh), a secreted
signaling protein. Shh is made in the notochord, the most ventral part of the
spinal cord, and in mice lacking Shh, ventral cell types are reduced or absent.
The response to Shh depends on transcription factors of the Gli family, but the
detailed mechanism is not understood. Here we show that Gli3 represses ventral
fates in a dose-dependent manner. Whereas Shh -/- mutant mice show reductions in 
several classes of ventral interneurons and a complete absence of motor neurons, 
these cell types were rescued in Shh-/-;Gli3 -/- double mutants. This rescue of
the Shh null phenotype depended on the level of Gli3 function; a partial rescue
was observed in Shh-/-;Gli3 +/- embryos. We propose that Shh is required to
antagonize Gli3, which would otherwise repress ventral fates. Differences between
rostral and caudal regions suggest that other signaling molecules-in addition to 
Shh-may be involved in specifying ventral fates, particularly in the caudal
region of the spinal cord.

PMID: 11017169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Nat Neurosci. 2000 Oct;3(10):967-9.

Achieving neuronal patterning by repression.

Stone D, Rosenthal A.

PMID: 11017163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Development. 2000 Oct;127(20):4395-405.

Gli2 functions in FGF signaling during antero-posterior patterning.

Brewster R(1), Mullor JL, Ruiz i Altaba A.

Author information: 
(1)The Skirball Institute, Developmental Genetics Program and Department of Cell 
Biology, NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Patterning along the anteroposterior (A-P) axis involves the interplay of
secreted and transcription factors that specify cell fates in the mesoderm and
neuroectoderm. While FGF and homeodomain proteins have been shown to play
different roles in posterior specification, the network coordinating their
effects remains elusive. Here we have analyzed the function of Gli zinc-finger
proteins in mesodermal A-P patterning. We find that Gli2 is sufficient to induce 
ventroposterior development, functioning in the FGF-brachyury regulatory loop.
Gli2 directly induces brachyury, a gene required and sufficient for mesodermal
development, and Gli2 is in turn induced by FGF signaling. Moreover, the homeobox
gene Xhox3, a critical determinant of posterior development, is also directly
regulated by Gli2. Gli3, but not Gli1, has an activity similar to that of Gli2
and is expressed in ventroposterior mesoderm after Gli2. These findings uncover a
novel function of Gli proteins, previously only known to mediate hedgehog
signals, in the maintenance and patterning of the embryonic mesoderm. More
generally, our results suggest a molecular basis for an integration of FGF and
hedgehog inputs in Gli-expressing cells that respond to these signals.

PMID: 11003839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Am J Hum Genet. 2000 Nov;67(5):1047-54. Epub 2000 Sep 21.

The sonic hedgehog-patched-gli pathway in human development and disease.

Villavicencio EH(1), Walterhouse DO, Iannaccone PM.

Author information: 
(1)Northwestern University Medical School and the Children's Memorial Institute
for Education and Research, Chicago, IL 60614, USA.

PMCID: PMC1288546
PMID: 11001584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Am J Med Genet. 2000 Sep 4;94(1):64-7.

Asymptomatic laryngeal malformations are common in patients with Pallister-Hall
syndrome.

Ondrey F(1), Griffith A, Van Waes C, Rudy S, Peters K, McCullagh L, Biesecker LG.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, the National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Pallister-Hall syndrome (PHS) comprises hypothalamic hamartoma, polydactyly,
pituitary dysfunction, laryngotracheal cleft, imperforate anus, and other
anomalies. Some patients with PHS have a bifid epiglottis, a rare malformation.
Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS) comprises polydactyly with
craniofacial malformations without the PHS malformations. Both disorders are
caused by mutations in the GLI3 gene. Laryngoscopy on 26 subjects with PHS showed
that 15 had a bifid or cleft epiglottis (58%) and none of 14 subjects with GCPS
had a cleft epiglottis. The malformed epiglottis was asymptomatic in all of the
prospectively evaluated subjects. One additional PHS subject was found to have
bifid epiglottis and a posterior laryngeal cleft on autopsy. We conclude that
bifid epiglottis is common in PHS but not GCPS. Posterior laryngeal clefts are an
uncommon manifestation of PHS and are identified only in severely affected
patients. The diagnosis of a bifid epiglottis should prompt a thorough search for
other sometimes asymptomatic anomalies of PHS to provide better medical care and 
recurrence risk assessment for affected individuals and families.

PMID: 10982485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Development. 2000 Oct;127(19):4293-301.

Expression of the vertebrate Gli proteins in Drosophila reveals a distribution of
activator and repressor activities.

Aza-Blanc P(1), Lin HY, Ruiz i Altaba A, Kornberg TB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

The Cubitus interruptus (Ci) and Gli proteins are transcription factors that
mediate responses to Hedgehog proteins (Hh) in flies and vertebrates,
respectively. During development of the Drosophila wing, Ci transduces the Hh
signal and regulates transcription of different target genes at different
locations. In vertebrates, the three Gli proteins are expressed in overlapping
domains and are partially redundant. To assess how the vertebrate Glis correlate 
with Drosophila Ci, we expressed each in Drosophila and monitored their behaviors
and activities. We found that each Gli has distinct activities that are
equivalent to portions of the regulatory arsenal of Ci. Gli2 and Gli1 have
activator functions that depend on Hh. Gli2 and Gli3 are proteolyzed to produce a
repressor form able to inhibit hh expression. However, while Gli3 repressor
activity is regulated by Hh, Gli2 repressor activity is not. These observations
suggest that the separate activator and repressor functions of Ci are unevenly
partitioned among the three Glis, yielding proteins with related yet distinct
properties.

PMID: 10976059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Dev Growth Differ. 2000 Aug;42(4):367-76.

Suppression of polydactyly of the Gli3 mutant (extra toes) by deltaEF1 homozygous
mutation.

Moribe H(1), Takagi T, Kondoh H, Higashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Osaka University, Suita, Japan.

Digit patterning is established through multiple genetic interactions.
Delta-crystallin enhancer/E2-box factor (deltaEF1) is a zinc finger and
homeodomain containing repressor protein, and is expressed in the posterior half 
of the forelimb bud and in the entire hindlimb bud during the early stage of limb
development. The 6EF1-deficient mutant mice display various skeletal
abnormalities, among which inferior ossification and abnormal patterning of
autopodial bones are similar to those observed in Hox and Gli gene mutants. Gli3 
mutant mice, extra toes (Xt), exhibit pre-axial polydactyly losing the identity
of digit I. It is demonstrated here that deltaEF1null(lacZ) homozygosity
suppressed formation of the extra digit, uniquely of the hindlimb, in both
Gli3XtJ heterozygous and homozygous mutants, but with no restoration of digit I
identity. In Gli3XtJ mutants, the Hoxd13 expression domain was expanded more
dramatically in homozygotes. In Gli3XtJ;deltaEF1null(lacZ) double homozygous
mutants, Hoxd13 expression once expanded in Gli3XtJ homozygous mutant was
reduced, more conspicuously in the hindlimbs, which may account for
hindlimb-restricted suppression of formation of the extra digit. The data suggest
the possibility that the extent of Hoxd13 expression along the distal margin of
the limb bud is determinative in defining the digit number.

PMID: 10969736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Clin Genet. 2000 Jul;58(1):28-30.

Overlap of PIV syndrome, VACTERL and Pallister-Hall syndrome: clinical and
molecular analysis.

Killoran CE(1), Abbott M, McKusick VA, Biesecker LG.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Disease Research Branch, NHGRI/National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The polydactyly, imperforate anus, vertebral anomalies syndrome (PIV, OMIM
174100) was determined as a distinct syndrome by Say and Gerald in 1968 (Say B,
Gerald PS. Lancet 1968: 2: 688). We noted that the features of PIV overlap with
the VATER association and Pallister-Hall syndrome (PHS, OMIM 146510), which
includes polydactyly, (central or postaxial), shortened fingers, hypoplastic
nails, renal anomalies, imperforate anus, and hypothalamic hamartoma. Truncation 
mutations in GL13, a zinc finger transcription factor gene, have been shown to
cause PHS. We performed a molecular evaluation on a patient diagnosed with PIV,
whose mother, grandfather, and maternal aunt had similar malformations. We
sequenced the GLI3 gene in the patient to determine if she had a mutation. The
patient was found to have a deletion in nucleotides 2188-2207 causing a
frameshift mutation that predicts a truncated protein product of the gene. Later 
clinical studies demonstrated that the patient also has a hypothalamic hamartoma,
a finding in PHS. We concluded that this family had atypical PHS and not PIV.
This result has prompted us to re-evaluate the PIV literature to see if PIV is a 
valid entity. Based on these data and our examination of the literature, we
conclude that PIV is not a valid diagnostic entity. We conclude that patients
diagnosed with PIV should be reclassified as having VACTERL, or PHS, or another
syndrome with overlapping malformations.

PMID: 10945658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Ernst Schering Res Found Workshop. 2000;(29):211-35.

Hedgehog signaling in animal development and human disease.

Bailey EC(1), Scott MP, Johnson RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham 35294-0005,
USA.

PMID: 10943312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Neurosci. 2000 Aug 1;20(15):5802-12.

Neocortical origin and tangential migration of guidepost neurons in the lateral
olfactory tract.

Tomioka N(1), Osumi N, Sato Y, Inoue T, Nakamura S, Fujisawa H, Hirata T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Science, Nagoya University Graduate School of Science, 
Japan.

The early-generated neurons designated as lot cells specifically mark the future 
site of the lateral olfactory tract (LOT) and guide LOT axons. We investigated
the mechanism of how lot cells develop and get localized in the LOT position. Lot
cells differentiated from neuroepithelial cells in all regions of the neocortex
but not from those in the ganglionic eminence in culture. Cell tracing analyses
demonstrated that lot cells generated from the neocortex subsequently followed a 
tangential migration stream ventrally toward the LOT position. Mutant mouse
embryos lacking the function of transcription factor Gli3 showed disturbances of 
the migration stream and translocation of lot cells in the dorsal telencephalon. 
These results reveal a new type of neuronal migration in the telencephalon and
introduce an unexpected dramatic feature of the earliest regionalization of the
telencephalon.

PMID: 10908621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Mech Dev. 2000 Jun;94(1-2):117-32.

Indian hedgehog signaling in extraembryonic endoderm and ectoderm differentiation
in ES embryoid bodies.

Maye P(1), Becker S, Kasameyer E, Byrd N, Grabel L.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Wesleyan University, Middletown, CT 06459-0170, USA.

We previously demonstrated that a member of the Hedgehog gene family, Indian
hedgehog (Ihh), is expressed in the visceral endoderm of EC and ES cell embryoid 
bodies and mouse embryos. Overexpression studies suggested that Ihh was involved 
in visceral endoderm differentiation. We now provide evidence for a Hh response
in the embryoid body core and in the mesothelial layer of the visceral yolk sac. 
We also demonstrate that treatment of ES embryoid bodies with the Hh antagonists 
cAMP and forskolin results in downregulation of the Hh response and altered
embryoid body differentiation. The outer endoderm layer undergoes a transition to
parietal endoderm while formation of an embryonic ectoderm layer surrounding a
cavity is inhibited. These treatments also result in a decrease in the expression
of markers for the mesoderm derivatives, blood and endothelial cells. We present 
a model to explain how Ihh and BMP signaling may regulate extraembryonic endoderm
and embryonic ectoderm differentiation.

PMID: 10842064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Nat Cell Biol. 2000 May;2(5):310-2.

Gli regulation by the opposing activities of fused and suppressor of fused.

Murone M(1), Luoh SM, Stone D, Li W, Gurney A, Armanini M, Grey C, Rosenthal A,
de Sauvage FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, CA
94080, USA.

PMID: 10806483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Development. 2000 May;127(10):2075-87.

Shh and Wnt signaling pathways converge to control Gli gene activation in avian
somites.

Borycki A(1), Brown AM, Emerson CP Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, BRBII/III, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6058, USA.

The regulation of the Gli genes during somite formation has been investigated in 
quail embryos. The Gli genes are a family encoding three related zinc finger
transcription factors, Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3, which are effectors of Shh signaling 
in responding cells. A quail Gli3 cDNA has been cloned and its expression
compared with Gli1 and Gli2. These studies show that Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3 are
co-activated at the time of somite formation, thus providing a mechanism for
regulating the initiation of Shh signaling in somites. Embryo surgery and
paraxial mesoderm explant experiments show that each of the Gli genes is
regulated by distinct signaling mechanisms. Gli1 is activated in response to Shh 
produced by the notochord, which also controls the dorsalization of Gli2 and Gli3
following their activation by Wnt signaling from the surface ectoderm and neural 
tube. This surface ectoderm/neural tube Wnt signaling has both negative and
positive functions in Gli2 and Gli3 regulation: these signals repress Gli3 in
segmental plate mesoderm prior to somite formation and then promote somite
formation and the somite-specific activation of Gli2 and Gli3. These studies,
therefore, establish a role for Wnt signaling in the control of Shh signal
transduction through the regulation of Gli2 and Gli3, and provide a mechanistic
basis for the known synergistic actions of surface ectoderm/neural tube and
notochord signaling in somite cell specification.

PMID: 10769232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Turk J Pediatr. 1999 Apr-Jun;41(2):259-65.

A Turkish family with Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome.

Boduroglu K(1), Balci S, Topçu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara.

Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome is a very rare autosomal dominant disease
characterized by postaxial polysyndactyly of hands, preaxial polysyndactyly of
feet and peculiar facial features, and has been shown to be due to mutations in
the GLI3 gene. We present clinical findings of a 39-year-old man and his
nine-day-old daughter with Greig cephalopolysyndactyly who showed variable
expression with regard to syndactyly of fingers and toes. The role of obstetric
ultrasonography in the prenatal diagnosis of the syndrome is also discussed.

PMID: 10770668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Development. 2000 Apr;127(8):1593-605.

Mouse Gli1 mutants are viable but have defects in SHH signaling in combination
with a Gli2 mutation.

Park HL(1), Bai C, Platt KA, Matise MP, Beeghly A, Hui CC, Nakashima M, Joyner
AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, Department of Cell Biology and Physiology and
Neuroscience, New York University Medical School, New York, NY 10016, USA.

The secreted factor Sonic hedgehog (SHH) is both required for and sufficient to
induce multiple developmental processes, including ventralization of the CNS,
branching morphogenesis of the lungs and anteroposterior patterning of the limbs.
Based on analogy to the Drosophila Hh pathway, the multiple GLI transcription
factors in vertebrates are likely to both transduce SHH signaling and repress Shh
transcription. In order to discriminate between overlapping versus unique
requirements for the three Gli genes in mice, we have produced a Gli1 mutant and 
analyzed the phenotypes of Gli1/Gli2 and Gli1/3 double mutants. Gli3(xt) mutants 
have polydactyly and dorsal CNS defects associated with ectopic Shh expression,
indicating GLI3 plays a role in repressing Shh. In contrast, Gli2 mutants have
five digits, but lack a floorplate, indicating that it is required to transduce
SHH signaling in some tissues. Remarkably, mice homozygous for a Gli1(zfd
)mutation that deletes the exons encoding the DNA-binding domain are viable and
appear normal. Transgenic mice expressing a GLI1 protein lacking the zinc fingers
can not induce SHH targets in the dorsal brain, indicating that the Gli1(zfd
)allele contains a hypomorphic or null mutation. Interestingly,
Gli1(zfd/zfd);Gli2(zfd/+), but not Gli1(zfd/zfd);Gli3(zfd/+) double mutants have 
a severe phenotype; most Gli1(zfd/zfd);Gli2(zfd/+) mice die soon after birth and 
all have multiple defects including a variable loss of ventral spinal cord cells 
and smaller lungs that are similar to, but less extreme than, Gli2(zfd/zfd)
mutants. Gli1/Gli2 double homozygous mutants have more extreme CNS and lung
defects than Gli1(zfd/zfd);Gli2(zfd/+) mutants, however, in contrast to Shh
mutants, ventrolateral neurons develop in the CNS and the limbs have 5 digits
with an extra postaxial nubbin. These studies demonstrate that the zinc-finger
DNA-binding domain of GLI1 protein is not required for SHH signaling in mouse.
Furthermore, Gli1 and Gli2, but not Gli1 and Gli3, have extensive overlapping
functions that are likely downstream of SHH signaling.

PMID: 10725236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Am J Med Genet. 2000 Jan 31;90(3):239-42.

Boy with syndactylies, macrocephaly, and severe skeletal dysplasia: not a new
syndrome, but two dominant mutations (GLI3 E543X and COL2A1 G973R) in the same
individual.

Sobetzko D(1), Eich G, Kalff-Suske M, Grzeschik KH, Superti-Furga A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University Children's Hospital, Zürich, Switzerland.

An unusual combination of syndactylies, macrocephaly, and severe skeletal
dysplasia was observed in a newborn infant. A history of digital anomalies in the
father and grandfather lead to the diagnosis of dominantly inherited Greig
cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS, MIM #175700). Having explained the digital 
findings and macrocephaly, the skeletal changes were thought to fit best
congenital spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia (SEDC MIM #183900), a type II collagen
disorder. Molecular analysis confirmed the presence of two dominant mutations in 
the propositus: a GLI3 mutation (E543X), which was present also in the father and
grandfather, and a de novo COL2A1 mutation leading to a G973R substitution. Thus,
this boy combined the syndactyly-macrocephaly phenotype of Greig
cephalosyndactyly syndrome with a severe form of spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia
caused by the structural defect in type II collagen. The diagnostic difficulties 
posed by the combination of two genetic disorders and the contribution of
molecular diagnostics are well illustrated by this case.

PMID: 10678662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Cell. 2000 Feb 18;100(4):423-34.

Hedgehog-regulated processing of Gli3 produces an anterior/posterior repressor
gradient in the developing vertebrate limb.

Wang B(1), Fallon JF, Beachy PA.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics,
The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

Ci/Gli zinc finger proteins mediate the transcriptional effects of Hedgehog
protein signals. In Drosophila, Ci action as transcriptional repressor or
activator is contingent upon Hedgehog-regulated, PKA-dependent proteolytic
processing. We demonstrate that PKA-dependent processing of vertebrate Gli3 in
developing limb similarly generates a potent repressor in a manner antagonized by
apparent long-range signaling from posteriorly localized Sonic hedgehog protein. 
The resulting anterior/posterior Gli3 repressor gradient can be perturbed by
mutations of Gli3 in human genetic syndromes or by misregulation of Gli3
processing in the chicken mutant talpid2, producing a range of limb patterning
malformations. The high relative abundance and potency of Gli3 repressor suggest 
specialization of Gli3 and its products for negative Hedgehog pathway regulation.

PMID: 10693759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Pediatr Surg. 2000 Feb;35(2):227-30; discussion 230-1.

New mouse models of congenital anorectal malformations.

Kimmel SG(1), Mo R, Hui CC, Kim PC.

Author information: 
(1)The Hospital for Sick Children, Research Institute, Infection, Immunity,
Injury, and Repair, University of Toronto, Department of Surgery, Ontario,
Canada.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: The genetic, embryological, and pathogenetic aspects of
hindgut development remain poorly understood. Recently, the morphogenetic pathway
involving the Sonic hedgehog (Shh) gene has been shown essential to the normal
development of many midaxial organs, including the foregut. This study reports
genetically based murine models of congenital anorectal malformations (CAM)
involving the Shh-responsive transcription factors, Gli2 and Gli3. Its purpose is
to show the necessity of these 2 factors to normal hindgut development.
METHODS: Gli2-/- mutants were generated by a targeted deletion. Gli3-/- mutants
are spontaneous mutants involving the Gli3 gene. Gli2-/- Gli3+/- mutants were
generated by intercrossing double heterozygotes. Whole-mount midsagittal sections
of the embryos were analyzed on embryonic days (E) 11.5 and E13.5.
RESULTS: Gli3-/- mutants had anal stenosis and ectopic anus, and Gli2-/- mutants 
showed imperforate anus and rectourethral fistula. Gli2-/- Gli3+/- mutants had a 
cloacal abnormality.
CONCLUSIONS: The phenotypic abnormalities observed in these mutant mice are
identical to the spectrum of human CAM. The severity of the phenotype appears to 
reflect the gene dose. Gli2 and Gli3 play an important role in the normal
development of murine hindgut. The results of this study provide, for the first
time, a molecular basis for CAM.

PMID: 10693670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Dev Biol. 2000 Jan 15;217(2):254-65.

Dorsoventral patterning of the telencephalon is disrupted in the mouse mutant
extra-toes(J).

Tole S(1), Ragsdale CW, Grove EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, 60637,
USA.

Little is known about the mechanisms that control the development of regional
identity in the mammalian telencephalon. The Gli family of transcription factor
genes is involved in the regulation of pattern at many sites in the embryo and is
expressed in the embryonic mouse telencephalon. We have analyzed telencephalic
patterning in the extra-toes (J) (Xt(J)) mouse mutant, which carries a deletion
in the Gli family member Gli3. We report that dorsoventral patterning of the
telencephalon is dramatically disrupted in the Xt(J) mutant. Specific dorsal
telencephalic cell types and gene expression patterns are lost in homozygous
Xt(J) mutants, and features of ventral telencephalic identity develop ectopically
in the dorsal telencephalon. This partial ventralization of the dorsal
telencephalon does not appear to be induced by an expansion of Sonic hedgehog
expression in the telencephalon, but may be due to a loss of Bmp and Wnt gene
expression in a putative dorsal telencephalic signaling center, the cortical hem.
Our findings suggest that in dorsal telencephalon Gli3 is needed to repress
ventral telencephalic identity.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10625551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Curr Biol. 1999 Nov 18;9(22):1319-22.

Distinct and regulated activities of human Gli proteins in Drosophila.

von Mering C(1), Basler K.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, Universität Zürich, Zürich, 8057, Switzerland.

In both vertebrates and Drosophila, limb development is organized by a
posteriorly located source of the signalling protein Hedgehog (Hh) [1] [2] [3]
[4]. In Drosophila, the expression of Hh target genes is controlled by two
opposing activities of the transcriptional regulator Cubitus interruptus (Ci),
which activates target genes in response to Hh signalling but is converted into a
repressor form in the absence of Hh [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10]. Three homologs of
Ci (Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3) have been implicated in mediating responses to Sonic
hedgehog (Shh) in vertebrates [11] [12]. Much attention has been devoted to the
expression pattern of GLI genes; GLI1 is induced by Shh, whereas GLI3
transcription appears to be repressed by Shh signalling [13] [14] [15]. The
regulation of GLI gene expression is therefore one important mechanism by which
GLI genes organize pattern. It is not well understood, however, whether Shh
signalling also controls the activities of Gli proteins post-translationally and 
whether these activities have activating or repressing effects on target genes in
vivo. Here, we have subjected the human proteins Gli1 and Gli3 to the precise and
well-defined Hh signalling assay of Drosophila wing development and established
that Gli1 functions as an activator and Gli3 as a repressor of Hh target genes;
that the activating transcriptional activity of Gli1 and the repressing activity 
of Gli3 are both subject to Hh regulation in vivo; and that the combined
activities of Gli1 and Gli3 can substitute for Ci in controlling Hh target gene
expression during embryonic and larval development.

PMID: 10574767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Cell Sci. 1999 Dec;112 ( Pt 23):4437-48.

Characterization of the human suppressor of fused, a negative regulator of the
zinc-finger transcription factor Gli.

Stone DM(1), Murone M, Luoh S, Ye W, Armanini MP, Gurney A, Phillips H, Brush J, 
Goddard A, de Sauvage FJ, Rosenthal A.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neuroscience, Genentech, Inc. 1 DNA Way, South San Francisco,
CA 94080, USA.

Drosophila Suppressor of fused (Su(fu)) encodes a novel 468-amino-acid
cytoplasmic protein which, by genetic analysis, functions as a negative regulator
of the Hedgehog segment polarity pathway. Here we describe the primary structure,
tissue distribution, biochemical and functional analyses of a human Su(fu)
(hSu(fu)). Two alternatively spliced isoforms of hSu(fu) were identified,
predicting proteins of 433 and 484 amino acids, with a calculated molecular mass 
of 48 and 54 kDa, respectively. The two proteins differ only by the inclusion or 
exclusion of a 52-amino-acid extension at the carboxy terminus. Both isoforms
were expressed in multiple embryonic and adult tissues, and exhibited a
developmental profile consistent with a role in Hedgehog signaling. The hSu(fu)
contains a high-scoring PEST-domain, and exhibits an overall 37% sequence
identity (63% similarity) with the Drosophila protein and 97% sequence identity
with the mouse Su(fu). The hSu(fu) locus mapped to chromosome 10q24-q25, a region
which is deleted in glioblastomas, prostate cancer, malignant melanoma and
endometrial cancer. HSu(fu) was found to repress activity of the zinc-finger
transcription factor Gli, which mediates Hedgehog signaling in vertebrates, and
to physically interact with Gli, Gli2 and Gli3 as well as with Slimb, an F-box
containing protein which, in the fly, suppresses the Hedgehog response, in part
by stimulating the degradation of the fly Gli homologue. Coexpression of Slimb
with Su(fu) potentiated the Su(fu)-mediated repression of Gli. Taken together,
our data provide biochemical and functional evidence for the hypothesis that
Su(fu) is a key negative regulator in the vertebrate Hedgehog signaling pathway. 
The data further suggest that Su(fu) can act by binding to Gli and inhibiting
Gli-mediated transactivation as well as by serving as an adaptor protein, which
links Gli to the Slimb-dependent proteasomal degradation pathway.

PMID: 10564661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Mech Dev. 1999 Dec;89(1-2):141-50.

Zic1 regulates the patterning of vertebral arches in cooperation with Gli3.

Aruga J(1), Mizugishi K, Koseki H, Imai K, Balling R, Noda T, Mikoshiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, Tsukuba Life Science Center, RIKEN,
Tsukuba-shi, Ibaraki, Japan. jaruga@brain.riken.go.jp

Skeletal abnormalities are described that appeared in Zic1-deficient mice. These 
mice show multiple abnormalities in the axial skeleton. The deformities are
severe in the dorsal parts of the vertebrae, vertebral arches, but less so in the
vertebral bodies (spina bifida occulta). The proximal ribs are deformed having
ectopic processes. The abnormalities found in the vertebral arches can be traced 
back to disturbed segmental patterns of dorsal sclerotome. The Zic1/Gli3 double
mutants showed severe abnormalities of vertebral arches not found in single
mutants. The abnormalities in the vertebral arches were less severe in Zic1/Pax1 
mutants than Zic1/Gli3 mutants, but significantly more pronounced than in Zic1
single mutants. The three genes may act synergistically in the development of the
vertebral arches.

PMID: 10559489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Curr Biol. 1999 Oct 7;9(19):1119-22.

Mouse suppressor of fused is a negative regulator of sonic hedgehog signaling and
alters the subcellular distribution of Gli1.

Ding Q(1), Fukami Si, Meng X, Nishizaki Y, Zhang X, Sasaki H, Dlugosz A, Nakafuku
M, Hui Cc.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology The Hospital for Sick Children Department of 
Molecular and Medical Genetics University of Toronto 555 University Avenue,
Toronto, Ontario, M5G 1X8, Canada.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway has critical functions during embryogenesis
of both invertebrate and vertebrate species [1]; defects in this pathway in
humans can cause developmental disorders as well as neoplasia [2]. Although the
Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3 zinc finger proteins are known to be effectors of Hh
signaling in vertebrates, the mechanisms regulating activity of these
transcription factors remain poorly understood [3] [4]. In Drosophila, activity
of the Gli homolog Cubitus interruptus (Ci) is likely to be modulated by its
interaction with a cytoplasmic complex containing several other proteins [5] [6],
including Costal2, Fused (Fu), and Suppressor of fused (Su(fu)), the last of
which has been shown to interact directly with Ci [7]. We have cloned mouse
Suppressor of fused (mSu(fu)) and detected its 4.5 kb transcript throughout
embryogenesis and in several adult tissues. In cultured cells, mSu(fu)
overexpression inhibited transcriptional activation mediated by Sonic hedgehog
(Shh), Gli1 and Gli2. Co-immunoprecipitation of epitope-tagged proteins indicated
that mSu(fu) interacts with Gli1, Gli2, and Gli3, and that the inhibitory effects
of mSu(fu) on Gli1's transcriptional activity were mediated through interactions 
with both amino- and carboxy-terminal regions of Gli1. Gli1 was localized
primarily to the nucleus of both HeLa cells and the Shh-responsive cell line
MNS-70; co-expression with mSu(fu) resulted in a striking increase in cytoplasmic
Gli1 immunostaining. Our findings indicate that mSu(fu) can function as a
negative regulator of Shh signaling and suggest that this effect is mediated by
interaction with Gli transcription factors.

PMID: 10531011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand). 1999 Jul;45(5):567-78.

The Shh signalling pathway in early tooth development.

Hardcastle Z(1), Hui CC, Sharpe PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, GKT Dental Institute, Kings College,
Guy's Hospital, London, UK.

The Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signalling pathway has been proposed to play an
important role in mammalian tooth development. We describe the spatial and
temporal expression of genes in this pathway during early tooth development and
interpret these patterns in terms of the likely roles of Shh signalling. We show 
that the two putative receptors of the Shh ligand, Ptc and Ptch-2, localise in
different cells, suggesting Shh may function in different ways as an epithelial
and mesenchymal signal. Shh signalling has previously been shown, in other
organs, to stimulate cell proliferation. In this paper we analyse the Fgf
signalling pathway in Gli-2 mutants and propose a mechanism as to how Gli-2 may
regulate cell proliferation in tooth development.

PMID: 10512189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Development. 1999 Oct;126(19):4257-65.

Functional association of retinoic acid and hedgehog signaling in Xenopus primary
neurogenesis.

Franco PG(1), Paganelli AR, López SL, Carrasco AE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Embriología Molecular, Instituto de Biología Celular y
Neurociencias, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Paraguay 2155, 
1121, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Previous work has shown that the posteriorising agent retinoic acid can
accelerate anterior neuronal differentiation in Xenopus laevis embryos
(Papalopulu, N. and Kintner, C. (1996) Development 122, 3409-3418). To elucidate 
the role of retinoic acid in the primary neurogenesis cascade, we investigated
whether retinoic acid treatment of whole embryos could change the spatial
expression of a set of genes known to be involved in neurogenesis. We show that
retinoic acid expands the N-tubulin, X-ngnr-1, X-MyT1, X-&Dgr;-1 and Gli3 domains
and inhibits the expression of Zic2 and sonic hedgehog in the neural ectoderm,
whereas a retinoid antagonist produces opposite changes. In contrast, sonic and
banded hedgehog overexpression reduced the N-tubulin stripes, enlarged the neural
plate at the expense of the neural crest, downregulated Gli3 and upregulated
Zic2. Thus, retinoic acid and hedgehog signaling have opposite effects on the
prepattern genes Gli3 and Zic2 and on other genes acting downstream in the
neurogenesis cascade. In addition, retinoic acid cannot rescue the inhibitory
effect of Notch(ICD), Zic2 or sonic hedgehog on primary neurogenesis. Our results
suggest that retinoic acid acts very early, upstream of sonic hedgehog, and we
propose a model for regulation of differentiation and proliferation in the neural
plate, showing that retinoic acid might be activating primary neurogenesis by
repressing sonic hedgehog expression.

PMID: 10477294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Am J Hum Genet. 1999 Sep;65(3):645-55.

The phenotypic spectrum of GLI3 morphopathies includes autosomal dominant
preaxial polydactyly type-IV and postaxial polydactyly type-A/B; No phenotype
prediction from the position of GLI3 mutations.

Radhakrishna U(1), Bornholdt D, Scott HS, Patel UC, Rossier C, Engel H, Bottani
A, Chandal D, Blouin JL, Solanki JV, Grzeschik KH, Antonarakis SE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva,
Switzerland.

Functional characterization of a gene often requires the discovery of the full
spectrum of its associated phenotypes. Mutations in the human GLI3 gene have been
identified in Greig cepalopolysyndactyly, Pallister-Hall syndrome (PHS), and
postaxial polydactyly type-A (PAP-A). We studied the involvement of GLI3 in
additional phenotypes of digital abnormalities in one family (UR003) with
preaxial polydactyly type-IV (PPD-IV), three families (UR014, UR015, and UR016)
with dominant PAP-A/B (with PPD-A and -B in the same family), and one family with
PHS. Linkage analysis showed no recombination with GLI3-linked polymorphisms.
Family UR003 had a 1-nt frameshift insertion, resulting in a truncated protein of
1,245 amino acids. A frameshift mutation due to a 1-nt deletion was found in
family UR014, resulting in a truncated protein of 1,280 amino acids. Family UR015
had a nonsense mutation, R643X, and family UR016 had a missense mutation, G727R, 
in a highly conserved amino acid of domain 3. The patient with PHS had a nonsense
mutation, E1147X. These results add two phenotypes to the phenotypic spectrum
caused by GLI3 mutations: the combined PAP-A/B and PPD-IV. These mutations do not
support the suggested association between the mutations in GLI3 and the resulting
phenotypes. We propose that all phenotypes associated with GLI3 mutations be
called "GLI3 morphopathies," since the phenotypic borders of the resulting
syndromes are not well defined and there is no apparent genotype-phenotype
correlation.

PMCID: PMC1377970
PMID: 10441570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Hum Mol Genet. 1999 Sep;8(9):1769-77.

Point mutations throughout the GLI3 gene cause Greig cephalopolysyndactyly
syndrome.

Kalff-Suske M(1), Wild A, Topp J, Wessling M, Jacobsen EM, Bornholdt D, Engel H, 
Heuer H, Aalfs CM, Ausems MG, Barone R, Herzog A, Heutink P, Homfray T,
Gillessen-Kaesbach G, König R, Kunze J, Meinecke P, Müller D, Rizzo R, Strenge S,
Superti-Furga A, Grzeschik KH.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinisches Zentrum für Humangenetik, Philipps-Universität Marburg, D-35037 
Marburg, Germany.

Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome, characterized by craniofacial and limb
anomalies (GCPS; MIM 175700), previously has been demonstrated to be associated
with translocations as well as point mutations affecting one allele of the zinc
finger gene GLI3. In addition to GCPS, Pallister-Hall syndrome (PHS; MIM 146510) 
and post-axial polydactyly type A (PAP-A; MIM 174200), two other disorders of
human development, are caused by GLI3 mutations. In order to gain more insight
into the mutational spectrum associated with a single phenotype, we report here
the extension of the GLI3 mutation analysis to 24 new GCPS cases. We report the
identification of 15 novel mutations present in one of the patient's GLI3
alleles. The mutations map throughout the coding gene regions. The majority are
truncating mutations (nine of 15) that engender prematurely terminated protein
products mostly but not exclusively N-terminally to or within the central region 
encoding the DNA-binding domain. Two missense and two splicing mutations mapping 
within the zinc finger motifs presumably also interfere with DNA binding. The
five mutations identified within the protein regions C-terminal to the zinc
fingers putatively affect additional functional properties of GLI3. In cell
transfection experiments using fusions of the DNA-binding domain of yeast GAL4 to
different segments of GLI3, transactivating capacity was assigned to two adjacent
independent domains (TA(1)and TA(2)) in the C-terminal third of GLI3. Since these
are the only functional domains affected by three C-terminally truncating
mutations, we postulate that GCPS may be due either to haploinsufficiency
resulting from the complete loss of one gene copy or to functional
haploinsufficiency related to compromised properties of this transcription factor
such as DNA binding and transactivation.

PMID: 10441342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Dev Biol. 1999 Aug 15;212(2):323-36.

Vertebrate homologs of Drosophila suppressor of fused interact with the gli
family of transcriptional regulators.

Pearse RV 2nd(1), Collier LS, Scott MP, Tabin CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, 200 Longwood Avenue, Boston,
Massachusetts, 02115, USA.

The hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is crucial for pattern formation during
metazoan development. Although originially characterized in Drosophila,
vertebrate homologs have been identified for several, but not all, genes in the
pathway. Analysis of mutants in Drosophila demonstrates that Suppressor of fused 
[Su(fu)] interacts genetically with genes encoding proteins in the Hh signal
transduction pathway, and its protein product physically interacts with two of
the proteins in the Hh pathway. We report here the molecular cloning and
characterization of chicken and mouse homologs of Su(fu). The chick and mouse
proteins are 27% identical and 53% similar at the amino acid level to the
Drosophila melanogaster and Drosophila virilis proteins. Vertebrate Su(fu) is
widely expressed in the developing embryo with higher levels in tissues that are 
known to be patterned by Hh signaling. The chick Su(fu) protein can physically
interact with factors known to function in Hh signal transduction including the
Drosophila serine/threonine kinase, Fused, and the vertebrate transcriptional
regulators Gli1 and Gli3. This interaction may be significant for transcriptional
regulation, as recombinant Su(fu) enhances the ability of Gli proteins to bind
DNA in electrophoretic mobility shift assays.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMCID: PMC4530617
PMID: 10433824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Development. 1999 Sep;126(17):3915-24.

Regulation of Gli2 and Gli3 activities by an amino-terminal repression domain:
implication of Gli2 and Gli3 as primary mediators of Shh signaling.

Sasaki H(1), Nishizaki Y, Hui C, Nakafuku M, Kondoh H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Biology, Institute for Molecular and Cellular
Biology, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.
hsasaki@imcb.osaka-u.ac.jp

Gli family zinc finger proteins are mediators of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling
in vertebrates. The question remains unanswered, however, as to how these Gli
proteins participate in the Shh signaling pathway. In this study, regulatory
activities associated with the Gli2 protein were investigated in relation to the 
Shh signaling. Although Gli2 acts as a weak transcriptional activator, it is in
fact a composite of positive and negative regulatory domains. In cultured cells, 
truncation of the activation domain in the C-terminal half results in a protein
with repressor activity, while removal of the repression domain at the N terminus
converts Gli2 into a strong activator. In transgenic mouse embryos, N-terminally 
truncated Gli2, unlike the full length protein, activates a Shh target gene,
HNF3beta, in the dorsal neural tube, thus mimicking the effect of Shh signal.
This suggests that unmasking of the strong activation potential of Gli2 through
modulation of the N-terminal repression domain is one of the key mechanisms of
the Shh signaling. A similar regulatory mechanism involving the N-terminal region
was also found for Gli3, but not for Gli1. When the Shh signal derived from the
notochord is received by the neural plate, the widely expressed Gli2 and Gli3
proteins are presumably converted to their active forms in the ventral cells,
leading to activation of transcription of their target genes, including Gli1.

PMID: 10433919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Dev Biol. 1999 Aug 1;212(1):137-49.

Constitutive activation of sonic hedgehog signaling in the chicken mutant
talpid(2): Shh-independent outgrowth and polarizing activity.

Caruccio NC(1), Martinez-Lopez A, Harris M, Dvorak L, Bitgood J, Simandl BK,
Fallon JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of Wisconsin at Madison, Madison, Wisconsin,
53706, USA.

We have examined the developmental properties of the polydactylous chicken
mutant, talpid(2). Ptc, Gli1, Bmp2, Hoxd13, and Fgf4 are expressed throughout the
anteroposterior axis of the mutant limb bud, despite normal Shh expression. The
expression of Gli3, Ihh, and Dhh appears to be normal, suggesting that the Shh
signaling pathway is constitutively active in talpid(2) mutants. We show that
preaxial talpid(2) limb bud mesoderm has polarizing activity in the absence of
detectable Shh mRNA. When the postaxial talpid(2) limb bud (including all
Shh-expressing cells) is removed, the preaxial cells reform a normal-shaped
talpid(2) limb bud (regulate). However, a Shh-expressing region (zone of
polarizing activity) does not reform; nevertheless Fgf4 expression in the apical 
ectodermal ridge is maintained. Such reformed talpid(2) limb buds develop
complete talpid(2) limbs. After similar treatment, normal limb buds downregulate 
Fgf4, the preaxial cells do not regulate, and a truncated anteroposterior
deficient limb forms. In talpid(2) limbs, distal outgrowth is independent of Shh 
and correlates with Fgf4, but not Fgf8, expression by the apical ectodermal
ridge. We propose a model for talpid(2) in which leaky activation of the Shh
signaling pathway occurs in the absence of Shh ligand.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10419691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Development. 1999 Aug;126(16):3561-71.

Gli3 is required for Emx gene expression during dorsal telencephalon development.

Theil T(1), Alvarez-Bolado G, Walter A, Rüther U.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology, Hannover Medical School, Carl-Neuberg-Strasse
1, D-30625 Hannover, Germany. thomas. theil@uni-duesseldorf.de

Dentate gyrus and hippocampus as centers for spatial learning, memory and
emotional behaviour have been the focus of much interest in recent years. The
molecular information on its development, however, has been relatively poor. To
date, only Emx genes were known to be required for dorsal telencephalon
development. Here, we report on forebrain development in the extra toes (Xt(J))
mouse mutant which carries a null mutation of the Gli3 gene. This defect leads to
a failure to establish the dorsal di-telencephalic junction and finally results
in a severe size reduction of the neocortex. In addition, Xt(J)/Xt(J) mice show
absence of the hippocampus (Ammon's horn plus dentate gyrus) and the choroid
plexus in the lateral ventricle. The medial wall of the telencephalon, which
gives rise to these structures, fails to invaginate during embryonic development.
On a molecular level, disruption of dorsal telencephalon development in
Xt(J)/Xt(J) embryos correlates with a loss of Emx1 and Emx2 expression.
Furthermore, the expression of Fgf8 and Bmp4 in the dorsal midline of the
telencephalon is altered. However, expression of Shh, which is negatively
regulated by Gli3 in the spinal cord, is not affected in the Xt(J)/Xt(J)
forebrain. This study therefore implicates Gli3 as a key regulator for the
development of the dorsal telencephalon and implies Gli3 to be upstream of Emx
genes in a genetic cascade controlling dorsal telencephalic development.

PMID: 10409502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Development. 1999 Jun;126(14):3205-16.

Gli proteins encode context-dependent positive and negative functions:
implications for development and disease.

Ruiz i Altaba A(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Skirball Institute, Developmental Genetics Program and Department of Cell 
Biology, NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA. ria@saturn.med.nyu.edu

Several lines of evidence implicate zinc finger proteins of the Gli family in the
final steps of Hedgehog signaling in normal development and disease. C-terminally
truncated mutant GLI3 proteins are also associated with human syndromes, but it
is not clear whether these C-terminally truncated Gli proteins fulfil the same
function as full-length ones. Here, structure-function analyses of Gli proteins
have been performed using floor plate and neuronal induction assays in frog
embryos, as well as induction of alkaline phosphatase (AP) in SHH-responsive
mouse C3H10T1/2 (10T1/2) cells. These assays show that C-terminal sequences are
required for positive inducing activity and cytoplasmic localization, whereas
N-terminal sequences determine dominant negative function and nuclear
localization. Analyses of nuclear targeted Gli1 and Gli2 proteins suggest that
both activator and dominant negative proteins are modified forms. In embryos and 
COS cells, tagged Gli cDNAs yield C-terminally deleted forms similar to that of
Ci. These results thus provide a molecular basis for the human Polydactyly type A
and Pallister-Hall Syndrome phenotypes, derived from the deregulated production
of C-terminally truncated GLI3 proteins. Analyses of full-length Gli function in 
10T1/2 cells suggest that nuclear localization of activating forms is a regulated
event and show that only Gli1 mimics SHH in inducing AP activity. Moreover,
full-length Gli3 and all C-terminally truncated forms act antagonistically
whereas Gli2 is inactive in this assay. In 10T1/2 cells, protein kinase A (PKA), 
a known inhibitor of Hh signaling, promotes Gli3 repressor formation and inhibits
Gli1 function. Together, these findings suggest a context-dependent functional
divergence of Gli protein function, in which a cell represses Gli3 and activates 
Gli1/2 prevents the formation of repressor Gli forms to respond to Shh.
Interpretation of Hh signals by Gli proteins therefore appears to involve a fine 
balance of divergent functions within each and among different Gli proteins, the 
misregulation of which has profound biological consequences.

PMID: 10375510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Development. 1999 Jun;126(14):3089-100.

Sonic hedgehog regulates the growth and patterning of the cerebellum.

Dahmane N(1), Ruiz i Altaba A.

Author information: 
(1)The Skirball Institute, Developmental Genetics Program and Department of Cell 
Biology, NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA. ria@saturn.med.nyu.edu

The molecular bases of brain development and CNS malignancies remain poorly
understood. Here we show that Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling controls the
development of the cerebellum at multiple levels. SHH is produced by Purkinje
neurons, it is required for the proliferation of granule neuron precursors and it
induces the differentiation of Bergmann glia. Blocking SHH function in vivo
results in deficient granule neuron and Bergmann glia differentiation as well as 
in abnormal Purkinje neuron development. Thus, our findings provide a molecular
model for the growth and patterning of the cerebellum by SHH through the
coordination of the development of cortical cerebellar cell types. In addition,
they provide a cellular context for medulloblastomas, childhood cancers of the
cerebellum.

PMID: 10375501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Curr Opin Pediatr. 1999 Jun;11(3):188-92.

Current concepts on lung development.

Warburton D(1), Lee MK.

Author information: 
(1)Childrens Hospital Los Angeles Research Institute, CA 90027, USA.
dwarburton@chlais.usc.edu

Recent molecular genetic and embryonic organ culture studies have implicated
several novel regulatory processes in the coordination of lung development.
Failure of pulmonary initiation results from interruptions of the sonic
hedgehog/patched/Gli and Nkx 2.1 signaling pathways. Sonic hedgehog null mutants 
and Gli2/Gli3 compound null mutants each exhibited failed tracheoesophageal
septation. However, proximodistal epithelial differentiation is disrupted by
compound Gli mutation, but is preserved in sonic hedgehog mutants. Null mutation 
of Nkx 2.1 also abrogates tracheoesophageal septation in association with thyroid
and pituitary agenesis. Primary tracheal branching is regulated by fibroblast
growth factor-10 signaling; in the murine fibroblast growth factor-10 null
phenotype, the lung fails to separate from the foregut and morphogenesis is
arrested distal to the trachea. Several genes in the fibroblast growth factor-10 
pathway have homologous roles in fruit fly tracheal organogenesis, and
corresponding Drosophila mutations yield strikingly similar phenotypes. Recent
data also indicate that airway branching can be regulated by vascular endothelial
growth factor, suggesting mutual regulation of airway and vascular development.
The bases of pulmonary left-right asymmetry and laterality have also been
investigated. The transforming growth factor-beta superfamily members Lefty-1,
Lefty-2, and nodal comprise a regulatory pathway whose function is required for
the development of left-right asymmetry, whereas left-right laterality is
dependent on regulation of dynein expression by the transcription factor
hepatocyte nuclear factor-4. Terminal lung differentiation is modulated by yet
another set of signals. Hoxa5 null mutants exhibit tracheal occlusion and
surfactant protein deficiency, whereas fibroblast growth factor receptor-2 and -4
compound null phenotypes include abrogated neonatal alveolization, perturbed
alveolar myofibroblast differentiation, and persistent neonatal elastin
deposition. These new contributions represent substantial advances toward a
comprehensive molecular model of pulmonary development.

PMID: 10349094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Am J Physiol. 1999 May;276(5 Pt 1):L697-704.

Molecular embryology of the lung: then, now, and in the future.

Warburton D(1), Zhao J, Berberich MA, Bernfield M.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program and Department of Surgery, Childrens Hospital
Los Angeles Research Institute, Los Angeles, California 90027, USA.
dwarburton@chla.usc.edu

Complementary molecular and genetic approaches are yielding information about
gain- versus loss-of-function phenotypes of specific genes and gene families in
the embryonic, fetal, neonatal, and adult lungs. New insights are being derived
from the conservation of function between genes regulating branching
morphogenesis of the respiratory organs in Drosophila and in the mammalian lung. 
The function of specific morphogenetic genes in the lung are now placed in
context with pattern-forming functions in other, better understood morphogenetic 
fields such as the limb bud. Initiation of lung morphogenesis from the floor of
the primitive foregut requires coordinated transcriptional activation and
repression involving hepatocyte nuclear factor-3beta, Sonic hedgehog, patched,
Gli2, and Gli3 as well as Nkx2.1. Subsequent inductive events require
epithelial-mesenchymal interaction mediated by specific fibroblast growth factor 
ligand-receptor signaling as well as modulation by other peptide growth factors
including epidermal growth factor, platelet-derived growth factor-A and
transforming growth factor-beta and by extracellular matrix components. A
scientific rationale for developing new therapeutic approaches to urgent
questions of human pulmonary health such as bronchopulmonary dysplasia is
beginning to emerge from work in this field.

PMID: 10330024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Development. 1999 Jun;126(11):2397-407.

Expression of ptc and gli genes in talpid3 suggests bifurcation in Shh pathway.

Lewis KE(1), Drossopoulou G, Paton IR, Morrice DR, Robertson KE, Burt DW, Ingham 
PW, Tickle C.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Programme, Krebs Institute, University of Sheffield,
Sheffield, S10 2TN, UK.

talpid3 is an embryonic-lethal chicken mutation in a molecularly un-characterised
autosomal gene. The recessive, pleiotropic phenotype includes polydactylous limbs
with morphologically similar digits. Previous analysis established that hox-D and
bmp genes, that are normally expressed posteriorly in the limb bud in response to
a localised, posterior source of Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) are expressed symmetrically
across the entire anteroposterior axis in talpid3 limb buds. In contrast, Shh
expression itself is unaffected. Here we examine expression of patched (ptc),
which encodes a component of the Shh receptor, and is probably itself a direct
target of Shh signalling, to establish whether talpid3 acts in the Shh pathway.
We find that ptc expression is significantly reduced in talpid3 embryos. We also 
demonstrate that talpid3 function is not required for Shh signal production but
is required for normal response to Shh signals, implicating talpid3 in
transduction of Shh signals in responding cells. Our analysis of expression of
putative components of the Shh pathway, gli1, gli3 and coupTFII shows that genes 
regulated by Shh are either ectopically expressed or no longer responsive to Shh 
signals in talpid3 limbs, suggesting possible bifurcation in the Shh pathway. We 
also describe genetic mapping of gli1, ptc, shh and smoothened in chickens and
confirm by co-segregation analysis that none of these genes correspond to
talpid3.

PMID: 10225999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Dev Biol. 1999 May 1;209(1):11-27.

GDF5 coordinates bone and joint formation during digit development.

Storm EE(1), Kingsley DM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and the Department of Developmental Biology,
Stanford University, Beckman Center B300, Palo Alto, California 94305-5329, USA.

A functional skeletal system requires the coordinated development of many
different tissue types, including cartilage, bones, joints, and tendons. Members 
of the Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) family of secreted signaling molecules
have been implicated as endogenous regulators of skeletal development. This is
based on their expression during bone and joint formation, their ability to
induce ectopic bone and cartilage, and the skeletal abnormalities present in
animals with mutations in BMP family members. One member of this family,
Growth/differentiation factor 5 (GDF5), is encoded by the mouse brachypodism
locus. Mice with mutations in this gene show reductions in the length of bones in
the limbs, altered formation of bones and joints in the sternum, and a reduction 
in the number of bones in the digits. The expression pattern of Gdf5 during
normal development and the phenotypes seen in mice with single or double
mutations in Gdf5 and Bmp5 suggested that Gdf5 has multiple functions in
skeletogenesis, including roles in joint and cartilage development. To further
understand the function of GDF5 in skeletal development, we assayed the response 
of developing chick and mouse limbs to recombinant GDF5 protein. The results from
these assays, coupled with an analysis of the development of brachypodism digits,
indicate that GDF5 is necessary and sufficient for both cartilage development and
the restriction of joint formation to the appropriate location. Thus, GDF5
function in the digits demonstrates a link between cartilage development and
joint development and is an important determinant of the pattern of bones and
articulations in the digits.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10208739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Mar 16;96(6):2880-4.

GLI3 mutations in human disorders mimic Drosophila cubitus interruptus protein
functions and localization.

Shin SH(1), Kogerman P, Lindström E, Toftgárd R, Biesecker LG.

Author information: 
(1)National Institutes of Health, National Human Genome Research Institute,
Genetic Disease Research Branch, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Truncation mutations of the GLI3 zinc finger transcription factor can cause Greig
cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS), Pallister-Hall syndrome (PHS), and
postaxial polydactyly type A (PAP-A). GLI3 is homologous to Drosophila Cubitus
interruptus (Ci), which regulates the patched (ptc), gooseberry (gsb), and
decapentaplegic (dpp) genes. Ci is sequestered in the cytoplasm and is subject to
posttranslational processing whereby the full-length transcriptional activator
form (Ci155) can be cleaved to a repressor form (Ci75). Under hedgehog signaling,
the Ci155 form translocates to the nucleus whereas in the absence of hedgehog,
the Ci75 form translocates to the nucleus. Based on the correlation of GLI3
truncation mutations and the human phenotypes, we hypothesized that GLI3 shows
transcriptional activation or repression activity and subcellular localization
similar to Ci. Here we show that full-length GLI3 localizes to the cytoplasm and 
activates PTCH1 expression, which is similar to full-length Ci155. PHS mutant
protein (GLI3-PHS) localizes to the nucleus and represses GLI3-activated PTCH1
expression, which is similar to Ci75. The GCPS mutant protein has no effect on
GLI3-activated PTCH1 transcription, consistent with the role of
haploinsufficiency in this disorder. The PAP-A mutant protein (GLI3-PAP-A) showed
less specific subcellular localization but still inhibited GLI3-activated PTCH1
transcription, suggesting it may be a weaker allele than the GLI3-PHS mutation.
These data show that GLI3 mutations in humans mimic functional effects of the
Drosophila ci gene and correlate with the distinct effects of these mutations on 
human development.

PMCID: PMC15863
PMID: 10077605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Biol Chem. 1999 Mar 19;274(12):8143-52.

Sonic Hedgehog-induced activation of the Gli1 promoter is mediated by GLI3.

Dai P(1), Akimaru H, Tanaka Y, Maekawa T, Nakafuku M, Ishii S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Tsukuba Life Science Center, RIKEN, 3-1-1
Koyadai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0074, Japan.

Drosophila transcription factor cubitus interruptus (Ci) and its co-activator CRE
(cAMP response element)-binding protein (CBP) activate a group of target genes on
the anterior-posterior border in response to hedgehog protein (Hh) signaling. In 
the anterior region, in contrast, the carboxyl-truncated form of Ci generated by 
protein processing represses Hh expression. In vertebrates, three Ci-related
transcription factors (glioblastoma gene products (GLIs) 1, 2, and 3) were
identified, but their functional difference in Hh signal transduction is unknown.
Here, we report distinct roles for GLI1 and GLI3 in Sonic hedgehog (Shh)
signaling. GLI3 containing both repression and activation domains acts both as an
activator and a repressor, as does Ci, whereas GLI1 contains only the activation 
domain. Consistent with this, GLI3, but not GLI1, is processed to generate the
repressor form. Transcriptional co-activator CBP binds to GLI3, but not to GLI1. 
The trans-activating capacity of GLI3 is positively and negatively regulated by
Shh and cAMP-dependent protein kinase, respectively, through a specific region of
GLI3, which contains the CBP-binding domain and the phosphorylation sites of
cAMP-dependent protein kinase. GLI3 directly binds to the Gli1 promoter and
induces Gli1 transcription in response to Shh. Thus, GLI3 may act as a mediator
of Shh signaling in the activation of the target gene Gli1.

PMID: 10075717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Cleft Palate Craniofac J. 1999 Jan;36(1):12-26.

Progress toward understanding craniofacial malformations.

Nuckolls GH(1), Shum L, Slavkin HC.

Author information: 
(1)Craniofacial Development Section, National Institute of Arthritis and
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892-2745, USA. gn18s@nih.gov

Significant advances in the study of the human face have revealed the genetic and
gene-environment bases of numerous common and rare craniofacial disorders.
Classification of craniofacial malformations based on clinical phenotypes is
sometimes quite different from the genetic findings of patients. Different
mutations in a single gene can cause distinct syndromes, and mutations in
different genes can cause the same syndrome. The extracellular signaling molecule
SHH, fibroblast growth factor receptors, and transcription factors GLI3, MSX2,
and TWIST are discussed as examples of molecules involved in interrelated signal 
transduction networks regulating craniofacial development. Progress in the
understanding of normal and abnormal craniofacial development, through the study 
of morphoregulatory signaling pathways, has benefited from multifactorial
approaches recommended 40 years ago at the National Institute of Dental
Research-sponsored landmark Gatlinburg Conference. The utilization of
biochemistry, protein structure analyses, tissue culture, and animal model
systems for developmental genetics has resulted in remarkable scientific
advances. The evolutionary conservation of morphoregulatory pathways has revealed
the homology of genes associated with human craniofacial malformations and their 
counterparts that regulate the morphogenesis of fruit flies. The continued
investments in basic, translational, and patient-oriented research regarding
normal and abnormal craniofacial development will translate into substantial
improvements in the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of craniofacial diseases
and disorders.

PMID: 10067756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Mamm Genome. 1999 Mar;10(3):205-9.

The mouse mutation Pdn (Polydactyly Nagoya) is caused by the integration of a
retrotransposon into the Gli3 gene.

Thien H(1), Rüther U.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, OE5250 30623
Hannover, Germany.

Mutations in the Gli3 gene are associated with a preaxial polydactyly in several 
mouse mutants such as extra-toes (Xt). The semidominant mouse mutant Pdn
(Polydactyly Nagoya) is characterized by a mild polydactyly on the anterior side 
of the hind limbs. Homozygous Pdn mice show a more severe polydactyly, additional
skeletal malformations, and abnormal brain development. Herein, we report the
molecular basis of Pdn, being the integration of an Early Transposon (ETn) into
the Gli3 gene. As a consequence, several novel Gli3 mRNAs are generated by
alternatively spliced transcripts.

PMID: 10051311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Nat Genet. 1998 Dec;20(4):325-6.

Carboxy-terminally truncated Gli3 proteins associate with Smads.

Liu F, Massagué J, Ruiz i Altaba A.

PMID: 9843199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Development. 1999 Jan;126(1):13-21.

Gli3 (Xt) and formin (ld) participate in the positioning of the polarising region
and control of posterior limb-bud identity.

Zúñiga A(1), Zeller R.

Author information: 
(1)EMBL, Meyerhofstrasse 1, D-69117 Heidelberg, Germany.

During initiation of limb-bud outgrowth in vertebrate embryos, the polarising
region (limb-bud organizer) is established upon activation of the Sonic Hedgehog 
(SHH) signaling molecule at the posterior limb-bud margin. Another hallmark of
establishing anteroposterior limb-bud identities is the colinear activation of
HoxD genes located at the 5' end of the cluster (5'HoxD genes). The unique and
shared functions of Gli3 and formin in these determinative events were
genetically analyzed using single and double homozygous Extra-toes (Xt;
disrupting Gli3) and limb deformity (ld; disrupting formin) mouse embryos.
Analysis of the limb skeletal phenotypes reveals genetic interaction of the two
genes. In addition to loss of digit identity and varying degrees of polydactyly, 
proximal skeletal elements are severely shortened in Xt;ld double homozygous
limbs. The underlying molecular defects affect both establishment of the
polarising region and posterior limb-bud identity. In particular, the synergism
between Gli3- and formin-mediated mesenchyme-AER interactions positions the SHH
signaling center at the posterior limb-bud margin. The present study shows that
establishment and positioning of the polarising region is regulated both by
restriction of Shh through Gli3 and its positive feedback regulation through
formin. Concurrently, Gli3 functions independently of formin during initial
posterior nesting of 5'HoxD domains, whereas their subsequent distal restriction 
and anterior expansion depends on genetic interaction of Gli3 and formin.

PMID: 9834182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Development. 1998 Nov;125(22):4417-25.

The role of Alx-4 in the establishment of anteroposterior polarity during
vertebrate limb development.

Takahashi M(1), Tamura K, Büscher D, Masuya H, Yonei-Tamura S, Matsumoto K,
Naitoh-Matsuo M, Takeuchi J, Ogura K, Shiroishi T, Ogura T, Izpisúa Belmonte JC.

Author information: 
(1)The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, Gene Expression Laboratory, La
Jolla, CA 92037-1099, USA.

Erratum in
    Development 1998 Dec;125(23):preceding 4595.

We have determined that Strong's Luxoid (lstJ) [corrected] mice have a 16 bp
deletion in the homeobox region of the Alx-4 gene. This deletion, which leads to 
a frame shift and a truncation of the Alx-4 protein, could cause the polydactyly 
phenotype observed in lstJ [corrected] mice. We have cloned the chick homologue
of Alx-4 and investigated its expression during limb outgrowth. Chick Alx-4
displays an expression pattern complementary to that of shh, a mediator of
polarizing activity in the limb bud. Local application of Sonic hedgehog (Shh)
and Fibroblast Growth Factor (FGF), in addition to ectodermal apical ridge
removal experiments suggest the existence of a negative feedback loop between
Alx-4 and Shh during limb outgrowth. Analysis of polydactylous mutants indicate
that the interaction between Alx-4 and Shh is independent of Gli3, a negative
regulator of Shh in the limb. Our data suggest the existence of a negative
feedback loop between Alx-4 and Shh during vertebrate limb outgrowth.

PMID: 9778501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Oncogene. 1998 Sep 3;17(9):1167-72.

PTCH gene mutations in invasive transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder.

McGarvey TW(1), Maruta Y, Tomaszewski JE, Linnenbach AJ, Malkowicz SB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Pennsylvania Medical Center and Veterans 
Administration Medical Center, Philadelphia 19104, USA.

LOH analysis suggests that multiple tumor suppressor genes play a role in the
development of human TCC. The human homolog of the Drosophila PTCH was recently
cloned and mapped to the BCNS locus on 9q22.3, a chromosomal region commonly
deleted in TCCs. We first examined the steady state mRNA transcription of the
PTCH, SMOH and GLI3 genes of the HH signal transduction pathway in TCC cell lines
and normal urothelium. Normal urothelium and TCC cell lines express these three
genes within the PTCH signal transduction pathway. We then screened for PTCH
mutations in 'hot spot' exons 6, 8, 13 and 16 by PCR/SSCP analysis of genomic
DNAs from 54 TCC tumor samples and control autologous peripheral blood
lymphocytes. DNA sequence analysis confirmed TCC-specific mutations in two of 54 
patients (3.7%). These mutations resulted a single amino acid substitution and
two frame shifts. One tumor had PTCH mutations in exon 16 as well as exon 13 and 
one tumor had a mutation in exon 13 alone. Both TCC tumors that contained PTCH
mutations had a loss of heterozygosity at 9q. Although the PTCH protein has an
unknown function in urothelial cells, the detection of the PTCH, SMOH and GLI3
transcripts in normal urothelium and TCC cell lines and rare PTCH mutations in
tumor samples suggest that the HH pathway may have a role in controlling the
proliferation of urothelial cells and that PTCH mutations may contribute to the
development of a subset of TCCs.

PMID: 9764827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Mol Med Today. 1998 Aug;4(8):343-9.

Human developmental disorders and the Sonic hedgehog pathway.

Ming JE(1), Roessler E, Muenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia 19104, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is a morphogen that is crucial for normal development of a
variety of organ systems, including the brain and spinal cord, the eye,
craniofacial structures, and the limbs. Mutations in the human SHH gene and genes
that encode its downstream intracellular signaling pathway cause several clinical
disorders. These include holoprosencephaly (HPE, the most common anomaly of the
developing forebrain), nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome, sporadic tumors,
including basal cell carcinomas, and three distinct congenital disorders: Greig
syndrome Pallister-Hall syndrome, and isolated postaxial polydactyly. These
conditions caused by abnormalities in the SHH pathway demonstrate the crucial
role of SHH in complex developmental processes, and molecular analyses of these
disorders provide insight into the normal function of the SHH pathway in human
development.

PMID: 9755453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Nat Genet. 1998 Sep;20(1):58-61.

Sonic hedgehog is essential to foregut development.

Litingtung Y(1), Lei L, Westphal H, Chiang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee 37232-2175, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 1998 Sep;20(1):7-8.

Congenital malformation of the foregut is common in humans, with an estimated
incidence of 1 in 3000 live births, although its aetiology remains largely
unknown. Mice with a targeted deletion of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) have foregut
defects that are apparent as early as embryonic day 9.5, when the tracheal
diverticulum begins to outgrow. Homozygous Shh-null mutant mice show oesophageal 
atresia/stenosis, tracheo-oesophageal fistula and tracheal and lung anomalies,
features similar to those observed in humans with foregut defects. The lung
mesenchyme shows enhanced cell death, decreased cell proliferation and
downregulation of Shh target genes. These results indicate that Shh is required
for the growth and differentiation of the oesophagus, trachea and lung, and
suggest that mutations in SHH and its signalling components may be involved in
foregut defects in humans.

PMID: 9731532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Nat Genet. 1998 Sep;20(1):54-7.

Essential function of Gli2 and Gli3 in the formation of lung, trachea and
oesophagus.

Motoyama J(1), Liu J, Mo R, Ding Q, Post M, Hui CC.

Author information: 
(1)Programs in Developmental Biology, Research Institute, The Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 1998 Sep;20(1):7-8.

Foregut malformations (oesophageal atresia, tracheo-oesophageal fistula, lung
anomalies and congenital stenosis of the oesophagus and trachea) are relatively
common anomalies occurring in 1 in 2,000-5,000 live births, although their
aetiology is poorly understood. The secreted glycoprotein Sonic hedgehog (Shh)
has been suggested to act as an endodermal signal that controls hindgut
patterning and lung growth. In mice, three zinc-finger transcription factors,
Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3, have been implicated in the transduction of Shh signal. We
report here that mutant mice lacking Gli2 function exhibit foregut defects,
including stenosis of the oesophagus and trachea, as well as hypoplasia and
lobulation defects of the lung. A reduction of 50% in the gene dosage of Gli3 in 
a Gli2-/- background resulted in oesophageal atresia with tracheo-oesophageal
fistula and a severe lung phenotype. Mutant mice lacking both Gli2 and Gli3
function did not form oesophagus, trachea and lung. These results indicate that
Gli2 and Gli3 possess specific and overlapping functions in Shh signalling during
foregut development, and suggest that mutations in GLI genes may be involved in
human foregut malformations.

PMID: 9731531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Nat Genet. 1998 Sep;20(1):7-8.

A lungful of transcription factors.

Whitsett J.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 1998 Sep;20(1):58-61.
    Nat Genet. 1998 Sep;20(1):54-7.

PMID: 9731520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Mamm Genome. 1998 Aug;9(8):676-8.

The XtJ allele generates a Gli3 fusion transcript.

Büscher D(1), Grotewold L, Rüther U.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover OE 5251,
30623 Hannover, Germany.

PMID: 9680393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Development. 1998 Aug;125(15):2803-11.

The Shh signalling pathway in tooth development: defects in Gli2 and Gli3
mutants.

Hardcastle Z(1), Mo R, Hui CC, Sharpe PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, UMDS, Guy's Hospital, London Bridge,
London SE1 9RT, UK.

The expression of genes involved in the Sonic Hedgehog signalling pathway,
including Shh, Ptc, Smo, Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3, were found to be expressed in
temporal and spatial patterns during early murine tooth development, suggestive
of a role in early tooth germ initiation and subsequent epithelial-mesenchymal
interactions. Of these Ptc, Smo, Gli1, Gli2 and Gli3 were expressed in epithelium
and mesenchyme whereas Shh was only detected in epithelium. This suggests that
Shh is involved in both lateral (epithelial-mesenchymal) and planar
(epithelial-epithelial) signalling in early tooth development. Ectopic
application of Shh protein to mandibular mesenchyme induced the expression of Ptc
and Gli1. Addition of exogenous Shh protein directly into early tooth germs and
adjacent to tooth germs, resulted in abnormal epithelial invagination, indicative
of a role for Shh in epithelial cell proliferation. In order to assess the
possible role of this pathway, tooth development in Gli2 and Gli3 mutant embryos 
was investigated. Gli2 mutants were found to have abnormal development of
maxillary incisors, probably resulting from a mild holoprosencephaly, whereas
Gli3 mutants had no major tooth abnormalities. Gli2/Gli3 double homozygous
mutants did not develop any normal teeth and did not survive beyond embryonic day
14.5; however, Gli2(-/-); Gli3(+/-) did survive until birth and had small molars 
and mandibular incisors whereas maxillary incisor development was arrested as a
rudimentary epithelial thickening. These results show an essential role for Shh
signalling in tooth development that involves functional redundancy of downstream
Gli genes.

PMID: 9655803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Development. 1998 Jul;125(14):2533-43.

Diminished Sonic hedgehog signaling and lack of floor plate differentiation in
Gli2 mutant mice.

Ding Q(1), Motoyama J, Gasca S, Mo R, Sasaki H, Rossant J, Hui CC.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology and Division of Endocrinology, Research
Institute, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada.

Floor plate cells at the midline of the neural tube are specified by high-level
activity of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) secreted by notochord, whereas motor neurons are
thought to be specified by a lower level activity of Shh secreted in turn by
floor plate cells. In Drosophila, the Gli zinc finger protein Cubitus interruptus
functions as a transcription factor activating Hedgehog-responsive genes. We
report that the expression of known Shh-responsive genes such as Ptc and Gli1 is 
downregulated in mutant mice lacking Gli2 function. Gli2 mutants fail to develop 
a floor plate yet still develop motor neurons, which occupy the ventral midline
of the neural tube. Our results imply that Gli2 is required to mediate high level
but not low level Shh activity and show that the development of motor neurons can
occur in the absence of floor plate induction.

PMID: 9636069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Development. 1998 Jun;125(12):2315-25.

The hem of the embryonic cerebral cortex is defined by the expression of multiple
Wnt genes and is compromised in Gli3-deficient mice.

Grove EA(1), Tole S, Limon J, Yip L, Ragsdale CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacological and Physiological Sciences, University of
Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. egrove@drugs.bsd.uchicago.edu

In the developing vertebrate CNS, members of the Wnt gene family are
characteristically expressed at signaling centers that pattern adjacent parts of 
the neural tube. To identify candidate signaling centers in the telencephalon, we
isolated Wnt gene fragments from cDNA derived from embryonic mouse telencephalon.
In situ hybridization experiments demonstrate that one of the isolated Wnt genes,
Wnt7a, is broadly expressed in the embryonic telencephalon. By contrast, three
others, Wnt3a, 5a and a novel mouse Wnt gene, Wnt2b, are expressed only at the
medial edge of the telencephalon, defining the hem of the cerebral cortex. The
Wnt-rich cortical hem is a transient, neuron-containing, neuroepithelial
structure that forms a boundary between the hippocampus and the telencephalic
choroid plexus epithelium (CPe) throughout their embryonic development.
Indicating a close developmental relationship between the cortical hem and the
CPe, Wnt gene expression is upregulated in the cortical hem both before and just 
as the CPe begins to form, and persists until birth. In addition, although the
cortical hem does not show features of differentiated CPe, such as expression of 
transthyretin mRNA, the CPe and cortical hem are linked by shared expression of
members of the Bmp and Msx gene families. In the extra-toesJ (XtJ) mouse mutant, 
telencephalic CPe fails to develop. We show that Wnt gene expression is deficient
at the cortical hem in XtJ/XtJ mice, but that the expression of other
telencephalic developmental control genes, including Wnt7a, is maintained. The
XtJ mutant carries a deletion in Gli3, a vertebrate homolog of the Drosophila
gene cubitus interruptus (ci), which encodes a transcriptional regulator of the
Drosophila Wnt gene, wingless. Our observations indicate that Gli3 participates
in Wnt gene regulation in the vertebrate telencephalon, and suggest that the loss
of telencephalic choroid plexus in XtJ mice is due to defects in the cortical hem
that include Wnt gene misregulation.

PMID: 9584130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Development. 1998 Jun;125(12):2203-12.

Combinatorial Gli gene function in floor plate and neuronal inductions by Sonic
hedgehog.

Ruiz i Altaba A(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Skirball Institute, Developmental Genetics Program and Department of Cell 
Biology, NYU Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, USA. ria@saturn.med.nyu.edu

Within the developing vertebrate nervous system, it is not known how progenitor
cells interpret the positional information provided by inducing signals or how
the domains in which distinct groups of neural cells differentiate are defined.
Gli proteins may be involved in these processes. In the frog neural plate, we
have previously shown that the zinc finger transcription factor Gli1 is expressed
in midline cells and mediates the effects of Shh inducing floor plate
differentiation. In contrast, Gli2 and Gli3 are expressed throughout the neural
plate except for the midline. Here, it is shown that Gli3 and Shh repress each
other whereas Gli2, like Gli1, is a target of Shh signaling. However, only Gli1
can induce the differentiation of floor plate cells. In addition, Gli2 and Gli3
repress the ectopic induction of floor plate cells by Gli1 in co-injection assays
and inhibit endogenous floor plate differentiation. The definition of the floor
plate domain, therefore, appears to be defined by the antagonizing activities of 
Gli2 and Gli3 on Gli1 function. Because both Gli1 and Gli2 are induced by Shh,
these results establish a regulatory feedback loop triggered by Shh that
restricts floor plate cells to the midline. We have also previously shown that
the Gli genes induce neuronal differentiation and here it is shown that there is 
specificity to the types of neurons the Gli proteins induce. Only Gli1 induces
Nkx2.1/TTF-1(+) ventral forebrain neurons. Moreover, Gli2 and Gli3 inhibit their 
differentiation. In contrast, the differentiation of spinal motor neurons can be 
induced by the two ventrally expressed Gli genes, Gli1 and Gli2, suggesting that 
Gli2 directly mediates induction of motor neurons by Shh. In addition, Gli3
inhibits motor neuron differentiation by Gli2. Thus, combinatorial Gli function
may pattern the neural tube, integrating positional information and cell type
differentiation.

PMID: 9584120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Clin Genet. 1998 Jan;53(1):3-7.

Lumping and splitting: molecular biology in the genetics clinic.

Biesecker LG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetic Disease Research, Bethesda, MD 20892-4472, USA.
leslieb@helix.nih.gov

PMID: 9550355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Clin Genet. 1997 Dec;52(6):436-41.

Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome: altered phenotype of a microdeletion
syndrome due to the presence of a cytogenetic abnormality.

Williams PG(1), Hersh JH, Yen FF, Barch MJ, Kleinert HE, Kunz J, Kalff-Suske M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Louisville, KY, USA.

A male had several features of Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS) and
significant developmental delay. He was found to have a de novo chromosomal
deletion of chromosome no. 7 involving p13; this resulted in loss of the zinc
finger gene, GLI3, which is the candidate gene in this syndrome. Modification of 
the CGPS phenotype in a sporadic case emphasizes the importance of searching for 
a chromosomal origin of this autosomal dominant disorder. Detection of a
chromosomal deletion in these patients may be associated with a poor prognosis
from the standpoint of cognitive development, and the potential for other
structural abnormalities not normally associated with GCPS.

PMID: 9520255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. J Biol Chem. 1998 Feb 6;273(6):3496-501.

GLI activates transcription through a herpes simplex viral protein 16-like
activation domain.

Yoon JW(1), Liu CZ, Yang JT, Swart R, Iannaccone P, Walterhouse D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Medical School,
Developmental Systems Biology, Children's Memorial Institute for Education and
Research, Children's Memorial Hospital, Chicago, Illinois 60614, USA.

Three proteins have been identified in mammals, GLI, GLI2, and GLI3, which share 
a highly conserved zinc finger domain with Drosophila Cubitus interruptus and are
believed to function as transcription factors in the vertebrate Sonic
hedgehog-Patched signaling pathway. To understand the role GLI plays in the Sonic
hedgehog-Patched pathway and mechanisms of GLI-induced transcriptional
regulation, we have characterized its transcriptional regulatory properties and
contributions of specific domains to transcriptional regulation. We have
demonstrated that GLI activates expression of reporter constructs in HeLa cells
in a concentration-dependent manner through the GLI consensus binding motif and
that a GAL4 binding domain-GLI fusion protein activates reporter expression
through the GAL4 DNA binding site. GLI-induced transcriptional activation
requires the carboxyl-terminal amino acids 1020-1091, which includes an 18-amino 
acid region highly similar to the alpha-helical herpes simplex viral protein 16
activation domain, including the consensus recognition element for the human
TFIID TATA box-binding protein-associated factor TAFII31 and conservation of all 
three amino acid residues believed to contact directly chemically complementary
residues in TAFII31. The presence of this region in the GLI activation domain
provides a mechanism for GLI-induced transcriptional regulation.

PMID: 9452474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Mech Dev. 1997 Dec;69(1-2):197-202.

Expression of indian hedgehog, bone morphogenetic protein 6 and gli during
skeletal morphogenesis.

Iwasaki M(1), Le AX, Helms JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of California, San Francisco
94143-0514, USA.

A complex signaling pathway involving members of the Hedgehog, Bone morphogenetic
protein (Bmp) and Gli families regulates early patterning events in fetal
skeletogenesis (Hui and Joyner, 1993. A mouse model of Greig
cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome: the extra-toes mutation contains an intragenic
deletion of the Gli3 gene. Nat. Genet. 3, 241-246; Bitgood and McMahon, 1995.
Hedgehog and Bmp genes are coexpressed at many diverse sites of cell-cell
interaction in the mouse embryo. Dev. Biol. 172, 126-138; Lanske et al., 1996.
PTH/PTHrP receptor in early development and Indian hedgehog-regulated bone
growth. Science 273, 663-666; Vortkamp et al., 1996. Regulation of rate of
cartilage differentiation by Indian hedgehog and PTH-related protein. Science
273, 613-622). Hedgehog genes encode secreted proteins that mediate patterning
and growth through the induction of secondary signals (reviewed in Hammerschmidt 
et al., 1997. The world according to hedgehog. Trends Genet. 13, 14-21). Two
potential targets of Ihh are bmp6 and gli (Johnson et al., 1995. Patched
overexpression alters wing disc size and pattern: transcriptional and
post-transcriptional effects on hedgehog targets. Development 121, 4161-4170;
Dominguez et al., 1996. Sending and receiving the hedgehog signal: control by the
Drosophila Gli protein Cubitus interruptus. Science 272, 1621-1625; Marigo et
al., 1996. Sonic hedgehog differentially regulates expression of GLI and GLI3
during limb development. Dev. Biol. 180, 273-283). We investigated the molecular 
similarities and differences between fetal and postnatal skeletal development by 
analyzing the coincident and complimentary expression domains of indian hedgehog 
(ihh), bmp6 and gli in adjacent sections throughout the process of
skeletogenesis. In almost all of the skeletal tissues examined, the expression
domains of ihh and bmp6 were adjacent to one another and this region was
surrounded by gli-expressing cells. These observations are in keeping with the
proposed function of gli as a negative regulator of Ihh signaling and the
induction of Bmps by Hedgehog proteins (Roberts et al., 1995. Sonic hedgehog is
an endodermal signal inducing Bmp-4 and Hox genes during induction and
regionalization of the chick hindgut. Development 121, 3163-3174; Kawakami et
al., 1996. BMP signaling during bone pattern determination in the developing
limb. Development 122, 3557-3566). By puberty, ihh, bmp6 and gli transcripts were
no longer detected in the growth plate, despite the fact that physeal
chondrocytes continued to hypertrophy and differentiate. Although bmp6 was
expressed, ihh transcripts were not found in primordia of intramembranous bones, 
nor in cells lining the future articular surfaces. Collectively our findings
suggest that ihh participates in, but is not required for chondrocyte
hypertrophy.

PMID: 9486541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Nature. 1997 Oct 23;389(6653):876-81.

Activation of the transcription factor Gli1 and the Sonic hedgehog signalling
pathway in skin tumours.

Dahmane N(1), Lee J, Robins P, Heller P, Ruiz i Altaba A.

Author information: 
(1)The Skirball Institute, Department of Cell Biology, New York University
Medical Center, New York 10016, USA.

Erratum in
    Nature 1997 Dec 4;390(6659):536.

Sporadic basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is the most common type of malignant cancer
in fair-skinned adults. Familial BCCs and a fraction of sporadic BCCs have lost
the function of Patched (Ptc), a Sonic hedgehog (Shh) receptor that acts
negatively on this signalling pathway. Overexpression of Shh can induce BCCs in
mice. Here we show that ectopic expression of the zinc-finger transcription
factor Gli1 in the embryonic frog epidermis results in the development of tumours
that express endogenous Gli1. We also show that Shh and the Gli genes are
normally expressed in hair follicles, and that human sporadic BCCs consistently
express Gli1 but not Shh or Gli3. Because Gli1, but not Gli3, acts as a target
and mediator of Shh signalling, our results suggest that expression of Gli1 in
basal cells induces BCC formation. Moreover, loss of Ptc or overexpression of Shh
cannot be the sole causes of Gli1 induction and sporadic BCC formation, as they
do not occur consistently. Thus any mutations leading to the expression of Gli1
in basal cells are predicted to induce BCC formation.

PMID: 9349822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Mol Med. 1997 Dec;3(12):826-35.

Expression of human GLI in mice results in failure to thrive, early death, and
patchy Hirschsprung-like gastrointestinal dilatation.

Yang JT(1), Liu CZ, Villavicencio EH, Yoon JW, Walterhouse D, Iannaccone PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Medical School, Chicago,
Illinois, USA.

BACKGROUND: GLI is an oncodevelopmental gene in the vertebrate hedgehog/patched
signaling pathway that is spatiotemporally regulated during development and is
amplified in a subset of human cancers. GLI is the prototype for the Gli-Kruppel 
family of transcription factors, which includes the Drosophila segment polarity
gene ci, the C. elegans sex-determining gene tra-1, and human and mouse GLI3, all
of which contain a conserved domain of five C2-H2 zinc fingers. GLI3 mutations
have been implicated in the mouse mutant extra toes, as well as in human Greig
cephalopolydactaly syndrome and the autosomal dominant form of Pallister-Hall
syndrome. As such, GLI and the vertebrate hedgehog/patched signaling pathway
appear to play important roles in both normal development and neoplasia.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Since it is not known whether aberrant GLI expression is
similarly linked to developmental disorders, we developed gain-of-function
transgenic mice which express human GLI ectopically.
RESULTS: Affected transgenic mice exhibit a phenotype of failure to thrive, early
death, and Hirschsprung-like patches of gastrointestinal dilatation. The colons
of affected mice have greatly attenuated smooth muscle layers and abnormal
overlying epithelium. The density of myenteric plexuses is reduced in the colonic
walls. The severity of the phenotype is related to the level of transgene
expression.
CONCLUSIONS: The transgenic mouse model supports a role for GLI in
gastrointestinal development. As part of the vertebrate hedgehog/patched
signaling pathway, GLI is essential to mesoderm and CNS ectoderm development and 
transgenic GLI expression affects neuronal, muscular, and epithelial cell
differentiation in the gut. Expression of human GLI in mice results in impairment
of enteric neuronal development and a Hirschsprung-like phenotype.

PMCID: PMC2230283
PMID: 9440116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Dev Dyn. 1998 Jan;211(1):88-96.

Expression profile of Gli family members and Shh in normal and mutant mouse limb 
development.

Büscher D(1), Rüther U.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Germany.

Gli genes represent a small family, encoding zinc-finger proteins of the
Krüppel-type. The family consists of Gli(1), Gli2, and Gli3, all of which are
expressed in the developing mouse limb bud. To assess the role of the Gli family 
and Sonic hedgehog (Shh) in mouse limb development, we compared the expression
domains of all three Gli genes and of Shh. Although each Gli gene has its own
distinct expression pattern in limb buds, at 10.5-11.5 dpc all three genes were
found not to be expressed in the posterior region, the presumptive Shh expression
domain. This transient mutually exclusive expression suggested a potential
interaction between Gli genes and Shh. To address this matter, we analysed the
expression of Gli genes and Shh in two polydactyly mouse mutants, Extra toes (Xt)
and Hemimelic-extra toes (Hx) which express Shh ectopically in the anterior
region of the limb field. Since Xt mice lack Gli3 expression, the ectopic Shh
expression is genetically linked to the absence of Gli3. In Hx mice we found a
down-regulation of Gli3 in the anterior region of the limb bud. In both mutants
Gli2 expression pattern was not altered, whereas Gli1 expression was anteriorly
up-regulated adjacent to the ectopic Shh domain. These results strongly suggest a
positive regulation of Gli1 by Shh and a negative interaction between Shh and
Gli3.

PMID: 9438426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Hum Genet. 1997 Dec;101(2):154-7.

Gene structure and allelic expression assay of the human GLI3 gene.

Kang S(1), Rosenberg M, Ko VD, Biesecker LG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetic Disease Research, National Human Genome Research
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-4472, USA.

The GLI3 gene encodes a putative zinc finger transcription factor that is
important in early vertebrate development. Haploinsufficiency of this gene has
been associated with the Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome and truncation
mutations cause Pallister-Hall syndrome. In the course of studies to determine
the etiology of Pallister-Hall syndrome, we required knowledge of the fine
structure of GLI3 to perform detailed genetic and physical mapping and mutation
screening of this gene. The coding region of GLI3 is composed of 14 exons,
including a large exon of more than 2500 bp. In addition, the gene contains two
intragenic dinucleotide repeats, and four single-base pair polymorphisms in the
coding region. We have used these coding region polymorphisms to design an
allele-specific expression study that will be useful for studying patients with
Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome. In addition, GLI3 should be considered a
candidate gene for related developmental anomalies of humans. Such hypotheses
will be more readily addressed with the availability of the fine structure of the
gene and the allele-expression assay.

PMID: 9402960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Development. 1997 Oct;124(20):3999-4008.

Polydactyly and ectopic ZPA formation in Alx-4 mutant mice.

Qu S(1), Niswender KD, Ji Q, van der Meer R, Keeney D, Magnuson MA, Wisdom R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Correct development of the limb is dependent on coordination between three
distinct signaling centers. Recently, fibroblast growth factor-4 has been
identified as a crucial determinant of AER function, which directs limb bud
outgrowth, and Sonic hedgehog has been identified as a signaling molecule that
mediates ZPA function, which specifies anterior-posterior patterning in the
developing limb bud. In addition, Shh and FGF-4 reciprocally reinforce each
other's expression via a positive feedback loop, providing a molecular basis for 
the coordination of limb bud outgrowth and anterior-posterior patterning. The
mechanisms by which these signaling centers come to occupy their normal positions
in the posterior limb bud during development are not understood. Here we identify
and characterize Alx-4, a gene that encodes a paired-type homeodomain protein.
Alx-4 is expressed in several populations of mesenchymal cells, including
mesenchymal cells in the anterior limb bud, and mice homozygous for targeted
disruption of the Alx-4 gene have multiple abnormalities, including preaxial
polydactyly. The polydactyly is associated with the formation of an ectopic
anterior ZPA, as indicated by anterior expression of Sonic hedgehog, HoxD13 and
fibroblast growth factor-4. The expression of other candidate regulators of
anterior-posterior positional information in the limb bud, including HoxB8 and
Gli3, is not altered in Alx-4 mutant embryos. By chromosomal mapping experiments,
Alx-4 is tightly linked to Strong's luxoid, a polydactylous mouse mutant. The
results identify Alx-4 as a determinant of anterior-posterior positional identity
in the limb and a component of a regulatory program that restricts ZPA formation 
to the posterior limb bud mesenchyme.

PMID: 9374397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Nat Genet. 1997 Nov;17(3):269-71.

Mutation in GLI3 in postaxial polydactyly type A.

Radhakrishna U, Wild A, Grzeschik KH, Antonarakis SE.

PMID: 9354785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Nat Genet. 1997 Nov;17(3):259-60.

Strike three for GLI3.

Biesecker LG.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet 1998 Jan;18(1):88.

PMID: 9354780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Hum Mol Genet. 1997 Oct;6(11):1979-84.

Point mutations in human GLI3 cause Greig syndrome.

Wild A(1), Kalff-Suske M, Vortkamp A, Bornholdt D, König R, Grzeschik KH.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Center of Human Genetics, Philipps University, Marburg, Germany.

Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS, MIM 175700) is a rare autosomal
dominant developmental disorder characterized by craniofacial abnormalities and
post-axial and pre-axial polydactyly as well as syndactyly of hands and feet.
Human GLI3, located on chromosome 7p13, is a candidate gene for the syndrome
because it is interrupted by translocation breakpoints associated with GCPS.
Since hemizygosity of 7p13 resulting in complete loss of one copy of GLI3 causes 
GCPS as well, haploinsufficiency of this gene was implicated as a mechanism to
cause this developmental malformation. To determine if point mutations within
GLI3 could be responsible for GCPS we describe the genomic sequences at the
boundaries of the 15 exons and primer pair sequences for mutation analysis with
polymerase chain reaction-based assays of the entire GLI3 coding sequences. In
two GCPS cases, both of which did not exhibit obvious cytogenetic rearrangements,
point mutations were identified in different domains of the protein, showing for 
the first time that Greig syndrome can be caused by GLI3 point mutations. In one 
case a nonsense mutation in exon X generates a stop codon truncating the protein 
in the C-H link of the first zinc finger. In the second case a missense mutation 
in exon XIV causes a Pro-->Ser replacement at a position that is conserved among 
GLI genes from several species altering a potential phosphorylation site.

PMID: 9302279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Dev Biol. 1997 Aug 15;188(2):337-48.

Evidence for the involvement of the Gli gene family in embryonic mouse lung
development.

Grindley JC(1), Bellusci S, Perkins D, Hogan BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee, 37232-2175, USA.

Murine Gli, Gli2, and Gli3 are zinc finger genes related to Drosophila cubitus
interuptus, a component of the hedgehog signal transduction pathway. In the
embryonic lung, all three Gli genes are strongly expressed at the pseudoglandular
stage, in distinct but overlapping domains of the mesoderm. Expression of Gli and
Gli3, but not of Gli2, is subsequently downregulated at the canalicular stage,
coincident with a decline in the expression of sonic hedgehog (Shh) and the
hedgehog receptor gene, patched (Ptc). Overexpression of Shh in the lung results 
in increased levels of Ptc mRNA. Gli, but not Gli2, is also upregulated,
suggesting a differential involvement of the Gli genes in the regulation of Ptc
by SHH during lung development. Gli3 is not upregulated by Shh overexpression.
However, its importance for lung development is shown by the finding that Gli3XtJ
embryos, homozygous for a mutation involving a deletion of the Gli3 gene, have a 
stereotypic pattern of abnormalities in lung morphogenesis. The pulmonary defects
in these embryos, consisting of localized shape changes and size reductions,
correlate with normal Gli3 expression. Thus, our data indicate that one of the
Gli genes, Gli3, is essential for normal lung development, and that another, Gli,
can be placed downstream of Shh signaling in the lung.

PMID: 9268579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Dev Biol. 1997 Aug 15;188(2):235-47.

Haploinsufficient phenotypes in Bmp4 heterozygous null mice and modification by
mutations in Gli3 and Alx4.

Dunn NR(1), Winnier GE, Hargett LK, Schrick JJ, Fogo AB, Hogan BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical School, Nashville,
Tennessee, 37232-2175, USA.

Bone morphogenetic protein 4 (Bmp4), a vertebrate homolog of Drosophila
decapentaplegic (dpp), encodes a signaling protein with multiple functions during
embryogenesis. Most mouse embryos homozygous for the Bmp4(tm1blh) null allele die
around the time of gastrulation, with little or no mesoderm. Two independently
derived Bmp4(tm1) mutations were backcrossed onto the C57BL/6 genetic background.
Several independently expressed, incompletely penetrant abnormalities were
observed in heterozygotes, including cystic kidney, craniofacial malformations,
microphthalmia, and preaxial polydactyly of the right hindlimb. In addition,
heterozygotes were consistently underrepresented at weaning. These results
indicate that Bmp4 gene dosage is essential for the normal development of a
variety of organs and for neonatal viability. Two mutations that enhance the
penetrance and expressivity of the polydactylous phenotype were identified:
Gli3(XtJ), a deletion mutation involving a gene encoding a zinc-finger protein
related to Drosophila cubitus interruptus, and Alx4(tm1rwm), a targeted null
mutation in a gene encoding a paired class homeoprotein related to Drosophila
aristaless. All double Bmp4(tm1); Gli3(XtJ) heterozygotes have extensive anterior
digit abnormalities of both fore- and hindlimbs, while all double Bmp4(tm1);
Alx4(tm1) heterozygotes display ectopic anterior digits only on the hindlimbs.
These genetic interactions suggest a model for the multigenic control of anterior
digit patterning during vertebrate limb development.

PMID: 9268572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Development. 1997 Jul;124(13):2537-52.

Gli1 is a target of Sonic hedgehog that induces ventral neural tube development.

Lee J(1), Platt KA, Censullo P, Ruiz i Altaba A.

Author information: 
(1)The Skirball Institute, Developmental Genetics Program and Department of Cell 
Biology, NYU Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, USA.

The vertebrate zinc finger genes of the Gli family are homologs of the Drosophila
gene cubitus interruptus. In frog embryos, Gli1 is expressed transiently in the
prospective floor plate during gastrulation and in cells lateral to the midline
during late gastrula and neurula stages. In contrast, Gli2 and Gli3 are absent
from the neural plate midline with Gli2 expressed widely and Gli3 in a graded
fashion with highest levels in lateral regions. In mouse embryos, the three Gli
genes show a similar pattern of expression in the neural tube but are coexpressed
throughout the early neural plate. Because Gli1 is the only Gli gene expressed in
prospective floor plate cells of frog embryos, we have investigated a possible
involvement of this gene in ventral neural tube development. Here we show that
Shh signaling activates Gli1 transcription and that widespread expression of
endogenous frog or human glioma Gli1, but not Gli3, in developing frog embryos
results in the ectopic differentiation of floor plate cells and ventral neurons
within the neural tube. Floor-plate-inducing ability is retained when cytoplasmic
Gli1 proteins are forced into the nucleus or are fused to the VP16
transactivating domain. Thus, our results identify Gli1 as a midline target of
Shh and suggest that it mediates the induction of floor plate cells and ventral
neurons by Shh acting as a transcriptional regulator.

PMID: 9216996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. J Med Genet. 1997 Jun;34(6):441-6.

Linkage mapping and phenotypic analysis of autosomal dominant Pallister-Hall
syndrome.

Kang S(1), Allen J, Graham JM Jr, Grebe T, Clericuzio C, Patronas N, Ondrey F,
Green E, Schäffer A, Abbott M, Biesecker LG.

Author information: 
(1)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Pallister-Hall syndrome is a human developmental disorder that is inherited in an
autosomal dominant pattern. The phenotypic features of the syndrome include
hypothalamic hamartoma, polydactyly, imperforate anus, laryngeal clefting, and
other anomalies. Here we describe the clinical characterisation of a family with 
22 affected members and the genetic mapping of the corresponding locus. Clinical,
radiographic, and endoscopic evaluations showed that this disorder is a fully
penetrant trait with variable expressivity and low morbidity. By analysing 60
subjects in two families using anonymous STRP markers, we have established
linkage to 7p13 by two point analysis with D7S691 resulting in a lod score of 7.0
at theta = 0, near the GLI3 locus. Deletions and translocations in GLI3 are
associated with the Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome. Although Greig
cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome has some phenotypic overlap with Pallister-Hall
syndrome, these two disorders are clinically distinct. The colocalisation of loci
for these distinct phenotypes led us to analyse GLI3 for mutations in patients
with Pallister-Hall syndrome. We have previously shown GLI3 mutations in two
other small, moderately affected families with Pallister-Hall syndrome. The
linkage data reported here suggest that these larger, mildly affected families
may also have mutations in GLI3.

PMCID: PMC1050964
PMID: 9192261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Oncogene. 1997 May 15;14(19):2259-64.

Gli family members are differentially expressed during the mitotic phase of
spermatogenesis.

Persengiev SP(1), Kondova II, Millette CF, Kilpatrick DL.

Author information: 
(1)Worcester Foundation for Biomedical Research, Neurobiology Group, Shrewsbury, 
Massachusetts 01545, USA.

The Gli family of DNA binding proteins has been implicated in multiple neoplasias
and developmental abnormalities, suggesting a primary involvement in cell
development and differentiation. However, to date their specific roles and
mechanisms of action remain obscure, and a drawback has been the lack of a model 
system in which to study their normal function. Here we demonstrate that Gli
family members are differentially expressed during spermatogenesis in mice.
Specifically, Gli and Gli3 mRNAs were detected in mouse germ cells, while Gli2
was not. Further, both Gli and Gli3 exhibited stage-dependent patterns of
expression selectively in type A and B spermatogonia. Gli expression was somewhat
higher in type B spermatogonia while the abundance of Gli3 transcripts was
similar in type A and B cells. Gel-shift analyses also demonstrated the
enrichment of DNA binding activity specific for the Gli target sequence in
spermatogonial cells. These results indicate a selective role for Gli and Gli3
during mitotic stages of male germ cell development. Spermatogenesis may thus
provide a unique opportunity to identify downstream targets and explore the
normal function of Gli family proteins.

PMID: 9178901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Matrix Biol. 1997 May;16(2):53-8.

The role of sonic hedgehog in vertebrate development.

Weed M(1), Mundlos S, Olsen BR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA.

Members of the hedgehog family are important signalling molecules during
embryonic development. One member, Sonic hedgehog, is expressed in embryonic
structures such as the zone of polarizing activity in the posterior limb bud, the
notochord, and the floor plate of the neural tube, where it plays a role in
patterning of the embryo. Sonic hedgehog is synthesized as an inactive precursor 
which must be proteolytically cleaved and modified by the addition of a
cholesterol moiety to become active as a signalling molecule. In this processing,
the C-terminal region of Sonic hedgehog serves as both the endoprotease and a
cholesterol transferase. The importance of cholesterol for Sonic hedgehog
function may explain many of the profound developmental defects caused by
perturbations of cholesterol metabolism. The receptor for Sonic hedgehog is
Patched, a multi-pass transmembrane protein which forms a complex with Smoothened
Mutations in Patched are associated with basal cell naevus syndrome, while
mutations in Sonic hedgehog cause holoprosencephaly. Downstream targets of Sonic 
hedgehog signalling are transcription factors like Gli3, responsible for Greigs
polycephalosyndactyly in humans and Hoxd13, responsible for polysyndactyly.

PMID: 9205942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Mech Dev. 1997 May;63(2):211-25.

A role for Xenopus Gli-type zinc finger proteins in the early embryonic
patterning of mesoderm and neuroectoderm.

Marine JC(1), Bellefroid EJ, Pendeville H, Martial JA, Pieler T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et de Génie Génétique, Université de
Liège, Sart-Tilman, Belgium.

Gli-type zinc finger proteins play important regulatory roles in vertebrate and
invertebrate embryogenesis. In Xenopus, the Gli-type proteins XGli-3 and XGli-4
are first expressed in earliest stages of mesoderm and neural development.
Transient transfection assays reveal that XGli-3 and XGli-4 can function as
transcription repressors. Counteracting the Gli-protein repressor activity by
ectopic expression of a fusion protein that contains the Gli-zinc finger cluster 
connected to the E1A activator domain in Xenopus embryos results in specific
morphological alterations in the developing somites and in the central nervous
system. Altered expression characteristics for a broad set of molecular markers
highlighting specific aspects of mesodermal and neural differentiation
demonstrate an important role for Gli-type zinc finger proteins in the early
mesodermal and neural patterning of Xenopus embryos.

PMID: 9203143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Nature. 1997 Apr 17;386(6626):735-8.

Drosophila CBP is a co-activator of cubitus interruptus in hedgehog signalling.

Akimaru H(1), Chen Y, Dai P, Hou DX, Nonaka M, Smolik SM, Armstrong S, Goodman
RH, Ishii S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Tsukuba Life Science Center, The Institute
of Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN), Ibaraki, Japan.

The transcription factor CBP, originally identified as a coactivator for CREB,
enhances transcription mediated by many other transcription factors. Mutations in
the human CBP gene are associated with Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome, a
haploinsufficiency disorder characterized by abnormal pattern formation, but the 
mechanism by which decreased CBP levels affect pattern formation is unclear. The 
hedgehog (hh) signalling pathway is an important determinant of pattern
formation. cubitus interruptus (ci), a component in hh signalling, encodes a
transcription factor homologous to the Gli family of proteins and is required for
induction of the hh-dependent expression of patched (ptc), decapentaplegic (dpp) 
and wingless (wg). Haploinsufficiency for the ci-related transcription factor
Gli3 causes phenotypic changes in mice (known as 'extra-toes) and humans (Greig's
cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome) that have similarities to Rubinstein-Taybi
syndrome. Here we show that Drosophila CBP (dCBP) functions as a coactivator of
Ci, suggesting that the dCBP-Ci interaction may shed light on the contribution of
CBP to pattern formation in mammals.

PMID: 9109493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Development. 1997 Apr;124(7):1313-22.

A binding site for Gli proteins is essential for HNF-3beta floor plate enhancer
activity in transgenics and can respond to Shh in vitro.

Sasaki H(1), Hui C, Nakafuku M, Kondoh H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Biology, Osaka University, Suita, Japan.
hsasaki@imcb.osaka-u.ac.jp

The floor plate plays important roles in ventral pattern formation and axonal
guidance within the neural tube of vertebrate embryos. A critical event for floor
plate development is the induction of a winged helix transcription factor,
Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor-3beta (HNF-3beta). The enhancer for floor plate
expression of HNF-3beta is located 3' of the transcription unit and consists of
multiple elements. HNF-3beta induction depends on the notochord-derived signal,
Sonic hedgehog (Shh). Genetic analysis in Drosophila has led to the
identification of genes involved in the Hh signalling pathway, and cubitus
interruptus (ci), encoding a protein with five zinc finger motifs, was placed
downstream. In the present work, we test the involvement of Gli proteins, the
mouse homologues of Ci, in activation of the floor plate enhancer of HNF-3beta.
Transgenic analysis shows that a Gli-binding site is required for the activity of
the minimal floor plate enhancer of HNF-3beta in vivo. Three Gli genes are
differentially expressed in the developing neural tube. Gli expression is
restricted to the ventral part, while Gli2 and Gli3 are expressed throughout the 
neural tube and dorsally, respectively. Strong Gli and Gli2, and weak Gli3
expressions transiently overlap with HNF-3beta at the time of its induction.
Consistent with ventrally localized expression, Gli expression can be
up-regulated by Shh in a cell line. Finally, the Gli-binding site acts as a Shh
responsive element, and human GLI, but not GLI3, can activate this binding site
in tissue culture. Taken together, these findings suggest that Gli, and probably 
also Gli2, are good candidates for transcriptional activators of the HNF-3beta
floor plate enhancer, and the binding site for Gli proteins is a key element for 
response to Shh signalling. These results also support the idea that Gli/Ci are
evolutionary conserved transcription factors in the Hedgehog signalling pathway.

PMID: 9118802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Mech Dev. 1997 Mar;62(2):175-82.

Evidence for genetic control of Sonic hedgehog by Gli3 in mouse limb development.

Büscher D(1), Bosse B, Heymer J, Rüther U.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Germany.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) expression in the developing limb is associated with the
zone of polarising activity (ZPA), and both are restricted to the posterior part 
of the limb bud. We show that the expression patterns of Shh and Gli3, a member
of the Gli-family believed to function in transcriptional control, appear to be
mutually exclusive in limb buds of mouse embryos. In the polydactyly mouse mutant
extra toes (Xt), possessing a null mutation of Gli3, Shh is additionally
expressed in the anterior region of the limb bud. The transcript of Ptc, the
putative receptor for Shh protein, can be detected anteriorly as well. Other
genes known to be involved in limb outgrowth and patterning, like Fibroblast
growth factor (Fgf), Bone morphogenetic protein (Bmp), and Hoxd are misexpressed 
in relation to the ectopic Shh expression domain in Xt limb buds. This data
suggest that Gli3 is a regulator of Shh expression in mouse limb development.

PMID: 9152009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Nat Genet. 1997 Mar;15(3):266-8.

GLI3 frameshift mutations cause autosomal dominant Pallister-Hall syndrome.

Kang S(1), Graham JM Jr, Olney AH, Biesecker LG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetic Disease Research, National Human Genome Research
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4472, USA.

Pallister-Hall syndrome (PHS, M146510) was first described in 1980 in six
newborns. It is a pleiotropic disorder of human development that comprises
hypothalamic hamartoma, central polydactyly, and other malformations. This
disorder is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait and has been mapped to 7p13 
(S. Kang et al. Autosomal dominant Pallister-Hall syndrome maps to 7p13. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 59, A81 (1996)), co-localizing the PHS locus and the GLI3 zinc finger
transcription factor gene. Large deletions or translocations resulting in
haploinsufficiency of the GLI3 gene have been associated with Greig
cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS; M175700) although no mutations have been
identified in GCPS patients with normal karyotypes. Both PHS and GCPS have
polysyndactyly, abnormal craniofacial features and are inherited in an autosomal 
dominant pattern, but they are clinically distinct. The polydactyly of GCPS is
commonly preaxial and that of PHS is typically central or postaxial. No reported 
cases of GCPS have hypothalamic hamartoma and PHS does not cause hypertelorism or
broadening of the nasal root or forehead. The co-localization of the loci for PHS
and GCPS led us to investigate GLI3 as a candidate gene for PHS. Herein we report
two PHS families with frameshift mutations in GLI3 that are 3' of the zinc
finger-encoding domains, including one family with a de novo mutation. These data
implicate mutations in GLI3 as the cause of autosomal dominant PHS, and suggest
that frameshift mutations of the GLI3 transcription factor gene can alter the
development of multiple organ systems in vertebrates.

PMID: 9054938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Dev Biol. 1997 Feb 1;182(1):42-51.

Multigenic control of the localization of the zone of polarizing activity in limb
morphogenesis in the mouse.

Masuya H(1), Sagai T, Moriwaki K, Shiroishi T.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian Genetics Laboratory, National Institute of Genetics, Mishima, Japan.

We report here that in three preaxial polydactylous mutants in the mouse, namely,
1st, 1x, and Xp1, ectopic expression of the Shh and Fgf-4 genes can be detected
at the anterior margin of limb buds. These and three other mutants, namely, Rim4,
Hx, and Xt1, which we described in our previous study, all appeared to form a
duplicated zone of polarizing activity (ZPA) at the anterior margin of the limb
bud. We studied the spatial and temporal pattern of expression of the Gli3 gene, 
which is affected in a loss-of-function type of mutation, Xt1. The expression
domain of Gli3 appeared to be complementary to the ZPA region and the gene was
expressed prior to Shh. The results support the hypothesis that GLI3 functions in
the anterior portion of limb mesoderm to suppress the expression of Shh. In
Drosophila, the gene ci, the fly homologue of Gli, functions to repress hh,
suggesting that the negative regulation of the expression of hedgehog by genes
belonging to the GLI-kruppel family has been conserved from flies to mice.
Finally, we found that the polydactylous phenotype of the mutants Rim4, Xt, 1st, 
and 1x could be abrogated by the crossing with an inbred strain derived from wild
mouse, MSM, whereas the phenotype of Xp1 could not. These results indicate the
presence of a modifier gene(s) that can influence the mutant phenotype and also
that the mutations could be classified into two categories with regard to the
mode of interaction with the modifier gene(s). Thus, this study revealed a
multigenic control in the establishment of the anteroposterior axis in mouse limb
development.

PMID: 9073443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Genomics. 1997 Jan 15;39(2):205-15.

Cloning and sequencing of the mouse Gli2 gene: localization to the Dominant
hemimelia critical region.

Hughes DC(1), Allen J, Morley G, Sutherland K, Ahmed W, Prosser J, Lettice L,
Allan G, Mattei MG, Farrall M, Hill RE.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Genetics Unit, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. 
davidh@ihr.mrc.ac.uk

The GLI family of zinc finger genes has been implicated in both neoplastic and
developmental disorders. We have cloned and sequenced the mouse homolog of the
zinc finger gene Gli2 and demonstrated significant similarity to the human GLI3
gene. We have also localized Gli2 to mouse chromosome 1, in the vicinity of the
morphogenetic mutation Dominant hemimelia (Dh), which is characterized by tibial 
hemimelia, poly/oligodactyly, and a number of visceral abnormalities, most
strikingly absence of the spleen. Using a Gli2-associated microsatellite, we
demonstrated no recombination between Dh and Gli2 in a Dh intraspecific
backcross. Gli2 is expressed in Dh heterozygotes and homozygotes. However, using 
a combination of mismatch analysis and direct sequencing, we have failed to
identify any mutations in the coding sequence of Gli2 from Dh. We have also
demonstrated that it is unlikely that there are any Gli genes in the mouse genome
in addition to the previously described Gli, Gli2, and Gli3.

PMID: 9027508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Development. 1997 Jan;124(1):113-23.

Specific and redundant functions of Gli2 and Gli3 zinc finger genes in skeletal
patterning and development.

Mo R(1), Freer AM, Zinyk DL, Crackower MA, Michaud J, Heng HH, Chik KW, Shi XM,
Tsui LC, Cheng SH, Joyner AL, Hui C.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology and Division of Endocrinology, Research
Institute, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The correct patterning of vertebrate skeletal elements is controlled by inductive
interactions. Two vertebrate hedgehog proteins, Sonic hedgehog and Indian
hedgehog, have been implicated in skeletal development. During somite
differentiation and limb development, Sonic hedgehog functions as an inductive
signal from the notochord, floor plate and zone of polarizing activity. Later in 
skeletogenesis, Indian hedgehog functions as a regulator of chondrogenesis during
endochondral ossification. The vertebrate Gli zinc finger proteins are putative
transcription factors that respond to Hedgehog signaling. In Drosophila, the Gli 
homolog cubitus interruptus is required for the activation of hedgehog targets
and also functions as a repressor of hedgehog expression. We show here that Gli2 
mutant mice exhibit severe skeletal abnormalities including cleft palate, tooth
defects, absence of vertebral body and intervertebral discs, and shortened limbs 
and sternum. Interestingly, Gli2 and Gli3 (C.-c. Hui and A. L. Joyner (1993).
Nature Genet. 3, 241-246) mutant mice exhibit different subsets of skeletal
defects indicating that they implement specific functions in the development of
the neural crest, somite and lateral plate mesoderm derivatives. Although Gli2
and Gli3 are not functionally equivalent, double mutant analysis indicates that, 
in addition to their specific roles, they also serve redundant functions during
skeletal development. The role of Gli2 and Gli3 in Hedgehog signaling during
skeletal development is discussed.

PMID: 9006072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Dev Biol. 1996 Nov 25;180(1):273-83.

Sonic hedgehog differentially regulates expression of GLI and GLI3 during limb
development.

Marigo V(1), Johnson RL, Vortkamp A, Tabin CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115,
USA.

Sonic hedgehog is a secreted factor regulating patterning of the
anterior-posterior axis in the developing limb. The signaling pathway mediating
the transduction of the signal is still poorly understood. In Drosophila several 
genes are known to act downstream of hedgehog, the fly homolog of Sonic hedgehog.
An important gene epistatic to hedgehog is cubitus interruptus, which encodes the
fly homolog of a family of vertebrate putative transcription factors, the GLI
genes. We have isolated two members of the GLI family from chick, called GLI and 
GLI3. Their expression patterns in a variety of tissues during embryogenesis
suggest that these genes may be targets of the Sonic hedgehog signal. We
demonstrate that the two GLI genes are differentially regulated by Sonic hedgehog
during limb development. Sonic hedgehog up-regulates GLI transcription, while
down-regulating GLI3 expression in the mesenchymal cells of the developing limb
bud. Finally, we demonstrate that an activated form of GLI can induce expression 
of Patched, a known target of Sonic hedgehog, thus implicating GLI as a key
transcription factor in the vertebrate hedgehog signaling pathway. In conjunction
with evidence from a mouse Gli3 mutant, our data suggest that GLI and GLI3 may
have taken two different functions of their Drosophila homolog cubitus
interruptus.

PMID: 8948590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1996 Jul 17;1307(3):267-9.

Cloning and sequence analysis of the murine Gli3 cDNA.

Thien H(1), Büscher D, Rüther U.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology, Hannover Medical School, Germany.

The zinc finger gene Gli3 plays a role in limb and brain development. To
facilitate the molecular analysis of different mouse mutations of this gene, the 
murine cDNA was isolated and sequenced. This 5113 bp cDNA encodes a putative
protein of 1596 amino acids. Comparison of the murine and human GLI3 cDNA
revealed an overall homology of 85% between the deduced amino acid sequences.
More importantly, several regions of the protein, including the zinc fingers, are
more highly conserved ( > 95%), suggesting that these represent functional
domains in the Gli3 protein.

PMID: 8688459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 1996 Jun;6(3):334-42.

Transcription factors in disease.

Engelkamp D(1), van Heyningen V.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Genetics Unit, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, UK.
dieter@hgu.mrc.ac.uk

Mutations affecting several predominantly tissue-specific transcriptional
regulators have recently been associated with disease phenotypes. Although the
mutational spectrum is variable, many of the reported cases involve clear
loss-of-function mutations-such as Waardenburg syndrome type 1, aniridia and
Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome-suggesting that the genetic mechanism involved in
disease is haplo-insufficiency. The high degree of dosage sensitivity often
appears to affect only a subset of the tissues that express the gene. Position
effects with cytogenetic rearrangements well outside the coding region have been 
implicated for four of the genes discussed: POU3F4, SOX9, PAX6, and GL13.

PMID: 8791518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Prog Neurobiol. 1995 Oct;47(2):135-55.

Apoptosis in the developing CNS.

Naruse I(1), Keino H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Morphology, Aichi Human Service Center, Kasugai, Japan.

In this review, apoptosis during normal development of the CNS and abnormal
apoptosis inducing hydrocephaly and arhinencephaly will be discussed. As the
prominent sites of apoptosis during normal development of the CNS, we focused on 
the area of fusion of the neural plate to form the neural tube, the developing
rhombomeres, and neuronal loss in the CNS during embryogenesis and postnatal
development. As examples of abnormal apoptosis inducing abnormal brain
morphogenesis, we will discuss genetically induced arhinencephaly and
hydrocephaly. It was suggested that apoptosis of the precursor mitral cells in
the anlage of the olfactory bulb was induced by non-innervation of olfactory
neurons, and apoptosis of the precursor neurons in the pyriform cortex was
induced by the non-innervation caused by the death of mitral cells in the mutant 
arhinencephalic mouse brain (Pdn/Pdn). Thus, sequential apoptosis of the
precursor neurons and sequential manifestation of the brain abnormalities were
proposed in arhinencephalic mutant mouse embryos and also in the arhinencephalic 
brains induced experimentally by fetal laser surgery exo utero. Meanwhile, it was
speculated that the Gli3 gene, mutation of which is responsible for the
arhinencephaly in Pdn/Pdn mice, might play a role in mesenchymal programmed cell 
death during development.

PMID: 8711131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. DNA Cell Biol. 1995 Jul;14(7):629-34.

Identification of optimized target sequences for the GLI3 zinc finger protein.

Vortkamp A(1), Gessler M, Grzeschik KH.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Marburg, Germany.

GLI3 represents an important control gene for development and differentiation of 
several body structures. Reduction in gene dosage already leads to severe
perturbation, especially of limb morphogenesis. The gene encodes a zinc finger
protein that likely functions as a transcriptional modulator. Because the five
zinc fingers should be capable of recognizing an extended stretch of genomic DNA,
we sought to identify sequences bound by GLI3 that may facilitate the search for 
target genes acting downstream of GLI3. Starting from the nonamer DNA binding
sequence of the highly related GLI protein, we employed an oligonucleotide
selection protocol to determine an optimized binding sequence for the GLI3
protein. The resulting sequence bound by the GLI3 zinc fingers consists of 16
nucleotides and shows a high degree of similarity to sequences bound by the GLI
and tra-1 proteins. Comparison with protein-DNA interactions in the known crystal
structure of the GLI-DNA complex suggests relevant interactions of additional
amino acids of GLI3 with its target site. The newly identified GLI3 target
sequence should prove very useful for both the structural analysis of the
protein-DNA complex and the search for genes whose expression is subject to
regulation by the GLI3 gene product.

PMID: 7626222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Genes Dev. 1995 Jan 15;9(2):155-67.

Dominant feminizing mutations implicate protein-protein interactions as the main 
mode of regulation of the nematode sex-determining gene tra-1.

de Bono M(1), Zarkower D, Hodgkin J.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK.

The tra-1 gene is the terminal global selector of somatic sex in Caenorhabditis
elegans: High tra-1 activity elicits female somatic development while low tra-1
activity elicits male development. Previous genetic studies defined a cascade of 
negatively interacting genes that regulates tra-1 activity in response to the
primary sex-determining signal. Here, we investigate the last step in this
regulatory cascade, by studying rare gain-of-function (gf) mutations of tra-1
that direct female somatic development irrespective of the upstream
sex-determining signal. These mutations appear to abolish negative regulation of 
tra-1 in male tissues. We identify the lesions associated with 29 of these
mutations and find that all affect a short stretch of amino acid residues present
in both protein products of the tra-1 gene. Twenty-six alleles are associated
with single nonconservative amino acid substitutions. Two alleles affect tra-1
RNA splicing and generate messages that omit part or all of the exon encoding
this short stretch. These results suggest that sexual regulation of tra-1 is
achieved post-translationally, by an inhibitory protein-protein interaction. The 
amino acid stretch altered by the tra-1(gf) mutations may define a site of
interaction for negative regulators of tra-1. The stretch includes a potential
phosphorylation site for glycogen synthase kinase 3 and may be conserved in the
human gene GLI3, a homolog of tra-1 identified previously.

PMID: 7851791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Hum Genet. 1995 Jan;95(1):82-8.

Isolation and characterization of a cosmid contig for the GCPS gene region.

Vortkamp A(1), Heid C, Gessler M, Grzeschik KH.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Marburg, Germany.

The zinc finger gene GLI3 has been shown to be involved in the embryonal
development of the limbs and skull. Mutations in GLI3 lead to the development of 
the human Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS) and the mouse mutations
extra toes (Xt) and anterior digit deformity (add). The GCPS locus on human
chromosome 7p13 has recently been isolated in a yeast artificial chromosome (YAC)
contig. Here, we describe the establishment of a cosmid contig that was derived
from two of the YAC clones, that spans 550 kb of human DNA, and that includes the
GLI3 gene. In this contig, three GCPS translocation breakpoints have been mapped 
to distinct EcoRI fragments in the 3' half of the gene. In addition,
exon-carrying fragments have been identified and the size of the GLI3 gene could 
be determined as at least 280 kb. The gene is flanked by a CpG island that lies
on the 5' side and that is in close proximity to the first exon detected by the
cloned GLI3 cDNA. Further upstream, five segments were found that have been
conserved between man and mouse. In the mouse, this region has been characterized
as the transgene integration site resulting in the add phenotype. Both the CpG
island and the conserved regions are probable candidates for a search for GLI3
promoter and control elements.

PMID: 7814032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Genomics. 1994 Aug;22(3):563-8.

Isolation of a yeast artificial chromosome contig spanning the Greig
cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS) gene region.

Vortkamp A(1), Gessler M, Le Paslier D, Elaswarapu R, Smith S, Grzeschik KH.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Marburg, Germany.

Disruption of the zinc finger gene GLI3 has been shown to be the cause of Greig
cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS), at least in some GCPS translocation
patients. To characterize this genomic region on human chromosome 7p13, we have
isolated a YAC contig of more than 1000 kb including the GLI3 gene. In this
contig the gene itself spans at least 200-250 kb. A CpG island is located in the 
vicinity of the 5' region of the known GLI3 cDNA, implying a potential promoter
region.

PMID: 8001967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Hum Mol Genet. 1994 Aug;3(8):1405-8.

Localization of the genetic locus for Saethre-Chotzen syndrome to a 6 cM region
of chromosome 7 using four cases with apparently balanced translocations at
7p21.2.

Rose CS(1), King AA, Summers D, Palmer R, Yang S, Wilkie AO, Reardon W, Malcolm
S, Winter RM.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Child Health, London, UK.

Saethre-Chotzen syndrome is a common autosomal dominant form of craniosynostosis,
which results in the premature fusion of cranial sutures. Craniosynostosis is
commonly associated with abnormalities of 7p; Vortkamp et al. (Nature 352,
539-540) demonstrated that the GLI3 gene in 7p13 was disrupted in, patients with 
Greig syndrome and, more recently, the linkage of genetic markers from 7p with
the Saethre-Chotzen syndrome locus has been reported (2,3). Here we report the
analysis by fluorescence in situ hybridization of four patients with
Saethre-Chotzen syndrome associated with apparently balanced translocations
involving band 7p21.2 and different reciprocal chromosomes. We show that in all
four patients the breakpoints in 7p are situated within a 6 cM region flanked by 
the genetic markers D7S488 and D7S493. These results provide further evidence
that the genetic locus for Saethre-Chotzen syndrome is located in distal 7p.

PMID: 7987323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Mamm Genome. 1994 Jun;5(6):384-6.

The mouse mutant Polydactyly Nagoya (Pdn) defines a novel allele of the zinc
finger gene Gli3.

Schimmang T(1), Oda SI, Rüther U.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany.

PMID: 8043956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Ciba Found Symp. 1994;181:118-34; discussion 134-43.

Genetic models of mammalian neural tube defects.

Copp AJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Unit, University of London, UK.

Several mouse mutations disturb the embryonic process of neurulation, yielding
neural tube defects. Analysis of the mutations offers the most feasible approach 
to understanding the aetiology and pathogenesis of human neural tube defects.
Interactions between the non-allelic mutant genes and between several of the
mutant genes and modifying genes in the genetic background modulate the frequency
and severity of the defects that develop. Environmental factors interact with the
genetic predisposition either to increase or to decrease the incidence of
defects. The gene loci corresponding to two of the mutations, splotch (Sp) and
extra toes (Xt), have been identified as those encoding the transcription factors
Pax-3 and Gli3, respectively; their human homologues are associated with
Waardenburg type I syndrome and Greig's cephalopolysyndactyly. Embryological
analysis reveals that several of the mutations disturb the process of neural tube
closure at the posterior neuropore (in the lumbosacral region), yielding spina
bifida and/or tail defects. The different mutations appear to achieve this
developmental end-point by different underlying mechanisms. In curly tail (ct),
non-neural tissues proliferate abnormally slowly causing ventral curvature of the
neuropore region and inhibiting neural tube closure. Neural tube defects can be
prevented in cultured ct/ct embryos by experimentally correcting either the
proliferative imbalance or the ventral curvature. In Sp the primary defect
appears to reside in the neuroepithelium. A combination of genetic analysis, gene
cloning and experimental embryology is revealing that neural tube defects in mice
and, by implication, in humans are a developmentally heterogeneous group of
malformations.

PMID: 8005021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Nat Genet. 1993 Mar;3(3):241-6.

A mouse model of greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome: the extra-toesJ mutation
contains an intragenic deletion of the Gli3 gene.

Hui CC(1), Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Developmental Biology, Samuel Lunenfield Research
Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet 1998 Aug;19(4):404.

Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS) is an autosomal dominant disorder
affecting limb and craniofacial development. Recently, the human GLI3 gene has
been proposed to be a candidate gene for GCPS. Here we describe the molecular
characterization of extra-toes (Xt), which is a mouse model of GCPS. The Xt
heterozygotes show craniofacial defects and a polydactyly phenotype similar to
GCPS. We show that a deficiency of Gli3 expression in the XtJ mutant is due to a 
deletion within the 3' end of the gene. Furthermore, structures affected in the
mouse mutant and human syndrome were found to correlate with expression domains
of Gli3 in mouse. These results strongly suggest that the deficiency of GLI3
function leads to GCPS.

PMID: 8387379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Dev Dyn. 1993 Feb;196(2):91-102.

gli, a zinc finger transcription factor and oncogene, is expressed during normal 
mouse development.

Walterhouse D(1), Ahmed M, Slusarski D, Kalamaras J, Boucher D, Holmgren R,
Iannaccone P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611.

The oncogene GLI is amplified and expressed in some cases of human malignant
glioma and undifferentiated childhood sarcoma and is the prototype for a gene
family characterized by a highly conserved set of five tandem zinc fingers and a 
consensus cysteine-histidine link. This zinc finger motif has been shown to bind 
DNA with sequence specificity and may mediate transcriptional regulation. Since
GLI is expressed in embryonal carcinoma cell lines but not in most normal adult
tissues and shows significant sequence similarity within its zinc finger domain
to cubitus interruptus dominant (ciD), a Drosophila segmentation gene known to be
important in the morphogenesis of the posterior portion of each larval segment,
we established the temporal and tissue expression patterns of the mouse homologue
of human GLI in day 10 through 18 mouse embryos with Northern blotting, reverse
transcriptase coupled PCR, and in situ hybridization. gli transcripts were
demonstrated on days 10 through 18 of mouse embryonic development as well as in
normal adult uterus, brain, testis, and limb. Tissue expression of gli during
gestation was demonstrated in Meckel's precartilage mesenchyme, the basis
occipitus, rib mesenchymal condensations, primordial vertebral bodies, digital
mesenchymal condensations in forefoot and hindfoot plates, the ependymal layer of
the spinal cord, and the mesoderm of the gastrointestinal tract. Expression
persisted throughout gestation in developing bone and cartilage of the
extremities, the ribs, and the vertebral bodies, as well as the gastrointestinal 
tract mesoderm. These findings support a role for gli family genes in normal
craniofacial and digital development in mammals first suggested by the
demonstration of translocation breakpoints within the GLI3 gene in families with 
the Greig cephalopolysyndactylyl syndrome and subsequently by reduced gli3
expression in the mouse mutant extra toes. It is surprising that a single gene
would be expressed in such a wide range of mesenchymal structures.

PMID: 8364225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Mamm Genome. 1993;4(5):276-7.

Molecular linkage of the morphogenetic mutation add and the zinc finger gene
Gli3.

van der Hoeven F(1), Schimmang T, Vortkamp A, Rüther U.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, FRG.

PMID: 8507982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Prog Clin Biol Res. 1993;383A:153-61.

Gli3 expression is affected in the morphogenetic mouse mutants add and Xt.

Schimmang T(1), van der Hoeven F, Rüther U.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany.

We investigated the relation between the recessive mutation add caused by
insertional mutagenesis of a transgene and the dominant mutation extra-toes (Xt) 
which display similar effects on limb morphogenesis. The transgene insertion in
add mapped close to the 5' end of the zinc finger gene Gli3 and 5'sequences of
Gli3 were deleted in Xt. Expression analysis revealed a reduction of the Gli3 RNA
level in both add and Xt mice. Thus, it is very likely that add and Xt are
alleles of the Gli3 gene.

PMID: 8302891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Development. 1992 Nov;116(3):799-804.

Expression of the zinc finger gene Gli3 is affected in the morphogenetic mouse
mutant extra-toes (Xt).

Schimmang T(1), Lemaistre M, Vortkamp A, Rüther U.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany.

Genetic analysis and homology between the phenotypic alterations of the human
Greig Cephalopolysyndactyly Syndrome (GCPS) and the mouse mutant extra-toes (Xt) 
have suggested a dominant mutation in the same gene of both species. Recently,
the GLI3 gene, a member of the Krüppel-related zinc finger genes, has been
proposed as a candidate gene for GCPS. We examined the expression of the mouse
Gli3 gene in both Xt mutant animals and during normal mouse development. Northern
and RNAase protection analysis of embryos revealed that Gli3 expression was
reduced about 50% in heterozygous Xt/+ mice and completely absent in homozygous
Xt/Xt mice. In addition, in situ analysis of wild-type mice documented Gli3
expression in the developing limb and brain, structures affected in Xt mutant
mice. This pattern suggests an important function of the Gli3 gene during
morphogenesis.

PMID: 1289066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Cell. 1992 Jul 24;70(2):237-49.

Molecular analysis of the C. elegans sex-determining gene tra-1: a gene encoding 
two zinc finger proteins.

Zarkower D(1), Hodgkin J.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, England.

The tra-1 gene is the terminal control gene for somatic sex determination in the 
nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Here we identify two tra-1 mRNAs: one is a 1.5
kb transcript that peaks in abundance in the second larval stage, and the other
is a 5 kb transcript that is present at relatively constant abundance throughout 
development. Both RNAs occur at similar levels in both sexes, suggesting that
regulation of tra-1 is posttranscriptional. Neither RNA is germline restricted.
The two RNAs are colinear at their 5' ends: the shorter RNA encodes a protein
with two zinc finger motifs, and the longer RNA encodes a protein with five zinc 
fingers. The identification of eight nonsense mutations confirms that these are
authentic tra-1 RNAs and demonstrates that the longer one is essential for tra-1 
activity. The transcription pattern reveals that alternative mRNA processing
governs the number of zinc fingers in the resulting tra-1 protein. The tra-1
fingers are strikingly similar to those of three other proteins, the products of 
the human GLI and GLI3 and Drosophila cubitus interruptus Dominant (ciD) genes.

PMID: 1339311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Mamm Genome. 1992;3(8):461-3.

Deletion of GLI3 supports the homology of the human Greig cephalopolysyndactyly
syndrome (GCPS) and the mouse mutant extra toes (Xt).

Vortkamp A(1), Franz T, Gessler M, Grzeschik KH.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Humangenetik der Philipps-Universität, Marburg, FRG.

PMID: 1322743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Mamm Genome. 1992;3(1):39-41.

Localization of genes and anonymous DNA probes on the short arm of chromosome 7.

Wagner K(1), Kroisel PM, Rosenkranz W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Biology and Human Genetics, Graz, Austria.

We have previously described the cytogenetic analysis of two patients with Greig 
cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS) and various microdeletions on the short arm
of Chromosome (Chr) 7. Using genes and anonymous DNA probes from 7p we analyzed
the DNA of our patients for loss of heterozygosity, or we determined the copy
number by semi-quantitative Southern hybridization. We have been able to show
hemizygosity for the genes of INHBA, IGFBP1 and GLI3 in both patients and
therefore can give the chromosomal assignment 7p12.3-p13. CRI-R944 and CRI-P137
map to the same region, whereas CRI-S207 can be assigned to 7p13-p14.2; TM102L,
TS93, TS194, TM77 and TN177 showed no change and these probes map distal to
7p14.2.

PMID: 1316194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Nature. 1991 Aug 8;352(6335):539-40.

GLI3 zinc-finger gene interrupted by translocations in Greig syndrome families.

Vortkamp A(1), Gessler M, Grzeschik KH.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Philipps-Universität, Marburg, Germany.

The Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS) is an autosomal dominant disorder
affecting limb and craniofacial development in humans. GCPS-affected individuals 
are characterized by postaxial polysyndactyly of hands, preaxial polysyndactyly
of feet, macroephaly, a broad base of the nose with mild hypertelorism and a
prominent forehead. The genetic locus has been pinpointed to chromosome 7p13 by
three balanced translocations associated with GCPS in different families. This
assignment is corroborated by the detection of two sporadic GCPS cases carrying
overlapping deletions in 7p13 (ref. 7), as well as by tight linkage of GCPS to
the epidermal growth factor receptor gene in 7p12-13 (ref. 8). Of the genes that 
map to this region, those encoding T cell receptor-gamma, interferon-beta 2,
epidermal growth factor receptor, and Hox1.4, a potential candidate gene for
GCPS, have been excluded from the region in which the deletions overlap. Here we 
show that two of the three translocations interup the GLI3 gene, a zinc-finger
gene of the GLI-Krüppel family already localized to 7p13 (refs 5, 6). The
breakpoints are within the first third of the coding sequence. In the third
translocation, chromosome 7 is broken at about 10 kilobases downstream of the 3' 
end of GLI3. Our results indicate that mutations disturbing normal GLI3
expression may have a causative role in GCPS.

PMID: 1650914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Mol Cell Biol. 1990 Oct;10(10):5408-15.

GLI3 encodes a 190-kilodalton protein with multiple regions of GLI similarity.

Ruppert JM(1), Vogelstein B, Arheden K, Kinzler KW.

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins Oncology Center, Baltimore, Maryland.

The GLI oncogene, discovered by virtue of its amplification in human tumors,
encodes a sequence-specific DNA-binding protein containing five zinc fingers. We 
have now characterized one member of a family of GLI-related zinc finger genes. A
previously identified fragment of GLI3 genomic DNA was used to localize GLI3 to
chromosome 7p13 and to isolate cDNA clones. Sequence analysis of these clones and
identification of the GLI3 protein by using polyclonal antisera demonstrated that
GLI3 encodes a protein of 1,596 amino acids and an apparent molecular mass of 190
kilodaltons. Amino acid sequence comparison with GLI demonstrated seven regions
of similarity (53 to 88% identity), with the zinc fingers representing the most
similar region. Furthermore, when produced in vitro, the GLI3 protein bound
specifically to genomic DNA fragments containing GLI-binding sites. Amino acid
sequence comparison with the product of another member of the GLI family, the
Drosophila segment polarity gene cubitus interruptus Dominant, revealed
additional similarity that was not shared with GLI. These studies suggest that
the GLI-related genes encode a family of DNA-binding proteins with related target
sequence specificities. In addition, sequence similarity aside from the zinc
finger region suggests that other aspects of function are shared among the
members of this gene family.

PMCID: PMC361243
PMID: 2118997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


