
1. Cell Regen (Lond). 2015 Nov 11;4:10. doi: 10.1186/s13619-015-0024-9. eCollection 
2015.

Reprogramming barriers and enhancers: strategies to enhance the efficiency and
kinetics of induced pluripotency.

Ebrahimi B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Yazd Cardiovascular Research Center, Shahid Sadoughi University of Medical
Sciences, Yazd, Iran.

Induced pluripotent stem cells are powerful tools for disease modeling, drug
screening, and cell transplantation therapies. These cells can be generated
directly from somatic cells by ectopic expression of defined factors through a
reprogramming process. However, pluripotent reprogramming is an inefficient
process because of various defined and unidentified barriers. Recent studies
dissecting the molecular mechanisms of reprogramming have methodically improved
the quality, ease, and efficiency of reprogramming. Different strategies have
been applied for enhancing reprogramming efficiency, including
depletion/inhibition of barriers (p53, p21, p57, p16(Ink4a)/p19(Arf), Mbd3,
etc.), overexpression of enhancing genes (e.g., FOXH1, C/EBP alpha, UTF1, and
GLIS1), and administration of certain cytokines and small molecules. The current 
review provides an in-depth overview of the cutting-edge findings regarding
distinct barriers of reprogramming to pluripotency and strategies to enhance
reprogramming efficiency. By incorporating the mechanistic insights from these
recent findings, a combined method of inhibition of roadblocks and application of
enhancing factors may yield the most reliable and effective approach in
pluripotent reprogramming.

PMCID: PMC4642739
PMID: 26566431  [PubMed]


2. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 23;10(9):e0138695. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0138695.
eCollection 2015.

Genome-Wide Association Study for Autism Spectrum Disorder in Taiwanese Han
Population.

Kuo PH(1), Chuang LC(2), Su MH(3), Chen CH(4), Chen CH(5), Wu JY(5), Yen CJ(6),
Wu YY(7), Liu SK(8), Chou MC(9), Chou WJ(9), Chiu YN(10), Tsai WC(10), Gau
SS(11).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, College of Public Health,
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan; Research Center for Genes,
Environment and Human Health, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Nursing, Cardinal Tien Junior College of Healthcare &
Management, I-Lan, Taiwan. (3)Institute of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, 
College of Public Health, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital-Linkou, Taoyuan,
Taiwan; Department and Graduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Chang Gung
University, Taoyuan, Taiwan. (5)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia
Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. (6)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan
University Hospital and College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan. (7)Department of
Psychiatry, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital-Linkou, Taoyuan, Taiwan. (8)Department
of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Taoyaun Psychiatric Center, Ministry of
Health and Welfare, Taoyuan, Taiwan. (9)Department of Child Psychiatry, Kaohsiung
Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung University College of Medicine,
Taoyuan, Taiwan. (10)Department of Psychiatry, National Taiwan University
Hospital and College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan. (11)Institute of Epidemiology
and Preventive Medicine, College of Public Health, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Psychiatry, National Taiwan University Hospital and
College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder with 
strong genetic components. Several recent genome-wide association (GWA) studies
in Caucasian samples have reported a number of gene regions and loci correlated
with the risk of ASD--albeit with very little consensus across studies.
METHODS: A two-stage GWA study was employed to identify common genetic variants
for ASD in the Taiwanese Han population. The discovery stage included 315
patients with ASD and 1,115 healthy controls, using the Affymetrix SNP array 6.0 
platform for genotyping. Several gene regions were then selected for fine-mapping
and top markers were examined in extended samples. Single marker, haplotype,
gene-based, and pathway analyses were conducted for associations.
RESULTS: Seven SNPs had p-values ranging from 3.4~9.9*10-6, but none reached the 
genome-wide significant level. Five of them were mapped to three known genes
(OR2M4, STYK1, and MNT) with significant empirical gene-based p-values in OR2M4
(p = 3.4*10(-5)) and MNT (p = 0.0008). Results of the fine-mapping study showed
single-marker associations in the GLIS1 (rs12082358 and rs12080993) and NAALADL2 
(rs3914502 and rs2222447) genes, and gene-based associations for the OR2M3-OR2T5 
(olfactory receptor genes, p = 0.02), and GLIPR1/KRR1 gene regions (p = 0.015).
Pathway analyses revealed important pathways for ASD, such as olfactory and G
protein-coupled receptors signaling pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: We reported Taiwanese Han specific susceptibility genes and variants
for ASD. However, further replication in other Asian populations is warranted to 
validate our findings. Investigation in the biological functions of our reported 
genetic variants might also allow for better understanding on the underlying
pathogenesis of autism.

PMCID: PMC4580585
PMID: 26398136  [PubMed - in process]


3. Int Immunopharmacol. 2015 Dec;29(2):739-47. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2015.08.045.
Epub 2015 Sep 11.

Geniposide alleviates inflammation by suppressing MeCP2 in mice with carbon
tetrachloride-induced acute liver injury and LPS-treated THP-1 cells.

Ma TT(1), Li XF(1), Li WX(1), Yang Y(1), Huang C(1), Meng XM(1), Zhang L(1), Li
J(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Anhui Key Laboratory of Bioactivity of Natural Products,
Anhui Medical University, Hefei 230032, China; Institute for Liver Diseases of
Anhui Medical University (AMU), Anhui Medical University, Hefei 230032, China;
Anhui Institute of Innovative Drugs, Hefei 230032, China. (2)School of Pharmacy, 
Anhui Key Laboratory of Bioactivity of Natural Products, Anhui Medical
University, Hefei 230032, China; Institute for Liver Diseases of Anhui Medical
University (AMU), Anhui Medical University, Hefei 230032, China; Anhui Institute 
of Innovative Drugs, Hefei 230032, China. Electronic address: lj@ahmu.edu.cn.

Geniposide (GP), an iridoid glucoside extracted from Gardenia jasminoides Ellis
fruits, has been used as a herbal medicine to treat liver and gall bladder
disorders for many years. However the mechanism of anti-inflammatory is largely
unknown. In this study, GP significantly attenuated inflammation in acute liver
injury (ALI) mice model and in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced THP-1 cells. It
was demonstrated that GP obviously decreased the expression of Methyl-CpG binding
protein 2 (MeCP2) in vivo and in vitro. Knockdown of MeCP2 with siRNA suppressed 
the expressions of IL-6 and TNF-a, while over-expression of MeCP2 had a
proinflammatory effect on the expression of IL-6 and TNF-a in LPS-induced THP-1
cells. Mechanistically, it was indicated that GP had anti-inflammatory effects at
least in part, through suppressing MeCP2. Interestingly, GP could attenuate
expressions of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and GLIS family zinc finger 1 (GLIS1) but
increase Ptched1 (PTCH1) expression. Similar findings were also demonstrated at
the protein level by siRNA MeCP2. Furthermore, over-expression of MeCP2 obviously
increased Shh and GLIS1 expressions but reduced PTCH1 expression. Taken together,
GP may serve as an effective modulator of MeCP2-hedgehog pathway (Hh)-axis during
the pathogenesis of inflammation. Our findings shed light on the potential
therapeutic feature of GP in recovering inflammatory diseases.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26371859  [PubMed - in process]


4. Leuk Res. 2015 Sep;39(9):990-1001. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2015.06.005. Epub 2015 
Jun 14.

Next-generation-sequencing of recurrent childhood high hyperdiploid acute
lymphoblastic leukemia reveals mutations typically associated with high risk
patients.

Chen C(1), Bartenhagen C(2), Gombert M(3), Okpanyi V(3), Binder V(3), Röttgers
S(4), Bradtke J(4), Teigler-Schlegel A(4), Harbott J(4), Ginzel S(5), Thiele
R(6), Husemann P(3), Krell PF(3), Borkhardt A(3), Dugas M(2), Hu J(7), Fischer
U(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Clinical Immunology,
University Children's Hospital, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University,
Düsseldorf, Germany; Fujian Institute of Hematology, Fujian Medical University
Union Hospital, Fuzhou, China. (2)Institute of Medical Informatics, University of
Münster, Münster, Germany. (3)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and
Clinical Immunology, University Children's Hospital, Medical Faculty, Heinrich
Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany. (4)Oncogenetic Laboratory, Department of
Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Justus Liebig University, Giessen, Germany.
(5)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Clinical Immunology,
University Children's Hospital, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University,
Düsseldorf, Germany; Department of Computer Science, Bonn-Rhine-Sieg University
of Applied Sciences, Sankt Augustin, Germany. (6)Department of Computer Science, 
Bonn-Rhine-Sieg University of Applied Sciences, Sankt Augustin, Germany.
(7)Fujian Institute of Hematology, Fujian Medical University Union Hospital,
Fuzhou, China. Electronic address: jdhu@medmail.com.cn. (8)Department of
Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Clinical Immunology, University Children's
Hospital, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany.
Electronic address: ute.fischer@med.uni-duesseldorf.de.

20% of children suffering from high hyperdiploid acute lymphoblastic leukemia
develop recurrent disease. The molecular mechanisms are largely unknown. Here, we
analyzed the genetic landscape of five patients at relapse, who developed
recurrent disease without prior high-risk indication using whole-exome- and
whole-genome-sequencing. Oncogenic mutations of RAS pathway genes (NRAS, KRAS,
FLT3, n=4) and deactivating mutations of major epigenetic regulators (CREBBP,
EP300, each n=2 and ARID4B, EZH2, MACROD2, MLL2, each n=1) were prominent in
these cases and virtually absent in non-recurrent cases (n=6) or other pediatric 
acute lymphoblastic leukemia cases (n=18). In relapse nucleotide variations were 
detected in cell fate determining transcription factors (GLIS1, AKNA). Structural
genomic alterations affected genes regulating B-cell development (IKZF1, PBX1,
RUNX1). Eleven novel translocations involved the genes ART4, C12orf60, MACROD2,
TBL1XR1, LRRN4, KIAA1467, and ELMO1/MIR1200. Typically, patients harbored only
single structural variations, except for one patient who displayed massive
rearrangements in the context of a germline tumor suppressor TP53 mutation and a 
Li-Fraumeni syndrome-like family history. Another patient harbored a germline
mutation in the DNA repair factor ATM. In summary, the relapse patients of our
cohort were characterized by somatic mutations affecting the RAS pathway,
epigenetic and developmental programs and germline mutations in DNA repair
pathways.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26189108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Cir Cir. 2015 Sep-Oct;83(5):393-401. doi: 10.1016/j.circir.2015.03.002. Epub 2015
Jul 3.

[Urinary protein detection by iTRAQ® associated with renal transplant
complications and its modification with therapy].

[Article in Spanish]

Escobedo-Villarreal MM(1), Mercado-Moreira AB(2), Muñoz-Espinosa LE(2),
Gamboa-Esparza M(2), Pérez-Rodríguez E(1), Cordero-Pérez P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Trasplantes, Departamento de Cirugía, Hospital Universitario Dr.
José Eleuterio González, Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, Monterrey, Nuevo
León, México. (2)Unidad de Hígado, Departamento de Medicina Interna, Hospital
Universitario Dr. José Eleuterio González, Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León,
Monterrey, Nuevo León, México. (3)Unidad de Hígado, Departamento de Medicina
Interna, Hospital Universitario Dr. José Eleuterio González, Universidad Autónoma
de Nuevo León, Monterrey, Nuevo León, México. Electronic address:
paucordero@yahoo.com.mx.

BACKGROUND: After renal transplant, surgical, infection complications, as well as
graft rejection may occur; early detection through non-invasive markers is the
key to change therapy and avoid biopsy.
OBJECTIVE: The aime of the study is to determine urine protein profiles in
patients undergoing renal transplant with complications and detect its variation 
when therapy is modified.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Urine samples were collected from patients prior the
transplant and various postoperative stages. Urinary protein profiles were
obtained by peptide labeling using isobaric isotopes for relative quantification 
(iTRAQ(®)).
RESULTS: A total of 22 patients were included, of whom 12 developed
post-transplant complication: 2 with graft rejection (one male and one female)
and 10 (6 males and 4 females) in the group of post-transplant infections. Using 
iTRAQ(®) 15/345 and 28/113 proteins were identified and fulfilled the acceptance 
criteria, in graft rejection and post-transplant infections group, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Albumin was the only protein found in both groups, the remaining
proteins were different. The 5 proteins with higher scores in graft rejection
were: alpha-1-microglobulin, 5'-nucleotidase cytosolic III, retinol-binding
protein 4, membrane protein palmitoylated 4, and serine carboxypeptidase, while
post-transplant infections were: mitochondrial acetyl-coenzyme A synthetase,
putative adenosyl homocysteinase 2, zinc finger protein GLIS1, putative protein
FAM157B, and zinc finger protein 615. It remains to elucidate the involvement of 
each of these in patients with renal transplantation.

Copyright © 2015 Academia Mexicana de Cirugía A.C. Published by Masson Doyma
México S.A. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26148981  [PubMed - in process]


6. Nat Cell Biol. 2015 Jul;17(7):856-67. doi: 10.1038/ncb3193. Epub 2015 Jun 22.

The oncogene c-Jun impedes somatic cell reprogramming.

Liu J(1), Han Q(1), Peng T(1), Peng M(1), Wei B(1), Li D(1), Wang X(2), Yu S(3), 
Yang J(1), Cao S(1), Huang K(1), Hutchins AP(2), Liu H(1), Kuang J(3), Zhou Z(1),
Chen J(1), Wu H(4), Guo L(1), Chen Y(1), Chen Y(1), Li X(1), Wu H(1), Liao B(1), 
He W(1), Song H(1), Yao H(1), Pan G(1), Chen J(2), Pei D(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology, South China Institute for Stem Cell
Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and
Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510530, China [2] Guangdong
Provincial Key Laboratory of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, South China
Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes
of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510530, China. 
(2)1] Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology, South China Institute for Stem Cell
Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and
Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510530, China [2] Guangdong
Provincial Key Laboratory of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, South China
Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes
of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510530, China
[3] Guangzhou Branch of the Supercomputing Center of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Guangzhou 510530, China. (3)1] Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology, South
China Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou
Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou
510530, China [2] School of Bioscience and Bioengineering, South China University
of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China. (4)1] Key Laboratory of Regenerative
Biology, South China Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine,
Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Guangzhou 510530, China [2] Department of Biological Engineering, College of
Pharmacy, Jilin University, 1266 Fu Jin Road Changchun 130021, China.

Erratum in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2015 Sep;17(9):1228.

Oncogenic transcription factors are known to mediate the conversion of somatic
cells to tumour or induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). Here we report c-Jun
as a barrier for iPSC formation. c-Jun is expressed by and required for the
proliferation of mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs), but not mouse embryonic stem
cells (mESCs). Consistently, c-Jun is induced during mESC differentiation, drives
mESCs towards the endoderm lineage and completely blocks the generation of iPSCs 
from MEFs. Mechanistically, c-Jun activates mesenchymal-related genes, broadly
suppresses the pluripotent ones, and derails the obligatory mesenchymal to
epithelial transition during reprogramming. Furthermore, inhibition of c-Jun by
shRNA, dominant-negative c-Jun or Jdp2 enhances reprogramming and replaces Oct4
among the Yamanaka factors. Finally, Jdp2 anchors 5 non-Yamanaka factors (Id1,
Jhdm1b, Lrh1, Sall4 and Glis1) to reprogram MEFs into iPSCs. Our studies reveal
c-Jun as a guardian of somatic cell fate and its suppression opens the gate to
pluripotency.

PMID: 26098572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Reprod Dev. 2015;61(5):369-74. doi: 10.1262/jrd.2015-029. Epub 2015 Jun 15.

Effects of downregulating GLIS1 transcript on preimplantation development and
gene expression of bovine embryos.

Takahashi K(1), Sakurai N, Emura N, Hashizume T, Sawai K.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Agriculture, Iwate University, Iwate 020-8550, Japan.

Krüppel-like protein Gli-similar 1 (GLIS1) is known as a direct reprogramming
factor for the generation of induced pluripotent stem cells. The objective of
this study was to investigate the role of GLIS1 in the preimplantation
development of bovine embryos. GLIS1 transcripts in in vitro-matured oocytes and 
1-cell to 4-cell stage embryos were detected, but they were either absent or at
trace levels at the 8-cell to blastocyst stages. We attempted GLIS1
downregulation of bovine early embryos by RNA interference and evaluated
developmental competency and gene transcripts, which are involved in zygotic gene
activation (ZGA) in GLIS1-downregulated embryos. Injection of specific siRNA
resulted in a distinct decrease in GLIS1 transcript in bovine embryos at the
4-cell stage. Although the bovine embryos injected with GLIS1-siRNA could develop
to the 16-cell stage, these embryos had difficulty in developing beyond the
32-cell stage. Gene transcripts of PDHA1 and HSPA8, which are transcribed after
ZGA, showed lower level in GLIS1 downregulated embryos. It is possible that
GLIS1-downregulated embryos fail to initiate ZGA. Our results indicated that
GLIS1 is an important factor for the preimplantation development of bovine
embryos.

PMCID: PMC4623141
PMID: 26074126  [PubMed - in process]


8. Biol Open. 2014 Sep 12;3(10):937-46. doi: 10.1242/bio.20148193.

Autocrine Activation of the Wnt/ß-Catenin Pathway by CUX1 and GLIS1 in Breast
Cancers.

Vadnais C(1), Shooshtarizadeh P(2), Rajadurai CV(1), Lesurf R(3), Hulea L(1),
Davoudi S(2), Cadieux C(4), Hallett M(5), Park M(6), Nepveu A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Goodman Cancer Research Centre, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 1A3,
Canada Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3G 1Y6,
Canada. (2)Goodman Cancer Research Centre, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A
1A3, Canada. (3)Goodman Cancer Research Centre, McGill University, Montreal, QC
H3A 1A3, Canada Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3G
1Y6, Canada McGill Centre for Bioinformatics, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3G
0B1, Canada. (4)Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3G
1Y6, Canada. (5)Goodman Cancer Research Centre, McGill University, Montreal, QC
H3A 1A3, Canada McGill Centre for Bioinformatics, McGill University, Montreal, QC
H3G 0B1, Canada. (6)Goodman Cancer Research Centre, McGill University, Montreal, 
QC H3A 1A3, Canada Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, QC
H3G 1Y6, Canada Department of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 1A1, 
Canada Department of Oncology, McGill University, Montreal, QC H2W 1S6, Canada.
(7)Goodman Cancer Research Centre, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 1A3,
Canada Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3G 1Y6,
Canada Department of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 1A1, Canada
Department of Oncology, McGill University, Montreal, QC H2W 1S6, Canada
alain.nepveu@mcgill.ca.

Autocrine activation of the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway occurs in several cancers,
notably in breast tumors, and is associated with higher expression of various Wnt
ligands. Using various inhibitors of the FZD/LRP receptor complex, we demonstrate
that some adenosquamous carcinomas that develop in MMTV-CUX1 transgenic mice
represent a model for autocrine activation of the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway. By
comparing expression profiles of laser-capture microdissected mammary tumors, we 
identify Glis1 as a transcription factor that is highly expressed in the subset
of tumors with elevated Wnt gene expression. Analysis of human cancer datasets
confirms that elevated WNT gene expression is associated with high levels of CUX1
and GLIS1 and correlates with genes of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) signature: VIM, SNAI1 and TWIST1 are elevated whereas CDH1 and OCLN are
decreased. Co-expression experiments demonstrate that CUX1 and GLIS1 cooperate to
stimulate TCF/ß-catenin transcriptional activity and to enhance cell migration
and invasion. Altogether, these results provide additional evidence for the role 
of GLIS1 in reprogramming gene expression and suggest a hierarchical model for
transcriptional regulation of the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway and the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4197442
PMID: 25217618  [PubMed]


9. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Oct 25. pii: S0006-291X(13)01764-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.10.083. [Epub ahead of print]

The Krüppel-like zinc finger transcription factor, GLI-similar 1, is regulated by
hypoxia-inducible factors via non-canonical mechanisms.

Khalesi E(1), Nakamura H(2), Leong Lee K(3), Chandra Putra A(4), Fukazawa T(1),
Kawahara Y(1), Makino Y(5), Poellinger L(6), Yuge L(1), Tanimoto K(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bio-Environmental Adaptation Sciences, Graduate School of Health
Sciences, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan. (2)Department of Cell and
Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (3)Cancer Science
Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore, Singapore.
(4)Department of Radiation Medicine, Research Institute for Radiation Biology and
Medicine, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan. (5)Department of Internal
Medicine, Asahikawa Medical University, Asahikawa, Japan. (6)Department of Cell
and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; Cancer Science
Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore, Singapore.
(7)Department of Radiation Medicine, Research Institute for Radiation Biology and
Medicine, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan. Electronic address:
ktanimo@hiroshima-u.ac.jp.

GLI-similar 1 (GLIS1) is important for the reprogramming of fibroblasts into
induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). However, the molecular mechanisms of
regulation of GLIS1 expression remain unclear. We have therefore examined GLIS1
expression in various cancer cell lines and demonstrated that GLIS1 expression
was dramatically increased under hypoxic conditions. Importantly, GLIS1
expression was significantly attenuated in VHL-overexpressing renal cell
carcinoma cells compared to the VHL-deficient parent control. Moreover, promoter 
analysis demonstrated that GLIS1 transcription was regulated by hypoxia through a
hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs)-dependent mechanism. Co-transfection experiments
revealed that HIF-2a had greater potency on the GLIS1 promoter activation than
HIF-1a. Subsequent studies using wild-type and mutant HIF-2a demonstrated that
DNA binding activity was not necessary but TADs were critical for GLIS1
induction. Finally, co-transfection experiments indicated that HIF-2a cooperated 
with AP-1 family members in upregulating GLIS1 transcription. These results
suggest that the hypoxic signaling pathway may play a pivotal role in regulating 
the reprogramming factor GLIS1, via non-canonical mechanisms involving partner
transcription factor rather than by direct HIF transactivation.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 24513211  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Nov 15;441(2):499-506.

The Krüppel-like zinc finger transcription factor, GLI-similar 1, is regulated by
hypoxia-inducible factors via non-canonical mechanisms.

Khalesi E, Nakamura H, Lee KL, Putra AC, Fukazawa T, Kawahara Y, Makino Y,
Poellinger L, Yuge L, Tanimoto K.

GLI-similar 1 (GLIS1) is important for the reprogramming of fibroblasts into
induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). However, the molecular mechanisms of
regulation of GLIS1 expression remain unclear. We have therefore examined GLIS1
expression in various cancer cell lines and demonstrated that GLIS1 expression
was dramatically increased under hypoxic conditions. Importantly, GLIS1
expression was significantly attenuated in VHL-overexpressing renal cell
carcinoma cells compared to the VHL-deficient parent control. Moreover, promoter 
analysis demonstrated that GLIS1 transcription was regulated by hypoxia through a
hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs)-dependent mechanism. Co-transfection experiments
revealed that HIF-2a had greater potency on the GLIS1 promoter activation than
HIF-1a. Subsequent studies using wild-type and mutant HIF-2a demonstrated that
DNA binding activity was not necessary but TADs were critical for GLIS1
induction. Finally, co-transfection experiments indicated that HIF-2a cooperated 
with AP-1 family members in upregulating GLIS1 transcription. These results
suggest that the hypoxic signaling pathway may play a pivotal role in regulating 
the reprogramming factor GLIS1, via non-canonical mechanisms involving partner
transcription factor rather than by direct HIF transactivation.

PMID: 24383088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Cell Stem Cell. 2013 Aug 1;13(2):246-54. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2013.06.001.

Efficient generation of human iPSCs by a synthetic self-replicative RNA.

Yoshioka N(1), Gros E, Li HR, Kumar S, Deacon DC, Maron C, Muotri AR, Chi NC, Fu 
XD, Yu BD, Dowdy SF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular & Molecular Medicine, University of California, San
Diego School of Medicine, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0686, USA.

The generation of human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) holds great
promise for the development of regenerative medicine therapies to treat a wide
range of human diseases. However, the generation of iPSCs in the absence of
integrative DNA vectors remains problematic. Here, we report a simple, highly
reproducible RNA-based iPSC generation approach that utilizes a single, synthetic
self-replicating VEE-RF RNA replicon that expresses four reprogramming factors
(OCT4, KLF4, and SOX2, with c-MYC or GLIS1) at consistent high levels prior to
regulated RNA degradation. A single VEE-RF RNA transfection into newborn or adult
human fibroblasts resulted in efficient generation of iPSCs with all
the hallmarks of stem cells, including cell surface markers, global gene
expression profiles, and in vivo pluripotency, to differentiate into all three
germ layers. The VEE-RF RNA-based approach has broad applicability for the
generation of iPSCs for ultimate use in human stem cell therapies in regenerative
medicine.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3845961
PMID: 23910086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2013 Feb;6(1):97-105. doi:
10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.112.964114. Epub 2012 Dec 11.

Admixture mapping of coronary artery calcified plaque in African Americans with
type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Divers J(1), Palmer ND, Lu L, Register TC, Carr JJ, Hicks PJ, Hightower RC, Smith
SC, Xu J, Cox AJ, Hruska KA, Bowden DW, Lewis CE, Heiss G, Province MA, Borecki
IB, Kerr KF, Chen YD, Palmas W, Rotter JI, Wassel CL, Bertoni AG, Herrington DM, 
Wagenknecht LE, Langefeld CD, Freedman BI.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biostatistical Sciences,Wake Forest School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, NC 27157-1053, USA.

BACKGROUND: The presence and severity of coronary artery calcified plaque (CAC)
differs markedly between individuals of African and European descent, suggesting 
that admixture mapping may be informative for identifying genetic variants
associated with subclinical cardiovascular disease.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Admixture mapping of CAC was performed in 1040 unrelated
African Americans with type 2 diabetes mellitus from the African
American-Diabetes Heart Study, Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis and Family
Heart Study using the Illumina custom ancestry informative marker panel. All
cohorts obtained computed tomography scanning of the coronary arteries using
identical protocols. For each ancestry informative marker, the probability of
inheriting 0, 1, and 2 copies of a European-derived allele was determined.
Linkage analysis was performed by testing for association between each ancestry
informative marker using these probabilities and CAC, accounting for global
ancestry, age, sex, and study. Markers on 1p32.3 in the GLIS1 gene (rs6663966,
logarithm of odds [LOD]=3.7), 1q32.1 near CHIT1 (rs7530895, LOD=3.1), 4q21.2 near
PRKG2 (rs1212373, LOD=3.0), and 11q25 in the OPCML gene (rs6590705, LOD=3.4) had 
statistically significant LOD scores, whereas markers on 8q22.2 (rs6994682,
LOD=2.7), 9p21.2 (rs439314, LOD=2.7), and 13p32.1 (rs7492028, LOD=2.8) manifested
suggestive evidence of linkage. These regions were uniformly characterized by
higher levels of European ancestry associating with higher levels or odds of CAC.
Findings were replicated in 1350 African Americans without diabetes mellitus and 
2497 diabetic European Americans from Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis and
the Diabetes Heart Study.
CONCLUSIONS: Fine mapping these regions will likely identify novel genetic
variants that contribute to CAC and clarify racial differences in susceptibility 
to subclinical cardiovascular disease.

PMCID: PMC3578054
PMID: 23233742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Eur Neurol. 2012;68(2):89-92. doi: 10.1159/000337955. Epub 2012 Jul 3.

GLIS1 rs797906: an increased risk factor for late-onset Parkinson's disease in
the Han Chinese population.

Song W(1), Chen YP, Huang R, Chen K, Pan PL, Li J, Yang Y, Shang HF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, PR 
China.

BACKGROUND: Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs797906 of the GLIS family zinc
finger 1 (GLIS1) gene has been linked to a risk of Parkinson's disease (PD) in
genome-wide association studies of Caucasian populations.
METHODS: A total of 380 unrelated Han patients with PD from the Department of
Neurology, West China Hospital of Sichuan University, and 275 unrelated Han
Chinese healthy controls (HC) from the same region were included. rs797906 SNP
was genotyped using Sequenom iPLEX Assay technology.
RESULTS: No significant differences were found in the genotype and allele
frequencies for rs797906 between the PD and HC groups. There were no significant 
differences in genotype frequencies between early-onset PD and HC groups and
between late-onset PD and HC groups. The frequency of allele 'A' for rs797906 in 
the late-onset PD group was significantly higher than that in the HC group (p =
0.046, OR 1.2726, 95% CI 1.0039-1.6132). Moreover, the frequency of allele 'A' in
the late-onset PD group was significantly higher than that in the early-onset PD 
group (p = 0.001).
CONCLUSION: We have found that allele 'A' of rs797906 SNP increases the risk for 
late-onset PD in the Han Chinese population. More associated studies with larger 
numbers of participants are needed to confirm the present findings.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22759478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Biotechnol J. 2012 Jun;7(6):789-97. doi: 10.1002/biot.201100356. Epub 2012 Feb
29.

Methods for iPS cell generation for basic research and clinical applications.

Mochiduki Y(1), Okita K.

Author information: 
(1)Center for iPS Cell Research and Application (CiRA), Kyoto University, Kyoto, 
Japan.

The induction of pluripotency can be achieved by forced expression of defined
factors in somatic cells. The established cells, termed induced pluripotent stem 
(iPS) cells, have pluripotency and an infinite capacity for self-renewal in
common with embryonic stem (ES) cells. Patient-specific iPS cells could be a
useful source for drug discovery and cell transplantation therapies; however, the
original method for iPS cell generation had several issues that were obstacles to
their clinical application. Recent studies have brought about various
improvements for iPS cell generation and uncovered several characteristics of iPS
cells. Here we summarize the current status of iPS cell studies, with a focus on 
the improved methods that can be used to generate iPS cells, and also refer to
the future challenges.

Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22378737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Cell Cycle. 2011 Nov 1;10(21):3613-4. doi: 10.4161/cc.10.21.17834. Epub 2011 Nov 
1.

Glis1, a unique pro-reprogramming factor, may facilitate clinical applications of
iPSC technology.

Maekawa M, Yamanaka S.

PMID: 22033139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. BMC Res Notes. 2011 Sep 26;4:370. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-4-370.

Unveiling novel genes upregulated by both rhBMP2 and rhBMP7 during early
osteoblastic transdifferentiation of C2C12 cells.

Bustos-Valenzuela JC(1), Fujita A, Halcsik E, Granjeiro JM, Sogayar MC.

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry Institute, Department of Biochemistry, Cell and Molecular Therapy
Centre (NUCEL), University of São Paulo, Avenida Prof, Lineu Prestes, 748 Bloco
9S, São Paulo, SP 05508-000, Brazil. mcsoga@iq.usp.br.

FINDINGS: We set out to analyse the gene expression profile of pre-osteoblastic
C2C12 cells during osteodifferentiation induced by both rhBMP2 and rhBMP7 using
DNA microarrays. Induced and repressed genes were intercepted, resulting in 1,318
induced genes and 704 repressed genes by both rhBMP2 and rhBMP7. We selected and 
validated, by RT-qPCR, 24 genes which were upregulated by rhBMP2 and rhBMP7; of
these, 13 are related to transcription (Runx2, Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx5, Id1, Id2, Id3,
Fkhr1, Osx, Hoxc8, Glis1, Glis3 and Cfdp1), four are associated with cell
signalling pathways (Lrp6, Dvl1, Ecsit and PKCd) and seven are associated with
the extracellular matrix (Ltbp2, Grn, Postn, Plod1, BMP1, Htra1 and IGFBP-rP10). 
The novel identified genes include: Hoxc8, Glis1, Glis3, Ecsit, PKCd, LrP6, Dvl1,
Grn, BMP1, Ltbp2, Plod1, Htra1 and IGFBP-rP10.
BACKGROUND: BMPs (bone morphogenetic proteins) are members of the TGFß
(transforming growth factor-ß) super-family of proteins, which regulate growth
and differentiation of different cell types in various tissues, and play a
critical role in the differentiation of mesenchymal cells into osteoblasts. In
particular, rhBMP2 and rhBMP7 promote osteoinduction in vitro and in vivo, and
both proteins are therapeutically applied in orthopaedics and dentistry.
CONCLUSION: Using DNA microarrays and RT-qPCR, we identified both previously
known and novel genes which are upregulated by rhBMP2 and rhBMP7 during the onset
of osteoblastic transdifferentiation of pre-myoblastic C2C12 cells. Subsequent
studies of these genes in C2C12 and mesenchymal or pre-osteoblastic cells should 
reveal more details about their role during this type of cellular differentiation
induced by BMP2 or BMP7. These studies are relevant to better understanding the
molecular mechanisms underlying osteoblastic differentiation and bone repair.

PMCID: PMC3196718
PMID: 21943021  [PubMed]


17. Nature. 2011 Jun 8;474(7350):225-9. doi: 10.1038/nature10106.

Direct reprogramming of somatic cells is promoted by maternal transcription
factor Glis1.

Maekawa M(1), Yamaguchi K, Nakamura T, Shibukawa R, Kodanaka I, Ichisaka T,
Kawamura Y, Mochizuki H, Goshima N, Yamanaka S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for iPS Cell Research and Application, Kyoto University, Kyoto
606-8507, Japan.

Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) are generated from somatic cells by the
transgenic expression of three transcription factors collectively called OSK:
Oct3/4 (also called Pou5f1), Sox2 and Klf4. However, the conversion to iPSCs is
inefficient. The proto-oncogene Myc enhances the efficiency of iPSC generation by
OSK but it also increases the tumorigenicity of the resulting iPSCs. Here we show
that the Gli-like transcription factor Glis1 (Glis family zinc finger 1) markedly
enhances the generation of iPSCs from both mouse and human fibroblasts when it is
expressed together with OSK. Mouse iPSCs generated using this combination of
transcription factors can form germline-competent chimaeras. Glis1 is enriched in
unfertilized oocytes and in embryos at the one-cell stage. DNA microarray
analyses show that Glis1 promotes multiple pro-reprogramming pathways, including 
Myc, Nanog, Lin28, Wnt, Essrb and the mesenchymal-epithelial transition. These
results therefore show that Glis1 effectively promotes the direct reprogramming
of somatic cells during iPSC generation.

PMID: 21654807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Biol Chem. 2011 Feb 11;286(6):4749-59. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.165951. Epub 2010 
Dec 2.

Identification of nuclear localization, DNA binding, and transactivating
mechanisms of Kruppel-like zinc finger protein Gli-similar 2 (Glis2).

Vasanth S(1), ZeRuth G, Kang HS, Jetten AM.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Section, Division of Intramural Research, Laboratory of
Respiratory Biology, NIEHS, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle
Park, North Carolina 27709, USA.

Gli-similar 1-3 (Glis1-3) constitute a subfamily of Krüppel-like zinc finger (ZF)
transcription factors that are closely related to the Gli protein family.
Mutations in GLIS2 are linked to nephronophthisis, a chronic kidney disease
characterized by renal fibrosis and atrophy in children and young adults.
Currently, very little information exists about the mechanism of action of Glis2,
its target genes, or the signaling pathways that regulate its activity. In this
study, we show that a region within ZF3 is required for the nuclear localization 
of Glis2. Analysis of Glis2 DNA binding demonstrated that Glis2 binds effectively
to the consensus Glis binding sequence (GlisBS) (G/C)TGGGGGGT(A/C). Although
Glis2 was unable to induce transactivation of a GlisBS-dependent reporter, it
effectively inhibited the GlisBS-mediated transactivation by Gli1. Mutations that
disrupt the tetrahedral configuration of each ZF within Glis2 abolished Glis2
binding to GlisBS and also abrogated its inhibition of Gli1-mediated
transactivation. In contrast, Glis2 was able to activate the murine insulin-2
(Ins2) promoter by binding directly to two GlisBS elements located at -263 and
-99 within the Ins2 promoter. Phosphomimetic mutation of Ser(245) inhibited the
binding of Glis2 to GlisBS and dramatically affected its transactivation of the
Ins2 promoter and its ability to inhibit GlisBS-dependent transactivation by
Gli1. In this study, we demonstrate that Glis2 can function as a transcriptional 
activator and that post-translational modification within its DNA-binding domain 
can regulate its transcriptional activity. This control may play a critical role 
in the Glis2-dependent regulation of target genes and renal function.

PMCID: PMC3039324
PMID: 21127075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Histol Histopathol. 2010 Nov;25(11):1481-96.

Gli-similar (Glis) Krüppel-like zinc finger proteins: insights into their
physiological functions and critical roles in neonatal diabetes and cystic renal 
disease.

Kang HS(1), ZeRuth G, Lichti-Kaiser K, Vasanth S, Yin Z, Kim YS, Jetten AM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Intramural Research, Cell Biology Section, National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle
Park, NC, USA.

GLI-similar (Glis) 1-3 proteins constitute a subfamily of the Krüppel-like zinc
finger transcription factors that are closely related to the Gli family. Glis1-3 
play critical roles in the regulation of a number of physiological processes and 
have been implicated in several pathologies. Mutations in GLIS2 have been linked 
to nephronophthisis, an autosomal recessive cystic kidney disease. Loss of Glis2 
function leads to renal atrophy and fibrosis that involves epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) of renal tubule epithelial cells. Mutations in human GLIS3 have 
been implicated in a syndrome characterized by neonatal diabetes and congenital
hypothyroidism (NDH) and in some patients accompanied by polycystic kidney
disease, glaucoma, and liver fibrosis. In addition, the GLIS3 gene has been
identified as a susceptibility locus for the risk of type 1 and 2 diabetes. Glis3
plays a key role in pancreatic development, particularly in the generation of
ß-cells and in the regulation of insulin gene expression. Glis2 and Glis3
proteins have been demonstrated to localize to the primary cilium, a signaling
organelle that has been implicated in several pathologies, including cystic renal
diseases. This association suggests that Glis2/3 are part of primary
cilium-associated signaling pathways that control the activity of Glis proteins. 
Upon activation in the primary cilium, Glis proteins may translocate to the
nucleus where they subsequently regulate gene transcription by interacting with
Glis-binding sites in the promoter regulatory region of target genes. In this
review, we discuss the current knowledge of the Glis signaling pathways, their
physiological functions, and their involvement in several human pathologies.

PMCID: PMC2996882
PMID: 20865670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Invest Dermatol. 2006 Jan;126(1):49-60.

Regulatory role for Krüppel-like zinc-finger protein Gli-similar 1 (Glis1) in
PMA-treated and psoriatic epidermis.

Nakanishi G(1), Kim YS, Nakajima T, Jetten AM.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Section, Division of Intramural Research, National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle
Park, North Carolina, USA.

In this study, we analyze the expression and potential function of the
Krüppel-like zinc-finger protein Gli-similar protein 1 (Glis1) in normal and
inflammatory skin and in the differentiation of epidermal keratinocytes. Glis1
mRNA is not expressed in normal human epidermis, but is significantly induced in 
psoriatic epidermis and in mouse skin upon treatment with the tumor promoter
phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA). The expression of Glis1 is restricted to
the suprabasal layers. These observations suggest that Glis1 expression is
associated with hyperplastic, inflammatory epidermis. Consistent with these
findings, Glis1 mRNA is not expressed in undifferentiated or differentiated
normal human epidermal keratinocytes (NHEK) in culture, but is dramatically
induced after the addition of PMA or interferon gamma. A similar induction of
Glis1 mRNA by PMA treatment was observed in the immortalized epidermal
keratinocyte cell line NHEK-HPV, whereas PMA did not induce Glis1 in HaCaT cells 
or in several squamous cell carcinoma cell lines. To obtain insight into its
function, Glis1 and a C-terminal deletion mutant Glis1DeltaC were expressed in
NHEK-HPV cells and changes in epidermal differentiation and gene expression
examined. Microarray analysis revealed that Glis1DeltaC promoted PMA-induced
epidermal differentiation, as indicated by increased expression of many
differentiation-specific genes. This, in association with its induction in
psoriasis, suggests that transcriptional factor Glis1 is involved in the
regulation of aberrant differentiation observed in psoriatic epidermis.

PMCID: PMC1435652
PMID: 16417217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Oct 1;31(19):5513-25.

GLIS3, a novel member of the GLIS subfamily of Krüppel-like zinc finger proteins 
with repressor and activation functions.

Kim YS(1), Nakanishi G, Lewandoski M, Jetten AM.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Section, Division of Intramural Research, National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Department of
Health and Human Services, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.

In this study, we describe the identification and characterization of a novel
transcription factor GLI-similar 3 (GLIS3). GLIS3 is an 83.8 kDa nuclear protein 
containing five C2H2-type Krüppel-like zinc finger motifs that exhibit 93%
identity with those of GLIS1, however, little homology exists outside their zinc 
finger domains. GLIS3 can function as a repressor and activator of transcription.
Deletion mutant analysis determined that the N- and C-termini are required for
optimal transcriptional activity. GLIS3 binds to the GLI-RE consensus sequence
and is able to enhance GLI-RE-dependent transcription. GLIS3(DeltaC496), a
dominant-negative mutant, inhibits transcriptional activation by GLIS3 and GLI1. 
Whole mount in situ hybridization on mouse embryos from stage E6.5 through E14.5 
demonstrated that GLIS3 is expressed in specific regions in developing kidney and
testis and in a highly dynamic pattern during neurulation. From E11.5 through
E12.5 GLIS3 was strongly expressed in the interdigital regions, which are fated
to undergo apoptosis. The temporal and spatial pattern of GLIS3 expression
observed during embryonic development suggests that it may play a critical role
in the regulation of a variety of cellular processes during development. Both the
repressor and activation functions of GLIS3 may be involved in this control.

PMCID: PMC206473
PMID: 14500813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 23;277(34):30901-13. Epub 2002 May 31.

Identification of Glis1, a novel Gli-related, Kruppel-like zinc finger protein
containing transactivation and repressor functions.

Kim YS(1), Lewandoski M, Perantoni AO, Kurebayashi S, Nakanishi G, Jetten AM.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Section, Division of Intramural Research, NIEHS/National
Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.

In this study, we describe the identification and characterization of a novel
Krüppel-like protein named Gli-similar 1 (Glis1). The Glis1 gene encodes an
84.3-kDa proline-rich protein. Its five tandem zinc finger motifs exhibit highest
homology with those of members of the Gli and Zic subfamilies of Krüppel-like
proteins. Glis1 was mapped to mouse chromosome 4C6. Northern blot analysis showed
that expression of the 3.3-kb Glis1 mRNA is most abundant in placenta and adult
kidney and expressed at lower levels in testis. Whole mount in situ hybridization
on mouse embryos demonstrated that Glis1 is expressed in a temporal and spatial
manner during development; expression was most prominent in several defined
structures of mesodermal lineage, including craniofacial regions, branchial
arches, somites, vibrissal and hair follicles, limb buds, and myotomes. Confocal 
microscopic analysis showed that Glis1 is localized to the nucleus. The zinc
finger region plays an important role in the nuclear localization of Glis1.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays demonstrated that Glis1 is able to bind
oligonucleotides containing the Gli-binding site consensus sequence GACCACCCAC.
Although monohybrid analysis showed that in several cell types Glis1 was unable
to induce transcription of a reporter, deletion mutant analysis revealed the
presence of a strong activation function at the carboxyl terminus of Glis1. The
activation through this activation function was totally suppressed by a repressor
domain at its amino terminus. Constitutively active Ca(2+)-dependent calmodulin
kinase IV enhanced Glis1-mediated transcriptional activation about 4-fold and may
be mediated by phosphorylation/activation of a co-activator. Our results suggest 
that Glis1 may play a critical role in the control of gene expression during
specific stages of embryonic development.

PMID: 12042312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


