
1. J Exp Med. 2016 Mar 7;213(3):433-49. doi: 10.1084/jem.20150806. Epub 2016 Feb 15.

Functional screen identifies regulators of murine hematopoietic stem cell
repopulation.

Holmfeldt P(1), Ganuza M(1), Marathe H(1), He B(2), Hall T(1), Kang G(3), Moen
J(3), Pardieck J(1), Saulsberry AC(1), Cico A(1), Gaut L(1), McGoldrick D(4),
Finkelstein D(4), Tan K(5), McKinney-Freeman S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN
38105. (2)Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Genetics, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, IA 52242. (3)Department of Biostatistics, St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105. (4)Department of Computational Biology, St. Jude
Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105. (5)Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242. (6)Department of Hematology,
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105
shannon.mckinney-freeman@stjude.org.

Understanding the molecular regulation of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell 
(HSPC) engraftment is paramount to improving transplant outcomes. To discover
novel regulators of HSPC repopulation, we transplanted >1,300 mice with
shRNA-transduced HSPCs within 24 h of isolation and transduction to focus on
detecting genes regulating repopulation. We identified 17 regulators of HSPC
repopulation: Arhgef5, Armcx1, Cadps2, Crispld1, Emcn, Foxa3, Fstl1, Glis2,
Gprasp2, Gpr56, Myct1, Nbea, P2ry14, Smarca2, Sox4, Stat4, and Zfp251. Knockdown 
of each of these genes yielded a loss of function, except in the cases of Armcx1 
and Gprasp2, whose loss enhanced hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) repopulation. The 
discovery of multiple genes regulating vesicular trafficking, cell surface
receptor turnover, and secretion of extracellular matrix components suggests
active cross talk between HSCs and the niche and that HSCs may actively condition
the niche to promote engraftment. We validated that Foxa3 is required for HSC
repopulating activity, as Foxa3(-/-) HSC fails to repopulate ablated hosts
efficiently, implicating for the first time Foxa genes as regulators of HSPCs. We
further show that Foxa3 likely regulates the HSC response to hematologic stress. 
Each gene discovered here offers a window into the novel processes that regulate 
stable HSPC engraftment into an ablated host.

© 2016 Holmfeldt et al.

PMID: 26880577  [PubMed - in process]


2. Eur J Hum Genet. 2015 Sep 16. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2015.199. [Epub ahead of print]

The C175R mutation alters nuclear localization and transcriptional activity of
the nephronophthisis NPHP7 gene product.

Ramachandran H(1), Yakulov TA(1), Engel C(1), Müller B(1), Walz G(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Renal Division, Freiburg University Medical Center, Freiburg, Germany.
(2)Center for Biological Signaling Studies (BIOSS), Albertstraße 19, Freiburg,
Germany.

Nephronophthisis (NPH) is a rare autosomal ciliopathy, but the leading cause for 
hereditary end-stage renal disease in children. Most NPH family members form
large protein networks, which appear to participate in structural elements of the
cilium and/or function to restrict access of molecules to the ciliary
compartment. The zinc-finger protein GLIS2/NPHP7 represents an exception as it
has been implicated in transcriptional regulation; only two families with
GLIS2/NPHP7 mutations and typical NPH manifestations have been identified so far.
We describe here that the recently identified GLIS2/NPHP7(C175R) point mutation
abolished the nuclear localization of GLIS2/NPHP7. Forced nuclear import did not 
rescue the transcriptional defects of GLIS2/NPHP7(C175R), indicating additional
defects as DNA-binding protein. We further observed that wild type, but not
GLIS2/NPHP7(C175R), prevented the cyst formation caused by depletion of nphp7 in 
zebrafish embryos. Taken together, our findings indicate that the C175R mutation 
affects both localization and function of GLIS2/NPHP7, supporting a role of this 
mutation in NPH, but questioning the direct involvement of GLIS2/NPHP7 in ciliary
functions.European Journal of Human Genetics advance online publication, 16
September 2015; doi:10.1038/ejhg.2015.199.

PMID: 26374130  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Blood. 2015 Aug 20;126(8):943-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-05-567859. Epub 2015 Jul
17.

The biology of pediatric acute megakaryoblastic leukemia.

Gruber TA(1), Downing JR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology and Department of Pathology, St. Jude Children's
Research Hospital, Memphis, TN. (2)Department of Pathology, St. Jude Children's
Research Hospital, Memphis, TN.

Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL) comprises between 4% and 15% of newly
diagnosed pediatric acute myeloid leukemia patients. AMKL in children with Down
syndrome (DS) is characterized by a founding GATA1 mutation that cooperates with 
trisomy 21, followed by the acquisition of additional somatic mutations. In
contrast, non-DS-AMKL is characterized by chimeric oncogenes consisting of genes 
known to play a role in normal hematopoiesis. CBFA2T3-GLIS2 is the most frequent 
chimeric oncogene identified to date in this subset of patients and confers a
poor prognosis.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4551356
PMID: 26186939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 7;10(7):e0131102. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131102.
eCollection 2015.

Novel Human Embryonic Stem Cell Regulators Identified by Conserved and Distinct
CpG Island Methylation State.

Pells S(1), Koutsouraki E(2), Morfopoulou S(2), Valencia-Cadavid S(2), Tomlinson 
SR(2), Kalathur R(3), Futschik ME(3), De Sousa PA(1).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Regenerative Medicine, School of Clinical Studies, University
of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, EH16 4SB, United Kingdom; Centre for Clinical Brain
Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, EH16 4SB, United Kingdom. (2)MRC
Centre for Regenerative Medicine, School of Clinical Studies, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, EH16 4SB, United Kingdom. (3)Centre for Molecular and
Structural Biomedicine, University of Algarve, 8005-139, Faro, Portugal.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) undergo epigenetic changes in vitro which may 
compromise function, so an epigenetic pluripotency "signature" would be
invaluable for line validation. We assessed Cytosine-phosphate-Guanine Island
(CGI) methylation in hESCs by genomic DNA hybridisation to a CGI array, and saw
substantial variation in CGI methylation between lines. Comparison of hESC CGI
methylation profiles to corresponding somatic tissue data and hESC mRNA
expression profiles identified a conserved hESC-specific methylation pattern
associated with expressed genes. Transcriptional repressors and activators were
over-represented amongst genes whose associated CGIs were methylated or
unmethylated specifically in hESCs, respectively. Knockdown of candidate
transcriptional regulators (HMGA1, GLIS2, PFDN5) induced differentiation in
hESCs, whereas ectopic expression in fibroblasts modulated iPSC colony formation.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation confirmed interaction between the candidates and
the core pluripotency transcription factor network. We thus identify novel
pluripotency genes on the basis of a conserved and distinct epigenetic
configuration in human stem cells.

PMCID: PMC4495055
PMID: 26151932  [PubMed - in process]


5. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 17;10(6):e0130275. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0130275.
eCollection 2015.

SUMOylation Blocks the Ubiquitin-Mediated Degradation of the Nephronophthisis
Gene Product Glis2/NPHP7.

Ramachandran H(1), Herfurth K(1), Grosschedl R(2), Schäfer T(1), Walz G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Renal Division, University of Freiburg Medical Center,
79106 Freiburg, Germany. (2)Max-Planck-Institute of Immunobiology and
Epigenetics, Stübeweg 51, D-79108 Freiburg, Germany. (3)Department of Medicine,
Renal Division, University of Freiburg Medical Center, 79106 Freiburg, Germany;
BIOSS Center for Biological Signaling Studies, 79108 Freiburg, Germany.

Glis2/NPHP7 is a transcriptional regulator mutated in type 7 nephronophthisis, an
autosomal recessive ciliopathy associated with cystic and fibrotic kidney disease
as well as characteristic extrarenal manifestations. While most
ciliopathy-associated molecules are found in the cilium, Glis2/NPHP7 presumably
localizes to the nucleus. However, the detection of endogenous Glis2/NPHP7 has
remained unsuccessful, potentially due to its ubiquitylation-dependent rapid
degradation. We report now that Glis2/NPHP7 is also SUMOylated, preferentially by
PIAS4, which conjugates Glis2/NPHP7 to SUMO3. SUMOylation interferes with
ubiquitylation and degradation of Glis2/NPHP7, suggesting that Glis2/NPHP7
protein levels are regulated by competing ubiquitylation/ SUMOylation.
SUMOylation also alters the transcriptional activity of Glis2/NPHP7. While
Glis2/NPHP7 activates the mouse insulin-2-promotor (mIns2), SUMOylated
Glis2/NPHP7 lacks this property, and seems to act as a repressor. Taken together,
our data reveal that Glis2/NPHP7 is extensively modified by post-translational
modifications, suggesting that a tight control of this transcriptional regulator 
is required for normal development and tissue homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC4471195
PMID: 26083374  [PubMed - in process]


6. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2015 Apr;35(3):345-54. doi: 10.1007/s10571-014-0130-1. Epub
2014 Nov 5.

Up-regulation of Glis2 involves in neuronal apoptosis after intracerebral
hemorrhage in adult rats.

Ke K(1), Song Y, Shen J, Niu M, Zhang H, Yuan D, Ni H, Zhang Y, Liu X, Dai A, Cao
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University, Nantong,
226001, Jiangsu Province, People's Republic of China.

The novel Krüppel-like zinc finger protein Gli-similar 2 (Glis2), one member of
the transcription factors, is involved in controlling the flow of genetic
information and the modulation of diverse cellular activities. Accumulating
evidence has demonstrated its important roles in adult development and several
diseases. However, information regarding the regulation and possible function of 
Glis2 in the central nervous system is still limited. In this study, we explored 
the roles of Glis2 during the pathophysiological process of intracerebral
hemorrhage (ICH). An ICH rat model was established and assessed by behavioral
tests. Expression of Glis2 was significantly up-regulated in brain areas
surrounding the hematoma following ICH. Immunofluorescence showed that Glis2 was 
strikingly increased in neurons, but not astrocytes or microglia. Up-regulation
of Glis2 was found to be accompanied by the increased expression of active
caspase-3 and Bax and decreased expression of Bcl-2 in vivo and vitro studies.
Moreover, knocking down Glis2 by RNA-interference in PC12 cells reduced active
caspase-3 and Bax expression while increased Bcl-2. Collectively, we speculated
that Glis2 might exert pro-apoptotic function in neurons following ICH.

PMID: 25370802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Mol Carcinog. 2015 Nov;54(11):1376-86. doi: 10.1002/mc.22213. Epub 2014 Sep 11.

Detection of coding microsatellite frameshift mutations in DNA mismatch
repair-deficient mouse intestinal tumors.

Woerner SM(1,)(2), Tosti E(3), Yuan YP(4,)(2), Kloor M(1,)(2,)(5), Bork P(4,)(2),
Edelmann W(3), Gebert J(1,)(2,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Tumor Biology, Institute of Pathology, University
Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. (2)Molecular Medicine Partnership Unit,
University of Heidelberg and European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg,
Germany. (3)Department of Cell Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New 
York, NY. (4)Structural and Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular
Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany. (5)Clinical Cooperation Unit Applied
Tumor Biology, DKFZ Heidelberg, Germany.

Different DNA mismatch repair (MMR)-deficient mouse strains have been developed
as models for the inherited cancer predisposing Lynch syndrome. It is completely 
unresolved, whether coding mononucleotide repeat (cMNR) gene mutations in these
mice can contribute to intestinal tumorigenesis and whether MMR-deficient mice
are a suitable molecular model of human microsatellite instability
(MSI)-associated intestinal tumorigenesis. A proof-of-principle study was
performed to identify mouse cMNR-harboring genes affected by insertion/deletion
mutations in MSI murine intestinal tumors. Bioinformatic algorithms were
developed to establish a database of mouse cMNR-harboring genes. A panel of five 
mouse noncoding mononucleotide markers was used for MSI classification of
intestinal matched normal/tumor tissues from MMR-deficient (Mlh1(-/-) , Msh2(-/-)
, Msh2(LoxP/LoxP) ) mice. cMNR frameshift mutations of candidate genes were
determined by DNA fragment analysis. Murine MSI intestinal tumors but not normal 
tissues from MMR-deficient mice showed cMNR frameshift mutations in six candidate
genes (Elavl3, Tmem107, Glis2, Sdccag1, Senp6, Rfc3). cMNRs of mouse Rfc3 and
Elavl3 are conserved in type and length in their human orthologs that are known
to be mutated in human MSI colorectal, endometrial and gastric cancer. We provide
evidence for the utility of a mononucleotide marker panel for detection of MSI in
murine tumors, the existence of cMNR instability in MSI murine tumors, the
utility of mouse subspecies DNA for identification of polymorphic repeats, and
repeat conservation among some orthologous human/mouse genes, two of them showing
instability in human and mouse MSI intestinal tumors. MMR-deficient mice hence
are a useful molecular model system for analyzing MSI intestinal carcinogenesis.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25213383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Biol Chem. 2014 Mar 21;289(12):8390-401. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.534024. Epub
2014 Feb 5.

Interaction with the Bardet-Biedl gene product TRIM32/BBS11 modifies the
half-life and localization of Glis2/NPHP7.

Ramachandran H(1), Schäfer T, Kim Y, Herfurth K, Hoff S, Lienkamp SS,
Kramer-Zucker A, Walz G.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Medicine, Renal Division, University of Freiburg
Medical Center, 79106 Freiburg, Germany.

Although the two ciliopathies Bardet-Biedl syndrome and nephronophthisis share
multiple clinical manifestations, the molecular basis for this overlap remains
largely unknown. Both BBS11 and NPHP7 are unusual members of their respective
gene families. Although BBS11/TRIM32 represents a RING finger E3 ubiquitin ligase
also involved in hereditary forms of muscular dystrophy, NPHP7/Glis2 is a
Gli-like transcriptional repressor that localizes to the nucleus, deviating from 
the ciliary localization of most other ciliopathy-associated gene products. We
found that BBS11/TRIM32 and NPHP7/Glis2 can physically interact with each other, 
suggesting that both proteins form a functionally relevant protein complex in
vivo. This hypothesis was further supported by the genetic interaction and
synergist cyst formation in the zebrafish pronephros model. However, contrary to 
our expectation, the E3 ubiquitin ligase BBS11/TRIM32 was not responsible for the
short half-life of NPHP7/Glis2 but instead promoted the accumulation of mixed
Lys(48)/Lys(63)-polyubiquitylated NPHP7/Glis2 species. This modification not only
prolonged the half-life of NPHP7/Glis2, but also altered the subnuclear
localization and the transcriptional activity of NPHP7/Glis2. Thus, physical and 
functional interactions between NPHP and Bardet-Biedl syndrome gene products,
demonstrated for Glis2 and TRIM32, may help to explain the phenotypic
similarities between these two syndromes.

PMCID: PMC3961664
PMID: 24500717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Oncotarget. 2013 Oct;4(10):1712-20.

DHH-RHEBL1 fusion transcript: a novel recurrent feature in the new landscape of
pediatric CBFA2T3-GLIS2-positive acute myeloid leukemia.

Masetti R(1), Togni M, Astolfi A, Pigazzi M, Manara E, Indio V, Rizzari C,
Rutella S, Basso G, Pession A, Locatelli F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, "Lalla Seràgnoli", Hematology-Oncology Unit,
University of Bologna, Italy.

Childhood Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) is a clinically and genetically
heterogeneous malignant disease. Despite improvements in outcome over the past
decades, the current survival rate still is approximately 60-70%. Cytogenetic,
recurrent genetic abnormalities and early response to induction treatment are the
main factors predicting clinical outcome. While the majority of children carry
recurrent chromosomal translocations, 20% of patients do not show any
recognizable cytogenetic alteration and are defined to have cytogenetically
normal AML (CN-AML). This subset of patients is characterized by a significant
heterogeneity in clinical outcome, which is influenced by factors only recently
started to be identified. In this respect, genome-wide analyses have been used
with the aim of defining the full array of genetic lesions in CN-AML. Recently,
through whole-transcriptome massively parallel sequencing of seven cases of
pediatric CN-AML, we identified a novel recurrent CBFA2T3-GLIS2 fusion,
predicting poorer outcome. However, since the expression of CBFA2T3-GLIS2 fusion 
in mice is not sufficient for leukemogenesis, we speculated that further unknown 
abnormalities could contribute to both cancer transformation and response to
treatment. Thus, we analyzed, by whole-transcriptome sequencing, 4
CBFA2T3-GLIS2-positive patients, as well as 4 CN-AML patients. We identified a
new fusion transcript in the CBFA2T3-GLIS2-positive patients, involving Desert
Hedgehog (DHH), a member of Hedgehog family, and Ras Homologue Enrich in Brain
Like 1 (RHEBL1), a gene coding for a small GTPase of the Ras family. Through the 
screening of a validation cohort of 55 additional pediatric AML patients, we
globally detected DHH-RHEBL1 fusion in 8 out of 20 (40%) CBFA2T3-GLIS2-rearranged
patients. Gene expression analysis performed on RNA-seq data revealed that
DHH-RHEBL1-positive patients exhibited a specific signature. These 8 patients had
an 8-year overall survival worse than that of the remaining 12
CBFA2T3-GLIS2-rearranged patients not harboring DHH-RHEBL1 fusion (25% vs 55%,
respectively, P=0.1). Taken together, these findings are unprecedented and
indicate that the DHH-RHEBL1 fusion transcript is a novel recurrent feature in
the changing landscape of CBFA2T3-GLIS2-positive childhood AML. Moreover, it
could be instrumental in the identification of a subgroup of
CBFA2T3-GLIS2-positive patients with a very poor outcome.

PMCID: PMC3858557
PMID: 24127550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Hum Genet. 2013 Aug;132(8):865-84. doi: 10.1007/s00439-013-1297-0. Epub 2013 Apr 
5.

Identification of 99 novel mutations in a worldwide cohort of 1,056 patients with
a nephronophthisis-related ciliopathy.

Halbritter J(1), Porath JD, Diaz KA, Braun DA, Kohl S, Chaki M, Allen SJ, Soliman
NA, Hildebrandt F, Otto EA; GPN Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Michigan Health System, 8220A MSRB
III, 1150 West Medical Center Drive, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-5646, USA.

Nephronophthisis-related ciliopathies (NPHP-RC) are autosomal-recessive cystic
kidney diseases. More than 13 genes are implicated in its pathogenesis to date,
accounting for only 40 % of all cases. High-throughput mutation screenings of
large patient cohorts represent a powerful tool for diagnostics and
identification of novel NPHP genes. We here performed a new high-throughput
mutation analysis method to study 13 established NPHP genes (NPHP1-NPHP13) in a
worldwide cohort of 1,056 patients diagnosed with NPHP-RC. We first applied
multiplexed PCR-based amplification using Fluidigm Access-Array technology
followed by barcoding and next-generation resequencing on an Illumina platform.
As a result, we established the molecular diagnosis in 127/1,056 independent
individuals (12.0 %) and identified a single heterozygous truncating mutation in 
an additional 31 individuals (2.9 %). Altogether, we detected 159 different
mutations in 11 out of 13 different NPHP genes, 99 of which were novel.
Phenotypically most remarkable were two patients with truncating mutations in
INVS/NPHP2 who did not present as infants and did not exhibit extrarenal
manifestations. In addition, we present the first case of Caroli disease due to
mutations in WDR19/NPHP13 and the second case ever with a recessive mutation in
GLIS2/NPHP7. This study represents the most comprehensive mutation analysis in
NPHP-RC patients, identifying the largest number of novel mutations in a single
study worldwide.

PMCID: PMC4643834
PMID: 23559409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Leukemia. 2013 Dec;27(12):2280-8. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.87. Epub 2013 Mar 27.

NUP98/JARID1A is a novel recurrent abnormality in pediatric acute
megakaryoblastic leukemia with a distinct HOX gene expression pattern.

de Rooij JD(1), Hollink IH, Arentsen-Peters ST, van Galen JF, Berna Beverloo H,
Baruchel A, Trka J, Reinhardt D, Sonneveld E, Zimmermann M, Alonzo TA, Pieters R,
Meshinchi S, van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM, Zwaan CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Erasmus MC-Sophia Children's
Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Cytogenetic abnormalities and early response to treatment are the main prognostic
factors in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Recently, NUP98/NSD1 (t(5; 11)(q35;
p15)), a cytogenetically cryptic fusion, was described as recurrent event in AML,
characterized by dismal prognosis and HOXA/B gene overexpression. Using
split-signal fluorescence in situ hybridization, other NUP98-rearranged pediatric
AML cases were identified, including several acute megakaryoblastic leukemia
(AMKL) cases with a cytogenetically cryptic fusion of NUP98 to JARID1A
(t(11;15)(p15;q35)). In this study we screened 105 pediatric AMKL cases to
analyze the frequency of NUP98/JARID1A and other recurrent genetic abnormalities.
NUP98/JARID1A was identified in 11/105 patients (10.5%). Other abnormalities
consisted of RBM15/MKL1 (n=16), CBFA2T3/GLIS2 (n=13) and MLL-rearrangements
(n=13). Comparing NUP98/JARID1A-positive patients with other pediatric AMKL
patients, no significant differences in sex, age and white blood cell count were 
found. NUP98/JARID1A was not an independent prognostic factor for 5-year overall 
(probability of overall survival (pOS)) or event-free survival (probability of
event-free survival (pEFS)), although the 5-year pOS for the entire AMKL cohort
was poor (42 ± 6%). Cases with RBM15/MLK1 fared significantly better in terms of 
pOS and pEFS, although this was not independent from other risk factors in
multivariate analysis. NUP98/JARID1A cases were characterized by HOXA/B gene
overexpression, which is a potential druggable pathway. In conclusion,
NUP98/JARID1A is a novel recurrent genetic abnormality in pediatric AMKL.

PMID: 23531517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Blood. 2013 Apr 25;121(17):3469-72. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-11-469825. Epub 2013 
Feb 13.

CBFA2T3-GLIS2 fusion transcript is a novel common feature in pediatric,
cytogenetically normal AML, not restricted to FAB M7 subtype.

Masetti R(1), Pigazzi M, Togni M, Astolfi A, Indio V, Manara E, Casadio R,
Pession A, Basso G, Locatelli F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Lalla Seràgnoli, Hematology-Oncology Unit,
University of Bologna, Italy.

Pediatric cytogenetically normal acute myeloid leukemia (CN-AML) is a
heterogeneous subgroup of myeloid clonal disorders that do not harbor known
mutations. To investigate the mutation spectrum of pediatric CN-AML, we performed
whole-transcriptome massively parallel sequencing on blasts from 7 CN-AML
pediatric patients. In 3 patients we identified a recurrent cryptic inversion of 
chromosome 16, encoding a CBFA2T3-GLIS2 fusion transcript. In a validation cohort
of 230 pediatric CN-AML samples we identified 17 new cases. Among a total of 20
patients with CBFA2T3-GLIS2 fusion transcript out of 237 investigated (8.4%), 10 
patients (50%) did not belong to the French-American-British (FAB) M7 subgroup.
The 5-year event-free survival for these 20 children was worse than that for the 
other CN-AML patients (27.4% vs 59.6%; P = .01). These data suggest that the
presence of CBFA2T3-GLIS2 fusion transcript is a novel common feature of
pediatric CN-AML, not restricted to the FAB M7 subtype, predicting poorer
outcome.

PMID: 23407549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53780. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053780. Epub 2013 Jan 10.

Parallel analysis of mRNA and microRNA microarray profiles to explore functional 
regulatory patterns in polycystic kidney disease: using PKD/Mhm rat model.

Dweep H(1), Sticht C, Kharkar A, Pandey P, Gretz N.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Faculty Mannheim, Medical Research Center, University of Heidelberg,
Mannheim, Germany.

Autosomal polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is a frequent monogenic renal
disease, characterised by fluid-filled cysts that are thought to result from
multiple deregulated pathways such as cell proliferation and apoptosis. MicroRNAs
(miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs that regulate the expression of many genes
associated with such biological processes and human pathologies. To explore the
possible regulatory role of miRNAs in PKD, the PKD/Mhm (cy/+) rat, served as a
model to study human ADPKD. A parallel microarray-based approach was conducted to
profile the expression changes of mRNAs and miRNAs in PKD/Mhm rats. 1,573 up- and
1,760 down-regulated genes were differentially expressed in PKD/Mhm. These genes 
are associated with 17 pathways (such as focal adhesion, cell cycle, ECM-receptor
interaction, DNA replication and metabolic pathways) and 47 (e.g., cell
proliferation, Wnt and Tgfß signaling) Gene Ontologies. Furthermore, we found the
similar expression patterns of deregulated genes between PKD/Mhm (cy/+) rat and
human ADPKD, PKD1(L3/L3), PKD1(-/-), Hnf1a-deficient, and Glis2(lacZ/lacZ)
models. Additionally, several differentially regulated genes were noted to be
target hubs for miRNAs. We also obtained 8 significantly up-regulated miRNAs
(rno-miR-199a-5p, -214, -146b, -21, -34a, -132, -31 and -503) in diseased kidneys
of PKD/Mhm rats. Additionally, the binding site overrepresentation and pathway
enrichment analyses were accomplished on the putative targets of these 8 miRNAs. 
7 out of these 8 miRNAs and their possible interactions have not been previously 
described in ADPKD. We have shown a strong overlap of functional patterns
(pathways) between deregulated miRNAs and mRNAs in the PKD/Mhm (cy/+) rat model. 
Our findings suggest that several miRNAs may be associated in regulating pathways
in ADPKD. We further describe novel miRNAs and their possible targets in ADPKD,
which will open new avenues to understand the pathogenesis of human ADPKD.
Furthermore they could serve as a useful resource for anti-fibrotic therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC3542345
PMID: 23326503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Med Sci (Paris). 2012 Nov;28(11):1013-6. doi: 10.1051/medsci/20122811025. Epub
2012 Nov 12.

[Novel ETO2-GLIS2 fusion and therapeutic strategy in acute megakaryoblastic
leukemia].

[Article in French]

Thiollier C(1), Pflumio F, Ballerini P, Crispino JD, Bernard O, Mercher T.

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris Diderot, Paris, France.

PMID: 23171910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Cancer Cell. 2012 Nov 13;22(5):683-97. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2012.10.007.

An Inv(16)(p13.3q24.3)-encoded CBFA2T3-GLIS2 fusion protein defines an aggressive
subtype of pediatric acute megakaryoblastic leukemia.

Gruber TA(1), Larson Gedman A, Zhang J, Koss CS, Marada S, Ta HQ, Chen SC, Su X, 
Ogden SK, Dang J, Wu G, Gupta V, Andersson AK, Pounds S, Shi L, Easton J, Barbato
MI, Mulder HL, Manne J, Wang J, Rusch M, Ranade S, Ganti R, Parker M, Ma J,
Radtke I, Ding L, Cazzaniga G, Biondi A, Kornblau SM, Ravandi F, Kantarjian H,
Nimer SD, Döhner K, Döhner H, Ley TJ, Ballerini P, Shurtleff S, Tomizawa D,
Adachi S, Hayashi Y, Tawa A, Shih LY, Liang DC, Rubnitz JE, Pui CH, Mardis ER,
Wilson RK, Downing JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN
38105, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2012 Nov 13;22(5):567-8.

To define the mutation spectrum in non-Down syndrome acute megakaryoblastic
leukemia (non-DS-AMKL), we performed transcriptome sequencing on diagnostic
blasts from 14 pediatric patients and validated our findings in a
recurrency/validation cohort consisting of 34 pediatric and 28 adult AMKL
samples. Our analysis identified a cryptic chromosome 16 inversion
(inv(16)(p13.3q24.3)) in 27% of pediatric cases, which encodes a CBFA2T3-GLIS2
fusion protein. Expression of CBFA2T3-GLIS2 in Drosophila and murine
hematopoietic cells induced bone morphogenic protein (BMP) signaling and resulted
in a marked increase in the self-renewal capacity of hematopoietic progenitors.
These data suggest that expression of CBFA2T3-GLIS2 directly contributes to
leukemogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3547667
PMID: 23153540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Exp Med. 2012 Oct 22;209(11):2017-31. doi: 10.1084/jem.20121343. Epub 2012 Oct 
8.

Characterization of novel genomic alterations and therapeutic approaches using
acute megakaryoblastic leukemia xenograft models.

Thiollier C(1), Lopez CK, Gerby B, Ignacimouttou C, Poglio S, Duffourd Y, Guégan 
J, Rivera-Munoz P, Bluteau O, Mabialah V, Diop M, Wen Q, Petit A, Bauchet AL,
Reinhardt D, Bornhauser B, Gautheret D, Lecluse Y, Landman-Parker J, Radford I,
Vainchenker W, Dastugue N, de Botton S, Dessen P, Bourquin JP, Crispino JD,
Ballerini P, Bernard OA, Pflumio F, Mercher T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) Unité 985, 
94805 Villejuif, France.

Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL) is a heterogeneous disease generally
associated with poor prognosis. Gene expression profiles indicate the existence
of distinct molecular subgroups, and several genetic alterations have been
characterized in the past years, including the t(1;22)(p13;q13) and the trisomy
21 associated with GATA1 mutations. However, the majority of patients do not
present with known mutations, and the limited access to primary patient leukemic 
cells impedes the efficient development of novel therapeutic strategies. In this 
study, using a xenotransplantation approach, we have modeled human pediatric AMKL
in immunodeficient mice. Analysis of high-throughput RNA sequencing identified
recurrent fusion genes defining new molecular subgroups. One subgroup of patients
presented with MLL or NUP98 fusion genes leading to up-regulation of the HOX A
cluster genes. A novel CBFA2T3-GLIS2 fusion gene resulting from a cryptic
inversion of chromosome 16 was identified in another subgroup of 31% of non-Down 
syndrome AMKL and strongly associated with a gene expression signature of
Hedgehog pathway activation. These molecular data provide useful markers for the 
diagnosis and follow up of patients. Finally, we show that AMKL xenograft models 
constitute a relevant in vivo preclinical screening platform to validate the
efficacy of novel therapies such as Aurora A kinase inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC3478932
PMID: 23045605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Oncogene. 2013 Mar 21;32(12):1594-600. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.151. Epub 2012 May
7.

The Trop-2 signalling network in cancer growth.

Guerra E(1), Trerotola M, Aloisi AL, Tripaldi R, Vacca G, La Sorda R, Lattanzio
R, Piantelli M, Alberti S.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Cancer Pathology, Department of Oncology and Experimental Medicine and
CeSI, Foundation University 'G. d'Annunzio', Chieti, Italy.

Our findings show that upregulation of a wild-type Trop-2 has a key controlling
role in human cancer growth, and that tumour development is quantitatively driven
by Trop-2 expression levels. However, little is known about the regulation of
expression of the TROP2 gene. Hence, we investigated the TROP2 transcription
control network. TROP2 expression was shown to depend on a highly interconnected 
web of transcription factors: TP63/TP53L, ERG, GRHL1/Get-1 (grainyhead-like
epithelial transactivator), HNF1A/TCF-1 (T-cell factor), SPI1/PU.1, WT (Wilms'
tumour)1, GLIS2, AIRE (autoimmune regulator), FOXM1 (forkhead box M1) and FOXP3, 
with HNF4A as the major network hub. TROP2 upregulation was shown to subsequently
drive the expression and activation of CREB1 (cyclic AMP-responsive-element
binding protein), Jun, NF-<U+03BA>B, Rb, STAT1 and STAT3 through induction of the cyclin
D1 and ERK (extracellular signal regulated kinase)/MEK (MAPK/ERK kinase)
pathways. Growth-stimulatory signalling through NF-<U+03BA>B, cyclin D1 and ERK was
shown to require an intact Trop-2 cytoplasmic tail. Network hubs and interacting 
partners are co-expressed with Trop-2 in primary human tumours, supporting a role
of this signalling network in cancer growth.

PMID: 22562244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Vitam Horm. 2012;88:141-71. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-394622-5.00007-9.

Gli-similar proteins: their mechanisms of action, physiological functions, and
roles in disease.

Lichti-Kaiser K(1), ZeRuth G, Kang HS, Vasanth S, Jetten AM.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Section, Division of Intramural Research, National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle
Park, North Carolina, USA.

Gli-similar (Glis) 1-3 proteins constitute a subfamily of Krüppel-like
zinc-finger proteins that are closely related to members of the Gli family. Glis 
proteins have been implicated in several pathologies, including cystic kidney
disease, diabetes, hypothyroidism, fibrosis, osteoporosis, psoriasis, and cancer.
In humans, a mutation in the Glis2 gene has been linked to the development of
nephronophthisis (NPHP), a recessive cystic kidney disease, while mutations in
Glis3 lead to an extended multisystem phenotype that includes the development of 
neonatal diabetes, polycystic kidneys, congenital hypothyroidism, and facial
dysmorphism. Glis3 has also been identified as a risk locus for type-1 and type-2
diabetes and additional studies have revealed a role for Glis3 in pancreatic
endocrine development, ß-cell maintenance, and insulin regulation. Similar to
Gli1-3, Glis2 and 3 have been reported to localize to the primary cilium. These
studies appear to suggest that Glis proteins are part of a primary
cilium-associated signaling pathway(s). It has been hypothesized that Glis
proteins are activated through posttranslational modifications and subsequently
translocate to the nucleus where they regulate transcription by interacting with 
Glis-binding sites in the promoter regions of target genes. This chapter
summarizes the current state of knowledge regarding mechanisms of action of the
Glis family of proteins, their physiological functions, as well as their roles in
disease.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3799816
PMID: 22391303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Nov 1;20(21):4155-66. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr339. Epub 2011 Aug 
4.

Increased hedgehog signaling in postnatal kidney results in aberrant activation
of nephron developmental programs.

Li B(1), Rauhauser AA, Dai J, Sakthivel R, Igarashi P, Jetten AM, Attanasio M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Hedgehog (Hh) is a core signaling pathway implicated in fundamental processes
during embryonic kidney development. We previously found that loss-of-function
mutations in the transcription factor GLIS2, a putative vertebrate ortholog of
Drosophila Ci, cause nephronophthisis type 7 in humans and mice. Kidney tubular
cells in Glis2-knockout mice acquire mesenchymal phenotype, but the cellular
mechanisms of this transition are unknown. Here, we demonstrate that Glis2 is a
functional component of Hh signaling and is necessary to suppress this pathway in
the postnatal kidney. In the epithelial compartment, Glis2 opposes Gli1 activity 
by binding cis-acting regulatory sequences in the 5' flanking regions of Snai1
and Wnt4, thereby inhibiting de-differentiation of tubular cells. We conclude
that Glis2 is necessary to inhibit Hh signaling and to maintain the mature
tubular epithelial phenotype in the adult kidney. This is the first description
of a molecular mechanism that links the Hh signaling pathway to cystic kidney
diseases and can open new avenues for the treatment of diverse ciliopathies.

PMCID: PMC3188992
PMID: 21816948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Biol Chem. 2011 Feb 11;286(6):4749-59. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.165951. Epub 2010 
Dec 2.

Identification of nuclear localization, DNA binding, and transactivating
mechanisms of Kruppel-like zinc finger protein Gli-similar 2 (Glis2).

Vasanth S(1), ZeRuth G, Kang HS, Jetten AM.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Section, Division of Intramural Research, Laboratory of
Respiratory Biology, NIEHS, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle
Park, North Carolina 27709, USA.

Gli-similar 1-3 (Glis1-3) constitute a subfamily of Krüppel-like zinc finger (ZF)
transcription factors that are closely related to the Gli protein family.
Mutations in GLIS2 are linked to nephronophthisis, a chronic kidney disease
characterized by renal fibrosis and atrophy in children and young adults.
Currently, very little information exists about the mechanism of action of Glis2,
its target genes, or the signaling pathways that regulate its activity. In this
study, we show that a region within ZF3 is required for the nuclear localization 
of Glis2. Analysis of Glis2 DNA binding demonstrated that Glis2 binds effectively
to the consensus Glis binding sequence (GlisBS) (G/C)TGGGGGGT(A/C). Although
Glis2 was unable to induce transactivation of a GlisBS-dependent reporter, it
effectively inhibited the GlisBS-mediated transactivation by Gli1. Mutations that
disrupt the tetrahedral configuration of each ZF within Glis2 abolished Glis2
binding to GlisBS and also abrogated its inhibition of Gli1-mediated
transactivation. In contrast, Glis2 was able to activate the murine insulin-2
(Ins2) promoter by binding directly to two GlisBS elements located at -263 and
-99 within the Ins2 promoter. Phosphomimetic mutation of Ser(245) inhibited the
binding of Glis2 to GlisBS and dramatically affected its transactivation of the
Ins2 promoter and its ability to inhibit GlisBS-dependent transactivation by
Gli1. In this study, we demonstrate that Glis2 can function as a transcriptional 
activator and that post-translational modification within its DNA-binding domain 
can regulate its transcriptional activity. This control may play a critical role 
in the Glis2-dependent regulation of target genes and renal function.

PMCID: PMC3039324
PMID: 21127075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Med Genet. 2011 Feb;48(2):105-16. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2010.082552. Epub 2010 Nov
10.

Mutation analysis of 18 nephronophthisis associated ciliopathy disease genes
using a DNA pooling and next generation sequencing strategy.

Otto EA(1), Ramaswami G, Janssen S, Chaki M, Allen SJ, Zhou W, Airik R, Hurd TW, 
Ghosh AK, Wolf MT, Hoppe B, Neuhaus TJ, Bockenhauer D, Milford DV, Soliman NA,
Antignac C, Saunier S, Johnson CA, Hildebrandt F; GPN Study Group.

Collaborators: Bergmann C, Zerres K, Gellermann J, Münch A, Neumann L, Schürmann 
MJ, Franke I, Beck B, Josefiak K, Michalk D, Stapenhorst, Ronda T, Weber M, Erler
T, Weidner B, Bonzel KE, Wingen AM, Dippell J, Kirschner J, Korinthenberg R, Mall
M, Omran H, Wolff G, Fuchs S, Gal A, van Husen M, Lüttgen S, Müller-Wiefel DE,
Drube J, Ehrich JH, Fründ S, Strehlau J, Hoffmann JF, Kiepe D, Kneppo C, Rieger
S, Tönshoff B, Bambauer R, Klüte R, Heckel M, Greiner A, Jeck N, Roos R, Bulla M,
Fründ S, Frye B, Harms E, Kuwertz-Broeking E, Wittwer B, Sanwald R, Stolpe HJ,
Höpfner J, Holder M, Leichter HE, Baynam G, Edwards C, Peters H, Jones C, Janecke
A, Sunder-Plassmann G, Devriendt K, Chow J, Trnka P, Ounap K, Apostolou T, Afroze
B, Lock Hock N, Eccles M, Dixon JW, Hashmi S, Drozdz D, Pogan A, Peco-Antic A,
Milosevic B, Stojanovic V, Holmberg E, Kern I, Axwijk PH, Knoers N, Ozaltin F,
Besbas N, Koyun M, Nayir A, Kayserili H, Ozturk S, Pehlivan D, Farrington R,
Raymond FL, Sandford R, Whittaker J, Kerr B, Cadnapaphornchai M, Hidalgo G,
Andreoli S, Mills B, Bendel-Stenzel M, Stover N, Weleber R, DeBeukelaer M, Kozma 
C, Schonberg R, Bitzan M.

Erratum in
    J Med Genet. 2015 Dec;52(12):866.

BACKGROUND: Nephronophthisis associated ciliopathies (NPHP-AC) comprise a group
of autosomal recessive cystic kidney diseases that includes nephronophthisis
(NPHP), Senior-Loken syndrome (SLS), Joubert syndrome (JBTS), and Meckel-Gruber
syndrome (MKS). To date, causative mutations in NPHP-AC have been described for
18 different genes, rendering mutation analysis tedious and expensive. To
overcome the broad genetic locus heterogeneity, a strategy of DNA pooling with
consecutive massively parallel resequencing (MPR) was devised.
METHODS: In 120 patients with severe NPHP-AC phenotypes, five pools of genomic
DNA with 24 patients each were prepared which were used as templates in order to 
PCR amplify all 376 exons of 18 NPHP-AC genes (NPHP1, INVS, NPHP3, NPHP4, IQCB1, 
CEP290, GLIS2, RPGRIP1L, NEK8, TMEM67, INPP5E, TMEM216, AHI1, ARL13B, CC2D2A,
TTC21B, MKS1, and XPNPEP3). PCR products were then subjected to MPR on an
Illumina Genome-Analyser and mutations were subsequently assigned to their
respective mutation carrier via CEL I endonuclease based heteroduplex screening
and confirmed by Sanger sequencing.
RESULTS: For proof of principle, DNA from patients with known mutations was used 
and detection of 22 out of 24 different alleles (92% sensitivity) was
demonstrated. MPR led to the molecular diagnosis in 30/120 patients (25%) and 54 
pathogenic mutations (27 novel) were identified in seven different NPHP-AC genes.
Additionally, in 24 patients only single heterozygous variants of unknown
significance were found.
CONCLUSIONS: The combined approach of DNA pooling followed by MPR strongly
facilitates mutation analysis in broadly heterogeneous single gene disorders. The
lack of mutations in 75% of patients in this cohort indicates further extensive
heterogeneity in NPHP-AC.

PMCID: PMC3913043
PMID: 21068128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Histol Histopathol. 2010 Nov;25(11):1481-96.

Gli-similar (Glis) Krüppel-like zinc finger proteins: insights into their
physiological functions and critical roles in neonatal diabetes and cystic renal 
disease.

Kang HS(1), ZeRuth G, Lichti-Kaiser K, Vasanth S, Yin Z, Kim YS, Jetten AM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Intramural Research, Cell Biology Section, National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle
Park, NC, USA.

GLI-similar (Glis) 1-3 proteins constitute a subfamily of the Krüppel-like zinc
finger transcription factors that are closely related to the Gli family. Glis1-3 
play critical roles in the regulation of a number of physiological processes and 
have been implicated in several pathologies. Mutations in GLIS2 have been linked 
to nephronophthisis, an autosomal recessive cystic kidney disease. Loss of Glis2 
function leads to renal atrophy and fibrosis that involves epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) of renal tubule epithelial cells. Mutations in human GLIS3 have 
been implicated in a syndrome characterized by neonatal diabetes and congenital
hypothyroidism (NDH) and in some patients accompanied by polycystic kidney
disease, glaucoma, and liver fibrosis. In addition, the GLIS3 gene has been
identified as a susceptibility locus for the risk of type 1 and 2 diabetes. Glis3
plays a key role in pancreatic development, particularly in the generation of
ß-cells and in the regulation of insulin gene expression. Glis2 and Glis3
proteins have been demonstrated to localize to the primary cilium, a signaling
organelle that has been implicated in several pathologies, including cystic renal
diseases. This association suggests that Glis2/3 are part of primary
cilium-associated signaling pathways that control the activity of Glis proteins. 
Upon activation in the primary cilium, Glis proteins may translocate to the
nucleus where they subsequently regulate gene transcription by interacting with
Glis-binding sites in the promoter regulatory region of target genes. In this
review, we discuss the current knowledge of the Glis signaling pathways, their
physiological functions, and their involvement in several human pathologies.

PMCID: PMC2996882
PMID: 20865670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Clin Cancer Res. 2010 Aug 15;16(16):4165-77. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-0066. 
Epub 2010 Aug 3.

Gene array and fluorescence in situ hybridization biomarkers of activity of
saracatinib (AZD0530), a Src inhibitor, in a preclinical model of colorectal
cancer.

Arcaroli JJ(1), Touban BM, Tan AC, Varella-Garcia M, Powell RW, Eckhardt SG,
Elvin P, Gao D, Messersmith WA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, University of Colorado, Denver, Colorado, USA.

PURPOSE: To evaluate the efficacy of saracatinib (AZD0530), an oral Src
inhibitor, in colorectal cancer (CRC) and to identify biomarkers that predict
antitumor activity.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Twenty-three CRC cell lines were exposed to saracatinib, and
baseline gene expression profiles of three sensitive and eight resistant cell
lines in vitro and in vivo were used to predict saracatinib sensitivity in an
independent group of 10 human CRC explant tumors using the gene array K-Top
Scoring Pairs (K-TSP) method. In addition, fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) and immunoblotting determined both Src gene copy number and activation of 
Src, respectively.
RESULTS: Two of 10 explant tumors were determined to be sensitive to saracatinib.
The K-TSP classifier (TOX>GLIS2, TSPAN7>BCAS4, and PARD6G>NXN) achieved 70% (7 of
10) accuracy on the test set. Evaluation of Src gene copy number by FISH showed a
trend toward significance (P = 0.066) with respect to an increase in Src gene
copy and resistance to saracatinib. Tumors sensitive to saracatinib showed an
increase in the activation of Src and FAK when compared with resistant tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: Saracatinib significantly decreased tumor growth in a subset of CRC 
cell lines and explants. A K-TSP classifier (TOX>GLIS2, TSPAN7>BCAS4, and
PARD6G>NXN) was predictive for sensitivity to saracatinib. In addition, increased
activation of the Src pathway was associated with sensitivity to saracatinib.
These results suggest that FISH, a K-TSP classifier, and activation of the Src
pathway have potential in identifying CRC patients that would potentially benefit
from treatment with saracatinib.

PMCID: PMC3805460
PMID: 20682712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. PLoS One. 2009 Jul 17;4(7):e6299. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006299.

Polycystic kidney disease in the medaka (Oryzias latipes) pc mutant caused by a
mutation in the Gli-Similar3 (glis3) gene.

Hashimoto H(1), Miyamoto R, Watanabe N, Shiba D, Ozato K, Inoue C, Kubo Y, Koga
A, Jindo T, Narita T, Naruse K, Ohishi K, Nogata K, Shin-I T, Asakawa S, Shimizu 
N, Miyamoto T, Mochizuki T, Yokoyama T, Hori H, Takeda H, Kohara Y, Wakamatsu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Bioscience and Biotechnology Center, Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan.
hsshsmt@bio.nagoya-u.ac.jp

Polycystic kidney disease (PKD) is a common hereditary disease in humans. Recent 
studies have shown an increasing number of ciliary genes that are involved in the
pathogenesis of PKD. In this study, the Gli-similar3 (glis3) gene was identified 
as the causal gene of the medaka pc mutant, a model of PKD. In the pc mutant, a
transposon was found to be inserted into the fourth intron of the pc/glis3 gene, 
causing aberrant splicing of the pc/glis3 mRNA and thus a putatively truncated
protein with a defective zinc finger domain. pc/glis3 mRNA is expressed in the
epithelial cells of the renal tubules and ducts of the pronephros and
mesonephros, and also in the pancreas. Antisense oligonucleotide-mediated
knockdown of pc/glis3 resulted in cyst formation in the pronephric tubules of
medaka fry. Although three other glis family members, glis1a, glis1b and glis2,
were found in the medaka genome, none were expressed in the embryonic or larval
kidney. In the pc mutant, the urine flow rate in the pronephros was significantly
reduced, which was considered to be a direct cause of renal cyst formation. The
cilia on the surface of the renal tubular epithelium were significantly shorter
in the pc mutant than in wild-type, suggesting that shortened cilia resulted in a
decrease in driving force and, in turn, a reduction in urine flow rate. Most
importantly, EGFP-tagged pc/glis3 protein localized in primary cilia as well as
in the nucleus when expressed in mouse renal epithelial cells, indicating a
strong connection between pc/glis3 and ciliary function. Unlike human patients
with GLIS3 mutations, the medaka pc mutant shows none of the symptoms of a
pancreatic phenotype, such as impaired insulin expression and/or diabetes,
suggesting that the pc mutant may be suitable for use as a kidney-specific model 
for human GLIS3 patients.

PMCID: PMC2706989
PMID: 19609364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2009 Jan;20(1):23-35. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2008050456. Epub 2008
Dec 31.

Nephronophthisis: disease mechanisms of a ciliopathy.

Hildebrandt F(1), Attanasio M, Otto E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of
Michigan Health System, 8220C MSRB III, 1150 West Medical Center Drive, Ann
Arbor, MI 48109-5646, USA. fhilde@umich.edu

Nephronophthisis (NPHP), a recessive cystic kidney disease, is the most frequent 
genetic cause of end-stage kidney disease in children and young adults.
Positional cloning of nine genes (NPHP1 through 9) and functional
characterization of their encoded proteins (nephrocystins) have contributed to a 
unifying theory that defines cystic kidney diseases as "ciliopathies." The theory
is based on the finding that all proteins mutated in cystic kidney diseases of
humans or animal models are expressed in primary cilia or centrosomes of renal
epithelial cells. Primary cilia are sensory organelles that connect
mechanosensory, visual, and other stimuli to mechanisms of epithelial cell
polarity and cell-cycle control. Mutations in NPHP genes cause defects in
signaling mechanisms that involve the noncanonical Wnt signaling pathway and the 
sonic hedgehog signaling pathway, resulting in defects of planar cell polarity
and tissue maintenance. The ciliary theory explains the multiple organ
involvement in NPHP, which includes retinal degeneration, cerebellar hypoplasia, 
liver fibrosis, situs inversus, and mental retardation. Positional cloning of
dozens of unknown genes that cause NPHP will elucidate further signaling
mechanisms involved. Nephrocystins are highly conserved in evolution, thereby
allowing the use of animal models to develop future therapeutic approaches.

PMCID: PMC2807379
PMID: 19118152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Apr;28(7):2358-67. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01722-07. Epub 2008 Jan
28.

Kruppel-like zinc finger protein Glis2 is essential for the maintenance of normal
renal functions.

Kim YS(1), Kang HS, Herbert R, Beak JY, Collins JB, Grissom SF, Jetten AM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Intramural Research, Cell Biology Section, National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle
Park, NC 27709, USA.

To obtain insight into the physiological functions of the Krüppel-like zinc
finger protein Gli-similar 2 (Glis2), mice deficient in Glis2 expression were
generated. Glis2 mutant (Glis2(mut)) mice exhibit significantly shorter life
spans than do littermate wild-type (WT) mice due to the development of
progressive chronic kidney disease with features resembling nephronophthisis.
Glis2(mut) mice develop severe renal atrophy involving increased cell death and
basement membrane thickening in the proximal convoluted tubules. This development
is accompanied by infiltration of lymphocytic inflammatory cells and
interstitial/glomerular fibrosis. The severity of the fibrosis, inflammatory
infiltrates, and glomerular and tubular changes progresses with age. Blood urea
nitrogen and creatinine increase, and Glis2(mut) mice develop proteinuria and
ultimately die prematurely of renal failure. A comparison of the gene expression 
profiles of kidneys from 25-day-old/60-day-old WT and Glis2(mut) mice by
microarray analysis showed increased expressions of many genes involved in immune
responses/inflammation and fibrosis/tissue remodeling in kidneys of Glis2(mut)
mice, including several cytokines and adhesion and extracellular matrix proteins.
Our data demonstrate that a deficiency in Glis2 expression leads to tubular
atrophy and progressive fibrosis, similar to nephronophthisis, that ultimately
results in renal failure. Our study indicates that Glis2 plays a critical role in
the maintenance of normal kidney architecture and functions.

PMCID: PMC2268411
PMID: 18227149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Nat Genet. 2007 Aug;39(8):1018-24. Epub 2007 Jul 8.

Loss of GLIS2 causes nephronophthisis in humans and mice by increased apoptosis
and fibrosis.

Attanasio M(1), Uhlenhaut NH, Sousa VH, O'Toole JF, Otto E, Anlag K, Klugmann C, 
Treier AC, Helou J, Sayer JA, Seelow D, Nürnberg G, Becker C, Chudley AE,
Nürnberg P, Hildebrandt F, Treier M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109,
USA.

Nephronophthisis (NPHP), an autosomal recessive kidney disease, is the most
frequent genetic cause of end-stage renal failure in the first three decades of
life. Positional cloning of the six known NPHP genes has linked its pathogenesis 
to primary cilia function. Here we identify mutation of GLIS2 as causing an
NPHP-like phenotype in humans and mice, using positional cloning and mouse
transgenics, respectively. Kidneys of Glis2 mutant mice show severe renal atrophy
and fibrosis starting at 8 weeks of age. Differential gene expression studies on 
Glis2 mutant kidneys demonstrate that genes promoting epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition and fibrosis are upregulated in the absence of Glis2. Thus, we
identify Glis2 as a transcription factor mutated in NPHP and demonstrate its
essential role for the maintenance of renal tissue architecture through
prevention of apoptosis and fibrosis.

PMID: 17618285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Mol Biol Cell. 2007 May;18(5):1918-27. Epub 2007 Mar 7.

The transcriptional repressor Glis2 is a novel binding partner for p120 catenin.

Hosking CR(1), Ulloa F, Hogan C, Ferber EC, Figueroa A, Gevaert K, Birchmeier W, 
Briscoe J, Fujita Y.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology and Cell
Biology Unit, Department of Biology, University College London, London WC1E 6BT, 
UK.

In epithelial cells, p120 catenin (p120) localizes at cell-cell contacts and
regulates adhesive function of the cadherin complex. In addition, p120 has been
reported to localize in the nucleus, although the nuclear function of p120 is not
fully understood. Here, we report the identification of Gli-similar 2 (Glis2) as 
a novel binding protein for p120. Glis2 is a Krüppel-like transcriptional
repressor with homology to the Gli family, but its physiological function has not
been well characterized. In this study, we show that coexpression of Glis2 and
Src induces nuclear translocation of p120. Furthermore, p120 induces the
C-terminal cleavage of Glis2, and this cleavage is further enhanced by Src. The
cleaved form of Glis2 loses one of its five zinc finger domains, but it is still 
able to bind DNA. Functional studies in chick neural tube indicate that
full-length Glis2 can affect neuronal differentiation, whereas the cleaved form
requires coexpression of p120 to have a similar effect. These data indicate that 
p120 has additional novel functions in the nucleus together with Glis2.

PMCID: PMC1855037
PMID: 17344476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. FEBS Lett. 2007 Mar 6;581(5):858-64. Epub 2007 Feb 2.

The Krüppel-like zinc finger protein Glis2 functions as a negative modulator of
the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway.

Kim YS(1), Kang HS, Jetten AM.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Section, LRB, Division of Intramural Research, National Institute
of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research
Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.

To gain insight into the mechanism by which Gli-similar 2 (Glis2) regulates
transcription, we performed yeast-two hybrid cDNA library screening using Glis2
as bait. This screening identified beta-catenin as a potential Glis2-interacting 
protein. Mammalian two-hybrid, co-immunoprecipitation, and GST-pulldown analyses 
supported the interaction between Glis2 and beta-catenin. Pulldown analyses with 
several Glis2 deletion mutants indicated that the 1st zinc finger motif of Glis2 
is critical for its interaction with beta-catenin, while the armadillo repeats of
beta-catenin are important in its interaction with Glis2. Reporter analyses
showed that Glis2 represses T-cell factor (TCF)-mediated transcriptional
activation. In addition, Glis2 represses the expression of the TCF target gene
cyclin D1. Our results indicate that Glis2 interacts with beta-catenin and
suggest that Glis2 functions as a negative modulator of beta-catenin/TCF-mediated
transcription.

PMCID: PMC1838965
PMID: 17289029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Dec 2;33(21):6805-15. Print 2005.

Krüppel-like zinc finger protein Gli-similar 2 (Glis2) represses transcription
through interaction with C-terminal binding protein 1 (CtBP1).

Kim SC(1), Kim YS, Jetten AM.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Section, Division of Intramural Research, National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle
Park, NC 27709, USA.

Glis2 is a member of the Gli-similar (Glis) subfamily of Krüppel-like zinc finger
transcription factors. It functions as an activator and repressor of gene
transcription. To identify potential co-activators or co-repressors that mediate 
these actions of Glis2, we performed yeast two-hybrid analysis using Glis2 as
bait. C-terminal binding protein 1 (CtBP1) was identified as one of the proteins 
that interact with Glis2. This interaction was confirmed by mammalian two-hybrid 
analysis. CtBP1 did not interact with other members of the Glis subfamily
suggesting that this interaction is specific for Glis2. Pulldown analysis with
GST-CtBP1 demonstrated that CtBP1 physically interacts with Glis2. Analysis of
CtBP1 and Glis2 deletion mutants identified several regions important for this
interaction. CtBP1 repressed transcriptional activation induced by Glis2(1-171). 
Repression by Glis2 appears to involve the recruitment of both CtBP1 and histone 
deacetylase 3 (HDAC3). Confocal microscopic analysis demonstrated that Glis2
localized to nuclear speckles while in most cells CtBP1 was found diffusely in
both cytoplasm and nucleus. However, when CtBP1 and Glis2 were co-expressed,
CtBP1 was restricted to nuclear speckles and co-localized with Glis2. Our
observations suggest that the co-repressor CtBP1 and HDAC3 are part of
transcription silencing complex that mediates the transcriptional repression by
Glis2.

PMCID: PMC1301595
PMID: 16326862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 22;277(12):10139-49. Epub 2001 Dec 12.

Characterization of Glis2, a novel gene encoding a Gli-related, Krüppel-like
transcription factor with transactivation and repressor functions. Roles in
kidney development and neurogenesis.

Zhang F(1), Nakanishi G, Kurebayashi S, Yoshino K, Perantoni A, Kim YS, Jetten
AM.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Section Division of Intramural Research, NIEHS, National
Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709, USA.

In this study, we describe the characterization of a gene encoding a novel
Krüppel-like protein, named Glis2. Glis2 encodes a relatively proline-rich, basic
55.8-kDa protein. Its five tandem Cys(2)-His(2) zinc finger motifs exhibit the
highest homology to those of members of the Gli and Zic subfamilies of
Krüppel-like proteins. Confocal microscopic analysis demonstrated that Glis2
localizes to the nucleus. Analysis of the genomic structure of the Glis2 gene
showed that it is composed of 6 exons separated by 5 introns spanning a genomic
region of more than 7.5 kb. Fluorescence in situ hybridization mapped the mouse
Glis2 gene to chromosome 16A3-B1. Northern blot analysis showed that the Glis2
gene encodes a 3.8-kb transcript that is most abundant in adult mouse kidney. By 
in situ hybridization, expression was localized to somites and neural tube, and
during metanephric development predominantly to the ureteric bud, precursor of
the collecting duct, and inductor of nephronic tubule formation. One-hybrid
analysis using Glis2 deletion mutants identified a novel activation function (AF)
at the N terminus. The activation of transcription through this AF domain was
totally suppressed by two repressor functions just downstream from the AF. One of
the repressor functions is contained within the first zinc finger motif. The
level of transcriptional activation and repression varied with the cell line
tested, which might be due to differences in cell type-specific expression of
co-activators and co-repressors. Our results suggest that Glis2 behaves as a
bifunctional transcriptional regulator. Both the activation and repressor
functions may play an important role in the regulation of gene expression during 
embryonic development.

PMID: 11741991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Gene. 2001 Dec 12;280(1-2):49-57.

Genomic structure of the gene encoding the human GLI-related, Krüppel-like zinc
finger protein GLIS2.

Zhang F(1), Jetten AM.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Section, Division of Intramural Research, National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health Research, Triangle
Park, NC 27709, USA.

In this study, we describe the sequence and genomic structure of the human GLIS2 
gene, encoding a new member of the Krüppel-like zinc finger protein family. GLIS2
is a relatively proline-rich, basic protein of 55.7 kDa in size. It contains five
tandem Cys(2)-His(2) zinc finger motifs consisting of the consensus sequence
X-Cys-X(2,4)-Cys-X(12,15)-His-X(3,4)-His-X. The sequence of the zinc finger
domain exhibits highest homology with those of members of the GLI and ZIC
subfamilies of Krüppel-like proteins. The zinc finger domain of GLIS2 exhibits
highest (58%) homology with that of GLI-1. The human GLIS2 gene consists of six
exons and five introns, and spans more than 7.5 kb. Primer extension identified
several putative transcription initiation sites. GLIS2 mRNA is most abundantly
expressed in human kidney suggesting a role in the regulation of certain kidney
functions. The GLIS2 gene maps to human chromosome 16p13.3, a locus implicated in
several human kidney diseases. The sequence and structure of human GLIS2 will be 
useful tools to study the regulation of GLIS2 and its potential role in human
disease.

PMID: 11738817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


