
1. PLoS Genet. 2016 Mar 28;12(3):e1005918. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005918.
eCollection 2016.

Transposon Dysregulation Modulates dWnt4 Signaling to Control Germline Stem Cell 
Differentiation in Drosophila.

Upadhyay M(1), Martino Cortez Y(1,)(2), Wong-Deyrup S(1), Tavares L(1),
Schowalter S(1,)(3), Flora P(1), Hill C(1,)(4), Nasrallah MA(1), Chittur
S(1,)(5), Rangan P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences/RNA Institute, University at Albany SUNY,
Albany, New York, United States of America. (2)NYU Langone Medical Center, New
York, New York, United States of America. (3)Boston University School of
Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America. (4)Department of
Environmental Health Sciences, University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst,
Massachusetts, United States of America. (5)CFG Core Facility, University at
Albany SUNY, Rensselaer, New York, United States of America.

Germline stem cell (GSC) self-renewal and differentiation are required for the
sustained production of gametes. GSC differentiation in Drosophila oogenesis
requires expression of the histone methyltransferase dSETDB1 by the somatic
niche, however its function in this process is unknown. Here, we show that
dSETDB1 is required for the expression of a Wnt ligand, Drosophila Wingless type 
mouse mammary virus integration site number 4 (dWnt4) in the somatic niche. dWnt4
signaling acts on the somatic niche cells to facilitate their encapsulation of
the GSC daughter, which serves as a differentiation cue. dSETDB1 is known to
repress transposable elements (TEs) to maintain genome integrity. Unexpectedly,
we found that independent upregulation of TEs also downregulated dWnt4, leading
to GSC differentiation defects. This suggests that dWnt4 expression is sensitive 
to the presence of TEs. Together our results reveal a chromatin-transposon-Wnt
signaling axis that regulates stem cell fate.

PMID: 27019121  [PubMed - in process]


2. Cancer Res. 2016 Mar 24. pii: canres.2386.2015. [Epub ahead of print]

CSF1 overexpression promotes high-grade glioma formation without impacting the
polarization status of glioma-associated microglia and macrophages.

De I(1), Steffen MD(2), Clark PA(3), Patros CJ(4), Sokn E(4), Bishop SM(4),
Litscher S(4), Maklakova VI(4), Kuo JS(5), Rodriguez FJ(6), Collier LS(7).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Carbone Cancer Center, Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology
Graduate Program, University of Wisconsin, Madison. (2)School of Pharmacy,
Carbone Cancer Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison. (3)Neurological Surgery,
University of Wisconsin-Madison. (4)School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin, 
Madison. (5)Neurological Surgery, Univ. Wis. Madison. (6)Department of Anatomic
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Mayo Clinic. (7)School of Pharmacy, Carbone
Cancer Center, Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology Graduate Program, University
of Wisconsin, Madison lcollier@wisc.edu.

Current therapies for high-grade gliomas extend survival only modestly. The
glioma microenvironment, including glioma-associated microglia/macrophages
(GAMs), is a potential therapeutic target. The microglia/macrophage cytokine CSF1
and its receptor CSF1R are overexpressed in human high-grade gliomas. To
determine if the other known CSF1R ligand IL-34 is expressed in gliomas, we
examined expression array data of human high-grade gliomas and performed RT-PCR
on glioblastoma sphere-forming cell lines (GSCs). Expression microarray analyses 
indicated that CSF1, but not IL-34, is frequently overexpressed in human tumors. 
We found that while GSCs did express CSF1, most GSC lines did not express
detectable levels of IL-34 mRNA. We therefore studied the impact of modulating
CSF1 levels on gliomagenesis in the context of the GFAP-V12Ha-ras-IRESLacZ (Ras*)
model. Csf1 deficiency deterred glioma formation in the Ras* model while CSF1
transgenic overexpression decreased the survival of Ras* mice and promoted the
formation of high-grade gliomas. Conversely, CSF1 overexpression increased GAM
density, but did not impact GAM polarization state. Regardless of CSF1 expression
status, most GAMs were negative for the M2 polarization markers ARG1 and CD206;
when present, ARG1+ and CD206+ cells were found in regions of peripheral immune
cell invasion. Therefore, our findings indicate that CSF1 signaling is oncogenic 
during gliomagenesis through a mechanism distinct from modulating GAM
polarization status.

Copyright ©2016, American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 27013192  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Cancer Res. 2016 Mar 24. pii: canres.3432.2015. [Epub ahead of print]

Extracellular vesicles from high grade glioma exchange diverse pro-oncogenic
signals that maintain intratumoral heterogeneity.

Ricklefs F(1), Mineo M(1), Rooj AK(1), Nakano I(2), Charest A(3), Weissleder
R(4), Breakefield XO(5), Chiocca EA(1), Godlewski J(1), Bronisz A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital/Harvard Medical
School. (2)Department of Neurosurgery and Comprehensive Cancer Center, University
of Alabama at Birmingham. (3)The Molecular Oncology Research Institute, Tufts
Medical Center. (4)Center for Systems Biology, Massachusetts General
Hospital/Harvard Medical School. (5)Department of Neurology, Neurosurgery and
Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital. (6)Department of Neurosurgery, Brigham
and Women's Hospital/Harvard Medical School abronisz@partners.org.

A lack of experimental models of tumor heterogeneity limits our knowledge of the 
complex subpopulation dynamics within the tumor ecosystem. In high grade gliomas 
(HGG), distinct hierarchical cell populations arise from different glioma
stem-like cell (GSC) subpopulations. Extracellular vesicles (EV) shed by cells
may serve as conduits of genetic and signaling communications, however, little is
known about how HGG heterogeneity may impact EV content and activity. In this
study, we performed a proteomic analysis of EV isolated from patient-derived GSC 
of either proneural or mesenchymal subtypes. EV signatures were heterogeneous,
but reflected the molecular make-up of the GSC and consistently clustered into
the two subtypes. EV-borne protein cargoes transferred between proneural and
mesenchymal GSC increased pro-tumorigenic behaviors <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in
vivo</i>. Clinically, analyses of HGG patient data from the TCGA database
revealed that proneural tumors with mesenchymal EV signatures or mesenchymal
tumors with proneural EV signatures were both associated with worse outcomes,
suggesting influences by the proportion of tumor cells of varying subtypes in
tumors. Collectively, our findings illuminate the heterogeneity among tumor EV
and the complexity of HGG heterogeneity which these EV help maintain.

Copyright ©2016, American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 27013191  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Cancer Res. 2016 Mar 22. pii: canres.3050.2015. [Epub ahead of print]

Polysome profiling links translational control to the radioresponse of
glioblastoma stem-like cells.

Wahba A(1), Rath BH(1), Bisht K(1), Camphausen K(1), Tofilon PJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Radiation Oncology Branch, NCI. (2)Radiation Oncology Branch, NCI
tofilonp@mail.nih.gov.

Changes in polysome-bound mRNA (translatome) are correlated closely with changes 
in the proteome in cells. Therefore, to better understand the processes mediating
the response of glioblastoma (GBM) to ionizing radiation (IR), we used polysome
profiling to define the IR-induced translatomes of a set of human glioblastoma
stem-like cell (GSC) lines. Whereas cell line specificity accounted for the
largest proportion of genes within each translatome, there were also genes that
were common to the GSC lines. In particular, analyses of the IR-induced common
translatome identified components of the DNA damage response, consistent with a
role for the translational control of gene expression in cellular radioresponse. 
Moreover, translatome analyses suggested that IR enhanced cap-dependent
translation processes, an effect corroborated by the finding of increased
eIF4F-cap complex formation detected after irradiation in all GSC lines.
Translatome analyses also predicted that Golgi function was affected by IR.
Accordingly, Golgi dispersal was detected after irradiation of each of the GSC
lines. In addition to the common responses seen, translatome analyses predicted
cell line-specific changes in mitochondria, as substantiated by changes in
mitochondrial mass and DNA content. Together, these results suggest that analysis
of radiation-induced translatomes can provide new molecular insights concerning
the radiation response of cancer cells. More specifically, they suggest that the 
translational control of gene expression may provide a source of molecular
targets for GBM radiosensitization.

Copyright ©2016, American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 27005284  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Neoplasia. 2016 Mar;18(3):185-98. doi: 10.1016/j.neo.2016.02.003.

Regulation of Glioblastoma Tumor-Propagating Cells by the Integrin Partner
Tetraspanin CD151.

Tilghman J(1), Schiapparelli P(2), Lal B(3), Ying M(3), Quinones-Hinojosa A(4),
Xia S(3), Laterra J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Hugo W. Moser Research Institute at Kennedy Krieger, Baltimore, MD, 21205,
USA; Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD,
21205, USA. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, 21205, USA. (3)Hugo W. Moser Research Institute at Kennedy
Krieger, Baltimore, MD, 21205, USA; Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins School
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, 21205, USA. (4)Department of Neuroscience, Johns
Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, 21205, USA; Department of
Neurosurgery, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, 21205, USA;
Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, 21205,
USA. (5)Hugo W. Moser Research Institute at Kennedy Krieger, Baltimore, MD,
21205, USA; Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, 21205, USA; Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, 21205, USA; Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins School
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, 21205, USA. Electronic address:
laterra@kennedykrieger.org.

Glioblastoma (GBM) stem cells (GSCs) represent tumor-propagating cells with
stem-like characteristics (stemness) that contribute disproportionately to GBM
drug resistance and tumor recurrence. Understanding the mechanisms supporting GSC
stemness is important for developing therapeutic strategies for targeting
GSC-dependent oncogenic mechanisms. Using GBM-derived neurospheres, we identified
the cell surface tetraspanin family member CD151 as a novel regulator of glioma
cell stemness, GSC self-renewal capacity, migration, and tumor growth. CD151 was 
found to be overexpressed in GBM tumors and GBM neurospheres enriched in GSCs.
Silencing CD151 inhibited neurosphere forming capacity, neurosphere cell
proliferation, and migration and attenuated the expression of markers and
transcriptional drivers of the GSC phenotype. Conversely, forced CD151 expression
promoted neurosphere self-renewal, cell migration, and expression of
stemness-associated transcription factors. CD151 was found to complex with
integrins a3, a6, and ß1 in neurosphere cells, and blocking CD151 interactions
with integrins a3 and a6 inhibited AKT phosphorylation, a downstream effector of 
integrin signaling, and impaired sphere formation and neurosphere cell migration.
Additionally, targeting CD151 in vivo inhibited the growth of GBM
neurosphere-derived xenografts. These findings identify CD151 and its
interactions with integrins a3 and a6 as potential therapeutic targets for
inhibiting stemness-driving mechanisms and stem cell populations in GBM.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26992919  [PubMed - in process]


6. Nanoscale. 2016 Mar 31;8(14):7646-53. doi: 10.1039/c6nr00241b.

The role of hydrogen in oxygen-assisted chemical vapor deposition growth of
millimeter-sized graphene single crystals.

Zhao P(1), Cheng Y(1), Zhao D(1), Yin K(1), Zhang X(1), Song M(2), Yin S(1), Song
Y(1), Wang P(1), Wang M(2), Xia Y(3), Wang H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Applied Mechanics and Key Laboratory of Soft Machines and Smart
Devices of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310012, P. R. China. 
peizhao@zju.edu.cn htw@zju.edu.cn. (2)Department of Physics, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou 310012, P. R. China. (3)Institute of Microelectronics, Chinese Academy
of Science, Beijing 100029, P. R. China.

Involving oxygen in the traditional chemical vapor deposition (CVD) process has
proven a promising approach to achieve large-scale graphene single crystals
(GSCs), but its many relevant fundamental aspects are still not fully understood.
Here we report a systematic study on the role of hydrogen in the growth of
millimeter-sized GSCs using enclosure-like Cu structures via the oxygen-assisted 
CVD process. Results show that GSCs have different first layer growth behaviors
on the inside and outside surfaces of a Cu enclosure when the H2 environment is
varied, and these behaviors will consequently and strongly influence the adlayer 
formation in these GSCs, leading to two entirely different growth modes. Low H2
partial pressure (PH2) tends to result in fast growth of dendritically shaped
GSCs with multiple small adlayers, but high PH2 can modify the GSC shape into
hexagons with single large adlayer nuclei. This difference of adlayers is
attributed to the different C diffusion paths determined by the shapes of their
host GSCs. On the basis of these observations, we developed an isothermal
two-step method to obtain GSCs with significantly improved growth rate and sample
quality, in which low PH2 is first set to accelerate the growth rate followed by 
high PH2 to restrict the adlayer nuclei. Our results prove that the growth of
GSCs can reach a reasonable optimization between their growth rates and sample
quality by simply adjusting the CVD H2 environment, which we believe will lead to
more improvements in graphene synthesis and fundamental insight into the related 
growth mechanisms.

PMID: 26987665  [PubMed - in process]


7. Oncol Rep. 2016 Mar 9. doi: 10.3892/or.2016.4665. [Epub ahead of print]

Epigenetic targeting of glioma stem cells: Short-term and long-term treatments
with valproic acid modulate DNA methylation and differentiation behavior, but not
temozolomide sensitivity.

Riva G(1), Butta V(1), Cilibrasi C(1), Baronchelli S(1), Redaelli S(1), Dalprà
L(1), Lavitrano M(1), Bentivegna A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Translational Medicine, University of
Milano-Bicocca, I-20900 Monza, Italy.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most aggressive tumor of the central nervous system.
GBM is a fatal tumor, incurable by conventional therapies. One of the factors
underlying tumor recurrence and poor long-term survival is the presence of a
cancer stem-like cell population, termed glioma stem cells (GSCs), which is
particularly resistant to chemotherapy and radiotherapy and supports tumor
self-renewal. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the impact and
difference in effects of short-term and long-term treatments with valproic acid
(VPA), a histone deacetylase inhibitor, on seven GSC lines. We investigated for
the first time the changes in the genome-wide DNA methylation profile and the
differentiation behavior of GSCs induced by short-term and long-term VPA
treatments. Moreover, we verified VPA sensitivity after long-term VPA
pretreatment and, notably, the results provide evidence of a subpopulation more
resistant to further VPA treatments. Finally, since short-term VPA treatment
induced a reversal of the MGMT methylation status, we aimed to sensitize GSCs to 
temozolomide, the drug commonly used for this tumor, using this regimen. The
overall data highlighted the heterogeneous behavior of GSC lines that is
representative of tumor heterogeneity in GBM. The VPA effects were variable among
these cell lines in terms of pro-differentiating ability and DNA methylation
switch. Here, we attempted to identify a suitable therapy for the eradication of 
the stem cell subpopulation, which is mandatory to achieve an effective treatment
for this tumor. Differentiation-inducing and epigenetic therapies are the most
promising approaches to affect the multiple properties of GSCs and, finally,
defeat GBM.

PMID: 26986767  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. Development. 2016 Mar 7. pii: dev.127936. [Epub ahead of print]

Activation of a T-box-Otx2-Gsc gene network independent of TBP and TBP-related
factors.

Gazdag E(1), Jacobi UG(1), van Kruijsbergen I(1), Weeks DL(2), Veenstra GJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Radboud University, Department of Molecular Developmental Biology, Faculty of 
Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands. (2)University of Iowa, Department of Biochemistry, Iowa City, IA,
USA. (3)Radboud University, Department of Molecular Developmental Biology,
Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands g.veenstra@science.ru.nl.

The developmental program relies on activating and repressing regulatory
influences which are faithfully integrated at the core promoter of individual
genes. In vertebrates, the basal machinery recognizing the core promoter includes
TATA binding protein (TBP) and two TBP-related factors. In Xenopus embryos the
three TBP family factors are all essential for development and required for
expression of distinct subsets of genes. Here we report on a non-canonical TBP
family-insensitive (TFI) mechanism of transcription initiation that involves
mesoderm and organizer gene expression. Using TBP family single and triple
knockdown experiments, a-amanitin treatment, transcriptome profiling and
chromatin immunoprecipitation, we found that TFI gene expression cannot be
explained by functional redundancy, is supported by active transcription, and
shows normal recruitment of the initiating form of RNA polymerase II to the
promoter. Strikingly, recruitment of Gcn5 (Kat2a), a co-activator which has been 
implicated in transcription initiation, to TFI promoters is increased upon
depletion of TBP family factors. TFI genes are part of a densely connected TBP
family-insensitive T-box-Otx2-Gsc interaction network. The results indicate that 
this network of genes bound by Vegt, Eomes, Otx2 and Gsc utilizes a novel,
flexible and non-canonical mechanism of transcription that does not require TBP
or TBP-related factors.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 26952988  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. J Plant Physiol. 2016 Feb 19;193:26-36. doi: 10.1016/j.jplph.2016.02.003. [Epub
ahead of print]

Soil water availability and capacity of nitrogen accumulation influence
variations of intrinsic water use efficiency in rice.

Xue W(1), Nay-Htoon B(2), Lindner S(3), Dubbert M(4), Otieno D(3), Ko J(5),
Werner C(4), Tenhunen J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Ecology, BayCEER, University of Bayreuth, 95440, Bayreuth,
Germany; State Key Laboratory of Desert and Oasis Ecology, Xinjiang Institute of 
Ecology and Geography, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 830011 Urumqi, China.
Electronic address: xuewei8341@yeah.net. (2)Department of Agroecosystem Research,
BayCEER, University of Bayreuth, 95440, Bayreuth, Germany. (3)Department of Plant
Ecology, BayCEER, University of Bayreuth, 95440, Bayreuth, Germany. (4)Department
of Agroecosystem Research, BayCEER, University of Bayreuth, 95440, Bayreuth,
Germany; Department of Ecosystem Physiology, University of Freiburg, 79085
Freiburg, Germany. (5)Department of Applied Plant Science, Chonnam National
University, 500757 Gwangju, South Korea.

Leaf intrinsic water use efficiency (WUEi) coupling maximum assimilation rate
(Amax) and transpirable water lost via stomatal conductance (gsc) has been
gaining increasing concern in sustainable crop production. Factors that influence
leaf Amax and WUEi in rice (Oryza sativa L. cv Unkang) at flooding and rainfed
conditions were evaluated. Positive correlations for leaf nitrogen content (Nm)
and maximum carboxylation rate (Vcmax), for nitrogen allocation in Rubisco
enzymes and mesophyll conductance (gm) were evident independent of cropping
cultures. Rainfed rice exhibited enriched canopy leaf average Nm resulting in
higher Amax, partially supporting improved leaf WUEi. Maximum WUEi (up to
0.14µmolmmol(-1)) recorded in rainfed rice under drought conditions resulted from
increasing gm/gsc ratio while at cost of significant decline in Amax due to
hydraulically constrained gsc. Amax sensitivity related to gsc which was
regulated by plant hydraulic conductance. WUEi was tightly correlated to
Vcmax/gsc and gm/gsc ratios across the paddy and rainfed not to light
environment, morphological and physiological traits, highlighting enhance
capacity of Nm accumulation in rainfed rice with gsc at moderately high level
similar to paddy rice facilitate optimization in Amax and WUEi while, is
challenged by drought-vulnerable plant hydraulic conductance.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26938938  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. J Acoust Soc Am. 2016 Feb;139(2):863. doi: 10.1121/1.4941914.

Array model interpolation and subband iterative adaptive filters applied to
beamforming-based acoustic echo cancellation.

Bai MR(1), Chi LW(1), Liang LH(1), Lo YY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Power Mechanical Engineering, National Tsing Hua University,
Number 101, Section 2, Kuang-Fu Road, Hsinchu, 30013, Taiwan.

In this paper, an evolutionary exposition is given in regard to the enhancing
strategies for acoustic echo cancellers (AECs). A fixed beamformer (FBF) is
utilized to focus on the near-end speaker while suppressing the echo from the far
end. In reality, the array steering vector could differ considerably from the
ideal freefield plane wave model. Therefore, an experimental procedure is
developed to interpolate a practical array model from the measured frequency
responses. Subband (SB) filtering with polyphase implementation is exploited to
accelerate the cancellation process. Generalized sidelobe canceller (GSC)
composed of an FBF and an adaptive blocking module is combined with AEC to
maximize cancellation performance. Another enhancement is an internal iteration
(IIT) procedure that enables efficient convergence in the adaptive SB filters
within a sample time. Objective tests in terms of echo return loss enhancement
(ERLE), perceptual evaluation of speech quality (PESQ), word recognition rate for
automatic speech recognition (ASR), and subjective listening tests are conducted 
to validate the proposed AEC approaches. The results show that the GSC-SB-AEC-IIT
approach has attained the highest ERLE without speech quality degradation, even
in double-talk scenarios.

PMID: 26936567  [PubMed - in process]


11. Zhonghua Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2016 Mar;54(3):182-6. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0529-5815.2016.03.006.

[Retrospective clinical analysis of surgical treatment for gastric stump
carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Xi HQ(1), Cui JX, Hu C, Ma LG, Wei B, Chen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Chinese People's Liberation Army General
Hospital, Beijing 100853, China.

OBJECTIVES: To investigate the clinical feature and surgical procedures of
gastric stump carcinoma (GSC) and to identify the prognostic factors which
influence survival rate of GSC patients.
METHODS: Clinical data of 167 patients who underwent R0 resection for gastric
stump carcinoma at Chinese People's Liberation Army General Hospital between
January 1990 and December 2012 was collected. There were 144 male and 23 female
cases. The clinicopathological features of GSC patients were compared between
those who underwent initial surgery for benign disease (GSC-B group, 78 cases)
and for gastric cancer (GSC-M group, 89 cases). The analysis of therapeutic
methods and survival time were also performed.t-test was used to compare the
quantitative data between two groups. Pearson <U+03C7>(2) test was used to compare the
various clinicopathological characteristics between the two groups. Kaplan-Meier 
method was used to analyze the survival rate. Multivariate survival analysis was 
based on the Cox proportional hazard model.
RESULTS: Compared with GSC-M group, the interval time between initial gastrectomy
and surgery in GSC-B group was longer ( (28.2±10.2) years vs. (10.8±1.0) years,
t=15.902, P=0.001). There were 56 patients (71.8%) who received Billroth<U+2160>
reconstruction in GSC-B group, and 49 patients (55.1%) who received Billroth<U+2161>
reconstruction in GSC-M group, the difference of anastomosis method between the
two groups was statistically significant (<U+03C7>(2)=25.770, P=0.001). Compared with
GSC-M group, the tumor of GSC-B group was usually located at the anastomotic site
(<U+03C7>(2)=6.975, P=0.031). The overall 1-, 3-, and 5-year survival rates of the 167
patients were 87%, 60%, and 41%. The 5-year survival rates for TNM stages<U+2160>, <U+2161>,
and <U+2162> were 65%, 43%, and 22%, respectively (P= 0.001). Multivariate analysis
showed that small intestinal or esophageal infiltration (HR=1.957, 95%CI: 1.096
to 3.494, P=0.023), tumor location (HR=1.618, 95%CI: 1.104 to 2.372, P=0.014),
and TNM stage (HR=2.307, 95%CI: 1.708 to 3.118, P=0.001) have independent effect 
on survival. The metastasis rates of perigastric lymph nodes, jejunum anastomosis
and mesenteric lymph nodes were very high (56.3% and 65.2%, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: The GSC appears earlier in patients with gastrectomy for malignant
disease than those with benign disease. Appropriate curative resection including 
residual lymph node dissection is very important to improve the prognosis. Small 
intestinal or esophageal infiltration, tumor location, and TNM stage have
independent effect on survival.

PMID: 26932885  [PubMed - in process]


12. Cancer Res. 2016 Feb 26. pii: canres.2162.2015. [Epub ahead of print]

Pharmacological targeting of the histone chaperone complex FACT preferentially
eliminates glioblastoma stem cells and prolongs survival in preclinical models.

Dermawan JK(1), Hitomi M(2), Silver DJ(2), Wu Q(3), Sandlesh P(4), Sloan AE(5),
Purmal AA(6), Gurova KV(4), Rich JN(3), Lathia JD(2), Stark GR(7), Venere M(8).

Author information: 
(1)Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic. (2)Department of Cellular and
Molecular Medicine, Cleveland Clinic Lerner Research Institute. (3)Department of 
Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Cleveland Clinic Lerner Research
Institute. (4)Department of Cell Stress Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute.
(5)Brain Tumor and Neuro-Oncology Center, Case Western Reserve University School 
of Medicine. (6)Chemistry, Cleveland Biolabs Inc. (7)Lerner Research Institute,
Cleveland Clinic starkg@ccf.org. (8)Department of Radiation Oncology, James
Cancer Hospital and Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University Wexner
School of Medicine.

The nearly universal recurrence of glioblastoma (GBM) is driven in part by a
treatment-resistant subpopulation of GBM stem cells (GSCs). To identify improved 
therapeutic possibilities, we combined the EGFR/HER2 inhibitor lapatinib with a
novel small molecule, CBL0137, which inhibits FACT (Facilitates Chromatin
Transcription), a histone chaperone complex predominantly expressed in
undifferentiated cells. Lapatinib and CBL0137 synergistically inhibited the
proliferation of patient-derived GBM cells. Compared to non-stem tumor cells
(NSTCs) enriched from the same specimens, the GSCs were extremely sensitive to
CBL0137 monotherapy or FACT knockdown. FACT expression was elevated in GSCs
compared to matched NSTCs, and decreased in GSCs upon differentiation. Acute
exposure of GSCs to CBL0137 increased asymmetric cell division, decreased GSC
marker expression, and decreased the capacity of GSCs to form tumor spheres in
vitro and to initiate tumors in vivo. Oral administration of CBL0137 to mice
bearing orthotopic glioblastoma prolonged their survival. Knockdown of FACT
reduced the expression of genes encoding several core stem cell transcription
factors (SOX2, OCT4, NANOG and OLIG2), and FACT occupied the promoters of these
genes. FACT expression was elevated in GBM tumors compared to non-neoplastic
brain tissues, portended a worse prognosis, and positively correlated with GSC
markers and stem cell gene expression signatures. Preferential targeting of GSCs 
by CBL0137 and synergy with EGFR inhibitors support the development of clinical
trials combining these two agents in GBM.

Copyright ©2016, American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26921329  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


13. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 23. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7580. [Epub ahead of print]

Systematic characterization of lncRNAs' cell-to-cell expression heterogeneity in 
glioblastoma cells.

Lv D(1), Wang X(1), Dong J(1), Zhuang Y(1), Huang S(1), Ma B(2), Chen P(3), Li
X(1), Zhang B(2), Li Z(1), Jin B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cancer Stem Cell, Cancer Center, Dalian Medical University,
Dalian, 116044, Liaoning, P.R. China. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, The Second
Hospital of Dalian Medical University, Dalian, 116023, Liaoning, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The Second Xiangya Hospital of
Central South University, Changsha, 410011, Hunan, P.R. China.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common malignant adult brain tumor generally
associated with high level of cellular heterogeneity and a dismal prognosis. Long
noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) are emerging as novel mediators of tumorigenesis.
Recently developed single-cell RNA-seq provides an unprecedented way for analysis
of the cell-to-cell variability in lncRNA expression profiles. Here we
comprehensively examined the expression patterns of 2,003 lncRNAs in 380 cells
from five primary GBMs and two glioblastoma stem-like cell (GSC) lines. Employing
the self-organizing maps, we displayed the landscape of the lncRNA expression
dynamics for individual cells. Further analyses revealed heterogeneous nature of 
lncRNA in abundance and splicing patterns. Moreover, lncRNA expression variation 
is also ubiquitously present in the established GSC lines composed of seemingly
identical cells. Through comparative analysis of GSC and corresponding
differentiated cell cultures, we defined a stemness signature by the set of 31
differentially expressed lncRNAs, which can disclose stemness gradients in five
tumors. Additionally, based on known classifier lncRNAs for molecular subtypes,
each tumor was found to comprise individual cells representing four subtypes. Our
systematic characterization of lncRNA expression heterogeneity lays the
foundation for future efforts to further understand the function of lncRNA,
develop valuable biomarkers, and enhance knowledge of GBM biology.

PMID: 26918340  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. Neurochem Res. 2016 Feb 25. [Epub ahead of print]

Short-Term Differentiation of Glioblastoma Stem Cells Induces Hypoxia Tolerance.

Skjellegrind HK(1), Fayzullin A(2), Johnsen EO(3), Eide L(4), Langmoen IA(2), Moe
MC(3), Vik-Mo EO(2).

Author information: 
(1)Vilhelm Magnus Laboratory for Neurosurgical Research, Department of
Neurosurgery and Institute for Surgical Research, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo,
Norway. havard@skjellegrind.no. (2)Vilhelm Magnus Laboratory for Neurosurgical
Research, Department of Neurosurgery and Institute for Surgical Research, Oslo
University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. (3)Center for Eye Research, Department of
Ophthalmology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. (4)Department of Medical
Biochemistry, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

Glioblastoma is the most common and malignant brain cancer. In spite of surgical 
removal, radiation and chemotherapy, this cancer recurs within short time and
median survival after diagnosis is less than a year. Glioblastoma stem cells
(GSCs) left in the brain after surgery is thought to explain the inevitable
recurrence of the tumor. Although hypoxia is a prime factor contributing to
treatment resistance in many cancers, its effect on GSC has been little studied. 
Especially how differentiation influences the tolerance to acute hypoxia in GSCs 
is not well explored. We cultured GSCs from three patient biopsies and exposed
these and their differentiated (1- and 4-weeks) progeny to acute hypoxia while
monitoring intracellular calcium and mitochondrial membrane potential (<U+0394><U+03A8>m).
Undifferentiated GSCs were not hypoxia tolerant, showing both calcium overload
and mitochondrial depolarization. One week differentiated cells were the most
tolerant to hypoxia, preserving intracellular calcium stability and <U+0394><U+03A8>m during
15 min of acute hypoxia. After 4 weeks of differentiation, mitochondrial mass was
significantly reduced. In these cells calcium homeostasis was maintained during
hypoxia, although the mitochondria were depolarized, suggesting a reduced
mitochondrial dependency. Basal metabolic rate increased by differentiation,
however, low oxygen consumption and high <U+0394><U+03A8>m in undifferentiated GSCs did not
provide hypoxia tolerance. The results suggest that undifferentiated GSCs are
oxygen dependent, and that limited differentiation induces relative hypoxia
tolerance. Hypoxia tolerance may be a factor involved in high-grade malignancy.
This warrants a careful approach to differentiation as a glioblastoma treatment
strategy.

PMID: 26915110  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


15. EMBO Mol Med. 2016 Feb 9;8(3):268-87. doi: 10.15252/emmm.201505495.

Therapeutic potential of targeting microRNA-10b in established intracranial
glioblastoma: first steps toward the clinic.

Teplyuk NM(1), Uhlmann EJ(1), Gabriely G(1), Volfovsky N(2), Wang Y(1), Teng
J(3), Karmali P(4), Marcusson E(4), Peter M(1), Mohan A(1), Kraytsberg Y(1),
Cialic R(1), Chiocca EA(5), Godlewski J(5), Tannous B(3), Krichevsky AM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Ann Romney Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham
and Women's Hospital Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (2)Simons
Foundation, New York, NY, USA. (3)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. (4)Regulus Therapeutics Inc., San Diego, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Neurosurgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA. (6)Department of Neurology, Ann Romney Center for
Neurologic Diseases, Brigham and Women's Hospital Harvard Medical School, Boston,
MA, USA akrichevsky@rics.bwh.harvard.edu.

MicroRNA-10b (miR-10b) is a unique oncogenic miRNA that is highly expressed in
all GBM subtypes, while absent in normal neuroglial cells of the brain. miR-10b
inhibition strongly impairs proliferation and survival of cultured glioma cells, 
including glioma-initiating stem-like cells (GSC). Although several miR-10b
targets have been identified previously, the common mechanism conferring the
miR-10b-sustained viability of GSC is unknown. Here, we demonstrate that in
heterogeneous GSC, miR-10b regulates cell cycle and alternative splicing, often
through the non-canonical targeting via 5'UTRs of its target genes, including
MBNL1-3, SART3, and RSRC1. We have further assessed the inhibition of miR-10b in 
intracranial human GSC-derived xenograft and murine GL261 allograft models in
athymic and immunocompetent mice. Three delivery routes for the miR-10b antisense
oligonucleotide inhibitors (ASO), direct intratumoral injections, continuous
osmotic delivery, and systemic intravenous injections, have been explored. In all
cases, the treatment with miR-10b ASO led to targets' derepression, and
attenuated growth and progression of established intracranial GBM. No significant
systemic toxicity was observed upon ASO administration by local or systemic
routes. Our results indicate that miR-10b is a promising candidate for the
development of targeted therapies against all GBM subtypes.

© 2016 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

PMID: 26881967  [PubMed - in process]


16. Stem Cells Int. 2016;2016:7849890. doi: 10.1155/2016/7849890. Epub 2016 Jan 6.

Glioma Stem Cells: Signaling, Microenvironment, and Therapy.

Liebelt BD(1), Shingu T(2), Zhou X(2), Ren J(2), Shin SA(2), Hu J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Department of Neurosurgery, Houston Methodist
Neurological Institute, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (2)Department of Cancer Biology, 
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Glioblastoma remains the most common and devastating primary brain tumor despite 
maximal therapy with surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation. The glioma stem cell
(GSC) subpopulation has been identified in glioblastoma and likely plays a key
role in resistance of these tumors to conventional therapies as well as recurrent
disease. GSCs are capable of self-renewal and differentiation;
glioblastoma-derived GSCs are capable of de novo tumor formation when implanted
in xenograft models. Further, GSCs possess unique surface markers, modulate
characteristic signaling pathways to promote tumorigenesis, and play key roles in
glioma vascular formation. These features, in addition to microenvironmental
factors, present possible targets for specifically directing therapy against the 
GSC population within glioblastoma. In this review, the authors summarize the
current knowledge of GSC biology and function and the role of GSCs in new
vascular formation within glioblastoma and discuss potential therapeutic
approaches to target GSCs.

PMCID: PMC4736567
PMID: 26880988  [PubMed]


17. Stem Cells Int. 2016;2016:6261490. doi: 10.1155/2016/6261490. Epub 2015 Dec 30.

Validation of Housekeeping Genes to Study Human Gingival Stem Cells and Their In 
Vitro Osteogenic Differentiation Using Real-Time RT-qPCR.

Taïhi I(1), Nassif A(1), Berbar T(2), Isaac J(2), Berdal A(3), Gogly B(1),
Fournier BP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oral Physiopathology, INSERM UMRS 1138, Cordeliers
Research Center, 75006 Paris, France; Paris-Descartes, Pierre and Marie Curie,
and Paris-Diderot Universities, UFR Odontology, 75006 Paris, France; AP-HP,
Hospital Complex Henri-Mondor Albert-Chenevier, CIC-BT-504, 94000 Creteil,
France. (2)Laboratory of Molecular Oral Physiopathology, INSERM UMRS 1138,
Cordeliers Research Center, 75006 Paris, France; Paris-Descartes, Pierre and
Marie Curie, and Paris-Diderot Universities, UFR Odontology, 75006 Paris, France.
(3)Laboratory of Molecular Oral Physiopathology, INSERM UMRS 1138, Cordeliers
Research Center, 75006 Paris, France; Paris-Descartes, Pierre and Marie Curie,
and Paris-Diderot Universities, UFR Odontology, 75006 Paris, France; Reference
Center for Dental Rare Disease, Rothschild Hospital, 75012 Paris, France.

Gingival stem cells (GSCs) are recently isolated multipotent cells. Their
osteogenic capacity has been validated in vitro and may be transferred to human
cell therapy for maxillary large bone defects, as they share a neural crest cell 
origin with jaw bone cells. RT-qPCR is a widely used technique to study gene
expression and may help us to follow osteoblast differentiation of GSCs. For
accurate results, the choice of reliable housekeeping genes (HKGs) is crucial.
The aim of this study was to select the most reliable HKGs for GSCs study and
their osteogenic differentiation (dGSCs). The analysis was performed with ten
selected HKGs using four algorithms: <U+0394>Ct comparative method, GeNorm, BestKeeper, 
and NormFinder. This study demonstrated that three HKGs, SDHA, ACTB, and B2M,
were the most stable to study GSC, whereas TBP, SDHA, and ALAS1 were the most
reliable to study dGSCs. The comparison to stem cells of mesenchymal origin
(ASCs) showed that SDHA/HPRT1 were the most appropriate for ASCs study. The
choice of suitable HKGs for GSCs is important as it gave access to an accurate
analysis of osteogenic differentiation. It will allow further study of this
interesting stem cells source for future human therapy.

PMCID: PMC4736224
PMID: 26880978  [PubMed]


18. Surgery. 2016 Feb 12. pii: S0039-6060(16)00040-4. doi:
10.1016/j.surg.2016.01.003. [Epub ahead of print]

Characteristics of gastric stump cancer: A single hospital retrospective analysis
of 262 patients.

Irino T(1), Hiki N(2), Ohashi M(1), Nunobe S(1), Tokunaga M(3), Sano T(1),
Yamaguchi T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Cancer Institute Hospital, Koto-ku,
Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Cancer Institute
Hospital, Koto-ku, Tokyo, Japan. Electronic address: naoki.hiki@jfcr.or.jp.
(3)Division of Gastric Surgery, Shizuoka Cancer Center, Nagaizumi-cho, Sunto-gun,
Shizuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Owing to its relative rarity, the characteristics of gastric stump
cancer (GSC) have not been fully understood. In this study, we clarified the
detailed characteristics from a large cohort of GSC patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: For this retrospective cohort study from 1 hospital in
Japan, we recruited 262 GSC patients who underwent surgery for GSC between 1984
and 2012. GSC was defined in accordance with Japanese Gastric Cancer Association.
Stage was categorized in accordance with the 7th TNM classification for primary
gastric cancer.
RESULTS: Although the time interval between the primary and second operations
differed significantly depending on the primary disease (34.3 years for benign vs
9.9 years for malignant on average), it did not influence survival. The 5-year
overall survival rates of patients with N0, N1, N2, and N3 were 70.4%, 27.7%,
21.8%, and 6.4%, respectively, whereas the rates for those with stage I, II, III,
and IV were 77.8%, 37.4%, 18.6%, and 10.5%, respectively. Recurrence in the
peritoneum was the most common pattern, followed by recurrence in the local
region or lymph nodes. The Cox proportional hazard model demonstrated that age > 
65, T stage, N stage, and tumor histology were significant independent prognostic
factors for survival, whereas neither primary disease nor primary anastomosis
type significantly impacted survival.
CONCLUSION: Neither primary disease nor anastomosis type affected survival
significantly, despite significant differences in their characteristics. In
addition, the time interval between the primary and second surgery did not impact
survival.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26879072  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


19. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016 Feb 10;1863(6 Pt A):1093-1105. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2016.02.006. [Epub ahead of print]

RNA helicase Belle (DDX3) is essential for male germline stem cell maintenance
and division in Drosophila.

Kotov AA(1), Olenkina OM(1), Kibanov MV(1), Olenina LV(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemical Genetics of Animals, Institute of Molecular
Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Kurchatov Sq. 2, Moscow 123182, Russia.
(2)Laboratory of Biochemical Genetics of Animals, Institute of Molecular
Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Kurchatov Sq. 2, Moscow 123182, Russia.
Electronic address: olenina_ludmila@mail.ru.

The present study showed that RNA helicase Belle (DDX3) was required
intrinsically for mitotic progression and survival of germline stem cells (GSCs) 
and spermatogonial cells in the Drosophila melanogaster testes. We found that
deficiency of Belle in the male germline resulted in a strong germ cell loss
phenotype. Early germ cells are lost through cell death, whereas somatic hub and 
cyst cell populations are maintained. The observed phenotype is related to that
of the human Sertoli Cell-Only Syndrome caused by the loss of DBY (DDX3)
expression in the human testes and results in a complete lack of germ cells with 
preservation of somatic Sertoli cells. We found the hallmarks of mitotic G2 delay
in early germ cells of the larval testes of bel mutants. Both mitotic cyclins, A 
and B, are markedly reduced in the gonads of bel mutants. Transcription levels of
cycB and cycA decrease significantly in the testes of hypomorph bel mutants.
Overexpression of Cyclin B in the germline partially rescues germ cell survival, 
mitotic progression and fertility in the bel-RNAi knockdown testes. Taken
together, these results suggest that a role of Belle in GSC maintenance and
regulation of early germ cell divisions is associated with the expression control
of mitotic cyclins.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26876306  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


20. J Transl Med. 2016 Feb 9;14(1):46. doi: 10.1186/s12967-016-0803-2.

Suppression of RAF/MEK or PI3K synergizes cytotoxicity of receptor tyrosine
kinase inhibitors in glioma tumor-initiating cells.

Shingu T(1,)(2), Holmes L(3,)(4), Henry V(5), Wang Q(6,)(7), Latha K(8), Gururaj 
AE(9), Gibson LA(10,)(11), Doucette T(12), Lang FF(13), Rao G(14), Yuan L(15),
Sulman EP(16), Farrell NP(17), Priebe W(18), Hess KR(19), Wang YA(20), Hu J(21), 
Bögler O(22,)(23).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX, 77030, USA. tshingu@mdanderson.org.
(2)Department of Cancer Biology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, 1881 East Road, Houston, TX, 77054, USA. tshingu@mdanderson.org.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX, 77030, USA. lindsay.holmes@bcm.edu.
(4)Baylor College of Medicine, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, USA. lindsay.holmes@bcm.edu. (5)Department of Neurosurgery, The 
University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard,
Houston, TX, 77030, USA. vkhenry@mdanderson.org. (6)Department of Bioinformatics 
and Computational Biology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 
1881 East Road, Houston, TX, 77054, USA. QWang5@mdanderson.org. (7)Department of 
Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1515
Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX, 77030, USA. QWang5@mdanderson.org. (8)Department
of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1515
Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX, 77030, USA. klatha@mdanderson.org. (9)Department
of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1515
Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX, 77030, USA. Anupama.E.Gururaj@uth.tmc.edu.
(10)Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
lagibson@mdanderson.org. (11)Department of Cancer Biology, The University of
Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1881 East Road, Houston, TX, 77054, USA.
lagibson@mdanderson.org. (12)Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas 
M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
tifslater@hotmail.com. (13)Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas M.
D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
flang@mdanderson.org. (14)Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas M. 
D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
grao@mdanderson.org. (15)Department of Cancer Biology, The University of Texas M.
D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1881 East Road, Houston, TX, 77054, USA.
LYuan3@mdanderson.org. (16)Department of Radiation Oncology, The University of
Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX, 77030, 
USA. EPSulman@mdanderson.org. (17)Department of Chemistry, Virginia Commonwealth 
University, 901 West Franklin Street, Richmond, VA, 23284-9005, USA.
npfarrell@vcu.edu. (18)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The University of
Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1881 East Road, Houston, TX, 77054, USA.
wpriebe@mdanderson.org. (19)Department of Biostatistics, The University of Texas 
M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
khess@mdanderson.org. (20)Department of Cancer Biology, The University of Texas
M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1881 East Road, Houston, TX, 77054, USA.
yalanwang@mdanderson.org. (21)Department of Cancer Biology, The University of
Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1881 East Road, Houston, TX, 77054, USA.
JHu3@mdanderson.org. (22)Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas M.
D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
obogler@mdanderson.org. (23)The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center,
7007 Bertner Ave., Houston, TX, 77030, USA. obogler@mdanderson.org.

BACKGROUND: The majority of glioblastomas have aberrant receptor tyrosine kinase 
(RTK)/RAS/phosphoinositide 3 kinase (PI3K) signaling pathways and malignant
glioma cells are thought to be addicted to these signaling pathways for their
survival and proliferation. However, recent studies suggest that monotherapies or
inappropriate combination therapies using the molecular targeted drugs have
limited efficacy possibly because of tumor heterogeneities, signaling redundancy 
and crosstalk in intracellular signaling network, indicating necessity of
rationale and methods for efficient personalized combination treatments. Here, we
evaluated the growth of colonies obtained from glioma tumor-initiating cells
(GICs) derived from glioma sphere culture (GSC) in agarose and examined the
effects of combination treatments on GICs using targeted drugs that affect the
signaling pathways to which most glioma cells are addicted.
METHODS: Human GICs were cultured in agarose and treated with inhibitors of RTKs,
non-receptor kinases or transcription factors. The colony number and volume were 
analyzed using a colony counter, and Chou-Talalay combination indices were
evaluated. Autophagy and apoptosis were also analyzed. Phosphorylation of
proteins was evaluated by reverse phase protein array and immunoblotting.
RESULTS: Increases of colony number and volume in agarose correlated with the
Gompertz function. GICs showed diverse drug sensitivity, but inhibitions of RTK
and RAF/MEK or PI3K by combinations such as EGFR inhibitor and MEK inhibitor,
sorafenib and U0126, erlotinib and BKM120, and EGFR inhibitor and sorafenib
showed synergy in different subtypes of GICs. Combination of erlotinib and
sorafenib, synergistic in GSC11, induced apoptosis and autophagic cell death
associated with suppressed Akt and ERK signaling pathways and decreased nuclear
PKM2 and ß-catenin in vitro, and tended to improve survival of nude mice bearing 
GSC11 brain tumor. Reverse phase protein array analysis of the synergistic
treatment indicated involvement of not only MEK and PI3K signaling pathways but
also others associated with glucose metabolism, fatty acid metabolism, gene
transcription, histone methylation, iron transport, stress response, cell cycle, 
and apoptosis.
CONCLUSION: Inhibiting RTK and RAF/MEK or PI3K could induce synergistic
cytotoxicity but personalization is necessary. Examining colonies in agarose
initiated by GICs from each patient may be useful for drug sensitivity testing in
personalized cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC4746796
PMID: 26861698  [PubMed - in process]


21. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 9;6:21557. doi: 10.1038/srep21557.

Metabolic/Proteomic Signature Defines Two Glioblastoma Subtypes With Different
Clinical Outcome.

Marziali G(1), Signore M(1), Buccarelli M(1), Grande S(2), Palma A(2), Biffoni
M(1), Rosi A(2), D'Alessandris QG(3), Martini M(4), Larocca LM(4), De Maria R(5),
Pallini R(3), Ricci-Vitiani L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore 
di Sanità, Rome, Italy. (2)Department of Technology and Health, Istituto
Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy. (3)nstitute of Neurosurgery, Università
Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy. (4)Institute of Anatomic Pathology,
Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy. (5)Regina Elena National
Cancer Institute, Rome, Italy.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is one of the deadliest human cancers. Because of the
extremely unfavorable prognosis of GBM, it is important to develop more effective
diagnostic and therapeutic strategies based on biologically and clinically
relevant subclassification systems. Analyzing a collection of seventeen
patient-derived glioblastoma stem-like cells (GSCs) by gene expression profiling,
NMR spectroscopy and signal transduction pathway activation, we identified two
GSC clusters, one characterized by a pro-neural-like phenotype and the other
showing a mesenchymal-like phenotype. Evaluating the levels of proteins
differentially expressed by the two GSC clusters in the TCGA GBM sample
collection, we found that SRC activation is associated with a GBM subgroup
showing better prognosis whereas activation of RPS6, an effector of mTOR pathway,
identifies a subgroup with a worse prognosis. The two clusters are also
differentiated by NMR spectroscopy profiles suggesting a potential prognostic
stratification based on metabolic evaluation. Our data show that the
metabolic/proteomic profile of GSCs is informative of the genomic/proteomic GBM
landscape, which differs among tumor subtypes and is associated with clinical
outcome.

PMCID: PMC4746700
PMID: 26857460  [PubMed - in process]


22. Adv Gerontol. 2015;28(2):218-21.

[CHANGING OF THE MORPHOMETRIC AND CYTOLOGICAL INDEXES OF THE SPLEEN IN THE
CONDITION OF ACUTE BLOOD LOSS ON THE BACKGROUND OF STEM CELLS INSERTION].

[Article in Russian]

Maklakova IY, Yastrebov AP, Grebnev DY.

The objective of the work was to study morphometric and cytological indexes of
the spleen in mature and old laboratory animals after acute blood loss on the
background of allogenic transplantation of placenta MMSC and GSC. The study
proved that 5 days after acute blood loss on the background of stem cells
transplantations to the mature animals there was a reduction of lymphoid
follicles area due to reduction in thymus independent area. There were no
immunosuppressive effects to the white pulp of the spleen in old animals. The
increase of leucocytes' and erythrocytes' elements in red pulp in the mature
animals was noted. In old animals, the increase of cells' density in red pulp is 
mainly due to increased number of erythroid cells.

PMID: 26856082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Theor Appl Genet. 2016 Feb 5. [Epub ahead of print]

Resynthesis of Brassica napus through hybridization between B. juncea and B.
carinata.

Chatterjee D(1), Banga S(1), Gupta M(1), Bharti S(1), Salisbury PA(2), Banga
SS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Breeding and Genetics, Punjab Agricultural University,
Ludhiana, 141004, India. (2)Institute of Land and Food Resources, University of
Melbourne, Parkville, Australia. (3)Department of Plant Breeding and Genetics,
Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana, 141004, India. nppbg@pau.edu.

KEY MESSAGE: First report for the resynthesis of Brassica napus by recombining A 
and C genome from B. juncea and B. carinata , respectively. Also documents B
genome introgressions in resynthesized B. napus. Resynthesis of Brassica napus
(AACC) was achieved by hybridizing Brassica juncea (AABB) with Brassica carinata 
(BBCC). This was facilitated by spontaneous chromosome doubling in the F1 hybrid 
(ABBC) to yield octaploid (AABBBBCC), elimination of extra B genome chromosomes
in the resulting octaploid and in subsequent selfed generations, aided with
directed selection for fertile plants having B. napus morphology. Twenty-five
plants with varying degrees of resemblance to natural B. napus were identified
from 17 A5 progenies and assayed for cytogenetic stability and genetic diversity.
Majority of these plants, except six (2n = 38) were hyperploids (2n = 40-56). The
six plants with 2n = 38 were designated as derived B. napus types. These showed
an expected meiotic configuration of 19II at metaphase-I, with 19-19 distribution
at anaphase-I. Genotyping based on A and C genome specific primers confirmed
genetic identity of six derived (2n = 38) B. napus plants with natural types
whereas genotyping with B genome specific primers indicated introgression of B
genome segments. This was also confirmed by genomic in situ hybridization (GISH).
Strong signals of B genome probe were detected, proving hitherto unreported
genetic exchanges between B and A/C chromosomes. These introgressions possibly
occurred en route five generations of selfing. Derived plants yielded fertile
hybrids in crosses with natural B. napus var. GSC 6. The selfed derived plants as
evaluated in A6 plant to progeny rows were morphologically similar to natural B. 
napus, and meiotically stable. Agronomic assessment of these progenies revealed
variation for key morpho-physiological traits. Of special interest were the
progenies with plants having oil content exceeding 47 % as against about 39-41 % 
in existing cultivars.

PMID: 26849238  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


24. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 5;6:20632. doi: 10.1038/srep20632.

Silver nanoparticles disrupt germline stem cell maintenance in the Drosophila
testis.

Ong C(1), Lee QY(1), Cai Y(2,)(3), Liu X(4), Ding J(4), Yung LY(5), Bay BH(1),
Baeg GH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of
Singapore, Singapore 117594, Singapore. (2)Temasek Life Sciences Laboratory,
National University of Singapore, Singapore 117604, Singapore. (3)Department of
Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117543,
Singapore. (4)Department of Materials Science &Engineering, Faculty of
Engineering, National University of Singapore, 7 Engineering Drive 1, 117574,
Singapore. (5)Department of Chemical &Biomolecular Engineering, Faculty of
Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117576, Singapore.

Silver nanoparticles (AgNPs), one of the most popular nanomaterials, are commonly
used in consumer products and biomedical devices, despite their potential
toxicity. Recently, AgNP exposure was reported to be associated with male
reproductive toxicity in mammalian models. However, there is still a limited
understanding of the effects of AgNPs on spermatogenesis. The fruit fly
Drosophila testis is an excellent in vivo model to elucidate the mechanisms
underlying AgNP-induced defects in spermatogenesis, as germ lineages can be
easily identified and imaged. In this study, we evaluated AgNP-mediated toxicity 
on spermatogenesis by feeding Drosophila with AgNPs at various concentrations. We
first observed a dose-dependent uptake of AgNPs in vivo. Concomitantly, AgNP
exposure caused a significant decrease in the viability and delay in the
development of Drosophila in a dose-dependent manner. Furthermore, AgNP-treated
male flies showed a reduction in fecundity, and the resulting testes contained a 
decreased number of germline stem cells (GSCs) compared to controls.
Interestingly, testes exposed to AgNPs exhibited a dramatic increase in reactive 
oxygen species levels and showed precocious GSC differentiation. Taken together, 
our study suggests that AgNP exposure may increase ROS levels in the Drosophila
testis, leading to a reduction of GSC number by promoting premature GSC
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4742918
PMID: 26847594  [PubMed - in process]


25. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2016 Feb 26;471(1):75-81. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.01.176. Epub 2016 Feb 1.

G-quadruplex ligand-induced DNA damage response coupled with telomere dysfunction
and replication stress in glioma stem cells.

Hasegawa D(1), Okabe S(2), Okamoto K(2), Nakano I(3), Shin-Ya K(4), Seimiya H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biotherapy, Cancer Chemotherapy Center, Japanese
Foundation for Cancer Research, 3-8-31 Ariake, Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-8550, Japan;
Laboratory of Molecular Target Therapy of Cancer, Department of Computational
Biology and Medical Sciences, Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, The
University of Tokyo, 3-8-31 Ariake, Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-8550, Japan. (2)Division
of Molecular Biotherapy, Cancer Chemotherapy Center, Japanese Foundation for
Cancer Research, 3-8-31 Ariake, Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-8550, Japan. (3)Department of 
Neurosurgery, Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham,
1824 6th Avenue South, Birmingham, AL 35233, USA. (4)Biomedical Information
Research Center, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and
Technology, 2-4-7 Aomi, Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-0064, Japan. (5)Division of Molecular 
Biotherapy, Cancer Chemotherapy Center, Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research, 
3-8-31 Ariake, Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-8550, Japan; Laboratory of Molecular Target
Therapy of Cancer, Department of Computational Biology and Medical Sciences,
Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 3-8-31 Ariake,
Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-8550, Japan. Electronic address: hseimiya@jfcr.or.jp.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is an invariably fatal brain tumor in which a small
subpopulation of self-renewable glioma stem cells (GSCs) contributes to tumor
propagation and relapse. Targeting GSCs could therefore have a significant
clinical impact for GBM. Telomestatin is a naturally-occurring compound that
preferentially impairs GSC growth by perturbing transcription and inducing a DNA 
damage response. Telomestatin stabilizes G-quadruplexes (G4s), which are
guanine-rich four-strand nucleic acid structures observed in vitro and in vivo.
However, the mechanism underlying the GSC-selective nature of the DNA damage
response remains unknown. Here we demonstrate that GSCs are more susceptible to
telomestatin-induced telomere dysfunction and replication stress when compared
with GSC-derived non-stem glioma cells (NSGCs). Telomestatin induced dissociation
of the telomere-capping protein TRF2 from telomeres, leading to telomeric DNA
damage in GSCs-but not in NSGCs. BIBR1532, a telomerase catalytic inhibitor, did 
not preferentially inhibit GSC growth, suggesting that telomestatin promotes
telomere dysfunction in a telomerase-independent manner. GSCs and NSGCs had
comparable levels of G4s in their nuclei, and both responded to telomestatin with
phosphorylation of RPA2 at Ser33-a hallmark of replication stress. However,
activation of the checkpoint kinase Chk1, induction of a DNA damage response, and
subsequent growth inhibition occurred only in telomestatin-treated GSCs. These
observations suggest that telomestatin impairs GSC growth through removal of TRF2
from telomeres and potent activation of the replication stress response pathway. 
Therefore, a novel G4-directed therapeutic strategy could specifically target
cancer stem cells in GBM.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26845351  [PubMed - in process]


26. Nat Commun. 2016 Feb 3;7:10637. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10637.

Downregulation of TLX induces TET3 expression and inhibits glioblastoma stem cell
self-renewal and tumorigenesis.

Cui Q(1,)(2), Yang S(1,)(2), Ye P(1), Tian E(1), Sun G(1), Zhou J(3), Sun G(4),
Liu X(5), Chen C(5), Murai K(1), Zhao C(1), Azizian KT(3), Yang L(6), Warden
C(6), Wu X(6), D'Apuzzo M(7), Brown C(8), Badie B(9), Peng L(5), Riggs AD(4),
Rossi JJ(2,)(3), Shi Y(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Division of Stem Cell
Biology Research, Cancer Center, Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope, 1500
E. Duarte Road, Duarte, California 91010, USA. (2)Irell and Manella Graduate
School of Biological Sciences, Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope, 1500
E. Duarte Road, Duarte, California 91010, USA. (3)Department of Molecular and
Cellular Biology, Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope, 1500 E. Duarte
Road, Duarte, California 91010, USA. (4)Department of Diabetes and Metabolic
Diseases Research, Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope, 1500 E. Duarte
Road, Duarte, California 91010, USA. (5)Aix-Marseille Université, CNRS, UMR 7325,
Centre Interdisciplinaire de Nanoscience de Marseille, 13288 Marseille, France.
(6)Integrative Genomics Core, Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope, 1500 E.
Duarte Road, Duarte, California 91010, USA. (7)Department of Pathology, Beckman
Research Institute of City of Hope, 1500 E. Duarte Road, Duarte, California
91010, USA. (8)Department of Hematology and Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation,
Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope, 1500 E. Duarte Road, Duarte,
California 91010, USA. (9)Department of Surgery, Beckman Research Institute of
City of Hope, 1500 E. Duarte Road, Duarte, California 91010, USA.

Glioblastomas have been proposed to be maintained by highly tumorigenic
glioblastoma stem cells (GSCs) that are resistant to current therapy. Therefore, 
targeting GSCs is critical for developing effective therapies for glioblastoma.
In this study, we identify the regulatory cascade of the nuclear receptor TLX and
the DNA hydroxylase Ten eleven translocation 3 (TET3) as a target for human GSCs.
We show that knockdown of TLX expression inhibits human GSC tumorigenicity in
mice. Treatment of human GSC-grafted mice with viral vector-delivered TLX shRNA
or nanovector-delivered TLX siRNA inhibits tumour development and prolongs
survival. Moreover, we identify TET3 as a potent tumour suppressor downstream of 
TLX to regulate the growth and self-renewal in GSCs. This study identifies the
TLX-TET3 axis as a potential therapeutic target for glioblastoma.

PMCID: PMC4742843
PMID: 26838672  [PubMed - in process]


27. Stem Cells. 2016 Jan 29. doi: 10.1002/stem.2299. [Epub ahead of print]

A Synthetic Polymer Scaffold Reveals the Self-Maintenance Strategies of Rat
Glioma Stem Cells by Organization of the Advantageous Niche.

Tabu K(1), Muramatsu N(1), Mangani C(2), Wu M(2), Zhang R(2,)(3), Kimura T(4),
Terashima K(1), Bizen N(1), Kimura R(1), Wang W(1), Murota Y(1), Kokubu Y(1),
Nobuhisa I(1), Kagawa T(1), Kitabayashi I(5), Bradley M(2), Taga T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Regulation, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo Medical 
and Dental University (TMDU), Japan. (2)EaStChem, School of Chemistry, University
of Edinburgh, UK. (3)School of Materials Science and Engineering, Changzhou
University, China. (4)Department of Pathology, Laboratory of Cancer Research,
Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine, Japan. (5)Division of
Hematological Malignancy, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Japan.

Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are believed to be maintained within a
micro-environmental niche. Here we used polymer microarrays for the rapid and
efficient identification of glioma CSC (GSC) niche mimicries and identified a
urethane-based synthetic polymer, upon which two groups of niche components,
namely extracellular matrices (ECMs) and iron are revealed. In cultures, side
population (SP) cells, defined as GSCs in the rat C6 glioma cell line, are more
efficiently sustained in the presence of their differentiated progenies
expressing higher levels of ECMs and transferrin, while in xenografts, ECMs are
supplied by the vascular endothelial cells (VECs), including SP cell-derived ones
with distinctively greater ability to retain xenobiotics than host VECs. Iron is 
stored in tumor infiltrating host macrophages (Mfs), whose protumoral activity is
potently enhanced by SP cell-secreted soluble factor(s). Finally, co-expression
of ECM-, iron-, and Mf-related genes is found to be predictive of glioma
patients' outcome. Our polymer-based approach reveals the intrinsic capacities of
GSCs, to adapt the environment to organize a self-advantageous microenvironment
niche, for their maintenance and expansion, which redefines the current concept
of anti-CSC niche therapy and has the potential to accelerate cancer therapy
development. (190 words) This article is protected by copyright. All rights
reserved.

© 2016 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 26822103  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


28. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 25;11(1):e0147717. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0147717.
eCollection 2016.

Inhibition of Fatty Acid Synthase Decreases Expression of Stemness Markers in
Glioma Stem Cells.

Yasumoto Y(1,)(2), Miyazaki H(1,)(2), Vaidyan LK(1), Kagawa Y(1,)(2), Ebrahimi
M(1,)(2), Yamamoto Y(1), Ogata M(2), Katsuyama Y(2), Sadahiro H(3), Suzuki M(3), 
Owada Y(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organ Anatomy, Yamaguchi University Graduate School of Medicine,
Ube, Japan. (2)Department of Organ Anatomy, Tohoku University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Sendai, Japan. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, Yamaguchi University
Graduate School of Medicine, Ube, Japan.

Cellular metabolic changes, especially to lipid metabolism, have recently been
recognized as a hallmark of various cancer cells. However, little is known about 
the significance of cellular lipid metabolism in the regulation of biological
activity of glioma stem cells (GSCs). In this study, we examined the expression
and role of fatty acid synthase (FASN), a key lipogenic enzyme, in GSCs. In the
de novo lipid synthesis assay, GSCs exhibited higher lipogenesis than
differentiated non-GSCs. Western blot and immunocytochemical analyses revealed
that FASN is strongly expressed in multiple lines of patient-derived GSCs (G144
and Y10), but its expression was markedly reduced upon differentiation. When GSCs
were treated with 20 µM cerulenin, a pharmacological inhibitor of FASN, their
proliferation and migration were significantly suppressed and de novo lipogenesis
decreased. Furthermore, following cerulenin treatment, expression of the GSC
markers nestin, Sox2 and fatty acid binding protein (FABP7), markers of GCSs,
decreased while that of glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) expression
increased. Taken together, our results indicate that FASN plays a pivotal role in
the maintenance of GSC stemness, and FASN-mediated de novo lipid biosynthesis is 
closely associated with tumor growth and invasion in glioblastoma.

PMCID: PMC4726602
PMID: 26808816  [PubMed - in process]


29. Mol Biol Cell. 2016 Mar 15;27(6):888-96. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E15-07-0528. Epub 2016 
Jan 20.

Heparan sulfate regulates the number and centrosome positioning of Drosophila
male germline stem cells.

Levings DC(1), Arashiro T(1), Nakato H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Development, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN 55455. (2)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Development,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455 nakat003@umn.edu.

Stem cell division is tightly controlled via secreted signaling factors and cell 
adhesion molecules provided from local niche structures. Molecular mechanisms by 
which each niche component regulates stem cell behaviors remain to be elucidated.
Here we show that heparan sulfate (HS), a class of glycosaminoglycan chains,
regulates the number and asymmetric division of germline stem cells (GSCs) in the
Drosophila testis. We found that GSC number is sensitive to the levels of 6-O
sulfate groups on HS. Loss of 6-O sulfation also disrupted normal positioning of 
centrosomes, a process required for asymmetric division of GSCs. Blocking HS
sulfation specifically in the niche, termed the hub, led to increased GSC numbers
and mispositioning of centrosomes. The same treatment also perturbed the
enrichment of Apc2, a component of the centrosome-anchoring machinery, at the
hub-GSC interface. This perturbation of the centrosome-anchoring process
ultimately led to an increase in the rate of spindle misorientation and symmetric
GSC division. This study shows that specific HS modifications provide a novel
regulatory mechanism for stem cell asymmetric division. The results also suggest 
that HS-mediated niche signaling acts upstream of GSC division orientation
control.

© 2016 Levings et al. This article is distributed by The American Society for
Cell Biology under license from the author(s). Two months after publication it is
available to the public under an AttributionNoncommercialShare Alike 3.0
Unported Creative Commons License
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0).

PMCID: PMC4791133 [Available on 2016-05-30]
PMID: 26792837  [PubMed - in process]


30. Nat Commun. 2016 Jan 21;7:10473. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10473.

The novel tumour suppressor Madm regulates stem cell competition in the
Drosophila testis.

Singh SR(1), Liu Y(1), Zhao J(1), Zeng X(1), Hou SX(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Basic Research Laboratory, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes 
of Health, Frederick, Maryland 21702, USA.

Stem cell competition has emerged as a mechanism for selecting fit stem
cells/progenitors and controlling tumourigenesis. However, little is known about 
the underlying molecular mechanism. Here we identify Mlf1-adaptor molecule
(Madm), a novel tumour suppressor that regulates the competition between germline
stem cells (GSCs) and somatic cyst stem cells (CySCs) for niche occupancy. Madm
knockdown results in overexpression of the EGF receptor ligand vein (vn), which
further activates EGF receptor signalling and integrin expression non-cell
autonomously in CySCs to promote their overproliferation and ability to
outcompete GSCs for niche occupancy. Conversely, expressing a constitutively
activated form of the Drosophila JAK kinase (hop(Tum-l)) promotes Madm nuclear
translocation, and suppresses vn and integrin expression in CySCs that allows
GSCs to outcompete CySCs for niche occupancy and promotes GSC tumour formation.
Tumour suppressor-mediated stem cell competition presented here could be a
mechanism of tumour initiation in mammals.

PMCID: PMC4736159
PMID: 26792023  [PubMed - in process]


31. BJOG. 2016 Jan 18. doi: 10.1111/1471-0528.13864. [Epub ahead of print]

The G-spot: an observational MRI pilot study.

Maratos YK(1), Gombergh R(1), Cornier E(2), Minart JP(3), Amoretti N(4),
Mpotsaris A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Centre d'Imagerie Médicale Numérisée (CIMN), Paris, France. (2)Clinique de la 
Muette, Paris, France. (3)Paris Prévention, Paris, France. (4)Department of
Radiology, Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire de Nice, Nice, France. (5)Department of
Radiology and Neuroradiology, University Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.

OBJECTIVES: To identify a G-spot complex (GSC) in vivo in MRI examinations at 1.5
Tesla field strength.
DESIGN: Observational study.
SETTING: Single centre.
POPULATION: Twenty-one consecutive patients (January-March 2014).
METHODS: Imaging analysis of routine imaging protocols for usual medical
indications with and without concomitant opacification of the vaginal cavity with
inert ultrasound gel. The gel distends the otherwise collapsed vaginal walls,
allowing for an improved discrimination of anatomic features. The macroscopic and
histological results recently derived from the dissections of fresh cadavers by
Ostrzenski et al. were translated into imaging characteristics to be expected in 
the respective MRI sequences (e.g. T1- and T2-weighted) in search of an in vivo
correlate of the GSC. Age, menopause status, medical indication and diagnosis
were co-variables.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: To analyse primarily whether MRI imaging is able to depict
a distinct morphological entity in vivo matching the GSC, based on anatomical
descriptions published recently. The elaboration of an appropriate MRI-imaging
protocol was a secondary aim.
RESULTS: A total of 21 studies were obtained. A GSC was identified within the
anterior vaginal wall in 13/21 patients (62%). In all, 10/21 (48%) had vaginal
gel opacification. We identified a GSC in 10/10 patients (100%) with
opacification in all three planes of the T2 images. This was only true for 3/11
cases (27%) without opacification.
CONCLUSIONS: There is evidence for an in vivo morphological correlate to the
postmortem anatomical findings of a GSC described by Ostrzenski et al.; its
visibility in MRI imaging can be significantly improved with vaginal
opacification by ultrasound gel.
TWEETABLE ABSTRACT: Identification of G-spot by MRI with vaginal
gel-opacification in 13/21 patients.

© 2016 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists.

PMID: 26776843  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


32. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2016 Feb 5;470(2):275-81. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.01.071. Epub 2016 Jan 14.

Senescence from glioma stem cell differentiation promotes tumor growth.

Ouchi R(1), Okabe S(2), Migita T(2), Nakano I(3), Seimiya H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biotherapy, Cancer Chemotherapy Center, Japanese
Foundation for Cancer Research, 3-8-31 Ariake, Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-8550, Japan;
Laboratory of Molecular Target Therapy of Cancer, Department of Computational
Biology and Medical Sciences, Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, The
University of Tokyo, 3-8-31 Ariake, Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-8550, Japan. (2)Division
of Molecular Biotherapy, Cancer Chemotherapy Center, Japanese Foundation for
Cancer Research, 3-8-31 Ariake, Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-8550, Japan. (3)Department of 
Neurosurgery, Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham,
1824 6th Avenue South, Birmingham, AL 35233, USA. (4)Division of Molecular
Biotherapy, Cancer Chemotherapy Center, Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research, 
3-8-31 Ariake, Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-8550, Japan; Laboratory of Molecular Target
Therapy of Cancer, Department of Computational Biology and Medical Sciences,
Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 3-8-31 Ariake,
Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-8550, Japan. Electronic address: hseimiya@jfcr.or.jp.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is a lethal brain tumor composed of heterogeneous cellular
populations including glioma stem cells (GSCs) and differentiated non-stem glioma
cells (NSGCs). While GSCs are involved in tumor initiation and propagation,
NSGCs' role remains elusive. Here, we demonstrate that NSGCs undergo senescence
and secrete pro-angiogenic proteins, boosting the GSC-derived tumor formation
in vivo. We used a GSC model that maintains stemness in neurospheres, but loses
the stemness and differentiates into NSGCs upon serum stimulation. These NSGCs
downregulated telomerase, shortened telomeres, and eventually became senescent.
The senescent NSGCs released pro-angiogenic proteins, including vascular
endothelial growth factors and senescence-associated interleukins, such as IL-6
and IL-8. Conditioned medium from senescent NSGCs promoted proliferation of brain
microvascular endothelial cells, and mixed implantation of GSCs and senescent
NSGCs into mice enhanced the tumorigenic potential of GSCs. The senescent NSGCs
seem to be clinically relevant, because both clinical samples and xenografts of
GBM contained tumor cells that expressed the senescence markers. Our data suggest
that senescent NSGCs promote malignant progression of GBM in part via paracrine
effects of the secreted proteins.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26775840  [PubMed - in process]


33. Tumour Biol. 2016 Jan 15. [Epub ahead of print]

Alpinetin targets glioma stem cells by suppressing Notch pathway.

Wang J(1), Yan Z(1), Liu X(1), Che S(1), Wang C(1), Yao W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, the Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, 16 
Jiangsu Road, Qingdao, Shandong, 266003, China. (2)Department of Neurosurgery,
the Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, 16 Jiangsu Road, Qingdao,
Shandong, 266003, China. yaoweicheng888@163.com.

Glioma is among the most common human malignancies with poor prognosis. Glioma
stem cells (GSCs) are the culprit of glioma, suggesting that GSCs are potential
therapeutic targets. Notch signaling pathway plays a pivotal role for the
function of GSCs, implying that suppression of Notch pathway may be an effective 
strategy for GSC-targeting therapy. In this study, we found that alpinetin, a
natural compound, can suppress the proliferation and invasiveness of GSCs and
induce apoptosis in GSCs. Immunoblot analysis and luciferase assay revealed that 
Notch signaling was suppressed by alpinetin. Furthermore, restoration of Notch
signaling activity rescued the effect of alpinetin on GSC's function. The
anti-tumor activity of alpinetin was further confirmed in an animal model.
Collectively, targeting of GSC by alpinetin is an effective strategy for glioma
therapy.

PMID: 26768745  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


34. Proc Biol Sci. 2016 Jan 13;283(1822). pii: 20152128. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2015.2128.

Evolutionary origins of germline segregation in Metazoa: evidence for a germ stem
cell lineage in the coral Orbicella faveolata (Cnidaria, Anthozoa).

Barfield S(1), Aglyamova GV(2), Matz MV(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX
78712, USA sbarfield@utexas.edu. (2)Department of Integrative Biology, University
of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA.

The ability to segregate a committed germ stem cell (GSC) lineage distinct from
somatic cell lineages is a characteristic of bilaterian Metazoans. However, the
occurrence of GSC lineage specification in basally branching Metazoan phyla, such
as Cnidaria, is uncertain. Without an independently segregated GSC lineage, germ 
cells and their precursors must be specified throughout adulthood from
continuously dividing somatic stem cells, generating the risk of propagating
somatic mutations within the individual and its gametes. To address the potential
for existence of a GSC lineage in Anthozoa, the sister-group to all remaining
Cnidaria, we identified moderate- to high-frequency somatic mutations and their
potential for gametic transfer in the long-lived coral Orbicella faveolata
(Anthozoa, Cnidaria) using a 2b-RAD sequencing approach. Our results demonstrate 
that somatic mutations can drift to high frequencies (up to 50%) and can also
generate substantial intracolonial genetic diversity. However, these somatic
mutations are not transferable to gametes, signifying the potential for an
independently segregated GSC lineage in O. faveolata. In conjunction with
previous research on germ cell development in other basally branching Metazoan
species, our results suggest that the GSC system may be a Eumetazoan
characteristic that evolved in association with the emergence of greater
complexity in animal body plan organization and greater specificity of stem cell 
functions.

© 2016 The Author(s).

PMCID: PMC4721087 [Available on 2017-01-13]
PMID: 26763699  [PubMed - in process]


35. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 2;7(5):6121-35. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6847.

Preferential expression of functional IL-17R in glioma stem cells: potential role
in self-renewal.

Parajuli P(1), Anand R(1), Mandalaparty C(1), Suryadevara R(1), Sriranga PU(1),
Michelhaugh SK(1), Cazacu S(2), Finniss S(2), Thakur A(3), Lum LG(3,)(4), Schalk 
D(3), Brodie C(2), Mittal S(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Wayne State University and Karmanos Cancer
Institute, Detroit, MI, USA. (2)Hermelin Brain Tumor Center, Henry Ford Hospital,
Detroit, MI, USA. (3)Department of Oncology, Wayne State University and Karmanos 
Cancer Institute, Detroit, MI, USA. (4)Departments of Internal Medicine,
Immunology and Microbiology and Pediatrics, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, 
USA.

Gliomas are the most common primary brain tumor and one of the most lethal solid 
tumors. Mechanistic studies into identification of novel biomarkers are needed to
develop new therapeutic strategies for this deadly disease. The objective for
this study was to explore the potential direct impact of IL-17-IL-17R interaction
in gliomas. Immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry analysis of 12 tumor samples 
obtained from patients with high grade gliomas revealed that a considerable
population (2-19%) of cells in all malignant gliomas expressed IL-17RA, with
remarkable co-expression of the glioma stem cell (GSC) markers CD133, Nestin, and
Sox2. IL-17 enhanced the self-renewal of GSCs as determined by proliferation and 
Matrigel® colony assays. IL-17 also induced cytokine/chemokine (IL-6, IL-8,
interferon-<U+03B3>-inducible protein [IP-10], and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1
[MCP-1]) secretion in GSCs, which were differentially blocked by antibodies
against IL-17R and IL-6R. Western blot analysis showed that IL-17 modulated the
activity of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), nuclear
factor <U+03BA>-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NF-<U+03BA>B), glycogen synthase
kinase-3ß (GSK-3ß) and ß-catenin in GSCs. While IL-17R-mediated secretion of IL-6
and IL-8 were significantly blocked by inhibitors of NF-<U+03BA>B and STAT3; NF-<U+03BA>B
inhibitor was more potent than STAT3 inhibitor in blocking IL-17-induced MCP-1
secretion. Overall, our results suggest that IL-17-IL-17R interaction in GSCs
induces an autocrine/paracrine cytokine feedback loop, which may provide an
important signaling component for maintenance/self-renewal of GSCs via
constitutive activation of both NF-<U+03BA>B and STAT3. The results also strongly
implicate IL-17R as an important functional biomarker for therapeutic targeting
of GSCs.

PMID: 26755664  [PubMed - in process]


36. Eur Cell Mater. 2016 Jan 5;30:40-58.

Characterisation of human gingival neural crest-derived stem cells in monolayer
and neurosphere cultures.

Fournier BP(1), Loison-Robert LS, Ferré FC, Owen GR, Larjava H, Häkkinen L.

Author information: 
(1)University of British Columbia, Faculty of Dentistry, Department of Oral
Biological and Medical Sciences, 2199 Wesbrook Mall, Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z3
Canada.lhakkine@dentistry.ubc.ca.

Neural crest (NC)-derived stem cells (NCSC) have an exceptionally wide
differentiation potential, but their use in regenerative therapy has been
hampered by their scarcity in adult tissues and complex isolation protocols.
Human oral mucosal gingiva may provide an attractive source of these cells as it 
contains NC-derived cells, the tissue is easily accessible and wound healing is
fast and scarless with very little morbidity. To this end, we first investigated 
whether NC-derived cells are retained in adult gingiva by examining 8-months-old 
NC-reporter Wnt1-Cre/R26RYFP mice. We then hypothesised that gingival cell
NC-like phenotype can be further enhanced by floating neurosphere cultures
generated from standard human gingival fibroblast (GF) and pooled CFU-F (GSC)
cultures. Findings showed that NC-derived cells are retained in the gingival
connective tissue of aged mice. Human GFs and GSCs expressed NC-related genes
nestin, Snai1, Twist1, Pax3, Sox9 and FoxD3, and generated neurospheres. This was
mediated via calcium- and connexin 43-dependent cell communication, which is
similar to neurospheres formed by neural progenitors. Cells in the spheres showed
significantly increased expression of NC-related genes, and down regulation of
fibroblast-related type I collagen. Structurally, the neurospheres were polarised
with nestin positive cells located on the outer layers underlined with an
extracellular matrix rich in molecules typical to embryonic NC. Sphere-derived
cells expressed significantly elevated levels of neural markers, and
differentiated into Tau, neurofilament-M and GFAP-positive cells suggesting
neural differentiation potential. Thus, human GF and GSC cultures may provide an 
efficient source of NC-derived cells via enrichment by floating sphere cultures.

PMID: 26728498  [PubMed - in process]


37. PLoS Genet. 2015 Dec 29;11(12):e1005750. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005750.
eCollection 2015.

The Nuclear Matrix Protein Megator Regulates Stem Cell Asymmetric Division
through the Mitotic Checkpoint Complex in Drosophila Testes.

Liu Y(1), Singh SR(1), Zeng X(1), Zhao J(1), Hou SX(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Basic Research Laboratory, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes 
of Health, Frederick, Maryland, United States of America.

In adult Drosophila testis, asymmetric division of germline stem cells (GSCs) is 
specified by an oriented spindle and cortically localized adenomatous coli tumor 
suppressor homolog 2 (Apc2). However, the molecular mechanism underlying these
events remains unclear. Here we identified Megator (Mtor), a nuclear matrix
protein, which regulates GSC maintenance and asymmetric division through the
spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) complex. Loss of Mtor function results in Apc2 
mis-localization, incorrect centrosome orientation, defective mitotic spindle
formation, and abnormal chromosome segregation that lead to the eventual GSC
loss. Expression of mitotic arrest-deficient-2 (Mad2) and monopolar spindle 1
(Mps1) of the SAC complex effectively rescued the GSC loss phenotype associated
with loss of Mtor function. Collectively our results define a new role of the
nuclear matrix-SAC axis in regulating stem cell maintenance and asymmetric
division.

PMCID: PMC4703072
PMID: 26714316  [PubMed - in process]


38. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 29;10(12):e0145417. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145417.
eCollection 2015.

Specific Tandem 3'UTR Patterns and Gene Expression Profiles in Mouse Thy1+
Germline Stem Cells.

Huang Y(1), Xiong Y(1,)(2), Lin Z(1), Feng X(1), Jiang X(1), Songyang Z(1), Huang
J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine of Guangdong Province, the First
Affiliated Hospital and Key Laboratory of Gene Engineering of the Ministry of
Education, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, 51000,
China. (2)SYSU-CMU Shunde International Joint Research Institute, Shunde, China.

A recently developed strategy of sequencing alternative polyadenylation (APA)
sites (SAPAS) with second-generation sequencing technology can be used to explore
complete genome-wide patterns of tandem APA sites and global gene expression
profiles. spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs) maintain long-term reproductive
abilities in male mammals. The detailed mechanisms by which SSCs self-renew and
generate mature spermatozoa are not clear. To understand the specific alternative
polyadenylation pattern and global gene expression profile of male germline stem 
cells (GSCs, mainly referred to SSCs here), we isolated and purified mouse Thy1+ 
cells from testis by magnetic-activated cell sorting (MACS) and then used the
SAPAS method for analysis, using pluripotent embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and
differentiated mouse embryonic fibroblast cells (MEFs) as controls. As a result, 
we obtained 99,944 poly(A) sites, approximately 40% of which were newly detected 
in our experiments. These poly(A) sites originated from three mouse cell types
and covered 17,499 genes, including 831 long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) genes. We
observed that GSCs tend to have shorter 3'UTR lengths while MEFs tend towards
longer 3'UTR lengths. We also identified 1337 genes that were highly expressed in
GSCs, and these genes were highly consistent with the functional characteristics 
of GSCs. Our detailed bioinformatics analysis identified APA site-switching
events at 3'UTRs and many new specifically expressed genes in GSCs, which we
experimentally confirmed. Furthermore, qRT-PCR was performed to validate several 
events of the 334 genes with distal-to-proximal poly(A) switch in GSCs.
Consistently APA reporter assay confirmed the total 3'UTR shortening in GSCs
compared to MEFs. We also analyzed the cis elements around the proximal poly(A)
site preferentially used in GSCs and found C-rich elements may contribute to this
regulation. Overall, our results identified the expression level and
polyadenylation site profiles and these data provide new insights into the
processes potentially involved in the GSC life cycle and spermatogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4699828
PMID: 26713853  [PubMed - in process]


39. Exp Cell Res. 2016 Jan 1;340(1):53-61. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2015.12.010. Epub
2015 Dec 19.

Wnt inhibition is dysregulated in gliomas and its re-establishment inhibits
proliferation and tumor sphere formation.

Kierulf-Vieira KS(1), Sandberg CJ(1), Grieg Z(1), Günther CC(2), Langmoen IA(3), 
Vik-Mo EO(3).

Author information: 
(1)Vilhelm Magnus Lab, Institute for Surgical Research and Department of
Neurosurgery, Oslo University Hospital, P.O. Box 4950 Nydalen, 0424 Oslo, Norway;
Cancer Stem Cell Innovation Center (CAST), Oslo University Hospital and
University of Oslo, Gaustadalléen 34, 0372 Oslo, Norway; Norwegian Stem Cell
Center, Oslo University Hospital and University of Oslo, P.O. Box 1112 Blindern, 
0317 Oslo, Norway. (2)Norwegian Computing Center, P.O. Box 114 Blindern, 0314
Oslo, Norway. (3)Vilhelm Magnus Lab, Institute for Surgical Research and
Department of Neurosurgery, Oslo University Hospital, P.O. Box 4950 Nydalen, 0424
Oslo, Norway; Cancer Stem Cell Innovation Center (CAST), Oslo University Hospital
and University of Oslo, Gaustadalléen 34, 0372 Oslo, Norway; Norwegian Stem Cell 
Center, Oslo University Hospital and University of Oslo, P.O. Box 1112 Blindern, 
0317 Oslo, Norway; Department of Neurosurgery, Oslo University Hospital, P.O. Box
4950/4956 Nydalen, 0424 Oslo, Norway.

Evidence indicates that the growth of glioblastoma (GBM), the most common and
malignant primary brain cancer, is driven by glioma stem cells (GSCs) resistant
to current treatment. As Wnt-signaling is pivotal in stem cell maintenance, we
wanted to explore its role in GSCs with the objective of finding distinct
signaling mechanisms that could serve as potential therapeutic targets. We
compared gene expression in GSCs (n=9) and neural stem cells from the adult human
brain (ahNSC; n=3) to identify dysregulated genes in the Wnt signaling pathway.
This identified a six-gene Wnt signature present in all nine primary GSC
cultures, and the combined expression of three of these genes (SFRP1, SFRP4 and
FZD7) reduced median survival of glioma patients from 38 to 17 months. Treatment 
with recombinant SFRP1 protein in primary cell cultures downregulated nuclear
ß-catenin and decreased in vitro proliferation and sphere formation in a
dose-dependent manner. Furthermore, expressional and functional analysis of
SFRP1-treated GSCs revealed that SFRP1 halts cell cycling and induces apoptosis. 
These observations demonstrate that Wnt signaling is dysregulated in GSC, and
that inhibition of the Wnt pathway could serve as a therapeutic strategy in the
treatment of GBM.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26712519  [PubMed - in process]


40. Stem Cell Reports. 2016 Jan 12;6(1):35-43. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2015.11.007.
Epub 2015 Dec 17.

Epigenetic Aberrations Are Not Specific to Transcription Factor-Mediated
Reprogramming.

Tiemann U(1), Wu G(2), Marthaler AG(2), Schöler HR(3), Tapia N(4).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University, Moorenstraße 5, 40225 Düsseldorf, 
Germany. (2)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Max Planck Institute
for Molecular Biomedicine, Röntgenstraße 20, 48149 Münster, Germany.
(3)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Max Planck Institute for
Molecular Biomedicine, Röntgenstraße 20, 48149 Münster, Germany; Medical Faculty,
University of Münster, Domagkstraße 3, 48149 Münster, Germany. Electronic
address: office@mpi-muenster.mpg.de. (4)Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine
University, Moorenstraße 5, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany. Electronic address:
natalia.tapia@med.uni-duesseldorf.de.

Somatic cells can be reprogrammed to pluripotency using different methods. In
comparison with pluripotent cells obtained through somatic nuclear transfer,
induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) exhibit a higher number of epigenetic
errors. Furthermore, most of these abnormalities have been described to be
intrinsic to the iPSC technology. Here, we investigate whether the aberrant
epigenetic patterns detected in iPSCs are specific to transcription
factor-mediated reprogramming. We used germline stem cells (GSCs), which are the 
only adult cell type that can be converted into pluripotent cells (gPSCs) under
defined culture conditions, and compared GSC-derived iPSCs and gPSCs at the
transcriptional and epigenetic level. Our results show that both reprogramming
methods generate indistinguishable states of pluripotency. GSC-derived iPSCs and 
gPSCs retained similar levels of donor cell-type memory and exhibited comparable 
numbers of reprogramming errors. Therefore, our study demonstrates that the
epigenetic abnormalities detected in iPSCs are not specific to transcription
factor-mediated reprogramming.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4720011
PMID: 26711876  [PubMed - in process]


41. Cancer Lett. 2016 Feb 28;371(2):274-84. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2015.12.012. Epub
2015 Dec 17.

Knockdown of Cathepsin L promotes radiosensitivity of glioma stem cells both in
vivo and in vitro.

Wang W(1), Long L(1), Wang L(1), Tan C(2), Fei X(3), Chen L(4), Huang Q(5), Liang
Z(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Soochow
University, Suzhou, China. (2)Department of Pharmacology, College of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Soochow University, Suzhou, China; Department of
Pharmacy, Affiliated Hospital of Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, China.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, Suzhou Kowloon Hospital of Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Suzhou, China. (4)Department of Radiotherapy, the 
Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, China. (5)Department of
Neurosurgery, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou,
China. (6)Department of Pharmacology, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Soochow
University, Suzhou, China. Electronic address: liangzhongqin@suda.edu.cn.

The presence of glioma stem cells (GSCs) in tumor is relevant for glioma
treatment resistance. This study assessed whether knockdown of Cathepsin L can
influence GSC growth, tumor radiosensitivity, and clinical outcome. Protein
levels of Cathepsin L and stem cell markers (CD133 and Nestin) were analyzed in
samples from 90 gliomas of different WHO grades and 6 normal brain tissues by
immunohistochemistry. Two glioma stem cell lines with overexpressed Cathepsin L
were stably transfected with Cathepsin L short hairpin RNA expression vectors.
The effects of Cathepsin L inhibition on radiosensitivity, self-renewal,
stemness, DNA damage, and apoptosis were evaluated. In addition, an intracranial 
animal model and subcutaneous tumor xenografts in nude mice were used to assess
tumor response to Cathepsin L inhibition in vivo. Our results proved that
expressions of Cathepsin L and CD133, but not of Nestin, correlated with
malignant grades of glioma tissues. GSCs with high Cathepsin L and CD133
co-expression were extraordinarily radioresistant. Cathepsin L inhibition with
radiotherapy significantly reduced GSC growth, promoted apoptosis, and improved
radiosensitivity. Knockdown of Cathepsin L resulted in a dramatic reduction of
CD133 expression, as well as the decreased phosphorylation of DNA repair
checkpoint proteins (ATM and DNA-PKcs). Furthermore, combination of Cathepsin L
inhibition and radiotherapy potently blocked tumor growth and decreased blood
vessel formation in vivo. Taken together, these findings suggest Cathepsin L as a
promising therapeutic target for clinical therapy in GBM patients.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26706414  [PubMed - in process]


42. J Pharmacol Sci. 2015 Dec;129(4):216-25. doi: 10.1016/j.jphs.2015.11.001. Epub
2015 Nov 10.

Resveratrol, a potential radiation sensitizer for glioma stem cells both in vitro
and in vivo.

Wang L(1), Long L(1), Wang W(1), Liang Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Soochow
University, Suzhou 215123, PR China. (2)Department of Pharmacology, College of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, PR China. Electronic 
address: liangzhongqin@suda.edu.cn.

Glioblastoma is a malignant human cancer that confers a dismal prognosis.
Ionizing radiation (IR) is applied as the standard treatment for malignant
gliomas. However, radiotherapy remains merely palliative because of the existence
of glioma stem cells (GSCs), which are regarded as highly radioresistant "seed"
cells. In this study, the effect and possible mechanisms of radiotherapy in
combination with resveratrol (Res) were investigated in a radioresistant GSC
line, SU-2. Our results showed that Res inhibited SU-2 proliferation and enhanced
radiosensitivity as indicated by clonogenic survival assay. We also observed a
decrease in the expression of neural stem cell marker CD133, which indicated that
treatment with Res and IR induced SU-2 cell differentiation. In addition, the
combination of Res with IR significantly increased autophagy and apoptosis levels
in both in vitro cells and nude mouse model. Finally, Res significantly
attenuated the repair of radiation-induced DNA damage. Taken together, the
present study demonstrated that the significant radiosensitization ability of Res
both in vitro and in vivo was attributed to its synergistic antitumor effects,
including inhibition of self-renewal and stemness, induction of autophagy,
promotion of apoptosis, and prevention of DNA repair. Therefore, Res may function
as a radiation sensitizer for malignant glioma treatment.

Copyright © 2015 Japanese Pharmacological Society. Production and hosting by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26698406  [PubMed - in process]


43. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Dec 12. pii: S0006-291X(15)31031-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.12.022. [Epub ahead of print]

Cancer stem cell-vascular endothelial cell interactions in glioblastoma.

Sharma A(1), Shiras A(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Cell Science (NCCS), SP Pune University Campus,
Ganeshkhind, Pune 411007, India. Electronic address: amans@nccs.res.in.
(2)National Centre for Cell Science (NCCS), SP Pune University Campus,
Ganeshkhind, Pune 411007, India. Electronic address: anjali@nccs.res.in.

Glioblastoma (GBM), a higher grade glial tumor, is highly aggressive, therapy
resistant and often shows poor patient prognosis due to frequent recurrence.
These features of GBM are attributed to presence of a significantly smaller
proportion of glioma stem cells (GSCs) that are endowed with self-renewal
ability, multi-potent nature and show resistance to therapy in patients. GSCs
preferably take shelter close to tumor vasculature due to paracrine need of
soluble factors secreted by endothelial cells (ECs) of vasculature. The physical 
proximity of GSCs to ECs creates a localized perivascular niche where mutual
GSC-EC interactions regulate GSC stemness, migration, therapy resistance, and
cellular kinetics during tumor growth. Together, perivascular niche presents a
therapeutically targetable tumor structure for clinical management of GBM. Thus, 
understanding cellular and non-cellular components in perivascular niche is vital
for designing in vitro and in vivo GBM tumor models. Here, we discuss the
components and structure of tumor vascular niche and its impact on tumor
progression.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 26692486  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


44. Chembiochem. 2016 Mar 2;17(5):378-82. doi: 10.1002/cbic.201500673. Epub 2016 Feb 
2.

Cyclic Peptides Made by Linking Synthetic and Genetically Encoded Fragments.

Palei S(1), Mootz HD(2).

Author information: 
(1)International Graduate School of Chemistry (GSC-MS), Institute of
Biochemistry, University of Muenster, Wilhelm-Klemm-Strasse 2, 48149, Münster,
Germany. (2)International Graduate School of Chemistry (GSC-MS), Institute of
Biochemistry, University of Muenster, Wilhelm-Klemm-Strasse 2, 48149, Münster,
Germany. Henning.Mootz@uni-muenster.de.

Cyclic peptides can be highly valuable as bioactive molecules, both for
biomedical applications and in basic research. We introduce a new fragment-based 
approach to access cyclic peptide structures in which one fragment is of
synthetic origin and the other is genetically encoded. The synthetic peptide,
which can contain one or more non-proteinogenic building blocks, is coupled to
the recombinantly expressed peptide through two bonds, one formed by protein
trans-splicing with a split intein and the other by oxime ligation. Semisynthetic
macrocycles were obtained with high efficiency for various sequences and ring
sizes; they can be prepared in quantities sufficient for initial bioactivity
tests. We also prepared lipidated and d-amino-acid-containing peptides that were 
inspired by the peptide antibiotic daptomycin. Such structures are not accessible
by other methods that harness the power of simple genetic diversification in the 
DNA-encoded part of the peptide.

© 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26691013  [PubMed - in process]


45. Cancer Lett. 2016 Feb 28;371(2):240-50. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2015.11.040. Epub
2015 Dec 9.

A novel drug conjugate, NEO212, targeting proneural and mesenchymal subtypes of
patient-derived glioma cancer stem cells.

Jhaveri N(1), Agasse F(2), Armstrong D(3), Peng L(4), Commins D(1), Wang W(2),
Rosenstein-Sisson R(1), Vaikari VP(5), Santiago SV(1), Santos T(1), Chen L(4),
Schönthal AH(5), Chen TC(6), Hofman FM(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, Keck School of
Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (3)University 
of California Riverside, USA. (4)Department of Neurosurgery, Luzhou Medical
University, Sichuan, China. (5)Department of Molecular Microbiology and
Immunology, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA, USA. (6)Department of Pathology, Keck School of Medicine, University
of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA; Department of Neurosurgery, Keck
School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
Electronic address: tcchen@med.usc.edu. (7)Department of Pathology, Keck School
of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA; Department 
of Neurosurgery, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA. Electronic address: hofman@usc.edu.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), a highly malignant brain tumor, accounts for half 
of all gliomas. Despite surgery, radiation and chemotherapy, the median survival 
is between 12 and 15 months. The poor prognosis is due to tumor recurrence
attributed to chemoresistant glioma cancer stem cells (GSCs). Here we examined
the effects of a novel compound NEO212, which is composed of two covalently
conjugated anti-cancer compounds - temozolomide (TMZ) and perillyl alcohol (POH),
on GSCs expressing either the proneural or mesenchymal gene signatures. These
GSCs were obtained from patient-derived tumor tissue. Our findings demonstrate
that NEO212 is 10 fold more cytotoxic to GSCs than TMZ (standard-of-care).
Furthermore, NEO212 is effective against both proneural and clinically aggressive
mesenchymal GSC subtypes. The mechanism of NEO212 mediated-cytotoxicity is
through double-strand DNA breaks and apoptosis. In vivo studies show that NEO212 
significantly delays tumor growth of both proneural and mesenchymal tumor stem
cell populations. Patient-derived GSCs and tumors derived from these cells are
highly reflective of the heterogeneity in human GBM. The efficacy of NEO212
against both GSC subtypes indicates that NEO212 has great clinical potential to
effectively target GBM.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26683773  [PubMed - in process]


46. Neuro Oncol. 2015 Dec 18. pii: nov310. [Epub ahead of print]

Bone morphogenetic protein signaling promotes tumorigenesis in a murine model of 
high-grade glioma.

Hover LD(1), Owens P(1), Munden AL(1), Wang J(1), Chambless LB(1), Hopkins CR(1),
Hong CC(1), Moses HL(1), Abel TW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee (L.D.H., T.W.A.); Department of Cancer
Biology and Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, Tennessee (P.O., H.L.M.); Department of Neurology, Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee (A.M.); Department of
Neurological Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee 
(J.W., L.C.); Department of Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, Tennessee (C.H.); Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of
Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee (C.C.H.);
Vanderbilt Institute of Chemical Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center
(C.C.H.); Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, Tennessee (C.C.H.); Research Medicine, Veterans Affairs Tennessee
Valley Healthcare System, Nashville, Tennessee (C.C.H.).

BACKGROUND: Improved therapies for high-grade glioma (HGG) are urgently needed as
the median survival for grade IV gliomas is only 15 months. Bone morphogenetic
protein (BMP) signaling plays critical and complex roles in many types of cancer,
including glioma, with most of the recently published work focusing on
BMP-mediated regulation of glioma stem cells (GSCs). We hypothesized that BMP
signaling may be an important modulator of tumorigenic properties in glioma cells
outside of the GSC compartment.
METHODS: We used a human HGG tissue microarray and performed immunohistochemistry
for phospho-Smads1,5,8. To examine the role of BMP signaling in tumorigenic
astrocytes, transgenic mice were used to delete the BMP type IA receptor (Bmpr1a)
and generate astrocytes transformed with oncogenic Ras and homozygous deletion of
p53. The cells were transplanted orthotopically into immunocompetent adult host
mice.
RESULTS: First we established that BMP signaling is active within the vast
majority of HGG tumor cells. Mice implanted with BMPR1a-knockout transformed
astrocytes showed an increase in median survival compared with mice that received
BMPR1a-intact transformed astrocytes (52.5 vs 16 days). In vitro analysis showed 
that deletion of BMPR1a in oncogenic astrocytes resulted in decreased
proliferation, decreased invasion, decreased migration, and increased expression 
of stemness markers. In addition, inhibition of BMP signaling in murine cells and
astrocytoma cells with a small molecule BMP receptor kinase inhibitor resulted in
similar tumor suppressive effects in vitro.
CONCLUSION: BMP inhibition may represent a viable therapeutic approach in adult
HGG.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Neuro-Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26683138  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


47. Stem Cells. 2015 Dec 16. doi: 10.1002/stem.2269. [Epub ahead of print]

Tumor Specific Recruitment and Reprogramming of Mesenchymal Stem Cells in
Tumorigenesis.

Berger L(1), Shamai Y(1), Skorecki K(1,)(2), Tzukerman M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Rappaport Faculty of Medicine and Research Institute, Technion-Israel
Institute of Technology, Haifa, 31096, Israel. (2)Rambam Medical Center, Haifa,
31096, Israel.

Non-neoplastic stromal cells harvested from patient tumors were identified as
tumor-derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells (MSC) by their multi-potential capacity to
differentiate into adipocytes, osteoblasts and chondrocytes and by the expression
of MSC specific cell surface markers. These procedures yielded also epithelial
cancer cells and their counterpart MSC from gastric carcinoma (GSC1) and lung
carcinoma (LC2). While the LC2 cancer cell growth is independent of their LC-MSC,
the GSC1 cancer cell growth is critically dependent on the presence of their
counterpart GSC-MSC or their conditioned medium (CM). The fact that none of the
various other tumor-derived MSC were able to restore the specific effect of
GSC-MSC on GSC1 cancer cell growth suggests specificity of tumor-derived MSC,
which are specifically recruited and 'educated'/reprogrammed by the cancer cells 
to support tumor growth. Using cytokine array analysis, we were able to
demonstrate that GSC1 cell growth is mediated through HGF/c-MET signaling pathway
which is activated exclusively by HGF secreted from GSC-MSC. An innovative
approach demonstrates GSC1-mediated specific tropism of 'naïve' MSC from the
adjacent tissue in a tumor specific manner to support tumor progression. The
results suggest that specific tumor tropic 'naïve' MSC are reprogrammed in a
tumor-specific manner to support gastric tumor progression. Understanding the
mechanisms involved in the interactions of the tumor cancer cells and
tumor-derived MSC will constitute the basis for developing multimodal anti-cancer
therapeutic strategies that will also take into account the specific tumor
tropism properties of MSC and their reprogramming. This article is protected by
copyright. All rights reserved.

© 2015 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 26676563  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


48. Cell Rep. 2015 Dec 22;13(11):2425-39. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.11.021. Epub
2015 Dec 7.

Genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 Screens Reveal Loss of Redundancy between PKMYT1 and WEE1
in Glioblastoma Stem-like Cells.

Toledo CM(1), Ding Y(2), Hoellerbauer P(1), Davis RJ(3), Basom R(4), Girard
EJ(5), Lee E(6), Corrin P(2), Hart T(7), Bolouri H(2), Davison J(4), Zhang Q(4), 
Hardcastle J(2), Aronow BJ(8), Plaisier CL(9), Baliga NS(9), Moffat J(7), Lin
Q(10), Li XN(10), Nam DH(11), Lee J(12), Pollard SM(13), Zhu J(6), Delrow JJ(4), 
Clurman BE(14), Olson JM(15), Paddison PJ(16).

Author information: 
(1)Human Biology Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA
98109, USA; Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA 98195, USA. (2)Human Biology Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer
Research Center, Seattle, WA 98109, USA. (3)Human Biology Division, Fred
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA 98109, USA; Molecular and Cellular
Biology Program, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA; Clinical
Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA 98109,
USA. (4)Genomics and Bioinformatics Shared Resources, Fred Hutchinson Cancer
Research Center, Seattle, WA 98109, USA. (5)Clinical Research Division, Fred
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA 98109, USA. (6)Department of
Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn Institute of Genomics and Multiscale
Biology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA.
(7)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto and Donnelly Centre,
Toronto, ON M5S3E1, Canada; Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, Toronto, ON
M5G1Z8, Canada. (8)Division of Biomedical Informatics, Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA. (9)Institute for Systems
Biology, Seattle, WA 98109, USA. (10)Brain Tumor Program, Texas Children's Cancer
Center, Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, 
USA. (11)Institute for Refractory Cancer Research, Samsung Medical Center, Seoul 
135-710, Korea. (12)Department of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine,
Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44192, USA.
(13)Edinburgh CRUK Cancer Research Centre and MRC Centre for Regenerative
Medicine, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH16 4UU, UK. (14)Human Biology 
Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA 98109, USA;
Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA
98109, USA. (15)Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research
Center, Seattle, WA 98109, USA. Electronic address: jolson@fredhutch.org.
(16)Human Biology Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA
98109, USA; Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA 98195, USA. Electronic address: paddison@fredhutch.org.

To identify therapeutic targets for glioblastoma (GBM), we performed genome-wide 
CRISPR-Cas9 knockout (KO) screens in patient-derived GBM stem-like cells (GSCs)
and human neural stem/progenitors (NSCs), non-neoplastic stem cell controls, for 
genes required for their in vitro growth. Surprisingly, the vast majority
GSC-lethal hits were found outside of molecular networks commonly altered in GBM 
and GSCs (e.g., oncogenic drivers). In vitro and in vivo validation of
GSC-specific targets revealed several strong hits, including the wee1-like
kinase, PKMYT1/Myt1. Mechanistic studies demonstrated that PKMYT1 acts
redundantly with WEE1 to inhibit cyclin B-CDK1 activity via CDK1-Y15
phosphorylation and to promote timely completion of mitosis in NSCs. However, in 
GSCs, this redundancy is lost, most likely as a result of oncogenic signaling,
causing GBM-specific lethality.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4691575
PMID: 26673326  [PubMed - in process]


49. Development. 2015 Dec 15;142(24):4242-52. doi: 10.1242/dev.124768.

COP9-Hedgehog axis regulates the function of the germline stem cell progeny
differentiation niche in the Drosophila ovary.

Lu T(1), Wang S(2), Gao Y(1), Mao Y(1), Yang Z(1), Liu L(1), Song X(3), Ni J(4), 
Xie T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Tsinghua-Peking Joint Center for Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences,
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. (2)Stowers Institute for Medical
Research, 1000 East 50th Street, Kansas City, MO 64110, USA Department of Anatomy
and Cell Biology, University of Kansas School of Medicine, 3901 Rainbow Blvd,
Kansas City, KS 66160, USA. (3)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, 1000 East 
50th Street, Kansas City, MO 64110, USA. (4)Tsinghua-Peking Joint Center for Life
Sciences, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
nijq@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn tgx@stowers.org. (5)Stowers Institute for Medical
Research, 1000 East 50th Street, Kansas City, MO 64110, USA Department of Anatomy
and Cell Biology, University of Kansas School of Medicine, 3901 Rainbow Blvd,
Kansas City, KS 66160, USA nijq@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn tgx@stowers.org.

Both stem cell self-renewal and lineage differentiation are controlled
extrinsically as well as intrinsically. Germline stem cells (GSCs) in the
Drosophila ovary provide an attractive model in which to study both stem cell
self-renewal and lineage differentiation at the molecular and cellular level.
Recently, we have proposed that escort cells (ECs) form a differentiation niche
to control GSC lineage specification extrinsically. However, it remains poorly
understood how the maintenance and function of the differentiation niche are
regulated at the molecular level. Here, this study reveals a new role of COP9 in 
the differentiation niche to modulate autocrine Hedgehog (Hh) signaling, thereby 
promoting GSC lineage differentiation. COP9, which is a highly conserved protein 
complex composed of eight CSN subunits, catalyzes the removal of Nedd8 protein
modification from target proteins. Our genetic results have demonstrated that all
the COP9 components and the hh pathway components, including hh itself, are
required in ECs to promote GSC progeny differentiation. Interestingly, COP9 is
required in ECs to maintain Hh signaling activity, and activating Hh signaling in
ECs can partially bypass the requirement for COP9 in GSC progeny differentiation.
Finally, both COP9 and Hh signaling in ECs promote GSC progeny differentiation
partly by preventing BMP signaling and maintaining cellular processes. Therefore,
this study has demonstrated that the COP9-Hh signaling axis operates in the
differentiation niche to promote GSC progeny differentiation partly by
maintaining EC cellular processes and preventing BMP signaling. This provides new
insight into how the function of the differentiation niche is regulated at the
molecular level.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 26672093  [PubMed - in process]


50. Cell Stem Cell. 2016 Feb 4;18(2):276-90. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2015.11.004. Epub
2015 Dec 6.

Regulation of Ribosome Biogenesis and Protein Synthesis Controls Germline Stem
Cell Differentiation.

Sanchez CG(1), Teixeira FK(2), Czech B(3), Preall JB(3), Zamparini AL(1), Seifert
JR(4), Malone CD(1), Hannon GJ(3), Lehmann R(5).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Kimmel Center for Biology and Medicine of 
the Skirball Institute, Department of Cell Biology, New York University School of
Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA. (2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Kimmel 
Center for Biology and Medicine of the Skirball Institute, Department of Cell
Biology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.
Electronic address: felipe.teixeira@med.nyu.edu. (3)Watson School of Biological
Sciences, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold
Spring Harbor, NY 11724, USA. (4)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Kimmel
Center for Biology and Medicine of the Skirball Institute, Department of Cell
Biology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA;
Department of Biology, Farmingdale State College, State University of New York,
Farmingdale, NY 11735, USA. (5)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Kimmel Center 
for Biology and Medicine of the Skirball Institute, Department of Cell Biology,
New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA. Electronic
address: ruth.lehmann@med.nyu.edu.

Complex regulatory networks regulate stem cell behavior and contributions to
tissue growth, repair, and homeostasis. A full understanding of the networks
controlling stem cell self-renewal and differentiation, however, has not yet been
realized. To systematically dissect these networks and identify their components,
we performed an unbiased, transcriptome-wide in vivo RNAi screen in female
Drosophila germline stem cells (GSCs). Based on characterized cellular defects,
we classified 646 identified genes into phenotypic and functional groups and
unveiled a comprehensive set of networks regulating GSC maintenance, survival,
and differentiation. This analysis revealed an unexpected role for ribosomal
assembly factors in controlling stem cell cytokinesis. Moreover, our data show
that the transition from self-renewal to differentiation relies on enhanced
ribosome biogenesis accompanied by increased protein synthesis. Collectively,
these results detail the extensive genetic networks that control stem cell
homeostasis and highlight the intricate regulation of protein synthesis during
differentiation.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4744108 [Available on 2017-02-04]
PMID: 26669894  [PubMed - in process]


51. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2015 Dec 6;108(5). pii: djv374. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djv374.
Print 2016 May.

Changes in Receipt of Cancer Screening in Medicare Beneficiaries Following the
Affordable Care Act.

Cooper GS(1), Kou TD(2), Schluchter MD(2), Dor A(2), Koroukian SM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, University Hospitals Case Medical Center,
Cleveland, OH (GSC, TDK); Comprehensive Cancer Center (GSC, MDS, SMK) and the
Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics (SMK), Case Western Reserve
University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH; Department of Health Policy, George
Washington University, Washington, DC (AD). gregory.cooper@uhhospitals.org.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, University Hospitals Case Medical Center,
Cleveland, OH (GSC, TDK); Comprehensive Cancer Center (GSC, MDS, SMK) and the
Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics (SMK), Case Western Reserve
University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH; Department of Health Policy, George
Washington University, Washington, DC (AD).

BACKGROUND: The Affordable Care Act (ACA) removed copayments for screening
mammography and colonoscopy in Medicare beneficiaries, but its clinical impact is
unknown.
METHODS: Using a 5% random sample of Medicare claims from 2009 through 2012 in
individuals age 70 years or older who were due for screening, we examined claims 
for screening mammography and screening or surveillance colonoscopy for two years
prior to ACA (2009-2010) and two years post-ACA (2011-2012). Receipt of the
procedures at the patient level was compared across years using generalized
estimating equations. Statistical tests were two-sided.
RESULTS: Compared with 2009, we found an increase in mammography uptake during
the ACA coverage period, with multivariable odds ratios (MOR) of 1.22 (95%
confidence interval [CI] = 1.20 to 1.25, P < .001) for 2011 and 1.17 (95% CI =
1.15 to 1.20, P < .001) for 2012 and less change in 2010 (OR = 1.03, 95% CI =
1.01 to 1.05, P = .01). In contrast to mammography, uptake of screening or
surveillance colonoscopy decreased in 2012 (MOR = 0.95, 95% CI = 0.92 to 0.98, P 
= .002) compared with 2009, with no change in 2010 (MOR = 1.01, 95% CI = 0.99 to 
1.04, P = .47) or 2011 (MOR = 1.01, 95% CI = 0.99 to 1.04, P = .34). Other
factors associated with procedure receipt included younger age and prior
preventive health visits. In an analysis restricted to patients age 70 to 74
years, colonoscopy use increased slightly in 2011 but was unchanged in 2012, and 
the findings by year for mammography were consistent with the main analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: Following ACA implementation with concomitant reduction in
out-of-pocket expenditures, there was a statistically significant increment in
mammography uptake but not colonoscopy. This suggests that affordability is a
necessary but not sufficient facilitator of preventive services.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26640244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. EBioMedicine. 2015 Aug 15;2(10):1351-63. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2015.08.026.
eCollection 2015.

The Human Glioblastoma Cell Culture Resource: Validated Cell Models Representing 
All Molecular Subtypes.

Xie Y(1), Bergström T(1), Jiang Y(1), Johansson P(1), Marinescu VD(1), Lindberg
N(2), Segerman A(1), Wicher G(1), Niklasson M(1), Baskaran S(1), Sreedharan S(1),
Everlien I(1), Kastemar M(1), Hermansson A(1), Elfineh L(1), Libard S(1), Holland
EC(2), Hesselager G(3), Alafuzoff I(1), Westermark B(1), Nelander S(1),
Forsberg-Nilsson K(1), Uhrbom L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Science for Life Laboratory,
Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala University, 751 85 Uppsala, Sweden. (2)Fred
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 1100 Fairview Ave N., PO Box 19024, Seattle,
WA 98109, United States. (3)Department of Neuroscience, Uppsala University,
Uppsala University Hospital, SE-751 85 Uppsala, Sweden.

Comment in
    EBioMedicine. 2015 Oct;2(10):1274-5.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most frequent and malignant form of primary brain
tumor. GBM is essentially incurable and its resistance to therapy is attributed
to a subpopulation of cells called glioma stem cells (GSCs). To meet the present 
shortage of relevant GBM cell (GC) lines we developed a library of annotated and 
validated cell lines derived from surgical samples of GBM patients, maintained
under conditions to preserve GSC characteristics. This collection, which we call 
the Human Glioblastoma Cell Culture (HGCC) resource, consists of a biobank of 48 
GC lines and an associated database containing high-resolution molecular data. We
demonstrate that the HGCC lines are tumorigenic, harbor genomic lesions
characteristic of GBMs, and represent all four transcriptional subtypes. The HGCC
panel provides an open resource for in vitro and in vivo modeling of a large part
of GBM diversity useful to both basic and translational GBM research.

PMCID: PMC4634360
PMID: 26629530  [PubMed - in process]


53. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 2;5:17463. doi: 10.1038/srep17463.

Heterochromatin components in germline stem cell maintenance.

Xing Y(1), Li WX(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Genetics, University of Rochester Medical Center,
Rochester, NY 14620. (2)Department of Medicine, University of California San
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093.

Stem cell maintenance requires expression of genes essential for stemness and
repression of differentiation genes. How this is achieved remains incompletely
understood. Here we investigate the requirement for central components of
heterochromatin, Heterochromatin Protein 1 (HP1) and the histone H3 lys9
methyltransferase Su(var)3-9, in the Drosophila male germline stem cell (GSC)
self-renewal, a paradigm for studying adult stem cell behavior. We found that
mutations or RNAi knock down of HP1 or Su(var)3-9 cause loss of GSCs, accompanied
by defects in cell division or survival and premature expression of the
differentiation gene bag of marbles (bam). Conversely, over-expressing HP1
increases GSC number in wildtype flies and, strikingly, restores fertility to the
sterile hopscotch (hop) mutant flies that lack niche signals. These results
suggest that the central components of heterochromatin play roles including
repressing differentiation genes in Drosophila male GSC maintenance.

PMCID: PMC4667240
PMID: 26626305  [PubMed - in process]


54. J Biomed Res. 2015 Sep 20;30. doi: 10.7555/JBR.30.20150100. [Epub ahead of print]

Emerging targets for glioblastoma stem cell therapy.

Safa AR(1,)(2), Saadatzadeh MR(1,)(3), Cohen-Gadol AA(3), Pollok KE(1,)(4,)(5),
Bijangi-Vishehsaraei K(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Indiana University Simon Cancer Center. (2)Department of Pharmacology and
Toxicology. asafa@iupui.edu. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, IU School of Medicine
and Goodman Campbell Brain and Spine. (4)Department of Pharmacology and
Toxicology. (5)Herman B. Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Indiana University 
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), designated as World Health Organization (WHO)
grade IV astrocytoma, is a lethal and therapy-resistant brain cancer comprised of
several tumor cell subpopulations, including GBM stem cells (GSCs) which are
believed to contribute to tumor recurrence following initial response to
therapies. Emerging evidence demonstrates that GBM tumors are initiated from
GSCs. The development and use of novel therapies including small molecule
inhibitors of specific proteins in signaling pathways that regulate stemness,
proliferation and migration of GSCs, immunotherapy, and non-coding microRNAs may 
provide better means of treating GBM. Identification and characterization of
GSC-specific signaling pathways would be necessary to identify specific
therapeutic targets which may lead to the development of more efficient therapies
selectively targeting GSCs. Several signaling pathways including mTOR, AKT,
maternal embryonic leucine zipper kinase (MELK), NOTCH1 and Wnt/ß-catenin as well
as expression of cancer stem cell markers CD133, CD44, Oct4, Sox2, Nanog, and
ALDH1A1 maintain GSC properties. Moreover, the data published in the Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA) specifically demonstrated the activated PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway
in GBM tumorigenesis. Studying such pathways may help to understand GSC biology
and lead to the development of potential therapeutic interventions to render them
more sensitive to chemotherapy and radiation therapy. Furthemore, recent
demonstration of dedifferentiation of GBM cell lines into CSC-like cells prove
that any successful therapeutic agent or combination of drugs for GBM therapy
must eliminate not only GSCs, but the differentiated GBM cells and the entire
bulk of tumor cells.

© 2016 the Journal of Biomedical Research. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4726830
PMID: 26616589  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


55. Stem Cell Reports. 2015 Nov 10;5(5):829-42.

Glioblastoma Stem Cells Respond to Differentiation Cues but Fail to Undergo
Commitment and Terminal Cell-Cycle Arrest.

Carén H, Stricker SH, Bulstrode H, Gagrica S, Johnstone E, Bartlett TE, Feber A, 
Wilson G, Teschendorff AE, Bertone P, Beck S, Pollard SM.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is an aggressive brain tumor whose growth is driven by
stemcell-like cells. BMP signaling triggers cell-cycle exit and differentiation
of GBM stemcells (GSCs) and, therefore, might have therapeutic value. However,
the epigenetic mechanisms that accompany differentiation remain poorly defined.
It is also unclear whether cell-cycle arrest is terminal. Herewe find only a
subset ofGSCcultures exhibit astrocyte differentiation in response to BMP.
Although overtly differentiated non-cycling astrocytes are generated, they remain
vulnerable to cell-cycle re-entry and fail to appropriately reconfigure DNA
methylation patterns. Chromatin accessibility mapping identified loci that failed
to alter in response to BMP and these were enriched in SOX transcription
factor-binding motifs. SOX transcription factors, therefore, may limit
differentiation commitment. A similar propensity for cell-cycle re-entry and
de-differentiation was observed in GSC-derived oligodendrocyte-like cells. These 
findings highlight significant obstacles to BMP-induced differentiation as
therapy forGBM.

PMCID: PMC4649264
PMID: 26607953  [PubMed - in process]


56. Zoological Lett. 2015 Nov 9;1:29. doi: 10.1186/s40851-015-0030-3. eCollection
2015.

Ancestral mesodermal reorganization and evolution of the vertebrate head.

Onai T(1), Aramaki T(2), Inomata H(3), Hirai T(1), Kuratani S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Kuratani Evolutionary Morphology Laboratory, RIKEN Center for Developmental
Biology, 2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, 650-0047 Japan. (2)Pattern 
Formation Group, Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences, Osaka University, 1-3
Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871 Japan. (3)Laboratory for Axial Pattern Dynamics,
RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology, 2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku,
Kobe, 650-0047 Japan.

INTRODUCTION: The vertebrate head is characterized by unsegmented head mesoderm
the evolutionary origin of which remains enigmatic. The head mesoderm is derived 
from the rostral part of the dorsal mesoderm, which is regionalized
anteroposteriorly during gastrulation. The basal chordate amphioxus resembles
vertebrates due to the presence of somites, but it lacks unsegmented head
mesoderm. Gastrulation in amphioxus occurs by simple invagination with little
mesodermal involution, whereas in vertebrates gastrulation is organized by
massive cell movements, such as involution, convergence and extension, and cell
migration.
RESULTS: To identify key developmental events in the evolution of the vertebrate 
head mesoderm, we compared anterior/posterior (A/P) patterning mechanisms of the 
dorsal mesoderm in amphioxus and vertebrates. The dorsal mesodermal genes gsc,
bra, and delta are expressed in similar patterns in early embryos of both
animals, but later in development, these expression domains become
anteroposteriorly segregated only in vertebrates. Suppression of mesodermal
involution in vertebrate embryos by inhibition of convergence and extension
recapitulates amphioxus-like dorsal mesoderm formation.
CONCLUSIONS: Reorganization of ancient mesoderm was likely involved in the
evolution of the vertebrate head.

PMCID: PMC4657371
PMID: 26605074  [PubMed]


57. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 23;10(11):e0142594. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142594.
eCollection 2015.

Increased Notch Signaling Enhances Radioresistance of Malignant Stromal Cells
Induced by Glioma Stem/ Progenitor Cells.

Shen Y(1), Chen H(2,)(3), Zhang J(4), Chen Y(4), Wang M(1), Ma J(4), Hong L(5),
Liu N(3), Fan Q(1), Lu X(1), Tian Y(1), Wang A(5), Dong J(4), Lan Q(4), Huang
Q(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiotherapy & Oncology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of
Soochow University; Institute of Radiotherapy & Oncology, Soochow University;
Suzhou Key Laboratory for Radiation Oncology, Suzhou, China. (2)Department of
Neurosurgery, Nanjing First Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, China. (4)Department of Neurosurgery, The Second Affiliated 
Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, China. (5)Laboratory Center, The Second
Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: Host malignant stromal cells induced by glioma stem/progenitor cells 
were revealed to be more radiation-resistant than the glioma stem/progenitor
cells themselves after malignant transformation in nude mice. However, the
mechanism underlying this phenomenon remains unclear.
METHODS: Malignant stromal cells induced by glioma stem/progenitor cell 2
(GSC-induced host brain tumor cells, ihBTC2) were isolated and identified from
the double color-coded orthotopic glioma nude mouse model. The survival fraction 
at 2 Gy (SF2) was used to evaluate the radiation resistance of ihBTC2, the human 
glioma stem/progenitor cell line SU3 and its radiation-resistant sub-strain
SU3-5R and the rat C6 glioma cell line. The mRNA of Notch 1 and Hes1 from ihBTC2 
cells were detected using qPCR before and after 4 Gy radiation. The expression of
the Notch 1, pAkt and Bcl-2 proteins were investigated by Western blot. To
confirm the role of the Notch pathway in the radiation resistance of ihBTC2,
Notch signaling blocker gamma secretase inhibitors (GSIs) were used.
RESULTS: The ihBTC2 cells had malignant phenotypes, such as infinite
proliferation, hyperpentaploid karyotype, tumorigenesis in nude mice and
expression of protein markers of oligodendroglia cells. The SF2 of ihBTC2 cells
was significantly higher than that of any other cell line (P<0.05, n = 3). The
expression of Notch 1 and Hes1 mRNAs from ihBTC2 cells was significantly
increased after radiation. Moreover, the Notch 1, pAkt and Bcl-2 proteins were
significantly increased after radiation (P<0.05, n = 3). Inhibition of Notch
signaling markedly enhanced the radiosensitivity of ihBTC2 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: In an orthotopic glioma model, the malignant transformation of host 
stromal cells was induced by glioma stem/progenitor cells. IhBTC2 cells are more 
radiation-resistant than the glioma stem/progenitor cells, which may be mediated 
by activation of the Notch signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC4657951
PMID: 26599017  [PubMed - in process]


58. Ethiop Med J. 2015 Jan;53(1):9-17.

MEDICAL AND NEUROLOGICAL COMPLICATIONS AMONG STROKE PATIENTS ADMITTED FOR
INPATIENT CARE IN ADDIS ABABA, ETHIOPIA.

Mamushet Y, Zenebe G, Addissie A.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Medical and neurologic complications of acute stroke
adversely impact patient outcome and in some cases can be preventable. There is
scarcity of data in the African medical setup and none to date in our country to 
our knowledge. The current study aims to describe types and frequencies of
neuro-medical complications occurring in hospitalized patients after an acute
stroke and to identify risk factors for development of these complications and
the role of these factors on mortality.
METHODS: A total of 71 patients with acute stroke (excluding Sub-arachnoid
Hemorrhage) who were admitted to three hospitals in Addis Ababa from June 2008 to
March 2009 were included in the study. These patients were prospectively followed
until their discharge or death to look for the nature and frequency of
neuro-medical complications. Basic demographic data, stroke related medical
information, pre-existing medical conditions, admission laboratory and imaging
findings were recorded. All events were documented for each patient using
pre-defined medical complication using a data collection format. Descriptive and 
analytic statistical tests were performed to measure associations between risk
and outcome factors.
RESULTS: Stroke-complications were detected in 71.8% (51/71) of the study
participants and the most frequent complication was aspiration pneumonia which
occurred in 33.8% (24/71). Miscellaneous complications such as sepsis,
hypokalemia exposure keratitis were detected in 25% (17/71) of stroke patients.
Complications were more common in patients with severe neurologic deficit as
measured by Glasgow coma scale (GSC) and old age. GCS < 12 and age > 40 years
were both significantly associated with developments of complications after
stroke (p < 0.05). A total of 17 (23%) patients died during their in-patient
stay. GCS < 12 was significantly associated with mortality related to stroke in
the admitted patients (p = 0.0002) while there was no association between old age
and mortality.
CONCLUSIONS: Complications after stroke are common and are major factors
contributing to mortality. Being aware of the types of common complications and
associated risk factors helps the clinical team involved in the care of stroke
patients to make preparations and plans for the best possible care and to take
preventive measures that will save a lot of lives with best possible use of
meager resources available such as educating the population to avoid oral feeding
for patients with altered mental state and physicians to evaluate gag reflex
bedside swallowing test and proper positioning of patients to avoid aspiration
pneumonia. GSC measurement at admission is an important predictor of
complications and death following stroke.

PMID: 26591287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Epidemiology.

Leo P, McCrea M.
In: Laskowitz D, Grant G, editors. Translational Research in Traumatic Brain
Injury. Boca Raton (FL): CRC Press/Taylor and Francis Group; 2016. Chapter 1.
Frontiers in Neuroscience.

Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is an important public health concern that is one of
the leading causes of death and disability annually around the world.1,2 Several 
factors have fueled increasing interest in TBI over the last several years,
including rising awareness around the acute and chronic effects of sport-related 
concussion (SRC) and the reported incidence of head injuries sustained by U.S.
military service members deployed to Iraq and Afghanistan. Sporting and military 
cohorts are now known to be at elevated risk of mild TBI (mTBI), characterized by
more subtle neurocognitive and neurobehavioral symptoms that are often
challenging to assess and characterized in a clinical setting. A strong
epidemiological framework for TBI is vital to improving our understanding of the 
injurys occurrence, populations at risk, and effective strategies for injury
prevention. The purpose of the current chapter is to review the most recent
epidemiological literature on TBI in both civilian and military populations. The 
epidemiological literature on TBI is limited by a number of factors, not the
least of which is that the definition of a TBI varies across studies. Though
there are a number of operational definitions, TBI is commonly and most basically
defined as an alteration in brain functioning or the emergence of evidence of
brain pathology caused by an external force.3 One of the methodological
limitations of many epidemiological studies over the last 20 to 30 years has been
suboptimal or inconsistent classification and inclusion criteria. Many studies
have included individuals who sustained an injury to the head that may not have
involved any alteration in brain function or physiological damage to the brain.
For example, Bazarian and colleagues used emergency department records for a
study of mTBI that included individuals with diagnostic codes such as skull
fracture, intracranial injury of unspecified nature, and head injury,
unspecified.4 Even though many individuals with these diagnoses likely met the
criteria for mTBI, there are others who did not sustain a TBI at all or may have 
sustained an injury that was more severe than an mTBI. Population-based
epidemiological studies are typically based on hospital admission or discharge
records, emergency department records, or death certificates, which creates a
selection bias.5 It has long been held that many patients with less severe
injuries do not present for medical treatment and therefore are not included in
many of these studies. In addition, changes in hospitalization patterns over the 
past several years, with fewer less severe patients being hospitalized, has also 
likely lead to an underestimation of the true incidence of milder forms of TBI
(for a review, see the study by McCrea6). TBI severity classification can also
vary among different studies. Commonly, clinical indicators related to acute
injury characteristics are used to indicate injury severity such as mild,
moderate, or severe. The indicators most commonly used are alteration in
consciousness, loss of consciousness (LOC), and post-traumatic amnesia (PTA)
following the injury. The Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) is the most commonly used
clinical tool for assessing consciousness following an injury.7 A GCS score of 13
to 15 is considered a mild injury, 9 to 12 is considered a moderate injury, and 8
or less is considered a severe injury. Methods used to classify TBI also have
varied utility. The GSC as a highly effective tool to differentiate the severity 
of TBI has been well founded and the GCS has been shown to be useful in
predicting morbidity and mortality in more severe injuries,710 but it has been
less useful as a prognostic indicator for mTBI.11 Historically, not all
epidemiological studies have employed a common or standardized classification
system, which complicates interpretation of epidemiological data and comparisons 
across studies. In terms of injury reporting, there is no single system in the
United States or most other countries that tracks the occurrence of head injury
over large populations. As a result, a true appreciation for TBIs national or
worldwide incidence is lacking. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) is the most comprehensive data source of epidemiological studies of TBI in 
the United States, as it monitors death records (National Vital Statistics
System), hospitalizations (National Hospital Discharge Survey), and emergency
department visits (National Hosptial Ambulatory Medical Care).12 The data for
military TBI injuries comes from the Department of Defense (DoD) in collaboration
with the Armed Forces Health Surveillance Center.13 Where available, other
sources from well-designed epidemiological studies in the United States and
around the world were also reviewed. The first section of the this chapter will
review the civilian literature, including sport-related concussions, and the
second section will focus on the military epidemiological literature.

PMID: 26583186  [PubMed]


60. Nat Commun. 2015 Nov 19;6:8856. doi: 10.1038/ncomms9856.

Histone H1-mediated epigenetic regulation controls germline stem cell
self-renewal by modulating H4K16 acetylation.

Sun J(1), Wei HM(2), Xu J(1,)(3), Chang JF(2), Yang Z(1), Ren X(1), Lv WW(1), Liu
LP(1,)(4), Pan LX(1), Wang X(1), Qiao HH(1), Zhu B(5), Ji JY(6), Yan D(7), Xie
T(8,)(9), Sun FL(2), Ni JQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. (2)Research
Center for Translational Medicine at East Hospital, School of Life Sciences and
Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai 200092/200120, China. (3)College of
Bioengineering, Hubei University of Technology, Wuhan 430068, China. (4)Tsinghua 
Fly Center, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. (5)Institute of
Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 102206, China. (6)Department of 
Molecular and Cellular Medicine, College of Medicine, Texas A&M Health Science
Center, College Station, Texas 77843, USA. (7)Department of Genetics, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. (8)Stowers Institute for
Medical Research, Kansas City, Missouri 64110, USA. (9)Department of Anatomy and 
Cell Biology, University of Kansas School of Medicine, Kansas City, Kansas 66160,
USA.

Epigenetics plays critical roles in controlling stem cell self-renewal and
differentiation. Histone H1 is one of the most critical chromatin regulators, but
its role in adult stem cell regulation remains unclear. Here we report that H1 is
intrinsically required in the regulation of germline stem cells (GSCs) in the
Drosophila ovary. The loss of H1 from GSCs causes their premature differentiation
through activation of the key GSC differentiation factor bam. Interestingly, the 
acetylated H4 lysine 16 (H4K16ac) is selectively augmented in the H1-depleted
GSCs. Furthermore, overexpression of mof reduces H1 association on chromatin. In 
contrast, the knocking down of mof significantly rescues the GSC loss phenotype. 
Taken together, these results suggest that H1 functions intrinsically to promote 
GSC self-renewal by antagonizing MOF function. Since H1 and H4K16 acetylation are
highly conserved from fly to human, the findings from this study might be
applicable to stem cells in other systems.

PMCID: PMC4673494
PMID: 26581759  [PubMed - in process]


61. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 5;7(1):459-72. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6314.

Atracurium Besylate and other neuromuscular blocking agents promote astroglial
differentiation and deplete glioblastoma stem cells.

Spina R(1), Voss DM(1), Asnaghi L(2), Sloan A(1,)(3), Bar EE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, Case Western Reserve University School of 
Medicine and Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, Cleveland, OH, USA. (2)Department 
of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)Department of Neurological Surgery, University Hospital-Case Medical Center,
Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, and Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland,
OH, USA.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) are the most common primary malignant brain tumor
in adults, with a median survival of about one year. This poor prognosis is
attributed primarily to therapeutic resistance and tumor recurrence after
surgical removal, with the root cause suggested to be found in glioblastoma stem 
cells (GSCs). Using glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) as a reporter of
astrocytic differentiation, we isolated multiple clones from three independent
GSC lines which express GFAP in a remarkably stable fashion. We next show that
elevated expression of GFAP is associated with reduced clonogenicity in vitro and
tumorigenicity in vivo. Utilizing this in vitro cell-based differentiation
reporter system we screened chemical libraries and identified the
non-depolarizing neuromuscular blocker (NNMB), Atracurium Besylate, as a small
molecule which effectively induces astroglial but not neuronal differentiation of
GSCs. Functionally, Atracurium Besylate treatment significantly inhibited the
clonogenic capacity of several independent patient-derived GSC neurosphere lines,
a phenomenon which was largely irreversible. A second NNMB, Vecuronium, also
induced GSC astrocytic differentiation while Dimethylphenylpiperazinium (DMPP), a
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) agonist, significantly blocked
Atracurium Besylate pro-differentiation activity. To investigate the clinical
importance of nAChRs in gliomas, we examined clinical outcomes and found that
glioma patients with tumors overexpressing CHRNA1 or CHRNA9 (encoding for the
AChR-a1 or AChR-a9) exhibit significant shorter overall survival. Finally, we
found that ex-vivo pre-treatment of GSCs, expressing CHRNA1 and CHRNA9, with
Atracurium Besylate significantly increased the survival of mice xenotransplanted
with these cells, therefore suggesting that tumor initiating subpopulations have 
been reduced.

PMID: 26575950  [PubMed - in process]


62. Cell Rep. 2015 Nov 17;13(7):1366-79. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.10.017. Epub 2015
Nov 5.

Twin Promotes the Maintenance and Differentiation of Germline Stem Cell Lineage
through Modulation of Multiple Pathways.

Fu Z(1), Geng C(2), Wang H(3), Yang Z(1), Weng C(2), Li H(2), Deng L(1), Liu
L(1), Liu N(3), Ni J(1), Xie T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Tsinghua-Peking Joint Center for Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences,
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. (2)Stowers Institute for Medical
Research, 1000 East 50(th) Street, Kansas City, MO 64110, USA.
(3)Interdisciplinary Research Center on Biology and Chemistry, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, 345 Ling Ling Road, Shanghai 200032, China. (4)Stowers Institute for
Medical Research, 1000 East 50(th) Street, Kansas City, MO 64110, USA; Department
of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Kansas School of Medicine, 3901
Rainbow Boulevard, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA. Electronic address:
tgx@stowers.org.

The central question in stem cell regulation is how the balance between
self-renewal and differentiation is controlled at the molecular level. This study
uses germline stem cells (GSCs) in the Drosophila ovary to demonstrate that the
Drosophila CCR4 homolog Twin is required intrinsically to promote both
GSC self-renewal and progeny differentiation. Twin/CCR4 is one of the two
catalytic subunits in the highly conserved CCR4-NOT mRNA deadenylase complex.
Twin works within the CCR4-NOT complex to intrinsically maintain GSC
self-renewal, at least partly by sustaining E-cadherin-mediated GSC-niche
interaction and preventing transposable element-induced DNA damage. It promotes
GSC progeny differentiation by forming protein complexes with differentiation
factors Bam and Bgcn independently of other CCR4-NOT components. Interestingly,
Bam can competitively inhibit the association of Twin with Pop2 in the CCR4-NOT
complex. Therefore, this study demonstrates that Twin has important intrinsic
roles in promoting GSC self-renewal and progeny differentiation by functioning in
different protein complexes.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26549449  [PubMed - in process]


63. Mol Cancer. 2015 Nov 6;14:189. doi: 10.1186/s12943-015-0459-1.

Bone morphogenetic protein 7 sensitizes O6-methylguanine methyltransferase
expressing-glioblastoma stem cells to clinically relevant dose of temozolomide.

Tso JL(1), Yang S(2,)(3), Menjivar JC(4), Yamada K(5,)(6), Zhang Y(7,)(8), Hong
I(9), Bui Y(10), Stream A(11), McBride WH(12,)(13), Liau LM(14,)(15), Nelson
SF(16,)(17), Cloughesy TF(18,)(19), Yong WH(20,)(21), Lai A(22,)(23), Tso
CL(24,)(25).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery/Surgical Oncology, David Geffen School of Medicine,
University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. jtso24@ucla.edu.
(2)Department of Surgery/Surgical Oncology, David Geffen School of Medicine,
University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. yshuai1001@msn.cn.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, Guangzhou General Hospital of Guangzhou Military
Command, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. yshuai1001@msn.cn. (4)Department of
Surgery/Surgical Oncology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. JimmyMenjivar@mednet.ucla.edu.
(5)Department of Surgery/Surgical Oncology, David Geffen School of Medicine,
University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
mdky@xc4.so-net.ne.jp. (6)Department of Advanced Molecular and Cell Therapy,
Kyushu University Hospital, Higashiku, Fukuoka, Japan. mdky@xc4.so-net.ne.jp.
(7)Department of Surgery/Surgical Oncology, David Geffen School of Medicine,
University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
ybzhang803@gmail.com. (8)Department of Orthopedics, Zhongshan Hospital, Xiamen
University, Xiamen, China. ybzhang803@gmail.com. (9)Department of
Surgery/Surgical Oncology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. ireneola@ucla.edu.
(10)Department of Surgery/Surgical Oncology, David Geffen School of Medicine,
University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. ybui@g.ucla.edu.
(11)Department of Surgery/Surgical Oncology, David Geffen School of Medicine,
University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. astream@ucla.edu. 
(12)Department of Radiation-Oncology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University
of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. WMcBride@mednet.ucla.edu.
(13)Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California at Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, USA. WMcBride@mednet.ucla.edu. (14)Department of Neurosurgery, David
Geffen School of Medicine, University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA. LLiau@mednet.ucla.edu. (15)Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, USA. LLiau@mednet.ucla.edu.
(16)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. nelsongenomics@mac.com.
(17)Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California at Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, USA. nelsongenomics@mac.com. (18)Department of Neurology, David
Geffen School of Medicine, University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA. tcloughe@ucla.edu. (19)Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University
of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, USA. tcloughe@ucla.edu. (20)Department
of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine, University
of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. wyong@mednet.ucla.edu.
(21)Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California at Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, USA. wyong@mednet.ucla.edu. (22)Department of Neurology, David
Geffen School of Medicine, University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA. AlbertLai@mednet.ucla.edu. (23)Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, USA.
AlbertLai@mednet.ucla.edu. (24)Department of Surgery/Surgical Oncology, David
Geffen School of Medicine, University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA. ctso@mednet.ucla.edu. (25)Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, USA. ctso@mednet.ucla.edu.

BACKGROUND: Temozolomide (TMZ) is an oral DNA-alkylating agent used for treating 
patients with glioblastoma. However, therapeutic benefits of TMZ can be
compromised by the expression of O6-methylguanine methyltransferase (MGMT) in
tumor tissue. Here we used MGMT-expressing glioblastoma stem cells (GSC) lines as
a model for investigating the molecular mechanism underlying TMZ resistance,
while aiming to explore a new treatment strategy designed to possibly overcome
resistance to the clinically relevant dose of TMZ (35 µM).
METHODS: MGMT-expressing GSC cultures are resistant to TMZ, and IC50 (half
maximal inhibitory concentration) is estimated at around 500 µM. Clonogenic GSC
surviving 500 µM TMZ (GSC-500 µM TMZ), were isolated. Molecular signatures were
identified via comparative analysis of expression microarray against parental GSC
(GSC-parental). The recombinant protein of top downregulated signature was used
as a single agent or in combination with TMZ, for evaluating therapeutic effects 
of treatment of GSC.
RESULTS: The molecular signatures characterized an activation of protective
stress responses in GSC-500 µM TMZ, mainly including
biotransformation/detoxification of xenobiotics, blocked endoplasmic reticulum
stress-mediated apoptosis, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), and
inhibited growth/differentiation. Bone morphogenetic protein 7 (BMP7) was
identified as the top down-regulated gene in GSC-500 µM TMZ. Although augmenting 
BMP7 signaling in GSC by exogenous BMP7 treatment did not effectively stop GSC
growth, it markedly sensitized both GSC-500 µM TMZ and GSC-parental to 35 µM TMZ 
treatment, leading to loss of self-renewal and migration capacity. BMP7 treatment
induced senescence of GSC cultures and suppressed mRNA expression of CD133, MGMT,
and ATP-binding cassette drug efflux transporters (ABCB1, ABCG2), as well as
reconfigured transcriptional profiles in GSC by downregulating genes associated
with EMT/migration/invasion, stemness, inflammation/immune response, and cell
proliferation/tumorigenesis. BMP7 treatment significantly prolonged survival time
of animals intracranially inoculated with GSC when compared to those untreated or
treated with TMZ alone (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0017), whereas combination of two agents further
extended animal survival compared to BMP7 alone (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0489).
CONCLUSIONS: These data support the view that reduced endogenous BMP7
expression/signaling in GSC may contribute to maintained stemness, EMT, and
chemoresistant phenotype, suggesting that BMP7 treatment may provide a novel
strategy in combination with TMZ for an effective treatment of glioblastoma
exhibiting unmethylated MGMT.

PMCID: PMC4636799
PMID: 26546412  [PubMed - in process]


64. Rozhl Chir. 2015 Sep;94(9):362-6.

[Gastric stump cancer--unicentric analysis of 7 patients].

[Article in Czech]

Jínek T, Adamcík L, Duda M, krovina M.

INTRODUCTION: Gastric stump cancer accounts for 14% of all gastric carcinomas.
Originally this term included patients who previously underwent surgery due to
peptic ulcer disease but today gastric stump cancer also includes patients
diagnosed some time after primary gastric resection due to gastric cancer. The
incidence is increasing. Gastric stump cancer is associated with poor prognosis
and its reported resecability is around 40%.
METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed the data of 7 patients with a preoperatively
histologically confirmed stump cancer who had been operated at the Department of 
Surgery at Nový Jicín Hospital during 2006-2014.
RESULTS: We operated 5 men and 2 women with the median age of 70 years (5580).
The primary surgical resection in all our patients was BII gastric resection due 
to peptic ulcer disease, and GSC had evolved within a median of 38 years (3246)
after primary intervention. None of the patients had been regularly screened by
endoscopy following primary surgery. We performed five curative resections (four 
total gastrectomies, one subtotal gastrectomy). Our resecability rate was 71%. In
two cases, only explorative laparotomy was performed due to generalisation of the
malignancy. Two patients from the resected group died after 30 and 34 months due 
to progression of their disease; the other three patients are still alive after
17, 19 and 88 months.
CONCLUSION: Gastric stump cancer is a malignancy often diagnosed in its late
stages. Regural endoscopic screening after primary gastric resection for benign
disease can lead to diagnosis at an earlier stage, thereby improving the
resection rate and overall survival. This also applies to long-term follow-up of 
patients with primary subtotal gastrectomy for cancer. Lymphatic metastasizing of
the carcinoma can often be different due to the previous surgical intervention
and altered anatomy. This must be taken into account during operations.

PMID: 26537100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Cell. 2015 Nov 5;163(4):920-33. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.10.002. Epub 2015 Oct
29.

Histone H3 Threonine Phosphorylation Regulates Asymmetric Histone Inheritance in 
the Drosophila Male Germline.

Xie J(1), Wooten M(1), Tran V(1), Chen BC(2), Pozmanter C(1), Simbolon C(1),
Betzig E(2), Chen X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA.
(2)HHMI, Janelia Research Campus, 19700 Helix Drive, Ashburn, VA 20147, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA.
Electronic address: xchen32@jhu.edu.

Comment in
    Cell. 2015 Nov 5;163(4):792-3.

A long-standing question concerns how stem cells maintain their identity through 
multiple divisions. Previously, we reported that pre-existing and newly
synthesized histone H3 are asymmetrically distributed during Drosophila male
germline stem cell (GSC) asymmetric division. Here, we show that phosphorylation 
at threonine 3 of H3 (H3T3P) distinguishes pre-existing versus newly synthesized 
H3. Converting T3 to the unphosphorylatable residue alanine (H3T3A) or to the
phosphomimetic aspartate (H3T3D) disrupts asymmetric H3 inheritance. Expression
of H3T3A or H3T3D specifically in early-stage germline also leads to cellular
defects, including GSC loss and germline tumors. Finally, compromising the
activity of the H3T3 kinase Haspin enhances the H3T3A but suppresses the H3T3D
phenotypes. These studies demonstrate that H3T3P distinguishes sister chromatids 
enriched with distinct pools of H3 in order to coordinate asymmetric segregation 
of "old" H3 into GSCs and that tight regulation of H3T3 phosphorylation is
required for male germline activity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4636931 [Available on 2016-11-05]
PMID: 26522592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Cancer Med. 2015 Nov;4(11):1705-16. doi: 10.1002/cam4.510. Epub 2015 Oct 30.

Coculture with astrocytes reduces the radiosensitivity of glioblastoma stem-like 
cells and identifies additional targets for radiosensitization.

Rath BH(1), Wahba A(1), Camphausen K(1), Tofilon PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Radiation Oncology Branch, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland,
20892.

Toward developing a model system for investigating the role of the
microenvironment in the radioresistance of glioblastoma (GBM), human glioblastoma
stem-like cells (GSCs) were grown in coculture with human astrocytes. Using a
trans-well assay, survival analyses showed that astrocytes significantly
decreased the radiosensitivity of GSCs compared to standard culture conditions.
In addition, when irradiated in coculture, the initial level of radiation-induced
<U+03B3>H2AX foci in GSCs was reduced and foci dispersal was enhanced suggesting that
the presence of astrocytes influenced the induction and repair of DNA
double-strand breaks. These data indicate that astrocytes can decrease the
radiosensitivity of GSCs in vitro via a paracrine-based mechanism and further
support a role for the microenvironment as a determinant of GBM radioresponse.
Chemokine profiling of coculture media identified a number of bioactive molecules
not present under standard culture conditions. The gene expression profiles of
GSCs grown in coculture were significantly different as compared to GSCs grown
alone. These analyses were consistent with an astrocyte-mediated modification in 
GSC phenotype and, moreover, suggested a number of potential targets for GSC
radiosensitization that were unique to coculture conditions. Along these lines,
STAT3 was activated in GSCs grown with astrocytes; the JAK/STAT3 inhibitor WP1066
enhanced the radiosensitivity of GSCs under coculture conditions and when grown
as orthotopic xenografts. Further, this coculture system may also provide an
approach for identifying additional targets for GBM radiosensitization.

© 2015 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4673998
PMID: 26518290  [PubMed - in process]


67. Medicine (Baltimore). 2015 Oct;94(43):e1894. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000001894.

Prospective Multicenter Feasibility Study of Laparoscopic Sentinel Basin
Dissection for Organ Preserving Surgery in Gastric Cancer: Quality Control Study 
for Surgical Standardization Prior to Phase III Trial.

Lee YJ(1), Jeong SH, Hur H, Han SU, Min JS, An JY, Hyung WJ, Cho GS, Jeong GA,
Jeong O, Park YK, Jung MR, Kim YW, Yoon HM, Eom BW, Park JY, Ryu KW; Sentinel
Node Oriented Tailored Approach (SENORITA) Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Surgery, Gyeongsang National University, Jinju (YJL,
SHJ); Department of Surgery, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon (HH,
S-UH); Department of Surgery, Dongnam Institute of Radiological and Medical
Science, Busan (JSM); Department of Surgery, Yonsei University School of
Medicine, Seoul (JYA, WJH); Department of Surgery, Soonchunhyang University
College of Medicine, Bucheon (GSC, GAJ); Department of Surgery, Chonnam National 
University Hwasun Hospital, Hwasun (OJ, YKP, MRJ); Gastric Cancer Branch,
National Cancer Center, Goyang (Y-WK, HMY, BWE, KWR); and Department of Surgery, 
National Cancer Center, Goyang, Korea (JYP).

The clinical application of sentinel node biopsies in early gastric cancer is
still controversial even though it appears promising. This study was conducted as
a prerequisite quality control for surgical standardization of laparoscopic
sentinel basin dissection (SBD) prior to the initiation of a phase III
trial.Laparoscopic SBD was performed in patients with preoperative stage T1-2N0
and tumor size <4<U+200A>cm in diameter. Intraoperative endoscopic submucosal injection 
of a standardized dual tracer was administered. All retrieved sentinel basin
nodes (SBN) were investigated with intraoperative frozen hematoxylin and eosin
(H&E) staining. A strict checklist consisting of 7 essential steps was followed
during laparoscopic SBD as the quality control study for a phase III trial.
Completion of all essential steps in the checklist for 10 cases was used to
define a qualified institution.Seven institutions participated and 112 patients
were enrolled in this study. However, 4 patients were excluded owing to screening
failure. The mean number of cases required for institutional qualification was 15
cases (range, 13-20 cases). Sentinel basins (SB) were detected and dissected in
100 of the 108 patients (92.6%); the median number of SB and SBN was 2 and 7,
respectively. Lymph node metastases were detected in 10 patients by postoperative
permanent H&E staining and they were detected by SBD in all 10 patients. Frozen
results of SBN were compatible with permanent staining reports.Laparoscopic SBD
is feasible and demonstrated improved sensitivity in detecting metastatic lymph
nodes compared to the previous study. A future phase III randomized trial
comparing laparoscopic SBD with organ-preserving gastrectomy and laparoscopic
standard gastrectomy seems promising for qualified institutions.

PMID: 26512607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Nov 10;112(45):13928-33. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1509856112. Epub 2015 Oct 28.

Fly LMBR1/LIMR-type protein Lilipod promotes germ-line stem cell self-renewal by 
enhancing BMP signaling.

Dolezal D(1), Liu Z(2), Zhou Q(2), Pignoni F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Upstate Medical University, 
Syracuse, NY 13210; (2)Department of Ophthalmology and Center for Vision
Research, Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY 13210; (3)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY
13210; Department of Ophthalmology and Center for Vision Research, Upstate
Medical University, Syracuse, NY 13210; Department of Neuroscience and
Physiology, Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY 13210 pignonif@upstate.edu.

Limb development membrane protein-1 (LMBR1)/lipocalin-interacting membrane
receptor (LIMR)-type proteins are putative nine-transmembrane receptors that are 
evolutionarily conserved across metazoans. However, their biological function is 
unknown. Here, we show that the fly family member Lilipod (Lili) is required for 
germ-line stem cell (GSC) self-renewal in the Drosophila ovary where it enhances 
bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling. lili mutant GSCs are lost through
differentiation, and display reduced levels of the Dpp transducer pMad and
precocious activation of the master differentiation factor bam. Conversely,
overexpressed Lili induces supernumerary pMad-positive bamP-GFP-negative GSCs.
Interestingly, differentiation of lili mutant GSCs is bam-dependent; however, its
effect on pMad is not. Thus, although it promotes stem cell self-renewal by
repressing a bam-dependent process, Lilipod enhances transduction of the Dpp
signal independently of its suppression of differentiation. In addition, because 
Lili is still required by a ligand-independent BMP receptor, its function likely 
occurs between receptor activation and pMad phosphorylation within the signaling 
cascade. This first, to our knowledge, in vivo characterization of a
LMBR1/LIMR-type protein in a genetic model reveals an important role in
modulating BMP signaling during the asymmetric division of an adult stem cell
population and in other BMP signaling contexts.

PMCID: PMC4653181 [Available on 2016-05-10]
PMID: 26512105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Oncotarget. 2015 Nov 10;6(35):37300-15. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5836.

Arsenic trioxide disrupts glioma stem cells via promoting PML degradation to
inhibit tumor growth.

Zhou W(1), Cheng L(2), Shi Y(1,)(3), Ke SQ(1), Huang Z(1), Fang X(1), Chu CW(1), 
Xie Q(1), Bian XW(3), Rich JN(1), Bao S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Lerner Research
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. (2)State Key Laboratory of
Medical Genomics, Shanghai Institute of Hematology, Rui Jin Hospital, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200025, China. (3)Institute of Pathology and
Southwest Cancer Center, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical University,
Chongqing 400038, China.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most lethal brain tumor. Tumor relapse in
GBM is inevitable despite maximal therapeutic interventions. Glioma stem cells
(GSCs) have been found to be critical players in therapeutic resistance and tumor
recurrence. Therapeutic drugs targeting GSCs may significantly improve GBM
treatment. In this study, we demonstrated that arsenic trioxide (As2O3)
effectively disrupted GSCs and inhibited tumor growth in the GSC-derived
orthotopic xenografts by targeting the promyelocytic leukaemia (PML). As2O3
treatment induced rapid degradation of PML protein along with severe apoptosis in
GSCs. Disruption of the endogenous PML recapitulated the inhibitory effects of
As2O3 treatment on GSCs both in vitro and in orthotopic tumors. Importantly,
As2O3 treatment dramatically reduced GSC population in the intracranial GBM
xenografts and increased the survival of mice bearing the tumors. In addition,
As2O3 treatment preferentially inhibited cell growth of GSCs but not matched
non-stem tumor cells (NSTCs). Furthermore, As2O3 treatment or PML disruption
potently diminished c-Myc protein levels through increased poly-ubiquitination
and proteasome degradation of c-Myc. Our study indicated a potential implication 
of As2O3 in GBM treatment and highlighted the important role of PML/c-Myc axis in
the maintenance of GSCs.

PMCID: PMC4741931
PMID: 26510911  [PubMed - in process]


70. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 27;10(10):e0141334. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0141334.
eCollection 2015.

Ribosomal Proteins RPS11 and RPS20, Two Stress-Response Markers of Glioblastoma
Stem Cells, Are Novel Predictors of Poor Prognosis in Glioblastoma Patients.

Yong WH(1), Shabihkhani M(2), Telesca D(3), Yang S(4), Tso JL(5), Menjivar JC(5),
Wei B(2), Lucey GM(2), Mareninov S(2), Chen Z(6), Liau LM(7), Lai A(8), Nelson
SF(9), Cloughesy TF(8), Tso CL(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of California Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of America; Jonsson Comprehensive
Cancer Center, David Geffen School of Medicine at University of California Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of America. (2)Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, California, United States of America. (3)Department of Biostatistics,
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of
America; Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, David Geffen School of Medicine at 
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of
America. (4)Department of Neurosurgery, General Hospital of Guangzhou Military
Command, Guangzhou, China; Department of Surgery/Surgical-Oncology, University of
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of America;
Department of Neurosurgery, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
California, United States of America. (5)Department of Surgery/Surgical-Oncology,
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of
America. (6)Department of Human Genetics, University of California Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, California, United States of America. (7)Department of Neurosurgery,
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of
America; Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, David Geffen School of Medicine at 
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of
America. (8)Department of Neurology/Neuro-Oncology, University of California Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of America; Jonsson Comprehensive
Cancer Center, David Geffen School of Medicine at University of California Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of America. (9)Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, California, United States of America; Department of Human Genetics,
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of
America; Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, David Geffen School of Medicine at 
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of
America. (10)Department of Surgery/Surgical-Oncology, University of California
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of America; Jonsson
Comprehensive Cancer Center, David Geffen School of Medicine at University of
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.

Glioblastoma stem cells (GSC) co-exhibiting a tumor-initiating capacity and a
radio-chemoresistant phenotype, are a compelling cell model for explaining tumor 
recurrence. We have previously characterized patient-derived, treatment-resistant
GSC clones (TRGC) that survived radiochemotherapy. Compared to glucose-dependent,
treatment-sensitive GSC clones (TSGC), TRGC exhibited reduced glucose dependence 
that favor the fatty acid oxidation pathway as their energy source. Using
comparative genome-wide transcriptome analysis, a series of defense signatures
associated with TRGC survival were identified and verified by siRNA-based gene
knockdown experiments that led to loss of cell integrity. In this study, we
investigate the prognostic value of defense signatures in glioblastoma (GBM)
patients using gene expression analysis with Probeset Analyzer (131 GBM) and The 
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data, and protein expression with a tissue microarray 
(50 GBM), yielding the first TRGC-derived prognostic biomarkers for GBM patients.
Ribosomal protein S11 (RPS11), RPS20, individually and together, consistently
predicted poor survival of newly diagnosed primary GBM tumors when overexpressed 
at the RNA or protein level [RPS11: Hazard Ratio (HR) = 11.5, p<0.001; RPS20: HR 
= 4.5, p = 0.03; RPS11+RPS20: HR = 17.99, p = 0.001]. The prognostic significance
of RPS11 and RPS20 was further supported by whole tissue section RPS11
immunostaining (27 GBM; HR = 4.05, p = 0.01) and TCGA gene expression data (578
primary GBM; RPS11: HR = 1.19, p = 0.06; RPS20: HR = 1.25, p = 0.02; RPS11+RPS20:
HR = 1.43, p = 0.01). Moreover, tumors that exhibited unmethylated
O-6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) or wild-type isocitrate
dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1) were associated with higher RPS11 expression levels [corr 
(IDH1, RPS11) = 0.64, p = 0.03); [corr (MGMT, RPS11) = 0.52, p = 0.04]. These
data indicate that increased expression of RPS11 and RPS20 predicts shorter
patient survival. The study also suggests that TRGC are clinically relevant cells
that represent resistant tumorigenic clones from patient tumors and that their
properties, at least in part, are reflected in poor-prognosis GBM. The screening 
of TRGC signatures may represent a novel alternative strategy for identifying new
prognostic biomarkers.

PMCID: PMC4624638
PMID: 26506620  [PubMed - in process]


71. Eur J Med Chem. 2015 Nov 13;105:274-88. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2015.10.020. Epub
2015 Oct 22.

Design and synthesis of 2-oxindole based multi-targeted inhibitors of PDK1/Akt
signaling pathway for the treatment of glioblastoma multiforme.

Sestito S(1), Nesi G(1), Daniele S(1), Martelli A(1), Digiacomo M(1), Borghini
A(2), Pietra D(2), Calderone V(1), Lapucci A(1), Falasca M(3), Parrella P(4),
Notarangelo A(5), Breschi MC(1), Macchia M(1), Martini C(1), Rapposelli S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, University of Pisa, Via Bonanno, 6, 56126 Pisa, Italy.
(2)Alidans S.r.l., Via Vecchializia, 48, 56017 San Giuliano Terme, PI, Italy.
(3)Metabolic Signalling Group, School of Biomedical Sciences, Curtin Health
Innovation Research Institute Biosciences, Curtin University, Perth, Western
Australia 6102, Australia. (4)Laboratory of Oncology, Hospital "Casa Sollievo
Della Sofferenza", Viale Cappuccini, 1, 71013 San Giovanni Rotondo, FG, Italy.
(5)Medical Genetics Unit, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, I-71013 
San Giovanni Rotondo, FG, Italy. (6)Department of Pharmacy, University of Pisa,
Via Bonanno, 6, 56126 Pisa, Italy. Electronic address:
simona.rapposelli@farm.unipi.it.

Aggressive behavior and diffuse infiltrative growth are the main features of
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), together with the high degree of resistance and
recurrence. Evidence indicate that GBM-derived stem cells (GSCs), endowed with
unlimited proliferative potential, play a critical role in tumor development and 
maintenance. Among the many signaling pathways involved in maintaining GSC
stemness, tumorigenic potential, and anti-apoptotic properties, the PDK1/Akt
pathway is a challenging target to develop new potential agents able to affect
GBM resistance to chemotherapy. In an effort to find new PDK1/Akt inhibitors, we 
rationally designed and synthesized a small family of 2-oxindole derivatives.
Among them, compound 3 inhibited PDK1 kinase and downstream effectors such as
CHK1, GS3Ka and GS3Kß, which contribute to GCS survival. Compound 3 appeared to
be a good tool for studying the role of the PDK1/Akt pathway in GCS self-renewal 
and tumorigenicity, and might represent the starting point for the development of
more potent and focused multi-target therapies for GBM.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26498573  [PubMed - in process]


72. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Dec;12(6):7949-56. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4446. Epub 2015 Oct
15.

Isolation and characteristics of CD133-/A2B5+ and CD133-/A2B5- cells from the
SHG139s cell line.

Han Y(1), Wang H(1), Huang Y(1), Cheng Z(1), Sun T(1), Chen G(1), Xie X(1), Zhou 
Y(1), Du Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Neurosurgery and Brain and Nerve Research Laboratory, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215006, P.R. China.

In glioma tissues, there are small cell populations with the capability of
sustaining tumor formation. These cells are referred to as glioma stem cells
(GSCs). However, the presence of subpopulations of GSCs, and the differences
between each subpopulation remain to be fully elucidated. In the present study,
CD133-/A2B5- and CD133-/A2B5+ cells from the SHG139 GSC cell line (SHG139s) were 
isolated using magnetic-activated cell sorting. Following xenografting into nude 
mice, the two isolated subpopulations generated tumors. The characteristics of
the two subpopulations were investigated extensively, and it was found that the
two exhibited cancer stem cell characteristics. These cells expressed stem cell
markers, exhibited a neurosphere-like appearance, and were found to exhibit
self-renewal and multipotency capabilities. Subsequently, the self-renewal and
proliferation abilities of the two subpopulations were compared. It was found
that the A2B5- cells had a higher proliferative index and a higher self-renewal
ability, compared with the A2B5+ cells. In addition, the A2B5- cells exhibited
increased angiogenic ability. However, the invasion ability of the A2B5+ cells
was higher than that of the A2B5- cells. Taken together, the results of the
present study suggested that there are different cell subpopulations in GSCs, and
each subpopulation has its own properties.

PMCID: PMC4758283
PMID: 26498168  [PubMed - in process]


73. Biol Open. 2015 Oct 21;4(11):1518-27. doi: 10.1242/bio.013961.

Epigenetic regulator Lid maintains germline stem cells through regulating
JAK-STAT signaling pathway activity.

Tarayrah L(1), Li Y(2), Gan Q(2), Chen X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, 3400 North Charles Street, The Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, MD 21218-2685, USA lama.tarayrah@weizmann.ac.il
xchen32@jhu.edu. (2)Department of Biology, 3400 North Charles Street, The Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218-2685, USA.

Signaling pathways and epigenetic mechanisms have both been shown to play
essential roles in regulating stem cell activity. While the role of either
mechanism in this regulation is well established in multiple stem cell lineages, 
how the two mechanisms interact to regulate stem cell activity is not as well
understood. Here we report that in the Drosophila testis, an H3K4me3-specific
histone demethylase encoded by little imaginal discs (lid) maintains germline
stem cell (GSC) mitotic index and prevents GSC premature differentiation. Lid is 
required in germ cells for proper expression of the Stat92E transcription factor,
the downstream effector of the Janus kinase signal transducer and activator of
transcription (JAK-STAT) signaling pathway. Our findings support a germ cell
autonomous role for the JAK-STAT pathway in maintaining GSCs and place Lid as an 
upstream regulator of this pathway. Our study provides new insights into the
biological functions of a histone demethylase in vivo and sheds light on the
interaction between epigenetic mechanisms and signaling pathways in regulating
stem cell activities.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4728359
PMID: 26490676  [PubMed]


74. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2016 Feb;52(2):218-27. doi:
10.1007/s11626-015-9963-2. Epub 2015 Oct 20.

Vitamin C stimulates human gingival stem cell proliferation and expression of
pluripotent markers.

Van Pham P(1), Tran NY(2), Phan NL(3), Vu NB(4), Phan NK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Stem Cell Research and Application, University of Science, Viet 
Nam National University, Ho Chi Minh City, Viet Nam. pvphuc@hcmuns.edu.vn.
(2)Faculty of Dentistry, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Ho Chi Minh City,
Viet Nam. yennga281@yahoo.com. (3)Laboratory of Stem Cell Research and
Application, University of Science, Viet Nam National University, Ho Chi Minh
City, Viet Nam. plcnhan@hcmus.edu.vn. (4)Laboratory of Stem Cell Research and
Application, University of Science, Viet Nam National University, Ho Chi Minh
City, Viet Nam. vbngoc@hcmus.edu.vn. (5)Laboratory of Stem Cell Research and
Application, University of Science, Viet Nam National University, Ho Chi Minh
City, Viet Nam. pkngoc@hcmus.edu.vn.

Gingival stem cells (GSCs) are a novel source of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs)
that are easily accessed from the oral cavity. GSCs were considered valuable
autograft MSCs with particular characteristics. However, the limitation in the
number of available GSCs remains an obstacle. Therefore, this study aimed to
stimulate GSC proliferation by ascorbic acid (AA) and determined the effects of
AA on GSC pluripotent potential-related gene expression. GSCs were isolated from 
gum tissue by explant culture and continuously subcultured before analysis of
stemness and effects of AA on pluripotent-related gene expression. GSCs cultured 
with various concentrations of AA showed increased proliferation in a
dose-dependent manner. AA-treated GSCs showed significantly higher expression of 
SSEA-3, Sox-2, Oct-3/4, Nanog, and TRA-1-60 compared with control cells. More
importantly, GSCs also maintained their stemness with MSC phenotypes and failed
to cause tumors in nude athymic mice. Our results show that AA is a suitable
factor to stimulate GSC proliferation.

PMID: 26487430  [PubMed - in process]


75. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2015 Oct 17. [Epub ahead of print]

Determination of the maximum rate of eccrine sweat glands' ion reabsorption using
the galvanic skin conductance to local sweat rate relationship.

Amano T(1), Gerrett N(2,)(3), Inoue Y(4), Nishiyasu T(5), Havenith G(2), Kondo
N(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Applied Human Physiology, Graduate School of Human Development 
and Environment, Kobe University, 3-11 Tsurukabuto, Nada-ku, Kobe, 657-8501,
Japan. (2)Environmental Ergonomics Research Centre, Loughborough University,
Loughborough, UK. (3)Institute of Sport and Exercise Science, University of
Worcester, Worcester, UK. (4)Laboratory for Human Performance Research, Osaka
International University, Osaka, Japan. (5)Institute of Health and Sports
Science, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan. (6)Laboratory for Applied Human
Physiology, Graduate School of Human Development and Environment, Kobe
University, 3-11 Tsurukabuto, Nada-ku, Kobe, 657-8501, Japan. kondo@kobe-u.ac.jp.

PURPOSE: The purpose of the present study was to develop and describe a simple
method to evaluate the rate of ion reabsorption of eccrine sweat glands in human 
using the measurement of galvanic skin conductance (GSC) and local sweating rate 
(SR). This purpose was investigated by comparing the SR threshold for increasing 
GSC with following two criteria of sweat ion reabsorption in earlier studies such
as (1) the SR threshold for increasing sweat ion was at approximately
0.2-0.5 mg/cm(2)/min and (2) exercise heat acclimation improved the sweat ion
reabsorption ability and would increase the criteria 1.
METHODS: Seven healthy non-heat-acclimated male subjects received passive heat
treatment both before and after 7 days of cycling in hot conditions (50 % maximum
oxygen uptake, 60 min/day, ambient temperature 32 °C, and 50 % relative
humidity).
RESULTS: Subjects became partially heat-acclimated, as evidenced by the decreased
end-exercise heart rate (p < 0.01), rate of perceived exhaustion (p < 0.01), and 
oesophageal temperature (p = 0.07), without alterations in whole-body sweat loss,
from the first to the last day of training. As hypothesized, we confirmed that
the SR threshold for increasing GSC was near the predicted SR during passive
heating before exercise heat acclimation, and increased significantly after
training (0.19 ± 0.09-0.32 ± 0.10 mg/cm(2)/min, p < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The reproducibility of sweat ion reabsorption by the eccrine glands 
in the present study suggests that the relationship between GSC and SR can serve 
as a new index for assessing the maximum rate of sweat ion reabsorption of
eccrine sweat glands in humans.

PMID: 26476545  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


76. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2015 Oct 15;6:198. doi: 10.1186/s13287-015-0174-2.

Metabolic activation of mitochondria in glioma stem cells promotes cancer
development through a reactive oxygen species-mediated mechanism.

Yuan S(1), Lu Y(2), Yang J(3), Chen G(4), Kim S(5), Feng L(6), Ogasawara M(7),
Hammoudi N(8), Lu W(9), Zhang H(10), Liu J(11), Colman H(12), Lee JS(13), Li
XN(14), Xu RH(15), Huang P(16,)(17), Wang F(18).

Author information: 
(1)Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center; State Key Laboratory of Oncology in
South China; Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, 651 E Dongfeng 
Road, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510060, China. yuanshq@sysucc.org.cn. (2)Sun Yat-sen 
University Cancer Center; State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China;
Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, 651 E Dongfeng Road,
Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510060, China. luyx@sysucc.org.cn. (3)Sun Yat-sen
University Cancer Center; State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China;
Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, 651 E Dongfeng Road,
Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510060, China. yangjing@sysucc.org.cn. (4)Department of
Translational Molecular Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, 77054, USA. gchen@mdanderson.org. (5)Department of Systems
Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 77054,
USA. sangbae.kim@uth.tmc.edu. (6)Department of Translational Molecular Pathology,
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 77054, USA.
lfeng@mdanderson.org. (7)Department of Translational Molecular Pathology, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 77054, USA.
mogasawara@mdanderson.org. (8)Department of Translational Molecular Pathology,
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 77054, USA.
amian84@hotmail.com. (9)Department of Translational Molecular Pathology, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 77054, USA.
wqlu@mdanderson.org. (10)Department of Translational Molecular Pathology, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 77054, USA.
huz012@eng.ucsd.edu. (11)Department of Translational Molecular Pathology, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 77054, USA.
jliu7@mdanderson.org. (12)Department of Neuro-Oncology, University of Utah, Salt 
Lake City, UT, USA. howard.colman@hsc.utah.edu. (13)Department of Systems
Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 77054,
USA. jlee@mdanderson.org. (14)Laboratory of Molecular Neuro-oncology, Texas
Children's Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
xiaonan@bcm.edu. (15)Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center; State Key Laboratory
of Oncology in South China; Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, 
651 E Dongfeng Road, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510060, China. xurh@sysucc.org.cn.
(16)Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center; State Key Laboratory of Oncology in
South China; Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, 651 E Dongfeng 
Road, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510060, China. phuang@mdanderson.org. (17)Department 
of Translational Molecular Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, TX, 77054, USA. phuang@mdanderson.org. (18)Sun Yat-sen
University Cancer Center; State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China;
Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, 651 E Dongfeng Road,
Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510060, China. wangfeng@sysucc.org.cn.

INTRODUCTION: Cancer stem cells (CSCs) possess characteristics associated with
normal stem cells, specifically the abilities to renew themselves and to give
rise to all cell types (differentiation). It is assumed that induction of
differentiation in CSCs would reduce their ability to form tumors. What triggers 
CSC differentiation and the role of "differentiation" in tumorigenesis remain
elusive.
METHODS: Glioma stem cell (GSC) lines and subcutaneous as well as orthotopic
xenografts established from fresh surgical specimens of glioblastoma multiforme
were used.
RESULTS: Exposure of GSCs to serum activates mitochondrial respiration and causes
an increase in mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS) as well as oxidative
stress responses, leading to the appearance of differentiation morphology and a
deceased expression of CSC markers. Chemical perturbation of the mitochondrial
electron transport chain causes ROS increase and further downregulation of stem
cell markers, while antioxidant N-acetyl-cysteine reduces ROS and suppresses the 
differentiation of GSCs. Surprisingly, the serum-induced differentiated GSCs
exhibit greater ability to form tumor in both orthotopic and subcutaneous
xenograft models, which can be suppressed by N-acetyl-cysteine. Mitochondrial ROS
from the serum-stimulated cells triggered the activation of nuclear
factor-kappa-B (NF<U+03BA>B) pathway, which is a potential mechanism for the promotion
of tumorigenesis.
CONCLUSION: This study suggests that ROS generated from active mitochondrial
respiration in the presence of serum is critical in CSCs activation, which
promotes tumor development in vivo.

PMCID: PMC4606508
PMID: 26472041  [PubMed - in process]


77. Brain Res. 2015 Dec 10;1629:85-93. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2015.10.010. Epub 2015
Oct 22.

Synergistic anti-tumor actions of luteolin and silibinin prevented cell migration
and invasion and induced apoptosis in glioblastoma SNB19 cells and glioblastoma
stem cells.

Chakrabarti M(1), Ray SK(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of South Carolina School of Medicine, Department of Pathology,
Microbiology, and Immunology, Columbia, SC 29209, USA. (2)University of South
Carolina School of Medicine, Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and
Immunology, Columbia, SC 29209, USA. Electronic address:
swapan.ray@uscmed.sc.edu.

Glioblastoma is the most lethal brain tumor. Failure of conventional
chemotherapies prompted the search for natural compounds for treatment of
glioblastoma. Plant-derived flavonoids could be alternative medicine for
inhibiting not only glioblastoma cells but also glioblastoma stem cells (GSC).
Two plant-derived flavonoids are luteolin (LUT) and silibinin (SIL). We
investigated anti-tumor mechanisms of LUT and SIL in different human glioblastoma
cells and GSC and found significant synergistic inhibition of human glioblastoma 
LN18 and SNB19 cells and GSC following treatment with combination of 20µM LUT and
50µM SIL. Combination of 20µM LUT and 50µM SIL was more effective than a
conventional chemotherapeutic agent (BCNU or TMZ). We continued our studies with 
SNB19 cells and GSC and found dramatic inhibition of cell migration from
spheroids and also cell invasion through matrigel following treatment with
combination of LUT and SIL. This combination was highly effective to block
angiogenesis and survival pathways leading to induction of apoptosis. Inhibition 
of PKCa, XIAP, and iNOS ultimately caused induction of extrinsic and intrinsic
pathways of apoptosis. Collectively, synergistic efficacy of LUT and SIL could be
a promising therapy to inhibit cell migration and invasion and induce apoptosis
in different glioblastoma cells including GSC.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26471408  [PubMed - in process]


78. Elife. 2015 Oct 9;4:e08174. doi: 10.7554/eLife.08174.

Wnt signaling-mediated redox regulation maintains the germ line stem cell
differentiation niche.

Wang S(1,)(2), Gao Y(3), Song X(1), Ma X(1,)(2), Zhu X(1), Mao Y(3), Yang Z(3),
Ni J(3), Li H(1), Malanowski KE(1), Anoja P(1), Park J(1), Haug J(1), Xie
T(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, United States.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Kansas School of
Medicine, Kansas City, United States. (3)Center for Life Sciences, College of
Life Sciences, School of Medical Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.

Adult stem cells continuously undergo self-renewal and generate differentiated
cells. In the Drosophila ovary, two separate niches control germ line stem cell
(GSC) self-renewal and differentiation processes. Compared to the self-renewing
niche, relatively little is known about the maintenance and function of the
differentiation niche. In this study, we show that the cellular redox state
regulated by Wnt signaling is critical for the maintenance and function of the
differentiation niche to promote GSC progeny differentiation. Defective Wnt
signaling causes the loss of the differentiation niche and the upregulated BMP
signaling in differentiated GSC progeny, thereby disrupting germ cell
differentiation. Mechanistically, Wnt signaling controls the expression of
multiple glutathione-S-transferase family genes and the cellular redox state.
Finally, Wnt2 and Wnt4 function redundantly to maintain active Wnt signaling in
the differentiation niche. Therefore, this study has revealed a novel strategy
for Wnt signaling in regulating the cellular redox state and maintaining the
differentiation niche.

PMCID: PMC4598714
PMID: 26452202  [PubMed - in process]


79. Oncotarget. 2015 Nov 10;6(35):37241-56. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5925.

miR-135b suppresses tumorigenesis in glioblastoma stem-like cells impairing
proliferation, migration and self-renewal.

Lulli V(1), Buccarelli M(1), Martini M(2), Signore M(1), Biffoni M(1), Giannetti 
S(3), Morgante L(3), Marziali G(1), Ilari R(1), Pagliuca A(1), Larocca LM(2), De 
Maria R(4), Pallini R(5), Ricci-Vitiani L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore 
di Sanità, Rome, Italy. (2)Institute of Anatomic Pathology, Università Cattolica 
del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy. (3)Institute of Human Anatomy, Università Cattolica
del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy. (4)Regina Elena National Cancer Institute, Rome,
Italy. (5)Institute of Neurosurgery, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, 
Italy.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and fatal malignant adult
primary brain tumor. Currently, the overall prognosis for GBM patients remains
poor despite advances in neurosurgery and adjuvant treatments. MicroRNAs (miRNAs)
contribute to the pathogenesis of various types of tumor, including GBM. In this 
study we analyzed the expression of a panel of miRNAs, which are known to be
differentially expressed by the brain and GBM tumor, in a collection of
patient-derived GBM stem-like cells (GSCs). Notably, the average expression level
of miR-135b, was the most downregulated compared to its normal counterpart,
suggesting a potential role as anti-oncogene.Restoration of miR-135b in GSCs
significantly decreased proliferation, migration and clonogenic abilities. More
importantly, miR-135b restoration was able to significantly reduce brain
infiltration in mouse models of GBM obtained by intracerebral injection of GSC
lines. We identified ADAM12 and confirmed SMAD5 and GSK3ß as miR-135b targets and
potential mediators of its effects. The whole transcriptome analysis ascertained 
that the expression of miR-135b downmodulated additional genes driving key
pathways in GBM survival and infiltration capabilities.Our results identify a
critical role of miR-135b in the regulation of GBM development, suggesting that
miR-135b might act as a tumor-suppressor factor and thus providing a potential
candidate for the treatment of GBM patients.

PMCID: PMC4741927
PMID: 26437223  [PubMed - in process]


80. Evodevo. 2015 Sep 28;6:28. doi: 10.1186/s13227-015-0023-5. eCollection 2015.

Evolution and development of the adelphophagic, intracapsular Schmidt's larva of 
the nemertean Lineus ruber.

Martín-Durán JM(1), Vellutini BC(1), Hejnol A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sars International Centre for Marine Molecular Biology, University of Bergen, 
Thormøhlensgate 55, 5008 Bergen, Norway.

BACKGROUND: The life cycle of many animals includes a larval stage, which has
diversified into an astonishing variety of ecological strategies. The Nemertea is
a group of spiralians that exhibits a broad diversity of larval forms, including 
the iconic pilidium. A pelagic planktotrophic pilidium is the ancestral form in
the Pilidiophora, but several lineages exhibit deviations of this condition,
mostly as a transition to pelagic lecithotrophy. The most extreme case occurs,
however, in the Pilidiophoran Lineus ruber, which exhibits an adelphophagic
intracapsular pilidium, the so-called Schmidt's larva.
RESULTS: We combined confocal laser scanning microscopy and gene expression
studies to characterize the development and metamorphosis of the Schmidt's larva 
of L. ruber. The larva forms after gastrulation, and comprises a thin epidermis, 
a proboscis rudiment and two pairs of imaginal discs from which the juvenile will
develop. The cells internalized during gastrulation form a blind gut and the
blastopore gives rise to the mouth of the larva and juvenile. The Schmidt's larva
eats other siblings that occupy the same egg capsule, accumulating nutrients for 
the juvenile. A gradual metamorphosis involves the differentiation of the
juvenile cell types from the imaginal discs and the shedding of the larval
epidermis. The expression of evolutionarily conserved anterior (foxQ2, six3/6,
gsc, otx), endomesodermal (foxA, GATA456-a, twi-a) and posterior (evx, cdx)
markers demonstrate that the juvenile retains the molecular patterning of the
Schmidt's larva. After metamorphosis, the juveniles stay over 20 days within the 
egg masses, until they are fully mature and hatch.
CONCLUSIONS: The evolution of the intracapsular Schmidt's larva involved the loss
of the typical feeding structures of the planktotrophic pilidium and a precocious
formation of the imaginal discs, as also observed in other pelagic lecithotrophic
forms. However, no special adaptations are observed related to adelphophagy. As
in planktotrophic pilidium, the molecular mechanism patterning the juvenile is
only active in the imaginal discs and not during the early development of the
larva, suggesting two separate molecular programs during nemertean embryogenesis.
Our results illuminate the diversification of larval forms in the Pilidiophora
and Nemertea, and thus on the developmental mechanisms underlying metazoan larval
evolution.

PMCID: PMC4584431
PMID: 26417429  [PubMed]


81. Development. 2015 Nov 15;142(22):3821-32. doi: 10.1242/dev.119628. Epub 2015 Sep 
28.

ProNodal acts via FGFR3 to govern duration of Shh expression in the prechordal
mesoderm.

Ellis PS(1), Burbridge S(1), Soubes S(1), Ohyama K(1), Ben-Haim N(2), Chen C(3), 
Dale K(4), Shen MM(5), Constam D(2), Placzek M(6).

Author information: 
(1)The Bateson Centre and Department of Biomedical Science, University of
Sheffield, Western Bank, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK. (2)ISREC, School of Life
Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Epalinges CH 1066,
Switzerland. (3)Departments of Medicine and Genetics & Development, Columbia
University Medical Center, Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center, 1130 St.
Nicholas Avenue, New York, NY 10032, USA Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology,
61 Biopolis Drive, Proteos, Singapore 138673, Singapore. (4)College of Life
Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK. (5)Departments of Medicine
and Genetics & Development, Columbia University Medical Center, Herbert Irving
Comprehensive Cancer Center, 1130 St. Nicholas Avenue, New York, NY 10032, USA.
(6)The Bateson Centre and Department of Biomedical Science, University of
Sheffield, Western Bank, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK m.placzek@sheffield.ac.uk.

The secreted glycoprotein sonic hedgehog (Shh) is expressed in the prechordal
mesoderm, where it plays a crucial role in induction and patterning of the
ventral forebrain. Currently little is known about how Shh is regulated in
prechordal tissue. Here we show that in the embryonic chick, Shh is expressed
transiently in prechordal mesoderm, and is governed by unprocessed Nodal.
Exposure of prechordal mesoderm microcultures to Nodal-conditioned medium, the
Nodal inhibitor CerS, or to an ALK4/5/7 inhibitor reveals that Nodal is required 
to maintain both Shh and Gsc expression, but whereas Gsc is largely maintained
through canonical signalling, Nodal signals through a non-canonical route to
maintain Shh. Further, Shh expression can be maintained by a recombinant Nodal
cleavage mutant, proNodal, but not by purified mature Nodal. A number of lines of
evidence suggest that proNodal acts via FGFR3. ProNodal and FGFR3
co-immunoprecipitate and proNodal increases FGFR3 tyrosine phosphorylation. In
microcultures, soluble FGFR3 abolishes Shh without affecting Gsc expression.
Further, prechordal mesoderm cells in which Fgfr3 expression is reduced by Fgfr3 
siRNA fail to bind to proNodal. Finally, targeted electroporation of Fgfr3 siRNA 
to prechordal mesoderm in vivo results in premature Shh downregulation without
affecting Gsc. We report an inverse correlation between proNodal-FGFR3 signalling
and pSmad1/5/8, and show that proNodal-FGFR3 signalling antagonises BMP-mediated 
pSmad1/5/8 signalling, which is poised to downregulate Shh. Our studies suggest
that proNodal/FGFR3 signalling governs Shh duration by repressing canonical BMP
signalling, and that local BMPs rapidly silence Shh once endogenous Nodal-FGFR3
signalling is downregulated.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4712875
PMID: 26417042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Gene. 2016 Jan 10;575(2 Pt 3):623-31. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.09.037. Epub 2015 
Sep 21.

Characterization of F-spondin in Japanese flounder (Paralichthys olivaceus) and
its role in the nervous system development of teleosts.

Hu H(1), Xin N(1), Liu J(1), Liu M(1), Wang Z(1), Wang W(1), Zhang Q(1), Qi J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Marine Genetics and Breeding, Ocean University of China,
266003 Qingdao, Shandong, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Marine Genetics and
Breeding, Ocean University of China, 266003 Qingdao, Shandong, China. Electronic 
address: qijie@ouc.edu.cn.

F-spondin was originally isolated from the developing embryonic floor plate of
vertebrates, secreting numerous kinds of neuron-related molecules. The protein
performs a positive function in nervous system development, which is attributed
to the high conservation of F-spondin protein, an extracellular matrix (ECM)
protein in several species. However, its precise function remains unknown,
especially in marine fish. In this study, the F-spondin of Japanese flounder
(Paralichthys olivaceus). was cloned, and its expression pattern and structural
characteristics were analyzed. The 2421bp-long cDNA ORF of PoF-spondin was
obtained and divided into 14 exons spread over 61,496bp of the genomic sequence. 
Phylogenetic analysis showed that PoF-spondin was actually the ortholog of the
human spon1 gene and shared high identities with other teleost spon1a genes.
Quantitative RT-PCR analysis showed that PoF-spondin was maternally expressed,
and transcripts were present from one-cell stage to hatching stage, peaking at
tailbud stage. Tissue distribution analysis indicated that PoF-spondin was
detectable mainly in the gonads (especially in the ovary) and the brain. Whole
mount in situ hybridization analysis revealed that the PoF-spondin transcription 
distributed throughout the cleavage of the ball in the early stage and expressed 
at a high level in the floor plate of the trunk at tailbud and pre-hatching
stages. Furthermore, the expression of genes related to nervous system
development (spon1b, foxo3b, and foxj1a) was significantly increased after the
injection of PoF-spondin into the embryos of wild-type zebrafish. Furthermore,
PoF-spondin significantly suppressed the expression of the chordamesoderm marker 
gene ntl, increased the expression of otx2/krox20, ectoderm mark genes, and left 
the expression of dorsal mesodermal marker gene gsc unaffected at 50% epiboly
stage in zebrafish. In short, our results suggest that PoF-spondin functions in
the development of the teleost nervous system.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26390814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2016 Jan;65(1):101-9. doi: 10.1007/s00262-015-1754-9. 
Epub 2015 Sep 16.

Immunotherapy with dendritic cells loaded with glioblastoma stem cells: from
preclinical to clinical studies.

Finocchiaro G(1), Pellegatta S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Molecular Neuro-Oncology, Fondazione I.R.C.C.S. Istituto Neurologico
C. Besta, Via Celoria 11, 20133, Milan, Italy.
gaetano.finocchiaro@istituto-besta.it. (2)Unit of Molecular Neuro-Oncology,
Fondazione I.R.C.C.S. Istituto Neurologico C. Besta, Via Celoria 11, 20133,
Milan, Italy. serenapellegatta@gmail.com.

Different approaches have been explored to raise effective antitumor responses
against glioblastoma (GBM), the deadliest of primary brain tumors. In many
clinical studies, cancer vaccines have been based on dendritic cells (DCs) loaded
with peptides, representing one or more specific tumor antigens or whole lysates 
as a source of multiple antigens. Randomized clinical trials using DCs are
ongoing, and results of efficacy are not yet available. Such strategies are
feasible and safe; however, immune-suppressive microenvironment, absence of
appropriate specific epitopes to target, and cancer immunoediting can limit their
efficacy. The aim of this review is to describe how the definition of novel and
more specific targets may increase considerably the possibility of successful DC 
immunotherapy. By proposing to target glioblastoma stem-like cells (GSCs), the
immune response will be pointed to eradicating factors and pathways highly
relevant to GBM biology. Preclinical observations on efficacy, and preliminary
results of immunotherapy trials, encourage exploring the clinical efficacy of DC 
immunotherapy in GBM patients using high-purity, GSC-loaded DC vaccines.

PMID: 26377689  [PubMed - in process]


84. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Sep 8;16(9):21575-90. doi: 10.3390/ijms160921575.

Effects of Low Molecular Weight Yeast ß-Glucan on Antioxidant and Immunological
Activities in Mice.

Lei N(1), Wang M(2), Zhang L(3), Xiao S(4), Fei C(5), Wang X(6), Zhang K(7),
Zheng W(8), Wang C(9), Yang R(10), Xue F(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Shanghai 200241, China. aoleina@126.com.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Shanghai 200241, China. wangmi@shvri.ac.cn.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Shanghai 200241, China. twinzhang@shvri.ac.cn. 
(4)Department of Pharmacy, Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Shanghai 200241, China. xiaosui@shvri.ac.cn.
(5)Department of Pharmacy, Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Shanghai 200241, China. aries@shvri.ac.cn.
(6)Department of Pharmacy, Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Shanghai 200241, China. wxy@shvri.ac.cn.
(7)Department of Pharmacy, Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Shanghai 200241, China. zcole@shvri.ac.cn.
(8)Department of Pharmacy, Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Shanghai 200241, China. wenli@shvri.ac.cn.
(9)Department of Pharmacy, Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Shanghai 200241, China.
wangchunmei@shvri.ac.cn. (10)Department of Pharmacy, Shanghai Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Shanghai 200241, China.
yangruile@shvri.ac.cn. (11)Department of Pharmacy, Shanghai Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Shanghai 200241, China.
feiqun@gmail.com.

To evaluate the antioxidant and immune effects of low molecular yeast ß-glucan on
mice, three sulfated glucans from Saccharomyces cerevisiae (sGSCs) with different
molecular weight (MW) and degrees of sulfation (DS) were prepared. The structures
of the sGSCs were analyzed through high performance liquid chromatography-gel
permeation chromatography (HPLC-GPC) and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy 
(FTIR). sGSC1, sGSC2, and sGSC3 had MW of 12.9, 16.5 and 19.2 kDa, respectively, 
and DS of 0.16, 0.24 and 0.27, respectively. In vitro and in vivo experiments
were conducted to evaluate the antioxidant and immunological activities of the
sGSCs. In vitro experiment, the reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenging
activities were determined. In vivo experiment, 50 male BALB/c mice were divided 
into five groups. The sGSC1, sGSC2 and sGSC3 treatment groups received the
corresponding sGSCs at 50 mg/kg/day each. The GSC (glucans from Saccharomyces
cerevisiae) treatment group received 50 mg/kg/day GSC. The normal control group
received equal volume of physiological saline solution. All treatments were
administered intragastrically for 14 day. Results showed that sGSC1, sGSC2 and
sGSC3 can scavenge 1,1-diphenyl-2-picryl-hydrazyl (DPPH), superoxide, and
hydroxyl radicals in vitro. The strength of the radical scavenging effects of the
sGSCs was in the order of sGSC1 > sGSC2 > sGSC3. Oral administration of sGSC1
significantly improved serum catalase (CAT) and glutathione peroxidase (GSH-Px)
activities and decreased malondialdehyde (MDA) level in mice. sGSC1 significantly
improved the spleen and thymus indexes and the lymphocyte proliferation,
effectively enhanced the percentage of CD4<U+207A> T cells, decreased the percentage of 
CD8<U+207A> T cells, and elevated the CD4<U+207A>/CD8<U+207A> ratio. sGSC1 significantly promoted the 
secretion of IL-2 and IFN-<U+03B3>. These results indicate that sGSC1 with low MW and DS
has better antioxidant and immunological activities than the other sGSCs, and
sGSC1 could be used as a new antioxidant and immune-enhancing agent.

PMCID: PMC4613268
PMID: 26370978  [PubMed - in process]


85. Plant Biotechnol J. 2016 Feb;14(2):519-532. doi: 10.1111/pbi.12468. Epub 2015 Sep
11.

Development of germ-line-specific CRISPR-Cas9 systems to improve the production
of heritable gene modifications in Arabidopsis.

Mao Y(1), Zhang Z(1,)(2), Feng Z(1,)(2,)(3), Wei P(1,)(2), Zhang H(1), Botella
JR(4), Zhu JK(1,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Center for Plant Stress Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai, China. (2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Shanghai,
China. (3)Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, Shanghai Institutes for
Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China. (4)School of
Agriculture and Food Sciences, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Qld,
Australia. (5)Department of Horticulture and Landscape Architecture, Purdue
University, West Lafayette, IN, USA.

The Streptococcus-derived CRISPR/Cas9 system is being widely used to perform
targeted gene modifications in plants. This customized endonuclease system has
two components, the single-guide RNA (sgRNA) for target DNA recognition and the
CRISPR-associated protein 9 (Cas9) for DNA cleavage. Ubiquitously expressed
CRISPR/Cas9 systems (UC) generate targeted gene modifications with high
efficiency but only those produced in reproductive cells are transmitted to the
next generation. We report the design and characterization of a
germ-line-specific Cas9 system (GSC) for Arabidopsis gene modification in male
gametocytes, constructed using a SPOROCYTELESS (SPL) genomic expression cassette.
Four loci in two endogenous genes were targeted by both systems for comparative
analysis. Mutations generated by the GSC system were rare in T1 plants but were
abundant (30%) in the T2 generation. The vast majority (70%) of the T2 mutant
population generated using the UC system were chimeras while the newly developed 
GSC system produced only 29% chimeras, with 70% of the T2 mutants being
heterozygous. Analysis of two loci in the T2 population showed that the abundance
of heritable gene mutations was 37% higher in the GSC system compared to the UC
system and the level of polymorphism of the mutations was also dramatically
increased with the GSC system. Two additional systems based on germ-line-specific
promoters (pDD45-GT and pLAT52-GT) were also tested, and one of them was capable 
of generating heritable homozygous T1 mutant plants. Our results suggest that
future application of the described GSC system will facilitate the screening for 
targeted gene modifications, especially lethal mutations in the T2 population.

© 2015 Society for Experimental Biology, Association of Applied Biologists and
John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26360626  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


86. Biomed Res Int. 2015;2015:689614. doi: 10.1155/2015/689614. Epub 2015 Aug 3.

Interleukin-27 Protects Cardiomyocyte-Like H9c2 Cells against Metabolic Syndrome:
Role of STAT3 Signaling.

Phan WL(1), Huang YT(2), Ma MC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Cardinal Tien Hospital, New Taipei City 23148,
Taiwan. (2)School of Medicine, Fu Jen Catholic University, New Taipei City 24205,
Taiwan.

The present results demonstrated that high glucose (G), salt (S), and cholesterol
C (either alone or in combination), as mimicking extracellular changes in
metabolic syndrome, damage cardiomyocyte-like H9c2 cells and reduce their
viability in a time-dependent manner. However, the effects were greatest when
cells were exposed to all three agents (GSC). The mRNA of glycoprotein (gp) 130
and WSX-1, both components of the interleukin (IL)-27 receptor, were present in
H9c2 cells. Although mRNA expression was not affected by exogenous treatment with
IL-27, the expression of gp130 mRNA (but not that of WSX-1 mRNA) was attenuated
by GSC. Treatment of IL-27 to H9c2 cells increased activation of signal
transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) and protected cells from
GSC-induced cytochrome c release and cell damage. The protective effects of IL-27
were abrogated by the STAT3 inhibitor, stattic. The results of the present study 
clearly demonstrate that the STAT3 pathway triggered by anti-inflammatory IL-27
plays a role in protecting cardiomyocytes against GSC-mediated damage.

PMCID: PMC4538580
PMID: 26339633  [PubMed - in process]


87. Genome Med. 2015 Sep 1;7(1):95. doi: 10.1186/s13073-015-0212-9.

Exploring the cellular basis of human disease through a large-scale mapping of
deleterious genes to cell types.

Cornish AJ(1), Filippis I(2), David A(3), Sternberg MJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, Exhibition Road, London,
SW7 2AZ, UK. a.cornish12@imperial.ac.uk. (2)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial
College London, Exhibition Road, London, SW7 2AZ, UK. i.filippis@imperial.ac.uk. 
(3)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, Exhibition Road, London,
SW7 2AZ, UK. alessia.david09@imperial.ac.uk. (4)Department of Life Sciences,
Imperial College London, Exhibition Road, London, SW7 2AZ, UK.
m.sternberg@imperial.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Each cell type found within the human body performs a diverse and
unique set of functions, the disruption of which can lead to disease. However,
there currently exists no systematic mapping between cell types and the diseases 
they can cause.
METHODS: In this study, we integrate protein-protein interaction data with
high-quality cell-type-specific gene expression data from the FANTOM5 project to 
build the largest collection of cell-type-specific interactomes created to date. 
We develop a novel method, called gene set compactness (GSC), that contrasts the 
relative positions of disease-associated genes across 73 cell-type-specific
interactomes to map genes associated with 196 diseases to the cell types they
affect. We conduct text-mining of the PubMed database to produce an independent
resource of disease-associated cell types, which we use to validate our method.
RESULTS: The GSC method successfully identifies known disease-cell-type
associations, as well as highlighting associations that warrant further study.
This includes mast cells and multiple sclerosis, a cell population currently
being targeted in a multiple sclerosis phase 2 clinical trial. Furthermore, we
build a cell-type-based diseasome using the cell types identified as manifesting 
each disease, offering insight into diseases linked through etiology.
CONCLUSIONS: The data set produced in this study represents the first large-scale
mapping of diseases to the cell types in which they are manifested and will
therefore be useful in the study of disease systems. Overall, we demonstrate that
our approach links disease-associated genes to the phenotypes they produce, a key
goal within systems medicine.

PMCID: PMC4557825
PMID: 26330083  [PubMed - in process]


88. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 22;6(28):26192-215. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4613.

Combined expressional analysis, bioinformatics and targeted proteomics identify
new potential therapeutic targets in glioblastoma stem cells.

Stangeland B(1,)(2), Mughal AA(1), Grieg Z(1,)(3), Sandberg CJ(1), Joel
M(1,)(3,)(4), Nygård S(5), Meling T(1), Murrell W(1), Vik Mo EO(1), Langmoen
IA(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Vilhelm Magnus Laboratory for Neurosurgical Research, Institute for Surgical
Research and Department of Neurosurgery, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. 
(2)SFI-CAST Biomedical Innovation Center, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(3)Norwegian Center for Stem Cell Research, Department of Immunology and
Transfusion Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. (4)Laboratory of
Neural Development and Optical Recording (NDEVOR), Department of Physiology,
Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(5)Bioinformatics Core Facility, Institute for Medical Informatics, Oslo
University Hospital and University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is both the most common and the most lethal primary brain
tumor. It is thought that GBM stem cells (GSCs) are critically important in
resistance to therapy. Therefore, there is a strong rationale to target these
cells in order to develop new molecular therapies.To identify molecular targets
in GSCs, we compared gene expression in GSCs to that in neural stem cells (NSCs) 
from the adult human brain, using microarrays. Bioinformatic filtering identified
20 genes (PBK/TOPK, CENPA, KIF15, DEPDC1, CDC6, DLG7/DLGAP5/HURP, KIF18A, EZH2,
HMMR/RHAMM/CD168, NOL4, MPP6, MDM1, RAPGEF4, RHBDD1, FNDC3B, FILIP1L, MCC,
ATXN7L4/ATXN7L1, P2RY5/LPAR6 and FAM118A) that were consistently expressed in GSC
cultures and consistently not expressed in NSC cultures. The expression of these 
genes was confirmed in clinical samples (TCGA and REMBRANDT). The first nine
genes were highly co-expressed in all GBM subtypes and were part of the same
protein-protein interaction network. Furthermore, their combined up-regulation
correlated negatively with patient survival in the mesenchymal GBM subtype. Using
targeted proteomics and the COGNOSCENTE database we linked these genes to GBM
signalling pathways.Nine genes: PBK, CENPA, KIF15, DEPDC1, CDC6, DLG7, KIF18A,
EZH2 and HMMR should be further explored as targets for treatment of GBM.

PMCID: PMC4694895
PMID: 26295306  [PubMed - in process]


89. Development. 2015 Oct 1;142(19):3362-73. doi: 10.1242/dev.123273. Epub 2015 Aug
20.

Coordinate post-transcriptional repression of Dpp-dependent transcription factors
attenuates signal range during development.

Newton FG(1), Harris RE(1), Sutcliffe C(1), Ashe HL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PT, UK.
(2)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PT, UK
hilary.ashe@manchester.ac.uk.

Precise control of the range of signalling molecule action is crucial for correct
cell fate patterning during development. For example, Drosophila ovarian germline
stem cells (GSCs) are maintained by exquisitely short-range BMP signalling from
the niche. In the absence of BMP signalling, one GSC daughter differentiates into
a cystoblast (CB) and this fate is stabilised by Brain tumour (Brat) and Pumilio 
(Pum)-mediated post-transcriptional repression of mRNAs, including that encoding 
the Dpp transducer, Mad. However, the identity of other repressed mRNAs and the
mechanism of post-transcriptional repression are currently unknown. Here, we
identify the Medea and schnurri mRNAs, which encode transcriptional regulators
required for activation and/or repression of Dpp target genes, as additional
Pum-Brat targets, suggesting that tripartite repression of the transducers is
deployed to desensitise the CB to Dpp. In addition, we show that repression by
Pum-Brat requires recruitment of the CCR4 and Pop2 deadenylases, with knockdown
of deadenylases in vivo giving rise to ectopic GSCs. Consistent with this,
Pum-Brat repression leads to poly(A) tail shortening and mRNA degradation in
tissue culture cells, and we detect a reduced number of Mad and shn transcripts
in the CB relative to the GSC based on single molecule mRNA quantitation.
Finally, we show generality of the mechanism by demonstrating that Brat also
attenuates pMad and Dpp signalling range in the early embryo. Together our data
serve as a platform for understanding how post-transcriptional repression
restricts interpretation of BMPs and other cell signals in order to allow robust 
cell fate patterning during development.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4631754
PMID: 26293305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. PLoS Genet. 2015 Aug 20;11(8):e1005453. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005453.
eCollection 2015.

The Drosophila bag of marbles Gene Interacts Genetically with Wolbachia and Shows
Female-Specific Effects of Divergence.

Flores HA(1), Bubnell JE(1), Aquadro CF(1), Barbash DA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, New 
York, United States of America.

Many reproductive proteins from diverse taxa evolve rapidly and adaptively. These
proteins are typically involved in late stages of reproduction such as sperm
development and fertilization, and are more often functional in males than
females. Surprisingly, many germline stem cell (GSC) regulatory genes, which are 
essential for the earliest stages of reproduction, also evolve adaptively in
Drosophila. One example is the bag of marbles (bam) gene, which is required for
GSC differentiation and germline cyst development in females and for regulating
mitotic divisions and entry to spermatocyte differentiation in males. Here we
show that the extensive divergence of bam between Drosophila melanogaster and D. 
simulans affects bam function in females but has no apparent effect in males. We 
further find that infection with Wolbachia pipientis, an endosymbiotic bacterium 
that can affect host reproduction through various mechanisms, partially
suppresses female sterility caused by bam mutations in D. melanogaster and
interacts differentially with bam orthologs from D. melanogaster and D. simulans.
We propose that the adaptive evolution of bam has been driven at least in part by
the long-term interactions between Drosophila species and Wolbachia. More
generally, we suggest that microbial infections of the germline may explain the
unexpected pattern of evolution of several GSC regulatory genes.

PMCID: PMC4546362
PMID: 26291077  [PubMed - in process]


91. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 18;10(8):e0135760. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135760.
eCollection 2015.

Discovery of Power-Law Growth in the Self-Renewal of Heterogeneous Glioma Stem
Cell Populations.

Sugimori M(1), Hayakawa Y(2), Boman BM(3), Fields JZ(4), Awaji M(1), Kozano H(1),
Tamura R(1), Yamamoto S(5), Ogata T(6), Yamada M(7), Endo S(2), Kurimoto M(2),
Kuroda S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Neuroscience, University of Toyama, 2630 Sugitani,
Toyama, Toyama 930-0194, Japan. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, University of
Toyama, 2630 Sugitani, Toyama, Toyama 930-0194, Japan. (3)Center for
Translational Cancer Research, Departments of Biology and Mathematics, University
of Delaware, Helen F Graham Cancer Center and Research Institute, Newark, DE
19711 United States of America. (4)Biotechnical Research, CATX, Inc., Gladwyne,
PA 19035 United States of America. (5)Department of Pathology, University of
Toyama, 2630 Sugitani, Toyama, Toyama 930-0194, Japan. (6)The Center of Sports
Science and Health Promotion in the NRCD Hospital, National Rehabilitation Center
for Persons with Disabilities, 4-1 Namiki, Tokorozawa, Saitama 359-8555, Japan.
(7)Department of Neuropsycopharmacology, National Institute of Mental Health,
National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, 4-1-1 Ogawahigashi, Kodaira, Tokyo
187-8553, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Accumulating evidence indicates that cancer stem cells (CSCs) drive
tumorigenesis. This suggests that CSCs should make ideal therapeutic targets.
However, because CSC populations in tumors appear heterogeneous, it remains
unclear how CSCs might be effectively targeted. To investigate the mechanisms by 
which CSC populations maintain heterogeneity during self-renewal, we established 
a glioma sphere (GS) forming model, to generate a population in which glioma stem
cells (GSCs) become enriched. We hypothesized, based on the clonal evolution
concept, that with each passage in culture, heterogeneous clonal sublines of GSs 
are generated that progressively show increased proliferative ability.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To test this hypothesis, we determined whether,
with each passage, glioma neurosphere culture generated from four different
glioma cell lines become progressively proliferative (i.e., enriched in large
spheres). Rather than monitoring self-renewal, we measured heterogeneity based on
neurosphere clone sizes (#cells/clone). Log-log plots of distributions of clone
sizes yielded a good fit (r>0.90) to a straight line (log(% total clones) =
k*log(#cells/clone)) indicating that the system follows a power-law (y = xk) with
a specific degree exponent (k = -1.42). Repeated passaging of the total GS
population showed that the same power-law was maintained over six passages (CV = 
-1.01 to -1.17). Surprisingly, passage of either isolated small or large
subclones generated fully heterogeneous populations that retained the original
power-law-dependent heterogeneity. The anti-GSC agent Temozolomide, which is well
known as a standard therapy for glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), suppressed the
self-renewal of clones, but it never disrupted the power-law behavior of a GS
population.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Although the data above did not support the stated
hypothesis, they did strongly suggest a novel mechanism that underlies CSC
heterogeneity. They indicate that power-law growth governs the self-renewal of
heterogeneous glioma stem cell populations. That the data always fit a power-law 
suggests that: (i) clone sizes follow continuous, non-random, and scale-free
hierarchy; (ii) precise biologic rules that reflect self-organizing emergent
behaviors govern the generation of neurospheres. That the power-law behavior and 
the original GS heterogeneity are maintained over multiple passages indicates
that these rules are invariant. These self-organizing mechanisms very likely
underlie tumor heterogeneity during tumor growth. Discovery of this power-law
behavior provides a mechanism that could be targeted in the development of new,
more effective, anti-cancer agents.

PMCID: PMC4540573
PMID: 26284929  [PubMed - in process]


92. J Transl Med. 2015 Aug 18;13:269. doi: 10.1186/s12967-015-0627-5.

Effect of the JAK2/STAT3 inhibitor SAR317461 on human glioblastoma tumorspheres.

Mukthavaram R(1,)(2), Ouyang X(3), Saklecha R(4), Jiang P(5), Nomura N(6), Pingle
SC(7), Guo F(8), Makale M(9), Kesari S(10,)(11,)(12).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Neuro-Oncology Laboratories, Moores Cancer Center, UC San Diego,
3855 Health Sciences Drive, MC#0819, La Jolla, CA, 92093-0819, USA.
rmukthavaram@ucsd.edu. (2)Department of Neurosciences, UC San Diego, La Jolla,
CA, USA. rmukthavaram@ucsd.edu. (3)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Xuzhou 3rd
Hospital, Affiliated Hospital of Jiangsu University, No. 131 Huancheng Road,
221005, Xuzhou, China. 15162100079@163.com. (4)Translational Neuro-Oncology
Laboratories, Moores Cancer Center, UC San Diego, 3855 Health Sciences Drive,
MC#0819, La Jolla, CA, 92093-0819, USA. Rsaklech@gmail.com. (5)Translational
Neuro-Oncology Laboratories, Moores Cancer Center, UC San Diego, 3855 Health
Sciences Drive, MC#0819, La Jolla, CA, 92093-0819, USA. pejiang@ucsd.edu.
(6)Translational Neuro-Oncology Laboratories, Moores Cancer Center, UC San Diego,
3855 Health Sciences Drive, MC#0819, La Jolla, CA, 92093-0819, USA.
nanomura@ucsd.edu. (7)Translational Neuro-Oncology Laboratories, Moores Cancer
Center, UC San Diego, 3855 Health Sciences Drive, MC#0819, La Jolla, CA,
92093-0819, USA. spingle@ucsd.edu. (8)Laboratory of Tumor Targeted Therapy,
Shanghai Advanced Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences, University of 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, 99 Haike Road, 201210, Shanghai, China.
guof@sari.ac.cn. (9)Translational Neuro-Oncology Laboratories, Moores Cancer
Center, UC San Diego, 3855 Health Sciences Drive, MC#0819, La Jolla, CA,
92093-0819, USA. mmakale@ucsd.edu. (10)Translational Neuro-Oncology Laboratories,
Moores Cancer Center, UC San Diego, 3855 Health Sciences Drive, MC#0819, La
Jolla, CA, 92093-0819, USA. skesari@ucsd.edu. (11)Department of Neurosciences, UC
San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. skesari@ucsd.edu. (12)Department of Radiation
Medicine and Applied Sciences, UC San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. skesari@ucsd.edu.

BACKGROUND: The STAT3 transcription factor is a major intracellular signaling
protein and is frequently dysregulated in the most common and lethal brain
malignancy in adults, glioblastoma multiforme (GBM). Activation of STAT3 in GBM
correlates with malignancy and poor prognosis. The phosphorylating signal
transducer JAK2 activates STAT3 in response to cytokines and growth factors.
Currently there are no JAK-STAT pathway inhibitors in clinical trials for GBM, so
we sought to examine the anti-GBM activity of SAR317461 (Sanofi-Aventis), a newer
generation, highly potent JAK2 inhibitor that exhibits low toxicity and good
pharmacokinetics. SAR317461 was initially approved for patient testing in the
treatment of primary myelofibrosis (PMF), and has shown activity in preclinical
models of melanoma and pulmonary cancer, but has not been tested in GBM.
METHODS: We hypothesized that a potent small molecule JAK2 inhibitor could
overcome the heterogeneous nature of GBM, and suppress a range of patient derived
GBM tumorsphere lines and immortalized GBM cell lines. We treated with SAR317461 
to determine IC50 values, and using Western blot analysis we asked whether the
response was linked to STAT3 expression. Western blot analysis, FACS, and cell
viability studies were used to identify the mechanism of SAR317461 induced cell
death.
RESULTS: We report for the first time that the JAK2 inhibitor SAR317461 clearly
inhibited STAT3 phosphorylation and had substantial activity against cells (IC50 
1-10 µM) from 6 of 7 different patient GSC derived GBM tumorsphere lines and
three immortalized GBM lines. One patient GSC derived line did not constitutively
express STAT3 and was more resistant to SAR317461 (IC50 25 µM). In terms of
mechanism we found cleaved PARP and clear apoptosis following SAR317461.
SAR317461 also induced autophagy and the addition of an autophagy inhibitor
markedly enhanced cell killing by SAR317461.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that SAR317461 potently inhibits STAT3 phosphorylation
and that it has significant activity against those GBM cells which express
activated STAT3. Further studies are warranted in terms of the potential of
SAR317461 as single and combined therapy for selectively treating human patients 
afflicted with GBMs expressing activation of the JAK2-STAT3 signaling axis.

PMCID: PMC4539675
PMID: 26283544  [PubMed - in process]


93. Cancer Res. 2015 Oct 15;75(20):4416-28. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3790. Epub 
2015 Aug 17.

Selective Inhibition of Parallel DNA Damage Response Pathways Optimizes
Radiosensitization of Glioblastoma Stem-like Cells.

Ahmed SU(1), Carruthers R(2), Gilmour L(2), Yildirim S, Watts C(3), Chalmers
AJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Radiation Biology, Institute of Cancer Sciences, Wolfson Wohl
Cancer Research Centre, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
shafiq.ahmed@glasgow.ac.uk anthony.chalmers@glasgow.ac.uk. (2)Translational
Radiation Biology, Institute of Cancer Sciences, Wolfson Wohl Cancer Research
Centre, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom. (3)Department of Clinical
Neurosciences, Division of Neurosurgery, ED Adrian Building, Forvie Site,
Robinson Way, Cambridge University, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Glioblastoma is the most common form of primary brain tumor in adults and is
essentially incurable. Despite aggressive treatment regimens centered on
radiotherapy, tumor recurrence is inevitable and is thought to be driven by
glioblastoma stem-like cells (GSC) that are highly radioresistant. DNA damage
response pathways are key determinants of radiosensitivity but the extent to
which these overlapping and parallel signaling components contribute to GSC
radioresistance is unclear. Using a panel of primary patient-derived glioblastoma
cell lines, we confirmed by clonogenic survival assays that GSCs were
significantly more radioresistant than paired tumor bulk populations. DNA damage 
response targets ATM, ATR, CHK1, and PARP1 were upregulated in GSCs, and CHK1 was
preferentially activated following irradiation. Consequently, GSCs exhibit rapid 
G2-M cell-cycle checkpoint activation and enhanced DNA repair. Inhibition of CHK1
or ATR successfully abrogated G2-M checkpoint function, leading to increased
mitotic catastrophe and a modest increase in radiation sensitivity. Inhibition of
ATM had dual effects on cell-cycle checkpoint regulation and DNA repair that were
associated with greater radiosensitizing effects on GSCs than inhibition of CHK1,
ATR, or PARP alone. Combined inhibition of PARP and ATR resulted in a profound
radiosensitization of GSCs, which was of greater magnitude than in bulk
populations and also exceeded the effect of ATM inhibition. These data
demonstrate that multiple, parallel DNA damage signaling pathways contribute to
GSC radioresistance and that combined inhibition of cell-cycle checkpoint and DNA
repair targets provides the most effective means to overcome radioresistance of
GSC.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26282173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 8;6(26):22680-97.

RTVP-1 promotes mesenchymal transformation of glioma via a STAT-3/IL-6-dependent 
positive feedback loop.

Giladi ND(1), Ziv-Av A(1), Lee HK(2), Finniss S(2), Cazacu S(2), Xiang C(2),
Waldman Ben-Asher H(1), deCarvalho A(2), Mikkelsen T(2), Poisson L(3), Brodie
C(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Everard and Mina Goodman Faculty of Life Sciences, Bar-Ilan University,
Ramat-Gan, Israel. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, Davidson Laboratory of Cell
Signaling and Tumorigenesis, Hermelin Brain Tumor Center, Henry Ford Hospital,
Detroit, MI, USA. (3)Department of Public Health Sciences, Henry Ford Hospital,
Detroit, MI, USA.

Glioblastomas (GBMs), the most aggressive primary brain tumors, exhibit increased
invasiveness and resistance to anti-tumor treatments. We explored the role of
RTVP-1, a glioma-associated protein that promotes glioma cell migration, in the
mesenchymal transformation of GBM. Analysis of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)
demonstrated that RTVP-1 expression was higher in mesenchymal GBM and predicted
tumor recurrence and poor clinical outcome. ChiP analysis revealed that the
RTVP-1 promoter binds STAT3 and C/EBPß, two master transcription factors that
regulate mesenchymal transformation of GBM. In addition, IL-6 induced RTVP-1
expression in a STAT3-dependent manner. RTVP-1 increased the migration and
mesenchymal transformation of glioma cells. Similarly, overexpression of RTVP-1
in human neural stem cells induced mesenchymal differentiation, whereas silencing
of RTVP-1 in glioma stem cells (GSCs) decreased the mesenchymal transformation
and stemness of these cells. Silencing of RTVP-1 also increased the survival of
mice bearing GSC-derived xenografts. Using gene array analysis of RTVP-1 silenced
glioma cells we identified IL-6 as a mediator of RTVP-1 effects on the
mesenchymal transformation and migration of GSCs, therefore acting in a positive 
feedback loop by upregulating RTVP-1 expression via the STAT3 pathway.
Collectively, these results implicate RTVP-1 as a novel prognostic marker and
therapeutic target in GBM.

PMCID: PMC4673191
PMID: 26267319  [PubMed - in process]


95. J Environ Manage. 2015 Oct 1;162:299-305. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvman.2015.07.055.
Epub 2015 Aug 8.

Improved waste water treatment by bio-synthesized Graphene Sand Composite.

Poornima Parvathi V(1), Umadevi M(2), Bhaviya Raj R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Mother Teresa Women's University, Kodaikanal, 624101,
India. (2)Department of Physics, Mother Teresa Women's University, Kodaikanal,
624101, India. Electronic address: ums10@yahoo.com.

The photocatalytic and antibacterial properties of graphene biosynthesized from
sugar and anchored on sand particles has been focused here. The morphology and
composition of the synthesized Graphene Sand Composite (GSC) was investigated by 
means of X-ray powder diffraction (XRD), Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM),
Energy Dispersive X-Ray Spectroscopy (EDAX), Fourier Transform Infra-red
Spectroscopy (FTIR) and UV-Visible spectroscopy. SEM images show wrinkly edges.
This is characteristic of graphenic morphology. Three types of waste water
samples namely, textile waste (TW), sugarcane industrial waste water (SW) and
domestic waste water from a local purification center at Kodaikanal (KWW) were
collected and treated. Adsorption experiments showed effective removal of
impurities at 0.2 g of GSC. Photocatalytic activity was analyzed under visible
and ultraviolet irradiation. The rate constant for TW increased to 0.0032/min for
visible light irradiation from 0.0029/min under UV irradiation. SW showed similar
improved activity with rate constant as 0.0023/min in visible irradiation
compared to 0.0016/min under UV irradiation. For KWW enhanced activity was seen
only in visible light irradiation with rate constant 0.0025/min. GSC showed an
inhibition zone of 20 mm against the bacterium Escherichia coli. Results suggest 
development of economic and effective waste water management systems.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26265599  [PubMed - in process]


96. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2015 Jun 14. pii: S0360-3016(15)00636-7. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2015.06.015. [Epub ahead of print]

Radiosensitivity of Patient-Derived Glioma Stem Cell 3-Dimensional Cultures to
Photon, Proton, and Carbon Irradiation.

Chiblak S(1), Tang Z(1), Campos B(2), Gal Z(2), Unterberg A(2), Debus J(1),
Herold-Mende C(2), Abdollahi A(3).

Author information: 
(1)German Cancer Consortium, Heidelberg, Germany; Molecular and Translational
Radiation Oncology, Heidelberg Ion Therapy Center, Heidelberg Institute of
Radiation Oncology, University of Heidelberg Medical School and National Center
for Tumor Diseases, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Division of Neurological Research, Department of Neurosurgery, University of
Heidelberg Medical School, Heidelberg, Germany. (3)German Cancer Consortium,
Heidelberg, Germany; Molecular and Translational Radiation Oncology, Heidelberg
Ion Therapy Center, Heidelberg Institute of Radiation Oncology, University of
Heidelberg Medical School and National Center for Tumor Diseases, German Cancer
Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address: a.amir@dkfz.de.

PURPOSE: To investigate the radiosensitivity of primary glioma stem cell (GSC)
cultures with different CD133 status in a 3-dimensional (3D) model after photon
versus proton versus carbon irradiation.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Human primary GSC spheroid cultures were established from 
tumor specimens of six consented glioblastoma patients. Human U87MG was used as a
classical glioblastoma radioresistant cell line. Cell suspensions were generated 
by mechanical dissociation of GSC spheroids and embedded in a semi-solid 3D
matrix before irradiation. Spheroid-like colonies were manually counted by
microscopy. Cells were also recovered and quantified by fluorescence. CD133
expression and DNA damage were evaluated by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: The fraction of CD133(+) cells varied between 0.014% and 96% in the six 
GSC cultures and showed a nonsignificant correlation with plating efficiency and 
survival fractions. The 4 most photon-radioresistant GSC cultures were NCH644,
NCH421k, NCH441, and NCH636. Clonogenic survival for proton irradiation revealed 
relative biologic effectiveness (RBE) in the range of 0.7-1.20. However, carbon
irradiation rendered the photon-resistant GSC cultures sensitive, with average
RBE of 1.87-3.44. This effect was partly attributed to impaired capability of GSC
to repair carbon ion-induced DNA double-strand breaks as determined by residual
DNA repair foci. Interestingly, radiosensitivity of U87 cells was comparable to
GSC cultures using clonogenic survival as the standard readout.
CONCLUSIONS: Carbon irradiation is effective in GSC eradication with similar RBE 
ranges approximately 2-3 as compared with non-stem GSC cultures (U87). Our data
strongly suggest further exploration of GSC using classic radiobiology endpoints 
such as the here-used 3D clonogenic survival assay and integration of additional 
GSC-specific markers.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26254681  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


97. Genom Data. 2015 Sep 1;5:333-336.

Gene expression profiling distinguishes proneural glioma stem cells from
mesenchymal glioma stem cells.

Chandran UR(1), Luthra S(1), Santana-Santos L(2), Mao P(3), Kim SH(4), Minata
M(4), Li J(5), Benos PV(2), DeWang M(6), Hu B(7), Cheng SY(7), Nakano I(8), Sobol
RW(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. (2)Department of Biomedical Informatics,
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA ;
Department of Computational and Systems Biology, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. (3)Department of Neurological Surgery, The Ohio State 
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA ; Department of Neurosurgery, First
Affiliated Hospital of Medical School, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi,
710061, China. (4)Department of Neurological Surgery, The Ohio State University, 
Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (5)Department of Pharmacology & Chemical Biology,
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15216, USA ;
University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, Hillman Cancer Center, Pittsburgh, PA 
15213-1863, USA ; University of South Alabama Mitchell Cancer Institute, Mobile, 
AL 36604, USA. (6)Department of Neurosurgery, First Affiliated Hospital of
Medical School, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, 710061, China.
(7)Department of Neurology & Northwestern Brain Tumor Institute, Center for
Genetic Medicine, Robert Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. (8)Department of 
Neurological Surgery, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA ; James 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. 
(9)Department of Pharmacology & Chemical Biology, University of Pittsburgh School
of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15216, USA ; University of Pittsburgh Cancer
Institute, Hillman Cancer Center, Pittsburgh, PA 15213-1863, USA ; Department of 
Human Genetics, University of Pittsburgh Graduate School of Public Health,
Pittsburgh, PA 15216, USA ; University of South Alabama Mitchell Cancer
Institute, Mobile, AL 36604, USA.

Tumor heterogeneity of high-grade glioma (HGG) is recognized by four clinically
relevant subtypes based on core gene signatures. However, molecular signaling in 
glioma stem cells (GSCs) in individual HGG subtypes is poorly characterized.
Previously we identified and characterized two mutually exclusive GSC subtypes
with distinct activated signaling pathways and biological phenotypes. One GSC
subtype presented with a gene signature resembling Proneural (PN) HGG, whereas
the other was similar to Mesenchymal (Mes) HGG. Classical HGG-derived GSCs were
sub-classified as either one of these two subtypes. Differential mRNA expression 
analysis of PN and Mes GSCs identified 5,796 differentially expressed genes,
revealing a pronounced correlation with the corresponding PN or Mes HGGs. Mes
GSCs displayed more aggressive phenotypes in vitro and as intracranial xenografts
in mice. Further, Mes GSCs were markedly resistant to radiation compared with PN 
GSCs. Expression of ALDH1A3 - one of the most up-regulated Mes representative
genes and a universal cancer stem cell marker in non-brain cancers - was
associated with self-renewal and a multi-potent stem cell population in Mes but
not PN samples. Moreover, inhibition of ALDH1A3 attenuated the growth of Mes but 
not PN GSCs in vitro. Lastly, radiation treatment of PN GSCs up-regulated
Mes-associated markers and down-regulated PN-associated markers, whereas
inhibition of ALDH1A3 attenuated an irradiation-induced gain of Mes identity in
PN GSCs in vitro. Taken together, our data suggest that two subtypes of GSCs,
harboring distinct metabolic signaling pathways, represent intertumoral glioma
heterogeneity and highlight previously unidentified roles of ALDH1A3-associated
signaling that promotes aberrant proliferation of Mes HGGs and GSCs. Inhibition
of ALDH1A3-mediated pathways therefore might provide a promising therapeutic
approach for a subset of HGGs with the Mes signature. Here, we describe the gene 
expression analysis, including pre-processing methods for the data published by
Mao and colleagues in PNAS [1], integration of microarray data from this study
with The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) glioblastoma data and also with another
published study.

PMCID: PMC4523279
PMID: 26251826  [PubMed]


98. World J Stem Cells. 2015 Jul 26;7(6):922-44. doi: 10.4252/wjsc.v7.i6.922.

Stem cell autotomy and niche interaction in different systems.

Dorn DC(1), Dorn A(1).

Author information: 
(1)David C Dorn, Department of Hematology, Hemostasis, Oncology, and Stem Cell
Transplantation, Hannover Medical School, 30625 Hannover, Germany.

The best known cases of cell autotomy are the formation of erythrocytes and
thrombocytes (platelets) from progenitor cells that reside in special niches.
Recently, autotomy of stem cells and its enigmatic interaction with the niche has
been reported from male germline stem cells (GSCs) in several insect species.
First described in lepidopterans, the silkmoth, followed by the gipsy moth and
consecutively in hemipterans, foremost the milkweed bug. In both, moths and the
milkweed bug, GSCs form finger-like projections toward the niche, the apical
cells (homologs of the hub cells in Drosophila). Whereas in the milkweed bug the 
projection terminals remain at the surface of the niche cells, in the gipsy moth 
they protrude deeply into the singular niche cell. In both cases, the projections
undergo serial retrograde fragmentation with progressing signs of autophagy. In
the gipsy moth, the autotomized vesicles are phagocytized and digested by the
niche cell. In the milkweed bug the autotomized vesicles accumulate at the niche 
surface and disintegrate. Autotomy and sprouting of new projections appears to
occur continuously. The significance of the GSC-niche interactions, however,
remains enigmatic. Our concept on the signaling relationship between stem
cell-niche in general and GSC and niche (hub cells and cyst stem cells) in
particular has been greatly shaped by Drosophila melanogaster. In comparing the
interactions of GSCs with their niche in Drosophila with those in species
exhibiting GSC autotomy it is obvious that additional or alternative modes of
stem cell-niche communication exist. Thus, essential signaling pathways,
including niche-stem cell adhesion (E-cadherin) and the direction of asymmetrical
GSC division - as they were found in Drosophila - can hardly be translated into
the systems where GSC autotomy was reported. It is shown here that the serial
autotomy of GSC projections shows remarkable similarities with Wallerian axonal
destruction, developmental axon pruning and dying-back degeneration in
neurodegenerative diseases. Especially the hypothesis of an existing evolutionary
conserved "autodestruction program" in axons that might also be active in GSC
projections appears attractive. Investigations on the underlying signaling
pathways have to be carried out. There are two other well known cases of
programmed cell autotomy: the enucleation of erythroblasts in the process of
erythrocyte maturation and the segregation of thousands of thrombocytes
(platelets) from one megakaryocyte. Both progenitor cell types - erythroblasts
and megakaryocytes - are associated with a niche in the bone marrow,
erythroblasts with a macrophage, which they surround, and the megakaryocytes with
the endothelial cells of sinusoids and their extracellular matrix. Although the
regulatory mechanisms may be specific in each case, there is one aspect that
connects all described processes of programmed cell autotomy and neuronal
autodestruction: apoptotic pathways play always a prominent role. Studies on the 
role of male GSC autotomy in stem cell-niche interaction have just started but
are expected to reveal hitherto unknown ways of signal exchange. Spermatogenesis 
in mammals advance our understanding of insect spermatogenesis. Mammal and insect
spermatogenesis share some broad principles, but a comparison of the signaling
pathways is difficult. We have intimate knowledge from Drosophila, but of almost 
no other insect, and we have only limited knowledge from mammals. The discovery
of stem cell autotomy as part of the interaction with the niche promises new
general insights into the complicated stem cell-niche interdependence.

PMCID: PMC4515436
PMID: 26240680  [PubMed]


99. Cancer Res. 2015 Aug 1;75(15):3065-76. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3307.

Cytomegalovirus Immediate-Early Proteins Promote Stemness Properties in
Glioblastoma.

Soroceanu L(1), Matlaf L(2), Khan S(2), Akhavan A(2), Singer E(2), Bezrookove
V(2), Decker S(3), Ghanny S(4), Hadaczek P(5), Bengtsson H(6), Ohlfest J(3),
Luciani-Torres MG(2), Harkins L(7), Perry A(8), Guo H(4), Soteropoulos P(4),
Cobbs CS(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, California Pacific Medical Center Research
Institute, San Francisco, California. sorocel@cpmcri.org charles.cobbs@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Neurosciences, California Pacific Medical Center Research
Institute, San Francisco, California. (3)Department of Pediatrics and
Neurosurgery, University of Minnesota Masonic Cancer Center, Minneapolis,
Minnesota. (4)Center for Applied Genomics, Institute of Genomic Medicine,
University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey.
(5)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California, San Francisco,
San Francisco, California. (6)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics,
University of California, San Francisco, California. (7)Department of Pathology, 
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama. (8)Department of
Pathology, University of California, San Francisco, California. (9)Department of 
Neurological Surgery, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco,
California. Ben and Catherine Ivy Center for Advanced Brain Tumor Treatment,
Seattle, Washington. sorocel@cpmcri.org charles.cobbs@gmail.com.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common and aggressive human brain tumor. Human
cytomegalovirus (HCMV) immediate-early (IE) proteins that are endogenously
expressed in GBM cells are strong viral transactivators with oncogenic
properties. Here, we show how HCMV IEs are preferentially expressed in glioma
stem-like cells (GSC), where they colocalize with the other GBM stemness markers,
CD133, Nestin, and Sox2. In patient-derived GSCs that are endogenously infected
with HCMV, attenuating IE expression by an RNAi-based strategy was sufficient to 
inhibit tumorsphere formation, Sox2 expression, cell-cycle progression, and cell 
survival. Conversely, HCMV infection of HMCV-negative GSCs elicited robust
self-renewal and proliferation of cells that could be partially reversed by IE
attenuation. In HCMV-positive GSCs, IE attenuation induced a molecular program
characterized by enhanced expression of mesenchymal markers and proinflammatory
cytokines, resembling the therapeutically resistant GBM phenotype.
Mechanistically, HCMV/IE regulation of Sox2 occurred via inhibition of miR-145, a
negative regulator of Sox2 protein expression. In a spontaneous mouse model of
glioma, ectopic expression of the IE1 gene (UL123) specifically increased Sox2
and Nestin levels in the IE1-positive tumors, upregulating stemness and
proliferation markers in vivo. Similarly, human GSCs infected with the HCMV
strain Towne but not the IE1-deficient strain CR208 showed enhanced growth as
tumorspheres and intracranial tumor xenografts, compared with mock-infected human
GSCs. Overall, our findings offer new mechanistic insights into how HCMV/IE
control stemness properties in GBM cells.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4526117 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26239477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Genet Genomics. 2015 Jul 20;42(7):355-71. doi: 10.1016/j.jgg.2015.06.003. Epub 
2015 Jun 24.

Identification of Global DNA Methylation Signatures in Glioblastoma-Derived
Cancer Stem Cells.

Lee EJ(1), Rath P(2), Liu J(1), Ryu D(1), Pei L(1), Noonepalle SK(3), Shull
AY(3), Feng Q(4), Litofsky NS(4), Miller DC(5), Anthony DC(6), Kirk MD(2),
Laterra J(7), Deng L(8), Xin HB(8), Wang X(9), Choi JH(10), Shi H(11).

Author information: 
(1)GRU Cancer Center, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA 30912, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, College of Art and Sciences, University of Missouri,
Columbia, MO 65211, USA. (3)GRU Cancer Center, Georgia Regents University,
Augusta, GA 30912, USA; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Georgia
Regents University, Augusta, GA 30912, USA. (4)Division of Neurological Surgery, 
University of Missouri School of Medicine, Columbia, MO 65211, USA. (5)Department
of Pathology and Anatomical Sciences, University of Missouri School of Medicine, 
Columbia, MO 65211, USA. (6)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
Brown University and Lifespan Academic Medical Center, Providence, RI 02903, USA.
(7)Department of Neurology, The Hugo W. Moser Research Institute at Kennedy
Krieger Inc. and The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD
21205, USA. (8)Institute of Translational Medicine, Nanchang University, Nanchang
330031, China. (9)David H. Murdock Research Institute, Kannapolis, NC 28081, USA.
(10)GRU Cancer Center, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA 30912, USA;
Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Georgia Regents University,
Augusta, GA 30912, USA. Electronic address: jechoi@gru.edu. (11)GRU Cancer
Center, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA 30912, USA; Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA
30912, USA. Electronic address: hshi@gru.edu.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common and most aggressive primary brain tumor in 
adults. The existence of a small population of stem-like tumor cells that
efficiently propagate tumors and resist cytotoxic therapy is one proposed
mechanism leading to the resilient behavior of tumor cells and poor prognosis. In
this study, we performed an in-depth analysis of the DNA methylation landscape in
GBM-derived cancer stem cells (GSCs). Parallel comparisons of primary tumors and 
GSC lines derived from these tumors with normal controls (a neural stem cell
(NSC) line and normal brain tissue) identified groups of hyper- and
hypomethylated genes that display a trend of either increasing or decreasing
methylation levels in the order of controls, primary GBMs, and their counterpart 
GSC lines, respectively. Interestingly, concurrent promoter hypermethylation and 
gene body hypomethylation were observed in a subset of genes including MGMT,
AJAP1 and PTPRN2. These unique DNA methylation signatures were also found in
primary GBM-derived xenograft tumors indicating that they are not tissue
culture-related epigenetic changes. Integration of GSC-specific epigenetic
signatures with gene expression analysis further identified candidate tumor
suppressor genes that are frequently down-regulated in GBMs such as SPINT2, NEFM 
and PENK. Forced re-expression of SPINT2 reduced glioma cell proliferative
capacity, anchorage independent growth, cell motility, and tumor sphere formation
in vitro. The results from this study demonstrate that GSCs possess unique
epigenetic signatures that may play important roles in the pathogenesis of GBM.

Copyright © 2015 Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, and Genetics Society of China. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4648292 [Available on 2016-07-20]
PMID: 26233891  [PubMed - in process]


101. Dev Biol. 2015 Sep 15;405(2):269-79. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.07.019. Epub 2015 
Jul 21.

Reduction of Cullin-2 in somatic cells disrupts differentiation of germline stem 
cells in the Drosophila ovary.

Ayyub C(1), Banerjee KK(2), Joti P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research,
Homi Bhabha Road, Mumbai 400005, India. Electronic address:
kali@mailhost.tifr.res.in. (2)Department of Biological Sciences, Tata Institute
of Fundamental Research, Homi Bhabha Road, Mumbai 400005, India.

Signaling from a niche consisting of somatic cells is essential for maintenance
of germline stem cells (GSCs) in the ovary of Drosophila. Decapentaplegic (Dpp), 
a type of bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signal, emanating from the niche, is
the most important signal for this process. Cullin proteins constitute the core
of a multiprotein E3-ligase important for their functions viz. degradation or
modification of proteins necessary for different cellular processes. We have
found that a Cullin protein called Cullin-2 (Cul-2) expresses in both somatic and
germline cells of the Drosophila ovary. Reduction of Cul-2 in somatic cells
causes upregulation of Dpp signal and produces accumulation of extra GSC-like
cells inside germarium, the anteriormost structure of the ovary. Our results
suggest that Cullin-2 protein present in the somatic cells is involved in a non
cell-autonomous regulation of the extent of Dpp signaling and thus controls the
differentiation of GSCs to cystoblasts (CBs).

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26206612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Stem Cells. 2015 Nov;33(11):3254-65. doi: 10.1002/stem.2111. Epub 2015 Aug 18.

Genome-Wide Identification of MESP1 Targets Demonstrates Primary Regulation Over 
Mesendoderm Gene Activity.

Soibam B(1,)(2), Benham A(1), Kim J(2), Weng KC(3), Yang L(1), Xu X(4), Robertson
M(1), Azares A(1), Cooney AJ(4), Schwartz RJ(1,)(2), Liu Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Texas Heart Institute, Texas Medical Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, Texas,
USA. (3)The Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A & M University
Health Science Center, Houston, Texas, USA. (4)Department of Molecular and
Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.

MESP1 is considered the first sign of the nascent cardiac mesoderm and plays a
critical role in the appearance of cardiac progenitors, while exhibiting a
transient expression in the developing embryo. We profiled the transcriptome of a
pure population of differentiating MESP1-marked cells and found that they chiefly
contribute to the mesendoderm lineage. High-throughput sequencing of endogenous
MESP1-bound DNA revealed that MESP1 preferentially binds to two variants of E-box
sequences and activates critical mesendoderm modulators, including Eomes, Gata4, 
Wnt5a, Wnt5b, Mixl1, T, Gsc, and Wnt3. These mesendoderm markers were enriched in
the MESP1 marked population before the appearance of cardiac progenitors and
myocytes. Further, MESP1-binding is globally associated with H(3)K(27)
acetylation, supporting a novel pivotal role of it in regulating target gene
epigenetics. Therefore, MESP1, the pioneer cardiac factor, primarily directs the 
appearance of mesendoderm, the intermediary of the earliest progenitors of
mesoderm and endoderm organogenesis.

© 2015 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 26205879  [PubMed - in process]


103. Elife. 2015 Aug 24;4. doi: 10.7554/eLife.07836.

Lipid-mediated regulation of SKN-1/Nrf in response to germ cell absence.

Steinbaugh MJ(1), Narasimhan SD(1), Robida-Stubbs S(1), Moronetti Mazzeo LE(1),
Dreyfuss JM(1), Hourihan JM(2), Raghavan P(1), Operaña TN(1), Esmaillie R(1),
Blackwell TK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Division, Joslin Diabetes Center, Boston, United States.
(2)Department of Genetics and Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, United States.

Comment in
    Elife. 2015;4. doi: 10.7554/eLife.10161.

In Caenorhabditis elegans, ablation of germline stem cells (GSCs) extends
lifespan, but also increases fat accumulation and alters lipid metabolism,
raising the intriguing question of how these effects might be related. Here, we
show that a lack of GSCs results in a broad transcriptional reprogramming in
which the conserved detoxification regulator SKN-1/Nrf increases stress
resistance, proteasome activity, and longevity. SKN-1 also activates diverse
lipid metabolism genes and reduces fat storage, thereby alleviating the increased
fat accumulation caused by GSC absence. Surprisingly, SKN-1 is activated by
signals from this fat, which appears to derive from unconsumed yolk that was
produced for reproduction. We conclude that SKN-1 plays a direct role in
maintaining lipid homeostasis in which it is activated by lipids. This SKN-1
function may explain the importance of mammalian Nrf proteins in fatty liver
disease and suggest that particular endogenous or dietary lipids might promote
health through SKN-1/Nrf.

PMCID: PMC4541496
PMID: 26196144  [PubMed - in process]


104. Yonago Acta Med. 2015 Mar;58(1):15-22. Epub 2015 Mar 27.

P19 Cells Overexpressing Lhx1 Differentiate into the Definitive Endoderm by
Recapitulating an Embryonic Developmental Pathway.

Hasegawa A(1), Shirayoshi Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Regenerative Medicine and Therapeutics, Department of Genetic
Medicine and Regenerative Therapeutics, Institute of Regenerative Medicine and
Biofunction, Tottori University Graduate School of Medical Science, Yonago
683-8503, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Epiblasts occur at the last pluripotent stage of embryonic
development and are important in elucidating how the three germ layers are
formed. However, little is known of the molecular mechanisms of their
development. We have shown that LIM homeobox 1 (Lhx1) was involved in epiblast
development in embryonic stem cells, especially meso- and endodermal
differentiation. However, since epiblasts in embryoid bodies spontaneously
develop into a further stage, it is difficult to study their development in this 
system.
METHODS: Mouse embryonal carcinoma P19 cells which have properties similar to
those of epiblasts provided new avenues of investigation into the regulatory
mechanism of epiblasts.
RESULTS: Overexpression of Lhx1 in P19 cells induced expression of organizer
marker genes (Cer1, Gsc) and endoderm marker genes (Gata6, Foxa2, Sox17) but not 
extra-embryonic endoderm marker genes (Sox7 or Hnf4alpha).
CONCLUSION: This study suggested that Lhx1 overexpression caused P19 cells to
differentiate into an endodermal lineage. Thus, P19 cells and their derivatives
can be a useful model system to study how the three germ layers are formed.

PMCID: PMC4502295
PMID: 26190893  [PubMed]


105. Eur J Neurol. 2016 Feb;23(2):320-6. doi: 10.1111/ene.12769. Epub 2015 Jul 14.

Anti-GQ1b antibody syndrome: anti-ganglioside complex reactivity determines
clinical spectrum.

Fukami Y(1), Wong AH(1), Funakoshi K(2), Safri AY(3), Shahrizaila N(4), Yuki
N(1,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University
of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. (2)Department of Neurology, Dokkyo Medical
University, Tochigi, Japan. (3)Department of Neurology, University of Indonesia, 
Jakarta, Indonesia. (4)Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia. (5)Department of Physiology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National 
University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Anti-GQ1b antibodies have been found in patients with
Miller Fisher syndrome as well as its related conditions. Our aim was to identify
the mechanism by which autoantibodies produce various clinical presentations in
'anti-GQ1b antibody syndrome'.
METHODS: Immunoglobulin G antibodies to ganglioside complex (GSC) of GQ1b or GT1a
with GM1, GD1a, GD1b or GT1b were tested in sera from patients with anti-GQ1b
(n = 708) or anti-GT1a (n = 696) IgG antibodies. Optical densities of the single 
anti-GQ1b or anti-GT1a antibodies were used as reference (100%), and those of
anti-GSC antibodies were expressed in percentages to reference. The relationships
between anti-GSC antibody reactivity and the corresponding clinical features were
assessed by multivariate logistic regression analysis.
RESULTS: Ophthalmoplegia and hypersomnolence were significantly associated with
complex-attenuated anti-GQ1b and anti-GT1a antibodies. Ataxia was associated with
GD1b- and GT1b-enhanced anti-GQ1b antibodies or GM1-enhanced anti-GT1a
antibodies. Bulbar palsy was associated with GT1b-enhanced anti-GQ1b antibodies. 
Neck weakness was associated with GD1a-enhanced anti-GQ1b antibodies. Arm
weakness was associated with GD1b-enhanced anti-GQ1b and GD1a-enhanced anti-GT1a 
antibodies. Leg weakness was associated with GD1a-enhanced anti-GQ1b and
anti-GT1a antibodies.
CONCLUSIONS: Differences in fine specificity of anti-GQ1b antibodies are
associated with clinical features, possibly due to the different expression of
gangliosides in different parts of the nervous system.

© 2015 EAN.

PMID: 26176883  [PubMed - in process]


106. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2015 Nov;51(10):1047-55. doi:
10.1007/s11626-015-9931-x. Epub 2015 Jul 14.

PI3K inhibitor combined with miR-125b inhibitor sensitize TMZ-induced anti-glioma
stem cancer effects through inactivation of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway.

Shi L(1,)(2), Fei X(3), Wang Z(3), You Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, 210029, People's Republic of China. sl1012002322@126.com.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, The First People's Hospital of Kunshan Affiliated 
with Jiangsu University, Suzhou, 215300, People's Republic of China.
sl1012002322@126.com. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, School of Medicine, Suzhou
Kowloon Hospital Affiliated with Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Suzhou, 215021,
People's Republic of China. (4)Department of Neurosurgery, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 210029, People's Republic of
China. yypl9@njmu.edu.cn.

Temozolomide (TMZ) is a promising chemotherapeutic agent for treating
glioblastomas. However, resistance develops quickly with a high frequency.
Glioblastoma stem cells (GSCs) causing resistance to drug therapy were considered
to be one of the key factors. The mechanisms underlying GSCs resistance to TMZ
are not fully understood. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have emerged to play important roles
in tumorigenesis and drug resistance. Our previous studies showed that miR-125b
was necessary for GSCs fission, and inhibition of which could enhance the
chemosensitivity of GSCs to TMZ. Recent studies have evidence that a variety of
drugs and upstream factors work through PI3K/Akt pathway, and the effects of
PI3K/Akt pathway inhibition on GSCs were much more than non-GSCs. In this study, 
we found that PI3K inhibitor combined with miR-125b inhibitor caused a marked
increase of TMZ-induced GSC proliferation and invasiveness inhibition. To explore
the potential mechanism, we found that this novel combinatorial regimen leads to 
changes of inactivation of Wnt/ß-catenin pathway which regulates a series of cell
activities including cell apoptosis, proliferation, differentiation, and
metabolism. Taken together, our data strongly support an important role for PI3K 
inhibitor and miR-125b inhibitor on conferring GSCs resistance to TMZ through
targeting Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway.

PMID: 26170223  [PubMed - in process]


107. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 13;10(7):e0132823. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132823.
eCollection 2015.

ROCK Inhibition Facilitates In Vitro Expansion of Glioblastoma Stem-Like Cells.

Tilson SG(1), Haley EM(1), Triantafillu UL(1), Dozier DA(1), Langford CP(2),
Gillespie GY(2), Kim Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, The University of Alabama, 
Tuscaloosa, Alabama, United States of America. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, The
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, United States of
America.

Due to their stem-like characteristics and their resistance to existing chemo-
and radiation therapies, there is a growing appreciation that cancer stem cells
(CSCs) are the root cause behind cancer metastasis and recurrence. However, these
cells represent a small subpopulation of cancer cells and are difficult to
propagate in vitro. Glioblastoma is an extremely deadly form of brain cancer that
is hypothesized to have a subpopulation of CSCs called glioblastoma stem cells
(GSCs; also called brain tumor initiating cells, BTICs). We propose the use of
selective Rho-kinase (ROCK) inhibitors, Y-27632 and fasudil, to promote
GSC/BTIC-like cell survival and propagation in vitro. ROCK inhibitors have been
implicated in suppressing apoptosis, and it was hypothesized that they would
increase the number of GSC/BTIC-like cells grown in vitro and improve cloning
efficiencies. Indeed, our data demonstrate that transient and continuous
supplementation of non-toxic concentrations of Y-27632 and fasudil inhibited
apoptosis, enhanced the cells' ability to form spheres, and increased stem cell
marker expressing GSC/BTIC-like cell subpopulation. Our data indicated that
pharmacological and genetic (siRNA) inhibitions of the ROCK pathway facilitates
in vitro expansion of GSC/BTIC-like cells. Thus, ROCK pathway inhibition shows
promise for future optimization of CSC culture media.

PMCID: PMC4500389
PMID: 26167936  [PubMed - in process]


108. Tissue Eng Part A. 2015 Oct;21(19-20):2572-82. doi: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2014.0504.

Extracellular Matrix Properties Regulate the Migratory Response of Glioblastoma
Stem Cells in Three-Dimensional Culture.

Herrera-Perez M(1,)(2), Voytik-Harbin SL(3,)(4), Rickus JL(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Agricultural and Biological Engineering, College of
Engineering, Purdue University , West Lafayette, Indiana. (2)2 Physiological
Sensing Facility at the Bindley Bioscience Center and the Birck Nanotechnology
Center, Purdue University , West Lafayette, Indiana. (3)3 Weldon School of
Biomedical Engineering, College of Engineering, Purdue University , West
Lafayette, Indiana. (4)4 Department of Basic Medical Sciences, College of
Veterinary Medicine. Purdue University , West Lafayette, Indiana.

Diffuse infiltration across brain tissue is a hallmark of glioblastoma and the
main cause of unsuccessful total resection that leads to tumor reappearance. A
subpopulation termed glioblastoma stem cells (GSCs) has been directly related to 
aggressive invasion; nonetheless, their migratory characteristics and regulation 
by the microenvironment are still unknown. In this study, we developed a
composite matrix of hyaluronan (HA) structurally supported by a collagen-oligomer
fibril network to simulate the brain tumor extracellular matrix (ECM)
composition. Matrigel-coated microfibers were embedded within the matrix to
create a tunable dual niche microenvironment that resembles the vascular network 
of the brain. This model was compared with the most commonly used in vitro
three-dimensional (3D) culture formats, Matrigel and collagen type-I monomer
matrices, to study how the mechanical and compositional properties of the ECM
alter the migration characteristics of GSC neurospheres. The migration mode,
distance, velocity, and morphology of the GSCs were monitored over a 72-h period.
The cells altered their migration mode depending on the matrix composition,
showing migration by expansive growth in Matrigel matrices, multicellular
extension along rigid interfaces (as Matrigel glass and coated microfibers), and 
mesenchymal single-cell migration in collagen matrices. Velocity and distance of 
migration within each composition varied according to matrix mechanical
properties. In the dual niche system, the presence of HA reduced velocity and
number of migratory cells; however, cells that came in contact with the
pseudovessels exhibited collective migration by an extensive strand and reached
higher velocities than cells migrating individually across the 3D matrix. Our
results show that GSCs adopt varied migration mechanisms to invade multiple ECM
microenvironments, and the migration characteristics exhibited are highly
influenced by the matrix physical properties. Moreover, GSC neurospheres exhibit 
concomitant single and collective migration as a function of the microenvironment
topography to reach the most productive migration strategy.

PMCID: PMC4605380 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26161688  [PubMed - in process]


109. PeerJ. 2015 Jul 2;3:e1070. doi: 10.7717/peerj.1070. eCollection 2015.

Identification of the underlying factor structure of the Derriford Appearance
Scale 24.

Moss TP(1), Lawson V(2), White P(1); Appearance Research Collaboration.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Appearance Research, University of the West of England , Bristol,
QY , UK. (2)Southwark Psychological Therapies Service, Maudsley Hospital , London
, UK.

Background. The Derriford Appearance Scale24 (DAS24) is a widely used measure of 
distress and dysfunction in relation to self-consciousness of appearance. It has 
been used in clinical and research settings, and translated into numerous
European and Asian languages. Hitherto, no study has conducted an analysis to
determine the underlying factor structure of the scale. Methods. A large (n =
1,265) sample of community and hospital patients with a visible difference were
recruited face to face or by post, and completed the DAS24. Results. A two factor
solution was generated. An evaluation of the congruence of the factor solutions
on each of the the hospital and the community samples using Tucker's Coefficient 
of Congruence (rc = .979) and confirmatory factor analysis, which demonstrated a 
consistent factor structure. A main factor, general self consciousness (GSC), was
represented by 18 items. Six items comprised a second factor, sexual and body
self-consciousness (SBSC). The SBSC scale demonstrated greater sensitivity and
specificity in identifying distress for sexually significant areas of the body.
Discussion. The factor structure of the DAS24 facilitates a more nuanced
interpretation of scores using this scale. Two conceptually and statistically
coherent sub-scales were identified. The SBSC sub-scale offers a means of
identifying distress and dysfunction around sexually significant areas of the
body not previously possible with this scale.

PMCID: PMC4493685
PMID: 26157633  [PubMed]


110. Dev Cell. 2015 Jul 27;34(2):192-205. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2015.05.003. Epub 2015
Jul 2.

Somatic cell encystment promotes abscission in germline stem cells following a
regulated block in cytokinesis.

Lenhart KF(1), DiNardo S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Perelman School of Medicine at
the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6058, USA. (2)Department
of Cell and Developmental Biology, Perelman School of Medicine at the University 
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6058, USA; Institute for Regenerative
Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6058, USA. Electronic address:
sdinardo@mail.med.upenn.edu.

In many tissues, the stem cell niche must coordinate behavior across multiple
stem cell lineages. How this is achieved is largely unknown. We have identified
delayed completion of cytokinesis in germline stem cells (GSCs) as a mechanism
that regulates the production of stem cell daughters in the Drosophila testis.
Through live imaging, we show that a secondary F-actin ring is formed through
regulation of Cofilin activity to block cytokinesis progress after contractile
ring disassembly. The duration of this block is controlled by Aurora B kinase.
Additionally, we have identified a requirement for somatic cell encystment of the
germline in promoting GSC abscission. We suggest that this non-autonomous role
promotes coordination between stem cell lineages. These findings reveal the
mechanisms by which cytokinesis is inhibited and reinitiated in GSCs and why such
complex regulation exists within the stem cell niche.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4519359 [Available on 2016-07-27]
PMID: 26143993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Genes Dis. 2015 Jun;2(2):152-163.

Glioblastoma stem cells (GSCs) epigenetic plasticity and interconversion between 
differentiated non-GSCs and GSCs.

Safa AR(1), Saadatzadeh MR(2), Cohen-Gadol AA(3), Pollok KE(4),
Bijangi-Vishehsaraei K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Indiana University Simon Cancer Center, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA ; Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Indiana 
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. (2)Indiana University
Simon Cancer Center, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN
46202, USA ; Department of Neurosurgery, IU School of Medicine and Goodman
Campbell Brain and Spine, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN
46202, USA. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, IU School of Medicine and Goodman
Campbell Brain and Spine, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN
46202, USA. (4)Indiana University Simon Cancer Center, Indiana University School 
of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA ; Department of Pharmacology and
Toxicology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA ; 
Herman B. Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. (5)Department of Pharmacology and
Toxicology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA ; 
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Cancer stem cells (CSCs) or cancer initiating cells (CICs) maintain self-renewal 
and multilineage differentiation properties of various tumors, as well as the
cellular heterogeneity consisting of several subpopulations within tumors. CSCs
display the malignant phenotype, self-renewal ability, altered genomic stability,
specific epigenetic signature, and most of the time can be phenotyped by cell
surface markers (e.g., CD133, CD24, and CD44). Numerous studies support the
concept that non-stem cancer cells (non-CSCs) are sensitive to cancer therapy
while CSCs are relatively resistant to treatment. In glioblastoma stem cells
(GSCs), there is clonal heterogeneity at the genetic level with distinct
tumorigenic potential, and defined GSC marker expression resulting from clonal
evolution which is likely to influence disease progression and response to
treatment. Another level of complexity in glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) tumors is
the dynamic equilibrium between GSCs and differentiated non-GSCs, and the
potential for non-GSCs to revert (dedifferentiate) to GSCs due to epigenetic
alteration which confers phenotypic plasticity to the tumor cell population.
Moreover, exposure of the differentiated GBM cells to therapeutic doses of
temozolomide (TMZ) or ionizing radiation (IR) increases the GSC pool both in
vitro and in vivo. This review describes various subtypes of GBM, discusses the
evolution of CSC models and epigenetic plasticity, as well as interconversion
between GSCs and differentiated non-GSCs, and offers strategies to potentially
eliminate GSCs.

PMCID: PMC4484766
PMID: 26137500  [PubMed]


112. Opt Lett. 2015 Jul 1;40(13):2937-40. doi: 10.1364/OL.40.002937.

General closed-form bit-error rate expressions for coded M-distributed
atmospheric optical communications.

Balsells JM, López-González FJ, Jurado-Navas A, Castillo-Vázquez M, Notario AP.

In this Letter, general closed-form expressions for the average bit error rate in
atmospheric optical links employing rate-adaptive channel coding are derived. To 
characterize the irradiance fluctuations caused by atmospheric turbulence, the
Málaga or M distribution is employed. The proposed expressions allow us to
evaluate the performance of atmospheric optical links employing channel coding
schemes such as OOK-GSc, OOK-GScc, HHH(1,13), or vw-MPPM with different coding
rates and under all regimes of turbulence strength. A hyper-exponential fitting
technique applied to the conditional bit error rate is used in all cases. The
proposed closed-form expressions are validated by Monte-Carlo simulations.

PMID: 26125336  [PubMed]


113. Cell Rep. 2015 Jul 7;12(1):150-61. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.06.004. Epub 2015
Jun 25.

Piwi Is a Key Regulator of Both Somatic and Germline Stem Cells in the Drosophila
Testis.

Gonzalez J(1), Qi H(1), Liu N(1), Lin H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Yale Stem Cell Center and Department of Cell Biology, Yale School of Medicine,
New Haven, CT 06519, USA. (2)Yale Stem Cell Center and Department of Cell
Biology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06519, USA; Shanghai Institute of
Advanced Immunochemical Studies and School of Life Science and Technology,
ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China. Electronic address:
haifan.lin@yale.edu.

The Piwi-piRNA pathway is well known for its germline function, yet its somatic
role remains elusive. We show here that Piwi is required autonomously not only
for germline stem cell (GSC) but also for somatic cyst stem cell (CySC)
maintenance in the Drosophila testis. Reducing Piwi activity in the testis caused
defects in CySC differentiation. Accompanying this, GSC daughters expanded beyond
the vicinity of the hub but failed to differentiate further. Moreover, Piwi
deficient in nuclear localization caused similar defects in somatic and germ cell
differentiation, which was rescued by somatic Piwi expression. To explore the
underlying molecular mechanism, we identified Piwi-bound piRNAs that uniquely map
to a gene key for gonadal development, Fasciclin 3, and demonstrate that Piwi
regulates its expression in somatic cyst cells. Our work reveals the
cell-autonomous function of Piwi in both somatic and germline stem cell types,
with somatic function possibly via its epigenetic mechanism.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4497877 [Available on 2016-07-07]
PMID: 26119740  [PubMed - in process]


114. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Aug 18;43(14):6969-82. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv646. Epub 2015
Jun 27.

Redefining the transcriptional regulatory dynamics of classically and
alternatively activated macrophages by deepCAGE transcriptomics.

Roy S(1), Schmeier S(2), Arner E(1), Alam T(3), Parihar SP(4), Ozturk M(4),
Tamgue O(4), Kawaji H(5), de Hoon MJ(1), Itoh M(5), Lassmann T(1), Carninci P(1),
Hayashizaki Y(6), Forrest AR(1), Bajic VB(3), Guler R(4); Fantom Consortium(7),
Brombacher F(8), Suzuki H(9).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genomic Technologies, RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies, 
1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan Riken Omics Science
Center, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. (2)Massey
University, Institute of Natural and Mathematical Sciences, Auckland, New
Zealand. (3)King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST),
Computational Bioscience Research Center (CBRC), Computer, Electrical and
Mathematical Sciences and Engineering Division (CEMSE), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia.
(4)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB), Cape
Town Component, Cape Town, South Africa University of Cape Town, Health Science
Faculty, Institute of Infectious Diseases and Molecular Medicine (IDM), Division 
of Immunology, Cape Town, South Africa. (5)Division of Genomic Technologies,
RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku,
Yokohama 230-0045, Japan Riken Omics Science Center, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho,
Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan Riken Preventive Medicine and Diagnosis
Innovation Program (PMI), 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045,
Japan. (6)Riken Omics Science Center, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama
230-0045, Japan Riken Preventive Medicine and Diagnosis Innovation Program (PMI),
1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. (7)Division of Genomic 
Technologies, RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho,
Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan Riken Omics Science Center, 1-7-22
Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan Massey University, Institute of
Natural and Mathematical Sciences, Auckland, New Zealand King Abdullah University
of Science and Technology (KAUST), Computational Bioscience Research Center
(CBRC), Computer, Electrical and Mathematical Sciences and Engineering Division
(CEMSE), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology (ICGEB), Cape Town Component, Cape Town, South Africa University of
Cape Town, Health Science Faculty, Institute of Infectious Diseases and Molecular
Medicine (IDM), Division of Immunology, Cape Town, South Africa Riken Preventive 
Medicine and Diagnosis Innovation Program (PMI), 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, 
Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. (8)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology (ICGEB), Cape Town Component, Cape Town, South Africa University of
Cape Town, Health Science Faculty, Institute of Infectious Diseases and Molecular
Medicine (IDM), Division of Immunology, Cape Town, South Africa
harukazu@gsc.riken.jp. (9)Division of Genomic Technologies, RIKEN Center for Life
Science Technologies, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan
Riken Omics Science Center, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045,
Japan harukazu@gsc.riken.jp.

Classically or alternatively activated macrophages (M1 and M2, respectively) play
distinct and important roles for microbiocidal activity, regulation of
inflammation and tissue homeostasis. Despite this, their transcriptional
regulatory dynamics are poorly understood. Using promoter-level expression
profiling by non-biased deepCAGE we have studied the transcriptional dynamics of 
classically and alternatively activated macrophages. Transcription factor (TF)
binding motif activity analysis revealed four motifs, NFKB1_REL_RELA, IRF1,2,
IRF7 and TBP that are commonly activated but have distinct activity dynamics in
M1 and M2 activation. We observe matching changes in the expression profiles of
the corresponding TFs and show that only a restricted set of TFs change
expression. There is an overall drastic and transient up-regulation in M1 and a
weaker and more sustainable up-regulation in M2. Novel TFs, such as Thap6, Maff, 
(M1) and Hivep1, Nfil3, Prdm1, (M2) among others, were suggested to be involved
in the activation processes. Additionally, 52 (M1) and 67 (M2) novel
differentially expressed genes and, for the first time, several differentially
expressed long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) transcriptome markers were identified. In 
conclusion, the finding of novel motifs, TFs and protein-coding and lncRNA genes 
is an important step forward to fully understand the transcriptional machinery of
macrophage activation.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4538831
PMID: 26117544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Cutan Ocul Toxicol. 2016 Jun;35(2):115-9. doi: 10.3109/15569527.2015.1055495.
Epub 2015 Jun 22.

Isobornyl acrylate: an impurity in alkyl glucosides.

Foti C(1), Romita P(1), Rigano L(2), Zimerson E(3), Sicilia M(4), Ballini A(5),
Ghizzoni O(4), Antelmi A(3), Angelini G(1), Bonamonte D(1), Bruze M(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Biomedical Science and Human Oncology , Dermatological Clinic,
University of Bari Aldo Moro , Bari , Italy . (2)b ISPE, Institute of Skin and
Product Evaluation, Milano , Milan , Italy . (3)c Department of Occupational and 
Environmental Dermatology , Malmö University Hospital, Lund University , Malmö , 
Sweden . (4)d GSC Laboratories, Olgiate Comasco , Como , Italy , and. (5)e
Department of Basic Medical Sciences , Neuroscience and Sense Organs, University 
of Bari Aldo Moro , Bari , Italy.

CONTEXT: Alkyl glucosides and alkyl poly-glucosides are widely used as wetting
agents, surfactants and emulsifiers in several industrial and cosmetic products. 
They are known as well-tolerated and are usually added to the primary surfactants
in order to reduce the irritating potential of the main foaming agents.
OBJECTIVE: Recently, some authors suggested that allergic contact dermatitis to
alkyl glucosides might be more frequent than suspected. On the other hand, the
chemical structures of glucosides do not show potentially allergenic chemical
groups or strongly polarized structures. The aim of our study is to investigate
alkyl glucosides carrying out a detailed chemical analysis on samples of raw
materials to identify potentially allergenic impurities or by-products contained 
in commercial samples of alkyl glucosides.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We chemically analyzed samples of cocoyl glucoside, decyl 
glucoside and lauryl glucoside by three different analytical methods, in order to
identify any undesired or polluting substances.
RESULT: In each of the three samples, we detected the presence of isobornyl
acrylate. Its approximate content in the tested samples is 500<U+2009>ng/g of the
product.
DISCUSSION: Isobornyl acrylate is not used in the synthesis of alkyl glucosides, 
but as a plasticizer in many plastic materials. It can be easily released to
materials flowing over these surfaces when they have high extraction power, as
glucosides.
CONCLUSION: Isobornyl acrylate may play a role as hidden allergen, in the form of
an impurity collected during the industrial process, explaining some cases of
allergic reaction to alkyl glucosides.

PMID: 26095233  [PubMed - in process]


116. Cell Rep. 2015 Jun 23;11(11):1809-21. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.05.027. Epub
2015 Jun 11.

A CDC20-APC/SOX2 Signaling Axis Regulates Human Glioblastoma Stem-like Cells.

Mao DD(1), Gujar AD(1), Mahlokozera T(2), Chen I(1), Pan Y(1), Luo J(3), Brost
T(4), Thompson EA(1), Turski A(1), Leuthardt EC(1), Dunn GP(5), Chicoine MR(6),
Rich KM(6), Dowling JL(6), Zipfel GJ(6), Dacey RG(6), Achilefu S(7), Tran DD(8), 
Yano H(9), Kim AH(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, Washington University School of Medicine, 
St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. (2)Department of Neurological Surgery, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA; Program in Neuroscience,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. (3)Division
of Biostatistics, Department of Medicine, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. (4)Program in Molecular Cell Biology,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. (5)Department
of Neurological Surgery, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 
63110, USA; Siteman Cancer Center, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, MO 63110, USA; Center for Human Immunology and Immunotherapy Programs,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA; Department of
Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO
63110, USA. (6)Department of Neurological Surgery, Washington University School
of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA; Siteman Cancer Center, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. (7)Molecular Imaging
Center, Mallinckrodt Institute of Radiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. (8)Siteman Cancer Center, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA; Division of Oncology,
Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO
63110, USA. (9)Department of Neurological Surgery, Washington University School
of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA; Siteman Cancer Center, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA; Department of Neurology,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA; Department of
Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(10)Department of Neurological Surgery, Washington University School of Medicine,
St. Louis, MO 63110, USA; Siteman Cancer Center, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA; Department of Neurology, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA; Department of
Developmental Biology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO
63110, USA. Electronic address: kima@wudosis.wustl.edu.

Glioblastoma harbors a dynamic subpopulation of glioblastoma stem-like cells
(GSCs) that can propagate tumors in vivo and is resistant to standard
chemoradiation. Identification of the cell-intrinsic mechanisms governing this
clinically important cell state may lead to the discovery of therapeutic
strategies for this challenging malignancy. Here, we demonstrate that the mitotic
E3 ubiquitin ligase CDC20-anaphase-promoting complex (CDC20-APC) drives
invasiveness and self-renewal in patient tumor-derived GSCs. Moreover, CDC20
knockdown inhibited and CDC20 overexpression increased the ability of human GSCs 
to generate brain tumors in an orthotopic xenograft model in vivo. CDC20-APC
control of GSC invasion and self-renewal operates through pluripotency-related
transcription factor SOX2. Our results identify a CDC20-APC/SOX2 signaling axis
that controls key biological properties of GSCs, with implications for
CDC20-APC-targeted strategies in the treatment of glioblastoma.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4481182 [Available on 2016-06-23]
PMID: 26074073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Mar 15;8(3):4487-93. eCollection 2015.

Prognostic factors of tuberculous meningitis: a single-center study.

Gu J(1), Xiao H(1), Wu F(1), Ge Y(1), Ma J(1), Sun W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Clinic and Research Center of Tuberculosis, Shanghai Key Lab of Tuberculosis, 
Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine Shanghai
200433, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the prognostic factors of tuberculous meningitis (TBM) 
and develop strategies for the improvement of clinical efficacy.
METHODS: A total of 156 TBM patients were retrospectively reviewed. The
demographic characteristics, underlying diseases, clinical features, laboratory
findings, bacteriologic test, images, use of steroids, mannitol and anti-TB
drugs, surgery or drainage, and clinical outcomes were collected and analyzed.
RESULTS: Patients with tubercle bacillus in the cerebrospinal fluid had
significantly higher rate of consciousness disturbance (78.8%) and greater
proportion of Glasgow coma scale (GCS) score of 3 (37.9%) when compared with the 
possible TBM patients (51.1% and 13.3%, respectively). Patients with definite TBM
had a poor outcome and their mortality was significantly higher than in possible 
TBM patients (42.4% vs. 17.8%, P < 0.05). Univariate regression analysis showed
that the advanced age, concomitant hematogenous disseminated pulmonary
tuberculosis, change in consciousness, low GCS score on admission and
hydrocephalus were associated with a poor prognosis; timely anti-TB treatment and
reasonable hormone applications predicted a favorable outcome. Multivariate
regression analysis showed that advanced age, change in consciousness, low GSC
score and concomitant hydrocephalus were independent risk factors of TBM, and use
of prednisone at = 60 mg/d was protective factor for TBM (P=0.003, OR=0.013).
CONCLUSIONS: The advanced age, changes in consciousness, low GCS score on
admission and concomitant hydrocephalus are independent risk factors of TBM. For 
patients with risk factors, diagnostic anti-TB therapy and reasonable hormone
therapy should be performed timely to reduce mortality and disability.

PMCID: PMC4443207
PMID: 26064373  [PubMed]


118. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2016 Feb;27(2):482-94. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2014111107. Epub 2015
Jun 8.

Proximal Tubules Have the Capacity to Regulate Uptake of Albumin.

Wagner MC(1), Campos-Bilderback SB(1), Chowdhury M(2), Flores B(1), Lai X(3),
Myslinski J(1), Pandit S(1), Sandoval RM(1), Wean SE(1), Wei Y(4), Satlin LM(4), 
Wiggins RC(2), Witzmann FA(5), Molitoris BA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Indiana University School of Medicine, The Roudebush Veterans Affair Medical
Center, Indiana Center for Biological Microscopy, Indianapolis, Indiana;
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan; 
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana; and. (4)Department of Pediatrics, The Icahn
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York; (5)Department of Cellular and
Integrative Physiology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
Indiana. (6)Indiana University School of Medicine, The Roudebush Veterans Affair 
Medical Center, Indiana Center for Biological Microscopy, Indianapolis, Indiana; 
Department of Cellular and Integrative Physiology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana bmolitor@iu.edu.

Evidence from multiple studies supports the concept that both glomerular
filtration and proximal tubule (PT) reclamation affect urinary albumin excretion 
rate. To better understand these roles of glomerular filtration and PT uptake, we
investigated these processes in two distinct animal models. In a rat model of
acute exogenous albumin overload, we quantified glomerular sieving coefficients
(GSC) and PT uptake of Texas Red-labeled rat serum albumin using two-photon
intravital microscopy. No change in GSC was observed, but a significant decrease 
in PT albumin uptake was quantified. In a second model, loss of endogenous
albumin was induced in rats by podocyte-specific transgenic expression of
diphtheria toxin receptor. In these albumin-deficient rats, exposure to
diphtheria toxin induced an increase in albumin GSC and albumin filtration,
resulting in increased exposure of the PTs to endogenous albumin. In this case,
PT albumin reabsorption was markedly increased. Analysis of known albumin
receptors and assessment of cortical protein expression in the albumin overload
model, conducted to identify potential proteins and pathways affected by acute
protein overload, revealed changes in the expression levels of calreticulin,
disabled homolog 2, NRF2, angiopoietin-2, and proteins involved in ATP synthesis.
Taken together, these results suggest that a regulated PT cell albumin uptake
system can respond rapidly to different physiologic conditions to minimize
alterations in serum albumin level.

Copyright © 2016 by the American Society of Nephrology.

PMCID: PMC4731114 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26054544  [PubMed - in process]


119. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 8;10(6):e0128290. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128290.
eCollection 2015.

Genetic Tools for the Analysis of Drosophila Stomatogastric Nervous System
Development.

Hernández K(1), Myers LG(1), Bowser M(1), Kidd T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biology/MS 314, University of Nevada, Reno, Nevada, United States of America.

The Drosophila stomatogastric nervous system (SNS) is a compact collection of
neurons that arises from the migration of neural precursors. Here we describe
genetic tools allowing functional analysis of the SNS during the migratory phase 
of development. We constructed GAL4 lines driven by fragments of the Ret
promoter, which yielded expression in a subset of migrating neural SNS precursors
and also included a distinct set of midgut associated cells. Screening of
additional GAL4 lines driven by fragments of the Gfrl/Munin, forkhead, twist and 
goosecoid (Gsc) promoters identified a Gsc fragment with expression from initial 
selection of SNS precursors until the end of embryogenesis. Inhibition of EGFR
signaling using three identified lines disrupted the correct patterning of the
frontal and recurrent nerves. To manipulate the environment traveled by SNS
precursors, a FasII-GAL4 line with strong expression throughout the entire
intestinal tract was identified. The transgenic lines described offer the ability
to specifically manipulate the migration of SNS precursors and will allow the
modeling and in-depth analysis of neuronal migration in ENS disorders such as
Hirschsprung's disease.

PMCID: PMC4460011
PMID: 26053861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Int Immunopharmacol. 2015 Nov;29(1):105-9. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2015.05.032.
Epub 2015 May 30.

The activation of M2 muscarinic receptor inhibits cell growth and survival in
human glioblastoma cancer stem cells.

Alessandrini F(1), Cristofaro I(1), Di Bari M(1), Zasso J(2), Conti L(2), Tata
AM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Biology and Biotechnologies C. Darwin, Research Center of
Neurobiology Daniel Bovet, "Sapienza" University of Rome, Roma, Italy. (2)Centre 
for Integrative Biology, Università degli Studi di Trento, Trento, Italy.
(3)Dept. of Biology and Biotechnologies C. Darwin, Research Center of
Neurobiology Daniel Bovet, "Sapienza" University of Rome, Roma, Italy. Electronic
address: adamaria.tata@uniroma1.it.

The involvement of muscarinic receptors in cancer has been reported. Recently we 
have demonstrated that the activation of M2 muscarinic receptors, through
arecaidine propargyl ester, arrests cell proliferation and induces apoptosis in
primary and established glioblastoma cell lines. Considering the inability of
conventional drugs to completely counteract the growth of glioblastoma cancer
stem cells (GSCs), we have investigated the effect produced by arecaidine on GSC 
growth and survival. The expression of M2 receptors has been analyzed in GSC cell
lines derived from human biopsies. Based on the M2 receptor expression levels, we
have selected two gliolastoma cell lines (GB7 and GB8). In both cell lines the
treatment with arecaidine decreased GCS cell growth. GB7 cells exhibited a time- 
and dose-dependent decrease of cell proliferation. Moreover arecaidine caused a
reduced cell survival in particular in GB8 cell line. These effects appear to be 
mediated by M2 receptor activation as suggested by pharmacological experiments
performed in the presence of M1 and M3 preferring antagonists (pirenzepine and
4-DAMP respectively) and M2/M4 antagonist methoctramine. M2 receptor silencing by
siRNA has further confirmed that the inhibition of cell growth arecaidine-induced
was mediated by the M2 receptor activation. These results suggest that the M2
receptors may represent a new interesting therapeutic tool to counteract
glioblastoma cancer stem cell growth and survival.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26033491  [PubMed - in process]


121. Neuro Oncol. 2016 Jan;18(1):37-47. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/nov091. Epub 2015 Jun 1.

USP1 targeting impedes GBM growth by inhibiting stem cell maintenance and
radioresistance.

Lee JK(1), Chang N(1), Yoon Y(1), Yang H(1), Cho H(1), Kim E(1), Shin Y(1), Kang 
W(1), Oh YT(1), Mun GI(1), Joo KM(1), Nam DH(1), Lee J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Samsung Medical Center and Samsung Biomedical
Research Institute, Seoul, Korea (J.-K.L., Y.Y., H.Y., W.K., D.-H.N.); Graduate
School of Health Science & Technology, Samsung Advanced Institute for Health
Science & Technology, Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul, Korea (N.C., H.C., Y.T.O., 
Y.Y., D.-H.N.); Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea (K.M.J.); Department of Stem Cell Biology and
Regenerative Medicine, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland,
Ohio (E.K., Y.S., G.I.M., J.L.).

BACKGROUND: Clinical benefits from standard therapies against glioblastoma (GBM) 
are limited in part due to intrinsic radio- and chemoresistance of GBM and
inefficient targeting of GBM stem-like cells (GSCs). Novel therapeutic approaches
that overcome treatment resistance and diminish stem-like properties of GBM are
needed.
METHODS: We determined the expression levels of ubiquitination-specific proteases
(USPs) by transcriptome analysis and found that USP1 is highly expressed in GBM. 
Using the patient GBM-derived primary tumor cells, we inhibited USP1 by
shRNA-mediated knockdown or its specific inhibitor pimozide and evaluated the
effects on stem cell marker expression, proliferation, and clonogenic growth of
tumor cells.
RESULTS: USP1 was highly expressed in gliomas relative to normal brain tissues
and more preferentially in GSC enrichment marker (CD133 or CD15) positive cells. 
USP1 positively regulated the protein stability of the ID1 and CHEK1, critical
regulators of DNA damage response and stem cell maintenance. Targeting USP1 by
RNA interference or treatment with a chemical USP1 inhibitor attenuated
clonogenic growth and survival of GSCs and enhanced radiosensitivity of GBM
cells. Finally, USP1 inhibition alone or in combination with radiation
significantly prolonged the survival of tumor-bearing mice.
CONCLUSION: USP1-mediated protein stabilization promotes GSC maintenance and
treatment resistance, thereby providing a rationale for USP1 inhibition as a
potential therapeutic approach against GBM.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Neuro-Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4677407 [Available on 2017-01-01]
PMID: 26032834  [PubMed - in process]


122. Expert Rev Neurother. 2015;15(7):741-52. doi: 10.1586/14737175.2015.1051968. Epub
2015 May 31.

The role of glioma stem cells in chemotherapy resistance and glioblastoma
multiforme recurrence.

Auffinger B(1), Spencer D, Pytel P, Ahmed AU, Lesniak MS.

Author information: 
(1)The Brain Tumor Center, The University of Chicago, 5841 South Maryland Ave,
M/C 3026, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Glioma stem cells (GSCs) constitute a slow-dividing, small population within a
heterogeneous glioblastoma. They are able to self-renew, recapitulate a whole
tumor, and differentiate into other specific glioblastoma multiforme (GBM)
subpopulations. Therefore, they have been held responsible for malignant relapse 
after primary standard therapy and the poor prognosis of recurrent GBM. The
failure of current therapies to eliminate specific GSC subpopulations has been
considered a major factor contributing to the inevitable recurrence in GBM
patients after treatment. Here, we discuss the molecular mechanisms of
chemoresistance of GSCs and the reasons why complete eradication of GSCs is so
difficult to achieve. We will also describe the targeted therapies currently
available for GSCs and possible mechanisms to overcome such chemoresistance and
avoid therapeutic relapse.

PMID: 26027432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Cell Biol. 2015 May 25;209(4):595-608. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201409142.

Wnt ligands regulate Tkv expression to constrain Dpp activity in the Drosophila
ovarian stem cell niche.

Luo L(1), Wang H(2), Fan C(2), Liu S(2), Cai Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Temasek Life Sciences Laboratory and Department of Biological Sciences,
National University of Singapore, Singapore, 117604 Temasek Life Sciences
Laboratory and Department of Biological Sciences, National University of
Singapore, Singapore, 117604. (2)Temasek Life Sciences Laboratory and Department 
of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, Singapore, 117604.
(3)Temasek Life Sciences Laboratory and Department of Biological Sciences,
National University of Singapore, Singapore, 117604 Temasek Life Sciences
Laboratory and Department of Biological Sciences, National University of
Singapore, Singapore, 117604 caiyu@tll.org.sg.

Stem cell self-renewal versus differentiation is regulated by the niche, which
provides localized molecules that favor self-renewal. In the Drosophila
melanogaster female germline stem cell (GSC) niche, Decapentaplegic (Dpp), a fly 
transforming growth factor ß molecule and well-established long-range morphogen, 
acts over one cell diameter to maintain the GSCs. Here, we show that Thickveins
(Tkv; a type I receptor of Dpp) is highly expressed in stromal cells next to
Dpp-producing cells and functions to remove excess Dpp outside the niche, thereby
spatially restricting its activity. Interestingly, Tkv expression in these
stromal cells is regulated by multiple Wnt ligands that are produced by the
niche. Our data demonstrate a self-restraining mechanism by which the Drosophila 
ovarian GSC niche acts to define its own boundary.

© 2015 Luo et al.

PMCID: PMC4442805
PMID: 26008746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. PLoS One. 2015 May 18;10(5):e0127058. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0127058.
eCollection 2015.

The HDAC Inhibitors Scriptaid and LBH589 Combined with the Oncolytic Virus
Delta24-RGD Exert Enhanced Anti-Tumor Efficacy in Patient-Derived Glioblastoma
Cells.

Berghauser Pont LM(1), Kleijn A(1), Kloezeman JJ(1), van den Bossche W(1),
Kaufmann JK(2), de Vrij J(3), Leenstra S(4), Dirven CM(1), Lamfers ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Brain Tumor Center, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, Harvey Cushing Neuro-Oncology
Laboratories, Brigham & Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, Utrecht
University Medical Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands. (4)Department of
Neurosurgery, Brain Tumor Center, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands;
Department of Neurosurgery, Elisabeth Hospital, Tilburg, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: A phase I/II trial for glioblastoma with the oncolytic adenovirus
Delta24-RGD was recently completed. Delta24-RGD conditionally replicates in cells
with a disrupted retinoblastoma-pathway and enters cells via avß3/5 integrins.
Glioblastomas are differentially sensitive to Delta24-RGD. HDAC inhibitors
(HDACi) affect integrins and share common cell death pathways with Delta24-RGD.
We studied the combination treatment effects of HDACi and Delta24-RGD in
patient-derived glioblastoma stem-like cells (GSC), and we determined the most
effective HDACi.
METHODS: SAHA, Valproic Acid, Scriptaid, MS275 and LBH589 were combined with
Delta24-RGD in fourteen distinct GSCs. Synergy was determined by Chou Talalay
method. Viral infection and replication were assessed using luciferase and GFP
encoding vectors and hexon-titration assays. Coxsackie adenovirus receptor and
avß3 integrin levels were determined by flow cytometry. Oncolysis and mechanisms 
of cell death were studied by viability, caspase-3/7, LDH and LC3B/p62,
phospho-p70S6K. Toxicity was studied on normal human astrocytes. MGMT promotor
methylation status, TCGA classification, Rb-pathway and integrin gene expression 
levels were assessed as markers of responsiveness.
RESULTS: Scriptaid and LBH589 acted synergistically with Delta24-RGD in
approximately 50% of the GSCs. Both drugs moderately increased avß3 integrin
levels and viral infection in responding but not in non-responding GSCs. LBH589
moderately increased late viral gene expression, however, virus titration
revealed diminished viral progeny production by both HDACi, Scriptaid augmented
caspase-3/7 activity, LC3B conversion, p62 and phospho-p70S6K consumption, as
well as LDH levels. LBH589 increased LDH and phospho-p70S6K consumption.
Responsiveness correlated with expression of various Rb-pathway genes and
integrins. Combination treatments induced limited toxicity to human astrocytes.
CONCLUSION: LBH589 and Scriptaid combined with Delta24-RGD revealed synergistic
anti-tumor activity in a subset of GSCs. Both HDACi moderately augmented viral
infection and late gene expression, but slightly reduced progeny production. The 
drugs differentially activated multiple cell death pathways. The limited toxicity
on astrocytes supports further evaluation of the proposed combination therapies.

PMCID: PMC4436250
PMID: 25993039  [PubMed - in process]


125. PLoS Biol. 2015 May 20;13(5):e1002152. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002152.
eCollection 2015.

Pigment Epithelium-Derived Factor (PEDF) Expression Induced by EGFRvIII Promotes 
Self-renewal and Tumor Progression of Glioma Stem Cells.

Yin J(1), Park G(1), Kim TH(2), Hong JH(2), Kim YJ(2), Jin X(3), Kang S(2), Jung 
JE(4), Kim JY(5), Yun H(1), Lee JE(6), Kim M(7), Chung J(8), Kim H(3), Nakano
I(9), Gwak HS(2), Yoo H(1), Yoo BC(10), Kim JH(6), Hur EM(11), Lee J(12), Lee
SH(1), Park MJ(13), Park JB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of System Cancer Science, Graduate School of Cancer Science and
Policy, National Cancer Center, Goyang, Korea; Specific Organs Cancer Branch,
Research Institute and Hospital, National Cancer Center, Goyang, Korea.
(2)Specific Organs Cancer Branch, Research Institute and Hospital, National
Cancer Center, Goyang, Korea. (3)Department of Biotechnology, School of Life
Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea University, Seoul, Korea. (4)Specific Organs
Cancer Branch, Research Institute and Hospital, National Cancer Center, Goyang,
Korea; Department of Biotechnology, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology,
Korea University, Seoul, Korea. (5)Divisions of Radiation Cancer Research,
Research Center for Radio-Senescence, Korea Institute of Radiological and Medical
Sciences, Seoul, Korea; Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, Korea
University, Seoul, Korea. (6)Department of System Cancer Science, Graduate School
of Cancer Science and Policy, National Cancer Center, Goyang, Korea; Cancer Cell 
and Molecular Biology Branch, Research Institute and Hospital, National Cancer
Center, Goyang, Korea. (7)Department of System Cancer Science, Graduate School of
Cancer Science and Policy, National Cancer Center, Goyang, Korea. (8)Department
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Seoul National University, College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea; Department of Cancer Biology, Seoul National University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (9)Department of Neurological Surgery, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, United States of America; James
Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, United
States of America. (10)Colorectal Cancer Branch, Research Institute and Hospital,
National Cancer Center, Goyangi, Korea. (11)Center for Neuroscience, Brain
Science Institute, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul, Korea;
Department of Neuroscience, Korea University of Science and Technology, Daejeon, 
Korea. (12)Department of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Lerner
Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America. 
(13)Divisions of Radiation Cancer Research, Research Center for Radio-Senescence,
Korea Institute of Radiological and Medical Sciences, Seoul, Korea.

Erratum in
    PLoS Biol. 2016 Jan;14(1):e1002367.

Epidermal growth factor receptor variant III (EGFRvIII) has been associated with 
glioma stemness, but the direct molecular mechanism linking the two is largely
unknown. Here, we show that EGFRvIII induces the expression and secretion of
pigment epithelium-derived factor (PEDF) via activation of signal transducer and 
activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), thereby promoting self-renewal and tumor
progression of glioma stem cells (GSCs). Mechanistically, PEDF sustained GSC
self-renewal by Notch1 cleavage, and the generated intracellular domain of Notch1
(NICD) induced the expression of Sox2 through interaction with its promoter
region. Furthermore, a subpopulation with high levels of PEDF was capable of
infiltration along corpus callosum. Inhibition of PEDF diminished GSC
self-renewal and increased survival of orthotopic tumor-bearing mice. Together,
these data indicate the novel role of PEDF as a key regulator of GSC and suggest 
clinical implications.

PMCID: PMC4439169
PMID: 25992628  [PubMed - in process]


126. Nihon Rinsho. 2015 May;73(5):836-43.

[Brain tumor stem cells].

[Article in Japanese]

Hide T, Makino K, Nakamura H, Yano S, Kuratsu J.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most frequent and aggressive brain tumor,
and which harbors not only rapidly dividing cells but also small populations of
slowly dividing and dormant cells with tumorigenesity-, self-renewal-, and
multi-lineage differentiation capabilities. GBM stem cells (GSCs), which are
resistant to conventional chemo -radiotherapy and may be a cause of local
recurrence and dissemination. Additionally, heterogeneity of GSCs in the same
tumor had been shown by the innovation of microarray and sequencing technology.
However, outcome in patients with GBM remains unsatisfactory. Accumulation of the
clinical evidence and basic research findings targeting for GSCs and their
specific microenvironments (GSC niches) raise the possibility of new treatments
to overcome GBM.

PMID: 25985640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Development. 2015 Jun 1;142(11):2069-79. doi: 10.1242/dev.120907. Epub 2015 May
14.

Context-specific function of the LIM homeobox 1 transcription factor in head
formation of the mouse embryo.

Fossat N(1), Ip CK(2), Jones VJ(3), Studdert JB(3), Khoo PL(3), Lewis SL(3),
Power M(3), Tourle K(3), Loebel DA(2), Kwan KM(4), Behringer RR(4), Tam PP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Embryology Unit, Children's Medical Research Institute, Westmead, New South
Wales 2145, Australia Discipline of Medicine, Sydney Medical School, University
of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales 2006, Australia nfossat@cmri.org.au.
(2)Embryology Unit, Children's Medical Research Institute, Westmead, New South
Wales 2145, Australia Discipline of Medicine, Sydney Medical School, University
of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales 2006, Australia. (3)Embryology Unit,
Children's Medical Research Institute, Westmead, New South Wales 2145, Australia.
(4)Department of Genetics, MD Anderson Cancer Center, University of Texas,
Houston, TX 77005, USA.

Lhx1 encodes a LIM homeobox transcription factor that is expressed in the
primitive streak, mesoderm and anterior mesendoderm of the mouse embryo. Using a 
conditional Lhx1 flox mutation and three different Cre deleters, we demonstrated 
that LHX1 is required in the anterior mesendoderm, but not in the mesoderm, for
formation of the head. LHX1 enables the morphogenetic movement of cells that
accompanies the formation of the anterior mesendoderm, in part through regulation
of Pcdh7 expression. LHX1 also regulates, in the anterior mesendoderm, the
transcription of genes encoding negative regulators of WNT signalling, such as
Dkk1, Hesx1, Cer1 and Gsc. Embryos carrying mutations in Pcdh7, generated using
CRISPR-Cas9 technology, and embryos without Lhx1 function specifically in the
anterior mesendoderm displayed head defects that partially phenocopied the
truncation defects of Lhx1-null mutants. Therefore, disruption of Lhx1-dependent 
movement of the anterior mesendoderm cells and failure to modulate WNT signalling
both resulted in the truncation of head structures. Compound mutants of Lhx1,
Dkk1 and Ctnnb1 show an enhanced head truncation phenotype, pointing to a
functional link between LHX1 transcriptional activity and the regulation of WNT
signalling. Collectively, these results provide comprehensive insight into the
context-specific function of LHX1 in head formation: LHX1 enables the formation
of the anterior mesendoderm that is instrumental for mediating the inductive
interaction with the anterior neuroectoderm and LHX1 also regulates the
expression of factors in the signalling cascade that modulate the level of WNT
activity.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 25977363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Purinergic Signal. 2015 Sep;11(3):331-46. doi: 10.1007/s11302-015-9454-7. Epub
2015 May 15.

Potentiation of temozolomide antitumor effect by purine receptor ligands able to 
restrain the in vitro growth of human glioblastoma stem cells.

D'Alimonte I(1), Nargi E, Zuccarini M, Lanuti P, Di Iorio P, Giuliani P,
Ricci-Vitiani L, Pallini R, Caciagli F, Ciccarelli R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical, Oral and Biotechnology Sciences, University of
Chieti-Pescara, via dei Vestini 29, 66100, Chieti, Italy.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), the most common and aggressive brain tumor in
humans, comprises a population of stem-like cells (GSCs) that are currently
investigated as potential target for GBM therapy. Here, we used GSCs isolated
from three different GBM surgical specimens to examine the antitumor activity of 
purines. Cultured GSCs expressed either metabotropic adenosine P1 and ATP P2Y
receptors or ionotropic P2X7 receptors. GSC exposure for 48 h to 10-150 µM ATP,
P2R ligand, or to ADPßS or MRS2365, P2Y1R agonists, enhanced cell expansion. This
effect was counteracted by the PY1R antagonist MRS2500. In contrast, 48-h
treatment with higher doses of ATP or UTP, which binds to P2Y2/4R, or
2'(3')-O-(4-benzoylbenzoyl)-ATP (Bz-ATP), P2X7R agonist, decreased GSC
proliferation. Such a reduction was due to apoptotic or necrotic cell death but
mostly to growth arrest. Accordingly, cell regrowth and secondary neurosphere
formation were observed 2 weeks after the end of treatment. Suramin, nonselective
P2R antagonist, MRS1220 or AZ11645373, selective A3R or P2X7R antagonists,
respectively, counteracted ATP antiproliferative effects. AZ11645373 also
abolished the inhibitory effect of Bz-ATP low doses on GSC growth. These findings
provide important clues on the anticancer potential of ligands for A3R, P2Y1R,
and P2X7R, which are involved in the GSC growth control. Interestingly, ATP and
BzATP potentiated the cytotoxicity of temozolomide (TMZ), currently used for GBM 
therapy, enabling it to cause a greater and long-lasting inhibitory effect on GSC
duplication when readded to cells previously treated with purine nucleotides plus
TMZ. These are the first findings identifying purine nucleotides as able to
enhance TMZ antitumor efficacy and might have an immediate translational impact.

PMCID: PMC4529851
PMID: 25976165  [PubMed - in process]


129. Radiat Prot Dosimetry. 2015 Sep;166(1-4):374-8. doi: 10.1093/rpd/ncv299. Epub
2015 May 11.

Glioblastoma stem cells: radiobiological response to ionising radiations of
different qualities.

Pecchia I(1), Dini V(2), Ricci-Vitiani L(3), Biffoni M(3), Balduzzi M(4), Fratini
E(5), Belli M(6), Campa A(2), Esposito G(2), Cirrone G(7), Romano F(7),
Stancampiano C(7), Pelacchi F(3), Pallini R(8), Tabocchini MA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Technology and Health, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, viale
Regina Elena 299, Rome 00161, Italy ilaria.pecchia@iss.it. (2)Department of
Technology and Health, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, viale Regina Elena 299, Rome
00161, Italy Sez. Roma1-Gruppo collegato Sanità, INFN, Rome, Italy. (3)Department
of Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore di Sanità,
Rome, Italy. (4)Sez. Roma1-Gruppo collegato Sanità, INFN, Rome, Italy
ENEA-CASACCIA, Rome, Italy. (5)Sez. Roma1-Gruppo collegato Sanità, INFN, Rome,
Italy Museo storico della fisica e Centro Studi e Ricerche 'E. Fermi', Rome,
Italy. (6)Sez. Roma1-Gruppo collegato Sanità, INFN, Rome, Italy. (7)Laboratori
Nazionali del Sud (LNS) - INFN, Catania, Italy. (8)Department of Neurosurgery,
Catholic University of Rome, Rome, Italy.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and malignant primary brain
tumour, with very poor prognosis. The high recurrence rate and failure of
conventional treatments are expected to be related to the presence of
radio-resistant cancer stem cells (CSCs) inside the tumour mass. CSCs can both
self-renew and differentiate into the heterogeneous lineages of cancer cells.
Recent evidence showed a higher effectiveness of C-ions and protons in
inactivating CSCs, suggesting a potential advantage of Hadrontherapy compared
with conventional radiotherapy for GBM treatment. To investigate the mechanisms
involved in the molecular and cellular responses of CSCs to ionising radiations, 
two GBM stem cell (GSC) lines, named lines 1 and 83, which were derived from
patients with different clinical outcomes and having different metabolic profiles
(as shown by NMR spectroscopy), were irradiated with (137)Cs photons and with
protons or C-ions of 62 MeV u(-1) in the dose range of 5-40 Gy. The biological
effects investigated were: cell death, cell cycle progression, and DNA damage
induction and repair. Preliminary results show a different response to ionising
radiation between the two GSC lines for the different end points investigated.
Further experiments are in progress to consolidate the data and to get more
insights on the influence of radiation quality.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25969527  [PubMed - in process]


130. Stem Cells. 2015 Aug;33(8):2400-15. doi: 10.1002/stem.2053. Epub 2015 May 27.

Mesenchymal Stem Cells Isolated From Human Gliomas Increase Proliferation and
Maintain Stemness of Glioma Stem Cells Through the IL-6/gp130/STAT3 Pathway.

Hossain A(1,)(2), Gumin J(1,)(2), Gao F(1,)(2), Figueroa J(1,)(2), Shinojima
N(1,)(2), Takezaki T(1,)(2), Priebe W(3,)(2), Villarreal D(1,)(2), Kang
SG(1,)(2), Joyce C(1,)(2), Sulman E(4,)(2), Wang Q(5,)(2), Marini FC(6), Andreeff
M(7), Colman H(8), Lang FF(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery. (2)Brain Tumor Center, The University of Texas
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA. (3)Department of Experimental
Therapeutics. (4)Department of Radiation Oncology. (5)Department of
Bioinformatics and Computational Biology. (6)Department of Cancer Biology, Wake
Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA. (7)Department of
Leukemia. (8)Department of Neuro-Oncology, University of Utah Health Science
Center, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.

Although mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have been implicated as stromal components
of several cancers, their ultimate contribution to tumorigenesis and their
potential to drive cancer stem cells, particularly in the unique microenvironment
of human brain tumors, remain largely undefined. Consequently, using established 
criteria, we isolated glioma-associated-human MSCs (GA-hMSCs) from fresh human
glioma surgical specimens for the first time. We show that these GA-hMSCs are
nontumorigenic stromal cells that are phenotypically similar to prototypical bone
marrow-MSCs. Low-passage genomic sequencing analyses comparing GA-hMSCs with
matched tumor-initiating glioma stem cells (GSCs) suggest that most GA-hMSCs
(60%) are normal cells recruited to the tumor (group 1 GA-hMSCs), although,
rarely (10%), GA-hMSCs may differentiate directly from GSCs (group 2 GA-hMSCs) or
display genetic patterns intermediate between these groups (group 3 GA-hMSCs).
Importantly, GA-hMSCs increase proliferation and self-renewal of GSCs in vitro
and enhance GSC tumorigenicity and mesenchymal features in vivo, confirming their
functional significance within the GSC niche. These effects are mediated by
GA-hMSC-secreted interleukin-6, which activates STAT3 in GSCs. Our results
establish GA-hMSCs as a potentially new stromal component of gliomas that drives 
the aggressiveness of GSCs, and point to GA-hMSCs as a novel therapeutic target
within gliomas.

© 2015 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4509942 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 25966666  [PubMed - in process]


131. J Immunol. 2015 Jun 15;194(12):6035-44. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1402521. Epub 2015 
May 8.

Batf2/Irf1 induces inflammatory responses in classically activated macrophages,
lipopolysaccharides, and mycobacterial infection.

Roy S(1), Guler R(2), Parihar SP(2), Schmeier S(3), Kaczkowski B(1), Nishimura
H(1), Shin JW(1), Negishi Y(1), Ozturk M(2), Hurdayal R(2), Kubosaki A(4), Kimura
Y(4), de Hoon MJ(1), Hayashizaki Y(5), Brombacher F(6), Suzuki H(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genomic Technologies, RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies, 
Yokohama 230-0045, Japan; RIKEN Omics Science Center, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan;
(2)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Cape Town
Component, Cape Town 7925, South Africa; Division of Immunology, Institute of
Infectious Diseases and Molecular Medicine, Health Science Faculty, University of
Cape Town, Cape Town 7925, South Africa; (3)Institute of Natural and Mathematical
Sciences, Massey University, North Shore City 0745, New Zealand; and. (4)RIKEN
Omics Science Center, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan; (5)RIKEN Omics Science Center,
Yokohama 230-0045, Japan; RIKEN Preventive Medicine and Diagnosis Innovation
Program, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. (6)International Centre for Genetic
Engineering and Biotechnology, Cape Town Component, Cape Town 7925, South Africa;
Division of Immunology, Institute of Infectious Diseases and Molecular Medicine, 
Health Science Faculty, University of Cape Town, Cape Town 7925, South Africa;
harukazu@gsc.riken.jp frank.brombacher@icgeb.org. (7)Division of Genomic
Technologies, RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies, Yokohama 230-0045,
Japan; RIKEN Omics Science Center, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan;
harukazu@gsc.riken.jp frank.brombacher@icgeb.org.

Basic leucine zipper transcription factor Batf2 is poorly described, whereas Batf
and Batf3 have been shown to play essential roles in dendritic cell, T cell, and 
B cell development and regulation. Batf2 was drastically induced in
IFN-<U+03B3>-activated classical macrophages (M1) compared with unstimulated or
IL-4-activated alternative macrophages (M2). Batf2 knockdown experiments from
IFN-<U+03B3>-activated macrophages and subsequent expression profiling demonstrated
important roles for regulation of immune responses, inducing inflammatory and
host-protective genes Tnf, Ccl5, and Nos2. Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Beijing
strain HN878)-infected macrophages further induced Batf2 and augmented
host-protective Batf2-dependent genes, particularly in M1, whose mechanism was
suggested to be mediated through both TLR2 and TLR4 by LPS and heat-killed HN878 
(HKTB) stimulation experiments. Irf1 binding motif was enriched in the promoters 
of Batf2-regulated genes. Coimmunoprecipitation study demonstrated Batf2
association with Irf1. Furthermore, Irf1 knockdown showed downregulation of
IFN-<U+03B3>- or LPS/HKTB-activated host-protective genes Tnf, Ccl5, Il12b, and Nos2.
Conclusively, Batf2 is an activation marker gene for M1 involved in gene
regulation of IFN-<U+03B3>-activated classical macrophages, as well as LPS/HKTB-induced 
macrophage stimulation, possibly by Batf2/Irf1 gene induction. Taken together,
these results underline the role of Batf2/Irf1 in inducing inflammatory responses
in M. tuberculosis infection.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 25957166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Int J Oncol. 2015 Jul;47(1):91-6. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.2992. Epub 2015 May 7.

Characterization of glioma stem-like cells from human glioblastomas.

Yamamuro S(1), Okamoto Y(2), Sano E(3), Ochiai Y(1), Ogino A(1), Ohta T(1), Hara 
H(4), Ueda T(3), Nakayama T(5), Yoshino A(1), Katayama Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, Nihon University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan. (2)New Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization,
Kanagawa, Japan. (3)Department of Medical Genome Sciences, Graduate School of
Frontier Science, The University of Tokyo, Chiba, Japan. (4)Department of
Functional Morphology, Nihon University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Division of Companion Diagnostics, Department of Pathology of Microbiology,
Nihon University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Glioma stem-like cells (GSCs) could have potential for tumorigenesis, treatment
resistance, and tumor recurrence (GSC hypothesis). However, the mechanisms
underlying such potential has remained elusive and few ultrastructural features
of the cells have been reported in detail. We therefore undertook observations of
the antigenic characteristics and ultrastructural features of GSCs isolated from 
human glioblastomas. Tumor spheres formed by variable numbers of cells,
exhibiting a variable appearance in both their size and shape, were frequently
seen in GSCs expressing the stem cell surface markers CD133 and CD15. Increased
cell nucleus atypia, mitochondria, rough endoplasmic reticulum, coated vesicles, 
and microvilli, were noted in the GSCs. Furthermore, cells at division phases and
different phases of the apoptotic process were occasionally observed. These
findings could imply that GSCs have certain relations with human neural stem
cells (NSCs) but are primitively different from undifferentiated NSCs. The data
may provide support for the GSC hypothesis, and also facilitate the establishment
of future glioblastoma treatments targeting GSCs.

PMCID: PMC4485645
PMID: 25955568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. PLoS One. 2015 May 8;10(5):e0125838. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125838.
eCollection 2015.

Molecular heterogeneity in a patient-derived glioblastoma xenoline is regulated
by different cancer stem cell populations.

Garner JM(1), Ellison DW(2), Finkelstein D(3), Ganguly D(1), Du Z(1), Sims M(1), 
Yang CH(1), Interiano RB(4), Davidoff AM(4), Pfeffer LM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, and the Center for Cancer
Research, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN, 38163,
United States of America. (2)Department of Pathology, St. Jude Children's
Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, 38105, United States of America. (3)Department of
Computational Biology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, 38105,
United States of America. (4)Department of Surgery, University of Tennessee
Health Science Center, Memphis, TN, 38163, United States of America; Department
of Surgery, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, 38105, United
States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(12):e0145052.

Malignant glioblastoma (GBM) is a highly aggressive brain tumor with a dismal
prognosis and limited therapeutic options. Genomic profiling of GBM samples has
identified four molecular subtypes (Proneural, Neural, Classical and
Mesenchymal), which may arise from different glioblastoma stem-like cell (GSC)
populations. We previously showed that adherent cultures of GSCs grown on
laminin-coated plates (Ad-GSCs) and spheroid cultures of GSCs (Sp-GSCs) had high 
expression of stem cell markers (CD133, Sox2 and Nestin), but low expression of
differentiation markers (ßIII-tubulin and glial fibrillary acid protein). In the 
present study, we characterized GBM tumors produced by subcutaneous and
intracranial injection of Ad-GSCs and Sp-GSCs isolated from a patient-derived
xenoline. Although they formed tumors with identical histological features, gene 
expression analysis revealed that xenografts of Sp-GSCs had a Classical molecular
subtype similar to that of bulk tumor cells. In contrast xenografts of Ad-GSCs
expressed a Mesenchymal gene signature. Adherent GSC-derived xenografts had high 
STAT3 and ANGPTL4 expression, and enrichment for stem cell markers,
transcriptional networks and pro-angiogenic markers characteristic of the
Mesenchymal subtype. Examination of clinical samples from GBM patients showed
that STAT3 expression was directly correlated with ANGPTL4 expression, and that
increased expression of these genes correlated with poor patient survival and
performance. A pharmacological STAT3 inhibitor abrogated STAT3 binding to the
ANGPTL4 promoter and exhibited anticancer activity in vivo. Therefore, Ad-GSCs
and Sp-GSCs produced histologically identical tumors with different gene
expression patterns, and a STAT3/ANGPTL4 pathway is identified in glioblastoma
that may serve as a target for therapeutic intervention.

PMCID: PMC4425556
PMID: 25955030  [PubMed - in process]


134. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2015 Sep;22(5):948-56. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocv037. Epub
2015 May 6.

A multilingual gold-standard corpus for biomedical concept recognition: the
Mantra GSC.

Kors JA(1), Clematide S(2), Akhondi SA(3), van Mulligen EM(3), Rebholz-Schuhmann 
D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Informatics, Erasmus University Medical Center,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands j.kors@erasmusmc.nl. (2)Institute of Computational
Linguistics, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. (3)Department of Medical 
Informatics, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: To create a multilingual gold-standard corpus for biomedical concept
recognition.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We selected text units from different parallel corpora
(Medline abstract titles, drug labels, biomedical patent claims) in English,
French, German, Spanish, and Dutch. Three annotators per language independently
annotated the biomedical concepts, based on a subset of the Unified Medical
Language System and covering a wide range of semantic groups. To reduce the
annotation workload, automatically generated preannotations were provided.
Individual annotations were automatically harmonized and then adjudicated, and
cross-language consistency checks were carried out to arrive at the final
annotations.
RESULTS: The number of final annotations was 5530. Inter-annotator agreement
scores indicate good agreement (median F-score 0.79), and are similar to those
between individual annotators and the gold standard. The automatically generated 
harmonized annotation set for each language performed equally well as the best
annotator for that language.
DISCUSSION: The use of automatic preannotations, harmonized annotations, and
parallel corpora helped to keep the manual annotation efforts manageable. The
inter-annotator agreement scores provide a reference standard for gauging the
performance of automatic annotation techniques.
CONCLUSION: To our knowledge, this is the first gold-standard corpus for
biomedical concept recognition in languages other than English. Other
distinguishing features are the wide variety of semantic groups that are being
covered, and the diversity of text genres that were annotated.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the American
Medical Informatics Association.

PMID: 25948699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Front Neuroanat. 2015 Apr 17;9:46. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2015.00046. eCollection
2015.

Molecular codes defining rostrocaudal domains in the embryonic mouse
hypothalamus.

Ferran JL(1), Puelles L(1), Rubenstein JL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy and Psychobiology, School Medicine, University of 
Murcia and IMIB (Instituto Murciano de Investigación Biosanitaria) Murcia, Spain.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Rock Hall, University of California San Francisco,
CA, USA.

The prosomeric model proposes that the hypothalamus is a rostral forebrain
entity, placed ventral to the telencephalon and rostral to the diencephalon. Gene
expression markers differentially label molecularly distinct dorsoventral
progenitor domains, which represent continuous longitudinal bands across the
hypothalamic alar and basal regions. There is also circumstantial support for a
rostrocaudal subdivision of the hypothalamus into transverse peduncular (caudal) 
and terminal (rostral) territories (PHy, THy). In addition, there is evidence for
a specialized acroterminal domain at the rostral midline of the terminal
hypothalamus (ATD). The PHy and THy transverse structural units are presently
held to form part of two hypothalamo-telencephalic prosomeres (hp1 and hp2,
respectively), which end dorsally at the telencephalic septocommissural roof. PHy
and THy have distinct adult nuclei, at all dorsoventral levels. Here we report
the results of data mining from the Allen Developing Mouse Brain Atlas database, 
looking for genes expressed differentially in the PHy, Thy, and ATD regions of
the hypothalamus at several developmental stages. This search allowed us to
identify additional molecular evidence supporting the postulated fundamental
rostrocaudal bipartition of the mouse hypothalamus into the PHy and THy, and also
corroborated molecularly the singularity of the ATD. A number of markers were
expressed in Thy (Fgf15, Gsc, Nkx6.2, Otx1, Zic1/5), but were absent in PHy,
while other genes showed the converse pattern (Erbb4, Irx1/3/5, Lmo4, Mfap4,
Plagl1, Pmch). We also identified markers that selectively label the ATD
(Fgf8/10/18, Otx2, Pomc, Rax, Six6). On the whole, these data help to explain
why, irrespective of the observed continuity of all dorsoventral molecular
hypothalamic subdivisions across PHy and THy, different nuclear structures
originate within each of these two domains, and also why singular structures
arise at the ATD, e.g., the suprachiasmatic nuclei, the arcuate nucleus, the
median eminence and the neurohypophysis.

PMCID: PMC4400913
PMID: 25941476  [PubMed]


136. Cell Cycle. 2015;14(13):2129-41. doi: 10.1080/15384101.2015.1041690. Epub 2015
Apr 30.

Co-expressed Cyclin D variants cooperate to regulate proliferation of germline
nuclei in a syncytium.

Subramaniam G(1), Campsteijn C, Thompson EM.

Author information: 
(1)a Sars International Center for Marine Molecular Biology; University of Bergen
; Bergen , Norway.

The role of the G1-phase Cyclin D-CDK 4/6 regulatory module in linking germline
stem cell (GSC) proliferation to nutrition is evolutionarily variable. In
invertebrate Drosophila and C. elegans GSC models, G1 is nearly absent and Cyclin
E is expressed throughout the cell cycle, whereas vertebrate spermatogonial stem 
cells have a distinct G1 and Cyclin D1 plays an important role in GSC renewal. In
the invertebrate, chordate, Oikopleura, where germline nuclei proliferate
asynchronously in a syncytium, we show a distinct G1-phase in which 2 Cyclin D
variants are co-expressed. Cyclin Dd, present in both somatic endocycling cells
and the germline, localized to germline nuclei during G1 before declining at
G1/S. Cyclin Db, restricted to the germline, remained cytoplasmic, co-localizing 
in foci with the Cyclin-dependent Kinase Inhibitor, CKIa. These foci showed a
preferential spatial distribution adjacent to syncytial germline nuclei at G1/S. 
During nutrient-restricted growth arrest, upregulated CKIa accumulated in
arrested somatic endoreduplicative nuclei but did not do so in germline nuclei.
In the latter context, Cyclin Dd levels gradually decreased. In contrast, the
Cyclin Dbß splice variant, lacking the Rb-interaction domain and phosphodegron,
was specifically upregulated and the number of cytoplasmic foci containing this
variant increased. This upregulation was dependent on stress response MAPK p38
signaling. We conclude that under favorable conditions, Cyclin Dbß-CDK6
sequesters CKIa in the cytoplasm to cooperate with Cyclin Dd-CDK6 in promoting
germline nuclear proliferation. Under nutrient-restriction, this sequestration
function is enhanced to permit continued, though reduced, cycling of the germline
during somatic growth arrest.

PMCID: PMC4612681 [Available on 2016-04-30]
PMID: 25928155  [PubMed - in process]


137. Stem Cell Reports. 2015 May 12;4(5):899-913. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2015.03.005.
Epub 2015 Apr 23.

Kinome-wide shRNA screen identifies the receptor tyrosine kinase AXL as a key
regulator for mesenchymal glioblastoma stem-like cells.

Cheng P(1), Phillips E(2), Kim SH(3), Taylor D(3), Hielscher T(4), Puccio L(2),
Hjelmeland AB(5), Lichter P(2), Nakano I(6), Goidts V(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH
43210, USA; Department of Neurosurgery, The First Hospital, China Medical
University, Shenyang, Liaoning 110001, China. (2)Division of Molecular Genetics, 
German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg 69120, Germany. (3)Department of
Neurological Surgery, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(4)Division of Biostatistics, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg 69120,
Germany. (5)Department of Cell, Developmental, and Integrative Biology (CDIB),
University of Alabama, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA. (6)Department of Neurological
Surgery, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA; James Comprehensive 
Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. Electronic
address: ichiro.nakano@osumc.edu. (7)Division of Molecular Genetics, German
Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg 69120, Germany. Electronic address:
v.goidts@dkfz.de.

Glioblastoma is a highly lethal cancer for which novel therapeutics are urgently 
needed. Two distinct subtypes of glioblastoma stem-like cells (GSCs) were
recently identified: mesenchymal (MES) and proneural (PN). To identify mechanisms
to target the more aggressive MES GSCs, we combined transcriptomic expression
analysis and kinome-wide short hairpin RNA screening of MES and PN GSCs. In
comparison to PN GSCs, we found significant upregulation and phosphorylation of
the receptor tyrosine kinase AXL in MES GSCs. Knockdown of AXL significantly
decreased MES GSC self-renewal capacity in vitro and inhibited the growth of
glioblastoma patient-derived xenografts. Moreover, inhibition of AXL with shRNA
or pharmacologic inhibitors also increased cell death significantly more in MES
GSCs. Clinically, AXL expression was elevated in the MES GBM subtype and
significantly correlated with poor prognosis in multiple cancers. In conclusion, 
we identified AXL as a potential molecular target for novel approaches to treat
glioblastoma and other solid cancers.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4437464
PMID: 25921812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Dev Biol. 2015 Jul 1;403(1):89-100. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.04.013. Epub 2015
Apr 24.

PIAS-like protein Zimp7 is required for the restriction of the zebrafish
organizer and mesoderm development.

Moreno-Ayala R(1), Schnabel D(1), Salas-Vidal E(1), Lomelí H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética del Desarrollo y Fisiología Molecular Instituto de
Biotecnología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico. (2)Departamento
de Genética del Desarrollo y Fisiología Molecular Instituto de Biotecnología,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico. Electronic address:
hilda@ibt.unam.mx.

The Zmiz2 (Zimp7) protein and its homolog Zmiz1 (Zimp10) were initially
identified in humans as androgen receptor co-activators. Sequence analysis
revealed the presence of an SP-RING/Miz domain, which is highly conserved in
members of the PIAS family and confers SUMO-conjugating activity. Zimp7 has been 
shown to interact with components of the Wnt/ß-Catenin signaling pathway and with
Brg1 and BAF57, components of the ATP-dependent mammalian SWI/SNF-like BAF
chromatin-remodeling complexes. In this work, we analyze the role of zygotic
Zimp7 in zebrafish development. We describe evidence indicating that Zimp7 is
required for mesoderm development and dorsoventral patterning.
Morpholino-mediated reduction of zygotic Zimp7 produced axial mesodermal defects 
that were preceded by up-regulation of organizer genes such as bozozok, goosecoid
and floating head at the onset of gastrulation and by down-regulation of the
ventral markers vox, vent and eve1 indicating loss of the ventrolateral mesoderm.
Consistently, embryos overexpressing zimp7 RNA exhibited midline defects such as 
loss of forebrain and cyclopia accompanied by transcriptional changes directly
opposite of those found in the morphants. In addition, the patterning of
ventralized embryos produced by the overexpression of vox and vent was restored
by a reduction of Zimp7 activity. Altogether, our findings indicate that Zimp7 is
involved in transcriptional regulation of factors that are essential for
patterning in the dorsoventral axis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25912688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Sci Rep. 2015 Apr 21;5:9956. doi: 10.1038/srep09956.

Combined inhibition of AKT/mTOR and MDM2 enhances Glioblastoma Multiforme cell
apoptosis and differentiation of cancer stem cells.

Daniele S(1), Costa B(1), Zappelli E(1), Da Pozzo E(1), Sestito S(1), Nesi G(1), 
Campiglia P(2), Marinelli L(3), Novellino E(3), Rapposelli S(1), Martini C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, University of Pisa, Italy. (2)Department of Pharmacy, 
University of Salerno, Italy. (3)Department of Pharmacy, University of Naples
Federico II, Italy.

The poor prognosis of Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) is due to a high resistance
to conventional treatments and to the presence of a subpopulation of glioma stem 
cells (GSCs). Combination therapies targeting survival/self-renewal signals of
GBM and GSCs are emerging as useful tools to improve GBM treatment. In this
context, the hyperactivated AKT/mammalian target of the rapamycin (AKT/mTOR) and 
the inhibited wild-type p53 appear to be good candidates. Herein, the interaction
between these pathways was investigated, using the novel AKT/mTOR inhibitor FC85 
and ISA27, which re-activates p53 functionality by blocking its endogenous
inhibitor murine double minute 2 homologue (MDM2). In GBM cells, FC85 efficiently
inhibited AKT/mTOR signalling and reactivated p53 functionality, triggering
cellular apoptosis. The combined therapy with ISA27 produced a synergic effect on
the inhibition of cell viability and on the reactivation of p53 pathway. Most
importantly, FC85 and ISA27 blocked proliferation and promoted the
differentiation of GSCs. The simultaneous use of these compounds significantly
enhanced GSC differentiation/apoptosis. These findings suggest that FC85 actively
enhances the downstream p53 signalling and that a combination strategy aimed at
inhibiting the AKT/mTOR pathway and re-activating p53 signalling is potentially
effective in GBM and in GSCs.

PMCID: PMC4404683
PMID: 25898313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2015;853:111-38. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-16537-0_7.

Chemoresistance and chemotherapy targeting stem-like cells in malignant glioma.

Sørensen MD(1), Fosmark S, Hellwege S, Beier D, Kristensen BW, Beier CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Odense University Hospital, Odense C, Denmark.

Glioblastoma remains a tumor with a dismal prognosis because of failure of
current treatment. Glioblastoma cells with stem cell (GSC) properties survive
chemotherapy and give rise to tumor recurrences that invariably result in the
death of the patients. Here we summarize the current knowledge on chemoresistance
of malignant glioma with a strong focus on GSC. Chemoresistant GSC are the most
likely cause of tumor recurrence, but it remains controversial if GSC and under
which conditions GSC are more chemoresistant than non-GSC within the tumor.
Regardless of this uncertainty, the chemoresistance varies and it is mainly
mediated by intrinsic factors. O6-methyl-guanidine methyltransferase (MGMT)
remains the most potent mediator of chemoresistance, but disturbed mismatch
repair system and multidrug resistance proteins contribute substantially.
However, the intrinsic resistance by MGMT expression is regulated by extrinsic
factors like hypoxia increasing MGMT expression and thereby resistance to
alkylating chemotherapy. The search of new biomarkers helping to predict the
tumor response to chemotherapy is ongoing and will complement the already known
markers like MGMT.

PMID: 25895710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Transl Med. 2015 Feb 26;13:74. doi: 10.1186/s12967-015-0427-y.

ABT-888 enhances cytotoxic effects of temozolomide independent of MGMT status in 
serum free cultured glioma cells.

Balvers RK(1), Lamfers ML(2), Kloezeman JJ(3), Kleijn A(4), Berghauser Pont
LM(5), Dirven CM(6), Leenstra S(7,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Brain Tumor Center; Department of Neurosurgery, Erasmus MC, Molewaterplein 50,
Ee2236, 3015GE, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. r.balvers@erasmusmc.nl. (2)Brain
Tumor Center; Department of Neurosurgery, Erasmus MC, Molewaterplein 50, Ee2236, 
3015GE, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. m.lamfers@erasmusmc.nl. (3)Brain Tumor
Center; Department of Neurosurgery, Erasmus MC, Molewaterplein 50, Ee2236,
3015GE, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. j.kloezeman@erasmusmc.nl. (4)Brain Tumor
Center; Department of Neurosurgery, Erasmus MC, Molewaterplein 50, Ee2236,
3015GE, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. a.kleijn@erasmusmc.nl. (5)Brain Tumor Center;
Department of Neurosurgery, Erasmus MC, Molewaterplein 50, Ee2236, 3015GE,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. l.m.e.berghauserpont@gmail.com. (6)Brain Tumor
Center; Department of Neurosurgery, Erasmus MC, Molewaterplein 50, Ee2236,
3015GE, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. c.dirven@erasmusmc.nl. (7)Brain Tumor Center;
Department of Neurosurgery, Erasmus MC, Molewaterplein 50, Ee2236, 3015GE,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. s.leenstra@erasmusmc.nl. (8)Department of
Neurosurgery, St Elisabeth Hospital, Tilburg, The Netherlands.
s.leenstra@erasmusmc.nl.

BACKGROUND: The current standard of care for Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM)
consists of fractionated focal irradiation with concomitant temozolomide (TMZ)
chemotherapy. A promising strategy to increase the efficacy of TMZ is through
interference with the DNA damage repair machinery, by poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase
protein inhibition(PARPi). The objective of the present study was to investigate 
the therapeutic benefit of combination therapy in patient-derived glioma
stem-like cells (GSC).
METHODS: Combination therapy feasibility was tested on established GBM cell lines
U373 and T98. We developed an in vitro drug-screening assay based on GSC cultures
derived from a panel of primary patient tissue samples (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>20) to evaluate the
effect of PARPi (ABT-888) monotherapy and combination therapy with TMZ.
Therapeutic effect was assessed by viability, double stranded breaks, apoptosis
and autophagy assays and longitudinal microscopic cell monitoring was performed. 
O-6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) status was determined by
methylation assay and protein expression by western blots.
RESULTS: PARPi monotherapy was found to decrease viability by more than 25% in 4 
of the 20 GSCs (20%) at 10 µM. TMZ monotherapy at 50 µM and 100 µM was effective 
in 12 and 14 of the 20 GSCs, respectively. TMZ resistance to 100 µM was found in 
7 of 8 MGMT protein positive cultures. Potentiation of TMZ therapy through PARPi 
was found in 90% (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>20) of GSCs, of which 6 were initially resistant and 7 were
sensitive to TMZ monotherapy. Increased induction of double stranded breaks and
apoptosis were noted in responsive GSCs. There was a trend noted, albeit
statistically insignificant, of increased autophagy both in western blots and
accumulation of autophagosomes.
CONCLUSION: PARPi mediated potentiation of TMZ is independent of TMZ sensitivity 
and can override MGMT(-) mediated resistance when administered simultaneously.
Response to combination therapy was associated with increased double strand
breaks induction, and coincided by increased apoptosis and autophagy. PARPi
addition potentiates TMZ treatment in primary GSCs. PARPi could potentially
enhance the therapeutic efficacy of the standard of care in GBM.

PMCID: PMC4359449
PMID: 25886061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Proteome Res. 2015 Jun 5;14(6):2511-9. doi: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.5b00076. Epub
2015 Apr 29.

ESI-MS/MS and MALDI-IMS Localization Reveal Alterations in Phosphatidic Acid,
Diacylglycerol, and DHA in Glioma Stem Cell Xenografts.

Wildburger NC, Wood PL(1), Gumin J, Lichti CF(2), Emmett MR(2), Lang FF, Nilsson 
CL(2).

Author information: 
(1)<U+2225>Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Lincoln Memorial University, 6965 
Cumberland Gap Parkway, Harrogate, Tennessee 37752, United States. (2)§UTMB
Cancer Center, University of Texas Medical Branch, 301 University Boulevard,
Galveston, Texas 77555-1074, United States.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common adult primary brain tumor. Despite
aggressive multimodal therapy, the survival of patients with GBM remains dismal. 
However, recent evidence has demonstrated the promise of bone marrow-derived
mesenchymal stem cells (BM-hMSCs) as a therapeutic delivery vehicle for
anti-glioma agents due to their ability to migrate or home to human gliomas.
While several studies have demonstrated the feasibility of harnessing the homing 
capacity of BM-hMSCs for targeted delivery of cancer therapeutics, it is now also
evident, based on clinically relevant glioma stem cell (GSC) models of GBMs, that
BM-hMSCs demonstrate variable tropism toward these tumors. In this study, we
compared the lipid environment of GSC xenografts that attract BM-hMSCs (N = 9)
with those that do not attract (N = 9) to identify lipid modalities that are
conducive to homing of BM-hMSC to GBMs. We identified lipids directly from tissue
by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) imaging mass spectrometry 
(IMS) and electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry (ESI-MS/MS) of lipid
extracts. Several species of signaling lipids, including phosphatidic acid (PA
36:2, PA 40:5, PA 42:5, and PA 42:7) and diacylglycerol (DAG 34:0, DAG 34:1, DAG 
36:1, DAG 38:4, DAG 38:6, and DAG 40:6), were lower in attracting xenografts.
Molecular lipid images showed that PA (36:2), DAG (40:6), and docosahexaenoic
acid (DHA) were decreased within tumor regions of attracting xenografts. Our
results provide the first evidence for lipid signaling pathways and
lipid-mediated tumor inflammatory responses in the homing of BM-hMSCs to GSC
xenografts. Our studies provide new fundamental knowledge on the molecular
correlates of the differential homing capacity of BM-hMSCs toward GSC xenografts.

PMID: 25880480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Mol Cancer. 2015 Apr 2;14:75. doi: 10.1186/s12943-015-0343-z.

Biological characteristics of a new human glioma cell line transformed into
A2B5(+) stem cells.

Li Y(1), Wang H(2), Sun T(3), Chen J(4), Guo L(5), Shen H(6), Du Z(7), Zhou Y(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery and Brain and Nerve Research Laboratory, The First 
Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, 188 Shizi Street, Suzhou, Jiangsu,
China. liyanyanjianchi@126.com. (2)Department of Neurosurgery and Brain and Nerve
Research Laboratory, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, 188
Shizi Street, Suzhou, Jiangsu, China. 1352108468@qq.com. (3)Department of
Neurosurgery and Brain and Nerve Research Laboratory, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Soochow University, 188 Shizi Street, Suzhou, Jiangsu, China.
sunting1979st@yahoo.com.cn. (4)Department of Neurosurgery and Brain and Nerve
Research Laboratory, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, 188
Shizi Street, Suzhou, Jiangsu, China. cjm198601@126.com. (5)Department of
Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, 188 Shizi Street,
Suzhou, Jiangsu, China. 413291526@qq.com. (6)Department of Neurosurgery and Brain
and Nerve Research Laboratory, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, 188 Shizi Street, Suzhou, Jiangsu, China. 775386382@qq.com.
(7)Department of Neurosurgery and Brain and Nerve Research Laboratory, The First 
Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, 188 Shizi Street, Suzhou, Jiangsu,
China. brain_lab@suda.edu.cn. (8)Department of Neurosurgery and Brain and Nerve
Research Laboratory, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, 188
Shizi Street, Suzhou, Jiangsu, China. zhouyouxin@suda.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVE: The new glioma cell line SHG-139 was established and its phenotype,
tumorigenicity, pathological characteristics, derived stem cells SHG139S were
studied.
METHODS: Immunohistochemistry was used to assess expressions in the patient and
mouse tumor tissues, SHG-139 and SHG-139S. Primary SHG-139 culture was performed,
cell proliferation, cell cycle and genetic characteristics were assessed. MiRNA
(Micro RNA) and LncRNA (Long non-coding RNA) microarray was performed.
RESULTS: We found that the glioma tissue was positive for A2B5 (Glial precursors 
ganglioside), GFAP (Glial fibrillary acidic protein), S-100 (Acid calcium
bingding protein), VEGF (Vascular endothelial growth factor), VEGFR (Vascular
endothelial growth factor receptor) and negative for Ki-67 (Nuclcar- associated
antigen). SHG-139 proliferated significantly within 24h; its total number of
chromosomes was 68; ratios of SHG-139 and SHG-139S cells in G1 phase were
highest. SHG-139 cells were positive for A2B5, GalC (Galactocerebrosides), GFAP, 
S-100 and Vimentin, while SHG-139S cells were positive for A2B5, Nestin, and NG2 
(Neuron-glia antigen2), and negative for Vimentin and IDHR132H (Isocitrate
dehydrogenase); cells rarely stained for CD133 (Cluster of differentiation133).
SHG-139 intracranial xenografts expressed GFAP, but no overt oligodendroglioma
was observed. In SHG-139S xenografts, GFAP and S-100 were expressed, while CD133 
was not detected; a few A2B5(+) cells were found at tumor edges, and typical
oligodendroglioma were obtained. In addition, SHG-139S xenograft tumors were more
aggressive than those of SHG-139. Anti-mouse CD31 (Cluster of differentiation31) 
staining revealed murine vessels at the border between xenograft tumor and normal
brain tissue; Anti-human CD34 (Cluster of differentiation34) staining was
negative. Biochip technology of SHG139S showed several miRNA and lncRNA were
differently expressed in SHG139 and SHG139S.
CONCLUSIONS: SHG-139 was an astroglioma cell line which yielded stem cells
SHG-139S. SHG-139S cells constituted an A2B5(+)/CD133(-) GSC subgroup.

PMCID: PMC4392480
PMID: 25879429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Neurophysiol. 2015 Jun 1;113(10):3462-73. doi: 10.1152/jn.00141.2015. Epub 2015
Apr 15.

Tactile cues significantly modulate the perception of sweat-induced skin wetness 
independently of the level of physical skin wetness.

Filingeri D(1), Fournet D(2), Hodder S(3), Havenith G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Ergonomics Research Centre, Loughborough Design School,
Loughborough University, Loughborough, United Kingdom;
davidefilingeri@hotmail.it. (2)Thermal Sciences Laboratory, Oxylane Research,
Villeneuve d'Ascq, France. (3)Environmental Ergonomics Research Centre,
Loughborough Design School, Loughborough University, Loughborough, United
Kingdom;

Humans sense the wetness of a wet surface through the somatosensory integration
of thermal and tactile inputs generated by the interaction between skin and
moisture. However, little is known on how wetness is sensed when moisture is
produced via sweating. We tested the hypothesis that, in the absence of skin
cooling, intermittent tactile cues, as coded by low-threshold skin
mechanoreceptors, modulate the perception of sweat-induced skin wetness,
independently of the level of physical wetness. Ten males (22 yr old) performed
an incremental exercise protocol during two trials designed to induce the same
physical skin wetness but to induce lower (TIGHT-FIT) and higher (LOOSE-FIT)
wetness perception. In the TIGHT-FIT, a tight-fitting clothing ensemble limited
intermittent skin-sweat-clothing tactile interactions. In the LOOSE-FIT, a
loose-fitting ensemble allowed free skin-sweat-clothing interactions. Heart rate,
core and skin temperature, galvanic skin conductance (GSC), and physical
(w(body)) and perceived skin wetness were recorded. Exercise-induced sweat
production and physical wetness increased significantly [GSC: 3.1 µS, SD 0.3 to
18.8 µS, SD 1.3, P < 0.01; w(body): 0.26 no-dimension units (nd), SD 0.02, to
0.92 nd, SD 0.01, P < 0.01], with no differences between TIGHT-FIT and LOOSE-FIT 
(P > 0.05). However, the limited intermittent tactile inputs generated by the
TIGHT-FIT ensemble reduced significantly whole-body and regional wetness
perception (P < 0.01). This reduction was more pronounced when between 40 and 80%
of the body was covered in sweat. We conclude that the central integration of
intermittent mechanical interactions between skin, sweat, and clothing, as coded 
by low-threshold skin mechanoreceptors, significantly contributes to the ability 
to sense sweat-induced skin wetness.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4455488 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25878153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Tumour Biol. 2015 Sep;36(9):7107-19. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3427-x. Epub 2015
Apr 16.

Demethoxycurcumin was prior to temozolomide on inhibiting proliferation and
induced apoptosis of glioblastoma stem cells.

Shi L(1), Fei X(2), Wang Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The First People's Hospital of Kunshan Affiliated 
with Jiangsu University, Suzhou, 215300, People's Republic of China.
sl1012002322@126.com. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, Suzhou Kowloon Hospital
Affiliated with Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Suzhou, 215021,
People's Republic of China. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, Suzhou Kowloon
Hospital Affiliated with Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine,
Suzhou, 215021, People's Republic of China. wanyiwzm@126.com.

Temozolomide (TMZ) is widely used for treating glioblastoma (GBM), which can
effectively inhibit the GBM growth for some months; however, it still could not
prevent the invariable recurrence of GBM. The existence of glioma stem cells
(GSCs) was considered to be a key factor. But TMZ has poor effects on GSCs.
Recently, demethoxycurcumin (DMC) has been shown to display anti-tumor activities
in malignant gliomas. However, its effects and the potential mechanisms on GSCs
were still unclear. Our study showed that DMC was prior to TMZ on resulting in a 
significant increase in GSC apoptosis and a marked inhibition of cell growth in
vitro. And combined treatment of DMC and TMZ showed more significant anti-GSC
effects. Further research into the underlying mechanism demonstrated that this
novel combinatorial regimen leads to changes of multiple cell signaling pathways 
including reactive oxygen species (ROS) production and caspase-3 signaling
mitochondria-related apoptosis activation as well as inactivation of JAK/STAT3
signaling pathway. Taken together, our data demonstrate that the anti-GSC effects
of DMC are better than TMZ, and combined treatment of DMC and TMZ has much
stronger effects on GSCs.

PMID: 25877753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Childs Nerv Syst. 2015 Aug;31(8):1273-81. doi: 10.1007/s00381-015-2700-z. Epub
2015 Apr 14.

Variations of the blood gas levels and thermodilutional parameters during ICP
monitoring after severe head trauma in children.

Lubrano R(1), Elli M, Stoppa F, Di Traglia M, Di Nardo M, Perrotta D, David P,
Paoli S, Cecchetti C.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Pediatria, CEQUAM, Sapienza Università di Roma, Viale Regina
Elena 324, 00161, Rome, Italy, riccardo.lubrano@uniroma1.it.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to define, in children following head
trauma and GSC<U+2009>=<U+2009>8, at which level of intracranial pressure (ICP), the
thermodilutional, and gas analytic parameters implicated in secondary cerebral
insults shows initial changes.
METHODS: We enrolled in the study 56 patients: 30 males and 26 females, mean age 
71<U+2009>±<U+2009>52 months. In all children, volumetric hemodynamic and blood gas parameters 
were monitored following initial resuscitation and every 4 h thereafter or
whenever a hemodynamic deterioration was suspected. During the cumulative
hospital stay, a total of 1050 sets of measurements were done. All parameters
were stratified in seven groups according to ICP (group A1<U+2009>=<U+2009>0-5 mmHg, group
A2<U+2009>=<U+2009>6-10 mmHg, group A3<U+2009>=<U+2009>11-15 mmHg, group A4 16-20 mmHg, group A5 21-25 mmHg, 
group A6 26-30 mmHg, group A7 >31 mmHg).
RESULTS: Mean values of jugular oxygen saturation (SJO2), jugular oxygen partial 
pressure (PJO2), extravascular lung water (EVLWi), pulmonary vascular
permeability (PVPi), fluid overload (FO), and cerebral extraction of oxygen
(CEO2) vary significantly from A3 (11-15 mmHg) to A4 (16-20 mmHg). They relate to
ICP in a four-parameter sigmoidal function (4PS function with: r(2)<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.90),
inflection point of 15 mmHg of ICP, and a maximum curvature point on the left
horizontal asymptote at 13 mmHg of ICP.
CONCLUSIONS: Mean values of SJO2, PJO2, EVLWi, PVPi, FO, and CEO2 become
pathologic at 15 mmHg of ICP; however, the curve turns steeper at 13 mmHg,
possibly a warning level in children for the development of post head trauma
secondary insult.

PMID: 25870026  [PubMed - in process]


147. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 7;10(4):e0123294. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0123294.
eCollection 2015.

Dynamic interplay of spectrosome and centrosome organelles in asymmetric stem
cell divisions.

Bang C(1), Cheng J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, The University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, 
Illinois, United States of America.

Stem cells have remarkable self-renewal ability and differentiation potency,
which are critical for tissue repair and tissue homeostasis. Recently it has been
found, in many systems (e.g. gut, neurons, and hematopoietic stem cells), that
the self-renewal and differentiation balance is maintained when the stem cells
divide asymmetrically. Drosophila male germline stem cells (GSCs), one of the
best characterized model systems with well-defined stem cell niches, were
reported to divide asymmetrically, where centrosome plays an important role.
Utilizing time-lapse live cell imaging, customized tracking, and image processing
programs, we found that most acentrosomal GSCs have the spectrosomes reposition
from the basal end (wild type) to the apical end close to hub-GSC interface
(acentrosomal GSCs). In addition, these apically positioned spectrosomes were
mostly stationary while the basally positioned spectrosomes were mobile. For
acentrosomal GSCs, their mitotic spindles were still highly oriented and divided 
asymmetrically with longer mitosis duration, resulting in asymmetric divisions.
Moreover, when the spectrosome was knocked out, the centrosomes velocity
decreased and centrosomes located closer to hub-GSC interface. We propose that in
male GSCs, the spectrosome recruited to the apical end plays a complimentary role
in ensuring proper spindle orientation when centrosome function is compromised.

PMCID: PMC4388834
PMID: 25849996  [PubMed - in process]


148. Tumour Biol. 2015 Sep;36(9):6805-11. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3400-8. Epub 2015
Apr 4.

miR-30 overexpression promotes glioma stem cells by regulating Jak/STAT3
signaling pathway.

Che S(1), Sun T(2), Wang J(1), Jiao Y(1), Wang C(1), Meng Q(1), Qi W(1), Yan
Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, the Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, 16 
Jiangsu Road, Qingdao, Shandong, 266003, China. (2)Intensive Care Unit, Qingdao
Municipal Hospital, Qingdao, Shandong, 266011, China. (3)Department of
Neurosurgery, the Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, 16 Jiangsu Road,
Qingdao, Shandong, 266003, China. yanzhiyongqd@126.com.

Malignant glioma is the most common intracranial tumor with poor prognosis. It is
well believed that glioma stem cells (GSCs) are responsible for the initiation
and progression of glioma. Janus kinase/signal transducer and activator of
transcription (Jak/STAT3) pathway plays a key role in the functions of GSCs.
However, the regulatory mechanism of Jak/STAT3 pathway has not been completely
elucidated. This study employed multidisciplinary approaches to investigate the
upstream regulators of Jak/STAT3 signaling in GSCs. miR-30 was found to be
overexpressed in the GSCs derived from U-87 MG and primary glioma cells, compared
with non-stem-cell-like glioma cells and normal cells. Downregulation of miR-30
was able to suppress Jak/STAT3 pathway and reduce the tumorigenecity of GSCs.
miR-30 decreased the expression of suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3)
expression by targeting 3'UTR of its mRNA. The silencing of SOCS3 abolished the
effect of miR-30 downregulation on GSCs. Collectively, there is a regulatory
pathway consisting of miR-30, SOCS3, and Jak/STAT3 in GSCs, and targeting this
pathway may be a promising strategy to treat glioma.

PMID: 25840690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Cancer Res. 2015 Jun 1;75(11):2337-48. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-2800. Epub
2015 Apr 1.

FoxM1 Drives a Feed-Forward STAT3-Activation Signaling Loop That Promotes the
Self-Renewal and Tumorigenicity of Glioblastoma Stem-like Cells.

Gong AH(1), Wei P(2), Zhang S(3), Yao J(4), Yuan Y(5), Zhou AD(2), Lang FF(2),
Heimberger AB(2), Rao G(2), Huang S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas. Department of Cell Biology, School of Medicine, Jiangsu
University, Zhenjiang, China. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (3)Department of Neurosurgery,
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. Program in
Cancer Biology, The University of Texas Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences at
Houston, Houston, Texas. (4)Department of Neuro-oncology, The University of Texas
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (5)Department of Biostatistics, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (6)Department of
Neurosurgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. 
Program in Cancer Biology, The University of Texas Graduate School of Biomedical 
Sciences at Houston, Houston, Texas. suhuang@mdanderson.org.

The growth factor PDGF controls the development of glioblastoma (GBM), but its
contribution to the function of GBM stem-like cells (GSC) has been little
studied. Here, we report that the transcription factor FoxM1 promotes PDGFA-STAT3
signaling to drive GSC self-renewal and tumorigenicity. In GBM, we found a
positive correlation between expression of FoxM1 and PDGF-A. In GSC and mouse
neural stem cells, FoxM1 bound to the PDGF-A promoter to upregulate PDGF-A
expression, acting to maintain the stem-like qualities of GSC in part through
this mechanism. Analysis of the human cancer genomic database The Cancer Genome
Atlas revealed that GBM expresses higher levels of STAT3, a PDGF-A effector
signaling molecule, as compared with normal brain. FoxM1 regulated STAT3
transcription through interactions with the ß-catenin/TCF4 complex. FoxM1
deficiency inhibited PDGF-A and STAT3 expression in neural stem cells and GSC,
abolishing their stem-like and tumorigenic properties. Further mechanistic
investigations defined a FoxM1-PDGFA-STAT3 feed-forward pathway that was
sufficient to confer stem-like properties to glioma cells. Collectively, our
findings showed how FoxM1 activates expression of PDGF-A and STAT3 in a pathway
required to maintain the self-renewal and tumorigenicity of glioma stem-like
cells.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4452436 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25832656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Jul;1853(7):1564-73. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2015.03.008. Epub 2015 Mar 25.

Programmed cell death 4 protein (Pdcd4) and homeodomain-interacting protein
kinase 2 (Hipk2) antagonistically control translation of Hipk2 mRNA.

Ohnheiser J(1), Ferlemann E(1), Haas A(1), Müller JP(1), Werwein E(1), Fehler
O(1), Biyanee A(2), Klempnauer KH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Westfälische-Wilhelms-Universität Münster,
Wilhelm-Klemm-Str. 2, D-48149 Münster, Germany. (2)Institut für Biochemie,
Westfälische-Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Wilhelm-Klemm-Str. 2, D-48149 Münster,
Germany; Graduate School of Chemistry (GSC-MS), Westfälische-Wilhelms-Universität
Münster, Germany. (3)Institut für Biochemie, Westfälische-Wilhelms-Universität
Münster, Wilhelm-Klemm-Str. 2, D-48149 Münster, Germany. Electronic address:
klempna@uni-muenster.de.

The tumor suppressor protein programmed cell death 4 (Pdcd4) is a highly
conserved RNA-binding protein that inhibits the translation of specific mRNAs.
Here, we have identified the homeobox-interacting protein kinase-2 (Hipk2) mRNA
as a novel translational target of Pdcd4. Unlike most other protein kinases Hipk2
is constitutively active after being synthesized by the ribosome and its
expression and activity are thought to be mainly controlled by modulation of the 
half-life of the kinase. Our work provides the first evidence that Hipk2
expression is also controlled on the level of translation. We show that Hipk2
stimulates the translation of its own mRNA and that Pdcd4 suppresses the
translation of Hipk2 mRNA by interfering with this auto-regulatory feedback
mechanism. We also show that the translation of the related kinase Hipk1 is
controlled by a similar feedback loop and that Hipk2 also stimulates the
translation of Hipk1 mRNA. Taken together, our work describes a novel mechanism
of translational suppression by Pdcd4 and shows for the first time that Hipk2
controls its own synthesis by an auto-regulatory feedback mechanism. Furthermore,
the effect of Hipk2 on the translation of Hipk1 RNA suggests that Hipk2 and Pdcd4
can act in similar manner to control the translation of other mRNAs.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25820028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Brain Pathol. 2016 Jan;26(1):43-61. doi: 10.1111/bpa.12263. Epub 2015 May 19.

Specific Preferences in Lineage Choice and Phenotypic Plasticity of Glioma Stem
Cells Under BMP4 and Noggin Influence.

Videla Richardson GA(1), Garcia CP(1), Roisman A(2), Slavutsky I(2), Fernandez
Espinosa DD(1), Romorini L(1), Miriuka SG(1), Arakaki N(3), Martinetto H(4),
Scassa ME(1), Sevlever GE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Investigación aplicada a Neurociencias (LIAN), Fundación para
la Lucha contra las Enfermedades Neurológicas de la Infancia (FLENI), Escobar,
Provincia de Buenos Aires, Argentina. (2)Laboratorio de Neuropatología,
Departamento de Neuropatología y Biología Molecular, Fundación para la Lucha
contra las Enfermedades Neurológicas de la Infancia (FLENI), Buenos Aires,
Argentina. (3)Laboratorio de Biología Molecular, Departamento de Neuropatología y
Biología Molecular, Fundación para la Lucha contra las Enfermedades Neurológicas 
de la Infancia (FLENI), Buenos Aires, Argentina. (4)Laboratorio de Genética de
Neoplasias Linfoides, Instituto de Medicina Experimental, CONICET, Academia
Nacional de Medicina, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Although BMP4-induced differentiation of glioma stem cells (GSCs) is well
recognized, details of the cellular responses triggered by this morphogen are
still poorly defined. In this study, we established several GSC-enriched cell
lines (GSC-ECLs) from high-grade gliomas. The expansion of these cells as
adherent monolayers, and not as floating neurospheres, enabled a thorough study
of the phenotypic changes that occurred during their differentiation. Herein, we 
evaluated GSC-ECLs' behavior toward differentiating conditions by depriving them 
of growth factors and/or by adding BMP4 at different concentrations. After
analyzing cellular morphology, proliferation and lineage marker expression, we
determined that GSC-ECLs have distinct preferences in lineage choice, where some 
of them showed an astrocyte fate commitment and others a neuronal one. We found
that this election seems to be dictated by the expression pattern of BMP
signaling components present in each GSC-ECL. Additionally, treatment of GSC-ECLs
with the BMP antagonist, Noggin, also led to evident phenotypic changes.
Interestingly, under certain conditions, some GSC-ECLs adopted an unexpected
smooth muscle-like phenotype. As a whole, our findings illustrate the wide
differentiation potential of GSCs, highlighting their molecular complexity and
paving a way to facilitate personalized differentiating therapies.

© 2015 International Society of Neuropathology.

PMID: 25808628  [PubMed - in process]


152. Int J Cancer. 2015 Oct 1;137(7):1630-42. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29521. Epub 2015 Apr 7.

Glioblastoma-derived extracellular vesicles modify the phenotype of monocytic
cells.

de Vrij J(1), Maas SL(1), Kwappenberg KM(2), Schnoor R(1), Kleijn A(3), Dekker
L(4), Luider TM(4), de Witte LD(5,)(6), Litjens M(5), van Strien ME(5), Hol
EM(5,)(7,)(8), Kroonen J(1), Robe PA(1), Lamfers ML(3), Schilham MW(2), Broekman 
ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Brain Center Rudolf Magnus Institute of
Neurosciences, University Medical Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands. (2)Department
of Pediatrics, Leiden University Medical Center, The Netherlands. (3)Department
of Neurosurgery, Brain Tumor Center, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. (4)Department of Neurology, Brain Tumor Center, Erasmus Medical
Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (5)Department of Translational Neuroscience, 
Brain Center Rudolf Magnus Institute of Neurosciences, University Medical Center,
Utrecht, The Netherlands. (6)Department of Psychiatry, University Medical Center,
Utrecht, The Netherlands. (7)Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience, an Institute
of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. (8)Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences, Center for Neuroscience, 
University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common primary brain tumor and is
without exception lethal. GBMs modify the immune system, which contributes to the
aggressive nature of the disease. Particularly, cells of the monocytic lineage,
including monocytes, macrophages and microglia, are affected. We investigated the
influence of GBM-derived extracellular vesicles (EVs) on the phenotype of
monocytic cells. Proteomic profiling showed GBM EVs to be enriched with proteins 
functioning in extracellular matrix interaction and leukocyte migration. GBM EVs 
appeared to skew the differentiation of peripheral blood-derived monocytes to
alternatively activated/M2-type macrophages. This was observed for EVs from an
established cell line, as well as for EVs from primary cultures of GBM stem-like 
cells (GSCs). Unlike EVs of non-GBM origin, GBM EVs induced modified expression
of cell surface proteins, modified cytokine secretion (e.g., an increase in
vascular endothelial growth factor and IL-6) and increased phagocytic capacity of
the macrophages. Most pronounced effects were observed upon incubation with EVs
from mesenchymal GSCs. GSC EVs also affected primary human microglia, resulting
in increased expression of Membrane type 1-matrix metalloproteinase, a marker for
GBM microglia and functioning as tumor-supportive factor. In conclusion,
GBM-derived EVs can modify cells of the monocytic lineage, which acquire
characteristics that resemble the tumor-supportive phenotypes observed in
patients.

© 2015 UICC.

PMID: 25802036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Pak J Pharm Sci. 2015 Mar;28(2 Suppl):687-92.

Research on green supply chain coordination strategy for uncertain market demand.

Cao J(1), Chen Y(1), Lu B(1), Tong C(1), Zhou G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Information Intelligence & Decision-making Optimization, Zhejiang
University of Technology, Hangzhou, China.

Based on the status that the green market began to develop (e.g. pharmaceutical
industry) in Mainland China, the paper mainly discusses how members of the green 
supply chain (GSC) cooperate effectively in the process of the supply chain
operations. For the uncertainties existing in the market demand of the green
products, the GSC coordination strategy is put forward based on the Stackelberg
game that the manufacturer is the leader and distributors are the followers. The 
relationship between the proposed coordination strategy and several factors
including the distributor's amount, the distributor's risk aversion and the
uncertainties of market demand are analyzed. It indicates that, when there are
uncertainties existing in the market demand of the green product, the revenue of 
each enterprise, the overall revenue and the customer's welfare all decrease;
while the increase in the number of distributors and low risk aversion of them
are beneficial to the entire GSC and the customer. The conclusions have good
guidance for the operational decisions of the green supply chain when the green
market is in its initial formation.

PMID: 25796145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Neuro Oncol. 2015 Nov;17(11):1463-73. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/nov041. Epub 2015 Mar
19.

Preclinical activity of combined HDAC and KDM1A inhibition in glioblastoma.

Singh MM(1), Johnson B(1), Venkatarayan A(1), Flores ER(1), Zhang J(1), Su X(1), 
Barton M(1), Lang F(1), Chandra J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics Research, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas (M.M.S., B.J., J.C.); Department of Molecular and Cellular
Oncology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas (A.V.,
E.R.F.); Department of Molecular Carcinogenesis, University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas (M.B., J.C.); Department of Bioinformatics and
Computational Biology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
Texas (J.Z., X.S.); Department of Neurosurgery, University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas (B.J., F.L.); Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, University of Texas Health Science Center, Houston, Texas (A.V.,
E.R.F., M.B., F.L., J.C.).

BACKGROUND: Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common and aggressive form of brain
cancer. Our previous studies demonstrated that combined inhibition of HDAC and
KDM1A increases apoptotic cell death in vitro. However, whether this combination 
also increases death of the glioma stem cell (GSC) population or has an effect in
vivo is yet to be determined. Therefore, we evaluated the translational potential
of combined HDAC and KDM1A inhibition on patient-derived GSCs and xenograft GBM
mouse models. We also investigated the changes in transcriptional programing
induced by the combination in an effort to understand the induced molecular
mechanisms of GBM cell death.
METHODS: Patient-derived GSCs were treated with the combination of vorinostat, a 
pan-HDAC inhibitor, and tranylcypromine, a KDM1A inhibitor, and viability was
measured. To characterize transcriptional profiles associated with cell death, we
used RNA-Seq and validated gene changes by RT-qPCR and protein expression via
Western blot. Apoptosis was measured using DNA fragmentation assays. Orthotopic
xenograft studies were conducted to evaluate the effects of the combination on
tumorigenesis and to validate gene changes in vivo.
RESULTS: The combination of vorinostat and tranylcypromine reduced GSC viability 
and displayed efficacy in the U87 xenograft model. Additionally, the combination 
led to changes in apoptosis-related genes, particularly TP53 and TP73 in vitro
and in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: These data support targeting HDACs and KDM1A in combination as a
strategy for GBM and identifies TP53 and TP73 as being altered in response to
treatment.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Neuro-Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4648298 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 25795306  [PubMed - in process]


155. Cell Rep. 2015 Mar 24;10(11):1899-912. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.02.041. Epub
2015 Mar 12.

Mouse low-grade gliomas contain cancer stem cells with unique molecular and
functional properties.

Chen YH(1), McGowan LD(1), Cimino PJ(2), Dahiya S(2), Leonard JR(3), Lee da Y(1),
Gutmann DH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
MO 63110, USA. (2)Department of Pathology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. (4)Department of
Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
Electronic address: gutmannd@neuro.wustl.edu.

The availability of adult malignant glioma stem cells (GSCs) has provided
unprecedented opportunities to identify the mechanisms underlying treatment
resistance. Unfortunately, there is a lack of comparable reagents for the study
of pediatric low-grade glioma (LGG). Leveraging a neurofibromatosis 1 (Nf1)
genetically engineered mouse LGG model, we report the isolation of CD133(+)
multi-potent low-grade glioma stem cells (LG-GSCs), which generate glioma-like
lesions histologically similar to the parent tumor following injection into
immunocompetent hosts. In addition, we demonstrate that these LG-GSCs harbor
selective resistance to currently employed conventional and biologically targeted
anti-cancer agents, which reflect the acquisition of new targetable signaling
pathway abnormalities. Using transcriptomic analysis to identify additional
molecular properties, we discovered that mouse and human LG-GSCs harbor high
levels of Abcg1 expression critical for protecting against ER-stress-induced
mouse LG-GSC apoptosis. Collectively, these findings establish that LGG cancer
stem cells have unique molecular and functional properties relevant to brain
cancer treatment.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4376586
PMID: 25772366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Development. 2015 Mar 15;142(6):1073-82. doi: 10.1242/dev.116590.

Maintenance of Drosophila germline stem cell sexual identity in oogenesis and
tumorigenesis.

Shapiro-Kulnane L(1), Smolko AE(1), Salz HK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences, Case Western Reserve University
School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH 44106-4955, USA. (2)Department of Genetics and 
Genome Sciences, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland,
OH 44106-4955, USA hks@case.edu.

Adult stem cells maintain tissue homeostasis by balancing self-renewal and
differentiation. In Drosophila females, germline stem cells (GSCs) require Sex
lethal (Sxl) to exit the stem cell state and to enter the differentiation
pathway. Without Sxl GSCs do not differentiate and instead form tumors. Previous 
studies have shown that these tumors are not caused by a failure in the
self-renewal/differentiation switch. Here, we show that Sxl is also necessary for
the cell-autonomous maintenance of germ cell female identity and demonstrate that
tumors are caused by the acquisition of male characteristics. Germ cells without 
Sxl protein exhibit a global derepression of testis genes, including Phf7, a male
germline sexual identity gene. Phf7 is a key effector of the tumor-forming
pathway, as it is both necessary and sufficient for tumor formation. In the
absence of Sxl protein, inappropriate Phf7 expression drives tumor formation
through a cell-autonomous mechanism that includes sex-inappropriate activation of
Jak/Stat signaling. Remarkably, tumor formation requires a novel response to
external signals emanating from the GSC niche, highlighting the importance of
interactions between mutant cells and the surrounding normal cells that make up
the tumor microenvironment. Derepression of testis genes, and inappropriate Phf7 
expression, is also observed in germ cell tumors arising from the loss of bag of 
marbles (bam), demonstrating that maintenance of female sexual identity requires 
the concerted actions of Sxl and bam. Our work reveals that GSCs must maintain
their sexual identity as they are reprogrammed into a differentiated cell, or
risk tumorigenesis.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4360176
PMID: 25758221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Artif Cells Nanomed Biotechnol. 2015 Mar 6:1-6. [Epub ahead of print]

The effect of silver nanoparticles on zebrafish embryonic development and
toxicology.

Xia G(1), Liu T, Wang Z, Hou Y, Dong L, Zhu J, Qi J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, College of Life Science, Tonghua Normal University
, Tonghua , P. R. China.

The unique physical and chemical characteristics of nanomaterials, such as the
effects of their small size, surface effects, very high rates of reaction, and
quantum tunnel effect, have aroused great interest among scholars. However,
improper usage has led to an increasing number of nanomaterials entering the
environment through various channels, greatly threatening the security of the
ecological environment and human health. The urgent need for a scientific
assessment of their biosafety can enable nanomaterials to truly benefit humanity.
However, the current research in this field is extremely limited with regard to
safety standards and waste disposal. In this study, we used silver nanoparticles 
(nano-Ag) and zebrafish embryos as experimental subjects, and we have reported
the deleterious effect on zebrafish embryos treated with different concentrations
of nano-Ag, with respect to morphological features (mortality, deformity rate,
and heartbeat) and the analysis of expression of relevant genes (sox17, gsc, ntl,
otx2); we found a dose-dependent increase in mortality and hatching delay. The
results of in situ hybridization indicated that nano-Ag causes a dose-dependent
toxicity in embryonic development, and would affect their development and lead to
deformity, delayed development, and even death. The safety limit for the
concentration of nano-Ag was found to be less than 5 mg/L.

PMID: 25749278  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


158. Oncotarget. 2015 Mar 10;6(7):5369-81.

Global analysis of H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 profiles in glioblastoma stem cells and
identification of SLC17A7 as a bivalent tumor suppressor gene.

Lin B(1,)(2,)(3), Lee H(4), Yoon JG(4), Madan A(4,)(5), Wayner E(4), Tonning
S(4), Hothi P(4), Schroeder B(4), Ulasov I(4), Foltz G(4), Hood L(6), Cobbs C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Institute (Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Intervention, China 
National Ministry of Education), The Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310003, China. (2)Dept. of
Urology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA. (3)System Biology
Division, Zhejiang-California International Nanosystem Institute (ZCNI), Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310058, China. (4)Swedish Neuroscience Institute, 
Swedish Medical Center, Seattle, WA 98122, USA. (5)LabCorp Clinical Trials
(Genomics Laboratory), Seattle, WA 98109, USA. (6)The Institute for Systems
Biology, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.

Epigenetic changes, including H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 histone modification, play an 
important role in carcinogenesis. However, no genome-wide histone modification
map has been generated for gliomas. Here, we report a genome-wide map of H3K4me3 
and H3K27me3 histone modifications for 8 glioma stem cell (GSC) lines, together
with the associated gene activation or repression patterns. In addition, we
compared the genome-wide histone modification maps of GSC lines to those of
astrocytes to identify unique gene activation or repression profiles in GSCs and 
astrocytes. We also identified a set of bivalent genes, which are genes that are 
associated with both H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 marks and are poised for action in
embryonic stem cells. These bivalent genes are potential targets for inducing
differentiation in glioblastoma (GBM) as a therapeutic approach. Finally, we
identified SLC17A7 as a bivalent tumor suppressor gene in GBM, as it is
down-regulated at both the protein and RNA levels in GBM tissues compared with
normal brain tissues, and it inhibits GBM cell proliferation, migration and
invasion.

PMCID: PMC4467155
PMID: 25749033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 Jun;14(6):1276-85. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-14-0662. Epub
2015 Mar 4.

Naphthol AS-E Phosphate Inhibits the Activity of the Transcription Factor Myb by 
Blocking the Interaction with the KIX Domain of the Coactivator p300.

Uttarkar S(1), Dukare S(1), Bopp B(2), Goblirsch M(2), Jose J(2), Klempnauer
KH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biochemistry, Westfälische-Wilhelms-Universität Münster,
Münster, Germany. Graduate School of Chemistry (GSC-MS),
Westfälische-Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Münster, Germany. (2)Institute for
Pharmaceutical and Medicinal Chemistry, Westfälische-Wilhelms-Universität
Münster, Münster, Germany. (3)Institute for Biochemistry,
Westfälische-Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Münster, Germany.
klempna@uni-muenster.de.

Comment in
    Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 Jun;14(6):1273-5.

The transcription factor c-Myb is highly expressed in hematopoietic progenitor
cells and controls the transcription of genes important for lineage
determination, cell proliferation, and differentiation. Deregulation of c-Myb has
been implicated in the development of leukemia and certain other types of human
cancer. c-Myb activity is highly dependent on the interaction of the c-Myb with
the KIX domain of the coactivator p300, making the disruption of this interaction
a reasonable strategy for the development of Myb inhibitors. Here, we have used
bacterial Autodisplay to develop an in vitro binding assay that mimics the
interaction of Myb and the KIX domain of p300. We have used this binding assay to
investigate the potential of Naphthol AS-E phosphate, a compound known to bind to
the KIX domain, to disrupt the interaction between Myb and p300. Our data show
that Naphthol AS-E phosphate interferes with the Myb-KIX interaction in vitro and
inhibits Myb activity in vivo. By using several human leukemia cell lines, we
demonstrate that Naphthol AS-E phosphate suppresses the expression of Myb target 
genes and induces myeloid differentiation and apoptosis. Our work identifies
Naphthol AS-E phosphate as the first low molecular weight compound that inhibits 
Myb activity by disrupting its interaction with p300, and suggests that
inhibition of the Myb-KIX interaction might be a useful strategy for the
treatment of leukemia and other tumors caused by deregulated c-Myb.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25740244  [PubMed - in process]


160. J Nutr Biochem. 2015 May;26(5):466-75. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2014.11.015. Epub
2015 Jan 19.

Pterostilbene suppressed irradiation-resistant glioma stem cells by modulating
GRP78/miR-205 axis.

Huynh TT(1), Lin CM(2), Lee WH(3), Wu AT(4), Lin YK(5), Lin YF(6), Yeh CT(7),
Wang LS(8).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Neurosurgery, University of Medicine
and Pharmacy, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam. (2)Graduate Institute of Clinical
Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan;
Department of Neurosurgery, Taipei Medical University-Shuang Ho Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan. (3)Department of Pathology, Taipei Medical University-Shuang Ho Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Ph.D. Program for Translational Medicine, College of Medical
Science and Technology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Biostatistics and Research Consultation Center, Taipei Medical University,
Taipei, Taiwan. (6)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, 
Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. (7)Graduate Institute of Clinical
Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan;
Department of Medical Research and Education, Taipei Medical University-Shuang Ho
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address: ctyeh@s.tmu.edu.tw. (8)Graduate
Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University,
Taipei, Taiwan; Division of Thoracic Surgery, Department of Surgery, Taipei
Medical University- Shuang Ho Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address:
wangls72269@yahoo.com.tw.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most aggressive type characterized by
relapse and resistance even with the combination of radio- and chemotherapy. The 
presence of glioma stem cells (GSCs) has been shown to contribute to
tumorigenesis, recurrence and treatment resistance. Particularly, CD133-positive 
glioma cells have been shown to represent the subpopulation that confers glioma
radioresistance and suggested to be the source of tumor recurrence after
radiation. Thus, a better understanding and the development of agents which
target GSCs could potentially lead to a significant improvement in treating GBM
patients. Here, we demonstrated that GRP78 (an antistress protein) was highly
expressed in GBM cells along with ß-catenin and Notch and correlated to the
development of GSCs. CD133+ GSCs exhibited enhanced migration/invasion and
self-renewal abilities. When GRP78 was silenced, GSC properties were suppressed
and the sensitivity towards irradiation increased. In addition, the level of
microRNA 205 appeared to be negatively associated with GRP78 expression. Our
previous study indicated that pterostilbene (PT) possessed anticancer stem cell
properties in hepatocellular carcinoma. Thus, we examined whether PT is also
effective against GSCs. We found that PT-treated GSCs exhibited suppressed
self-renewal and irradiation-resistant abilities. PT-mediated effects were
associated with an increase of miR-205. Finally, we showed that PT treatment
suppressed tumorigenesis in GSC xenograft mice. In conclusion, we provided
evidence that GRP78/miR-205 axis played an important role in GSC maintenance and 
irradiation resistance. PT treatment suppressed GSC development via negatively
modulating GRP78 signaling. PT may be considered for combined therapeutic agent
to enhance irradiation efficacy in GBM patients.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25736407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Gynecol Obstet Fertil. 2015 Mar;43(3):191-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gyobfe.2015.01.015.
Epub 2015 Feb 25.

[Cesarean scar ectopic pregnancies: combined modality therapies with uterine
artery embolization before surgical procedure].

[Article in French]

Le Gall J(1), Fichez A(2), Lamblin G(3), Philip CA(2), Huissoud C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Service de gynécologie-obstétrique, hôpital de la Croix-Rousse, hospices
civils de Lyon, 93, Grande-Rue-de-la-Croix-Rousse, 69004 Lyon, France. Electronic
address: jlegall@9online.fr. (2)Service de gynécologie-obstétrique, hôpital de la
Croix-Rousse, hospices civils de Lyon, 93, Grande-Rue-de-la-Croix-Rousse, 69004
Lyon, France. (3)Service de gynécologie-obstétrique, hôpital Femme-Mère-Enfant,
hospices civils de Lyon, 59, boulevard Pinel, 69500 Bron, France. (4)Service de
gynécologie-obstétrique, hôpital de la Croix-Rousse, hospices civils de Lyon, 93,
Grande-Rue-de-la-Croix-Rousse, 69004 Lyon, France; Inserm U846, Stem Cell and
Brain Research Institute, université de Lyon-1, 18, avenue Doyen-Lepine, 69500
Bron, France; UMR-S 846, 69003 Lyon, France.

OBJECTIVES: To offer a therapeutic management of cesarean scar pregnancies (GSC) 
in the first trimester of pregnancy with a first approach by uterine artery
embolization (UAE) PATIENTS AND METHODS: This study describes seven cases of GSC 
diagnosed between 2009 and 2013 in the clinic of the University Hospital of the
Hospital of Croix-Rousse. We present the symptoms and how imagery has led to the 
diagnosis and the therapeutic management conducted.
RESULTS: The mean gestational age at diagnosis was 9 weeks gestation. There were 
ongoing pregnancies with cardiac activity present for each patient. An additional
MRI was performed in five patients. Five patients were treated with methotrexate 
injection, two patients received the Mifegyne. All patients then received a
selective uterine artery embolization. Finally within 48hours, suction curettage 
was performed in 6 patients. A patient at 13 WA+1 required a subtotal
hysterectomy for placenta accreta. Intra-operative complications were represented
by a bladder injury, two bleeding of 1000mL in patients at 13 WA+1 and 12 WA. For
the 6 cases of GSC with a gestational age less than 10 WA, average blood loss was
less than 500mL. Three patients underwent resection of scar isthmocele confirmed 
by EVAC. An intrauterine pregnancy was carried to term after care.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: Cesarean scar pregnancies is a diagnostic and
therapeutic challenge, which should be diagnosed as early as soon as possible
with care in a medical facility with a uterine artery embolization technical
platform. Our protocol combining Mifegyne and methotrexate for termination of
pregnancy and uterine artery embolization (UAE) followed by curettage for
evacuation of pregnancy allows conservative treatment while minimizing the risk
of bleeding (for GSC diagnosed before 10 WA).

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25724449  [PubMed - in process]


162. Genome Biol. 2015 Jan 5;16:22. doi: 10.1186/s13059-014-0560-6.

Gateways to the FANTOM5 promoter level mammalian expression atlas.

Lizio M, Harshbarger J, Shimoji H, Severin J, Kasukawa T, Sahin S, Abugessaisa I,
Fukuda S, Hori F, Ishikawa-Kato S, Mungall CJ, Arner E, Baillie JK, Bertin N,
Bono H, de Hoon M, Diehl AD, Dimont E, Freeman TC, Fujieda K, Hide W,
Kaliyaperumal R, Katayama T, Lassmann T, Meehan TF, Nishikata K, Ono H, Rehli M, 
Sandelin A, Schultes EA, 't Hoen PA, Tatum Z, Thompson M, Toyoda T, Wright DW,
Daub CO, Itoh M, Carninci P, Hayashizaki Y, Forrest AR, Kawaji H; FANTOM
consortium.

The FANTOM5 project investigates transcription initiation activities in more than
1,000 human and mouse primary cells, cell lines and tissues using CAGE. Based on 
manual curation of sample information and development of an ontology for sample
classification, we assemble the resulting data into a centralized data resource
(http://fantom.gsc.riken.jp/5/). This resource contains web-based tools and
data-access points for the research community to search and extract data related 
to samples, genes, promoter activities, transcription factors and enhancers
across the FANTOM5 atlas.

PMCID: PMC4310165
PMID: 25723102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2015 Apr;40:17-26. doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2015.02.011. Epub
2015 Feb 23.

Extracellular vesicles in the biology of brain tumour stem cells--Implications
for inter-cellular communication, therapy and biomarker development.

Nakano I(1), Garnier D(2), Minata M(3), Rak J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, James Comprehensive Cancer Center, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, United States. Electronic address:
Ichiro.nakano@osumc.edu. (2)McGill University, Montreal Children's Hospital, RI
MUHC, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. (3)Department of Neurological Surgery, James
Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, United
States. (4)McGill University, Montreal Children's Hospital, RI MUHC, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada. Electronic address: janusz.rak@mcgill.ca.

Extracellular vesicles (EVs) act as carriers of molecular and oncogenic
signatures present in subsets of tumour cells and tumour-associated stroma, and
as mediators of intercellular communication. These processes likely involve
cancer stem cells (CSCs). EVs represent a unique pathway of cellular export and
cell-to-cell transfer of insoluble molecular regulators such as membrane
receptors, signalling proteins and metabolites, thereby influencing the
functional integration of cancer cell populations. While mechanisms that control 
biogenesis, cargo and uptake of different classes of EVs (exosomes,
microvesicles, ectosomes, large oncosomes) are poorly understood, they likely
remain under the influence of stress-responses, microenvironment and oncogenic
processes that define the biology and heterogeneity of human cancers. In
glioblastoma (GBM), recent molecular profiling approaches distinguished several
disease subtypes driven by distinct molecular, epigenetic and mutational
mechanisms, leading to formation of proneural, neural, classical and mesenchymal 
tumours. Moreover, molecularly distinct clonal cellular lineages co-exist within 
individual GBM lesions, where they differentiate according to distinct stem cell 
hierarchies resulting in several facets of tumour heterogeneity and the related
potential for intercellular interactions. Glioma stem cells (GSCs) may carry
signatures of either proneural or mesenchymal GBM subtypes and differ in several 
biological characteristics that are, at least in part, represented by the output 
and repertoire of EV production (vesiculome). We report that vesiculomes differ
between known GBM subtypes. EVs may also reflect and influence the equilibrium of
the stem cell hierarchy, contain oncogenic drivers and modulate the
microenvironment (vascular niche). The GBM/GSC subtype-specific differentials in 
EV cargo of proteins, transcripts, microRNA and DNA may enable detection of the
dynamics of the stem cell compartment and result in biological effects that
remain to be fully characterized.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25721810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Cell Death Differ. 2015 Sep;22(9):1517-25. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2015.7. Epub 2015 Feb
27.

The LIM-only transcription factor LMO2 determines tumorigenic and angiogenic
traits in glioma stem cells.

Kim SH(1), Kim EJ(2), Hitomi M(3), Oh SY(2), Jin X(4), Jeon HM(2), Beck S(5), Jin
X(2), Kim JK(2), Park CG(2), Chang SY(2), Yin J(6), Kim T(7), Jeon YJ(8), Song
J(9), Lim YC(10), Lathia JD(11), Nakano I(12), Kim H(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology and Institute of Life Science and
Natural Resources, Korea University, Seoul 136-713, Republic of Korea [2]
Department of Neurological Surgery, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH
43210, USA. (2)School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology and Institute of Life
Science and Natural Resources, Korea University, Seoul 136-713, Republic of
Korea. (3)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Lerner Research
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. (4)Department of Stem Cell
Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. (5)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of
Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA. (6)Specific Organs Cancer Branch,
Research Institute and Hospital, National Cancer Center, Goyang 410-769, Republic
of Korea. (7)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (8)Department of
Molecular Virology, Immunology and Medical Genetics, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (9)Department of Neurological Surgery, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (10)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head
and Neck Surgery, Research Institute of Medical Science, Konkuk University School
of Medicine, Seoul 143-752, Republic of Korea. (11)1] Department of Cellular and 
Molecular Medicine, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH
44195, USA [2] Department of Molecular Medicine, Cleveland Clinic Lerner College 
of Medicine, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA [3] Case Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. (12)1] Department of Neurological Surgery, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA [2] James Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Glioblastomas (GBMs) maintain their cellular heterogeneity with glioma stem cells
(GSCs) producing a variety of tumor cell types. Here we interrogated the
oncogenic roles of Lim domain only 2 (LMO2) in GBM and GSCs in mice and human.
High expression of LMO2 was found in human patient-derived GSCs compared with the
differentiated progeny cells. LMO2 is required for GSC proliferation both in
vitro and in vivo, as shRNA-mediated LMO2 silencing attenuated tumor growth
derived from human GSCs. Further, LMO2 is sufficient to induce stem cell
characteristics (stemness) in mouse premalignant astrocytes, as forced LMO2
expression facilitated in vitro and in vivo growth of astrocytes derived from
Ink4a/Arf null mice and acquisition of GSC phenotypes. A subset of mouse and
human GSCs converted into vascular endothelial-like tumor cells both in vitro and
in vivo, which phenotype was attenuated by LMO2 silencing and promoted by LMO2
overexpression. Mechanistically, the action of LMO2 for induction of glioma
stemness is mediated by transcriptional regulation of Jagged1 resulting in
activation of the Notch pathway, whereas LMO2 directly occupies the promoter
regions of the VE-cadherin gene for a gain of endothelial cellular phenotype.
Subsequently, selective ablation of human GSC-derived VE-cadherin-expressing
cells attenuated vascular formation in mouse intracranial tumors, thereby
significantly prolonging mouse survival. Clinically, LMO2 expression was elevated
in GBM tissues and inversely correlated with prognosis of GBM patients. Taken
together, our findings describe novel dual roles of LMO2 to induce tumorigenesis 
and angiogenesis, and provide potential therapeutic targets in GBMs.

PMCID: PMC4532780 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 25721045  [PubMed - in process]


165. Stem Cells Dev. 2015 Jul 1;24(13):1521-35. doi: 10.1089/scd.2014.0588. Epub 2015 
Apr 9.

VAV3 Overexpressed in Cancer Stem Cells Is a Poor Prognostic Indicator in Ovarian
Cancer Patients.

Kwon AY(1), Kim GI(1,)(2), Jeong JY(2), Song JY(2), Kwack KB(3), Lee C(4), Kang
HY(1,)(2), Kim TH(1,)(2), Heo JH(1,)(2), An HJ(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, CHA University , Sungnam,
Republic of Korea. (2)2 Institute for Clinical Research, College of Medicine, CHA
University , Sungnam, Republic of Korea. (3)3 Department of Biomedical Science,
College of Medicine, CHA University , Sungnam, Republic of Korea. (4)4 Department
of Gynecologic Oncology, College of Medicine, CHA University , Sungnam, Republic 
of Korea.

Ovarian carcinoma is a highly lethal malignancy due to frequent relapse and drug 
resistance. Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are thought to contribute significantly to
disease relapse and drug resistance. In this study, a subpopulation of CSCs of
ovarian carcinoma was isolated and the genes differentially expressed in these
cells were identified to characterize CSCs and to find candidate biomarkers.
Ovarian carcinoma cells from patients were primarily cultured, and
spheroid-forming cells (SFCs) were isolated. The characteristic genes of SFCs
were identified through cDNA microarray and validation by quantitative real-time 
polymerase chain reaction and immunohistochemistry, and the association of their 
expression with clinicopathologic parameters was analyzed. GSC (4.26-fold), VAV3 
(7.05-fold), FOXA2 (12.06-fold), LEF1 (17.26-fold), COMP (21.33-fold), GRIN2A
(9.36-fold), CD86 (23.14-fold), PYY (4.18-fold), NKX3-2 (10.35-fold), and PDK4
(74.26-fold) were significantly upregulated in SFCs compared with parental cancer
cells. With validation for human ovarian carcinomas, LEF1, PYY, NKX3-2, and WNT3A
were significantly upregulated in chemoresistant cancers compared with
chemosensitive cancers. Overexpression of LEF1, VAV3, and NKX3-2 was
significantly associated with distant metastasis by immunohistochemistry. VAV3
overexpression was an independent poor survival indicator (hazard ratio=15.27,
P<0.05) by multivariate Cox analysis. The further functional assay revealed that 
VAV3 knockdown regulated CSC activation and ovarian cancer cell proliferation and
sensitized paclitaxel (PTX)-resistant cancer cells to PTX treatment. Taken
together, we identified by high-throughput analysis of CSCs that VAV3
overexpression is a novel biomarker for poor prognosis and survival in ovarian
carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC4499777 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 25715123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Cancer Res. 2015 Apr 15;75(8):1760-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3621. Epub
2015 Feb 20.

Hyperthermia Sensitizes Glioma Stem-like Cells to Radiation by Inhibiting AKT
Signaling.

Man J(1), Shoemake JD(1), Ma T(1), Rizzo AE(2), Godley AR(3), Wu Q(1), Mohammadi 
AM(4), Bao S(1), Rich JN(1), Yu JS(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, Ohio. (2)Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine of Case Western
Reserve University, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio. (3)Department of Radiation
Oncology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio. (4)Department of Neurosurgery,
Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio. (5)Department of Stem Cell Biology and
Regenerative Medicine, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio. Department of Radiation
Oncology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio. yuj2@ccf.org.

Glioma stem-like cells (GSC) are a subpopulation of cells in tumors that are
believed to mediate self-renewal and relapse in glioblastoma (GBM), the most
deadly form of primary brain cancer. In radiation oncology, hyperthermia is known
to radiosensitize cells, and it is reemerging as a treatment option for patients 
with GBM. In this study, we investigated the mechanisms of hyperthermic
radiosensitization in GSCs by a phospho-kinase array that revealed the survival
kinase AKT as a critical sensitization determinant. GSCs treated with radiation
alone exhibited increased AKT activation, but the addition of hyperthermia before
radiotherapy reduced AKT activation and impaired GSC proliferation. Introduction 
of constitutively active AKT in GSCs compromised hyperthermic radiosensitization.
Pharmacologic inhibition of PI3K further enhanced the radiosensitizing effects of
hyperthermia. In a preclinical orthotopic transplant model of human GBM,
thermoradiotherapy reduced pS6 levels, delayed tumor growth, and extended animal 
survival. Together, our results offer a preclinical proof-of-concept for further 
evaluation of combined hyperthermia and radiation for GBM treatment.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4401644 [Available on 2016-04-15]
PMID: 25712125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2015 Jun;32:31-6. doi: 10.1016/j.gde.2015.01.005. Epub 2015 
Feb 19.

Organizing stem cell units in the Drosophila ovary.

Gilboa L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Regulation, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
7610001, Israel. Electronic address: lilach.gilboa@weizmann.ac.il.

Organogenesis utilizes processes fundamental to development: cell proliferation, 
cell differentiation and morphogenesis. Each of these processes is complex in
itself; the challenge of studying organogenesis is to determine how all of them
integrate to shape organs with recurring precision. This review focuses on the
emerging understanding of how synchronized proliferation and differentiation of
both somatic and germ cell lineages form 16-20 germ line stem cell (GSC) units in
the ovary of Drosophila melanogaster. Recent work demonstrates that the Insulin, 
ecdysone, Epidermal Growth Factor, Decapentaplegic and Activin signaling pathways
are used reiteratively for proliferation and differentiation in both somatic and 
germ cell lineages. This linkage underlies ovarian coordinated development and
provides opportunity for correction mechanisms for stem cell unit numbers.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25703842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Mitochondrial DNA. 2015 Sep 4:1-7. [Epub ahead of print]

Mitogenome metadata: current trends and proposed standards.

Strohm JH(1), Gwiazdowski RA, Hanner R.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Integrative Biology , Centre for Biodiversity Genomics,
University of Guelph , Ontario , Canada and.

Mitogenome metadata are descriptive terms about the sequence, and its specimen
description that allow both to be digitally discoverable and interoperable. Here,
we review a sampling of mitogenome metadata published in the journal
Mitochondrial DNA between 2005 and 2014. Specifically, we have focused on a
subset of metadata fields that are available for GenBank records, and specified
by the Genomics Standards Consortium (GSC) and other biodiversity metadata
standards; and we assessed their presence across three main categories:
collection, biological and taxonomic information. To do this we reviewed 146
mitogenome manuscripts, and their associated GenBank records, and scored them for
13 metadata fields. We also explored the potential for mitogenome
misidentification using their sequence diversity, and taxonomic metadata on the
Barcode of Life Datasystems (BOLD). For this, we focused on all Lepidoptera and
Perciformes mitogenomes included in the review, along with additional mitogenome 
sequence data mined from Genbank. Overall, we found that none of 146 mitogenome
projects provided all the metadata we looked for; and only 17 projects provided
at least one category of metadata across the three main categories. Comparisons
using mtDNA sequences from BOLD, suggest that some mitogenomes may be
misidentified. Lastly, we appreciate the research potential of mitogenomes
announced through this journal; and we conclude with a suggestion of 13 metadata 
fields, available on GenBank, that if provided in a mitogenomes's GenBank record,
would increase their research value.

PMID: 25693692  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


169. World J Gastroenterol. 2015 Feb 14;21(6):1865-71. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v21.i6.1865.

Prognostic factors and survival in patients with gastric stump cancer.

Huang H(1), Wang W(1), Chen Z(1), Jin JJ(1), Long ZW(1), Cai H(1), Liu XW(1),
Zhou Y(1), Wang YN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hua Huang, Jie-Jie Jin, Zi-Wen Long, Hong Cai, Xiao-Wen Liu, Ye Zhou, Ya-Nong 
Wang, Department of Gastric Cancer and Soft Tissue Sarcoma, Fudan University
Shanghai Cancer Center, Shanghai 200032, China.

AIM: To elucidate the clinicopathological characteristics and prognostic factors 
of gastric stump cancer (GSC).
METHODS: The clinical data for 92 patients with GSC were collected at Fudan
University Shanghai Cancer Center. The prognostic factors were analyzed with Cox 
proportional hazard models.
RESULTS: GSC tended to occur within 25 years following the primary surgery, when 
the initial disease is benign, whereas it primarily occurred within the first 15 
years post-operation for gastric cancer. Patients with regular follow-up after
primary surgery had a better survival rate. The multivariate Cox regression
analysis revealed that Borrmann type I/II (HR = 3.165, 95%CI: 1.055-9.500, P =
0.040) and radical resection (HR = 1.780, 95%CI: 1.061-2.987, P = 0.029) were
independent prognostic factors for GSC. The overall 1-, 3-, and 5-year survival
rates of the 92 patients were 78.3%, 45.6% and 27.6%, respectively. The 1-, 3-,
and 5-year survival rates of those undergoing radical resection were 79.3%,
52.2%, and 37.8%, respectively. The 5-year survival rates for stages I, II, III, 
and IV were 85.7%, 47.4%, 16.0%, and 13.3%, respectively (P = 0.005).
CONCLUSION: The appearance of GSC occurs sooner in patients with primary
malignant cancer than in patients with a primary benign disease. Therefore, close
follow-up is necessary. The overall survival of patients with GSC is poor, and
curative resection can improve their prognosis.

PMCID: PMC4323464
PMID: 25684953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Biol Open. 2015 Feb 6;4(3):285-300. doi: 10.1242/bio.201410553.

Soma influences GSC progeny differentiation via the cell adhesion-mediated
steroid-let-7-Wingless signaling cascade that regulates chromatin dynamics.

König A(1), Shcherbata HR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Research Group of Gene Expression and Signaling, Max Planck
Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Am Fassberg 11, 37077, Göttingen, Germany.
(2)Max Planck Research Group of Gene Expression and Signaling, Max Planck
Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Am Fassberg 11, 37077, Göttingen, Germany
halyna.shcherbata@mpibpc.mpg.de.

It is known that signaling from the germline stem cell niche is required to
maintain germline stem cell identity in Drosophila. However, it is not clear
whether the germline stem-cell daughters differentiate by default (because they
are physically distant from the niche) or whether additional signaling is
necessary to initiate the differentiation program. Previously, we showed that
ecdysteroid signaling cell non-autonomously regulates early germline
differentiation via its soma-specific co-activator and co-repressor, Taiman and
Abrupt. Now, we demonstrate that this regulation is modulated by the miRNA let-7,
which acts in a positive feedback loop to confer ecdysone signaling robustness
via targeting its repressor, the transcription factor Abrupt. This feedback loop 
adjusts ecdysteroid signaling in response to some stressful alterations in the
external and internal conditions, which include temperature stress and aging, but
not nutritional deprivation. Upon let-7 deficit, escort cells fail to properly
differentiate: their shape, division, and cell adhesive characteristics are
perturbed. These cells have confused cellular identity and form columnar-like
rather than squamous epithelium and fail to send protrusions in between
differentiating germline cysts, affecting soma-germline communication.
Particularly, levels of the homophilic cell adhesion protein Cadherin, which
recruits Wg signaling transducer ß-catenin, are increased in mutant escort cells 
and, correspondingly, in the adjacent germline cells. Readjustment of heterotypic
(soma-germline) cell adhesion modulates Wg signaling intensity in the germline,
which in turn regulates histone modifications that promote expression of the
genes necessary to trigger early germline differentiation. Thus, our data first
show the intrinsic role for Wg signaling in the germline and support a model
where the soma influences the tempo of germline differentiation in response to
external conditions.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4359735
PMID: 25661868  [PubMed]


171. Indian J Exp Biol. 2014 Dec;52(12):1201-5.

Reliable screening technique for evaluation of wild crucifers against mustard
aphid Lipaphis erysimi (Kalt.).

Singh SP, Kumar S, Singh YP, Singh R.

Wild crucifers namely Arabidopsis thaliana, Brassica fruticulosa, B. rugosa, B.
spinescens, B. tournefortii, Camelina sativa, Capsella bursa-pastoris, Crambe
abysinnica, Cronopus didymus, Diplotaxis assurgens, D. gomez-campoi, D. muralis, 
D. siettiana, D. tenuisiliqua, Enatharocarpus lyratus, Lepidium sativum and
Sinapis alba along with five cultivated Brassica species including B. rapa
(BSH-1), B. juncea (Rohini), B. napus (GSC-6), B. carinata (DLSC-2) and Eruca
sativa (T-27) were screened against mustard aphid Lipaphis erysimi (Kalt.) with a
standardized technique under definite level of aphid pressure developed using
specially designed cages. Observations have revealed that B. fruticulosa, B.
spinescens, Camelina sativa, Crambe abysinnica and Lepidium sativum were
resistant to mustard aphid L. erysimi with aphid infestation index (AII) = 1.
Capsella bursa-pastoris was highly susceptible to bean aphid, Aphis fabae during 
its vegetative stage (with 100% mortality). Other genotypes were found in the
range of 'susceptible' to 'highly susceptible' with AII ranging 3-5.

PMID: 25651614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. PLoS Genet. 2015 Feb 3;11(2):e1004653. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004653.
eCollection 2015.

Abscission is regulated by the ESCRT-III protein shrub in Drosophila germline
stem cells.

Matias NR(1), Mathieu J(1), Huynh JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Institut Curie, Paris,
France; CNRS UMR3215, Inserm U934, Paris, France.

Abscission is the final event of cytokinesis that leads to the physical
separation of the two daughter cells. Recent technical advances have allowed a
better understanding of the cellular and molecular events leading to abscission
in isolated yeast or mammalian cells. However, how abscission is regulated in
different cell types or in a developing organism remains poorly understood. Here,
we characterized the function of the ESCRT-III protein Shrub during cytokinesis
in germ cells undergoing a series of complete and incomplete divisions. We found 
that Shrub is required for complete abscission, and that levels of Shrub are
critical for proper timing of abscission. Loss or gain of Shrub delays abscission
in germline stem cells (GSCs), and leads to the formation of stem-cysts, where
daughter cells share the same cytoplasm as the mother stem cell and cannot
differentiate. In addition, our results indicate a negative regulation of Shrub
by the Aurora B kinase during GSC abscission. Finally, we found that Lethal giant
discs (lgd), known to be required for Shrub function in the endosomal pathway,
also regulates the duration of abscission in GSCs.

PMCID: PMC4372032
PMID: 25647097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Cell Biol Int. 2015 May;39(5):591-9. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10430. Epub 2015 Feb 12.

Differential effect of Activin A and WNT3a on definitive endoderm differentiation
on electrospun nanofibrous PCL scaffold.

Hoveizi E(1), Massumi M, Ebrahimi-barough S, Tavakol S, Ai J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, Shahid Chamran University of
Ahvaz, Ahvaz, Iran.

The first step in the formation of hepatocytes and beta cells is the generation
of definitive endoderm (DE) which involves a central issue in developmental
biology. Human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) have the pluripotency to
differentiate into all three germ layers in vitro and have been considered potent
candidates for regenerative medicine as an unlimited source of cells for
therapeutic applications. In this study, we investigated the differentiating
potential of hiPSCs on poly (e-caprolactone) (PCL) nanofibrous scaffold into DE
cells. Here, we demonstrate directed differentiation of hiPSCs by factors such as
Activin A and Wnt3a. The differentiation was determined by immunofluoresence
staining with Sox17, FoxA2 and Goosecoid (Gsc) and also by qRT-PCR analysis. The 
results of this study showed that hiPSCs, as a new cell source, have the ability 
to differentiate into DE cells with a high capacity and also demonstrate that
three dimension (3D) culture provides a suitable nanoenviroment for growth,
proliferation and differentiation of hiPSCs. PCL nanofibrous scaffold with
essential supplements, stimulating factors and EB-derived cells is able to
provide a novel method for enhancing functional differentiation of hiPSCs into DE
cells.

© 2015 International Federation for Cell Biology.

PMID: 25640312  [PubMed - in process]


174. BMC Dev Biol. 2015 Jan 31;15:8. doi: 10.1186/s12861-015-0059-8.

Reversible regulation of stem cell niche size associated with dietary control of 
Notch signalling.

Bonfini A(1), Wilkin MB(2), Baron M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, Michael Smith Building, Oxford Road, University of
Manchester, Manchester, M13 9PT, UK. alessandro.bonfini@cornell.edu. (2)Faculty
of Life Sciences, Michael Smith Building, Oxford Road, University of Manchester, 
Manchester, M13 9PT, UK. marian.b.wilkin@manchester.ac.uk. (3)Faculty of Life
Sciences, Michael Smith Building, Oxford Road, University of Manchester,
Manchester, M13 9PT, UK. mbaron@manchester.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Stem cells can respond to environmental and physiological inputs to
adaptively remodel tissues. Little is known about whether stem cell niches are
similarly responsive. The Drosophila ovary germline stem cell (GSC) niche is a
well-studied model, which is comprised of cap cells that provide anchorage and
maintenance signals for GSCs to maintain oogenesis. Previous studies have shown a
strong link between diet and the regulation of oogenesis, making this a useful
model system in which to investigate dietary regulation of the niche and its
associated stem cells.
RESULTS: We show that the Drosophila ovary GSC cap cell niche is a dynamic
structure, which can contract and expand in fluctuating dietary conditions. Cap
cells are lost when adult flies are shifted to nutrient poor diet and are
restored after returning flies to nutrient-rich medium. Notch signalling in cap
and escort cells is similarly reduced and restored by dietary shifts to nutrient 
poor and rich media. In old flies decreased Notch signalling is associated with
decreased robustness of the niche to dietary changes. We demonstrated using a
Notch temperature sensitive allele that removal and restoration of Notch
signalling also leads to a reduction and re-expansion of the niche. Changes in
niche size were not associated with apoptosis or cell division. We identified two
distinct roles for Notch in the adult germarium. Notch can act in cap cells to
prevent their loss while activation of Notch in the flanking escort cells results
in expansion of the niche.
CONCLUSIONS: We provide evidence that dietary changes alone are sufficient to
alter Notch signalling and reversibly change niche size in the adult in wild type
flies. We show Notch acts in different cells to maintain and re-expand the niche 
and propose a model in which cell fate transitions between cap cells and flanking
somatic cells accounts for niche dynamics. These findings reveal an unexpected
reversible plasticity of the GSC niche whose responses provide an integrated read
out of the physiological status of the fly that is modulated by diet and age.

PMCID: PMC4320563
PMID: 25637382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Dev Biol. 2015 Apr 1;400(1):33-42. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.01.013. Epub 2015
Jan 23.

Ecdysone response gene E78 controls ovarian germline stem cell niche formation
and follicle survival in Drosophila.

Ables ET(1), Bois KE(2), Garcia CA(3), Drummond-Barbosa D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bloomberg School of Public
Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA; Division of
Reproductive Biology, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA; Department of Biology, East Carolina
University, Greenville, NC 27858, USA. Electronic address: ablese@ecu.edu.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bloomberg School of Public
Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA; Division of
Reproductive Biology, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. (3)Department of Biology, East Carolina
University, Greenville, NC 27858, USA. (4)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA; Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Bloomberg 
School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA;
Division of Reproductive Biology, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. Electronic address:
dbarbosa@jhu.edu.

Nuclear hormone receptors have emerged as important regulators of mammalian and
Drosophila adult physiology, affecting such seemingly diverse processes as
adipogenesis, carbohydrate metabolism, circadian rhythm, stem cell function, and 
gamete production. Although nuclear hormone receptors Ecdysone Receptor (EcR) and
Ultraspiracle (Usp) have multiple known roles in Drosophila development and
regulate key processes during oogenesis, the adult function of the majority of
nuclear hormone receptors remains largely undescribed. Ecdysone-induced protein
78C (E78), a nuclear hormone receptor closely related to Drosophila E75 and to
mammalian Rev-Erb and Peroxisome Proliferator Activated Receptors, was originally
identified as an early ecdysone target; however, it has remained unclear whether 
E78 significantly contributes to adult physiology or reproductive function. To
further explore the biological function of E78 in oogenesis, we used available
E78 reporters and created a new E78 loss-of-function allele. We found that E78 is
expressed throughout the germline during oogenesis, and is important for proper
egg production and for the maternal control of early embryogenesis. We showed
that E78 is required during development to establish the somatic germline stem
cell (GSC) niche, and that E78 function in the germline promotes the survival of 
developing follicles. Consistent with its initial discovery as an
ecdysone-induced target, we also found significant genetic interactions between
E78 and components of the ecdysone-signaling pathway. Taken together with the
previously described roles of EcR, Usp, and E75, our results suggest that nuclear
hormone receptors are critical for the broad transcriptional control of a wide
variety of cellular processes during oogenesis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4448935
PMID: 25624267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Stem Cell Reports. 2015 Feb 10;4(2):226-38. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.12.006.
Epub 2015 Jan 15.

EZH2 protects glioma stem cells from radiation-induced cell death in a
MELK/FOXM1-dependent manner.

Kim SH(1), Joshi K(1), Ezhilarasan R(2), Myers TR(3), Siu J(1), Gu C(1),
Nakano-Okuno M(1), Taylor D(1), Minata M(1), Sulman EP(2), Lee J(4), Bhat KP(5), 
Salcini AE(3), Nakano I(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, The James Comprehensive Cancer Center, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (2)Department of Radiation
Oncology, The University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, 
USA. (3)Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), University of Copenhagen, 
Ole Maaløes Vej 5, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark. (4)Department of Stem Cell Biology
and Regenerative Medicine, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. (5)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas, MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (6)Department of Neurological
Surgery, The James Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA. Electronic address: ichiro.nakano@osumc.edu.

Glioblastoma (GBM)-derived tumorigenic stem-like cells (GSCs) may play a key role
in therapy resistance. Previously, we reported that the mitotic kinase MELK binds
and phosphorylates the oncogenic transcription factor FOXM1 in GSCs. Here, we
demonstrate that the catalytic subunit of Polycomb repressive complex 2, EZH2, is
targeted by the MELK-FOXM1 complex, which in turn promotes resistance to
radiation in GSCs. Clinically, EZH2 and MELK are coexpressed in GBM and
significantly induced in postirradiation recurrent tumors whose expression is
inversely correlated with patient prognosis. Through a gain-and loss-of-function 
study, we show that MELK or FOXM1 contributes to GSC radioresistance by
regulation of EZH2. We further demonstrate that the MELK-EZH2 axis is
evolutionarily conserved in Caenorhabditis elegans. Collectively, these data
suggest that the MELK-FOXM1-EZH2 signaling axis is essential for GSC
radioresistance and therefore raise the possibility that MELK-FOXM1-driven EZH2
signaling can serve as a therapeutic target in irradiation-resistant GBM tumors.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4325196
PMID: 25601206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Cell Death Dis. 2015 Jan 15;6:e1601. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.566.

Reactive oxygen species-mediated therapeutic response and resistance in
glioblastoma.

Singer E(1), Judkins J(1), Salomonis N(2), Matlaf L(1), Soteropoulos P(3),
McAllister S(1), Soroceanu L(1).

Author information: 
(1)California Pacific Medical Center Research Institute, San Francisco, CA, USA. 
(2)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA. (3)Center 
for Applied Genomics, UMDNJ, Newark, NJ, USA.

Glioblastoma (GBM) resistance to therapy is the most common cause of tumor
recurrence, which is ultimately fatal in 90% of the patients 5 years after
initial diagnosis. A sub-population of tumor cells with stem-like properties,
glioma stem cells (GSCs), is specifically endowed to resist or adapt to the
standard therapies, leading to therapeutic resistance. Several anticancer agents,
collectively termed redox therapeutics, act by increasing intracellular levels of
reactive oxygen species (ROS). In this study, we investigated mechanisms
underlying GSC response and resistance to cannabidiol (CBD), a non-toxic,
non-psychoactive cannabinoid and redox modulator. Using primary GSCs, we showed
that CBD induced a robust increase in ROS, which led to the inhibition of cell
survival, phosphorylated (p)-AKT, self-renewal and a significant increase in the 
survival of GSC-bearing mice. Inhibition of self-renewal was mediated by the
activation of the p-p38 pathway and downregulation of key stem cell regulators
Sox2, Id1 and p-STAT3. Following CBD treatment, a subset of GSC successfully
adapted, leading to tumor regrowth. Microarray, Taqman and functional assays
revealed that therapeutic resistance was mediated by enhanced expression of the
antioxidant response system Xc catalytic subunit xCT (SLC7A11 (solute carrier
family 7 (anionic amino-acid transporter light chain), member 11)) and
ROS-dependent upregulation of mesenchymal (MES) markers with concomitant
downregulation of proneural (PN) markers, also known as PN-MES transition. This
'reprogramming' of GSCs occurred in culture and in vivo and was partially due to 
activation of the NFE2L2 (NRF2 (nuclear factor, erythroid 2-like))
transcriptional network. Using genetic knockdown and pharmacological inhibitors
of SLC7A11, we demonstrated that combining CBD treatment with the inhibition of
system Xc resulted in synergistic ROS increase leading to robust antitumor
effects, that is, decreased GSC survival, self-renewal, and invasion. Our
investigation provides novel mechanistic insights into the antitumor activity of 
redox therapeutics and suggests that combinatorial approaches using small
molecule modulators of ROS offer therapeutic benefits in GBM.

PMCID: PMC4669764
PMID: 25590811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. NMR Biomed. 2015 Mar;28(3):317-26. doi: 10.1002/nbm.3254. Epub 2015 Jan 8.

(1) H NMR spectroscopy of glioblastoma stem-like cells identifies
alpha-aminoadipate as a marker of tumor aggressiveness.

Rosi A(1), Ricci-Vitiani L, Biffoni M, Grande S, Luciani AM, Palma A, Runci D,
Cappellari M, De Maria R, Guidoni L, Pallini R, Viti V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Technology and Health, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome,
Italy; INFN Sezione di Roma, Rome, Italy.

Patients suffering from glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) face a poor prognosis with 
median survival of about 14 months. High recurrence rate and failure of
conventional treatments are attributed to the presence of GBM cells with
stem-like properties (GSCs). Metabolite profiles of 42 GSC lines established from
the tumor tissue of adult GBM patients were screened with (1) H NMR spectroscopy 
and compared with human neural progenitor cells from human adult olfactory bulb
(OB-NPCs) and from the developing human brain (HNPCs). A first subset (n=12) of
GSCs exhibited a dramatic accumulation of the metabolite a-aminoadipate (aAAD),
product of the oxidation of a-aminoadipic semialdehyde catalyzed by the ALDH7A1
aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) family in lysine catabolism. aAAD was low/not
detectable in a second GSC subset (n=13) with the same neural metabolic profile
as well as in a third GSC subset (n=17) characterized by intense lipid signals.
Likewise, aAAD was not detected in the spectra of OB-NPCs or HNPCs. Inhibition of
mitochondrial ATP synthase by oligomycin treatment revealed that the lysine
degradative pathway leading to aAAD formation proceeds through saccharopine, as
usually observed in developing brain. Survival curves indicated that high aAAD
levels in GSCs significantly correlated with poor patient survival, similarly to 
prostate and non-small-cell-lung cancers, where activity of ALDH7A1 correlates
with tumor aggressiveness.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 25581615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Nat Cell Biol. 2015 Feb;17(2):170-82. doi: 10.1038/ncb3090. Epub 2015 Jan 12.

Periostin secreted by glioblastoma stem cells recruits M2 tumour-associated
macrophages and promotes malignant growth.

Zhou W(1), Ke SQ(1), Huang Z(1), Flavahan W(1), Fang X(1), Paul J(1), Wu L(2),
Sloan AE(3), McLendon RE(4), Li X(2), Rich JN(1), Bao S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Lerner Research
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA. (2)Department of
Immunology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio 44195,
USA. (3)Departments of Neurological Surgery &Pathology, University Hospitals,
Case Medical Center &Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, Case Western Reserve
University School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA. (4)Department of
Pathology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2015 Mar;12(3):128.
    Nat Cell Biol. 2015 Feb;17(2):107-9.
    Cell Stem Cell. 2015 Mar 5;16(3):219-20.

Tumour-associated macrophages (TAMs) are enriched in glioblastoma multiformes
(GBMs) that contain glioma stem cells (GSCs) at the apex of their cellular
hierarchy. The correlation between TAM density and glioma grade suggests a
supportive role for TAMs in tumour progression. Here we interrogated the
molecular link between GSCs and TAM recruitment in GBMs and demonstrated that
GSCs secrete periostin (POSTN) to recruit TAMs. TAM density correlates with POSTN
levels in human GBMs. Silencing POSTN in GSCs markedly reduced TAM density,
inhibited tumour growth, and increased survival of mice bearing GSC-derived
xenografts. We found that TAMs in GBMs are not brain-resident microglia, but
mainly monocyte-derived macrophages from peripheral blood. Disrupting POSTN
specifically attenuated the tumour-supportive M2 type of TAMs in xenografts.
POSTN recruits TAMs through the integrin avß3 as blocking this signalling by an
RGD peptide inhibited TAM recruitment. Our findings highlight the possibility of 
improving GBM treatment by targeting POSTN-mediated TAM recruitment.

PMCID: PMC4312504
PMID: 25580734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Dev Biol. 2015 Mar 15;399(2):226-36. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.12.033. Epub 2015 
Jan 7.

Insulin-independent role of adiponectin receptor signaling in Drosophila germline
stem cell maintenance.

Laws KM(1), Sampson LL(1), Drummond-Barbosa D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Division of Reproductive
Biology, Baltimore, MD, USA. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Division of Reproductive Biology, Baltimore, MD, USA; Department of Environmental
Health Sciences, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD
21205, USA. Electronic address: dbarbosa@jhu.edu.

Adipocytes have key endocrine roles, mediated in large part by secreted protein
hormones termed adipokines. The adipokine adiponectin is well known for its role 
in sensitizing peripheral tissues to insulin, and several lines of evidence
suggest that adiponectin might also modulate stem cells/precursors. It remains
unclear, however, how adiponectin signaling controls stem cells and whether this 
role is secondary to its insulin-sensitizing effects or distinct. Drosophila
adipocytes also function as an endocrine organ and, although no obvious
adiponectin homolog has been identified, Drosophila AdipoR encodes a
well-conserved homolog of mammalian adiponectin receptors. Here, we generate a
null AdipoR allele and use clonal analysis to demonstrate an intrinsic
requirement for AdipoR in germline stem cell (GSC) maintenance in the Drosophila 
ovary. AdipoR null GSCs are not fully responsive to bone morphogenetic protein
ligands from the niche and have a slight reduction in E-cadherin levels at the
GSC-niche junction. Conversely, germline-specific overexpression of AdipoR
inhibits natural GSC loss, suggesting that reduction in adiponectin signaling
might contribute to the normal decline in GSC numbers observed over time in
wild-type females. Surprisingly, AdipoR is not required for insulin sensitization
of the germline, leading us to speculate that insulin sensitization is a more
recently acquired function than stem cell regulation in the evolutionary history 
of adiponectin signaling. Our findings establish Drosophila female GSCs as a new 
system for future studies addressing the molecular mechanisms whereby adiponectin
receptor signaling modulates stem cell fate.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25576925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Cell Physiol. 2015 Aug;230(8):1929-43. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24927.

Acetate supplementation as a means of inducing glioblastoma stem-like cell growth
arrest.

Long PM(1), Tighe SW, Driscoll HE, Fortner KA, Viapiano MS, Jaworski DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Sciences, University of Vermont College of
Medicine, Burlington, Vermont.

Glioblastoma (GBM), the most common primary adult malignant brain tumor, is
associated with a poor prognosis due, in part, to tumor recurrence mediated by
chemotherapy and radiation resistant glioma stem-like cells (GSCs). The metabolic
and epigenetic state of GSCs differs from their non-GSC counterparts, with GSCs
exhibiting greater glycolytic metabolism and global hypoacetylation. However,
little attention has been focused on the potential use of acetate supplementation
as a therapeutic approach. N-acetyl-l-aspartate (NAA), the primary storage form
of brain acetate, and aspartoacylase (ASPA), the enzyme responsible for NAA
catalysis, are significantly reduced in GBM tumors. We recently demonstrated that
NAA supplementation is not an appropriate therapeutic approach since it increases
GSC proliferation and pursued an alternative acetate source. The FDA approved
food additive Triacetin (glyceryl triacetate, GTA) has been safely used for
acetate supplementation therapy in Canavan disease, a leukodystrophy due to ASPA 
mutation. This study characterized the effects of GTA on the proliferation and
differentiation of six primary GBM-derived GSCs relative to established U87 and
U251 GBM cell lines, normal human cerebral cortical astrocytes, and murine neural
stem cells. GTA reduced proliferation of GSCs greater than established GBM lines.
Moreover, GTA reduced growth of the more aggressive mesenchymal GSCs greater than
proneural GSCs. Although sodium acetate induced a dose-dependent reduction of GSC
growth, it also reduced cell viability. GTA-mediated growth inhibition was not
associated with differentiation, but increased protein acetylation. These data
suggest that GTA-mediated acetate supplementation is a novel therapeutic strategy
to inhibit GSC growth.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4414874 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 25573156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Jan 6;16(1):1192-208. doi: 10.3390/ijms16011192.

Telomerase reverse transcriptase regulates microRNAs.

Lassmann T(1), Maida Y(2), Tomaru Y(3), Yasukawa M(4), Ando Y(5), Kojima M(6),
Kasim V(7), Simon C(8), Daub CO(9), Carninci P(10), Hayashizaki Y(11), Masutomi
K(12).

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Omics Science Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho,
Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. lassmann@gsc.riken.jp. (2)Cancer Stem Cell 
Project, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 5-1-1 Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo
104-0045, Japan. ymaida@ncc.go.jp. (3)RIKEN Omics Science Center, RIKEN Yokohama 
Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan.
tomaru@gsc.riken.jp. (4)Cancer Stem Cell Project, National Cancer Center Research
Institute, 5-1-1 Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan. myasukaw@ncc.go.jp.
(5)RIKEN Omics Science Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho,
Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. yando@gsc.riken.jp. (6)RIKEN Omics Science 
Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama
230-0045, Japan. miki1978@gsc.riken.jp. (7)Cancer Stem Cell Project, National
Cancer Center Research Institute, 5-1-1 Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan. 
vkasim@ncc.go.jp. (8)RIKEN Omics Science Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22
Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. simon@gsc.riken.jp. (9)RIKEN
Omics Science Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku,
Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. daub@gsc.riken.jp. (10)RIKEN Omics Science Center,
RIKEN Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045,
Japan. carninci@riken.jp. (11)RIKEN Omics Science Center, RIKEN Yokohama
Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. (12)Cancer
Stem Cell Project, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 5-1-1 Tsukiji,
Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan. kmasutom@ncc.go.jp.

MicroRNAs are small non-coding RNAs that inhibit the translation of target mRNAs.
In humans, most microRNAs are transcribed by RNA polymerase II as long primary
transcripts and processed by sequential cleavage of the two RNase III enzymes,
DROSHA and DICER, into precursor and mature microRNAs, respectively. Although the
fundamental functions of microRNAs in RNA silencing have been gradually
uncovered, less is known about the regulatory mechanisms of microRNA expression. 
Here, we report that telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) extensively affects 
the expression levels of mature microRNAs. Deep sequencing-based screens of short
RNA populations revealed that the suppression of TERT resulted in the
downregulation of microRNAs expressed in THP-1 cells and HeLa cells. Primary and 
precursor microRNA levels were also reduced under the suppression of TERT.
Similar results were obtained with the suppression of either BRG1 (also called
SMARCA4) or nucleostemin, which are proteins interacting with TERT and
functioning beyond telomeres. These results suggest that TERT regulates microRNAs
at the very early phases in their biogenesis, presumably through non-telomerase
mechanism(s).

PMCID: PMC4307298
PMID: 25569094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Genes Cancer. 2014 Nov;5(11-12):445-59.

The Bcl-2 inhibitor Obatoclax overcomes resistance to histone deacetylase
inhibitors SAHA and LBH589 as radiosensitizers in patient-derived glioblastoma
stem-like cells.

Berghauser Pont LM(1), Spoor JK(1), Venkatesan S(1), Swagemakers S(2), Kloezeman 
JJ(1), Dirven CM(1), van der Spek PJ(2), Lamfers ML(1), Leenstra S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Brain Tumor Center, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. (2)Department of Bio-informatics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, Brain Tumor Center, Erasmus MC,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands ; Department of Neurosurgery, Elisabeth Medical
Hospital, Tilburg, The Netherlands.

Glioblastoma has shown resistance to histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) as
radiosensitizers in cultures with Bcl-XL over-expression. We study the efficacy
of SAHA/RTx and LBH589/RTx when manipulating Bcl-2 family proteins using the
Bcl-2 inhibitor Obatoclax in patient-derived glioblastoma stem-like cell (GSC)
cultures. GSC cultures in general have a deletion in phosphatase and tensin
homolog (PTEN). Synergy was determined by the Chou Talalay method. The effects on
apoptosis and autophagy were studied by measuring caspase-3/7, Bcl-XL, Mcl-1 and 
LC3BI/II proteins. The relation between treatment response and
O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) promoter methylation status,
recurrence and gene expression levels of the tumors were studied. Obatoclax
synergized with SAHA and LBH589 and sensitized cells to HDACi/RTx. Over 50% of
GSC cultures were responsive to Obatoclax with either single agent. Combined with
HDACi/RTx treatment, Obatoclax increased caspase-3/7 and inhibited Bcl-2 family
proteins Bcl-XL and Mcl-1 more effectively than other treatments. Genes
predictive for treatment response were identified, including the F-box/WD
repeat-containing protein-7, which was previously related to Bcl-2 inhibition and
HDACi sensitivity. We emphasize the functional relation between Bcl-2 proteins
and radiosensitization by HDACi and provide a target for increasing
responsiveness in glioblastoma by using the Bcl-2 inhibitor Obatoclax.

PMCID: PMC4279441
PMID: 25568669  [PubMed]


184. J Cell Biochem. 2015 May;116(5):864-76. doi: 10.1002/jcb.25043.

Immunophenotypic characterization of human glioblastoma stem cells: correlation
with clinical outcome.

Miconi G(1), Palumbo P, Dehcordi SR, La Torre C, Lombardi F, Evtoski Z, Cimini
AM, Galzio R, Cifone MG, Cinque B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life, Health and Environmental Sciences, University of
L'Aquila-Building Delta 6, Coppito, L'Aquila, 67100, Italy.

Recently, glioma stem cells have been identified as the main cause of glioma
propagation and recurrence and a number of several cell markers have been
indicated as putative GSC markers. In the present work, a retrospective study to 
evaluate the prognostic potential of ability to generate GSCs in our series of 15
glioblastoma patients is described. ß-tubulin III, nestin, CD133, GFAP, and SOX-2
marker expression, both in primary GBM cultures and in respective glioblastoma
stem cells (GSCs), was evaluated by flow cytometric analysis. Our results
demonstrated various expression levels of these markers in both cell cultures; of
note, only those cells expressing SOX-2 at greater than 30% levels were able to
produce in vitro neurospheres. Moreover, statistical analysis revealed that the
GSCs generation negatively affected overall survival (OS) (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.000) and
progression-free survival (PFS) (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001). In addition, a very poor OS
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.000) and PFS (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.000) were observed among patients whose tumors
expressed Ki67, evaluated by immunohistochemistry, and showed the ability to
generate in vitro GSCs. Overall, the results suggest that in vitro GSCs
generation associated to the expression of Ki67 and SOX-2 may be useful to
identify patients at risk of disease progression.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25559650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 30;9(12):e116178. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116178.
eCollection 2014.

Human cytomegalovirus gene expression in long-term infected glioma stem cells.

Fiallos E(1), Judkins J(1), Matlaf L(1), Prichard M(2), Dittmer D(3), Cobbs C(4),
Soroceanu L(1).

Author information: 
(1)California Pacific Medical Center Research Institute, San Francisco,
California, United States of America. (2)Department of Pediatrics and Infectious 
Disease, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, United States 
of America. (3)Department of Virology, University of North Carolina School of
Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, United States of America. (4)The Ben and
Catherine Ivy Center for Advanced Brain Tumor Treatment, Swedish Neuroscience
Institute, Seattle, Washington, United States of America; Department of
Neurosurgery, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, 
United States of America.

The most common adult primary brain tumor, glioblastoma (GBM), is characterized
by fifteen months median patient survival and has no clear etiology. We and
others have identified the presence of human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) gene products
endogenously expressed in GBM tissue and primary cells, with a subset of viral
genes being consistently expressed in most samples. Among these viral genes,
several have important oncomodulatory properties, regulating tumor stemness,
proliferation, immune evasion, invasion and angiogenesis. These findings lead us 
to hypothesize that a specific HCMV gene signature may be associated with GBM
pathogenesis. To investigate this hypothesis, we used glioma cell lines and
primary glioma stem-like cells (GSC) infected with clinical and laboratory HCMV
strains and measured relative viral gene expression levels along several time
points up to 15 weeks post-infection. While HCMV gene expression was detected in 
several infected glioma lines through week 5 post-infection, only HCMV-infected
GSC expressed viral gene products 15 weeks post-infection. Efficiency of
infection across time was higher in GSC compared to cell lines. Importantly,
HCMV-infected GSC outlived their uninfected counterparts, and this extended
survival was paralleled by increased tumorsphere frequency and upregulation of
stemness regulators, such as SOX2, p-STAT3, and BMX (a novel HCMV target
identified in this study). Interleukin 6 (IL-6) treatment significantly
upregulated HCMV gene expression in long-term infected glioma cultures,
suggesting that pro-inflammatory signaling in the tumor milieu may further
augment HCMV gene expression and subsequent tumor progression driven by
viral-induced cellular signaling. Together, our data support a critical role for 
long-term, low-level HCMV infection in promoting survival, stemness, and
proliferation of GSC that could significantly contribute to GBM pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4280176
PMID: 25549333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 26;9(12):e116114. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116114.
eCollection 2014.

Selective lentiviral gene delivery to CD133-expressing human glioblastoma stem
cells.

Bayin NS(1), Modrek AS(2), Dietrich A(3), Lebowitz J(3), Abel T(4), Song HR(3),
Schober M(5), Zagzag D(6), Buchholz CJ(7), Chao MV(8), Placantonakis DG(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY, United
States of America; Helen L. and Martin S. Kimmel Center for Stem Cell Biology,
NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States of America. (2)Department of 
Neurosurgery, NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States of America;
Medical Scientist Training Program, NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY, United 
States of America. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, NYU School of Medicine, New
York, NY, United States of America. (4)Molecular Biotechnology and Gene Therapy, 
Paul-Ehrlich-Institut, Langen, Germany. (5)Helen L. and Martin S. Kimmel Center
for Stem Cell Biology, NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States of
America; Department of Cell Biology, NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY, United
States of America; Ronald O. Perelman Department of Dermatology, NYU School of
Medicine, New York, NY, United States of America. (6)Department of Pathology, NYU
School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States of America. (7)Molecular
Biotechnology and Gene Therapy, Paul-Ehrlich-Institut, Langen, Germany; German
Cancer Consortium, Heidelberg, Germany. (8)Skirball Institute, NYU School of
Medicine, New York, NY, United States of America. (9)Department of Neurosurgery, 
NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States of America; Helen L. and
Martin S. Kimmel Center for Stem Cell Biology, NYU School of Medicine, New York, 
NY, United States of America; Brain Tumor Center, NYU School of Medicine, New
York, NY, United States of America.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is a deadly primary brain malignancy. Glioblastoma 
stem cells (GSC), which have the ability to self-renew and differentiate into
tumor lineages, are believed to cause tumor recurrence due to their resistance to
current therapies. A subset of GSCs is marked by cell surface expression of
CD133, a glycosylated pentaspan transmembrane protein. The study of
CD133-expressing GSCs has been limited by the relative paucity of genetic tools
that specifically target them. Here, we present CD133-LV, a lentiviral vector
presenting a single chain antibody against CD133 on its envelope, as a vehicle
for the selective transduction of CD133-expressing GSCs. We show that CD133-LV
selectively transduces CD133+ human GSCs in dose-dependent manner and that
transduced cells maintain their stem-like properties. The transduction efficiency
of CD133-LV is reduced by an antibody that recognizes the same epitope on CD133
as the viral envelope and by shRNA-mediated knockdown of CD133. Conversely, the
rate of transduction by CD133-LV is augmented by overexpression of CD133 in
primary human GBM cultures. CD133-LV selectively transduces CD133-expressing
cells in intracranial human GBM xenografts in NOD.SCID mice, but spares normal
mouse brain tissue, neurons derived from human embryonic stem cells and primary
human astrocytes. Our findings indicate that CD133-LV represents a novel tool for
the selective genetic manipulation of CD133-expressing GSCs, and can be used to
answer important questions about how these cells contribute to tumor biology and 
therapy resistance.

PMCID: PMC4277468
PMID: 25541984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. BMC Genomics. 2014 Dec 24;15:1177. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-1177.

CAGE-defined promoter regions of the genes implicated in Rett Syndrome.

Vitezic M(1,)(2,)(3), Bertin N(4,)(5,)(6), Andersson R(7), Lipovich L(8,)(9),
Kawaji H(10,)(11,)(12), Lassmann T(13,)(14,)(15), Sandelin A(16), Heutink
P(17,)(18,)(19), Goldowitz D(20), Ha T(21), Zhang P(22), Patrizi A(23), Fagiolini
M(24), Forrest AR(25,)(26), Carninci P(27,)(28), Saxena A(29,)(30); FANTOM
Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Omics Science Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Omics Science Center (OSC),
1-17-22 Suehiro cho, Tsurumi ku, Yokohama, Japan. mvitezic@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology (CMB), Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden. mvitezic@gmail.com. (3)The Bioinformatics Center, Department
of Biology and Biotech Research and Innovation Center, University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen, Denmark. mvitezic@gmail.com. (4)Omics Science Center, RIKEN Yokohama 
Institute, Omics Science Center (OSC), 1-17-22 Suehiro cho, Tsurumi ku, Yokohama,
Japan. nicolas.bertin@gmail.com. (5)Division of Genomic Technologies (DGT), RIKEN
Center for Life Science Technologies, Yokohama, Japan. nicolas.bertin@gmail.com. 
(6)Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore,
Singapore, Singapore. nicolas.bertin@gmail.com. (7)The Bioinformatics Center,
Department of Biology and Biotech Research and Innovation Center, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. robin@binf.ku.dk. (8)Center for Molecular
Medicine and Genetics, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA.
LLipovich@med.wayne.edu. (9)Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, Wayne
State University, Detroit, MI, USA. LLipovich@med.wayne.edu. (10)Omics Science
Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Omics Science Center (OSC), 1-17-22 Suehiro
cho, Tsurumi ku, Yokohama, Japan. kawaji@gsc.riken.jp. (11)Division of Genomic
Technologies (DGT), RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies, Yokohama, Japan. 
kawaji@gsc.riken.jp. (12)RIKEN Preventive Medicine and Diagnosis Innovation
Program (PMI), Wako, Japan. kawaji@gsc.riken.jp. (13)Omics Science Center, RIKEN 
Yokohama Institute, Omics Science Center (OSC), 1-17-22 Suehiro cho, Tsurumi ku, 
Yokohama, Japan. timo.lassmann@telethonkids.org.au. (14)Division of Genomic
Technologies (DGT), RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies, Yokohama, Japan. 
timo.lassmann@telethonkids.org.au. (15)Telethon Kids Institute, The University of
Western Australia, Perth, Australia. timo.lassmann@telethonkids.org.au. (16)The
Bioinformatics Center, Department of Biology and Biotech Research and Innovation 
Center, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. albin@binf.ku.dk.
(17)Division of Genomic Technologies (DGT), RIKEN Center for Life Science
Technologies, Yokohama, Japan. peter.heutink@dzne.de. (18)German Center for
Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Tübingen, Germany. peter.heutink@dzne.de.
(19)Eberhard Karls University, Tübingen, Germany. peter.heutink@dzne.de.
(20)Centre for Molecular Medicine and Therapeutics, Child and Family Research
Institute, Dept of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
Canada. dang@cmmt.ubc.ca. (21)Centre for Molecular Medicine and Therapeutics,
Child and Family Research Institute, Dept of Medical Genetics, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. tjha@cmmt.ubc.ca. (22)Centre for Molecular
Medicine and Therapeutics, Child and Family Research Institute, Dept of Medical
Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. pzhang@cmmt.ubc.ca. 
(23)FM Kirby Neurobiology Center, Department of Neurology, Boston Children's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
annarita.patrizi@childrens.harvard.edu. (24)FM Kirby Neurobiology Center,
Department of Neurology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA. michela.fagiolini@childrens.harvard.edu. (25)Omics Science
Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Omics Science Center (OSC), 1-17-22 Suehiro
cho, Tsurumi ku, Yokohama, Japan. forrest@gsc.riken.jp. (26)Division of Genomic
Technologies (DGT), RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies, Yokohama, Japan. 
forrest@gsc.riken.jp. (27)Omics Science Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Omics
Science Center (OSC), 1-17-22 Suehiro cho, Tsurumi ku, Yokohama, Japan.
carninci@riken.jp. (28)Division of Genomic Technologies (DGT), RIKEN Center for
Life Science Technologies, Yokohama, Japan. carninci@riken.jp. (29)Omics Science 
Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Omics Science Center (OSC), 1-17-22 Suehiro
cho, Tsurumi ku, Yokohama, Japan. alka.saxena@gstt.nhs.uk. (30)Biomedical
Research Centre at Guy's and St Thomas' Trust, Genomics Core Facility, Guy's
Hospital, London, UK. alka.saxena@gstt.nhs.uk.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in three functionally diverse genes cause Rett Syndrome.
Although the functions of Forkhead box G1 (FOXG1), Methyl CpG binding protein 2
(MECP2) and Cyclin-dependent kinase-like 5 (CDKL5) have been studied
individually, not much is known about their relation to each other with respect
to expression levels and regulatory regions. Here we analyzed data from hundreds 
of mouse and human samples included in the FANTOM5 project, to identify
transcript initiation sites, expression levels, expression correlations and
regulatory regions of the three genes.
RESULTS: Our investigations reveal the predominantly used transcription start
sites (TSSs) for each gene including novel transcription start sites for FOXG1.
We show that FOXG1 expression is poorly correlated with the expression of MECP2
and CDKL5. We identify promoter shapes for each TSS, the predicted location of
enhancers for each gene and the common transcription factors likely to regulate
the three genes. Our data imply Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) mediated
silencing of Foxg1 in cerebellum.
CONCLUSIONS: Our analyses provide a comprehensive picture of the regulatory
regions of the three genes involved in Rett Syndrome.

PMCID: PMC4522966
PMID: 25539566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Patol Fiziol Eksp Ter. 2014 Jul-Sep;(3):52-7.

[The opportunity to use combined stem cells transplantation for haemopoesis
activation in the old and mature laboratory animals under the conditions of
ionizing radiation].

[Article in Russian]

Grebnev DU.

The objective of this work was to study the influence of combined transplantation
of stem cells (multypotent mesenchimal stromal and hem poetic stem cells) on the 
haemopoesis of old and mature laboratory animals under the condition of ionizing 
radiation. The experiments were conducted on 48 white male mice with the body
weight of 30 g, age of 3-4 months, and 48 male mice of 3 years of age and body
mass of 50 g. The experiments for obtaining the MMSC and HSC cultures were
conducted on 16 laboratory animals: female mice of 3-4 months of age and body
mass of 30 g., 18 days gestation period. The control group was formed by the
animals not under the ionizing radiation. The experimental group animals got the 
dose of 4 Gr. These animals also got MMSC and HSC mixture intravenously in the
doses of 6 mln. c/kg. and 330 thousand cell/kg prospectively. The control group
animals got the 0.9% NaCl - 0.2 ml. intravenously. The infusions were made 1 hour
after radiation once. As the result of the experiment it was shown that under
physiological conditions combined transplantation brings the erithropoesis
activation, under the ionizing radiation conditions it brings the erythroid and
granulocytopoesis activation. More over the combined MMSC and HSC transplantation
gives cytoprotective action on the myeloid tissue due to decrease of cyto
genically changed cells in the mature animals under the condition of ionizing
radiation, but in the old animals this effect can be seen even under
physiological condition. Conclusions: Combined transplantation of MMSC and GSC
can be used in the mature and old laboratory animals under the conditions of
ionising radiation for the haemopoesis activation.

PMID: 25536791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Cancer Lett. 2014 Dec 16. pii: S0304-3835(14)00783-6. doi:
10.1016/j.canlet.2014.12.028. [Epub ahead of print]

Tumor vasculature and glioma stem cells: Contributions to glioma progression.

Jhaveri N(1), Chen TC(2), Hofman FM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, California, USA. (2)Department of Pathology, Keck School
of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA;
Department of Neurosurgery, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, California, USA. (3)Department of Pathology, Keck School
of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA;
Department of Neurosurgery, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, California, USA. Electronic address: hofman@usc.edu.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), the most malignant of brain tumors, is
characterized by extensive vascularization and a high degree of invasion. The
current standard of care is not very effective, resulting in tumor recurrence
with patients rarely surviving over 2 years. This tumor recurrence is attributed 
to the presence of chemo and radiation resistant glioma stem cells (GSCs). These 
cells are associated with vascular niches which regulate GSC self-renewal and
survival. Recent studies suggest that while blood vessels support glioma stem
cells, these tumor cells in turn may regulate and contribute to the tumor
vasculature by transdifferentiating into endothelial cells directly or through
the secretion of regulatory growth factors such as vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) and hepatoma derived growth factor (HDGF). The relationship between
the tumor vasculature and the glioma stem cells is the subject of this review.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25527451  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


190. PLoS Genet. 2014 Dec 18;10(12):e1004888. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004888.
eCollection 2014.

Notch signaling mediates the age-associated decrease in adhesion of germline stem
cells to the niche.

Tseng CY(1), Kao SH(2), Wan CL(2), Cho Y(2), Tung SY(3), Hsu HJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular and Organismic Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan;
Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei,
Taiwan. (2)Institute of Cellular and Organismic Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei,
Taiwan. (3)Genomic Core Facility, Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia
Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

Erratum in
    PLoS Genet. 2015 Dec;11(12):e1005766.

Stem cells have an innate ability to occupy their stem cell niche, which in turn,
is optimized to house stem cells. Organ aging is associated with reduced stem
cell occupancy in the niche, but the mechanisms involved are poorly understood.
Here, we report that Notch signaling is increased with age in Drosophila female
germline stem cells (GSCs), and this results in their removal from the niche.
Clonal analysis revealed that GSCs with low levels of Notch signaling exhibit
increased adhesiveness to the niche, thereby out-competing their neighbors with
higher levels of Notch; adhesiveness is altered through regulation of E-cadherin 
expression. Experimental enhancement of Notch signaling in GSCs hastens their
age-dependent loss from the niche, and such loss is at least partially mediated
by Sex lethal. However, disruption of Notch signaling in GSCs does not delay GSC 
loss during aging, and nor does it affect BMP signaling, which promotes
self-renewal of GSCs. Finally, we show that in contrast to GSCs, Notch activation
in the niche (which maintains niche integrity, and thus mediates GSC retention)
is reduced with age, indicating that Notch signaling regulates GSC niche
occupancy both intrinsically and extrinsically. Our findings expose a novel role 
of Notch signaling in controlling GSC-niche adhesion in response to aging, and
are also of relevance to metastatic cancer cells, in which Notch signaling
suppresses cell adhesion.

PMCID: PMC4270478
PMID: 25521289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Zhonghua Xin Xue Guan Bing Za Zhi. 2014 Sep;42(9):714-20.

[Chinese expert consensus on cardiac rehabilitation for patients with chronic
stable heart failure].

[Article in Chinese]

Chinese Rehabilitation Medical Association Professional Committee of
Cardiovascular Diseases; Committee of Cardio-Cerebral-Vascular Diseases of GSC.

Collaborators: Wang L(1), Hu D(2).

PMID: 25511088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Medicine (Baltimore). 2014 Dec;93(27):e136. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000000136.

Signet ring cell histology is not an independent predictor of poor prognosis
after curative resection for gastric cancer: a propensity analysis by the KLASS
Group.

Shim JH(1), Song KY, Kim HH, Han SU, Kim MC, Hyung WJ, Kim W, Lee HJ, Ryu SW, Cho
GS, Ryu SY.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Surgery (JHS, KYS, Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, College
of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul; Department of Surgery
(H-HK), Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seoul National University
College of Medicine, Seongnam, Korea; Department of Surgery (S-UH), Ajou
University School of Medicine, Suwon; Department of Surgery (M-CK), Dong-A
University College of Medicine, Busan; Department of Surgery (WJH), Institute of 
Gastroenterology, Yonsei University College of Medicine; Department of Surgery
(WK), Yeouido St. Mary's Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic University
of Korea; Department of Surgery (H-JL), Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul; Department of Surgery (SWR), Keimyung
University School of Medicine, Daegu; Department of Surgery (GSC), Soonchunhyang 
University Bucheon Hospital, Soonchunhyang University College of Medicine,
Bucheon; and Department of Surgery (SYR), Chonnam National University Medical
School, Gwangju, Korea.

Whether signet ring cell (SRC) histology carries a worse prognosis than other
forms of gastric adenocarcinoma has been questioned. The present study
investigated the differences in clinicopathologic features and survival between
SRC and non-SRC adenocarcinoma. The prospectively collected data of 2643 patients
who had undergone curative gastrectomy between 1998 and 2005 by 10 surgeons were 
reviewed. Additionally, we employed analysis of covariance, propensity-score risk
adjustment, and propensity-based matching to account for possible selection bias.
The baseline characteristics of prematched patients with SRC or non-SRC
adenocarcinoma histology differed: SRC presented in younger patients and less
often in men, was more likely found in the middle stomach, and was more likely to
be Stage I. After applying the propensity-score strata and propensity-score
matching, there was no difference in the baseline characteristics, and SRC was
not an independent risk factor for mortality in the same stage. SRC is not an
independent predictor of poor prognosis after curative resection for gastric
cancer in Korea.

PMCID: PMC4602776
PMID: 25501051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Fly (Austin). 2014;8(2):63-7. doi: 10.4161/fly.28063.

Nuclear lamina builds tissues from the stem cell niche.

Chen H(1), Zheng Y.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Embryology; Carnegie Institution for Science; Baltimore, MD
USA.

Recent studies show that nuclear lamins, the type V intermediate filament
proteins, are required for proper building of at least some organs. As the major 
structural components of the nuclear lamina found underneath the inner nuclear
membranes, lamins are ubiquitously expressed in all animal cells. How the broadly
expressed lamins support the building of specific tissues is not understood. By
studying Drosophila testis, we have uncovered a mechanism by which lamin-B
functions in the cyst stem cell (CySC) and its differentiated cyst cell, the cell
types known to form the niche/microenvironment for the germline stem cells (GSC) 
and the developing germ line, to ensure testis organogenesis (1). In this extra
view, we discuss some remaining questions and the implications of our findings in
the understanding of how the ubiquitous nuclear lamina regulates tissue building 
in a context-dependent manner.

PMCID: PMC4197016
PMID: 25483250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Aging Cell. 2015 Feb;14(1):25-34. doi: 10.1111/acel.12288. Epub 2014 Dec 3.

Aging and insulin signaling differentially control normal and tumorous germline
stem cells.

Kao SH(1), Tseng CY, Wan CL, Su YH, Hsieh CC, Pi H, Hsu HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular and Organismic Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, 11529, 
Taiwan.

Aging influences stem cells, but the processes involved remain unclear. Insulin
signaling, which controls cellular nutrient sensing and organismal aging,
regulates the G2 phase of Drosophila female germ line stem cell (GSC) division
cycle in response to diet; furthermore, this signaling pathway is attenuated with
age. The role of insulin signaling in GSCs as organisms age, however, is also
unclear. Here, we report that aging results in the accumulation of tumorous GSCs,
accompanied by a decline in GSC number and proliferation rate. Intriguingly, GSC 
loss with age is hastened by either accelerating (through eliminating expression 
of Myt1, a cell cycle inhibitory regulator) or delaying (through mutation of
insulin receptor (dinR) GSC division, implying that disrupted cell cycle
progression and insulin signaling contribute to age-dependent GSC loss. As flies 
age, DNA damage accumulates in GSCs, and the S phase of the GSC cell cycle is
prolonged. In addition, GSC tumors (which escape the normal stem cell regulatory 
microenvironment, known as the niche) still respond to aging in a similar manner 
to normal GSCs, suggesting that niche signals are not required for GSCs to sense 
or respond to aging. Finally, we show that GSCs from mated and unmated females
behave similarly, indicating that female GSC-male communication does not affect
GSCs with age. Our results indicate the differential effects of aging and diet
mediated by insulin signaling on the stem cell division cycle, highlight the
complexity of the regulation of stem cell aging, and describe a link between
ovarian cancer and aging.

© 2014 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley
& Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4326914
PMID: 25470527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Cell Rep. 2014 Dec 11;9(5):1812-26. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.10.055. Epub 2014 
Nov 20.

Sema3C promotes the survival and tumorigenicity of glioma stem cells through Rac1
activation.

Man J(1), Shoemake J(1), Zhou W(1), Fang X(1), Wu Q(1), Rizzo A(1), Prayson R(2),
Bao S(3), Rich JN(3), Yu JS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Lerner Research
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.
(2)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Tomsich Pathology and Laboratory Medicine
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA;
Burkhardt Brain Tumor and Neuro-Oncology Center, Neurological Institute,
Cleveland Clinic, 9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. (3)Department of 
Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland
Clinic, 9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA; Burkhardt Brain Tumor and
Neuro-Oncology Center, Neurological Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 9500 Euclid
Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. (4)Department of Stem Cell Biology and
Regenerative Medicine, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 9500 Euclid
Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA; Burkhardt Brain Tumor and Neuro-Oncology
Center, Neurological Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, 
OH 44195, USA; Department of Radiation Oncology, Taussig Cancer Institute,
Cleveland Clinic, 9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. Electronic
address: yuj2@ccf.org.

Different cancer cell compartments often communicate through soluble factors to
facilitate tumor growth. Glioma stem cells (GSCs) are a subset of tumor cells
that resist standard therapy to contribute to disease progression. How GSCs
employ a distinct secretory program to communicate with and nurture each other
over the nonstem tumor cell (NSTC) population is not well defined. Here, we show 
that GSCs preferentially secrete Sema3C and coordinately express PlexinA2/D1
receptors to activate Rac1/nuclear factor (NF)-<U+03BA>B signaling in an
autocrine/paracrine loop to promote their own survival. Importantly, Sema3C is
not expressed in neural progenitor cells (NPCs) or NSTCs. Disruption of Sema3C
induced apoptosis of GSCs, but not NPCs or NSTCs, and suppressed tumor growth in 
orthotopic models of glioblastoma. Introduction of activated Rac1 rescued the
Sema3C knockdown phenotype in vivo. Our study supports the targeting of Sema3C to
break this GSC-specific autocrine/paracrine loop in order to improve glioblastoma
treatment, potentially with a high therapeutic index.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4268066
PMID: 25464848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Magn Reson. 2014 Oct 18;249C:38-48. doi: 10.1016/j.jmr.2014.10.006. [Epub ahead
of print]

Operation of a 400MHz NMR magnet using a (RE:Rare Earth)Ba2Cu3O7-x
high-temperature superconducting coil: Towards an ultra-compact super-high field 
NMR spectrometer operated beyond 1GHz.

Yanagisawa Y(1), Piao R(1), Iguchi S(2), Nakagome H(3), Takao T(4), Kominato
K(5), Hamada M(5), Matsumoto S(6), Suematsu H(7), Jin X(8), Takahashi M(8),
Yamazaki T(8), Maeda H(9).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Life Science Technologies, RIKEN, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan;
Graduate School of Engineering, Chiba University, Chiba 236-8522, Japan.
(2)Center for Life Science Technologies, RIKEN, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan; Faculty
of Science and Technology, Sophia University, Yotsuya 102-8554, Japan.
(3)Graduate School of Engineering, Chiba University, Chiba 236-8522, Japan.
(4)Faculty of Science and Technology, Sophia University, Yotsuya 102-8554, Japan.
(5)Japan Superconductor Technology, Inc, Kobe, Hyogo 651-2271, Japan.
(6)Superconducting Wire Unit, National Institute for Materials Science, Tsukuba
305-0003, Japan. (7)JEOL RESONANCE Inc., Akishima, Tokyo 196-8558, Japan.
(8)Center for Life Science Technologies, RIKEN, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan.
(9)Center for Life Science Technologies, RIKEN, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan.
Electronic address: maeda@jota.gsc.riken.jp.

High-temperature superconductors (HTS) are the key technology to achieve
super-high magnetic field nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometers with an 
operating frequency far beyond 1GHz (23.5T). (RE)Ba2Cu3O7-x (REBCO, RE: rare
earth) conductors have an advantage over Bi2Sr2Ca2Cu3O10-x (Bi-2223) and
Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8-x (Bi-2212) conductors in that they have very high tensile
strengths and tolerate strong electromagnetic hoop stress, thereby having the
potential to act as an ultra-compact super-high field NMR magnet. As a first
step, we developed the world's first NMR magnet comprising an inner REBCO coil
and outer low-temperature superconducting (LTS) coils. The magnet was
successfully charged without degradation and mainly operated at 400MHz (9.39T).
Technical problems for the NMR magnet due to screening current in the REBCO coil 
were clarified and solved as follows: (i) A remarkable temporal drift of the
central magnetic field was suppressed by a current sweep reversal method
utilizing ~10% of the peak current. (ii) A Z2 field error harmonic of the main
coil cannot be compensated by an outer correction coil and therefore an
additional ferromagnetic shim was used. (iii) Large tesseral harmonics emerged
that could not be corrected by cryoshim coils. Due to those harmonics, the
resolution and sensitivity of NMR spectra are ten-fold lower than those for a
conventional LTS NMR magnet. As a result, a HSQC spectrum could be achieved for a
protein sample, while a NOESY spectrum could not be obtained. An ultra-compact
1.2GHz NMR magnet could be realized if we effectively take advantage of REBCO
conductors, although this will require further research to suppress the effect of
the screening current.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25462945  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


197. Dev Biol. 2015 Feb 1;398(1):68-79. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.11.014. Epub 2014
Nov 24.

CSN maintains the germline cellular microenvironment and controls the level of
stem cell genes via distinct CRLs in testes of Drosophila melanogaster.

Qian Y(1), Ng CL(2), Schulz C(3).

Author information: 
(1)(a)University of Georgia, Department of Cellular Biology, Athens, GA 30602,
USA; Ripon College, Department of Biology, Ripon, WI 54971, USA. (2)(a)University
of Georgia, Department of Cellular Biology, Athens, GA 30602, USA.
(3)(a)University of Georgia, Department of Cellular Biology, Athens, GA 30602,
USA. Electronic address: cschulz@uga.edu.

Stem cells and their daughters are often associated with and depend on cues from 
their cellular microenvironment. In Drosophila testes, each Germline Stem Cell
(GSC) contacts apical hub cells and is enclosed by cytoplasmic extensions from
two Cyst Stem Cells (CySCs). Each GSC daughter becomes enclosed by cytoplasmic
extensions from two CySC daughters, called cyst cells. CySC fate depends on an
Unpaired (Upd) signal from the hub cells, which activates the Janus Kinase and
Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription (Jak/STAT) pathway in the stem
cells. Germline enclosure depends on Epidermal Growth Factor (EGF) signals from
the germline to the somatic support cells. Expression of RNA-hairpins against
subunits of the COnstitutively Photomorphogenic-9- (COP9-) signalosome (CSN) in
somatic support cells disrupted germline enclosure. Furthermore, CSN-depleted
somatic support cells in the CySC position next to the hub had reduced levels of 
the Jak/STAT effectors Zinc finger homeotic-1 (Zfh-1) and Chronologically
inappropriate morphogenesis (Chinmo). Knockdown of CSN in the somatic support
cells does not disrupt EGF and Upd signal transduction as downstream signal
transducers, phosphorylated STAT (pSTAT) and phosphorylated Mitogen Activated
Protein Kinase (pMAPK), were still localized to the somatic support cell nuclei. 
The CSN modifies fully formed Cullin RING ubiquitin ligase (CRL) complexes to
regulate selective proteolysis. Reducing cullin2 (cul2) from the somatic support 
cells disrupted germline enclosure, while reducing cullin1 (cul1) from the
somatic support cells led to a low level of Chinmo. We propose that different
CRLs enable the responses of somatic support cells to Upd and EGF.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25459658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Apr;11(4):2953-8. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.3021. Epub 2014 Nov 28.

Effects of tachyplesin I on human U251 glioma stem cells.

Ding H(1), Jin G(2), Zhang L(2), Dai J(2), Dang J(2), Han Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Chemical Engineering and Light Industry, Guangdong University of
Technology, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510006, P.R. China. (2)School of Applied
Chemistry and Biotechnology, Shenzhen Polytechnic, Shenzhen Public Technology
Service Platform for Scale Cell Culture Techniques and Cell Resource, Shenzhen,
Guangdong 518055, P.R. China.

Glioblastoma, is one of the most malignant types of intracranial tumor with
complex progressive cellular and underlying molecular events. The use of glioma
stem cells (GSCs) offers a promising strategy for tumor therapy in the future.
Tachyplesin I has been demonstrated to have potential anticancer activity and was
first observed in leukocytes. In the present study, the GSC subset was isolated
from U251 glioma cells and tachyplesin I was assessed for antitumor activity. As 
a result, the U251 cells exhibited certain GSC phenotypes, including the
expression of stem cell biomarkers CD133 and nestin, when transferred into stem
cell culture conditions. The GSCs were grown in an adherent manner in a medium
containing serum, while the U251 glioma cells were suspended and cultured in
serum-free medium. Tachyplesin I damaged the structure of GSC and inhibited the
culture of GSC spheres in a time and dose-dependent manner. When tachyplesin I
was administered at a concentration of 10-40 µg/ml, GSC differentiation was
induced. GSCs treated with a low dose of tachyplesin I disrupted the plasma
membrane and led to a loss of cytoplasmic organelles. These findings indicated
that tachyplesin I had an effect on inhibiting tumor stem cells and demonstrated 
that tachyplesin I inhibited GSCs by disrupting the plasma membranes and inducing
GSC differentiation.

PMID: 25434611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Neurosurg Focus. 2014 Dec;37(6):E10. doi: 10.3171/2014.9.FOCUS14520.

Targeting MET for glioma therapy.

Awad AJ(1), Burns TC, Zhang Y, Abounader R.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neurosurgery and.

Glioblastoma multiforme is the most common and most lethal of all primary brain
tumors. Even with the standard therapy, life expectancy is still poor, with an
average survival of approximately 14 months following initial diagnosis. Hence,
there is an urgent need for novel treatment strategies that inhibit proliferation
and angiogenesis in high-grade gliomas. One such strategy consists of inhibiting 
receptor tyrosine kinases, including MET and/or its ligand hepatocyte growth
factor (HGF). Because of their widespread involvement in human cancer, HGF and
MET have emerged as promising therapeutic targets, and some inhibitory agents
that target them have already entered clinical trials. In this paper, the authors
highlight recent evidence implicating HGF/MET pathway deregulation in
glioblastoma multiforme, discuss therapeutic approaches to inhibit HGF/MET
signaling, and summarize ongoing clinical trials targeting this pathway.

PMID: 25434379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Gene Ther. 2015 Apr;22(4):348-55. doi: 10.1038/gt.2014.107. Epub 2014 Nov 27.

<U+03B3>134.5-deleted HSV-1-expressing human cytomegalovirus IRS1 gene kills human
glioblastoma cells as efficiently as wild-type HSV-1 in normoxia or hypoxia.

Friedman GK(1), Nan L(1), Haas MC(1), Kelly VM(1), Moore BP(1), Langford CP(2),
Xu H(3), Han X(4), Beierle EA(5), Markert JM(2), Cassady KA(6), Gillespie GY(2).

Author information: 
(1)Brain Tumor Research Program, Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology,
Department of Pediatrics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL,
USA. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Alabama at Birmingham,
Birmingham, AL, USA. (3)Department of Dermatology, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA. (4)Department of Neurology, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA. (5)Department of Surgery, University 
of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA. (6)Division of Infectious
Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, University of Alabama at Birmingham,
Birmingham, AL, USA.

Erratum in
    Gene Ther. 2015 Apr;22(4):356.

Pathophysiological hypoxia, which fosters the glioma stem-like cell (GSC)
phenotype, is present in high-grade gliomas and has been linked to tumor
development, invasiveness and resistance to chemotherapy and radiation. Oncolytic
virotherapy with engineered herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1) is a promising therapy
for glioblastoma; however, the efficacy of <U+03B3>(1)34.5-deleted HSVs, which have been
used in clinical trials, was diminished in hypoxia. We investigated the ability
of a chimeric human cytolomegalovirus (HCMV)/HSV-1 virus, which expresses the
human CMV protein kinase R evasion gene IRS1 and is in preparation for clinical
trials, to infect and kill adult and pediatric patient-derived glioblastoma
xenografts in hypoxia and normoxia. Infectivity, cytotoxicity and viral recovery 
were significantly greater with the chimeric virus compared with the
<U+03B3>(1)34.5-deleted virus, regardless of oxygen tension. The chimeric virus infected
and killed CD133+ GSCs similarly to wild-type HSV-1. Increased activation of
mitogen-activated protein kinase p38 and its substrate heat-shock protein 27
(Hsp27) was seen after viral infection in normoxia compared with hypoxia. Hsp27
knockdown or p38 inhibition reduced virus recovery, indicating that the p38
pathway has a role in the reduced efficacy of the <U+03B3>(1)34.5-deleted virus in
hypoxia. Taken together, these findings demonstrate that chimeric HCMV/HSV-1
efficiently targets both CD133+ GSCs and glioma cells in hypoxia.

PMCID: PMC4383690
PMID: 25427614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 24;9(11):e113423. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113423.
eCollection 2014.

gone early, a novel germline factor, ensures the proper size of the stem cell
precursor pool in the Drosophila ovary.

Matsuoka S(1), Gupta S(2), Suzuki E(3), Hiromi Y(1), Asaoka M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics, National Institute of Genetics, Mishima,
Shizuoka, Japan; Department of Genetics, SOKENDAI, Mishima, Shizuoka, Japan.
(2)Department of Developmental Genetics, National Institute of Genetics, Mishima,
Shizuoka, Japan. (3)Department of Genetics, SOKENDAI, Mishima, Shizuoka, Japan;
Structural Biology Center, National Institute of Genetics, Mishima, Shizuoka,
Japan.

In order to sustain lifelong production of gametes, many animals have evolved a
stem cell-based gametogenic program. In the Drosophila ovary, germline stem cells
(GSCs) arise from a pool of primordial germ cells (PGCs) that remain
undifferentiated even after gametogenesis has initiated. The decision of PGCs to 
differentiate or remain undifferentiated is regulated by somatic stromal cells:
specifically, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling activated in the 
stromal cells determines the fraction of germ cells that remain undifferentiated 
by shaping a Decapentaplegic (Dpp) gradient that represses PGC differentiation.
However, little is known about the contribution of germ cells to this process.
Here we show that a novel germline factor, Gone early (Goe), limits the fraction 
of PGCs that initiate gametogenesis. goe encodes a non-peptidase homologue of the
Neprilysin family metalloendopeptidases. At the onset of gametogenesis, Goe was
localized on the germ cell membrane in the ovary, suggesting that it functions in
a peptidase-independent manner in cell-cell communication at the cell surface.
Overexpression of Goe in the germline decreased the number of PGCs that enter the
gametogenic pathway, thereby increasing the proportion of undifferentiated PGCs. 
Inversely, depletion of Goe increased the number of PGCs initiating
differentiation. Excess PGC differentiation in the goe mutant was augmented by
halving the dose of argos, a somatically expressed inhibitor of EGFR signaling.
This increase in PGC differentiation resulted in a massive decrease in the number
of undifferentiated PGCs, and ultimately led to insufficient formation of GSCs.
Thus, acting cooperatively with a somatic regulator of EGFR signaling, the
germline factor goe plays a critical role in securing the proper size of the GSC 
precursor pool. Because goe can suppress EGFR signaling activity and is expressed
in EGF-producing cells in various tissues, goe may function by attenuating EGFR
signaling, and thereby affecting the stromal environment.

PMCID: PMC4242634
PMID: 25420147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. PLoS Genet. 2014 Nov 20;10(11):e1004797. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004797.
eCollection 2014.

Three RNA binding proteins form a complex to promote differentiation of germline 
stem cell lineage in Drosophila.

Chen D(1), Wu C(1), Zhao S(1), Geng Q(1), Gao Y(1), Li X(2), Zhang Y(1), Wang
Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Developmental Biology, Institute of Genetics
and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, P.R. China,; The
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, P.R. China. (2)State Key
Laboratory of Molecular Developmental Biology, Institute of Genetics and
Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, P.R. China.

In regenerative tissues, one of the strategies to protect stem cells from genetic
aberrations, potentially caused by frequent cell division, is to transiently
expand the stem cell daughters before further differentiation. However, failure
to exit the transit amplification may lead to overgrowth, and the molecular
mechanism governing this regulation remains vague. In a Drosophila mutagenesis
screen for factors involved in the regulation of germline stem cell (GSC)
lineage, we isolated a mutation in the gene CG32364, which encodes a putative
RNA-binding protein (RBP) and is designated as tumorous testis (tut). In tut
mutant, spermatogonia fail to differentiate and over-amplify, a phenotype similar
to that in mei-P26 mutant. Mei-P26 is a TRIM-NHL tumor suppressor homolog
required for the differentiation of GSC lineage. We found that Tut binds
preferentially a long isoform of mei-P26 3'UTR, and is essential for the
translational repression of mei-P26 reporter. Bam and Bgcn are both RBPs that
have also been shown to repress mei-P26 expression. Our genetic analyses indicate
that tut, bam, or bgcn is required to repress mei-P26 and to promote the
differentiation of GSCs. Biochemically, we demonstrate that Tut, Bam, and Bgcn
can form a physical complex in which Bam holds Tut on its N-terminus and Bgcn on 
its C-terminus. Our in vivo and in vitro evidence illustrate that Tut acts with
Bam, Bgcn to accurately coordinate proliferation and differentiation in
Drosophila germline stem cell lineage.

PMCID: PMC4238977
PMID: 25412508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Dentomaxillofac Radiol. 2015;44(3):20140290. doi: 10.1259/dmfr.20140290. Epub
2014 Nov 20.

Detection of the genial spinal canal in atrophic mandibles with a CBCT: a cadaver
study.

Birkenfeld F(1), Becker M, Sasse M, Gassling V, Lucius R, Wiltfang J, Kern M.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Oral-Maxillofacial-Surgery, University Hospital
Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany.

OBJECTIVES: The use of a single midline implant to retain a complete mandibular
denture when more implants cannot be used is an incipient treatment modality.
However, in the mandibular symphysis, the genial spinal canal (GSC) is an
anatomical structure with neurovascular content that can be harmed during dental 
implant surgery. The purpose of the present study was to use CBCT of edentulous
atrophic cadaver mandibles and evaluate how often the simulated placement of a
single midline implant would contact the GSC if present.
METHODS: CBCT scans of 47 edentulous cadaver mandibles were performed. A digital 
simulation of the placement of a single midline implant (3.8<U+2009>×<U+2009>11.0<U+2009>mm) was
performed, and the implant-GSC contact was evaluated.
RESULTS: A GSC was detected in the CBCT scan of all atrophic mandibles. In 42
cases (89.4%), the single midline implant contacted the GSC. On average, the five
cases without GSC contact had a higher alveolar ridge (4.1<U+2009>mm) and a lower GSC
(0.79<U+2009>mm) than did the cases with GSC contact.
CONCLUSIONS: CBCT scans can adequately detect the GSC during pre-surgical
diagnostics. There is a high risk of implant-GSC contact during surgery of the
anterior mandible. However, the clinical relevance of such a contact is not known
yet, because none of the clinical studies evaluating a single midline implant has
reported any implant-GSC contact-related complications.

PMCID: PMC4614160
PMID: 25411711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2015 Feb;42(2):197-209. doi:
10.1007/s00259-014-2949-6. Epub 2014 Nov 20.

The diagnostic value of PET/CT imaging with the (68)Ga-labelled PSMA ligand
HBED-CC in the diagnosis of recurrent prostate cancer.

Afshar-Oromieh A(1), Avtzi E, Giesel FL, Holland-Letz T, Linhart HG, Eder M,
Eisenhut M, Boxler S, Hadaschik BA, Kratochwil C, Weichert W, Kopka K, Debus J,
Haberkorn U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, University Hospital of Heidelberg, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 400, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany, a.afshar@gmx.de.

PURPOSE: Since the introduction of positron emission tomography (PET) imaging
with (68)Ga-PSMA-HBED-CC (=(68)Ga-DKFZ-PSMA-11), this method has been regarded as
a significant step forward in the diagnosis of recurrent prostate cancer (PCa).
However, published data exist for small patient cohorts only. The aim of this
evaluation was to analyse the diagnostic value of (68)Ga-PSMA-ligand PET/CT in a 
large cohort and the influence of several possibly interacting variables.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective analysis in 319 patients who underwent
(68)Ga-PSMA-ligand PET/CT from 2011 to 2014. Potential influences of several
factors such as prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level and doubling time (DT),
Gleason score (GSC), androgen deprivation therapy (ADT), age and amount of
injected tracer were evaluated. Histological verification was performed in 42
patients after the (68)Ga-PSMA-ligand PET/CT. Tracer uptake was measured in 901
representative tumour lesions.
RESULTS: In 82.8% of the patients at least one lesion indicative of PCa was
detected. Tumor-detection was positively associated with PSA level and ADT. GSC
and PSA-DT were not associated with tumor-detection. The average maximum
standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of tumour lesions was 13.3<U+2009>±<U+2009>14.6 (0.7-122.5).
Amongst lesions investigated by histology, 30 were false-negative in 4 different 
patients, and all other lesions (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>416) were true-positive or true-negative. A 
lesion-based analysis of sensitivity, specificity, negative predictive value
(NPV) and positive predictive value (PPV) revealed values of 76.6%, 100%, 91.4%
and 100%. A patient-based analysis revealed a sensitivity of 88.1%. Of 116
patients available for follow-up, 50 received local therapy after
(68)Ga-PSMA-ligand PET/CT.
CONCLUSION: (68)Ga-PSMA-ligand PET/CT can detect recurrent PCa in a high number
of patients. In addition, the radiotracer is highly specific for PCa. Tumour
detection is positively associated with PSA and ADT. (68)Ga-PSMA-ligand PET/CT
can help delay systemic therapy of PCa.

PMCID: PMC4315487
PMID: 25411132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Scand J Trauma Resusc Emerg Med. 2014 Nov 19;22:68. doi:
10.1186/s13049-014-0068-9.

Performance of IMPACT, CRASH and Nijmegen models in predicting six month outcome 
of patients with severe or moderate TBI: an external validation study.

Majdan M(1,)(2), Lingsma HF(3), Nieboer D(4), Mauritz W(5), Rusnak M(6,)(7),
Steyerberg EW(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health, Trnava University, Faculty of Health Sciences and
Social Work, Univerzitne namestie 1, Trnava, 91701, Slovakia. mmajdan@igeh.org.
(2)International Neurotrauma Research organization (INRO), Moelkergasse 4/3,
Vienna, A-1080, Austria. mmajdan@igeh.org. (3)Department of Public Health,
Erasmus MC, Dr. Molewaterplein 50, Rotterdam, 3015 CE, the Netherlands.
h.lingsma@erasmusmc.nl. (4)Department of Public Health, Erasmus MC, Dr.
Molewaterplein 50, Rotterdam, 3015 CE, the Netherlands. d.nieboer@erasmusmc.nl.
(5)International Neurotrauma Research organization (INRO), Moelkergasse 4/3,
Vienna, A-1080, Austria. walter.mauritz@igeh.org. (6)Department of Public Health,
Trnava University, Faculty of Health Sciences and Social Work, Univerzitne
namestie 1, Trnava, 91701, Slovakia. rusnakm@igeh.org. (7)International
Neurotrauma Research organization (INRO), Moelkergasse 4/3, Vienna, A-1080,
Austria. rusnakm@igeh.org. (8)Department of Public Health, Erasmus MC, Dr.
Molewaterplein 50, Rotterdam, 3015 CE, the Netherlands.
E.Steyerberg@ErasmusMC.nl.

BACKGROUND: External validation on different TBI populations is important in
order to assess the generalizability of prognostic models to different settings. 
We aimed to externally validate recently developed models for prediction of six
month unfavourable outcome and six month mortality.
METHODS: The International Neurotrauma Research Organization - Prehospital
dataset (INRO-PH) was collected within an observational study between 2009-2012
in Austria and includes 778 patients with TBI of GCS<U+2009><<U+2009>= 12. Three sets of
prognostic models were externally validated: the IMPACT core and extended models,
CRASH basic models and the Nijmegen models developed by Jacobs et al - all for
prediction of six month unfavourable outcome and six month mortality. The
external validity of the models was assessed by discrimination (Area Under the
receiver operating characteristic Curve, AUC) and calibration (calibration
statistics and plots).
RESULTS: Median age in the validation cohort was 50 years and 44% had an
admission GSC motor score of 1-3. Six-month mortality was 27%. Mortality could
better be predicted (AUCs around 0.85) than unfavourable outcome (AUCs around
0.80). Calibration plots showed that the observed outcomes were systematically
better than was predicted for all models considered. The best performance was
noted for the original Nijmegen model, but refitting led to similar performance
for the IMPACT Extended, CRASH Basic, and Nijmegen models.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, all the prognostic models we validated in this study 
possess good discriminative ability for prediction of six month outcome in
patients with moderate or severe TBI but outcomes were systemically better than
predicted. After adjustment for this under prediction in locally adapted models, 
these may well be used for recent TBI patients.

PMCID: PMC4267426
PMID: 25406964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Appl Opt. 2014 Nov 1;53(31):7523-33. doi: 10.1364/AO.53.007523.

Method for validating cloud mask obtained from satellite measurements using
ground-based sky camera.

Letu H, Nagao TM, Nakajima TY, Matsumae Y.

Error propagation in Earth's atmospheric, oceanic, and land surface parameters of
the satellite products caused by misclassification of the cloud mask is a
critical issue for improving the accuracy of satellite products. Thus,
characterizing the accuracy of the cloud mask is important for investigating the 
influence of the cloud mask on satellite products. In this study, we proposed a
method for validating multiwavelength satellite data derived cloud masks using
ground-based sky camera (GSC) data. First, a cloud cover algorithm for GSC data
has been developed using sky index and bright index. Then, Moderate Resolution
Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) satellite data derived cloud masks by two
cloud-screening algorithms (i.e., MOD35 and CLAUDIA) were validated using the GSC
cloud mask. The results indicate that MOD35 is likely to classify ambiguous
pixels as "cloudy," whereas CLAUDIA is likely to classify them as "clear."
Furthermore, the influence of error propagations caused by misclassification of
the MOD35 and CLAUDIA cloud masks on MODIS derived reflectance, brightness
temperature, and normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI) in clear and
cloudy pixels was investigated using sky camera data. It shows that the influence
of the error propagation by the MOD35 cloud mask on the MODIS derived monthly
mean reflectance, brightness temperature, and NDVI for clear pixels is
significantly smaller than for the CLAUDIA cloud mask; the influence of the error
propagation by the CLAUDIA cloud mask on MODIS derived monthly mean cloud
products for cloudy pixels is significantly smaller than that by the MOD35 cloud 
mask.

PMID: 25402920  [PubMed]


207. J Proteome Res. 2015 Feb 6;14(2):778-86. doi: 10.1021/pr500810g. Epub 2014 Nov
25.

Systematic identification of single amino acid variants in glioma
stem-cell-derived chromosome 19 proteins.

Lichti CF(1), Mostovenko E, Wadsworth PA, Lynch GC, Pettitt BM, Sulman EP, Wang
Q, Lang FF, Rezeli M, Marko-Varga G, Végvári Á, Nilsson CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology and Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, UTMB Cancer Center, University of Texas Medical Branch , Galveston,
Texas 77555, United States.

Novel proteoforms with single amino acid variations represent proteins that often
have altered biological functions but are less explored in the human proteome. We
have developed an approach, searching high quality shotgun proteomic data against
an extended protein database, to identify expressed mutant proteoforms in glioma 
stem cell (GSC) lines. The systematic search of MS/MS spectra using PEAKS 7.0 as 
the search engine has recognized 17 chromosome 19 proteins in GSCs with altered
amino acid sequences. The results were further verified by manual spectral
examination, validating 19 proteoforms. One of the novel findings, a mutant form 
of branched-chain aminotransferase 2 (p.Thr186Arg), was verified at the
transcript level and by targeted proteomics in several glioma stem cell lines.
The structure of this proteoform was examined by molecular modeling in order to
estimate conformational changes due to mutation that might lead to functional
modifications potentially linked to glioma. Based on our initial findings, we
believe that our approach presented could contribute to construct a more complete
map of the human functional proteome.

PMCID: PMC4324435
PMID: 25399873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Neurosurg. 2015 Feb;122(2):324-30. doi: 10.3171/2014.9.JNS132253. Epub 2014 Nov
14.

Stem cell signature in glioblastoma: therapeutic development for a moving target.

Nakano I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, James Comprehensive Cancer Center, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.

Tumor heterogeneity of adult high-grade glioma (HGG) is recognized in 3 major
subtypes based on core gene signatures. However, the molecular signatures and
clinical implications of glioma stem cells (GSCs) in individual HGG subtypes
remain poorly characterized. Recently genome-wide transcriptional analysis
identified two mutually exclusive GSC subtypes with distinct dysregulated
signaling and metabolic pathways. Analysis of genetic profiles and phenotypic
assays distinguished proneural (PN) from mesenchymal (MES) GSCs and revealed a
striking correlation with the corresponding PN or MES HGGs. Similar to HGGs with 
a MES signature, MES GSCs display more aggressive phenotypes both in vitro and in
vivo. Furthermore, MES GSCs are markedly resistant to radiation as compared with 
PN GSCs, consistent with the relative radiation resistance of MES GBM compared
with other subtypes. A systems biology approach has identified a set of
transcription factors as the master regulators for the MES signature. Metabolic
reprogramming in MES GSCs has also been noticed with the prominent activation of 
the glycolytic pathway, comprising aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) family genes.
This review summarizes recent progress in the characterization of the molecular
signature in distinct HGG and GSC subtypes and plasticity between different GSC
subtypes as well as between GSCs and non-GSCs in HGG tumors. Clinical
implications of the translational GSC research are also discussed.

PMID: 25397368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 12;9(11):e112582. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0112582.
eCollection 2014.

Investigation of adhesion and mechanical properties of human glioma cells by
single cell force spectroscopy and atomic force microscopy.

Andolfi L(1), Bourkoula E(2), Migliorini E(3), Palma A(2), Pucer A(2), Skrap
M(2), Scoles G(2), Beltrami AP(2), Cesselli D(2), Lazzarino M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Officina dei Materiali-National Research Council, Trieste, Italy.
(2)Department of Medical and Biological Sciences, University of Udine, Udine,
Italy. (3)Département de Chimie Moléculaire, Ingénierie et Interactions Bio
Moléculaires, Université Joseph Fourier, Grenoble, France. (4)Istituto Officina
dei Materiali-National Research Council, Trieste, Italy; Cluster in Biomedicine, 
Trieste, Italy.

Active cell migration and invasion is a peculiar feature of glioma that makes
this tumor able to rapidly infiltrate into the surrounding brain tissue. In our
recent work, we identified a novel class of glioma-associated-stem cells (defined
as GASC for high-grade glioma--HG--and Gasc for low-grade glioma--LG) that,
although not tumorigenic, act supporting the biological aggressiveness of
glioma-initiating stem cells (defined as GSC for HG and Gsc for LG) favoring also
their motility. Migrating cancer cells undergo considerable molecular and
cellular changes by remodeling their cytoskeleton and cell interactions with
surrounding environment. To get a better understanding about the role of the
glioma-associated-stem cells in tumor progression, cell deformability and
interactions between glioma-initiating stem cells and glioma-associated-stem
cells were investigated. Adhesion of HG/LG-cancer cells on
HG/LG-glioma-associated stem cells was studied by time-lapse microscopy, while
cell deformability and cell-cell adhesion strengths were quantified by
indentation measurements by atomic force microscopy and single cell force
spectroscopy. Our results demonstrate that for both HG and LG glioma,
cancer-initiating-stem cells are softer than glioma-associated-stem cells, in
agreement with their neoplastic features. The adhesion strength of GSC on GASC
appears to be significantly lower than that observed for Gsc on Gasc. Whereas,
GSC spread and firmly adhere on Gasc with an adhesion strength increased as
compared to that obtained on GASC. These findings highlight that the grade of
glioma-associated-stem cells plays an important role in modulating cancer cell
adhesion, which could affect glioma cell migration, invasion and thus cancer
aggressiveness. Moreover this work provides evidence about the importance of
investigating cell adhesion and elasticity for new developments in disease
diagnostics and therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC4229222
PMID: 25390644  [PubMed - in process]


210. Tumour Biol. 2015 Mar;36(3):1943-53. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2800-5. Epub 2014
Nov 12.

Identification of OLIG2 as the most specific glioblastoma stem cell marker
starting from comparative analysis of data from similar DNA chip microarray
platforms.

Trépant AL(1), Bouchart C, Rorive S, Sauvage S, Decaestecker C, Demetter P,
Salmon I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Erasme University Hospital, Université Libre de
Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium.

Despite advances in surgical and adjuvant treatments, overall survival of
glioblastoma (GBM) patients remains poor. The cancer stem cell concept suggests
that a rare stem cell population, called glioma stem cells (GSCs), has high
ability to self-renewal leading to recurrence in GBM. The identification of
specific markers of GSCs would provide a powerful tool to detect and to
characterise them in order to develop targeted therapies. We carried out a
comparative analysis based on the identification of inter-study concordances to
identify the genes that exhibit at best differential levels of expression between
GSC-enriched cell cultures and differentiated tumour cell cultures from
independent studies using DNA chip microarray technologies. We finally studied
the protein expression of the marker we considered the most specific by
immunohistochemistry and semi-quantitative analysis on a retrospective series of 
18 GBMs. Of the selected studies, 32 genes were retained. Among them, eight genes
were identified to be overexpressed in GSC-enriched cultures compared to
differentiated tumour cell cultures. Finally, among the eight genes,
oligodendrocyte lineage transcription factor 2 (OLIG2) was characterised by the
most different expression level in the "GSC model" compared to the
"differentiated tumour cells model". Our approach suggests that OLIG2 is the most
specific GSC marker; additional investigations with careful considerations about 
methodology and strategies of validation are, however, mandatory.

PMID: 25384509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Curr Pharm Biotechnol. 2014;15(9):839-46.

Targeted delivery of tumor suppressor microRNA-1 by transferrin-conjugated
lipopolyplex nanoparticles to patient-derived glioblastoma stem cells.

Wang X, Huang X, Yang Z, Gallego-Perez D, Ma J, Zhao X, Xie J, Nakano I, Lee
LJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)1012 Smith Lab, 174 West 18th Ave. The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH
43210, USA. lee.31@osu.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Among heterogeneous glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) cells, glioblastoma 
stem cells (GSCs) is a subpopulation having a critical role in tumor initiation
and therapy resistance. Thus targeting GSCs would be an essential step to
completely eradicate this lethal disease. MicroRNA-1 (miR-1) expression is
deregulated in GBM patients and restoration of miR-1 by viral-vector in GBM cells
has been demonstrated to inhibit tumor initiation and attenuate cell migration.
Here, we show that a transferrin-targeting non-invasive nanoparticle delivery
system (Tf-NP) can efficiently deliver miR-1 to GBM patient-derived GSC-enriched 
sphere cultures (GBM spheres).
METHODS: Delivery efficiency of the transferrin- targeting non-invasive
nanoparticle was investigated by flow cytometry and further confirmed by confocal
microscopy. The levels of miR-1 and its target molecules in GBM spheres were
measured by qRT-PCR and immunoblotting. Migration capacity of Tf-NP-miR-1 treated
GBM spheres were evaluated by transwell migration assay.
RESULTS: Tf-NPmiR- 1 treatment resulted in an over 200-fold increase of mature
miR-1 compared to free miR-1 and Tf-NP-miR negative control (Tf-NP-miR-NC).
Transferrin-mediated NP delivery resulted in a 3-fold higher delivery efficiency 
compared to NP without transferrin modification. Tf-NP-miR-1 treatment on GBM
spheres significantly inhibited migration of GBM spheres by 30-50% with
associated decline of MET and EGFR expression. Our data supported that Tf-NP
could be used as an efficient and effective delivery system which has high
potential to benefit the development of miR-based therapeutics for GBM treatment.

PMID: 25374033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 3;9(11):e111783. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111783.
eCollection 2014.

Identification of molecular pathways facilitating glioma cell invasion in situ.

Nevo I(1), Woolard K(1), Cam M(1), Li A(1), Webster JD(2), Kotliarov Y(1), Kim
HS(1), Ahn S(1), Walling J(1), Kotliarova S(1), Belova G(1), Song H(1), Bailey
R(1), Zhang W(1), Fine HA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Neuro-Oncology Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institute of
Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland, United States of America. (2)Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Genetics,
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland,
United States of America.

Gliomas are mostly incurable secondary to their diffuse infiltrative nature.
Thus, specific therapeutic targeting of invasive glioma cells is an attractive
concept. As cells exit the tumor mass and infiltrate brain parenchyma, they
closely interact with a changing micro-environmental landscape that sustains
tumor cell invasion. In this study, we used a unique microarray profiling
approach on a human glioma stem cell (GSC) xenograft model to explore gene
expression changes in situ in Invading Glioma Cells (IGCs) compared to tumor
core, as well as changes in host cells residing within the infiltrated
microenvironment relative to the unaffected cortex. IGCs were found to have
reduced expression of genes within the extracellular matrix compartment, and
genes involved in cell adhesion, cell polarity and epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT) processes. The infiltrated microenvironment showed activation of
wound repair and tissue remodeling networks. We confirmed by protein analysis the
downregulation of EMT and polarity related genes such as CD44 and PARD3 in IGCs, 
and EFNB3, a tissue-remodeling agent enriched at the infiltrated
microenvironment. OLIG2, a proliferation regulator and glioma progenitor cell
marker upregulated in IGCs was found to function in enhancing migration and
stemness of GSCs. Overall, our results unveiled a more comprehensive picture of
the complex and dynamic cell autonomous and tumor-host interactive pathways of
glioma invasion than has been previously demonstrated. This suggests targeting of
multiple pathways at the junction of invading tumor and microenvironment as a
viable option for glioma therapy.

PMCID: PMC4218815
PMID: 25365423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. J Neurosurg. 2015 Jan;122(1):69-77. doi: 10.3171/2014.9.JNS132373.

Myelin-forming cell-specific cadherin-19 is a marker for minimally infiltrative
glioblastoma stem-like cells.

Zorniak M(1), Clark PA, Kuo JS.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Training Program, 

OBJECT: Glioblastoma stem-like cells (GSCs) exhibit stem-like properties, are
highly efficient at forming tumor xenografts, and are resistant to many current
therapies. Current molecular identifiers of GSCs are scarce and controversial.
The authors describe differential cell-surface gene expression profiling to
identify GSC-specific markers.
METHODS: Independent human GSC lines were isolated and maintained in standard
neural stem cell (NSC) media and were validated for self-renewal, multipotent
differentiation, and tumor initiation properties. Candidate upregulated
GSCspecific plasma membrane markers were identified through differential
Affymetrix U133 Plus 2.0 Array gene expression profiling of GSCs, human NSCs
(hNSCs), normal brain tissue, and primary/recurrent glioblastoma multiforme
samples. Results were validated by using comparative quantitative reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction and Western blot analysis of GSCs, hNSCs,
normal human astrocytes, U87 glioma cell line, and patient-matched serum-cultured
glioblastoma multiforme samples.
RESULTS: A candidate GSC-specific signature of 19 upregulated known and novel
plasma membrane-associated genes was identified. Preferential upregulation of
these plasma membrane-linked genes was validated by quantitative polymerase chain
reaction. Cadherin-19 (CDH19) protein expression was enhanced in minimally
infiltrative GSC lines.
CONCLUSIONS: Gene expression profiling of GSCs has shown CDH19 to be an exciting 
new target for drug development and study of GBM tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC4337891
PMID: 25361488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Development. 2014 Dec;141(23):4479-88. doi: 10.1242/dev.116467. Epub 2014 Oct 30.

Adipocyte amino acid sensing controls adult germline stem cell number via the
amino acid response pathway and independently of Target of Rapamycin signaling in
Drosophila.

Armstrong AR(1), Laws KM(1), Drummond-Barbosa D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bloomberg School of Public
Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA Division of
Reproductive Biology, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, 
MD 21205, USA Division of Reproductive Biology, Bloomberg School of Public
Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA Department of
Environmental Health Sciences, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA dbarbosa@jhu.edu.

How adipocytes contribute to the physiological control of stem cells is a
critical question towards understanding the link between obesity and multiple
diseases, including cancers. Previous studies have revealed that adult stem cells
are influenced by whole-body physiology through multiple diet-dependent factors. 
For example, nutrient-dependent pathways acting within the Drosophila ovary
control the number and proliferation of germline stem cells (GSCs). The potential
role of nutrient sensing by adipocytes in modulating stem cells in other organs, 
however, remains largely unexplored. Here, we report that amino acid sensing by
adult adipocytes specifically modulates the maintenance of GSCs through a Target 
of Rapamycin-independent mechanism. Instead, reduced amino acid levels and the
consequent increase in uncoupled tRNAs trigger activation of the GCN2-dependent
amino acid response pathway within adipocytes, causing increased rates of GSC
loss. These studies reveal a new step in adipocyte-stem cell crosstalk.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4302921
PMID: 25359724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Jan;43(Database issue):D1099-106. doi:
10.1093/nar/gku950. Epub 2014 Oct 27.

The Genomes OnLine Database (GOLD) v.5: a metadata management system based on a
four level (meta)genome project classification.

Reddy TB(1), Thomas AD(2), Stamatis D(2), Bertsch J(2), Isbandi M(2), Jansson
J(2), Mallajosyula J(2), Pagani I(2), Lobos EA(2), Kyrpides NC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Prokaryotic Super Program, DOE Joint Genome Institute, Walnut Creek, CA 94598,
USA tbreddy@lbl.gov. (2)Prokaryotic Super Program, DOE Joint Genome Institute,
Walnut Creek, CA 94598, USA. (3)Prokaryotic Super Program, DOE Joint Genome
Institute, Walnut Creek, CA 94598, USA Department of Biological Sciences, Faculty
of Science, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.

The Genomes OnLine Database (GOLD; http://www.genomesonline.org) is a
comprehensive online resource to catalog and monitor genetic studies worldwide.
GOLD provides up-to-date status on complete and ongoing sequencing projects along
with a broad array of curated metadata. Here we report version 5 (v.5) of the
database. The newly designed database schema and web user interface supports
several new features including the implementation of a four level (meta)genome
project classification system and a simplified intuitive web interface to access 
reports and launch search tools. The database currently hosts information for
about 19,200 studies, 56,000 Biosamples, 56,000 sequencing projects and 39,400
analysis projects. More than just a catalog of worldwide genome projects, GOLD is
a manually curated, quality-controlled metadata warehouse. The problems
encountered in integrating disparate and varying quality data into GOLD are
briefly highlighted. GOLD fully supports and follows the Genomic Standards
Consortium (GSC) Minimum Information standards.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic Acids Research 2014.
This work is written by (a) US Government employee(s) and is in the public domain
in the US.

PMCID: PMC4384021
PMID: 25348402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Neurooncol. 2015 Jan;121(1):19-29. doi: 10.1007/s11060-014-1602-3. Epub 2014
Oct 26.

Tight regulation between cell survival and programmed cell death in GBM stem-like
cells by EGFR/GSK3b/PP2A signaling.

Gürsel DB(1), Banu MA, Berry N, Marongiu R, Burkhardt JK, Kobylarz K, Kaplitt MG,
Rafii S, Boockvar JA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Translational Brain Tumor and Stem Cell Research, Department of
Neurological Surgery, Weill Cornell Brain Tumor Center, Weill Cornell Medical
College, 525 East 68th Street, Box 99, New York, NY, 10021, USA.

Malignant gliomas represent one of the most aggressive forms of cancer,
displaying high mortality rates and limited treatment options. Specific
subpopulations of cells residing in the tumor niche with stem-like
characteristics have been postulated to initiate and maintain neoplasticity while
resisting conventional therapies. The study presented here aims to define the
role of glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta (GSK3b) in patient-derived glioblastoma
(GBM) stem-like cell (GSC) proliferation, apoptosis and invasion. To evaluate the
potential role of GSK3b in GBM, protein profiles from 68 GBM patients and 20
normal brain samples were analyzed for EGFR-mediated PI3kinase/Akt and GSK3b
signaling molecules including protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A). To better understand
the function of GSK3b in GBM, GSCs were isolated from GBM patient samples.
Blocking GSK3b phosphorylation at Serine 9 attenuated cell proliferation while
concomitantly stimulating apoptosis through activation of Caspase-3 in
patient-derived GSCs. Increasing GSK3b protein content resulted in the inhibition
of cell proliferation, colony formation and stimulated programmed cell death.
Depleting GSK3b in GSCs down regulated PP2A. Furthermore, knocking down PP2A or
blocking its activity by okadaic acid inactivated GSK3b by increasing GSK3b
phosphorylation at Serine 9. Our data suggests that GSK3b may function as a
regulator of apoptosis and tumorigenesis in GSCs. Therapeutic approaches
targeting GSK3b in glioblastoma stem-like cells may be a useful addition to our
current therapeutic armamentarium.

PMID: 25344882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 24;9(10):e109695. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0109695.
eCollection 2014.

Goosecoid promotes the metastasis of hepatocellular carcinoma by modulating the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Xue TC(1), Ge NL(1), Zhang L(1), Cui JF(1), Chen RX(1), You Y(1), Ye SL(1), Ren
ZG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Liver Cancer Institute, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, P.R.
China; Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion (Fudan University),
Ministry of Education, Shanghai, P.R. China.

The homeobox gene, goosecoid (GSC), is a transcription factor that participates
in cell migration during embryonic development. Because cell migration during
development has characteristics similar to cell invasion during metastasis, we
evaluated the potential role of GSC in the metastasis of hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC). GSC expression in HCC cell lines and tissues was evaluated, and its
effects on the migration potential of HCC cells were determined by GSC knock-down
and overexpression methods. In addition, the prognostic role of GSC expression in
the metastasis of cancer cells in HCC patients was determined. Our data showed
that GSC was highly expressed in several HCC cell lines, particularly in a highly
metastatic HCC cell line. Overexpression of GSC promoted cell migration and
invasion of HCC cells in vitro. Gain-of-function induced the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition but not collective cell migration, whereas
loss-of-function induced the reverse change. High-level expression of GSC
correlated closely with poor survival and lung metastasis in HCC patients; lung
metastases showed more upregulated GSC expression than the primary tumor. We
conclude that GSC promotes metastasis of HCC potentially through initiating the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition. GSC is also a prognostic factor for poor
survival and metastasis of HCC, which suggests its potential as a therapeutic
target for metastatic HCC.

PMCID: PMC4208742
PMID: 25343336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Int J Mol Sci. 2014 Oct 21;15(10):19134-46. doi: 10.3390/ijms151019134.

Genetic analysis of 430 Chinese Cynodon dactylon accessions using
sequence-related amplified polymorphism markers.

Huang C(1), Liu G(2), Bai C(3), Wang W(4).

Author information: 
(1)Tropical Crops Genetic Resources Institute, Chinese Academy of Tropical
Agricultural Sciences, Key Laboratory of Crop Gene Resources and Germplasm
Enhancement in Southern China, Ministry of Agriculture, Danzhou 571737, China.
huangchunqiong44@163.com. (2)Tropical Crops Genetic Resources Institute, Chinese 
Academy of Tropical Agricultural Sciences, Key Laboratory of Crop Gene Resources 
and Germplasm Enhancement in Southern China, Ministry of Agriculture, Danzhou
571737, China. liuguodao2008@163.com. (3)Tropical Crops Genetic Resources
Institute, Chinese Academy of Tropical Agricultural Sciences, Key Laboratory of
Crop Gene Resources and Germplasm Enhancement in Southern China, Ministry of
Agriculture, Danzhou 571737, China. baichangjun@126.com. (4)Tropical Crops
Genetic Resources Institute, Chinese Academy of Tropical Agricultural Sciences,
Key Laboratory of Crop Gene Resources and Germplasm Enhancement in Southern
China, Ministry of Agriculture, Danzhou 571737, China. wwqnmg@163.com.

Although Cynodon dactylon (C. dactylon) is widely distributed in China,
information on its genetic diversity within the germplasm pool is limited. The
objective of this study was to reveal the genetic variation and relationships of 
430 C. dactylon accessions collected from 22 Chinese provinces using
sequence-related amplified polymorphism (SRAP) markers. Fifteen primer pairs were
used to amplify specific C. dactylon genomic sequences. A total of 481 SRAP
fragments were generated, with fragment sizes ranging from 260-1800 base pairs
(bp). Genetic similarity coefficients (GSC) among the 430 accessions averaged
0.72 and ranged from 0.53-0.96. Cluster analysis conducted by two methods, namely
the unweighted pair-group method with arithmetic averages (UPGMA) and principle
coordinate analysis (PCoA), separated the accessions into eight distinct groups. 
Our findings verify that Chinese C. dactylon germplasms have rich genetic
diversity, which is an excellent basis for C. dactylon breeding for new
cultivars.

PMCID: PMC4227265
PMID: 25338051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Adv Gerontol. 2014;27(2):348-52.

[The opportunity to use combined stem cells transplantation for haemopoesis
activation in the old and mature laboratory animals under the conditions of
ionizing radiation].

[Article in Russian]

Grebnev DIu, Maklakova IIu, Iastrebov AP.

The objective of this work was to study the influence of combined transplantation
of stem cells (multypotent mesenchimal stromal and haemopoetic stem cells) on the
haemopoesis of old and mature laboratory animals under the condition of ionizing 
radiation. The result of the experiment shows that under physiological conditions
the combined transplantation brings the erithropoesis activation, under the
ionizing radiation conditions it brings the erythroid and granulocytopoesis
activation. Moreover the combined MMSC and HSC transplantation gives
cytoprotective action on the myeloid tissue due to decrease of cyto genically
changed cells in the mature animals under the condition of ionizing radiation,
but in the old animals this effect can be seen even under physiological
condition. Combined transplantation of MMSC and GSC can be used in the mature and
old laboratory animals under the conditions of ionising radiation for the
haemopoesis activation.

PMID: 25306670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Apoptosis. 2014 Dec;19(12):1736-54. doi: 10.1007/s10495-014-1040-x.

Radiation-induced glioblastoma signaling cascade regulates viability, apoptosis
and differentiation of neural stem cells (NSC).

Ivanov VN(1), Hei TK.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Radiological Research, Department of Radiation Oncology, College of
Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, 630 West 168th Street, New York,
NY, 10032, USA, vni3@columbia.edu.

Ionizing radiation alone or in combination with chemotherapy is the main
treatment modality for brain tumors including glioblastoma. Adult neurons and
astrocytes demonstrate substantial radioresistance; in contrast, human neural
stem cells (NSC) are highly sensitive to radiation via induction of apoptosis.
Irradiation of tumor cells has the potential risk of affecting the viability and 
function of NSC. In this study, we have evaluated the effects of irradiated
glioblastoma cells on viability, proliferation and differentiation potential of
non-irradiated (bystander) NSC through radiation-induced signaling cascades.
Using media transfer experiments, we demonstrated significant effects of the
U87MG glioblastoma secretome after gamma-irradiation on apoptosis in
non-irradiated NSC. Addition of anti-TRAIL antibody to the transferred media
partially suppressed apoptosis in NSC. Furthermore, we observed a dramatic
increase in the production and secretion of IL8, TGFß1 and IL6 by irradiated
glioblastoma cells, which could promote glioblastoma cell survival and modify the
effects of death factors in bystander NSC. While differentiation of NSC into
neurons and astrocytes occurred efficiently with the corresponding
differentiation media, pretreatment of NSC for 8 h with medium from irradiated
glioblastoma cells selectively suppressed the differentiation of NSC into
neurons, but not into astrocytes. Exogenous IL8 and TGFß1 increased NSC/NPC
survival, but also suppressed neuronal differentiation. On the other hand, IL6
was known to positively affect survival and differentiation of astrocyte
progenitors. We established a U87MG neurosphere culture that was substantially
enriched by SOX2(+) and CD133(+) glioma stem-like cells (GSC). Gamma-irradiation 
up-regulated apoptotic death in GSC via the FasL/Fas pathway. Media transfer
experiments from irradiated GSC to non-targeted NSC again demonstrated induction 
of apoptosis and suppression of neuronal differentiation of NSC. In summary,
intercellular communication between glioblastoma cells and bystander NSC/NPC
could be involved in the amplification of cancer pathology in the brain.

PMCID: PMC4378234
PMID: 25273222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Brain Inj. 2014;28(13-14):1744-7. doi: 10.3109/02699052.2014.947621. Epub 2014
Sep 29.

A Spanish validation of the Coma Recovery Scale-Revised (CRS-R).

Tamashiro M(1), Rivas ME, Ron M, Salierno F, Dalera M, Olmos L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical Therapy and.

Comment in
    Brain Inj. 2015;29(7-8):1002-3.

RESEARCH DESIGN: Analysis of inter-rater reliability and concurrent validity.
OBJECTIVE: To determine measurement properties of a Spanish version of The Coma
Recovery Scale-Revised (CRS-R).
METHODS AND PROCEDURES: A sample of 35 in-patients with severe acquired brain
injury. To test concurrent validity of the translated scale, the Glasgow Coma
Scale (GSC) and Disability Rating Scale (DRS) were also administered. Two experts
in the field were recruited to assess inter-rater agreement.
RESULTS: Inter-rater reliability was good for total CRS-R scores (Cronbach
a<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.973, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001). Sub-scale analysis showed moderate-to-high inter-rater
agreement. Total CRS-R scores correlated significantly (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) with total GCS 
(r<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.74) and DRS (r<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.54) scores, indicating acceptable concurrent validity.
CONCLUSIONS: The Spanish version of CRS-R can be administered reliably by trained
and experienced examiners. CRS-R appears capable of differentiating patients in
Emergence from Minimally Conscious State (EMCS) or in Minimally Conscious State
(MCS) from those in a Vegetative State (VS).

PMID: 25264811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Am J Surg. 2015 Jun;209(6):1063-8. doi: 10.1016/j.amjsurg.2014.06.021. Epub 2014 
Aug 7.

Gastric stump carcinoma after distal subtotal gastrectomy for early gastric
cancer: experience of 541 patients with long-term follow-up.

Morgagni P(1), Gardini A(2), Marrelli D(3), Vittimberga G(2), Marchet A(4), de
Manzoni G(5), Di Cosmo MA(5), Rossi GM(4), Garcea D(2), Roviello F(3); Italian
Research Group for Gastric Cancer.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Morgagni-Pierantoni Hospital, via Carlo
Forlanini 34, 47121 Forlì, Italy. Electronic address: p.morgagni@ausl.fo.it.
(2)Department of General Surgery, Morgagni-Pierantoni Hospital, via Carlo
Forlanini 34, 47121 Forlì, Italy. (3)Surgical Oncology Unit, University of Siena,
Via Banchi di Sotto 55, 53100 Siena, Italy. (4)Second Surgical Clinic, Padua
University, via 8 Febbraio 2, 35122 Padua, Italy. (5)First Surgical Clinic,
Verona University, via dell'Artigliere 19, 37129 Verona, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Gastric stump carcinoma (GSC) has been studied after primary
gastrectomy for benign disease but few studies have evaluated its correlation
with gastric cancer.
PATIENTS: We assessed 541 patients submitted to subtotal gastrectomy for early
gastric cancer at least 15 years ago.
RESULTS: GSC was diagnosed in 16 (2.9%) patients, giving a 4% cumulative risk of 
GSC 20 years after surgery. Diagnosis was made within 5 years of surgery in 10
patients and after 8 years in 6 cases. GSC occurred in 13/470 (2.8%) patients
submitted to Billroth 2 reconstruction, 2/30 (6.7%) patients who underwent
Billroth 1, and 1/41 (2.4%) patients after Roux-en-Y reconstruction. Significant 
risk factors observed for GSC were histologic type and sex. Other synchronous or 
metachronous extragastric tumors were registered in 56 (11.2%) patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The risk of GSC was low, even 20 years after subtotal gastrectomy
for early gastric cancer. Lauren intestinal histotype and male sex were
frequently associated with GSC. No correlation was observed between GSC and
reconstruction technique or multifocality. Clinically speaking, GSC could be
considered a subset of gastric cancer.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25218580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Neurooncol. 2015 Jan;121(1):91-100. doi: 10.1007/s11060-014-1612-1. Epub 2014
Sep 12.

Single agent efficacy of the VEGFR kinase inhibitor axitinib in preclinical
models of glioblastoma.

Lu L(1), Saha D, Martuza RL, Rabkin SD, Wakimoto H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, 02114, USA.

Anti-angiogenic therapy is a promising therapeutic strategy for the highly
vascular and malignant brain tumor, glioblastoma (GBM), although current clinical
trials have failed to demonstrate an extension in overall survival. The small
molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor axitinib that targets vascular endothelial
growth factor receptor, potently inhibits angiogenesis and has single-agent
clinical activity in non-small cell lung, thyroid, and advanced renal cell
cancer. Here we show that axitinib exerts direct cytotoxic activity against a
number of patient-derived GBM stem cell (GSCs) and an endothelial cell line, and 
inhibits endothelial tube formation in vitro. Axitinib treatment of mice bearing 
hypervascular intracranial tumors generated from human U87 glioma cells, MGG4
GSCs and mouse 005 GSCs significantly extended survival that was associated with 
decreases in tumor-associated vascularity. We thus show for the first time the
anti-angiogenic effect and survival prolongation provided by systemic single
agent treatment with axitinib in preclinical orthotopic GBM models including
clinically relevant GSC models. These results support further investigation of
axitinib as an anti-angiogenic agent for GBM.

PMCID: PMC4751887
PMID: 25213669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Cell Signal. 2014 Dec;26(12):2896-902. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2014.08.027. Epub
2014 Sep 6.

Neurotensin signaling regulates stem-like traits of glioblastoma stem cells
through activation of IL-8/CXCR1/STAT3 pathway.

Zhou J(1), Yi L(1), Ouyang Q(1), Xu L(1), Cui H(2), Xu M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Daping Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing 400042, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Silkworm Genome
Biology, Institute of Sericulture and Systems Biology, Southwest University,
Chongqing 400716, China. Electronic address: hcui@swu.edu.cn. (3)Department of
Neurosurgery, Daping Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing
400042, China. Electronic address: dr_minhuixu@126.com.

We recently found that neurotensin (NTS) and its primary receptor NTSR1 play a
crucial role in glioblastoma cell proliferation and invasion. However, very
little is known regarding the functional role of NTS/NTSR1 signaling in
glioblastoma stem cells (GSCs). Here, we showed that NTSR1 is highly expressed in
GSCs than its non-GSC counterparts. Pharmacological blockade with SR48692 or
lentivirus mediated knockdown of NTSR1 efficiently reduced the sphere-forming
ability and expression of stem cell markers such as nestin and Sox2 in GSCs
isolated from glioblastoma cell line and glioblastoma tissues. Conversely,
treated GSCs with NTS led to increase of tumor sphere formation. Mechanistically,
we demonstrated that EGFR-dependent enhancement of IL-8 secretion is responsible 
for the effect of NTS signaling in the regulation of stem-like traits. Finally,
we showed that NTSR1 or IL-8 knockdown decreased the phosphorylation of
transcriptional factor STAT3 at Tyr705, which is a major transcription factor
implicated in the regulation of GSC stem-like traits. Although both CXCR1 and
CXCR2 inhibition reduced the tumor sphere formation, we found that CXCR1, but not
CXCR2, is primarily responsible for STAT3 phosphorylation. Taken together, our
findings suggest that NTS/IL-8/CXCR1/STAT3 signaling is crucial for the
maintenance of stem-like traits in GSCs and provides a potential therapeutic
target for glioblastoma therapy.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25200966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Immunother Cancer. 2014 Aug 19;2:25. doi: 10.1186/2051-1426-2-25. eCollection
2014.

Multiple chimeric antigen receptors successfully target chondroitin sulfate
proteoglycan 4 in several different cancer histologies and cancer stem cells.

Beard RE(1), Zheng Z(1), Lagisetty KH(1), Burns WR(1), Tran E(1), Hewitt SM(2),
Abate-Daga D(1), Rosati SF(1), Fine HA(3), Ferrone S(4), Rosenberg SA(1), Morgan 
RA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Surgery Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, 10
Center Drive, Building 10 Hatfield CRC, Rm 3-5930, 20892-1201 Bethesda, MD, USA. 
(2)Laboratory of Pathology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, 10 Center Drive, Building 10 Hatfield CRC, MSC 4605, 20892-1201
Bethesda, MD, USA. (3)Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, New York
University Langone Medical Center, New York, New York, USA. (4)Department of
Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, 55 Fruit Street, Boston, MA 02114, USA. 
(5)Surgery Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, 10
Center Drive, Building 10 Hatfield CRC, Rm 3-5930, 20892-1201 Bethesda, MD, USA ;
Current address: Bluebird bio, 150 Second St, Cambridge, MA 02141, USA.

BACKGROUND: The development of immunotherapy has led to significant progress in
the treatment of metastatic cancer, including the development of genetic
engineering technologies that redirect lymphocytes to recognize and target a wide
variety of tumor antigens. Chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) are hybrid proteins 
combining antibody recognition domains linked to T cell signaling elements.
Clinical trials of CAR-transduced peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL) have induced
remission of both solid organ and hematologic malignancies. Chondroitin sulfate
proteoglycan 4 (CSPG4) is a promising target antigen that is overexpressed in
multiple cancer histologies including melanoma, triple-negative breast cancer,
glioblastoma, mesothelioma and sarcoma.
METHODS: CSPG4 expression in cancer cell lines was assayed using flow cytometry
(FACS) and reverse-transcription PCR (RT-PCR). Immunohistochemistry was utilized 
to assay resected melanomas and normal human tissues (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>30) for CSPG4
expression and a reverse-phase protein array comprising 94 normal tissue samples 
was also interrogated for CSPG4 expression. CARs were successfully constructed
from multiple murine antibodies (225.28S, TP41.2, 149.53) using second generation
(CD28.CD3<U+03B6>) signaling domains. CAR sequences were cloned into a gamma-retroviral 
vector with subsequent successful production of retroviral supernatant and PBL
transduction. CAR efficacy was assayed by cytokine release and cytolysis
following coculture with target cell lines. Additionally, glioblastoma stem cells
were generated from resected human tumors, and CSPG4 expression was determined by
RT-PCR and FACS.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemistry demonstrated prominent CSPG4 expression in melanoma
tumors, but failed to demonstrate expression in any of the 30 normal human
tissues studied. Two of 94 normal tissue protein lysates were positive by protein
array. CAR constructs demonstrated cytokine secretion and cytolytic function
after co-culture with tumor cell lines from multiple different histologies,
including melanoma, breast cancer, mesothelioma, glioblastoma and osteosarcoma.
Furthermore, we report for the first time that CSPG4 is expressed on glioblastoma
cancer stem cells (GSC) and demonstrate that anti-CSPG4 CAR-transduced T cells
recognize and kill these GSC.
CONCLUSIONS: The functionality of multiple different CARs, with the widespread
expression of CSPG4 on multiple malignancies, suggests that CSPG4 may be an
attractive candidate tumor antigen for CAR-based immunotherapies using
appropriate technology to limit possible off-tumor toxicity.

PMCID: PMC4155770
PMID: 25197555  [PubMed]


226. Stand Genomic Sci. 2014 Feb 15;9(3):599-601. doi: 10.4056/sigs.5559680.
eCollection 2014.

Genomic standards consortium projects.

Field D(1), Sterk P(2), Kottmann R(3), De Smet JW(4), Amaral-Zettler L(5),
Cochrane G(6), Cole JR(7), Davies N(8), Dawyndt P(4), Garrity GM(9), Gilbert
JA(10), Glöckner FO(3), Hirschman L(11), Klenk HP(12), Knight R(13), Kyrpides
N(14), Meyer F(15), Karsch-Mizrachi I(16), Morrison N(17), Robbins R(18), San Gil
I(19), Sansone S(2), Schriml L(20), Tatusova T(16), Ussery D(21), Yilmaz P(3),
White O(20), Wooley J(18), Caporaso G(22).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Ecology and Hydrology, Maclean Building, Benson Lane, Crowmarsh
Gifford, Wallingford, Oxfordshire, OX10 8BB, United Kingdom ; Oxford e-Research
Centre, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. (2)Oxford e-Research
Centre, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. (3)Microbial Genomics
Group, Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology, Bremen & Jacobs University
Bremen, Germany. (4)Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Ghent
University, Ghent, Belgium. (5)The Josephine Bay Paul Center for Comparative
Molecular Biology and Evolution, Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole,
Massachusetts, USA. (6)European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL) Outstation,
European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI), Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton,
Cambridge, United Kingdom. (7)Center for Microbial Ecology, Michigan State
University, East Lansing, Michigan, USA. (8)Gump South Pacific Research Station, 
University of California Berkeley, Moorea, French Polynesia ; Biodiversity
Institute, Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, The Tinbergen Building,
South Parks Road, Oxford, United Kingdom. (9)Department of Microbiology and
Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan, USA.
(10)Institute for Genomic and Systems Biology, Argonne National Laboratory, 9700 
South Cass Avenue, Argonne, IL, USA ; Department of Ecology and Evolution,
University of Chicago, 5640 South Ellis Avenue, Chicago, IL, USA. (11)Information
Technology Center, The MITRE Corporation, Bedford, Massachusetts, USA. (12)DSMZ -
German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures GmbH, Braunschweig,
Germany. (13)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, and BioFrontiers Institute, and
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado, Boulder,
Colorado, USA. (14)DOE Joint Genome Institute, Walnut Creek, California, USA.
(15)Institute for Genomic and Systems Biology, Argonne National Laboratory, 9700 
South Cass Avenue, Argonne, IL, USA ; Computation Institute, University of
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA. (16)National Center for Biotechnology
Information, National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland, USA. (17)University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester,
United Kingdom. (18)University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California USA.
(19)LTER Network Office, Department of Biology, University of New Mexico,
Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA. (20)Institute for Genome Sciences, University of
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. (21)DOE Oak Ridge National
Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee, USA. (22)Center for Microbial Genetics and
Genomics, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, Arizona, USA .

The Genomic Standards Consortium (GSC) is an open-membership community that was
founded in 2005 to work towards the development, implementation and harmonization
of standards in the field of genomics. Starting with the defined task of
establishing a minimal set of descriptions the GSC has evolved into an active
standards-setting body that currently has 18 ongoing projects, with additional
projects regularly proposed from within and outside the GSC. Here we describe our
recently enacted policy for proposing new activities that are intended to be
taken on by the GSC, along with the template for proposing such new activities.

PMCID: PMC4148985
PMID: 25197446  [PubMed]


227. World J Surg. 2015 Jan;39(1):165-71. doi: 10.1007/s00268-014-2745-2.

New Injury Severity Score is a better predictor of mortality for blunt trauma
patients than the Injury Severity Score.

Eid HO(1), Abu-Zidan FM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, UAE
University, PO Box 17666, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates.

BACKGROUND: Trauma-related mortality depends on injury severity. Several trauma
scores are used to evaluate injury severity. We compared the Injury Severity
Score (ISS) and the New Injury Severity Score (NISS) in terms of predicting
mortality among hospitalized blunt trauma patients.
METHODS: The data of Al-Ain Hospital Trauma Registry were prospectively collected
over 3 years. Data of blunt trauma patients were then analyzed retrospectively.
Univariate analysis was used to compare patients who died with those who
survived. Sex, age, mechanism of injury, heart rate, systolic blood pressure
(SBP), and Glasgow Coma Score (GSC) on arrival at the hospital, ISS, and NISS
were studied. Significant factors were then entered into a direct likelihood
ratio logistic regression model.
RESULTS: Of 2,573 patients in the registry, 2,115 (82.2 %) suffered blunt trauma 
at a mean (SD) age of 32 (15.3) years. Among them, 1,838 (87 %) were male. Main
mechanisms of injury were road traffic collision (vehicle occupants) (32.8 %) and
falling from a height (22.4 %). Fifty patients (2.4 %) died. Univariate analysis 
showed that GCS and SBP at hospital arrival, ISS, NISS, and mechanism of injury
significantly affected mortality. Logistic regression model showed that mortality
was significantly increased by low GCS (p < 0.0001), high NISS (p < 0.0001), and 
low SBP (p = 0.006) at hospital arrival.
CONCLUSIONS: Mortality of blunt trauma in the UAE is significantly affected by
high NISS, low GCS, and hypotension. NISS is better than ISS for predicting
mortality of blunt trauma patients and may replace it.

PMID: 25189444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Int J Oncol. 2014 Nov;45(5):1989-96. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2629. Epub 2014 Aug
29.

Neural stem cells preferentially migrate to glioma stem cells and reduce their
stemness phenotypes.

Zhang S(1), Xie R(1), Zhao T(1), Yang X(1), Han L(1), Ye F(1), Lei T(1), Wan
F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery and Chinese-German Lab of Molecular Neurooncology, 
Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan 430030, P.R. China.

Glioma stem cells (GSCs), characterized by self-renewal, multi-potentiality and
tumorigenicity, are responsible for the tumor propagation, recurrence and
resistance to traditional treatments, representing a critical therapeutic target.
Neural stem cells (NSCs) possess inherent tropism to brain tumor cells and
inhibit their growth. However, there is a limited understanding of the mechanism 
underlying NSC tropism and the effect of NSC migration on GSC stemness
phenotypes. In the present study, we showed that GSCs exhibited enhanced
chemotaxis for NSC tropism compared with their differentiated cells. Chemokines
secreted by GSCs contributed to the targeted migration of NSCs. Hypoxia enhanced 
NSC tropism via the upregulated chemokine expression of GSCs, such as VEGF, EGF
and bFGF. In vitro migration of NSCs induced GSC differentiation and reduced
stem-like phenotypes. Moreover, in vivo data provided direct evidence that
transplanted NSCs could migrate to GSCs from either the homolateral or
contralateral brain injection site, which prolonged the survival of grafted mice.
Taken together, these findings show that NSCs preferentially migrate to GSCs and 
reduce their stemness phenotypes, raising the intriguing possibility that the
targeted migration of NSCs can be applied as a novel therapeutic strategy to
target these intractable brain tumors.

PMID: 25176161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Anticancer Agents Med Chem. 2014;14(8):1075-84.

Therapeutic targeting of malignant glioma.

Alexandru-Abrams D, Jadus MR, Hsu FP, Stathopoulos A, Bota DA(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of California, Irvine, Shanbrom Hall, Suite 121, Mail Code: 4280,
Irvine, CA 92697. dbota@uci.edu.

Glioblastoma Multiforme (GMB) is the most aggressive primary brain tumor with
poor survival rates and universal recurrence despite aggressive treatments.
Recent research suggested that GBM has multiple glioma cell populations, some of 
which are organized in a stem cell hierarchical order with different stages of
differention. Evidence indicated that recurrence is due to a development or
persistance of a subpopulation of these tumor cells which are inherently
resistant to treatment and these were defined as the glioma stem-like cells
(GSC). It is hypothesized that GSC become highly malignant by accumulating
mutations in oncogenic pathways. These cells present with specific surface
markers which helps identify them. Targeting the surface markers as well as the
signaling pathways of GSCs has been an ongoing research effort. This review
focuses on summarizing the current treatment modalities used to glioblastoma
treatments, evaluating their efficacy in controlling and eradicatig the GSCs,
discussing the machanisms involved in GSC tumor proliferation and resistance to
treatments in addition to proposing potential avenues to target GSCs in order to 
provide a potential cure for this cancer.

PMID: 25175690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2014 Aug 18;5(4):98. doi: 10.1186/scrt487.

Ovarian germline stem cells.

Dunlop CE, Telfer EE, Anderson RA.

It has long been established that germline stem cells (GSCs) are responsible for 
lifelong gametogenesis in males, and some female invertebrates (for example,
Drosophila) and lower vertebrates (for example, teleost fish and some prosimians)
also appear to rely on GSCs to replenish their oocyte reserve in adulthood.
However, the presence of such cells in the majority of female mammals is
controversial, and the idea of a fixed ovarian reserve determined at birth is the
prevailing belief among reproductive biologists. However, accumulating evidence
demonstrates the isolation and culture of putative GSCs from the ovaries of adult
mice and humans. Live offspring have been reportedly produced from the culture of
adult mouse GSCs, and human GSCs formed primordial follicles using a mouse
xenograft model. If GSCs were present in adult female ovaries, it could be
postulated that the occurrence of menopause is not due to the exhaustion of a
fixed supply of oocytes but instead is a result of GSC and somatic cell aging.
Alternatively, they may be benign under normal physiological conditions. If their
existence were confirmed, female GSCs could have many potential applications in
both basic science and clinical therapies. GSCs not only may provide a valuable
model for germ cell development and maturation but may have a role in the field
of fertility preservation, with women potentially being able to store GSCs or
GSC-derived oocytes from their own ovaries prior to infertility-inducing
treatments. Essential future work in this field will include further independent 
corroboration of the existence of GSCs in female mammals and the demonstration of
the production of mature competent oocytes from GSCs cultured entirely in vitro.

PMCID: PMC4282152
PMID: 25157949  [PubMed - in process]


231. Biomaterials. 2014 Nov;35(34):9290-301. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2014.07.051. 
Epub 2014 Aug 13.

The influence of age on adaptive bone formation and bone resorption.

Birkhold AI(1), Razi H(1), Duda GN(2), Weinkamer R(3), Checa S(2), Willie BM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Julius Wolff Institut, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Augustenburger
Platz 1, 13353 Berlin, Germany; Berlin-Brandenburg School for Regenerative
Therapies GSC 203, Germany. (2)Julius Wolff Institut, Charité-Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, Augustenburger Platz 1, 13353 Berlin, Germany. (3)Max Planck Institute of
Colloids and Interfaces, Am Mühlenberg 1, 14476 Potsdam, Germany. (4)Julius Wolff
Institut, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Augustenburger Platz 1, 13353
Berlin, Germany. Electronic address: bettina.willie@charite.de.

Bone is a tissue with enormous adaptive capacity, balancing resorption and
formation processes. It is known that mechanical loading shifts this balance
towards an increased formation, leading to enhanced bone mass and mechanical
performance. What is not known is how this adaptive response to mechanical
loading changes with age. Using dynamic micro-tomography, we show that structural
adaptive changes of trabecular bone within the tibia of living mice subjected to 
two weeks of in vivo cyclic loading are altered by aging. Comparisons of 10, 26
and 78 weeks old animals reveal that the adaptive capacity diminishes.
Strikingly, adaptation was asymmetric in that loading increases formation more
than it reduces resorption. This asymmetry further shifts the (re)modeling
balance towards a net bone loss with age. Loading results in a major increase in 
the surface area of mineralizing bone. Interestingly, the resorption thickness is
independent of loading in trabecular bone in all age groups. This data suggests
that during youth, mechanical stimulation induces the recruitment of bone
modeling cells whereas in old age, only bone forming cells are affected. These
findings provide mechanistic insights into the processes that guide skeletal
aging in mice as well as in other mammals.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25128376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Tumour Biol. 2014 Nov;35(11):11505-11. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2466-z. Epub 2014 
Aug 16.

LEF1 regulates glioblastoma cell proliferation, migration, invasion, and cancer
stem-like cell self-renewal.

Gao X(1), Mi Y, Ma Y, Jin W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medicine Science, Xi'an Medical University, 1 Xin Wang
Road, Xi'an, 710021, China, gxc199281003@163.com.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM; WHO grade IV) is one of the most common primary
tumors of the central nervous system. This disease remains one of the incurable
human malignancies because the molecular mechanism driving the GBM development
and recurrence is still largely unknown. Here, we show that knockdown of
lymphocyte enhancer factor-1 (LEF1), a major transcription factor of Wnt pathway,
inhibits U251 cell migration, invasion, and proliferation. Furthermore,
downregulation of LEF1 expression inhibits the self-renewal capacity of U251 GBM 
stem-like cells and decreases the expression level of the GBM stem-like cell
(GSC) markers such as CD133 and nestin. Our findings reveal that LEF1 maintains
the GBM cell proliferation, migration, and GBM stem-like cell self-renewal. Taken
together, these results suggest that LEF1 may be a novel therapeutic target for
GBM suppression.

PMID: 25128061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. J Immunol Res. 2014;2014:131494. doi: 10.1155/2014/131494. Epub 2014 Jul 9.

Glioma-associated antigen HEATR1 induces functional cytotoxic T lymphocytes in
patients with glioma.

Wu ZB(1), Qiu C(2), Zhang AL(2), Cai L(3), Lin SJ(3), Yao Y(4), Tang QS(4), Xu
M(4), Hua W(4), Chu YW(5), Mao Y(4), Zhu JH(4), Xu J(2), Zhou LF(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai
200040, China ; Department of Neurosurgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou 
Medical University, Wenzhou 325000, China ; Department of Neurosurgery, Ruijin
Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025,
China. (2)Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology of Ministry of
Education/Health at Shanghai Medical College, Shanghai Public Health Clinical
Center and Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Fudan University, Jinshan District,
Shanghai 200040, China. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, First Affiliated Hospital 
of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou 325000, China. (4)Department of
Neurosurgery, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 200040, China.
(5)Department of Immunology and Biotherapy Research Center, Shanghai Medical
College, Fudan University, Shanghai 200040, China.

A2B5+ glioblastoma (GBM) cells have glioma stem-like cell (GSC) properties that
are crucial to chemotherapy resistance and GBM relapse. T-cell-based antigens
derived from A2B5+ GBM cells provide important information for immunotherapy.
Here, we show that HEAT repeat containing 1 (HEATR1) expression in GBM tissues
was significantly higher than that in control brain tissues. Furthermore, HEATR1 
expression in A2B5+ U87 cells was higher than that in A2B5-U87 cells (P = 0.016).
Six peptides of HEATR1 presented by HLA-A*02 were selected for testing of their
ability to induce T-cell responses in patients with GBM. When peripheral blood
mononuclear cells from healthy donors (n = 6) and patients with glioma (n = 33)
were stimulated with the peptide mixture, eight patients with malignant gliomas
had positive reactivity with a significantly increased number of responding
T-cells. The peptides HEATR(1682-690), HEATR(11126-1134), and HEATR(1757-765) had
high affinity for binding to HLA-A*02:01 and a strong capacity to induce CTL
response. CTLs against HEATR1 peptides were capable of recognizing and lysing GBM
cells and GSCs. These data are the first to demonstrate that HEATR1 could induce 
specific CTL responses targeting both GBM cells and GSCs, implicating that HEATR1
peptide-based immunotherapy could be a novel promising strategy for treating
patients with GBM.

PMCID: PMC4121097
PMID: 25126583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Nature. 2014 Oct 9;514(7521):233-6. doi: 10.1038/nature13562.

Protein competition switches the function of COP9 from self-renewal to
differentiation.

Pan L(1), Wang S(2), Lu T(3), Weng C(4), Song X(4), Park JK(5), Sun J(6), Yang
ZH(6), Yu J(7), Tang H(8), McKearin DM(5), Chamovitz DA(9), Ni J(6), Xie T(10).

Author information: 
(1)1] Stowers Institute for Medical Research, 1000 East 50th Street, Kansas City,
Missouri 64110, USA [2] Chinese Academy of Sciences Key Laboratory of Infection
and Immunity, Institute of Biophysics, 15 Da Tun Road, Beijing 100101, China [3].
(2)1] Stowers Institute for Medical Research, 1000 East 50th Street, Kansas City,
Missouri 64110, USA [2] Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of
Kansas School of Medicine, 3901 Rainbow Boulevard, Kansas City, Kansas 66160, USA
[3]. (3)1] Center for Life Sciences, School of Medicine, Tsinghua University,
Beijing 100084, China [2]. (4)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, 1000 East
50th Street, Kansas City, Missouri 64110, USA. (5)1] Department of Molecular
Biology and Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390-9148, USA [2] Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, Maryland 20815-6789, USA. (6)Center for Life
Sciences, School of Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. (7)1]
Stowers Institute for Medical Research, 1000 East 50th Street, Kansas City,
Missouri 64110, USA [2] Chinese Academy of Sciences Key Laboratory of Infection
and Immunity, Institute of Biophysics, 15 Da Tun Road, Beijing 100101, China.
(8)Chinese Academy of Sciences Key Laboratory of Infection and Immunity,
Institute of Biophysics, 15 Da Tun Road, Beijing 100101, China. (9)Department of 
Plant Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel. (10)1] Stowers
Institute for Medical Research, 1000 East 50th Street, Kansas City, Missouri
64110, USA [2] Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of Kansas
School of Medicine, 3901 Rainbow Boulevard, Kansas City, Kansas 66160, USA.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2014 Nov 10;31(3):261-2.

The balance between stem cell self-renewal and differentiation is controlled by
intrinsic factors and niche signals. In the Drosophila melanogaster ovary, some
intrinsic factors promote germline stem cell (GSC) self-renewal, whereas others
stimulate differentiation. However, it remains poorly understood how the balance 
between self-renewal and differentiation is controlled. Here we use D.
melanogaster ovarian GSCs to demonstrate that the differentiation factor Bam
controls the functional switch of the COP9 complex from self-renewal to
differentiation via protein competition. The COP9 complex is composed of eight
Csn subunits, Csn1-8, and removes Nedd8 modifications from target proteins.
Genetic results indicated that the COP9 complex is required intrinsically for GSC
self-renewal, whereas other Csn proteins, with the exception of Csn4, were also
required for GSC progeny differentiation. Bam-mediated Csn4 sequestration from
the COP9 complex via protein competition inactivated the self-renewing function
of COP9 and allowed other Csn proteins to promote GSC differentiation. Therefore,
this study reveals a protein-competition-based mechanism for controlling the
balance between stem cell self-renewal and differentiation. Because numerous
self-renewal factors are ubiquitously expressed throughout the stem cell lineage 
in various systems, protein competition may function as an important mechanism
for controlling the self-renewal-to-differentiation switch.

PMID: 25119050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Viruses. 2014 Aug 12;6(8):3080-96. doi: 10.3390/v6083080.

Locally-delivered T-cell-derived cellular vehicles efficiently track and deliver 
adenovirus delta24-RGD to infiltrating glioma.

Balvers RK(1), Belcaid Z(2), van den Hengel SK(3), Kloezeman J(4), de Vrij J(5), 
Wakimoto H(6), Hoeben RC(7), Debets R(8), Leenstra S(9), Dirven C(10), Lamfers
ML(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Brain Tumor Center, Erasmus MC, Dr. Molewaterplein
50, Ee2236, 3015GE, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. r.balvers@erasmusmc.nl.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Brain Tumor Center, Erasmus MC, Dr. Molewaterplein
50, Ee2236, 3015GE, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. z.belcaid@erasmusmc.nl.
(3)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, Einthovenweg 20, 2333 ZC, The Netherlands. sanne.vandenhengel@wetsus.nl. 
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, Brain Tumor Center, Erasmus MC, Dr. Molewaterplein
50, Ee2236, 3015GE, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. j.kloezeman@erasmusmc.nl.
(5)Department of Neurosurgery, Brain Tumor Center, Erasmus MC, Dr. Molewaterplein
50, Ee2236, 3015GE, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. j.devrij@erasmusmc.nl.
(6)Molecular Neurosurgery Laboratory, Brain Tumor Research Center, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA. HWakimoto@partners.org. (7)Department of
Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Einthovenweg
20, 2333 ZC, The Netherlands. r.c.hoeben@lumc.nl. (8)Laboratory of Experimental
Tumor Immunology, Department Medical Oncology, Erasmus MC Cancer Institute,
Rotterdam, 3015 GE, The Netherlands. j.debets@erasmusmc.nl. (9)Department of
Neurosurgery, Brain Tumor Center, Erasmus MC, Dr. Molewaterplein 50, Ee2236,
3015GE, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. s.leenstra@erasmusmc.nl. (10)Department of
Neurosurgery, Brain Tumor Center, Erasmus MC, Dr. Molewaterplein 50, Ee2236,
3015GE, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. c.dirven@erasmusmc.nl. (11)Department of
Neurosurgery, Brain Tumor Center, Erasmus MC, Dr. Molewaterplein 50, Ee2236,
3015GE, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. m.lamfers@erasmusmc.nl.

Oncolytic adenoviral vectors are a promising alternative for the treatment of
glioblastoma. Recent publications have demonstrated the advantages of shielding
viral particles within cellular vehicles (CVs), which can be targeted towards the
tumor microenvironment. Here, we studied T-cells, often having a natural capacity
to target tumors, for their feasibility as a CV to deliver the oncolytic
adenovirus, Delta24-RGD, to glioblastoma. The Jurkat T-cell line was assessed in 
co-culture with the glioblastoma stem cell (GSC) line, MGG8, for the optimal
transfer conditions of Delta24-RGD in vitro. The effect of intraparenchymal and
tail vein injections on intratumoral virus distribution and overall survival was 
addressed in an orthotopic glioma stem cell (GSC)-based xenograft model. Jurkat
T-cells were demonstrated to facilitate the amplification and transfer of
Delta24-RGD onto GSCs. Delta24-RGD dosing and incubation time were found to
influence the migratory ability of T-cells towards GSCs. Injection of
Delta24-RGD-loaded T-cells into the brains of GSC-bearing mice led to migration
towards the tumor and dispersion of the virus within the tumor core and
infiltrative zones. This occurred after injection into the ipsilateral
hemisphere, as well as into the non-tumor-bearing hemisphere. We found that
T-cell-mediated delivery of Delta24-RGD led to the inhibition of tumor growth
compared to non-treated controls, resulting in prolonged survival (p = 0.007).
Systemic administration of virus-loaded T-cells resulted in intratumoral viral
delivery, albeit at low levels. Based on these findings, we conclude that
T-cell-based CVs are a feasible approach to local Delta24-RGD delivery in
glioblastoma, although efficient systemic targeting requires further improvement.

PMCID: PMC4147687
PMID: 25118638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Dev Biol. 2014 Oct 1;394(1):129-41. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.07.016. Epub 2014
Aug 2.

Steroid signaling promotes stem cell maintenance in the Drosophila testis.

Li Y(1), Ma Q(1), Cherry CM(1), Matunis EL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, 725 N. Wolfe Street, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. (2)Department of Cell Biology, 725 
N. Wolfe Street, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD
21205, USA. Electronic address: matunis@jhmi.edu.

Stem cell regulation by local signals is intensely studied, but less is known
about the effects of hormonal signals on stem cells. In Drosophila, the primary
steroid twenty-hydroxyecdysone (20E) regulates ovarian germline stem cells (GSCs)
but was considered dispensable for testis GSC maintenance. Male GSCs reside in a 
microenvironment (niche) generated by somatic hub cells and adjacent cyst stem
cells (CySCs). Here, we show that depletion of 20E from adult males by
overexpressing a dominant negative form of the Ecdysone receptor (EcR) or its
heterodimeric partner ultraspiracle (usp) causes GSC and CySC loss that is
rescued by 20E feeding, uncovering a requirement for 20E in stem cell
maintenance. EcR and USP are expressed, activated and autonomously required in
the CySC lineage to promote CySC maintenance, as are downstream genes ftz-f1 and 
E75. In contrast, GSCs non-autonomously require ecdysone signaling. Global
inactivation of EcR increases cell death in the testis that is rescued by
expression of EcR-B2 in the CySC lineage, indicating that ecdysone signaling
supports stem cell viability primarily through a specific receptor isoform.
Finally, EcR genetically interacts with the NURF chromatin-remodeling complex,
which we previously showed maintains CySCs. Thus, although 20E levels are lower
in males than females, ecdysone signaling acts through distinct cell types and
effectors to ensure both ovarian and testis stem cell maintenance.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4165524
PMID: 25093968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Neuro Oncol. 2015 Jan;17(1):81-94. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/nou144. Epub 2014 Aug 1.

Adult mouse subventricular zones stimulate glioblastoma stem cells specific
invasion through CXCL12/CXCR4 signaling.

Goffart N(1), Kroonen J(1), Di Valentin E(1), Dedobbeleer M(1), Denne A(1),
Martinive P(1), Rogister B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, GIGA-Neurosciences Research Center, 
University of Liège, Liège, Belgium (N.G., A.D., M.D., B.R.); Human Genetics, CHU
and University of Liège, Liège, Belgium (J.K.); The T&P Bohnenn Laboratory for
Neuro-Oncology, Department of Neurosurgery, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Utrecht, The Netherlands (J.K.); GIGA-Viral Vector Platform, University of Liège,
Liège, Belgium (E.D.V.); Unit of Radiology and Radiotherapy, CHU and University
of Liège, Liège, Belgium (P.M.); Department of Neurology, CHU and University of
Liège, Liège, Belgium (B.R.); GIGA-Development, Stem Cells and Regenerative
Medicine, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium (B.R.).

BACKGROUND: Patients with glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) have an overall median
survival of 15 months. This catastrophic survival rate is the consequence of
systematic relapses that could arise from remaining glioblastoma stem cells
(GSCs) left behind after surgery. We previously demonstrated that GSCs are able
to escape the tumor mass and specifically colonize the adult subventricular zones
(SVZs) after transplantation. This specific localization, away from the initial
injection site, therefore represents a high-quality model of a clinical obstacle 
to therapy and relapses because GSCs notably retain the ability to form secondary
tumors.
METHOD: In this work, we questioned the role of the CXCL12/CXCR4 signaling in the
GSC-specific invasion of the SVZs.
RESULTS: We demonstrated that both receptor and ligand are respectively expressed
by different GBM cell populations and by the SVZ itself. In vitro migration
bio-assays highlighted that human U87MG GSCs isolated from the SVZs (U87MG-SVZ)
display stronger migratory abilities in response to recombinant CXCL12 and/or
SVZ-conditioned medium (SVZ-CM) compared with cancer cells isolated from the
tumor mass (U87MG-TM). Moreover, in vitro inhibition of the CXCR4 signaling
significantly decreased the U87MG-SVZ cell migration in response to the SVZ-CM.
Very interestingly, treating U87MG-xenografted mice with daily doses of AMD3100, 
a specific CXCR4 antagonist, prevented the specific invasion of the SVZ. Another 
in vivo experiment, using CXCR4-invalidated GBM cells, displayed similar results.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, these data demonstrate the significant role of the
CXCL12/CXCR4 signaling in this original model of brain cancer invasion.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Neuro-Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4483049
PMID: 25085362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. J Neurooncol. 2014 Sep;119(3):547-55. doi: 10.1007/s11060-014-1498-y. Epub 2014
Aug 1.

Stem cells and gliomas: past, present, and future.

Germano IM(1), Binello E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 1 Gustave
L. Levy Place, Box 1136, New York, NY, 10029, USA,
isabelle.germano@mountsinai.org.

The recognition of stem cells (SC) in the adult CNS and in association with
gliomas has spawned an entire field of research and intense investigation. A
large body of knowledge is being accumulated to gain insight into the
pathobiology of gliomas with the intent of finally improving the grave prognosis 
that continues to beset patients with high grade gliomas (HGG). In this article, 
we provide a historical overview of the events leading to the discovery of SC and
glioma stem cells (GSC). We then focus on the current understanding of GSC with
respect to markers, clinical significance, and their targeting. We discuss
current data and developments using SC as vehicles to delivery therapeutic agents
to HGG. We conclude with a discussion of opportunities for future development and
concepts aimed at reducing tumor recurrence and improving survival for patients
with HGG.

PMID: 25081973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 28;9(7):e103473. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0103473.
eCollection 2014.

Evidence for chromatin-remodeling complex PBAP-controlled maintenance of the
Drosophila ovarian germline stem cells.

He J(1), Xuan T(2), Xin T(1), An H(1), Wang J(3), Zhao G(1), Li M(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, P R China. (2)School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao 
Tong University, Shanghai, P R China; School of Biomedical Engineering, Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, P R China. (3)School of Biomedical Engineering,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, P R China.

In the Drosophila oogenesis, germline stem cells (GSCs) continuously self-renew
and differentiate into daughter cells for consecutive germline lineage
commitment. This developmental process has become an in vivo working platform for
studying adult stem cell fate regulation. An increasing number of studies have
shown that while concerted actions of extrinsic signals from the niche and
intrinsic regulatory machineries control GSC self-renewal and germline
differentiation, epigenetic regulation is implicated in the process. Here, we
report that Brahma (Brm), the ATPase subunit of the Drosophila SWI/SNF
chromatin-remodeling complexes, is required for maintaining GSC fate. Removal or 
knockdown of Brm function in either germline or niche cells causes a GSC loss,
but does not disrupt normal germline differentiation within the germarium
evidenced at the molecular and morphological levels. There are two Drosophila
SWI/SNF complexes: the Brm-associated protein (BAP) complex and the
polybromo-containing BAP (PBAP) complex. More genetic studies reveal that
mutations in polybromo/bap180, rather than gene encoding Osa, the BAP
complex-specific subunit, elicit a defect in GSC maintenance reminiscent of the
brm mutant phenotype. Further genetic interaction test suggests a functional
association between brm and polybromo in controlling GSC self-renewal. Taken
together, studies in this paper provide the first demonstration that Brm in the
form of the PBAP complex functions in the GSC fate regulation.

PMCID: PMC4113433
PMID: 25068272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Aug 5;111(31):11467-72. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1317751111. Epub 2014 Jul 21.

PAPD5-mediated 3' adenylation and subsequent degradation of miR-21 is disrupted
in proliferative disease.

Boele J(1), Persson H(2), Shin JW(3), Ishizu Y(3), Newie IS(4), Søkilde R(4),
Hawkins SM(5), Coarfa C(6), Ikeda K(7), Takayama K(8), Horie-Inoue K(7), Ando
Y(9), Burroughs AM(10), Sasaki C(11), Suzuki C(11), Sakai M(3), Aoki S(3), Ogawa 
A(11), Hasegawa A(3), Lizio M(3), Kaida K(3), Teusink B(12), Carninci P(3),
Suzuki H(3), Inoue S(13), Gunaratne PH(14), Rovira C(4), Hayashizaki Y(15), de
Hoon MJ(16).

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Omics Science Center, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan;Department of
Systems Bioinformatics, Amsterdam Institute for Molecules, Medicines and Systems,
VU University Amsterdam, 1081 HV, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; (2)Department of
Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, SE-141 83 Huddinge, Sweden;
(3)RIKEN Omics Science Center, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan;Division of
Genomic Technologies, RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies, Yokohama,
Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan; (4)Division of Oncology, Department of Clinical
Sciences, Lund University Cancer Center/Medicon Village, SE-223 81 Lund, Sweden; 
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Center for Reproductive Medicine. 
(6)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, and. (7)Division of Gene
Regulation and Signal Transduction, Research Center for Genomic Medicine, Saitama
Medical University, Saitama 350-1241, Japan; (8)Departments of Anti-Aging
Medicine andGeriatric Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan; (9)RIKEN Omics Science Center, Yokohama,
Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan;Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Bloomberg School of Public Health, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD
21205; (10)RIKEN Omics Science Center, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045,
Japan;National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of
Medicine, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20894; (11)RIKEN Omics
Science Center, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan; (12)Department of Systems
Bioinformatics, Amsterdam Institute for Molecules, Medicines and Systems, VU
University Amsterdam, 1081 HV, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; (13)Division of Gene
Regulation and Signal Transduction, Research Center for Genomic Medicine, Saitama
Medical University, Saitama 350-1241, Japan;Departments of Anti-Aging Medicine
andGeriatric Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan; (14)Department of Pathology and Immunology,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030;Department of Biology and
Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, TX 77204; and. (15)RIKEN Omics
Science Center, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan;RIKEN Preventive Medicine and 
Diagnosis Innovation Program, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan. (16)RIKEN Omics
Science Center, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan;Division of Genomic
Technologies, RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies, Yokohama, Kanagawa
230-0045, Japan; mdehoon@gsc.riken.jp.

Next-generation sequencing experiments have shown that microRNAs (miRNAs) are
expressed in many different isoforms (isomiRs), whose biological relevance is
often unclear. We found that mature miR-21, the most widely researched miRNA
because of its importance in human disease, is produced in two prevalent isomiR
forms that differ by 1 nt at their 3' end, and moreover that the 3' end of miR-21
is posttranscriptionally adenylated by the noncanonical poly(A) polymerase PAPD5.
PAPD5 knockdown caused an increase in the miR-21 expression level, suggesting
that PAPD5-mediated adenylation of miR-21 leads to its degradation.
Exoribonuclease knockdown experiments followed by small-RNA sequencing suggested 
that PARN degrades miR-21 in the 3'-to-5' direction. In accordance with this
model, microarray expression profiling demonstrated that PAPD5 knockdown results 
in a down-regulation of miR-21 target mRNAs. We found that disruption of the
miR-21 adenylation and degradation pathway is a general feature in tumors across 
a wide range of tissues, as evidenced by data from The Cancer Genome Atlas, as
well as in the noncancerous proliferative disease psoriasis. We conclude that
PAPD5 and PARN mediate degradation of oncogenic miRNA miR-21 through a tailing
and trimming process, and that this pathway is disrupted in cancer and other
proliferative diseases.

PMCID: PMC4128123
PMID: 25049417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Cancer Res. 2014 Sep 15;74(18):5218-28. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1151. Epub 
2014 Jul 21.

TLR9 is critical for glioma stem cell maintenance and targeting.

Herrmann A(1), Cherryholmes G(1), Schroeder A(2), Phallen J(3), Alizadeh D(4),
Xin H(1), Wang T(1), Lee H(1), Lahtz C(1), Swiderski P(2), Armstrong B(5),
Kowolik C(2), Gallia GL(3), Lim M(3), Brown C(6), Badie B(4), Forman S(6),
Kortylewski M(1), Jove R(2), Yu H(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Immunotherapeutics and Tumor Immunology, Beckman Research
Institute at City of Hope Medical Center, Duarte, California. (2)Department of
Molecular Medicine, Beckman Research Institute at City of Hope Medical Center,
Duarte, California. (3)Department of Neurosurgery at the Sidney Kimmel Cancer
Center, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
(4)Division of Neurosurgery, City of Hope Medical Center, Duarte, California.
(5)Department of Neuroscience, Beckman Research Institute at City of Hope Medical
Center, Duarte, California. (6)Department of Hematology and Hematopoietic Cell
Transplantation, City of Hope Medical Center, Duarte, California. (7)Department
of Cancer Immunotherapeutics and Tumor Immunology, Beckman Research Institute at 
City of Hope Medical Center, Duarte, California. Center for Translational
Medicine, Shanghai Zhangjiang High-Tech Park, Shanghai, China. hyu@coh.org.

Understanding supports for cancer stem-like cells in malignant glioma may suggest
therapeutic strategies for their elimination. Here, we show that the Toll-like
receptor TLR9 is elevated in glioma stem-like cells (GSC) in which it contributes
to glioma growth. TLR9 overexpression is regulated by STAT3, which is required
for GSC maintenance. Stimulation of TLR9 with a CpG ligand (CpG ODN) promoted GSC
growth, whereas silencing TLR9 expression abrogated GSC development. CpG-ODN
treatment induced Frizzled4-dependent activation of JAK2, thereby activating
STAT3. Targeted delivery of siRNA into GSC was achieved via TLR9 using CpG-siRNA 
conjugates. Through local or systemic treatment, administration of CpG-Stat3
siRNA to silence STAT3 in vivo reduced GSC along with glioma growth. Our findings
identify TLR9 as a functional marker for GSC and a target for the delivery of
efficacious therapeutics for glioma treatment. Cancer Res; 74(18); 5218-28. ©2014
AACR.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4167470
PMID: 25047528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Glia. 2014 Dec;62(12):1968-81. doi: 10.1002/glia.22718. Epub 2014 Jul 5.

Autocrine/paracrine sphingosine-1-phosphate fuels proliferative and stemness
qualities of glioblastoma stem cells.

Marfia G(1), Campanella R, Navone SE, Di Vito C, Riccitelli E, Hadi LA, Bornati
A, de Rezende G, Giussani P, Tringali C, Viani P, Rampini P, Alessandri G, Parati
E, Riboni L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Neurosurgery and Cell Therapy, Neurosurgery Unit,
Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico Milan, University of
Milan, Italy.

Accumulating reports suggest that human glioblastoma contains glioma stem-like
cells (GSCs) which act as key determinants driving tumor growth, angiogenesis,
and contributing to therapeutic resistance. The proliferative signals involved in
GSC proliferation and progression remain unclear. Using GSC lines derived from
human glioblastoma specimens with different proliferative index and stemness
marker expression, we assessed the hypothesis that sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) 
affects the proliferative and stemness properties of GSCs. The results of
metabolic studies demonstrated that GSCs rapidly consume newly synthesized
ceramide, and export S1P in the extracellular environment, both processes being
enhanced in the cells exhibiting high proliferative index and stemness markers.
Extracellular S1P levels reached nM concentrations in response to increased
extracellular sphingosine. In addition, the presence of EGF and bFGF potentiated 
the constitutive capacity of GSCs to rapidly secrete newly synthesized S1P,
suggesting that cooperation between S1P and these growth factors is of central
importance in the maintenance and proliferation of GSCs. We also report for the
first time that S1P is able to act as a proliferative and pro-stemness autocrine 
factor for GSCs, promoting both their cell cycle progression and stemness
phenotypic profile. These results suggest for the first time that the GSC
population is critically modulated by microenvironmental S1P, this bioactive
lipid acting as an autocrine signal to maintain a pro-stemness environment and
favoring GSC proliferation, survival and stem properties.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25042636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 9;9(7):e102156. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102156. eCollection
2014.

Advantages of evaluating mean nuclear volume as an adjunct parameter in prostate 
cancer.

Leze E(1), Maciel-Osorio CF(1), Mandarim-de-Lacerda CA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Morphometry, Metabolism and Cardiovascular Disease, Biomedical
Center, State University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Efforts to improve the diagnosis, prognosis and surveillance of
prostate cancer (PCa) are relevant. Gleason score (GSc) overestimation may
subject individuals to unnecessary aggressive treatment. We aimed to use
stereology in PCa evaluations and investigate whether mean nuclear volume (MNV)
correlates with the Gleason primary pattern (Gpp) and to improve the subjective
GSc to obtain an objective and reliable method without inter-observer dissension.
METHODS: We identified 74 radical prostatectomy specimens that were divided into 
six groups based on Gpp, from 3 to 5. Controls (C) were designed in paired
non-tumor regions of the same specimens. MNV was estimated using the
"point-sampled intercepts" method. Differences in MNV among the C groups and the 
Gpp groups were tested with the Kruskall-Wallis test and Dunn post-hoc test.
Differences between each Gpp group and its control counterpart were tested with
the Wilcoxon test. Correlations were evaluated with the Spearman rank correlation
(R[Spearman]).
RESULTS: The correlations between prostate-specific antigen (PSA) and GSc
(R[Spearman] of 0.76) and between PSA and MNV (R[Spearman] of 0.78) were
moderately strong and highly significant, and the correlation between MNV and Gpp
(R[Spearman] of 0.53) was moderate and highly significant. MNV was significantly 
greater in cancerous regions than in paired-control regions. Limitations included
sample size.
CONCLUSIONS: Proper planning of a study, as well as the availability of equipment
and software for morphological quantification, can provide incentive to quickly
and accurately estimate MNV as an adjunct parameter in the assessment of PCa.
Current data are in favor of the use of MNV associated with GSc and PSA in the
assessment of PCa.

PMCID: PMC4090007
PMID: 25007252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Dec 1;23(23):2875-82. doi: 10.1089/scd.2014.0120. Epub 2014 
Aug 11.

Cell fusion enhances mesendodermal differentiation of human induced pluripotent
stem cells.

Qin J(1), Sontag S, Lin Q, Mitzka S, Leisten I, Schneider RK, Wang X, Jauch A,
Peitz M, Brüstle O, Wagner W, Zhao RC, Zenke M.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Cell Biology, Institute for Biomedical Engineering, RWTH
Aachen University Medical School , Aachen, Germany .

Human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPS cells) resemble embryonic stem cells
and can differentiate into cell derivatives of all three germ layers. However,
frequently the differentiation efficiency of iPS cells into some lineages is
rather poor. Here, we found that fusion of iPS cells with human hematopoietic
stem cells (HSCs) enhances iPS cell differentiation. Such iPS hybrids showed a
prominent differentiation bias toward hematopoietic lineages but also toward
other mesendodermal lineages. Additionally, during differentiation of iPS
hybrids, expression of early mesendodermal markers-Brachyury (T), MIX1
Homeobox-Like Protein 1 (MIXL1), and Goosecoid (GSC)-appeared with faster
kinetics than in parental iPS cells. Following iPS hybrid differentiation there
was a prominent induction of NODAL and inhibition of NODAL signaling blunted
mesendodermal differentiation. This indicates that NODAL signaling is critically 
involved in mesendodermal bias of iPS hybrid differentiation. In summary, we
demonstrate that iPS cell fusion with HSCs prominently enhances iPS cell
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4235980
PMID: 25004077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Front Microbiol. 2014 Jun 20;5:303. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2014.00303. eCollection
2014.

Oncolytic herpes simplex virus-based strategies: toward a breakthrough in
glioblastoma therapy.

Ning J(1), Wakimoto H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Brain Tumor Research Center, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Harvard Medical School Boston, MA, USA.

Oncolytic viruses (OV) are a class of antitumor agents that selectively kill
tumor cells while sparing normal cells. Oncolytic herpes simplex virus (oHSV) has
been investigated in clinical trials for patients with the malignant brain tumor 
glioblastoma for more than a decade. These clinical studies have shown the safety
of oHSV administration to the human brain, however, therapeutic efficacy of oHSV 
as a single treatment remains unsatisfactory. Factors that could hamper the
anti-glioblastoma efficacy of oHSV include: attenuated potency of oHSV due to
deletion or mutation of viral genes involved in virulence, restricting viral
replication and spread within the tumor; suboptimal oHSV delivery associated with
intratumoral injection; virus infection-induced inflammatory and cellular immune 
responses which could inhibit oHSV replication and promote its clearance; lack of
effective incorporation of oHSV into standard-of-care, and poor knowledge about
the ability of oHSV to target glioblastoma stem cells (GSCs). In an attempt to
address these issues, recent research efforts have been directed at: (1) design
of new engineered viruses to enhance potency, (2) better understanding of the
role of the cellular immunity elicited by oHSV infection of tumors, (3)
combinatorial strategies with different antitumor agents with a mechanistic
rationale, (4) "armed" viruses expressing therapeutic transgenes, (5) use of
GSC-derived models in oHSV evaluation, and (6) combinations of these. In this
review, we will describe the current status of oHSV clinical trials for
glioblastoma, and discuss recent research advances and future directions toward
successful oHSV-based therapy of glioblastoma.

PMCID: PMC4064532
PMID: 24999342  [PubMed]


246. Mol Biol Evol. 2014 Sep;31(9):2457-71. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msu204. Epub 2014 Jun 
28.

The coevolutionary period of Wolbachia pipientis infecting Drosophila ananassae
and its impact on the evolution of the host germline stem cell regulating genes.

Choi JY(1), Aquadro CF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University
jc2439@cornell.edu. (2)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell
University.

The endosymbiotic bacteria Wolbachia pipientis is known to infect a wide range of
arthropod species yet less is known about the coevolutionary history it has with 
its hosts. Evidence of highly identical W. pipientis strains in evolutionary
divergent hosts suggests horizontal transfer between hosts. For example,
Drosophila ananassae is infected with a W. pipientis strain that is nearly
identical in sequence to a strain that infects both D. simulans and D. suzukii,
suggesting recent horizontal transfer among these three species. However, it is
unknown whether the W. pipientis strain had recently invaded all three species or
a more complex infectious dynamic underlies the horizontal transfers. Here, we
have examined the coevolutionary history of D. ananassae and its resident W.
pipientis to infer its period of infection. Phylogenetic analysis of D. ananassae
mitochondrial DNA and W. pipientis DNA sequence diversity revealed the current W.
pipientis infection is not recent. In addition, we examined the population
genetics and molecular evolution of several germline stem cell (GSC) regulating
genes of D. ananassae. These studies reveal significant evidence of recent and
long-term positive selection at stonewall in D. ananassae, whereas pumillio
showed patterns of variation consistent with only recent positive selection.
Previous studies had found evidence for adaptive evolution of two key germline
differentiation genes, bag of marbles (bam) and benign gonial cell neoplasm
(bgcn), in D. melanogaster and D. simulans and proposed that the adaptive
evolution at these two genes was driven by arms race between the host GSC and W. 
pipientis. However, we did not find any statistical departures from a neutral
model of evolution for bam and bgcn in D. ananassae despite our new evidence that
this species has been infected with W. pipientis for a period longer than the
most recent infection in D. melanogaster. In the end, analyzing the GSC
regulating genes individually showed two of the seven genes to have evidence of
selection. However, combining the data set and fitting a specific population
genetic model significant proportion of the nonsynonymous sites across the GSC
regulating genes were driven to fixation by positive selection. Clearly the GSC
system is under rapid evolution and potentially multiple drivers are causing the 
rapid evolution.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For permissions, please
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4137719
PMID: 24974378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Oncol Rep. 2014 Sep;32(3):1303-11. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3293. Epub 2014 Jun 26.

Tanshinone IIA inhibits the growth, attenuates the stemness and induces the
apoptosis of human glioma stem cells.

Yang L(1), Guo H(1), Dong L(1), Wang L(1), Liu C(1), Wang X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Oncology, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West 
China Hospital, West China Medical School, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan
610041, P.R. China.

Glioma stem cells (GSCs) are believed to contribute to glioblastoma
multiforme (GBM) propagation and treatment resistance. Tanshinone IIA possesses
anticancer and anti-inflammatory activities. This study aimed to determine the
inhibitory effect of tanshinone IIA on human GSCs in vitro and in vivo and to
explore the underlying mechanisms. In the present study, human GBM neurospheres
(GBMS) were isolated from adherent GBM cells in serum-free medium, and the cells 
from the GBMS displayed characteristics of GSCs. Results from the MTT,
neurosphere formation and in vivo inhibition assays revealed that tanshinone IIA 
had a significant inhibitory effect on human GSCs in vitro and in vivo.
Furthermore, tanshinone IIA increased the expression of differentiation and
neural lineage markers including GFAP and ß-tubulin, decreased expression of GSC 
markers including CD133 and nestin, and induced GSC apoptosis in vitro and
in vivo in a dose-dependent manner. Inflammatory cytokines and signaling pathways
are believed to play key roles in maintaining the stem-like properties in human
glioma cells. In the present study, inflammatory cytokine interleukin 6 (IL6) and
its downstream activated signal transducer and activator of transcription 3
[phospho-STAT3(tyrosine705) and phospho-STAT3(serine727)] were downregulated
after tanshinone IIA treatment in vitro and in vivo. This result indicated that
disturbance of the IL6/STAT3 signaling axis by tanshinone IIA is closely related 
to the growth inhibition of GSCs. Taken together, our results indicate that
tanshinone IIA has the potential to target and kill GSCs through suppression of
proliferation, attenuation of stemness and induction of apoptosis. Its mechanism 
of activity may be associated with attenuation of the IL6/STAT3 signaling
pathway.

PMID: 24970314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 25;9(6):e101141. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0101141.
eCollection 2014.

Lin-28 regulates oogenesis and muscle formation in Drosophila melanogaster.

Stratoulias V(1), Heino TI(1), Michon F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Institute of Biotechnology, Developmental Biology Program, University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

Understanding the control of stem cell (SC) differentiation is important to
comprehend developmental processes as well as to develop clinical applications.
Lin28 is a conserved molecule that is involved in SC maintenance and
differentiation by regulating let-7 miRNA maturation. However, little is known
about the in vivo function of Lin28. Here, we report critical roles for lin-28
during oogenesis. We found that let-7 maturation was increased in lin-28 null
mutant fly ovaries. We showed that lin-28 null mutant female flies displayed
reduced fecundity, due to defects in egg chamber formation. More specifically, we
demonstrated that in mutant ovaries, the egg chambers fuse during early oogenesis
resulting in abnormal late egg chambers. We also showed that this phenotype is
the combined result of impaired germline SC differentiation and follicle SC
differentiation. We suggest a model in which these multiple oogenesis defects
result from a misregulation of the ecdysone signaling network, through the
fine-tuning of Abrupt and Fasciclin2 expression. Our results give a better
understanding of the evolutionarily conserved role of lin-28 on GSC maintenance
and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4071072
PMID: 24963666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. ScientificWorldJournal. 2014;2014:942923. doi: 10.1155/2014/942923. Epub 2014 Apr
29.

The generalized sidelobe canceller based on quaternion widely linear processing.

Tao JW(1), Chang WX(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Flight Vehicle Control, Aviation University, Changchun, Jilin
130022, China. (2)College of Communication Engineering, Jilin University,
Changchun, Jilin 130025, China.

We investigate the problem of quaternion beamforming based on widely linear
processing. First, a quaternion model of linear symmetric array with
two-component electromagnetic (EM) vector sensors is presented. Based on array's 
quaternion model, we propose the general expression of a quaternion semiwidely
linear (QSWL) beamformer. Unlike the complex widely linear beamformer, the QSWL
beamformer is based on the simultaneous operation on the quaternion vector, which
is composed of two jointly proper complex vectors, and its involution
counterpart. Second, we propose a useful implementation of QSWL beamformer, that 
is, QSWL generalized sidelobe canceller (GSC), and derive the simple expressions 
of the weight vectors. The QSWL GSC consists of two-stage beamformers. By
designing the weight vectors of two-stage beamformers, the interference is
completely canceled in the output of QSWL GSC and the desired signal is not
distorted. We derive the array's gain expression and analyze the performance of
the QSWL GSC in the presence of one type of interference. The advantage of QSWL
GSC is that the main beam can always point to the desired signal's direction and 
the robustness to DOA mismatch is improved. Finally, simulations are used to
verify the performance of the proposed QSWL GSC.

PMCID: PMC4032679
PMID: 24955425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. FEBS Open Bio. 2014 May 22;4:485-95. doi: 10.1016/j.fob.2014.05.002. eCollection 
2014.

Tumor suppressive miRNA-34a suppresses cell proliferation and tumor growth of
glioma stem cells by targeting Akt and Wnt signaling pathways.

Rathod SS(1), Rani SB(1), Khan M(1), Muzumdar D(2), Shiras A(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Cell Science, Pune, India. (2)Seth GS Medical College and 
KEM Hospital, Mumbai, India.

MiRNA-34a is considered as a potential prognostic marker for glioma, as studies
suggest that its expression negatively correlates with patient survival in grade 
III and IV glial tumors. Here, we show that expression of miR-34a was decreased
in a graded manner in glioma and glioma stem cell-lines as compared to normal
brain tissues. Ectopic expression of miR-34a in glioma stem cell-lines HNGC-2 and
NSG-K16 decreased the proliferative and migratory potential of these cells,
induced cell cycle arrest and caused apoptosis. Notably, the miR-34a glioma cells
formed significantly smaller xenografts in immuno-deficient mice as compared with
control glioma stem cell-lines. Here, using a bioinformatics approach and various
biological assays, we identify Rictor, as a novel target for miR-34a in glioma
stem cells. Rictor, a defining component of mTORC2 complex, is involved in cell
survival signaling. mTORC2 lays downstream of Akt, and thus is a direct activator
of Akt. Our earlier studies have elaborated on role of Rictor in glioma invasion 
(Das et al., 2011). Here, we demonstrate that miR34a over-expression in glioma
stem cells profoundly decreased levels of p-AKT (Ser473), increased GSK-3ß levels
and targeted for degradation ß-catenin, an important mediator of Wnt signaling
pathway. This led to diminished levels of the Wnt effectors cyclin D1 and c-myc. 
Collectively, we show that the tumor suppressive function of miR-34a in
glioblastoma is mediated via Rictor, which through its effects on AKT/mTOR
pathway and Wnt signaling causes pronounced effects on glioma malignancy.

PMCID: PMC4060015
PMID: 24944883  [PubMed]


251. J Gastrointest Surg. 2014 Aug;18(8):1429-33. doi: 10.1007/s11605-014-2576-3. Epub
2014 Jun 19.

Subtotal gastrectomy with limited lymph node dissection is a feasible treatment
option for patients with early gastric stump cancer.

Irino T(1), Hiki N, Nunobe S, Ohashi M, Tanimura S, Sano T, Yamaguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Cancer Institute Hospital, 3-8-31, 
Ariake, Koto-ku, 135-8550, Tokyo, Japan.

The de facto standard treatment for early gastric stump cancer (GSC) has been
total gastrectomy combined with radical lymph node dissection. However, some
patients could benefit if partial resection of the gastric stump is feasible. We 
investigated the feasibility of subtotal gastrectomy for early GSC as less
invasive surgery. Subtotal gastrectomy was defined as a segmental resection of
the gastric remnant including the anastomosis with limited lymph node dissection.
A total of 66 patients with early GSC were enrolled and 24 patients (36.4 %)
underwent subtotal gastrectomy (SG group). Clinicopathological characteristics
were analyzed along with those of the other 42 patients (63.6 %) who underwent
total gastrectomy (TG group). There were no significant differences between the
two groups in the number of lymph nodes harvested (p = 0.880). Lymph node
involvement was detected in 2 patients (8.3 %) in SG group and 5 patients (11.9
%) in TG group (p = 1.000). The previous disease (benign or malignant) and
surgery (Billroth I or II) did not affect the rate of nodal involvement. The
5-year overall survival rate of SG group (94.7 %) was acceptable. Subtotal
gastrectomy of the gastric remnant could be a feasible treatment option for
patients with early gastric stump cancer when indicated.

PMID: 24944156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Glia. 2014 Oct;62(10):1687-98. doi: 10.1002/glia.22708. Epub 2014 Jun 7.

Molecular targeting of TRF2 suppresses the growth and tumorigenesis of
glioblastoma stem cells.

Bai Y(1), Lathia JD, Zhang P, Flavahan W, Rich JN, Mattson MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking
University Health Science Center, Beijing, 100191, China; Laboratory of
Neurosciences, National Institute on Aging Intramural Research Program,
Baltimore, Maryland.

Glioblastoma is the most prevalent primary brain tumor and is essentially
universally fatal within 2 years of diagnosis. Glioblastomas contain cellular
hierarchies with self-renewing glioblastoma stem cells (GSCs) that are often
resistant to chemotherapy and radiation therapy. GSCs express high amounts of
repressor element 1 silencing transcription factor (REST), which may contribute
to their resistance to standard therapies. Telomere repeat-binding factor 2
(TRF2) stablizes telomeres and REST to maintain self-renewal of neural stem cells
and tumor cells. Here we show viral vector-mediated delivery of shRNAs targeting 
TRF2 mRNA depletes TRF2 and REST from GSCs isolated from patient specimens. As a 
result, GSC proliferation is reduced and the level of proteins normally expressed
by postmitotic neurons (L1CAM and ß3-tubulin) is increased, suggesting that loss 
of TRF2 engages a cell differentiation program in the GSCs. Depletion of TRF2
also sensitizes GSCs to temozolomide, a DNA-alkylating agent currently used to
treat glioblastoma. Targeting TRF2 significantly increased the survival of mice
bearing GSC xenografts. These findings reveal a role for TRF2 in the maintenance 
of REST-associated proliferation and chemotherapy resistance of GSCs, suggesting 
that TRF2 is a potential therapeutic target for glioblastoma.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4141001
PMID: 24909307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Gastric Cancer. 2015 Jul;18(3):485-94. doi: 10.1007/s10120-014-0390-y. Epub 2014 
Jun 8.

Overexpression of Ephrin A2 receptors in cancer stromal cells is a prognostic
factor for the relapse of gastric cancer.

Kikuchi S(1), Kaibe N, Morimoto K, Fukui H, Niwa H, Maeyama Y, Takemura M,
Matsumoto M, Nakamori S, Miwa H, Hirota S, Sasako M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Hyogo College of Medicine, 1-1 Mukogawa-cho,
Nishinomiya, Hyogo, 663-8501, Japan, skikuchi@hyo-med.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Microenvironments control cancer growth and progression. We explored 
the prognostic impact of stromal reaction and cancer stromal cells on relapse
risk and survival after curative gastrectomy in gastric cancer patients.
METHODS: Tissue samples were obtained from 107 patients with gastric
adenocarcinoma who underwent curative (R0) gastrectomy. Primary stromal cells
isolated from gastric cancer tissue (GCSC) and normal gastric tissue (Gastric
stromal cell: GSC) in each patient were cultured and subjected to comprehensive
proteome (LC-MS/MS) and real-time RT-PCR analysis. Expression of Ephrin A2
receptors (EphA2) in cancers and GCSC was evaluated immunohistochemically.
Intermingling of EphA2-positive cancer cells and GCSC (IC/A2+) and overexpression
of EphA2 in cancer cells (Ca/A2+) in invasive parts of tumors were assessed, as
were relationships of IC/A2+, Ca/A2+, and clinicopathological factors with
relapse-free survival and overall survival.
RESULTS: Proteome analysis showed that EphA2 expression was significantly higher 
in GCSC than GSC. Real-time RT-PCR analysis showed that levels of EphA1/A2/A3/A5 
and EphB2/B4 were =2.0-fold higher in GCSC than GSC. Ca/A2 and IC/A2 were
positive in 65 (60.7 %) and 26 (24.3 %) patients, respectively. Relapse was
significantly more frequent in IC/A2-positive than in IC/A2-negative (HR, 2.12;
95 % CI, 1.16-5.41; p = 0.0207) patients. Among the 54 patients who received S-1 
adjuvant chemotherapy, relapse-free survival (RFS) was significantly shorter in
those who were IC/A2-positive than in those who were IC/A2-negative and
Ca/A2-negative (HR, 2.83; 95 % CI, 1.12-12.12; p = 0.0339). Multivariable
analysis indicated that pathological stage (p = 0.010) and IC/A2+ (p = 0.008)
were independent risk factors for recurrence.
CONCLUSION: IC/A2+ was predictive of relapse after curative (R0) gastrectomy.

PMID: 24908114  [PubMed - in process]


254. Development. 2014 Jul;141(13):2602-10. doi: 10.1242/dev.109611. Epub 2014 Jun 5.

Without children is required for Stat-mediated zfh1 transcription and for
germline stem cell differentiation.

Maimon I(1), Popliker M(1), Gilboa L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological regulation, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel. (2)Department of Biological regulation, Weizmann Institute of
Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel lilach.gilboa@weizmann.ac.il.

Tissue homeostasis is maintained by balancing stem cell self-renewal and
differentiation. How surrounding cells support this process has not been entirely
resolved. Here we show that the chromatin and telomere-binding factor Without
children (Woc) is required for maintaining the association of escort cells (ECs) 
with germ cells in adult ovaries. This tight association is essential for
germline stem cell (GSC) differentiation into cysts. Woc is also required in
larval ovaries for the association of intermingled cells (ICs) with primordial
germ cells. Reduction in the levels of two other proteins, Stat92E and its target
Zfh1, produce phenotypes similar to woc in both larval and adult ovaries,
suggesting a molecular connection between these three proteins. Antibody staining
and RT-qPCR demonstrate that Zfh1 levels are increased in somatic cells that
contact germ cells, and that Woc is required for a Stat92E-mediated upregulation 
of zfh1 transcription. Our results further demonstrate that overexpression of
Zfh1 in ECs can rescue GSC differentiation in woc-deficient ovaries. Thus, Zfh1
is a major Woc target in ECs. Stat signalling in niche cells has been previously 
shown to maintain GSCs non-autonomously. We now show that Stat92E also promotes
GSC differentiation. Our results highlight the Woc-Stat-Zfh1 module as promoting 
somatic encapsulation of germ cells throughout their development. Each somatic
cell type can then provide the germline with the support it requires at that
particular stage. Stat is thus a permissive factor, which explains its apparently
opposite roles in GSC maintenance and differentiation.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 24903753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. BMC Bioinformatics. 2014 May 16;15:144. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-15-144.

MOIRAI: a compact workflow system for CAGE analysis.

Hasegawa A, Daub C, Carninci P, Hayashizaki Y, Lassmann T(1).

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies (CLST), Riken Yokohama Institute,
1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, 230-0045 Kanagawa, Japan.
lassmann@gsc.riken.jp.

BACKGROUND: Cap analysis of gene expression (CAGE) is a sequencing based
technology to capture the 5' ends of RNAs in a biological sample. After mapping, 
a CAGE peak on the genome indicates the position of an active transcriptional
start site (TSS) and the number of reads correspond to its expression level. CAGE
is prominently used in both the FANTOM and ENCODE project but presently there is 
no software package to perform the essential data processing steps.
RESULTS: Here we describe MOIRAI, a compact yet flexible workflow system designed
to carry out the main steps in data processing and analysis of CAGE data. MOIRAI 
has a graphical interface allowing wet-lab researchers to create, modify and run 
analysis workflows. Embedded within the workflows are graphical quality control
indicators allowing users assess data quality and to quickly spot potential
problems. We will describe three main workflows allowing users to map, annotate
and perform an expression analysis over multiple samples.
CONCLUSIONS: Due to the many built in quality control features MOIRAI is
especially suitable to support the development of new sequencing based protocols.
AVAILIABILITY: The MOIRAI source code is freely available at
http://sourceforge.net/projects/moirai/.

PMCID: PMC4033680
PMID: 24884663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 2014 Aug;173(7):1727-36. doi: 10.1007/s12010-014-0960-9.
Epub 2014 May 27.

Small molecules differentiate definitive endoderm from human induced pluripotent 
stem cells on PCL scaffold.

Hoveizi E(1), Khodadadi S, Tavakol S, Karima O, Nasiri-Khalili MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, Shahid Chamran University of
Ahvaz, Ahvaz, Iran, e.hoveizi@yahoo.com.

Human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) are attractive sources of cells for
disease modeling in vitro, and they may eventually provide access to
cells/tissues for the treatment of many degenerative diseases. Stepwise
differentiation from hiPSCs to definitive endoderm (DE) will identify a key step 
in hepatocytes and beta cell development and may prove useful for transplantation
therapy for liver diseases and diabetes. Inducer of definitive endoderm 1 (IDE1) 
is known to play an important role in the regional specification of DE. Here, we 
have investigated the effect of stimulation with IDE1 on the development of
hiPSCs into DE cells in three-dimensional (3D) cultures. The differentiation was 
determined by immunofluorescence staining with Sox17, FoxA2, and goosecoid (Gsc) 
and also by quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
(qRT-PCR) analysis. In this study, we showed that hiPSCs with 6-day IDE1
treatment (as chemical tool) on poly(e-caprolactone) (PCL) nanofibrous scaffold
were able to differentiate into DE cells.

PMID: 24861317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Oncol Rep. 2014 Jul;32(1):189-98. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3203. Epub 2014 May 20.

Overexpression of goosecoid homeobox is associated with chemoresistance and poor 
prognosis in ovarian carcinoma.

Kang KW(1), Lee MJ(1), Song JA(1), Jeong JY(1), Kim YK(1), Lee C(2), Kim TH(1),
Kwak KB(3), Kim OJ(1), An HJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical Research, College of Medicine, CHA University, Sungnam 
463-712, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Gynecologic Oncology, College of
Medicine, CHA University, Sungnam 463-712, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of
Biomedical Science, College of Life Science, CHA University, Sungnam 463-712,
Republic of Korea.

Ovarian carcinoma is the most lethal cancer among all gynecological malignancies 
due to recurrence through chemoresistance. The aim of the present study was to
identify new biomarkers to predict chemoresistance and prognosis in ovarian
carcinomas. The mRNA expression by qRT-PCR was examined in 60 ovarian serous
carcinomas for selected genes from the screening by PCR array focusing on
apoptosis, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and cancer pathways. The clinical
impact was assessed by analyzing the correlation between gene expression and
clinicopathological variables. Further validation with immunohistochemistry was
performed with 75 cases of serous carcinomas. The chemoresistance was
significantly associated with high expression of FOS, GSC, SNAI1, TERT and
TNFRSF10D, and low expression of CDKN1A, TNFRSF10A, TNFRSF10C and TRAF1 (p<0.05, 
t-test). Low expression of TRAF1 and high expression of E2F1, FOS, TERT and GSC
were significantly associated with advanced clinical stage (p<0.05, <U+03C7>2-test).
Lymph node metastasis was significantly associated with high expression of GSC.
The upregulation group of TERT, GSC, NOTCH1 and SNAI1, and downregulation group
of TRAF1 were significantly associated with poor overall survival (p<0.05,
log-rank test). On further validation with immunohistochemistry, overexpression
of goosecoid homeobox (GSC) was associated with poor overall survival. The
results suggest that GSC is the most potential biomarker of drug response and
poor prognosis in ovarian serous carcinomas.

PMID: 24858567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Jul;1839(7):559-70. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.05.003.
Epub 2014 May 17.

Distinct functions of alternatively spliced isoforms encoded by zebrafish mef2ca 
and mef2cb.

Ganassi M(1), Badodi S(2), Polacchini A(2), Baruffaldi F(2), Battini R(2), Hughes
SM(3), Hinits Y(4), Molinari S(5).

Author information: 
(1)University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Department of Life Sciences, Italy;
Randall Division of Cell and Molecular Biophysics, New Hunt's House, Guy's
Campus, King's College London, SE1 1UL, UK. (2)University of Modena and Reggio
Emilia, Department of Life Sciences, Italy. (3)Randall Division of Cell and
Molecular Biophysics, New Hunt's House, Guy's Campus, King's College London, SE1 
1UL, UK. (4)Randall Division of Cell and Molecular Biophysics, New Hunt's House, 
Guy's Campus, King's College London, SE1 1UL, UK. Electronic address:
yaniv.hinits@kcl.ac.uk. (5)University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Department of 
Life Sciences, Italy. Electronic address: susanna.molinari@unimore.it.

In mammals, an array of MEF2C proteins is generated by alternative splicing (AS),
yet specific functions have not been ascribed to each isoform. Teleost fish
possess two MEF2C paralogues, mef2ca and mef2cb. In zebrafish, the Mef2cs
function to promote cardiomyogenic differentiation and myofibrillogenesis in
nascent skeletal myofibers. We found that zebrafish mef2ca and mef2cb are
alternatively spliced in the coding exons 4-6 region and these splice variants
differ in their biological activity. Of the two, mef2ca is more abundantly
expressed in developing skeletal muscle, its activity is tuned through zebrafish 
development by AS. By 24hpf, we found the prevalent expression of the highly
active full length protein in differentiated muscle in the somites. The splicing 
isoform of mef2ca that lacks exon 5 (mef2ca 4-6), encodes a protein that has 50% 
lower transcriptional activity, and is found mainly earlier in development,
before muscle differentiation. mef2ca transcripts including exon 5 (mef2ca 4-5-6)
are present early in the embryo. Over-expression of this isoform alters the
expression of genes involved in early dorso-ventral patterning of the embryo such
as chordin, nodal related 1 and goosecoid, and induces severe developmental
defects. AS of mef2cb generates a long splicing isoform in the exon 5 region
(Mef2cbL) that predominates during somitogenesis. Mef2cbL contains an
evolutionarily conserved domain derived from exonization of a fragment of intron 
5, which confers the ability to induce ectopic muscle in mesoderm upon
over-expression of the protein. Taken together, the data show that AS is a
significant regulator of Mef2c activity.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4064114
PMID: 24844180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Int J Oncol. 2014 Aug;45(2):699-709. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2448. Epub 2014 May
19.

ß-elemene inhibits stemness, promotes differentiation and impairs chemoresistance
to temozolomide in glioblastoma stem-like cells.

Zhu TZ(1), Li XM(1), Luo LH(2), Song ZQ(1), Gao X(1), Li ZQ(1), Su JY(1), Liang
GB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, General Hospital of Shenyang Military Area
Command, Shenyang 110840, P.R. China. (2)Health Care Centre, Shenyang Entry-Exit 
Inspection and Quarantine Bureau, Shenyang 110016, P.R. China.

Accumulating evidence indicates that glioblastoma stem-like cells (GSCs) are key 
factors in tumour development, recurrence and chemoresistance. The impairment of 
stemness and the enhancement of differentiation contributes to the weakening of
radiation and chemotherapy resistance of GSCs. We previously found that ß-elemene
was an effective anti-glioblastoma agent and chemosensitizer. In this study, we
examined the distribution of CD133(+) cells in human glioblastoma tissues by
immunohistochemistry. Following treatment with ß-elemene, the formation of GSC
spheres was investigated by manual counting, the proliferation of GSCs was
measured with a Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) assay, and the dispersion of GSC
spheres was observed with an inverted microscope. GSC spheres were treated with
ß-elemene, and the expression levels of CD133, ATP-binding cassette subfamily G
member 2 (ABCG2) and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) were examined by
western blotting. After treatment with ß-elemene, the volumes and weights of GSC 
xenografts were measured, and the expression of CD133, ABCG2 and GFAP was
evaluated through immunohistochemistry analysis. After treatment with ß-elemene
and temozolomide (TMZ), GSC viability was examined by the CCK-8 assay, and the
volumes and weights of xenografts were measured. We found that CD133(+) cells
were assembled in some vascular walls and also sparsely distributed in other
parts of glioblastoma tissues. ß-elemene decreased the formation of GSC spheres, 
dispersed GSC spheres and inhibited the proliferation of GSCs in vitro and in
vivo. In the GSC spheres and xenografts treated with ß-elemene, the expression of
CD133 and ABCG2 was significantly downregulated, and the expression of GFAP
increased. Furthermore, the sensitivity of GSCs to TMZ was enhanced in vitro and 
in vivo. These results suggest that ß-elemene impaired the stemness of GSC
spheres, promoted their differentiation and sensitized GSCs to TMZ. ß-elemene
will hopefully become a valuable agent to enhance the effects of radiotherapy and
chemotherapy.

PMID: 24841897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Consult Clin Psychol. 2014 Dec;82(6):1128-39. doi: 10.1037/a0036939. Epub 2014 
May 19.

A randomized controlled trial of guided self-change with minority adolescents.

Wagner EF(1), Hospital MM(1), Graziano JN(1), Morris SL(1), Gil AG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Community-Based Intervention Research Group.

OBJECTIVE: Adolescent substance use and abuse is a pressing public health problem
and is strongly related to interpersonal aggression. Such problems
disproportionately impact minority youth, who have limited access to
evidence-based interventions such as ecological family therapies, brief
motivational interventions (BMIs), and cognitive behavioral therapies (CBTs).
With a predominantly minority sample, our objective was to rigorously evaluate
the efficacy of a school-based BMI/CBT, Guided Self-Change (GSC), for addressing 
substance use and aggressive behavior.
METHOD: We conducted a school-based randomized, controlled trial with 514 high
school students (mean age 16.24 years, 41% female, 80% minority) reporting using 
substances and perpetrating aggression. We used structural equation modeling to
compare participants randomly assigned to receive GSC or standard care (SC;
education/assessment/referral-only) at posttreatment and at 3 and 6 months
posttreatment on alcohol use, drug use, and interpersonal aggression outcomes as 
assessed by the Timeline Follow-Back.
RESULTS: Compared with SC participants, GSC participants showed significant
reductions (p < .05) in total number of alcohol use days (Cohen's d = 0.45 at
posttreatment and 0.20 at 3 months posttreatment), drug use days (Cohen's d =
0.22 at posttreatment and 0.20 at 3 months posttreatment), and aggressive
behavior incidents (Cohen's d = 0.23 at posttreatment). Moreover, treatment
effects did not vary by gender or ethnicity.
CONCLUSIONS: With minority youth experiencing mild to moderate problems with
substance use and aggressive behavior, GSC holds promise as an early intervention
approach that can be implemented with success in schools.

PMCID: PMC4757436
PMID: 24841864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Stem Cells. 2014 Aug;32(8):2033-47. doi: 10.1002/stem.1730.

The zinc finger transcription factor ZFX is required for maintaining the
tumorigenic potential of glioblastoma stem cells.

Fang X(1), Huang Z, Zhou W, Wu Q, Sloan AE, Ouyang G, McLendon RE, Yu JS, Rich
JN, Bao S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Lerner Research
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

Glioblastomas are highly lethal brain tumors containing tumor-propagating glioma 
stem cells (GSCs). The molecular mechanisms underlying the maintenance of the GSC
phenotype are not fully defined. Here we demonstrate that the zinc finger and
X-linked transcription factor (ZFX) maintains GSC self-renewal and tumorigenic
potential by upregulating c-Myc expression. ZFX is differentially expressed in
GSCs relative to non-stem glioma cells and neural progenitor cells. Disrupting
ZFX by shRNA reduced c-Myc expression and potently inhibited GSC self-renewal and
tumor growth. Ectopic expression of c-Myc to its endogenous level rescued the
effects caused by ZFX disruption, supporting that ZFX controls GSC properties
through c-Myc. Furthermore, ZFX binds to a specific sequence (GGGCCCCG) on the
human c-Myc promoter to upregulate c-Myc expression. These data demonstrate that 
ZFX functions as a critical upstream regulator of c-Myc and plays essential roles
in the maintenance of the GSC phenotype. This study also supports that c-Myc is a
dominant driver linking self-renewal to malignancy.

© 2014 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4349564
PMID: 24831540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Int J Oncol. 2014 Jul;45(1):302-10. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2432. Epub 2014 May 9.

The role of Src family kinases in growth and migration of glioma stem cells.

Han X(1), Zhang W(1), Yang X(1), Wheeler CG(1), Langford CP(2), Wu L(1),
Filippova N(1), Friedman GK(3), Ding Q(4), Fathallah-Shaykh HM(1), Gillespie
GY(2), Nabors LB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuro-Oncology, Department of Neurology, University of Alabama at 
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294-3410, USA. (2)Division of Neurosurgery,
Department of Surgery, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL
35294-3410, USA. (3)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294-3410, USA. (4)Division 
of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294-3410, USA.

Src family kinases (SFKs) are highly expressed and active in clinical
glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) specimens. SFKs inhibitors have been demonstrated
to inhibit proliferation and migration of glioma cells. However, the role of SFKs
in glioma stem cells (GSCs), which are important for treatment resistance and
recurrence, has not been reported. Here, we examined the expression pattern of
individual members of SFKs and their functional role in CD133<U+207A> GSCs in comparison
to primary glioma cells. We found that Fyn, c-Src and Yes were robustly expressed
in GSCs while Lck was absent. Knockdown of c-Src, Yes or treatment with the SFK
inhibitor dasatinib inhibited the migration of GSCs, but had no impact on their
growth or self-renewal. These results suggest that SFKs represent an effective
target for GSC migration but not for their growth.

PMCID: PMC4079155
PMID: 24819299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Cell Death Dis. 2014 May 8;5:e1223. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.188.

Combined PDK1 and CHK1 inhibition is required to kill glioblastoma stem-like
cells in vitro and in vivo.

Signore M(1), Pelacchi F(1), di Martino S(2), Runci D(1), Biffoni M(1), Giannetti
S(3), Morgante L(3), De Majo M(1), Petricoin EF(4), Stancato L(5), Larocca LM(6),
De Maria R(2), Pallini R(7), Ricci-Vitiani L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore 
di Sanità, Rome, Italy. (2)Italian National Cancer Institute 'Regina Elena',
Rome, Italy. (3)Institute of Human Anatomy, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore,
Rome, Italy. (4)Center for Applied Proteomics and Molecular Medicine, George
Mason University, Manassas, VA, USA. (5)Cancer Biology and Patient Tailoring,
Discovery Oncology, Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, IN, USA. (6)Institute of
Pathology, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy. (7)Institute of
Neurosurgery, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common and deadly adult brain tumor. Despite
aggressive surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy, the life expectancy of patients 
diagnosed with GBM is ~14 months. The extremely aggressive nature of GBM results 
from glioblastoma stem-like cells (GSCs) that sustain GBM growth, survive
intensive chemotherapy, and give rise to tumor recurrence. There is accumulating 
evidence revealing that GSC resilience is because of concomitant activation of
multiple survival pathways. In order to decode the signal transduction networks
responsible for the malignant properties of GSCs, we analyzed a collection of GSC
lines using a dual, but complementary, experimental approach, that is,
reverse-phase protein microarrays (RPPMs) and kinase inhibitor library screening.
We treated GSCs in vitro with clinically relevant concentrations of temozolomide 
(TMZ) and performed RPPM to detect changes in phosphorylation patterns that could
be associated with resistance. In addition, we screened GSCs in vitro with a
library of protein and lipid kinase inhibitors to identify specific targets
involved in GSC survival and proliferation. We show that GSCs are relatively
insensitive to TMZ treatment in terms of pathway activation and, although
displaying heterogeneous individual phospho-proteomic profiles, most GSCs are
resistant to specific inhibition of the major signaling pathways involved in cell
survival and proliferation. However, simultaneous multipathway inhibition by the 
staurosporin derivative UCN-01 results in remarkable inhibition of GSC growth in 
vitro. The activity of UCN-01 on GSCs was confirmed in two in vivo models of GBM 
growth. Finally, we used RPPM to study the molecular and functional effects of
UCN-01 and demonstrated that the sensitivity to UCN-01 correlates with activation
of survival signals mediated by PDK1 and the DNA damage response initiated by
CHK1. Taken together, our results suggest that a combined inhibition of PDK1 and 
CHK1 represents a potentially effective therapeutic approach to reduce the growth
of human GBM.

PMCID: PMC4047898
PMID: 24810059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Biochem Pharmacol. 2014 Jun 15;89(4):477-89. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2014.04.014. Epub
2014 Apr 30.

Anti-neoplastic activity of low-dose endothelial-monocyte activating
polypeptide-II results from defective autophagy and G2/M arrest mediated by
PI3K/Akt/FoxO1 axis in human glioblastoma stem cells.

Liu J(1), Liu L(2), Xue Y(2), Meng F(2), Li S(1), Wang P(2), Liu Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University,
Shenyang 110004, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of Neurobiology,
College of Basic Medicine, China Medical University, Shenyang 110001, People's
Republic of China; Institute of Pathology and Pathophysiology, China Medical
University, Shenyang 110001, People's Republic of China. (3)Department of
Neurosurgery, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang 110004,
People's Republic of China. Electronic address: liuyunhui2014@yeah.net.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is a life-threatening brain tumor with fatal
recurrence, for which glioblastoma stem cells (GSCs) are held responsible. Though
endothelial-monocyte activating polypeptide-II (EMAP-II) has been confirmed as a 
possible antitumor agent that can induce apoptosis of endothelial cells and
inhibit tumor angiogenesis, the direct cytotoxicity by EMAP-II on tumor cells and
its underlying mechanism are largely unknown. In the present study, it was
demonstrated that low-dose (0.05 nM) EMAP-II reduces cell viability and
mitochondrial membrane potential in vitro. Likewise, EMAP-II suppressed tumor
growth in GSC-xenografted mice. Though no apoptosis was detected, all these
antitumor effects were attenuated when GSCs were pretreated with 3-methyladenine 
(3-MA). Analysis of EMAP-II-treated GSCs exhibited the morphological and
biochemical changes typical of autophagy, which was further shown to be
defective. Moreover, EMAP-II was found to suppress tumor growth by inducing G2/M 
arrest in GSCs. Our data further showed that EMAP-II inhibited PI3K/Akt
activation with concomitant induction of FoxO1 activation. FoxO1 knockdown
significantly attenuated the induction of autophagy and G2/M arrest. Excessive
accumulation of lipid droplets was intriguingly detected by transmission electron
microscope, which was accompanied by autophagosomes. Further investigation
indicated that the transcriptional regulation of Atg2B by FoxO1 was responsible
for the induction of autophagy and formation of lipid droplets. These results
suggest that EMAP-II is an effective anticancer agent for glioblastoma therapy,
which can induce direct growth suppression in GSCs through defective autophagy
and G2/M arrest mediated by the PI3K/Akt/FoxO1 axis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24792437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Neuroreport. 2014 May 28;25(8):625-32. doi: 10.1097/WNR.0000000000000161.

Downregulation of ABCG2 protein inhibits migration and invasion in U251 glioma
stem cells.

Gong W(1), Wang Z, Wan Y, Shi L, Zhou Y.

Author information: 
(1)aDepartment of Neurosurgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University bDepartment of Neurosurgery, The First People's Hospital of Kunshan
Affiliated with Jiangsu University cDepartment of Neurosurgery, Suzhou Kowloon
Hospital affiliated with Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine,
Suzhou, People's Republic of China.

ABCG2 is a member of the ATP-binding cassette transporter family, which has been 
detected in a wide variety of human aggressive tumors, including glioma stem
cells (GSCs), glioma tissues of higher grades, and implanted glioma xenografts.
Previous research has implied that ABCG2 might be associated closely with
invasion and spread in tumors. However, the specific roles and mechanisms of
ABCG2 in regulating the migration and invasion of GSCs remain unclear. In this
study, we aimed to identify the effects and mechanisms of ABCG2 on invasion by
GSCs. Our results showed that downregulation of ABCG2 protein significantly
inhibited the migration and invasion potentials of U251 GSCs. Further research on
the underlying mechanism showed that the effects of ABCG2 downregulation on
inhibiting the migration and invasion of U251 GSCs were through significantly
decreasing the activity of matrix metalloproteinase-9, but not the expression of 
matrix metalloproteinase-9 protein. These findings show that ABCG2 plays an
important role in regulating the migration and invasion of GSC, and represents a 
potential novel therapeutic agent to target the progression of GSCs.

PMID: 24781949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. BMC Genomics. 2014 Apr 25;15:269. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-269.

RECLU: a pipeline to discover reproducible transcriptional start sites and their 
alternative regulation using capped analysis of gene expression (CAGE).

Ohmiya H, Vitezic M, Frith MC, Itoh M, Carninci P, Forrest AR, Hayashizaki Y,
Lassmann T(1); FANTOM Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies (CLST), Division of Genomic
Technologies, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, 230-0045 
Yokohama, Japan. lassmann@gsc.riken.jp.

BACKGROUND: Next generation sequencing based technologies are being extensively
used to study transcriptomes. Among these, cap analysis of gene expression (CAGE)
is specialized in detecting the most 5' ends of RNA molecules. After mapping the 
sequenced reads back to a reference genome CAGE data highlights the
transcriptional start sites (TSSs) and their usage at a single nucleotide
resolution.
RESULTS: We propose a pipeline to group the single nucleotide TSS into larger
reproducible peaks and compare their usage across biological states. Importantly,
our pipeline discovers broad peaks as well as the fine structure of individual
transcriptional start sites embedded within them. We assess the performance of
our approach on a large CAGE datasets including 156 primary cell types and two
cell lines with biological replicas. We demonstrate that genes have complicated
structures of transcription initiation events. In particular, we discover that
narrow peaks embedded in broader regions of transcriptional activity can be
differentially used even if the larger region is not.
CONCLUSIONS: By examining the reproducible fine scaled organization of TSS we can
detect many differentially regulated peaks undetected by previous approaches.

PMCID: PMC4029093
PMID: 24779366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. World J Stem Cells. 2014 Apr 26;6(2):230-8. doi: 10.4252/wjsc.v6.i2.230.

Glioblastoma stem cells: Molecular characteristics and therapeutic implications.

Bayin NS(1), Modrek AS(1), Placantonakis DG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Nermin Sumru Bayin, Aram Sandaldjian Modrek, Dimitris George Placantonakis,
Department of Neurosurgery, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 
10016, United States.

Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) is a grade IV astrocytoma, with a median survival
of 14.6 mo. Within GBM, stem-like cells, namely glioblastoma stem cells (GSCs),
have the ability to self-renew, differentiate into distinct lineages within the
tumor and initiate tumor xenografts in immunocompromised animal models. More
importantly, GSCs utilize cell-autonomous and tumor microenvironment-mediated
mechanisms to overcome current therapeutic approaches. They are, therefore, very 
important therapeutic targets. Although the functional criteria defining GSCs are
well defined, their molecular characteristics, the mechanisms whereby they
establish the cellular hierarchy within tumors, and their contribution to tumor
heterogeneity are not well understood. This review is aimed at summarizing
current findings about GSCs and their therapeutic importance from a molecular and
cellular point of view. A better characterization of GSCs is crucial for
designing effective GSC-targeted therapies.

PMCID: PMC3999780
PMID: 24772249  [PubMed]


268. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 22;9(4):e95872. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095872. eCollection
2014.

Enhanced antitumor efficacy of an oncolytic herpes simplex virus expressing an
endostatin-angiostatin fusion gene in human glioblastoma stem cell xenografts.

Zhang G(1), Jin G(2), Nie X(3), Mi R(2), Zhu G(2), Jia W(4), Liu F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Beijing Tiantan Hospital affiliated to Capital
Medical University, Beijing, P.R. China. (2)Brain Tumor Research Center, Beijing 
Neurosurgical Institute, Beijing Tiantan Hospital affiliated to Capital Medical
University, Beijing, P.R. China. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, Rizhao City
People's Hospital, Shandong, P.R. China. (4)Brain Research Center, Department of 
Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

Viruses have demonstrated strong potential for the therapeutic targeting of
glioblastoma stem cells (GSCs). In this study, the use of a herpes simplex virus 
carrying endostatin-angiostatin (VAE) as a novel therapeutic targeting strategy
for glioblastoma-derived cancer stem cells was investigated. We isolated six
stable GSC-enriched cultures from 36 human glioblastoma specimens and selected
one of the stable GSCs lines for establishing GSC-carrying orthotopic nude mouse 
models. The following results were obtained: (a) VAE rapidly proliferated in GSCs
and expressed endo-angio in vitro and in vivo 48 h and 10 d after infection,
respectively; (b) compared with the control gliomas treated with rHSV or
Endostar, the subcutaneous gliomas derived from the GSCs showed a significant
reduction in microvessel density after VAE treatment; (c) compared with the
control, a significant improvement was observed in the length of the survival of 
mice with intracranial and subcutaneous gliomas treated with VAE; (d) MRI
analysis showed that the tumor volumes of the intracranial gliomas generated by
GSCs remarkably decreased after 10 d of VAE treatment compared with the controls.
In conclusion, VAE demonstrated oncolytic therapeutic efficacy in animal models
of human GSCs and expressed an endostatin-angiostatin fusion gene, which enhanced
antitumor efficacy most likely by restricting tumor microvasculature development.

PMCID: PMC3995956
PMID: 24755877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 21;9(4):e95584. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095584. eCollection
2014.

Scaling up stomatal conductance from leaf to canopy using a dual-leaf model for
estimating crop evapotranspiration.

Ding R(1), Kang S(1), Du T(1), Hao X(1), Zhang Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Agricultural Water Research in China, China Agricultural
University, Beijing, China. (2)National Center of Efficient Irrigation
Engineering and Technology Research-Beijing, China Institute of Water Resources
and Hydropower Research, Beijing, China.

The dual-source Shuttleworth-Wallace model has been widely used to estimate and
partition crop evapotranspiration (<U+03BB>ET). Canopy stomatal conductance (Gsc), an
essential parameter of the model, is often calculated by scaling up leaf stomatal
conductance, considering the canopy as one single leaf in a so-called "big-leaf" 
model. However, Gsc can be overestimated or underestimated depending on leaf area
index level in the big-leaf model, due to a non-linear stomatal response to
light. A dual-leaf model, scaling up Gsc from leaf to canopy, was developed in
this study. The non-linear stomata-light relationship was incorporated by
dividing the canopy into sunlit and shaded fractions and calculating each
fraction separately according to absorbed irradiances. The model includes: (1)
the absorbed irradiance, determined by separately integrating the sunlit and
shaded leaves with consideration of both beam and diffuse radiation; (2) leaf
area for the sunlit and shaded fractions; and (3) a leaf conductance model that
accounts for the response of stomata to PAR, vapor pressure deficit and available
soil water. In contrast to the significant errors of Gsc in the big-leaf model,
the predicted Gsc using the dual-leaf model had a high degree of data-model
agreement; the slope of the linear regression between daytime predictions and
measurements was 1.01 (R2<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.98), with RMSE of 0.6120 mm s-1 for four clear-sky 
days in different growth stages. The estimates of half-hourly <U+03BB>ET using the
dual-source dual-leaf model (DSDL) agreed well with measurements and the error
was within 5% during two growing seasons of maize with differing
hydrometeorological and management strategies. Moreover, the estimates of soil
evaporation using the DSDL model closely matched actual measurements. Our results
indicate that the DSDL model can produce more accurate estimation of Gsc and <U+03BB>ET,
compared to the big-leaf model, and thus is an effective alternative approach for
estimating and partitioning <U+03BB>ET.

PMCID: PMC3994067
PMID: 24752329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. J Biol Regul Homeost Agents. 2014 Jan-Mar;28(1):1-15.

Glioblastoma stem cells: a new target for metformin and arsenic trioxide.

Carmignani M(1), Volpe AR(1), Aldea M(2), Soritau O(3), Irimie A(4), Florian
IS(5), Tomuleasa C(6), Baritchii A(5), Petrushev B(2), Crisan G(7), Valle G(8).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pharmacology and Toxicologyy, Department of Life, Health and
Environmental Sciences, University of L'Aquila, Coppito, Italy. (2)Iuliu
Hatieganu University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj Napoca, Romania.
(3)Department of Immunology, Ion Chiricuta Comprehensive Cancer Center, Cluj
Napoca, Romania. (4)Departments of Surgery, Iuliu Hatieganu University of
Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj Napoca, Romania. (5)Neurosurgery, Iuliu Hatieganu
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj Napoca, Romania. (6)Department of
Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, the Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. (7)Pharmaceutical Botany,
Iuliu Hatieganu University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj Napoca, Romania.
(8)Nuclear Medicine Unit, Scientific Institute Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza,
San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy.

The high malignancy of glioblastoma has been recently attributed to the presence,
within the tumor, of glioblastoma stem cells (GSC) poorly responsive to chemo-
and radiotherapy. Here, the potential employment of metformin and arsenic
trioxide (ATO) in glioblastoma therapy is discussed focusing on their effects on 
GSC. Metformin exerts anticancer effects by primarily blocking the pivotal
LKB1/AMPK/mTOR/S6K1 pathway-dependent cell growth, induces selective lethal
effects on GSC by impairing the GSC-initiating spherogenesis and inhibits the
proliferation of CD133+ cells, while having a low or null effect on
differentiated glioblastoma cells and normal human stem cells. Metformin and ATO 
induce autophagy and apoptosis in glioma cells by inhibiting and stimulating the 
PI3K/Akt and the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways, respectively. Both
drugs promote differentiation of GSC into non-tumorigenic cells. In this regard, 
metformin acts via activation of the AMPK-FOXO3 axis, whereas ATO blocks the
interleukin 6-induced promotion of STAT3 phosphorylation. Blood-brain barrier,
easily crossed by metformin but not by ATO, undergoes important
glioblastoma-induced alterations that increase its permeability, thus allowing
ATO to distribute more into the glioblastoma bulk than in the normal brain
parenchyma. A prompt clinical assessment of metformin and ATO in glioblastoma
patients would represent a valid attempt to improve their survival.

PMID: 24750786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 16;9(4):e92546. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092546. eCollection
2014.

Multi-kinase inhibitor C1 triggers mitotic catastrophe of glioma stem cells
mainly through MELK kinase inhibition.

Minata M(1), Gu C(2), Joshi K(1), Nakano-Okuno M(3), Hong C(1), Nguyen CH(4),
Kornblum HI(5), Molla A(6), Nakano I(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, The Ohio State University Medical Center, 
Columbus, Ohio, United States of America. (2)Department of Neurological Surgery, 
The Ohio State University Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio, United States of
America; Departments of Neurosurgery, Beijing Sanbo Brain Hospital, Capital
Medical University, Beijing, China. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio 
State University Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio, United States of America.
(4)Pharmaco-chemistry, UMR 176 CNRS-Institut Curie, Orsay, France. (5)Departments
of Psychiatry and Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, University of California
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of America. (6)Institut
Albert Bonniot, Université Joseph Fourier, Grenoble Cedex 9, France.
(7)Department of Neurological Surgery, The Ohio State University Medical Center, 
Columbus, Ohio, United States of America; James Comprehensive Cancer Center, The 
Ohio State University Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio, United States of America.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is a highly lethal brain tumor. Due to resistance
to current therapies, patient prognosis remains poor and development of novel and
effective GBM therapy is crucial. Glioma stem cells (GSCs) have gained attention 
as a therapeutic target in GBM due to their relative resistance to current
therapies and potent tumor-initiating ability. Previously, we identified that the
mitotic kinase maternal embryonic leucine-zipper kinase (MELK) is highly
expressed in GBM tissues, specifically in GSCs, and its expression is inversely
correlated with the post-surgical survival period of GBM patients. In addition,
patient-derived GSCs depend on MELK for their survival and growth both in vitro
and in vivo. Here, we demonstrate evidence that the role of MELK in the GSC
survival is specifically dependent on its kinase activity. With in silico
structure-based analysis for protein-compound interaction, we identified the
small molecule Compound 1 (C1) is predicted to bind to the kinase-active site of 
MELK protein. Elimination of MELK kinase activity was confirmed by in vitro
kinase assay in nano-molar concentrations. When patient-derived GSCs were treated
with C1, they underwent mitotic arrest and subsequent cellular apoptosis in
vitro, a phenotype identical to that observed with shRNA-mediated MELK knockdown.
In addition, C1 treatment strongly induced tumor cell apoptosis in slice cultures
of GBM surgical specimens and attenuated growth of mouse intracranial tumors
derived from GSCs in a dose-dependent manner. Lastly, C1 treatment sensitizes
GSCs to radiation treatment. Collectively, these data indicate that targeting
MELK kinase activity is a promising approach to attenuate GBM growth by
eliminating GSCs in tumors.

PMCID: PMC3989164
PMID: 24739874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 11;9(4):e94045. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094045. eCollection
2014.

Micro-environment causes reversible changes in DNA methylation and mRNA
expression profiles in patient-derived glioma stem cells.

Baysan M(1), Woolard K(2), Bozdag S(3), Riddick G(4), Kotliarova S(4), Cam MC(4),
Belova GI(4), Ahn S(4), Zhang W(4), Song H(4), Walling J(5), Stevenson H(5),
Meltzer P(5), Fine HA(1).

Author information: 
(1)New York University Cancer Institute, New York University Brain Tumor Center, 
New York University Langone Medical Center, New York, New York, United States of 
America. (2)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of 
California Davis, Davis, California, United States of America. (3)Department of
Mathematics, Statistics, and Computer Science, Marquette University, Milwaukee,
Wisconsin, United States of America. (4)Neuro-Oncology Branch, National Cancer
Institute, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America. (5)Genetics
Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland, United States of America.

In vitro and in vivo models are widely used in cancer research. Characterizing
the similarities and differences between a patient's tumor and corresponding in
vitro and in vivo models is important for understanding the potential clinical
relevance of experimental data generated with these models. Towards this aim, we 
analyzed the genomic aberrations, DNA methylation and transcriptome profiles of
five parental tumors and their matched in vitro isolated glioma stem cell (GSC)
lines and xenografts generated from these same GSCs using high-resolution
platforms. We observed that the methylation and transcriptome profiles of in
vitro GSCs were significantly different from their corresponding xenografts,
which were actually more similar to their original parental tumors. This points
to the potentially critical role of the brain microenvironment in influencing
methylation and transcriptional patterns of GSCs. Consistent with this
possibility, ex vivo cultured GSCs isolated from xenografts showed a tendency to 
return to their initial in vitro states even after a short time in culture,
supporting a rapid dynamic adaptation to the in vitro microenvironment. These
results show that methylation and transcriptome profiles are highly dependent on 
the microenvironment and growth in orthotopic sites partially reverse the changes
caused by in vitro culturing.

PMCID: PMC3984100
PMID: 24728236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Mol Cancer Ther. 2014 Jun;13(6):1664-72. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0854. Epub
2014 Apr 10.

Culture dimensionality influences the resistance of glioblastoma stem-like cells 
to multikinase inhibitors.

Fernandez-Fuente G(1), Mollinedo P(1), Grande L(1), Vazquez-Barquero A(1),
Fernandez-Luna JL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Molecular Genetics Unit and Neurosurgery Service,
Hospital Valdecilla and Instituto de Formación e Investigación Marqués de
Valdecilla (IFIMAV), Santander, Spain. (2)Authors' Affiliations: Molecular
Genetics Unit and Neurosurgery Service, Hospital Valdecilla and Instituto de
Formación e Investigación Marqués de Valdecilla (IFIMAV), Santander, Spain
fluna@humv.es.

Sunitinib, an inhibitor of kinases, including VEGFR and platelet-derived growth
factor receptor (PDGFR), efficiently induces apoptosis in vitro in glioblastoma
(GBM) cells, but does not show any survival benefit in vivo. One detrimental
aspect of current in vitro models is that they do not take into account the
contribution of extrinsic factors to the cellular response to drug treatment.
Here, we studied the effects of substrate properties including elasticity,
dimensionality, and matrix composition on the response of GBM stem-like cells
(GSC) to chemotherapeutic agents. Thirty-seven cell cultures, including GSCs,
parenchymal GBM cells, and GBM cell lines, were treated with nine antitumor
compounds. Contrary to the expected chemoresistance of GSCs, these cells were
more sensitive to most agents than GBM parenchymal cells or GBM cell lines
cultured on flat (two-dimensional; 2D) plastic or collagen-coated surfaces.
However, GSCs cultured in collagen-based three-dimensional (3D) environments
increased their resistance, particularly to receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors, 
such as sunitinib, BIBF1120, and imatinib. Differences in substrate rigidity or
matrix components did not modify the response of GSCs to the inhibitors.
Moreover, the MEK-ERK and PI3K-Akt pathways, but not PDGFR, mediate at least in
part, this dimensionality-dependent chemoresistance. These findings suggest that 
survival of GSCs on 2D substrates, but not in a 3D environment, relies on kinases
that can be efficiently targeted by sunitinib-like inhibitors. Overall, our data 
may help explain the lack of correlation between in vitro and in vivo models used
to study the therapeutic potential of kinase inhibitors, and provide a rationale 
for developing more robust drug screening models.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 24723451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Cancer Res. 2014 Jun 1;74(11):3168-79. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2103. Epub
2014 Apr 7.

HMMR maintains the stemness and tumorigenicity of glioblastoma stem-like cells.

Tilghman J(1), Wu H(2), Sang Y(2), Shi X(2), Guerrero-Cazares H(2),
Quinones-Hinojosa A(1), Eberhart CG(1), Laterra J(3), Ying M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Hugo W. Moser Research Institute at Kennedy Krieger;
Departments of Neurology, Neuroscience, Oncology, Neurosurgery, and Pathology,
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine; Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of
Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland; and Department of Biostatistics and
Bioinformatics, Rollins School of Public Health, Emory University, Atlanta,
GeorgiaAuthors' Affiliations: Hugo W. Moser Research Institute at Kennedy
Krieger; Departments of Neurology, Neuroscience, Oncology, Neurosurgery, and
Pathology, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine; Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland; and Department of
Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Rollins School of Public Health, Emory
University, Atlanta, Georgia. (2)Authors' Affiliations: Hugo W. Moser Research
Institute at Kennedy Krieger; Departments of Neurology, Neuroscience, Oncology,
Neurosurgery, and Pathology, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine; Epidemiology,
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland; and
Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Rollins School of Public Health, 
Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia. (3)Authors' Affiliations: Hugo W. Moser
Research Institute at Kennedy Krieger; Departments of Neurology, Neuroscience,
Oncology, Neurosurgery, and Pathology, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine;
Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore,
Maryland; and Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Rollins School of
Public Health, Emory University, Atlanta, GeorgiaAuthors' Affiliations: Hugo W.
Moser Research Institute at Kennedy Krieger; Departments of Neurology,
Neuroscience, Oncology, Neurosurgery, and Pathology, Johns Hopkins School of
Medicine; Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health,
Baltimore, Maryland; and Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Rollins 
School of Public Health, Emory University, Atlanta, GeorgiaAuthors' Affiliations:
Hugo W. Moser Research Institute at Kennedy Krieger; Departments of Neurology,
Neuroscience, Oncology, Neurosurgery, and Pathology, Johns Hopkins School of
Medicine; Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health,
Baltimore, Maryland; and Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Rollins 
School of Public Health, Emory University, Atlanta, GeorgiaAuthors' Affiliations:
Hugo W. Moser Research Institute at Kennedy Krieger; Departments of Neurology,
Neuroscience, Oncology, Neurosurgery, and Pathology, Johns Hopkins School of
Medicine; Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health,
Baltimore, Maryland; and Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Rollins 
School of Public Health, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia
ying@kennedykrieger.org laterra@kennedykrieger.org. (4)Authors' Affiliations:
Hugo W. Moser Research Institute at Kennedy Krieger; Departments of Neurology,
Neuroscience, Oncology, Neurosurgery, and Pathology, Johns Hopkins School of
Medicine; Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health,
Baltimore, Maryland; and Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Rollins 
School of Public Health, Emory University, Atlanta, GeorgiaAuthors' Affiliations:
Hugo W. Moser Research Institute at Kennedy Krieger; Departments of Neurology,
Neuroscience, Oncology, Neurosurgery, and Pathology, Johns Hopkins School of
Medicine; Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health,
Baltimore, Maryland; and Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Rollins 
School of Public Health, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia
ying@kennedykrieger.org laterra@kennedykrieger.org.

Glioblastoma (GBM) stem cells (GSC) are a subpopulation of tumor cells that
display stem-like characteristics (stemness) and play unique roles in tumor
propagation, therapeutic resistance, and tumor recurrence. Therapeutic targets in
GSCs are a focus of increasing interest to improve GBM therapy. Here we report
that the hyaluronan-mediated motility receptor (HMMR) is highly expressed in GBM 
tumors, where it supports the self-renewal and tumorigenic potential of GSCs.
HMMR silencing impairs GSC self-renewal and inhibits the expression of GSC
markers and regulators. Furthermore, HMMR silencing suppresses GSC-derived tumor 
growth and extends the survival of mice bearing GSC xenografts. Conversely, HMMR 
overexpression promotes GSC self-renewal and intracranial tumor propagation. In
human GBM tumor specimens, HMMR expression is correlated positively with the
expression of stemness-associated markers and regulators. Our findings identify
HMMR as a candidate therapeutic target to GSCs as a GBM treatment strategy.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4059010
PMID: 24710409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Cancer Lett. 2014 Jul 10;349(1):67-76. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2014.03.035. Epub
2014 Apr 3.

Hif-1a and Hif-2a differentially regulate Notch signaling through competitive
interaction with the intracellular domain of Notch receptors in glioma stem
cells.

Hu YY(1), Fu LA(2), Li SZ(3), Chen Y(1), Li JC(1), Han J(1), Liang L(1), Li L(3),
Ji CC(3), Zheng MH(4), Han H(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology, Department of Medical Genetics and
Developmental Biology, Fourth Military Medical University, Chang-Le Xi Street
#17, Xi'an 710032, China. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, Xijing Hospital, Fourth 
Military Medical University, Chang-Le Xi Street #17, Xi'an 710032, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology, Department of Medical Genetics and
Developmental Biology, Fourth Military Medical University, Chang-Le Xi Street
#17, Xi'an 710032, China; Department of Neurosurgery, Xijing Hospital, Fourth
Military Medical University, Chang-Le Xi Street #17, Xi'an 710032, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology, Department of Medical Genetics and
Developmental Biology, Fourth Military Medical University, Chang-Le Xi Street
#17, Xi'an 710032, China. Electronic address: zhengminhua@gmail.com. (5)State Key
Laboratory of Cancer Biology, Department of Medical Genetics and Developmental
Biology, Fourth Military Medical University, Chang-Le Xi Street #17, Xi'an
710032, China. Electronic address: huahan@fmmu.edu.cn.

Hypoxia contributes to GSC expansion principally through Hif-1a and Hif-2a, but
how these two factors work together has not been completely understood. We show
that hypoxia promoted proliferation, self-renewal and inhibited the conversion of
GSCs into INP-like cells through activating Notch signaling. Further data
suggested that Hif-2a interacted with NICD and repressed the activity of Notch
signaling, in contrast to the role of Hif-1a in Notch signaling. Together, our
findings suggest that Hif-1a and Hif-2a competitively bind to NICD and
dynamically regulate the activation of Notch signaling in GSCs likely depending
on different oxygen tensions, providing improved therapeutic opportunities for
malignant gliomas.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24705306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Oncogene. 2015 Mar 12;34(11):1407-19. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.75. Epub 2014 Apr 7.

Oncogenic miR-20a and miR-106a enhance the invasiveness of human glioma stem
cells by directly targeting TIMP-2.

Wang Z(1), Wang B(1), Shi Y(1), Xu C(1), Xiao HL(1), Ma LN(1), Xu SL(1), Yang
L(1), Wang QL(1), Dang WQ(1), Cui W(1), Yu SC(1), Ping YF(1), Cui YH(1), Kung
HF(1), Qian C(1), Zhang X(1), Bian XW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Tumor Immunopathology of Ministry of Education of China,
Institute of Pathology and Southwest Cancer Center, Southwest Hospital, Third
Military Medical University, Chongqing, PR China.

Emerging evidence has shown that cancer stem cells (CSCs) are the cellular
determinants to promote cancer invasion and metastasis. However, the mechanism
underlying CSC invasion remains unknown. MicroRNAs are evolutionally conserved
small noncoding RNAs that are critical for the regulation of gene expression, and
their expressions are often dysregulated in cancers. In the present study, we
demonstrated that two functionally related microRNAs, miR-20a and -106a
(miR-20a/106a), were capable of enhancing the invasiveness of CD133(+) glioma
stem cells (GSCs) isolated from both glioblastoma cell line U87 and primary human
glioma specimens. We found that the level of miR-20a/106a in GSCs was
significantly higher than that in the committed CD133(-) glioma cells, and
correlated with the invasive capability of GSCs. By bioinformatic analysis, we
identified tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-2 (TIMP-2) as one of the
miR-20a/106a-targeted genes. TIMP-2 level correlated inversely with miR-20/106
expression. Directly targeting by miR-20a/106a on 3'-untranslation region
(3'-UTR) of TIMP-2 mRNA was confirmed by 3'-UTR dual-luciferase reporter assay.
Knockdown of miR-20a/106a in GSCs increased endogenous TIMP-2 protein abundance, 
thereby inhibiting GSC invasion. We also found that Nordy, a synthetic
lipoxygenase inhibitor, inhibited GSC invasiveness by elevating the expression of
TIMP-2 via downregulation of miR-20a/106a. Our results indicate that miR-20a/106a
has a key role in GSC invasion and may serve as targets for treatment of
glioblastoma.

PMID: 24704830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Mol Genet Metab. 2014 May;112(1):73-83. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.12.006. Epub
2013 Dec 16.

Transcriptional profiling of the human fibrillin/LTBP gene family, key regulators
of mesenchymal cell functions.

Davis MR(1), Andersson R(2), Severin J(3), de Hoon M(4), Bertin N(5), Baillie
JK(6), Kawaji H(7), Sandelin A(8), Forrest AR(9), Summers KM(10); FANTOM
Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)The Roslin Institute and Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies, University
of Edinburgh, Easter Bush EH25 9RG, UK. Electronic address:
margaret.davis@roslin.ed.ac.uk. (2)The Bioinformatics Centre, Department of
Biology and Biotech Research and Innovation Centre, University of Copenhagen, Ole
Maaloes Vej 5, 2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark. Electronic address: robin@binf.ku.dk. 
(3)RIKEN Omics Science Center, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan(1); RIKEN
Center for Life Science Technologies, Division of Genomic Technologies, Yokohama,
Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. Electronic address: severin@gsc.rkien.jp. (4)RIKEN
Omics Science Center, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan(1); RIKEN Center for
Life Science Technologies, Division of Genomic Technologies, Yokohama, Kanagawa
230-0045, Japan. Electronic address: mdehoon@gsc.riken.jp. (5)RIKEN Omics Science
Center, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan(1); RIKEN Center for Life Science
Technologies, Division of Genomic Technologies, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045,
Japan. Electronic address: nbertin@gsc.riken.jp. (6)The Roslin Institute and
Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies, University of Edinburgh, Easter Bush
EH25 9RG, UK. Electronic address: kennethbaillie@gmail.com. (7)RIKEN Omics
Science Center, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan(1); RIKEN Center for Life
Science Technologies, Division of Genomic Technologies, Yokohama, Kanagawa
230-0045, Japan; RIKEN Preventive Medicine and Diagnosis Innovation Program,
Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan. Electronic address: kawaji@gsc.riken.jp. (8)The
Bioinformatics Centre, Department of Biology and Biotech Research and Innovation 
Centre, University of Copenhagen, Ole Maaloes Vej 5, 2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark. 
Electronic address: albin@binf.ku.dk. (9)RIKEN Omics Science Center, Yokohama,
Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan(1); RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies, Division
of Genomic Technologies, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. Electronic address: 
forrest@gsc.riken.jp. (10)The Roslin Institute and Royal (Dick) School of
Veterinary Studies, University of Edinburgh, Easter Bush EH25 9RG, UK; The
University of Queensland Northside Clinical School, Prince Charles Hospital,
Chermside 4032, Australia. Electronic address: kim.summers@roslin.ed.ac.uk.

The fibrillins and latent transforming growth factor binding proteins (LTBPs)
form a superfamily of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins characterized by the
presence of a unique domain, the 8-cysteine transforming growth factor beta
(TGFß) binding domain. These proteins are involved in the structure of the
extracellular matrix and controlling the bioavailability of TGFß family members. 
Genes encoding these proteins show differential expression in mesenchymal cell
types which synthesize the extracellular matrix. We have investigated the
promoter regions of the seven gene family members using the FANTOM5 CAGE database
for human. While the protein and nucleotide sequences show considerable sequence 
similarity, the promoter regions were quite diverse. Most genes had a single
predominant transcription start site region but LTBP1 and LTBP4 had two regions
initiating different transcripts. Most of the family members were expressed in a 
range of mesenchymal and other cell types, often associated with use of
alternative promoters or transcription start sites within a promoter in different
cell types. FBN3 was the lowest expressed gene, and was found only in embryonic
and fetal tissues. The different promoters for one gene were more similar to each
other in expression than to promoters of the other family members. Notably
expression of all 22 LTBP2 promoters was tightly correlated and quite distinct
from all other family members. We located candidate enhancer regions likely to be
involved in expression of the genes. Each gene was associated with a unique
subset of transcription factors across multiple promoters although several motifs
including MAZ, SP1, GTF2I and KLF4 showed overrepresentation across the gene
family. FBN1 and FBN2, which had similar expression patterns, were regulated by
different transcription factors. This study highlights the role of alternative
transcription start sites in regulating the tissue specificity of closely related
genes and suggests that this important class of extracellular matrix proteins is 
subject to subtle regulatory variations that explain the differential roles of
members of this gene family.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4019825
PMID: 24703491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 1;9(4):e90454. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090454. eCollection 
2014.

Three-step method for proliferation and differentiation of human embryonic stem
cell (hESC)-derived male germ cells.

Lim JJ(1), Shim MS(1), Lee JE(1), Lee DR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Fertility Center of CHA Gangnam Medical Center, College of Medicine, CHA
University, Seoul, Korea. (2)Fertility Center of CHA Gangnam Medical Center,
College of Medicine, CHA University, Seoul, Korea; Department of Biomedical
Science, College of Life Science, CHA University, Seoul, Korea.

The low efficiency of differentiation into male germ cell (GC)-like cells and
haploid germ cells from human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) reflects the culture
method employed in the two-dimensional (2D)-microenvironment. In this study, we
applied a three-step media and calcium alginate-based 3D-culture system for
enhancing the differentiation of hESCs into male germ stem cell (GSC)-like cells 
and haploid germ cells. In the first step, embryoid bodies (EBs) were derived
from hESCs cultured in EB medium for 3 days and re-cultured for 4 additional days
in EB medium with BMP4 and RA to specify GSC-like cells. In the second step, the 
resultant cells were cultured in GC-proliferation medium for 7 days. The GSC-like
cells were then propagated after selection using GFR-a1 and were further cultured
in GC-proliferation medium for 3 weeks. In the final step, a 3D-co-culture system
using calcium alginate encapsulation and testicular somatic cells was applied to 
induce differentiation into haploid germ cells, and a culture containing
approximately 3% male haploid germ cells was obtained after 2 weeks of culture.
These results demonstrated that this culture system could be used to efficiently 
induce GSC-like cells in an EB population and to promote the differentiation of
ESCs into haploid male germ cells.

PMCID: PMC3972183
PMID: 24690677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 28;9(3):e93505. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093505. eCollection
2014.

Endothelial secreted factors suppress mitogen deprivation-induced autophagy and
apoptosis in glioblastoma stem-like cells.

Galan-Moya EM(1), Treps L(1), Oliver L(2), Chneiweiss H(3), Vallette FM(2),
Bidère N(4), Gavard J(1).

Author information: 
(1)UMR 8104, Centre National pour la Recherche Scientifique, Paris, France;
U1016, Institut National de la Sante Et de la Recherche Medicale, Paris, France; 
Sorbonne Paris Cite, Universite Paris Descartes, Paris, France. (2)UMR 892,
Institut National de la Sante Et de la Recherche Medicale, Nantes, France; UMR
6299, Centre National pour la Recherche Scientifique, Nantes, France; Faculte de 
Medecine, Universite de Nantes, Nantes, France; Institut de Cancerologie de
l'Ouest, Nantes, France; Equipe Labellisee Ligue contre le Cancer, Paris, France.
(3)UMRS 1130 Neuroscience Paris Seine, Institut National de la Sante Et de la
Recherche Medicale, Paris, France; UMR 8246, Centre National pour la Recherche
Scientifique, Paris, France; UMCR18, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris,
France. (4)Equipe Labellisee Ligue contre le Cancer, Paris, France; UMR_S1014,
Institut National de la Sante Et de la Recherche Medicale, Villejuif, France;
Universite Paris-Sud P11, Orsay, France.

Rapidly growing and highly vascularized tumors, such as glioblastoma multiforme, 
contain heterogeneous areas within the tumor mass, some of which are
inefficiently supplied with nutrients and oxygen. While the cell death rate is
elevated in such zones, tumor cells are still suspected to grow and survive
independently of extracellular growth factors. In line with this, glioblastoma
stem-like cells (GSCs) are found closely associated with brain vasculature in
situ, and as such are most likely in a protected microenvironment. However, the
behavior of GSCs under deprived conditions has not been explored in detail. Using
a panel of 14 patient-derived GSCs, we report that ex vivo mitogen deprivation
impaired self-renewal capability, abolished constitutive activation of the mTor
pathway, and impinged on GSC survival via the engagement of autophagic and
apoptotic cascades. Moreover, pharmacological inhibition of the mTor pathway
recapitulated the mitogen deprivation scenario. In contrast, blocking either
apoptosis or autophagy, or culturing GSCs with endothelial-secreted factors
partly restored mTor pathway activation and rescued GSC survival. Overall, our
data suggest that GSCs are addicted to mTor, as their survival and self-renewal
are profoundly dependent on this signaling axis. Thus, as mTor governs the fate
of GSCs under both deprivation conditions and in the presence of endothelial
factors, it could be a key target for therapeutic purposes.

PMCID: PMC3969309
PMID: 24682219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Oncogene. 2015 Mar 12;34(11):1384-92. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.83. Epub 2014 Mar 31.

A novel mechanism for the control of translation of specific mRNAs by tumor
suppressor protein Pdcd4: inhibition of translation elongation.

Biyanee A(1), Ohnheiser J(2), Singh P(2), Klempnauer KH(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Institute for Biochemistry, Westfälische-Wilhelms-Universität Münster,
Münster, Germany [2] Graduate School of Chemistry (GSC-MS),
Westfälische-Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Münster, Germany. (2)Institute for
Biochemistry, Westfälische-Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Münster, Germany.

The tumor suppressor gene Pdcd4 (programmed cell death gene 4) has drawn
considerable attention because its downregulation is involved in the development 
of several types of cancer. Because Pdcd4 interacts with the translation
initiation factor eIF4A and inhibits its helicase activity, Pdcd4 has been
implicated in the translational suppression of cellular mRNAs containing
structured 5'-untranslated regions. However, Pdcd4's role in translation
regulation is still poorly understood, because only very few physiological Pdcd4 
target mRNAs are known. By using a Pdcd4-deficient clone of the chicken B-cell
line DT40, we have discovered that the mRNA of the A-myb proto-oncogene is a
novel Pdcd4 target RNA whose translation is suppressed by Pdcd4. Interestingly,
the inhibitory effect of Pdcd4 is independent of the Pdcd4-eIF4A interaction, but
is dependent on an RNA-binding domain at the N terminus of Pdcd4 and on sequences
located within the coding region of A-myb mRNA, indicating that Pdcd4 suppresses 
A-myb translation by a novel mechanism. Our data show that the Pdcd4 RNA-binding 
domain preferentially recognizes an RNA secondary structure element formed by the
part of the A-myb coding region that mediates Pdcd4-dependent suppression.
Previously, we have shown that Pdcd4 also suppresses the translation of the c-myb
mRNA by a similar mechanism involving binding of Pdcd4 to RNA secondary structure
formed by the c-myb coding region. Surprisingly, our data show that Pdcd4 exerts 
its inhibitory activity only when the target region of Pdcd4 in A-myb and c-myb
mRNA is itself translated, consistent with a mechanism in which Pdcd4 suppresses 
translation by interfering with translation elongation. Taken together, our work 
reveals a novel mechanism by which Pdcd4 affects the translational of cellular
RNAs. Furthermore, as c-myb and A-myb are members of the Myb proto-oncogene
family whose deregulation has been implicated in tumorigenesis, inhibiting their 
translation might contribute to the tumor-suppressive activity of Pdcd4.

PMID: 24681950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 21;9(3):e90267. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090267. eCollection
2014.

Piwi is required in multiple cell types to control germline stem cell lineage
development in the Drosophila ovary.

Ma X(1), Wang S(1), Do T(2), Song X(2), Inaba M(3), Nishimoto Y(2), Liu LP(4),
Gao Y(4), Mao Y(4), Li H(4), McDowell W(2), Park J(2), Malanowski K(2), Peak
A(2), Perera A(2), Li H(2), Gaudenz K(2), Haug J(2), Yamashita Y(3), Lin H(5), Ni
JQ(4), Xie T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, Missouri, United States
of America; Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Kansas School
of Medicine, Kansas City, Kansas, United States of America. (2)Stowers Institute 
for Medical Research, Kansas City, Missouri, United States of America. (3)Life
Sciences Institute, Center for Stem Cell Biology, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, Michigan, United States of America. (4)School of Medicine, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China. (5)Yale Stem Cell Center, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, United Sates of America.

The piRNA pathway plays an important role in maintaining genome stability in the 
germ line by silencing transposable elements (TEs) from fly to mammals. As a
highly conserved piRNA pathway component, Piwi is widely expressed in both germ
cells and somatic cells in the Drosophila ovary and is required for piRNA
production in both cell types. In addition to its known role in somatic cap cells
to maintain germline stem cells (GSCs), this study has demonstrated that Piwi has
novel functions in somatic cells and germ cells of the Drosophila ovary to
promote germ cell differentiation. Piwi knockdown in escort cells causes a
reduction in escort cell (EC) number and accumulation of undifferentiated germ
cells, some of which show active BMP signaling, indicating that Piwi is required 
to maintain ECs and promote germ cell differentiation. Simultaneous knockdown of 
dpp, encoding a BMP, in ECs can partially rescue the germ cell differentiation
defect, indicating that Piwi is required in ECs to repress dpp. Consistent with
its key role in piRNA production, TE transcripts increase significantly and DNA
damage is also elevated in the piwi knockdown somatic cells. Germ cell-specific
knockdown of piwi surprisingly causes depletion of germ cells before adulthood,
suggesting that Piwi might control primordial germ cell maintenance or GSC
establishment. Finally, Piwi inactivation in the germ line of the adult ovary
leads to gradual GSC loss and germ cell differentiation defects, indicating the
intrinsic role of Piwi in adult GSC maintenance and differentiation. This study
has revealed new germline requirement of Piwi in controlling GSC maintenance and 
lineage differentiation as well as its new somatic function in promoting germ
cell differentiation. Therefore, Piwi is required in multiple cell types to
control GSC lineage development in the Drosophila ovary.

PMCID: PMC3962343
PMID: 24658126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Neurochem Int. 2014 May;71:1-7. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2014.03.005. Epub 2014 Mar 
19.

Glioblastoma cancer stem cells: Biomarker and therapeutic advances.

Pointer KB(1), Clark PA(2), Zorniak M(3), Alrfaei BM(4), Kuo JS(5).

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI,
United States; Department of Neurological Surgery, Madison, WI, United States;
Cellular and Molecular Biology, Madison, WI, United States. (2)University of
Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI, United States;
Department of Neurological Surgery, Madison, WI, United States. (3)University of 
Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI, United States;
Department of Neurological Surgery, Madison, WI, United States; Neuroscience
Training Program, Madison, WI, United States. (4)University of Wisconsin School
of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI, United States; Department of
Neurological Surgery, Madison, WI, United States; Cellular and Molecular
Pathology Training Program, Madison, WI, United States; Human Oncology, Madison, 
WI, United States. (5)University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public
Health, Madison, WI, United States; Department of Neurological Surgery, Madison, 
WI, United States; Cellular and Molecular Biology, Madison, WI, United States;
Neuroscience Training Program, Madison, WI, United States; Cellular and Molecular
Pathology Training Program, Madison, WI, United States; Human Oncology, Madison, 
WI, United States; Carbone Cancer Center, Madison, WI, United States. Electronic 
address: j.kuo@neurosurgery.wisc.edu.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and aggressive primary brain
tumor in humans. It accounts for fifty-two percent of primary brain malignancies 
in the United States and twenty percent of all primary intracranial tumors.
Despite the current standard therapies of maximal safe surgical resection
followed by temozolomide and radiotherapy, the median patient survival is still
less than 2 years due to inevitable tumor recurrence. Glioblastoma cancer stem
cells (GSCs) are a subgroup of tumor cells that are radiation and chemotherapy
resistant and likely contribute to rapid tumor recurrence. In order to gain a
better understanding of the many GBM-associated mutations, analysis of the GBM
cancer genome is on-going; however, innovative strategies to target GSCs and
overcome tumor resistance are needed to improve patient survival. Cancer stem
cell biology studies reveal basic understandings of GSC resistance patterns and
therapeutic responses. Membrane proteomics using phage and yeast display
libraries provides a method to identify novel antibodies and surface antigens to 
better recognize, isolate, and target GSCs. Altogether, basic GBM and GSC
genetics and proteomics studies combined with strategies to discover
GSC-targeting agents could lead to novel treatments that significantly improve
patient survival and quality of life.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4119816
PMID: 24657832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Neoplasma. 2014;61(4):401-10. doi: 10.4149/neo_2014_049.

The PGI-KLF4 pathway regulates self-renewal of glioma stem cells residing in the 
mesenchymal niches in human gliomas.

Zhu XY, Wang L, Luan SH, Zhang HS, Huang WT, Wang NH.

Gliomas display cellular hierarchies with self-renewing tumorigenic glioma stem
cells (GSCs) at the apex. The GSC niches function as a regulator of GSC
maintenance, however, the exact components of GSC niches that mediate this
process are still far from fully defined. Here, we showed that glioma cells with 
aberrant mesenchymal phenotypes constitute a mesenchymal niche for GSCs. Using
patient-derived specimens, we demonstrated that the paracrine PGI signaling,
initiated by mesenchymal glioma cells, induces the self-renewal and tumorigenic
potentials of GSCs through induction of KLF4. Treatment of intracranial
orthotopic xenografts with shPGI or shKLF4 leads to less lethal potency. Our data
therefore suggest that blockade of the PGI-KLF4 pathway may provide a therapeutic
strategy against GSC niches.

PMID: 24645841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Ann Surg Oncol. 2014 Aug;21(8):2594-600. doi: 10.1245/s10434-014-3633-6. Epub
2014 Mar 18.

Gastric stump cancer after distal gastrectomy for benign disease:
clinicopathological features and surgical outcomes.

Di Leo A(1), Pedrazzani C, Bencivenga M, Coniglio A, Rosa F, Morgani P, Marrelli 
D, Marchet A, Cozzaglio L, Giacopuzzi S, Tiberio GA, Doglietto GB, Vittimberga G,
Roviello F, Ricci F.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of General Surgery, Rovereto Hospital, APSS of Trento, Trento, Italy,
dileomd@libero.it.

PURPOSE: The purpose of the present study was to analyze clinicopathologic
features and long-term prognosis of gastric stump cancer (GSC) arising in the
remnant stomach 5 years or later after partial gastrectomy for benign disease.
METHODS: We reviewed the results of 176 patients resected with curative intent
for GSC at 8 Italian centers belonging to the Italian Research Group for Gastric 
Cancer (GIRCG). The median (range) follow-up time for surviving patients was 71.2
(6-207) months.
RESULTS: One hundred forty-six patients were men, the mean age at the time of
diagnosis was 69.2 years, and the great majority (167 cases) underwent Billroth
II reconstruction. R0 resection was achieved in 158 (90 %) patients, and in 94
(53 %) lymph node dissection was =D2. Postoperative mortality and complication
rates were 6.2 and 43.2 %, respectively. T1 tumor was diagnosed in 45 (25 %)
cases. Lymph node metastases were evident in 86 patients (49 %). Thirteen
patients had involvement of the jejunal mesentery nodes (pJN+); five cases were
T2-T3 and eight cases were T4. Overall 5-year survival rate was 53.1 %. Five-year
survival rates were 68.1, 37.8, and 33.1 % for pT1, pT2-3, and pT4 tumors,
respectively (P = 0.001). Five-year survival rate was 56.5 % for node-negative
tumors (pN0), 32.3 % for tumors with nodal metastases without involvement of
jejunal mesentery nodes (pN+), and 17.1 % for tumors with involvement of jejunal 
mesentery nodes (pJN+) (P = 0.002).
CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests that an aggressive surgical approach can achieve 
a satisfactory outcome in GSC.

PMID: 24639193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Oncogenesis. 2014 Mar 17;3:e91. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2014.5.

A mesenchymal glioma stem cell profile is related to clinical outcome.

Balbous A(1), Cortes U(1), Guilloteau K(1), Villalva C(1), Flamant S(2), Gaillard
A(3), Milin S(4), Wager M(5), Sorel N(1), Guilhot J(6), Bennaceur-Griscelli A(2),
Turhan A(2), Chomel JC(1), Karayan-Tapon L(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Malignant and Therapeutic Stem Cell Models Laboratory, INSERM, U935,
Poitiers, France [2] Malignant and Therapeutic Stem Cell Models Laboratory,
University of Poitiers, U935, Poitiers, France [3] Department of Oncology and
Hematology, University Hospital of Poitiers, Poitiers, France. (2)1] Malignant
and Therapeutic Stem Cell Models Laboratory, University of Paris Sud 11, U935,
Villejuif, France [2] Malignant and Therapeutic Stem Cell Models Laboratory, Paul
Brousse-AP-HP Hospital, U935, Villejuif, France. (3)1] Experimental and Clinical 
Neurosciences Laboratory, INSERM, U1084, Poitiers, France [2] Experimental and
Clinical Neurosciences Laboratory, University of Poitiers, U1084, Poitiers,
France. (4)Department of Pathology, University Hospital of Poitiers, Poitiers,
France. (5)Department of Neurosurgery, University Hospital of Poitiers, Poitiers,
France. (6)INSERM, CIC 0802, Poitiers, France.

Recent studies have demonstrated a relationship between the expression of stem
cell-associated genes and relapses in glioblastoma (GBM), suggesting a key role
for tumor stem cells in this process. Although there is increasing interest in
this field, glioma stem cells (GSCs) are still poorly characterized, their
'stemness' state and factors maintaining these properties remain largely unknown.
We performed an expression profiling analysis of pluripotency in gliomaspheres
derived from 11 patients. Comparative analysis between GSCs and H1 and H9 human
embryonic stem cells as well as H9-derived neural stem cells indicates major
variations in gene expression of pluripotency factors Nanog and OCT4, but a
stable pattern for SOX2 suggesting its important function in maintaining
pluripotency in GSCs. Our results also showed that all GSC lines have the
capacity to commit to neural differentiation and express mesenchymal or
endothelial differentiation markers. In addition, hierarchical clustering
analysis revealed two groups of GSCs reflecting their heterogeneity and
identified COL1A1 and IFITM1 as the most discriminating genes. Similar patterns
have been observed in tumors from which gliomaspheres have been established. To
determine whether this heterogeneity could be clinically relevant, the expression
of both genes was further analyzed in an independent cohort of 30 patients with
GBM and revealed strong correlation with overall survival. In vitro silencing of 
COL1A1 and IFTM1 confirmed the effect of these mesenchymal-associated genes on
cell invasion and gliomasphere initiation. Our results indicate that COL1A1 and
IFITM1 genes could be considered for use in stratifying patients with GBM into
subgroups for risk of recurrence at diagnosis, as well as for prognostic and
therapeutic evolution.

PMCID: PMC4038390
PMID: 24637491  [PubMed]


286. PLoS Genet. 2014 Mar 13;10(3):e1004200. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004200.
eCollection 2014.

Lsd1 restricts the number of germline stem cells by regulating multiple targets
in escort cells.

Eliazer S(1), Palacios V(1), Wang Z(1), Kollipara RK(2), Kittler R(3), Buszczak
M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center at Dallas, Dallas, Texas, United States of America. (2)McDermott Center
for Human Growth and Development, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
at Dallas, Dallas, Texas, United States of America. (3)McDermott Center for Human
Growth and Development, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at
Dallas, Dallas, Texas, United States of America; Department of Pharmacology,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, Dallas, Texas, United 
States of America.

Specialized microenvironments called niches regulate tissue homeostasis by
controlling the balance between stem cell self-renewal and the differentiation of
stem cell daughters. However the mechanisms that govern the formation, size and
signaling of in vivo niches remain poorly understood. Loss of the highly
conserved histone demethylase Lsd1 in Drosophila escort cells results in
increased BMP signaling outside the cap cell niche and an expanded germline stem 
cell (GSC) phenotype. Here we present evidence that loss of Lsd1 also results in 
gradual changes in escort cell morphology and their eventual death. To better
characterize the function of Lsd1 in different cell populations within the ovary,
we performed Chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with massive parallel
sequencing (ChIP-seq). This analysis shows that Lsd1 associates with a
surprisingly limited number of sites in escort cells and fewer, and often,
different sites in cap cells. These findings indicate that Lsd1 exhibits highly
selective binding that depends greatly on specific cellular contexts. Lsd1 does
not directly target the dpp locus in escort cells. Instead, Lsd1 regulates
engrailed expression and disruption of engrailed and its putative downstream
target hedgehog suppress the Lsd1 mutant phenotype. Interestingly,
over-expression of engrailed, but not hedgehog, results in an expansion of GSC
cells, marked by the expansion of BMP signaling. Knockdown of other potential
direct Lsd1 target genes, not obviously linked to BMP signaling, also partially
suppresses the Lsd1 mutant phenotype. These results suggest that Lsd1 restricts
the number of GSC-like cells by regulating a diverse group of genes and provide
further evidence that escort cell function must be carefully controlled during
development and adulthood to ensure proper germline differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3952827
PMID: 24625679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Cell Death Differ. 2014 Jul;21(7):1119-31. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2014.31. Epub 2014
Mar 7.

Conversion of differentiated cancer cells into cancer stem-like cells in a
glioblastoma model after primary chemotherapy.

Auffinger B(1), Tobias AL(1), Han Y(1), Lee G(1), Guo D(1), Dey M(1), Lesniak
MS(2), Ahmed AU(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Brain Tumor Center, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. (2)1] The
Brain Tumor Center, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA [2] Department of
Surgery, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

Glioblastoma multiforme patients have a poor prognosis due to therapeutic
resistance and tumor relapse. It has been suggested that gliomas are driven by a 
rare subset of tumor cells known as glioma stem cells (GSCs). This hypothesis
states that only a few GSCs are able to divide, differentiate, and initiate a new
tumor. It has also been shown that this subpopulation is more resistant to
conventional therapies than its differentiated counterpart. In order to
understand glioma recurrence post therapy, we investigated the behavior of GSCs
after primary chemotherapy. We first show that exposure of patient-derived as
well as established glioma cell lines to therapeutic doses of temozolomide (TMZ),
the most commonly used antiglioma chemotherapy, consistently increases the GSC
pool over time both in vitro and in vivo. Secondly, lineage-tracing analysis of
the expanded GSC pool suggests that such amplification is a result of a
phenotypic shift in the non-GSC population to a GSC-like state in the presence of
TMZ. The newly converted GSC population expresses markers associated with
pluripotency and stemness, such as CD133, SOX2, Oct4, and Nestin. Furthermore, we
show that intracranial implantation of the newly converted GSCs in nude mice
results in a more efficient grafting and invasive phenotype. Taken together,
these findings provide the first evidence that glioma cells exposed to
chemotherapeutic agents are able to interconvert between non-GSCs and GSCs,
thereby replenishing the original tumor population, leading to a more
infiltrative phenotype and enhanced chemoresistance. This may represent a
potential mechanism for therapeutic relapse.

PMCID: PMC4207480
PMID: 24608791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. J Pathol. 2014 Sep;234(1):11-22. doi: 10.1002/path.4349. Epub 2014 Jun 18.

Endothelial cells promote stem-like phenotype of glioma cells through activating 
the Hedgehog pathway.

Yan GN(1), Yang L, Lv YF, Shi Y, Shen LL, Yao XH, Guo QN, Zhang P, Cui YH, Zhang 
X, Bian XW, Guo DY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology and Southwest Cancer Centre, Southwest Hospital, Third 
Military Medical University and Key Laboratory of Tumour Immunopathology,
Ministry of Education of China, Chongqing, 400038, People's Republic of China.

Microenvironmental regulation of cancer stem cells (CSCs) strongly influences the
onset and spread of cancer. The way in which glioma cells interact with their
microenvironment and acquire the phenotypes of CSCs remains elusive. We
investigated how communication between vascular endothelial cells and glioma
cells promoted the properties of glioma stem cells (GSCs). We observed that
CD133(+) GSCs were located closely to Shh(+) endothelial cells in specimens of
human glioblastoma multiforme (GBM). In both in vitro and in vivo studies, we
found that endothelial cells promoted the appearance of CSC-like glioma cells, as
demonstrated by increases in tumourigenicity and expression of stemness genes
such as Sox2, Olig2, Bmi1 and CD133 in glioma cells that were co-cultured with
endothelial cells. Knockdown of Smo in glioma cells led to a significant
reduction of their CSC-like phenotype formation in vitro and in vivo. Endothelial
cells with Shh knockdown failed to promote Hedgehog (HH) pathway activation and
CSC-like phenotype formation in co-cultured glioma cells. By examination of
glioma tissue specimens from 65 patients, we found that the survival of glioma
patients was closely correlated with the expression of both Shh by endothelial
cells and Gli1 by perivascular glioma cells. Taken together, our study
demonstrates that endothelial cells in the tumour microenvironment provide Shh to
activate the HH signalling pathway in glioma cells, thereby promoting GSC
properties and glioma propagation.

© 2014 The Authors. The Journal of Pathology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
on behalf of Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

PMCID: PMC4260128
PMID: 24604164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. OMICS. 2014 May;18(5):310-23. doi: 10.1089/omi.2013.0084. Epub 2014 Mar 6.

An epigenetic biomarker panel for glioblastoma multiforme personalized medicine
through DNA methylation analysis of human embryonic stem cell-like signature.

Chiang JH(1), Cheng WS, Hood L, Tian Q.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering, National Cheng
Kung University , Tainan City, Taiwan .

Alterations of DNA methylation occur during the course of both stem cell
development and tumorigenesis. We present a novel strategy that can be used to
stratify glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) patients through the epigenetic states of 
genes associated with human embryonic stem cell (hESC) identity in order to 1)
assess linkages between the methylation signatures of these stem cell genes and
survival of GBM patients, and 2) delineate putative mechanisms leading to poor
prognosis in some patient subgroups. A DNA methylation signature was established 
for stratifying GBM patients into several hESC methylator subgroups. The hESC
methylator-negative phenotype has demonstrated poor survival and upregulation of 
glioma stem cell (GSC) markers, and is enriched in one of the previously defined 
transcriptomic phenotypes-the mesenchymal phenotype. We further identified a
refined signature of 36 genes as the gene panel, including SOX2, POU3F2, FGFR2,
GAP43, NTRK2, NTRK3, and NKX2-2, which are highly enriched in the nervous system.
Both signatures outperformed the O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT)
methylation test in predicting patient's outcome. These findings were also
validated through an independent dataset of patients. Furthermore, through
statistical analyses, both signatures were examined significantly.
Hypomethylation of hESC-associated genes predicted poorer clinical outcome in
GBM, supporting the idea that epigenetic activation of stem cell genes
contributes to GBM aggression. The gene panel presented herein may be developed
into clinical assays for patient stratification and future personalized medicine 
interventions.

PMCID: PMC4012637
PMID: 24601786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Mol Hum Reprod. 2014 Jun;20(6):526-37. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gau016. Epub 2014 Mar 
5.

Hypoxia inducible factor 2a/insulin-like growth factor receptor signal loop
supports the proliferation and Oct-4 maintenance of mouse germline stem cells.

Huang YH(1), Lin MH(2), Wang PC(3), Wu YC(4), Chiang HL(4), Wang YL(3), Chang
JH(4), Huang YK(5), Gu SY(5), Ho HN(6), Ling TY(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei
Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences,
College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan Center for
Reproductive Medicine and Sciences, Taipei Medical University Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan. (2)School of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical University,
Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, College of
Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan Graduate Institute of Medical
Sciences, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei
Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. (5)Department of Pharmacology, College of
Medicine, National Taiwan University, No.1, Section 1, Je-Ai Rd, Taipei, Taiwan. 
(6)Graduate Institute of Clinical Genomics, College of Medicine, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei, Taiwan Division of Endocrinology and Infertility, Department 
of Obstetrics and Gynecology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. (7)Department of Pharmacology, College
of Medicine, National Taiwan University, No.1, Section 1, Je-Ai Rd, Taipei,
Taiwan tyling@ntu.edu.tw.

Hypoxia inducible factor 2a (HIF-2a) is critical for primordial germ cell (PGC)
survival as knockout of HIF-2a (HIF-2a(-/-)) decreases both expression of Oct-4
and PGC number in genital ridge. Hypoxia is known to stabilize HIF-2a protein
from proteasomal degradation. However, little is known about the
hypoxia-associated endocrinal signaling in HIF-2a expression. The current work
demonstrates a role for an endocrine insulin-like growth factor-I receptor
(IGF-IR)-PI3K/Akt-mTOR-HIF-2a regulatory loop in the proliferation and Oct-4
maintenance of PGC-like alkaline phosphatase positive mouse germline stem cells
(AP(+)GSCs). We found that hypoxia greatly increased the cell proliferation and
the levels of nuclear Oct-4/HIF-2a protein of AP(+)GSCs. The hypoxic-AP(+)GSCs
presented stronger stemness ability for germ cell differentiation than normoxic, 
with expressions of c-KIT (differentiation germ cell marker), VASA
(differentiation germ cell marker) and SCP3 (meiotic marker) using a renal
capsule transplantation assay. Meanwhile, hypoxia significantly increased the
expression levels of secreted-IGF-I and IGF-IR. The IGF-I dose dependently
increased the HIF-2a expression levels in AP(+)GSCs; and, the inhibition of
IGF-IR by RNA interference (shIGF-IR) or LY294002 (PI3K inhibitor)/Rapamycin
(mTOR inhibitor) effectively suppressed the IGF-I- and/or hypoxia-induced HIF-2a 
and Oct-4 expression, suggesting that the IGF-IR and its downstream Akt/mTOR
signaling are involved in the IGF-I/hypoxia effects. Additionally, knockdown of
HIF-2a dramatically suppressed Oct-4 and IGF-IR protein levels in AP(+)GSC cells.
In conclusion, the present study demonstrates a regulatory loop of
IGF-IR-PI3K/Akt-mTOR-HIF-2a in proliferation and Oct-4 maintenance of PGC-like
AP(+)GSCs under hypoxia. This finding provides insights into the niche
endocrinology underlying early germ cell development.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 24598112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. BMC Cancer. 2014 Mar 5;14:151. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-151.

Pharmacological inhibition of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 modulates resistance 
of human glioblastoma stem cells to temozolomide.

Tentori L(1), Ricci-Vitiani L, Muzi A, Ciccarone F, Pelacchi F, Calabrese R,
Runci D, Pallini R, Caiafa P, Graziani G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of System Medicine, University of Rome "Tor Vergata", Via
Montpellier 1, 00133 Rome, Italy. tentori@uniroma2.it.

BACKGROUND: Chemoresistance of glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) has been attributed 
to the presence within the tumor of cancer stem cells (GSCs). The standard
therapy for GBM consists of surgery followed by radiotherapy and the
chemotherapeutic agent temozolomide (TMZ). However, TMZ efficacy is limited by
O6-methylguanine-DNA-methyltransferase (MGMT) and Mismatch Repair (MMR)
functions. Strategies to counteract TMZ resistance include its combination with
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitors (PARPi), which hamper the repair of
N-methylpurines. PARPi are also investigated as monotherapy for tumors with
deficiency of homologous recombination (HR). We have investigated whether PARPi
may restore GSC sensitivity to TMZ or may be effective as monotherapy.
METHODS: Ten human GSC lines were assayed for MMR proteins, MGMT and PARP-1
expression/activity, MGMT promoter methylation and sensitivity to TMZ or PARPi,
alone and in combination. Since PTEN defects are frequently detected in GBM and
may cause HR dysfunction, PTEN expression was also analyzed. The statistical
analysis of the differences in drug sensitivity among the cell lines was
performed using the ANOVA and Bonferroni's post-test or the non-parametric
Kruskal-Wallis analysis and Dunn's post-test for multiple comparisons. Synergism 
between TMZ and PARPi was analyzed by the median-effect method of Chou and
Talalay. Correlation analyses were done using the Spearman's rank test.
RESULTS: All GSCs were MMR-proficient and resistance to TMZ was mainly associated
with high MGMT activity or low proliferation rate. MGMT promoter hypermethylation
of GSCs correlated both with low MGMT activity/expression (Spearman's test, P =
0.004 and P = 0.01) and with longer overall survival of GBM patients (P = 0.02). 
Sensitivity of each GSC line to PARPi as single agent did not correlate with
PARP-1 or PTEN expression. Notably, PARPi and TMZ combination exerted synergistic
antitumor effects in eight out of ten GSC lines and the TMZ dose reduction
achieved significantly correlated with the sensitivity of each cell line to PARPi
as single agent (P = 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: The combination of TMZ with PARPi may represent a valuable strategy 
to reverse GSC chemoresistance.

PMCID: PMC3975727
PMID: 24593254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 19;9(2):e88372. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088372. eCollection
2014.

A DTC niche plexus surrounds the germline stem cell pool in Caenorhabditis
elegans.

Byrd DT(1), Knobel K(2), Affeldt K(2), Crittenden SL(3), Kimble J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
Wisconsin, United States of America ; Department of Biochemistry, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America. (2)Department of
Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, United States 
of America. (3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America. (4)Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America ;
Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, 
United States of America ; Laboratory of Molecular Biology, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America ; Department of
Medical Genetics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, United
States of America.

The mesenchymal distal tip cell (DTC) provides the niche for Caenorhabditis
elegans germline stem cells (GSCs). The DTC has a complex cellular architecture: 
its cell body caps the distal gonadal end and contacts germ cells extensively,
but it also includes multiple cellular processes that extend along the germline
tube and intercalate between germ cells. Here we use the lag-2 DTC promoter to
drive expression of myristoylated GFP, which highlights DTC membranes and permits
a more detailed view of DTC architecture. We find that short processes
intercalating between germ cells contact more germ cells than seen previously. We
define this region of extensive niche contact with germ cells as the DTC plexus. 
The extent of the DTC plexus corresponds well with the previously determined
extent of the GSC pool. Moreover, expression of a differentiation marker
increases as germ cells move out of the plexus. Maintenance of this DTC plexus
depends on the presence of undifferentiated germ cells, suggesting that germ cell
state can influence niche architecture. The roles of this DTC architecture remain
an open question. One idea is that the DTC plexus delivers Notch signaling to the
cluster of germ cells comprising the GSC pool; another idea is that the plexus
anchors GSCs at the distal end.

PMCID: PMC3929564
PMID: 24586318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Dev Cell. 2014 Feb 24;28(4):459-73. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2014.01.020.

A regulatory network of Drosophila germline stem cell self-renewal.

Yan D(1), Neumüller RA(1), Buckner M(2), Ayers K(3), Li H(4), Hu Y(2), Yang-Zhou 
D(2), Pan L(4), Wang X(4), Kelley C(1), Vinayagam A(1), Binari R(1), Randklev
S(1), Perkins LA(2), Xie T(4), Cooley L(3), Perrimon N(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(2)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA;
Drosophila RNAi Screening Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. 
(3)Departments of Genetics and Cell Biology, School of Medicine, Yale University,
New Haven, CT 06520, USA. (4)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City,
MO 64110, USA. (5)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02115, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02115, USA. Electronic address: perrimon@receptor.med.harvard.edu.

Stem cells possess the capacity to generate two cells of distinct fate upon
division: one cell retaining stem cell identity and the other cell destined to
differentiate. These cell fates are established by cell-type-specific genetic
networks. To comprehensively identify components of these networks, we performed 
a large-scale RNAi screen in Drosophila female germline stem cells (GSCs)
covering ~25% of the genome. The screen identified 366 genes that affect GSC
maintenance, differentiation, or other processes involved in oogenesis.
Comparison of GSC regulators with neural stem cell self-renewal factors
identifies common and cell-type-specific self-renewal genes. Importantly, we
identify the histone methyltransferase Set1 as a GSC-specific self-renewal
factor. Loss of Set1 in neural stem cells does not affect cell fate decisions,
suggesting a differential requirement of H3K4me3 in different stem cell lineages.
Altogether, our study provides a resource that will help to further dissect the
networks underlying stem cell self-renewal.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3998650
PMID: 24576427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Mar 11;111(10):3739-44. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1401861111. Epub 2014 Feb 24.

Discovery of two GLP-1/Notch target genes that account for the role of
GLP-1/Notch signaling in stem cell maintenance.

Kershner AM(1), Shin H, Hansen TJ, Kimble J.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Biochemistry, University of 
Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706.

A stem cell's immediate microenvironment creates an essential "niche" to maintain
stem cell self-renewal. Many niches and their intercellular signaling pathways
are known, but for the most part, the key downstream targets of niche signaling
remain elusive. Here, we report the discovery of two GLP-1/Notch target genes,
lst-1 (lateral signaling target) and sygl-1 (synthetic Glp), that function
redundantly to maintain germ-line stem cells (GSCs) in the nematode
Caenorhabditis elegans. Whereas lst-1 and sygl-1 single mutants appear normal,
lst-1 sygl-1 double mutants are phenotypically indistinguishable from glp-1/Notch
mutants. Multiple lines of evidence demonstrate that GLP-1/Notch signaling
activates lst-1 and sygl-1 expression in GSCs within the niche. Therefore, these 
two genes fully account for the role of GLP-1/Notch signaling in GSC maintenance.
Importantly, lst-1 and sygl-1 are not required for GLP-1/Notch signaling per se. 
We conclude that lst-1 and sygl-1 forge a critical link between Notch signaling
and GSC maintenance.

PMCID: PMC3956202
PMID: 24567412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Front Genet. 2014 Feb 3;5:14. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2014.00014. eCollection 2014.

Non-coding RNAs as epigenetic regulator of glioma stem-like cell differentiation.

Katsushima K(1), Kondo Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epigenomics, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, Nagoya Japan.

Glioblastomas show heterogeneous histological features. These distinct phenotypic
states are thought to be associated with the presence of glioma stem cells
(GSCs), which are highly tumorigenic and self-renewing sub-population of tumor
cells that have different functional characteristics. Differentiation of GSCs may
be regulated by multi-tiered epigenetic mechanisms that orchestrate the
expression of thousands of genes. One such regulatory mechanism involves
functional non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs), such as microRNAs (miRNAs); a large number
of ncRNAs have been identified and shown to regulate the expression of genes
associated with cell differentiation programs. Given the roles of miRNAs in cell 
differentiation, it is possible they are involved in the regulation of gene
expression networks in GSCs that are important for the maintenance of the
pluripotent state and for directing differentiation. Here, we review recent
findings on ncRNAs associated with GSC differentiation and discuss how these
ncRNAs contribute to the establishment of tissue heterogeneity during
glioblastoma tumor formation.

PMCID: PMC3910277
PMID: 24550934  [PubMed]


296. Cell Death Differ. 2014 Jun;21(6):929-40. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2014.12. Epub 2014 Feb
14.

Stem cell characteristics in glioblastoma are maintained by the ecto-nucleotidase
E-NPP1.

Bageritz J(1), Puccio L(1), Piro RM(2), Hovestadt V(1), Phillips E(1), Pankert
T(3), Lohr J(4), Herold-Mende C(4), Lichter P(1), Goidts V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Heidelberg, Germany. (2)1] Division of Theoretical Bioinformatics, German Cancer 
Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany [2] Department of Bioinformatics and 
Functional Genomics, Institute of Pharmacy and Molecular Biotechnology, BioQuant,
University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. (3)Research Group Genome
Organization & Function, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) & BioQuant,
Heidelberg, Germany. (4)Division of Experimental Neurosurgery, University of
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

Glioblastomas are highly aggressive brain tumours and are characterised by
substantial cellular heterogeneity within a single tumour. A sub-population of
glioblastoma stem-like cells (GSCs) that shares properties with neural precursor 
cells has been described, exhibiting resistance to therapy and therefore being
considered responsible for the high recurrence rate in glioblastoma. To elucidate
the underlying cellular processes we investigated the role of phosphatases in the
GSC phenotype, using an in vitro phosphatome-wide RNA interference screen. We
identified a set of genes, the knockdown of which induces a significant decrease 
in the glioma stem cell marker CD133, indicating a role in the glioblastoma
stem-like phenotype. Among these genes, the ecto-nucleotidase ENPP1
(ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase 1) was found to be highly
expressed in GSCs compared with normal brain and neural stem cells. Knockdown of 
ENPP1 in cultured GSCs resulted in an overall downregulation of stem
cell-associated genes, induction of differentiation into astrocytic cell lineage,
impairment of sphere formation, in addition to increased cell death, accumulation
of cells in G1/G0 cell cycle phase and sensitisation to chemotherapeutic
treatment. Genome-wide gene expression analysis and nucleoside and nucleotide
profiling revealed that knockdown of ENPP1 affects purine and pyrimidine
metabolism, suggesting a link between ENPP1 expression and a balanced
nucleoside-nucleotide pool in GSCs. The phenotypic changes in E-NPP1-deficient
GSCs are assumed to be a consequence of decreased transcriptional function of
E2F1. Together, these results reveal that E-NPP1, by acting upstream of E2F1, is 
indispensable for the maintenance of GSCs in vitro and hence required to keep
GSCs in an undifferentiated, proliferative state.

PMCID: PMC4013511
PMID: 24531536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Feb 25;111(8):3026-31. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1316552111. Epub 2014 Feb 10.

Day-night cycles and the sleep-promoting factor, Sleepless, affect stem cell
activity in the Drosophila testis.

Tulina NM(1), Chen WF, Chen JH, Sowcik M, Sehgal A.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Temple University School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19111-2497.

Adult stem cells maintain tissue integrity and function by renewing cellular
content of the organism through regulated mitotic divisions. Previous studies
showed that stem cell activity is affected by local, systemic, and environmental 
cues. Here, we explore a role of environmental day-night cycles in modulating
cell cycle progression in populations of adult stem cells. Using a classic stem
cell system, the Drosophila spermatogonial stem cell niche, we reveal daily
rhythms in division frequencies of germ-line and somatic stem cells that act
cooperatively to produce male gametes. We also examine whether behavioral
sleep-wake cycles, which are driven by the environmental day-night cycles,
regulate stem cell function. We find that flies lacking the sleep-promoting
factor Sleepless, which maintains normal sleep in Drosophila, have increased
germ-line stem cell (GSC) division rates, and this effect is mediated, in part,
through a GABAergic signaling pathway. We suggest that alterations in sleep can
influence the daily dynamics of GSC divisions.

PMCID: PMC3939882
PMID: 24516136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. J Neurooncol. 2014 Apr;117(2):225-34. doi: 10.1007/s11060-014-1385-6. Epub 2014
Feb 4.

Characterization of fenofibrate-mediated anti-proliferative pro-apoptotic effects
on high-grade gliomas and anti-invasive effects on glioma stem cells.

Binello E(1), Mormone E, Emdad L, Kothari H, Germano IM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, 1 Gustave L. Levy 
Place, Box 1136, New York, NY, 10029, USA.

Glioblastoma is the most common, and at the same time, most aggressive type of
high-grade glioma (HGG). The prognosis of glioblastoma patients treated with
standard therapy including surgery, temozolomide and radiation therapy remains
poor. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-a (PPARa) agonists are in
widespread clinical use for the treatment of hyperlipidemia. Recent evidence has 
suggested a potential role in various cancers including glioblastoma. In this
study, we characterized the effects of PPARa agonist, fenofibrate, directly on
HGG cells and glioma stem cells (GSC). Fenofibrate exhibited dose-dependent
p53-independent anti-proliferative effects on HGG starting at 25 µM and
pro-apoptotic effects starting at 50 µM, suggesting that the anti-proliferative
actions are present only at 25 µM. PPARa was expressed in all HGG cell lines.
Inhibition of PPARa with specific inhibitor GW6471 did not affect either
proliferation or apoptosis suggesting that these are PPARa-independent effects.
Fenofibrate treatment of HGG cells robustly diminished the expression of key
signaling pathways, including NF-<U+03BA>B and cyclin D1. Phosphorylation of Akt was
also diminished, with no change in total Akt. Effects on apoptotic signaling
molecules, Bax and Bcl-xL, had a trend towards pro-apoptotic effects. With
respect to GSC, fenofibrate treatment at 25 µM significantly decreased invasion
in association with a decrease in CD133 and Oct4 expression. Overall, results
support consideration of fenofibrate as an anti-glioma agent and establish its
potential as an adjunct treatment strategy for HGG. Translation to the clinical
setting could be rapid given its current use as a clinical agent and its low
toxicity profile.

PMID: 24493576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Oncogene. 2015 Jan 29;34(5):558-67. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.590. Epub 2014 Feb 3.

EphA2 promotes infiltrative invasion of glioma stem cells in vivo through
cross-talk with Akt and regulates stem cell properties.

Miao H(1), Gale NW(2), Guo H(1), Qian J(1), Petty A(1), Kaspar J(1), Murphy
AJ(2), Valenzuela DM(2), Yancopoulos G(2), Hambardzumyan D(3), Lathia JD(3), Rich
JN(3), Lee J(3), Wang B(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Rammelkamp Center for Research, MetroHealth Medical Center, Case Western
Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, USA [2] Department of
Pharmacology and Oncology, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine,
Cleveland, OH, USA. (2)VelociGene Division, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc.,
Tarrytown, NY, USA. (3)1] Department of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative
Medicine, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA [2]
Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve
University, Cleveland, OH, USA. (4)1] Rammelkamp Center for Research, MetroHealth
Medical Center, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland,
OH, USA [2] Department of Pharmacology and Oncology, Case Western Reserve
University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, USA [3] Case Comprehensive Cancer
Center, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA.

Diffuse infiltrative invasion is a major cause for the dismal prognosis of
glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), but the underlying mechanisms remain incompletely 
understood. Using human glioma stem cells (GSCs) that recapitulate the invasive
propensity of primary GBM, we find that EphA2 critically regulates GBM invasion
in vivo. EphA2 was expressed in all seven GSC lines examined, and overexpression 
of EphA2 enhanced intracranial invasion. The effects required Akt-mediated
phosphorylation of EphA2 on serine 897. In vitro the Akt-EphA2 signaling axis is 
maintained in the absence of ephrin-A ligands and is disrupted upon ligand
stimulation. To test whether ephrin-As in tumor microenvironment can regulate GSC
invasion, the newly established Efna1;Efna3;Efna4 triple knockout mice (TKO) were
used in an ex vivo brain slice invasion assay. We observed significantly
increased GSC invasion through the brain slices of TKO mice relative to wild-type
(WT) littermates. Mechanistically EphA2 knockdown suppressed stem cell properties
of GSCs, causing diminished self-renewal, reduced stem marker expression and
decreased tumorigenicity. In a subset of GSCs, the reduced stem cell properties
were associated with lower Sox2 expression. Overexpression of EphA2 promoted stem
cell properties in a kinase-independent manner and increased Sox2 expression.
Disruption of Akt-EphA2 cross-talk attenuated stem cell marker expression and
neurosphere formation while having minimal effects on tumorigenesis. Taken
together, the results show that EphA2 endows invasiveness of GSCs in vivo in
cooperation with Akt and regulates glioma stem cell properties.

PMCID: PMC4119862
PMID: 24488013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Cell Biol Int. 2014 Apr;38(4):426-34. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10207. Epub 2014 Jan 30.

mGlu3 receptor blockade inhibits proliferation and promotes astrocytic phenotype 
in glioma stem cells.

Zhou K(1), Song Y, Zhou W, Zhang C, Shu H, Yang H, Wang B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency, Xinqiao Hospital, Chongqing, 400037, China.

We have characterised, using both in vivo and in vitro methods, the effects of
the metabotropic glutamate receptor subtype 3 (mGlu3) antagonist (LY341495) and
agonist (LY379268) on the proliferation and differentiation of glioma stem cells 
(GSC). For in vitro studies, a CCK-8 assay was used to determine the cell
proliferation, flow cytometry was performed to determine cell cycle phases, and
immunohistochemistry and laser confocal microscopy were employed to detect CD133 
expression. For in vivo studies, GSCs were injected into nude mice treated with
either LY379268 or LY341495 and the growth of the tumours was measured after 3
weeks. When compared with controls, the proliferation rates and proportion of
cells in S phase within the LY341495 treated group decreased in a time-dependent 
manner. In the presence of differentiation medium containing LY341495, GSC
differentiation was diverted into an astrocyte rather than neuronal phenotype.
The growth rate and volume of tumours injected into nude mice was reduced in
LY341495 treated mice compared with controls. Thus pharmacological blockade of
mGlu3 receptor signalling pathway significantly inhibits the growth and
proliferation of GSCs both in vitro and in vivo while promoting differentiation
to astrocytes. These results further implicate mGlu3 in the biology of glioma and
as a target for continued research.

© 2013 International Federation for Cell Biology.

PMID: 24482010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2014 Mar 7;21(2):343-53. doi: 10.1530/ERC-14-0036. Print
2014 Apr.

Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease is a negative risk factor for prostate cancer
recurrence.

Choi WM(1), Lee JH, Yoon JH, Kwak C, Lee YJ, Cho YY, Lee YB, Yu SJ, Kim YJ, Kim
HH, Kim HC, Cho SY, Lee SB, Jeong H, Kim CY, Lee HS.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Internal Medicine and Liver Research Institute Urology
Radiology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 28 Yeongeon-dong,
Jongno-gu, Seoul 110-744, Republic of Korea Department of Urology, Seoul
Metropolitan Government-Seoul National University Boramae Medical Center, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea.

Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is closely related to the metabolic
syndrome, which is associated with an increased risk of various malignancies. In 
this study, we investigated the association between NAFLD and prostate cancer
biochemical recurrence (BCR) after radical prostatectomy. Consecutive prostate
cancer patients who underwent radical prostatectomy were enrolled from two
hospitals in Korea and randomly assigned to the training (n=147) or validation
set (n=146). The presence of NAFLD, BMI, preoperative prostate-specific antigen, 
and histological findings including Gleason score (GSc) were analyzed in regard
to their association with BCR. NAFLD was diagnosed based on ultrasonography or
unenhanced computed tomography images. BCR-free survival rates were calculated
using the Kaplan-Meier method. In the training set, 32 (21.8%) patients developed
BCR during a median follow-up period of 51 (inter-quartile range, 35-65) months. 
In the multivariate analysis, the presence of NAFLD (hazard ratio (HR), 0.36; 95%
CI, 0.14-0.97; P=0.04) was an independent negative predictive factor of BCR after
adjustment for pathological GSc. Applied to the validation set, the presence of
NAFLD maintained its prognostic value for longer time-to-BCR (HR, 0.17; 95% CI,
0.06-0.49; P=0.001). In the subgroup analysis of patients with NAFLD, NAFLD
fibrosis score was a single independent negative predictor for BCR (HR, 0.54; 95%
CI, 0.30-0.98; P=0.04). Our study demonstrated that NAFLD may play a protective
role against BCR after radical prostatectomy for prostate cancer. Further study
is warranted to elucidate the mechanism of protective effect in patients with
NAFLD.

PMID: 24481324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Histochem Cell Biol. 2014 Aug;142(2):217-26. doi: 10.1007/s00418-014-1183-4. Epub
2014 Jan 30.

Differentiation of human embryonic stem cells to hepatocyte-like cells on a new
developed xeno-free extracellular matrix.

Farzaneh Z(1), Pakzad M, Vosough M, Pournasr B, Baharvand H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cells and Developmental Biology at the Cell Science
Research Center, Royan Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Technology, ACECR, PO 
Box 19395-4644, Tehran, Iran.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) provide a new source for hepatocyte production
in translational medicine and cell replacement therapy. The reported hESC-derived
hepatocyte-like cells (HLCs) were commonly generated on Matrigel, a mouse cell
line-derived extracellular matrix (ECM). Here, we performed the hepatic lineage
differentiation of hESCs following a stepwise application of growth factors on a 
newly developed serum- and xeno-free, simple and cost-benefit ECM, designated
"RoGel," which generated from a modified conditioned medium of human fibroblasts.
In comparison with Matrigel, the differentiated HLCs on both ECMs expressed
similar levels of hepatocyte-specific genes, secreted a-fetoprotein, and
metabolized ammonia, showed glycogen storage activity as well as low-density
lipoprotein and indocyanine green uptake. The transplantation of hESC-HLCs into
the carbon tetrachloride-injured liver demonstrated incorporation of the cells
into the host mouse liver and the expression of albumin. The results suggest that
the xeno-free and cost-benefit matrix may be applicable in bioartificial livers
and also may facilitating a clinical application of human pluripotent stem
cell-derived hepatocytes in the future.

PMID: 24477550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Tissue Cell. 2014 Apr;46(2):127-35. doi: 10.1016/j.tice.2013.12.006. Epub 2013
Dec 31.

Valproic acid promotes differentiation of hepatocyte-like cells from whole human 
umbilical cord-derived mesenchymal stem cells.

An SY(1), Han J(1), Lim HJ(1), Park SY(1), Kim JH(2), Do BR(2), Kim JH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Division of Biotechnology, College of Life
Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea University, Seoul 136-713, Republic of Korea.
(2)Biotechnology Research Institute, HurimBioCell Inc., Seoul 157-793, Republic
of Korea. (3)Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Division of Biotechnology, College 
of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea University, Seoul 136-713, Republic of 
Korea. Electronic address: jhkim@korea.ac.kr.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are mesoderm-derived cells that are considered a
good source of somatic cells for treatment of many degenerative diseases.
Previous studies have reported the differentiation of mesodermal MSCs into
endodermal and ectodermal cell types beyond their embryonic lineages, including
hepatocytes and neurons. However, the molecular pathways responsible for the
direct or indirect cell type conversion and the functional ability of the
differentiated cells remain unclear and need further research. In the present
study, we demonstrated that valproic acid (VPA), which is a histone deacetylase
inhibitor, induced an increase in the expression of endodermal genes including
CXCR4, SOX17, FOXA1, FOXA2, GSC, c-MET, EOMES, and HNF-1ß in human umbilical cord
derived MSCs (hUCMSCs). In addition, we found that VPA is able to increase these 
endodermal genes in hUCMSCs by activating signal transduction of AKT and ERK. VPA
pretreatment increased hepatic differentiation at the expense of adipogenic
differentiation. The effects of VPA on modulating hUCMSCs fate were diminished by
blocking AKT and ERK activation using specific signaling inhibitors. Together,
our results suggest that VPA contributes to the lineage conversion of hUCMSCs to 
hepatic cell fate by upregulating the expression of endodermal genes through AKT 
and ERK activation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24472423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Pol Przegl Chir. 2013 Dec;85(12):699-705. doi: 10.2478/pjs-2013-0107.

Analysis of the reliability of clinical examination in predicting traumatic
cerebral lesions and skull fractures in patients with mild and moderate head
trauma.

Zyluk A, Mazur A, Piotuch B, Safranow K.

The aim of the study was to assess the reliability of neurological examination
and other factors in predicting traumatic cerebral lesions and skull fractures in
patients with mild and moderate head trauma (GCS 10-15).MATERIAL AND METHODS:
Over a one-year period, 227 patients: 145 male and 82 female, aged a mean of 51
years who sustained mild or moderate head trauma (GSC 10-15) were examined
neurologically and had performed head CT scans. The neurological examination as a
whole and each finding of the neurological examination were tested as predictors 
of the presence of traumatic abnormalities in the head CT scan.
RESULTS: Post-traumatic lesions in head CT scan were found in 109 patients (48%):
skull fractures in 66 of these and brain injuries in 94; fifty-eight patients had
skull fracture combined with brain injury. Seventeen patients required
neurosurgical intervention (hematoma evacuation). Abnormal neurological
examination showed the highest reliability in identifying patients with brain
injuries in CT (sensitivity 87%, specificity 79%). Of single findings, gait
abnormalities and consciousness disturbances, present in sober patients, were the
strongest predictors of cerebral lesions. Likewise, abnormal neurological
examination was the best indicator of skull fractures (sensitivity 77%,
specificity 63%). Gait abnormalities and "raccoon eyes" present in alcohol
intoxicated patients were the strongest individual predictors of skull fractures.
CONCLUSION: Results of our study show neurological abnormalities as the most
reliable (although not 100% accurate) in identifying patients who are likely to
have brain injuries and/or skull fracture following head trauma. Use of clinical 
decision rules may reduce the number of head CT scans performed "just in case".

PMID: 24468590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Cell Mol Bioeng. 2013 Dec;6(4):441-448.

Lineage tracing quantification reveals symmetric stem cell division in Drosophila
male germline stem cells.

Salzmann V(1), Inaba M(1), Cheng J(2), Yamashita YM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Life Sciences Institute, Department of Cell and Developmental Biology,
University of Michigan Ann Arbor. (2)Department of Bioengineering, University of 
Illinois at Chicago, 851 S Morgan Street, Chicago IL 60607.

In the homeostatic state, adult stem cells divide either symmetrically to
increase the stem cell number to compensate stem cell loss, or asymmetrically to 
maintain the population while producing differentiated cells. We have
investigated the mode of stem cell division in the testes of Drosophila
melanogaster by lineage tracing and confirm the presence of symmetric stem cell
division in this system. We found that the rate of symmetric division is limited 
to 1-2% of total germline stem cell (GSC) divisions, but it increases with
expression of a cell adhesion molecule, E-cadherin, or a regulator of the actin
cytoskeleton, Moesin, which may modulate adhesiveness of germ cells to the stem
cell niche. Our results indicate that the decision regarding asymmetric vs.
symmetric division is a dynamically regulated process that contributes to tissue 
homeostasis, responding to the needs of the tissue.

PMCID: PMC3899098
PMID: 24465278  [PubMed]


306. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Jan 23;5:e1023. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.560.

A cell-penetrating peptide based on the interaction between c-Src and connexin43 
reverses glioma stem cell phenotype.

Gangoso E(1), Thirant C(2), Chneiweiss H(2), Medina JM(1), Tabernero A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Instituto de Neurociencias de
Castilla y León (INCYL), Universidad de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain.
(2)Laboratoire Plasticité Gliale, Centre de Psychiatrie et de Neuroscience-INSERM
U894, Paris 75014, France.

Connexin43 (Cx43), the main gap junction channel-forming protein in astrocytes,
is downregulated in malignant gliomas. These tumors are composed of a
heterogeneous population of cells that include many with stem-cell-like
properties, called glioma stem cells (GSCs), which are highly tumorigenic and
lack Cx43 expression. Interestingly, restoring Cx43 reverses GSC phenotype and
consequently reduces their tumorigenicity. In this study, we investigated the
mechanism by which Cx43 exerts its antitumorigenic effects on GSCs. We have
focused on the tyrosine kinase c-Src, which interacts with the intracellular
carboxy tail of Cx43. We found that Cx43 regulates c-Src activity and
proliferation in human GSCs expanded in adherent culture. Thus, restoring Cx43 in
GSCs inhibited c-Src activity, which in turn promoted the downregulation of the
inhibitor of differentiation Id1. Id1 sustains stem cell phenotype as it controls
the expression of Sox2, responsible for stem cell self-renewal, and promotes
cadherin switching, which has been associated to epithelial-mesenchymal
transition. Our results show that both the ectopic expression of Cx43 and the
inhibition of c-Src reduced Id1, Sox2 expression and promoted the switch from N- 
to E-cadherin, suggesting that Cx43, by inhibiting c-Src, downregulates Id1 with 
the subsequent changes in stem cell phenotype. On the basis of this mechanism, we
found that a cell-penetrating peptide, containing the region of Cx43 that
interacts with c-Src, mimics the effect of Cx43 on GSC phenotype, confirming the 
relevance of the interaction between Cx43 and c-Src in the regulation of the
malignant phenotype and pinpointing this interaction as a promising therapeutic
target.

PMCID: PMC4040690
PMID: 24457967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 15;9(1):e85759. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085759. eCollection
2014.

A synthetic dl-nordihydroguaiaretic acid (Nordy), inhibits angiogenesis, invasion
and proliferation of glioma stem cells within a zebrafish xenotransplantation
model.

Yang X(1), Cui W(1), Yu S(1), Xu C(1), Chen G(1), Gu A(1), Li T(1), Cui Y(1),
Zhang X(1), Bian X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Tumor Immunopathology, Ministry of Education of China,
Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, China ;
Institute of Pathology and Southwest Cancer Center, Southwest Hospital, Third
Military Medical University, Chongqing, China.

The zebrafish (Danio rerio) and their transparent embryos represent a promising
model system in cancer research. Compared with other vertebrate model systems, we
had previously shown that the zebrafish model provides many advantages over mouse
or chicken models to study tumor invasion, angiogenesis, and tumorigenesis. In
this study, we systematically investigated the biological features of glioma stem
cells (GSCs) in a zebrafish model, such as tumor angiogenesis, invasion, and
proliferation. We demonstrated that several verified anti-angiogenic agents
inhibited angiogenesis that was induced by xenografted-GSCs. We next evaluated
the effects of a synthetic dl-nordihydroguaiaretic acid compound (dl-NDGA or
"Nordy"), which revealed anti-tumor activity against human GSCs in vitro by
establishing parameters through studying its ability to suppress angiogenesis,
tumor invasion, and proliferation. Furthermore, our results indicated that Nordy 
might inhibit GSCs invasion and proliferation through regulation of the
arachidonate 5-lipoxygenase (Alox-5) pathway. Moreover, the combination of Nordy 
and a VEGF inhibitor exhibited an enhanced ability to suppress angiogenesis that 
was induced by GSCs. By contrast, even following treatment with 50 µM Nordy,
there was no discernible effect on zebrafish embryonic development. Together,
these results suggested efficacy and safety of using Nordy in vivo, and further
demonstrated that this model should be suitable for studying GSCs and anti-GSC
drug evaluation.

PMCID: PMC3893259
PMID: 24454929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Science. 2014 Jan 17;343(6168):298-301. doi: 10.1126/science.1246384.

Changes in rRNA transcription influence proliferation and cell fate within a stem
cell lineage.

Zhang Q(1), Shalaby NA, Buszczak M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center at Dallas, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA.

Ribosome biogenesis drives cell growth and proliferation, but mechanisms that
modulate this process within specific lineages remain poorly understood. Here, we
identify a Drosophila RNA polymerase I (Pol I) regulatory complex composed of
Under-developed (Udd), TAF1B, and a TAF1C-like factor. Disruption of udd or TAF1B
results in reduced ovarian germline stem cell (GSC) proliferation. Female GSCs
display high levels of ribosomal RNA (rRNA) transcription, and Udd becomes
enriched in GSCs relative to their differentiating daughters. Increasing Pol I
transcription delays differentiation, whereas reducing rRNA production induces
both morphological changes that accompany multicellular cyst formation and
specific decreased expression of the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) pathway
component Mad. These findings demonstrate that modulating rRNA synthesis fosters 
changes in the cell fate, growth, and proliferation of female Drosophila GSCs and
their daughters.

PMCID: PMC4084784
PMID: 24436420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Exp Cell Res. 2014 Mar 10;322(1):51-61. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2014.01.006. Epub
2014 Jan 13.

Efficient programming of human eye conjunctiva-derived induced pluripotent stem
(ECiPS) cells into definitive endoderm-like cells.

Massumi M(1), Hoveizi E(2), Baktash P(3), Hooti A(3), Ghazizadeh L(3), Nadri
S(4), Pourasgari F(5), Hajarizadeh A(6), Soleimani M(7), Nabiuni M(2),
Khorramizadeh MR(8).

Author information: 
(1)Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell Biotechnology Team, Stem Cells Department,
National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Iran; Stem
Cells Biology Department, Stem Cell Technology Research Center, Tehran, Iran;
Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
Electronic address: massumi.mohammad@gmail.com. (2)Department of Biology, Faculty
of Sciences, Kharazmi University (Tarbiat Moallem), Tehran, Iran. (3)Induced
Pluripotent Stem Cell Biotechnology Team, Stem Cells Department, National
Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Iran. (4)Stem Cells
Biology Department, Stem Cell Technology Research Center, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Department of Biotechnology, Razi Vaccine and Serum Research Center, Karaj,
Iran; Molecular Biology and Genetic Engineering Department, Stem Cell Technology 
Research Center, Tehran, Iran. (6)Molecular Biology and Genetic Engineering
Department, Stem Cell Technology Research Center, Tehran, Iran. (7)Department of 
Hematology, Faculty of Medical Science, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran.
(8)Department of Medical Biotechnology, School of Advanced Medical Technologies, 
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address:
khoramza@sina.tums.ac.ir.

Due to pluripotency of induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells, and the lack of
immunological incompatibility and ethical issues, iPS cells have been considered 
as an invaluable cell source for future cell replacement therapy. This study was 
aimed first at establishment of novel iPS cells, ECiPS, which directly
reprogrammed from human Eye Conjunctiva-derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells (EC-MSCs);
second, comparing the inductive effects of Wnt3a/Activin A biomolecules to IDE1
small molecule in derivation of definitive endoderm (DE) from the ECiPS cells. To
that end, first, the EC-MSCs were transduced by SOKM-expressing lentiviruses and 
characterized for endogenous expression of embryonic markers Then the established
ECiPS cells were induced to DE formation by Wnt3a/Activin A or IDE1.
Quantification of GSC, Sox17 and Foxa2 expression, as DE-specific markers, in
both mRNA and protein levels revealed that induction of ECiPS cells by either
Wnt3a/Activin A or IDE1 could enhance the expression level of the genes; however 
the levels of increase were higher in Wnt3a/Activin A induced ECiPS-EBs than IDE1
induced cells. Furthermore, the flow cytometry analyses showed no synergistic
effect between Activin A and Wnt3a to derive DE-like cells from ECiPS cells. The 
comparative findings suggest that although both Wnt3a/Activin A signaling and
IDE1 molecule could be used for differentiation of iPS into DE cells, the
DE-inducing effect of Wnt3a/Activin A was statistically higher than IDE1.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24434355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Cancer Res. 2014 Mar 1;74(5):1541-53. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-1449. Epub
2014 Jan 14.

microRNA-148a is a prognostic oncomiR that targets MIG6 and BIM to regulate EGFR 
and apoptosis in glioblastoma.

Kim J(1), Zhang Y, Skalski M, Hayes J, Kefas B, Schiff D, Purow B, Parsons S,
Lawler S, Abounader R.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Departments of Microbiology, Immunology and Cancer
Biology, Neurology, and Cancer Center, University of Virginia, Charlottesville,
Virginia; Leeds Institute of Cancer and Pathology, University of Leeds, Leeds,
United Kingdom; and Department of Neurosurgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts.

Great interest persists in useful prognostic and therapeutic targets in
glioblastoma. In this study, we report the definition of miRNA (miR)-148a as a
novel prognostic oncomiR in glioblastoma. miR-148a expression was elevated in
human glioblastoma specimens, cell lines, and stem cells (GSC) compared with
normal human brain and astrocytes. High levels were a risk indicator for
glioblastoma patient survival. Functionally, miR-148a expression increased cell
growth, survival, migration, and invasion in glioblastoma cells and GSCs and
promoted GSC neurosphere formation. Two direct targets of miR-148a were
identified, the EGF receptor (EGFR) regulator MIG6 and the apoptosis regulator
BIM, which rescue experiments showed were essential to mediate the oncogenic
activity of miR-148a. By inhibiting MIG6 expression, miR-148a reduced EGFR
trafficking to Rab7-expressing compartments, which includes late endosomes and
lysosomes. This process coincided with reduced degradation and elevated
expression and activation of EGFR. Finally, inhibition of miR-148a strongly
suppressed GSC and glioblastoma xenograft growth in vivo. Taken together, our
findings provide a comprehensive analysis of the prognostic value and oncogenic
function of miR-148a in glioblastoma, further defining it as a potential target
for glioblastoma therapy.

©2014 AACR

PMCID: PMC3947487
PMID: 24425048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Oncol Res. 2013;21(2):93-102. doi: 10.3727/096504013X13786659070154.

Wnt antagonist, secreted frizzled-related protein 4 (sFRP4), increases
chemotherapeutic response of glioma stem-like cells.

Warrier S(1), Balu SK, Kumar AP, Millward M, Dharmarajan A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Stem Cells and Cardiovascular Regeneration, Manipal
Institute of Regenerative Medicine, Manipal University, Bangalore, India.

Malignant gliomas have a highly tumorigenic subpopulation, termed cancer stem
cells (CSCs), that drives tumor formation and proliferation. CSCs possess
inherent resistance mechanisms against radiation- and chemotherapy-induced cancer
cell death, enabling them to survive and initiate tumor recurrence. We examined
the effect of secreted frizzled-related protein 4 (sFRP4), a Wnt signaling
antagonist, in chemosensitizing the glioma cell line U138MG and glioma stem cells
(GSCs) enriched from U138MG to chemotherapeutics. We found that sFRP4 alone and
in combination with either doxorubicin or cisplatin induced apoptosis.
Proliferation decreased substantially in GSC-enriched population as measured by
MTT and BrdU assays. JC-1 and caspase-3 assays demonstrated that cell death was
through the apoptotic pathway. sFRP4 treatment also decreased neurosphere
formation and induced neuronal differentiation. Inhibition by sFRP4 was abolished
by Wnt3a, indicating that sFRP4 acts through the frizzled receptor. Further
indication that sFRP4 acts through the Wnt ß-catenin pathway was provided by
decrease in the ß-catenin protein and decrease in the ß-catenin-stimulated gene
cyclin D1 upon sFRP4 induction. By real-time PCR, an increase in apoptotic
markers Bax and p21, a decrease in pro-proliferative marker CycD1, and a decrease
in the GSC marker CD133 were observed. These observations indicate that sFRP4 is 
able to sensitize glioma cells and stem cells to chemotherapeutics. We thus
identified for the first time that sFRP4 could help to destroy cancer stem cells 
of glioma cell line, which would lead to effective treatment regimen to combat
brain tumors.

PMID: 24406045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed). 2014 Jan 1;19:818-24.

The role of glioma stem cells in glioma tumorigenesis.

Yin CL(1), Lv SQ(2), Chen XY(1), Guo H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, 30 Gaotanyan Street, Shapingba Area, Chongqing 400038, China.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing 400037, China.

Malignant gliomas, the most common type of primary brain tumor, account for 80%
of malignant tumors in the central nervous system (CNS). There are three
principal types of glioma: astrocytomas, oligodendrogliomas, and
oligoastrocytomas. Glioma stem cells (GSCs) have been found in all types;
however, many fundamental questions about GSCs remain unanswered. This review
will examine the current state of knowledge regarding GSC origin and the
signaling pathways implicated in GSC tumorigenesis. The outstanding challenges
for the study of GSCs in the context of glioma progression will also be
discussed.

PMID: 24389226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Fertil Steril. 2014 Jan;101(1):20-30. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2013.11.009.

Ovarian germline stem cells: an unlimited source of oocytes?

Hanna CB(1), Hennebold JD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive and Developmental Sciences, Oregon National Primate
Research Center, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, Oregon.
Electronic address: hannaca@ohsu.edu. (2)Division of Reproductive and
Developmental Sciences, Oregon National Primate Research Center, Oregon Health
and Science University, Portland, Oregon; Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, Oregon.

While there has been progress in directing the development of embryonic stem
cells and induced pluripotent stem cells toward a germ cell state, their ability 
to serve as a source of functional oocytes in a clinically relevant model or
situation has yet to be established. Recent studies suggest that the adult
mammalian ovary is not endowed with a finite number of oocytes, but instead
possesses stem cells that contribute to their renewal. The ability to isolate and
promote the growth and development of such ovarian germline stem cells (GSCs)
would provide a novel means to treat infertility in women. Although such ovarian 
GSCs are well characterized in nonmammalian model organisms, the findings that
support the existence of adult ovarian GSCs in mammals have been met with
considerable evidence that disputes their existence. This review details the
lessons provided by model organisms that successfully utilize ovarian GSCs to
allow for a continual and high level of female germ cell production throughout
their life, with a specific focus on the cellular mechanisms involved in GSC
self-renewal and oocyte development. Such an overview of the role that oogonial
stem cells play in maintaining fertility in nonmammalian species serves as a
backdrop for the data generated to date that supports or disputes the existence
of GSCs in mammals as well as the future of this area of research in terms of its
potential for any application in reproductive medicine.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3926438
PMID: 24382341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2013 Oct;35(10):726-31.

[Phenotype of SHG-44 glioma stem cell spheres and pathological characteristics of
their xenograft tumors].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu TF(1), Chen JM(1), Chen SS(1), Chen GL(1), Wei YX(1), Xie XS(1), Du ZW(1),
Zhou YX(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, the First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, Suzhou 215006, China. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, the First
Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, China. Email:
zhouyxyq2008@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: To study the phenotype and tumorigenicity of SHG-44 glioma stem cell
spheres and the pathological characteristics of their xenograft tumors.
METHODS: SHG-44 glioma cells were cultured under neural stem cell medium and
glioma stem cell spheres were collected. Immunocytochemistry was used to dectet
the expression of CD133, nestin, A2B5, vimentin, VEGFR-2 and IDH R132H. Cell
spheres were induced using serum-containing medium, and the expression of CD133, 
nestin, vimentin, GFAP, ß-III tubulin and GalC in the cell spheres were detected.
The expression of CD133, nestin, VEGFR-2, GFAP, S-100 and CD34 in the
intracranial xenograft tumor tissues was detected using immunohistochemistry. The
pathological characteristics of orthotopic xenograft tumors generated from the
SHG-44 glioma cells and SHG-44 glioma stem cell spheres were compared.
RESULTS: SHG-44 glioma stem cell spheres were collected successfully after
cultured under neural stem cell medium. The ratio of CD133(+) cells in the
passage 10 SHG-44 glioma stem cell spheres was (71.63 ± 5.92)%, significantly
higher than that in the SHG-44 glioma cells [(1.95 ± 1.45)%]. Immunocytochemistry
showed that in the SHG-44 glioma cell spheres, the ratio of nestin(+) cells was
(84.06 ± 7.58)%, vimentin(+) cells (29.11 ± 3.44)%, VEGFR 2(+) cells (64.44 ±
3.69)%, and A2B5(+) cells (14.08 ± 2.19)%. A subpopulation of cells with mutation
of IDH R132H was detected harboring in the SHG-44 glioma cell spheres. After
induction of differentiation with serum-containing medium, the ratio of CD133(+) 
cells was (1.89 ± 1.27)%, nestin(+) cells (6.67 ± 2.75)%, vimentin(+) cells
(93.75 ± 2.95)%, GFAP (+) cells (91.33 ± 4.75)%, ß-III tubulin(+) cells (82.36 ± 
4.02)%, and GalC(+) cells (8.92 ± 3.19)%. Immunohistochemistry showed positive
expression of GFAP, S-100, VEGFR-2, and negative of CD133 and nestin in the
orthotopic xenograft tumors. A very small amount of human-specific CD34 cells
formed a tubular structure. Compared with the SHG-44 glioma cell-formed xenograft
tumor, the SHG-44 glioma stem cell-formed xenograft tumor exhibited a higher
local invasiveness.
CONCLUSIONS: SHG-44 glioma cell spheres are successfully collected after cultured
under neural stem cell medium. They belong to the CD133(+)A2B5(-) GSC
subpopulation, highly expressing VEGFR-2, possess the ability of both
self-renewal and multi-directional differentiation, and may participate in the
formation of vasculogenic mimicry.

PMID: 24378091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Cancer Cell Microenviron. 2014;1(5). pii: e295.

Cellular plasticity regulated cancer stem cell niche: a possible new mechanism of
chemoresistance.

Deheeger M(1), Lesniak MS(2), Ahmed AU(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Brain Tumor Center, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(2)The Brain Tumor Center, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA ;
Department of Surgery, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

The cancer stem cell (CSC) theory is an emerging concept that proposes a
hierarchical nature of carcinogenesis, where a small number of tumor cells are
capable of driving tumor growth. Despite many unanswered questions surrounding
the cancer stem cell model, the hypothesis has rejuvenated hopes for formulating 
a novel therapeutic strategy for targeting the roots of cancer. This model
predicts that cancer stem cells have the capacity to resist conventional radio-
and chemotherapy and initiate disease recurrence. We recently investigated the
mechanisms of chemoresistance in glioblastoma (GBM), the most common and
aggressive adult human brain tumor. Exposure of patient derived glioma xenograft 
lines to a therapeutic dose of temolozolomide (TMZ), the most commonly used
chemotherapy for patients with GBM, consistently increased the glioma stem cell
(GSC) frequency over time. Lineage tracing analysis at the single sell level
revealed unprecedented cellular plasticity within the glioma cells, allowing them
to reprogram from a differentiated state to an undifferentiated CSC-like state.
This reprogramming, mediated by cellular plasticity, is driven by TMZ-induced
hypoxia inducible factors (HIFs), and provides a novel mechanism for
chemoresistance acquisition. We herein discuss the possible role of temozolomide 
in regulating a cancer stem cell niche that supports GSC resistance,
proliferation, and subsequent therapeutic relapse.

PMCID: PMC4494756
PMID: 26161429  [PubMed]


316. Evodevo. 2014 Oct 29;5:39. doi: 10.1186/2041-9139-5-39. eCollection 2014.

Molecular conservation of metazoan gut formation: evidence from expression of
endomesoderm genes in Capitella teleta (Annelida).

Boyle MJ(1), Yamaguchi E(2), Seaver EC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Naos Island Laboratory, Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, Apartado,
0843-03089 Panamá, República de Panamá (2)Kewalo Marine Laboratory,
PBRC/University of Hawaii, 41 Ahui Street, Honolulu, HI 96813 USA. (3)Whitney
Laboratory for Marine Bioscience, University of Florida, 9505 Ocean Shore Blvd.
St., Augustine, FL 32080 USA.

BACKGROUND: Metazoan digestive systems develop from derivatives of ectoderm,
endoderm and mesoderm, and vary in the relative contribution of each germ layer
across taxa and between gut regions. In a small number of well-studied model
systems, gene regulatory networks specify endoderm and mesoderm of the gut within
a bipotential germ layer precursor, the endomesoderm. Few studies have examined
expression of endomesoderm genes outside of those models, and thus, it is unknown
whether molecular specification of gut formation is broadly conserved. In this
study, we utilize a sequenced genome and comprehensive fate map to correlate the 
expression patterns of six transcription factors with embryonic germ layers and
gut subregions during early development in Capitella teleta.
RESULTS: The genome of C. teleta contains the five core genes of the sea urchin
endomesoderm specification network. Here, we extend a previous study and
characterize expression patterns of three network orthologs and three additional 
genes by in situ hybridization during cleavage and gastrulation stages and during
formation of distinct gut subregions. In cleavage stage embryos, Ct-otx,
Ct-blimp1, Ct-bra and Ct-nkx2.1a are expressed in all four macromeres, the
endoderm precursors. Ct-otx, Ct-blimp1, and Ct-nkx2.1a are also expressed in
presumptive endoderm of gastrulae and later during midgut development. Additional
gut-specific expression patterns include Ct-otx, Ct-bra, Ct-foxAB and Ct-gsc in
oral ectoderm; Ct-otx, Ct-blimp1, Ct-bra and Ct-nkx2.1a in the foregut; and both 
Ct-bra and Ct-nkx2.1a in the hindgut.
CONCLUSIONS: Identification of core sea urchin endomesoderm genes in C. teleta
indicates they are present in all three bilaterian superclades. Expression of
Ct-otx, Ct-blimp1 and Ct-bra, combined with previously published Ct-foxA and
Ct-gataB1 patterns, provide the most comprehensive comparison of these five
orthologs from a single species within Spiralia. Each ortholog is likely involved
in endoderm specification and midgut development, and several may be essential
for establishment of the oral ectoderm, foregut and hindgut, including
specification of ectodermal and mesodermal contributions. When the five core
genes are compared across the Metazoa, their conserved expression patterns
suggest that 'gut gene' networks evolved to specify distinct digestive system
subregions, regardless of species-specific differences in gut architecture or
germ layer contributions within each subregion.

PMCID: PMC4407770
PMID: 25908956  [PubMed]


317. J Glaucoma. 2014 Jan;23(1):e18-22. doi: 10.1097/IJG.0000000000000033.

Clinical applicability of the International Classification of Disease and Related
Health Problems (ICD-9) glaucoma staging codes to predict disease severity in
patients with open-angle glaucoma.

Parekh AS(1), Tafreshi A, Dorairaj SK, Weinreb RN.

Author information: 
(1)*Hamilton Glaucoma Center, University of California, La Jolla, CA Mayo
Clinic, Jacksonville, FL.

PURPOSE: The aim of the study was to determine how the International
Classification of Disease and Related Health Problems (ICD-9) Glaucoma Staging
Codes (GSC) relate to visual field global indices and average retinal nerve fiber
layer (RNFL) thickness in patients with primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG).
METHODS: Over a 6-week period, charts of consecutive patients were prospectively 
reviewed. Included patients had optic nerve head damage consistent with glaucoma 
as well as reliable functional and imaging tests. Patients were divided into
early-stage, moderate-stage, and severe-stage glaucoma using the ICD-9 GSC
guidelines. Relationships between mean deviation (MD), pattern SD (PSD), average 
RNFL thickness, and the staging system were evaluated.
RESULTS: A total of 616 patient charts were evaluated and 135 patients met the
inclusion criteria. Of the 135 patients, both eyes (270 eyes) were evaluated and 
the worse eye (by MD) was included in the analysis. Using the ICD-9 GSC
guidelines as a basis for defining severity, MD was significantly lower in the
severe-stage compared with the moderate-stage group (P<0.01) and in the
moderate-stage when compared with the early-stage group (P=0.020). PSD was
significantly higher in the severe-stage compared with the moderate-stage group
(P<0.01) and in the moderate-stage compared with the early-stage group (P<0.01). 
Average RNFL thickness was not significantly lower in the severe-stage compared
with the moderate-stage group (P=0.05); however, it was significantly lower in
the severe-stage and moderate-stage groups compared with the early-stage group
(P<0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: ICD-9 GSC showed a significant relationship between worsening visual
field indices and RNFL loss with increasing disease severity in patients with
POAG.

PMID: 24370808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Sep 10;93(34):2745-9.

[Effects of Bmi1 gene on endothelial cells promoting glioma stem cell-like
phenotype].

[Article in Chinese]

Yan GN(1), Yang L(1), Cui YH(1), Jiang XF(1), Wang QL(1), Guo DY(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing 400038, China. (2)Department of Pathology, Southwest
Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing 400038, China. Email:
gdy007@tmmu.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effects of B-cell specific Maloney leukemia virus
integration site 1 (Bmi1) gene on endothelial cells promoting glioma stem cell
(GSC)-like phenotype.
METHODS: Glioblastoma cell line GL261 and brain micro-vessel endothelial cell
line b.END3 were used. Transwell co-culture system, limit dilution assay,
xenograft, real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR), Western blot, fluorescence 
activating cell sorter (FACS) and gene knock-down assay were used to determine
the GSC-like phenotype and Bmi1 gene expression in glioma cells.
RESULTS: Compared with the control of GL261 cell alone, (1) more and larger tumor
spheres formed after co-culturing with endothelial cells (62.5% ± 1.5% vs 25.0% ±
4.6% at 40 cells/well, P = 0.000). Xenografts generated by GL261 cells with
b.END3 cells appeared earlier and were larger than that by GL261 cells alone
((0.798 ± 0.297) cm(3) vs (0.362 ± 0.123) cm(3), P = 0.000); (2) CD133 positive
glioma cells increased after co-culturing with endothelial cells (8.48% ± 0.78%
vs 4.81% ± 0.37%, P = 0.000); (3) the expression of Bmi1 in co-cultured glioma
cells was up-regulated at mRNA level (2.72 ± 0.18 vs 1.00 ± 0.15, P = 0.000) and 
at protein level; (4) the above phenomenon was attenuated when Bmi1 gene
expression was inhibited by siRNA in glioma cells, CD133 positive portion of
Bmi1-knockdown GL261 cells co-culturing with b.END3 cells decreased than that of 
wildtype GL261 cells (0.34% ± 0.21% vs 1.70% ± 0.69%, P = 0.025).
CONCLUSION: Endothelial cells promote GSC-like phenotype by up-regulating the
expression of Bmi1 in glioma cells.

PMID: 24360113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Neuroreport. 2014 Mar 26;25(5):289-96. doi: 10.1097/WNR.0000000000000085.

miR-125b promotes cell proliferation by directly targeting Lin28 in glioblastoma 
stem cells with low expression levels of miR-125b.

Wan Y(1), Sun G, Wang Z, Guo J, Shi L.

Author information: 
(1)aDepartment of Neurosurgery, Suzhou Kowloon Hospital affiliated with Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine bDepartment of Neurosurgery, Fourth
Affiliated Yancheng Hospital of Nantong University, Yancheng cDepartment of
Neurosurgery, The First People's Hospital of Kunshan affiliated with Jiangsu
University, Suzhou, People's Republic of China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small noncoding RNA molecules that regulate protein
expression by cleaving or repressing the translation of target mRNAs. Our
previous studies have revealed that miR-125b is a typical overexpressed miRNA in 
human primary glioblastoma stem cells (GSCs). Here, we report that miR-125b was
also found to be significantly underexpressed in three primary GSCs.
Characterization of the effects of the underexpressed miR-125b in GSCs showed
that elevated levels of miR-125b inhibited cell growth and induced cell cycle
arrest in the G0/G1 phase in vitro; a reduction in miR-125b levels had the
opposite effect on tumour growth and progression. Further research into the
underlying mechanism demonstrated that miR-125b acts by targeting Lin28 to
regulate cell growth. Lin28 is highly expressed in human embryonic stem cells and
glioblastomas. We showed that the specific repression of Lin28 results in
decreased GSC proliferation, and that the overexpression of Lin28 accelerates
cell proliferation. Our results highlight a novel molecular interaction between
miR-125b and Lin28, and miR-125b may represent a potential novel therapeutic
agent for targeting the proliferation of GSCs. In view of our previous research
showing that miR-125b was overexpressed in GSCs and functioned as an oncogene,
here our finding was not in agreement with our previous report, which implies
that the personalized treatment on GSCs may be necessary and important.

PMID: 24356103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. C. elegans germline stem cells and their niche.

Kimble J, Seidel H.
In: StemBook [Internet]. Cambridge (MA): Harvard Stem Cell Institute; 2008-.
2013 Nov 15.

C. elegans germline stem cells are a particularly simple system for analysis of
stem cell regulation. Their well-defined mesenchymal niche consists of a single
cell, the Distal Tip Cell, which uses Notch signaling to maintain a pool of
germline stem cells. Downstream of Notch signaling a post-transcriptional
regulatory network dictates self-renewal or differentiation. The major
self-renewal hub of that network is FBF, a conserved RNA-binding protein and
conserved stem cell regulator. FBF represses mRNAs encoding key regulators of
germline differentiation (entry into the meiotic cell cycle, sperm or oocyte
specification) as well as established regulators of somatic differentiation.
Transcriptional and post-transcriptional mechanisms also control totipotency in
the C. elegans germline. The key C. elegans GSC regulators are conserved broadly,
making this system a paradigm for stem cell regulation.

PMID: 24354021  [PubMed]


321. Development. 2014 Jan;141(1):73-82. doi: 10.1242/dev.101931.

The actin-binding protein profilin is required for germline stem cell maintenance
and germ cell enclosure by somatic cyst cells.

Shields AR(1), Spence AC, Yamashita YM, Davies EL, Fuller MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 
94305, USA.

Specialized microenvironments, or niches, provide signaling cues that regulate
stem cell behavior. In the Drosophila testis, the JAK-STAT signaling pathway
regulates germline stem cell (GSC) attachment to the apical hub and somatic cyst 
stem cell (CySC) identity. Here, we demonstrate that chickadee, the Drosophila
gene that encodes profilin, is required cell autonomously to maintain GSCs,
possibly facilitating localization or maintenance of E-cadherin to the GSC-hub
cell interface. Germline specific overexpression of Adenomatous Polyposis Coli 2 
(APC2) rescued GSC loss in chic hypomorphs, suggesting an additive role of APC2
and F-actin in maintaining the adherens junctions that anchor GSCs to the niche. 
In addition, loss of chic function in the soma resulted in failure of somatic
cyst cells to maintain germ cell enclosure and overproliferation of
transit-amplifying spermatogonia.

PMCID: PMC3865751
PMID: 24346697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jan 31;289(5):2826-38. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.527754. Epub 2013 
Dec 5.

Down-modulation of SEL1L, an unfolded protein response and endoplasmic
reticulum-associated degradation protein, sensitizes glioma stem cells to the
cytotoxic effect of valproic acid.

Cattaneo M(1), Baronchelli S, Schiffer D, Mellai M, Caldera V, Saccani GJ, Dalpra
L, Daga A, Orlandi R, DeBlasio P, Biunno I.

Author information: 
(1)From the Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico (IRCCS)
MultiMedica, 20138 Milan, Italy.

Valproic acid (VPA), an histone deacetylase inhibitor, is emerging as a promising
therapeutic agent for the treatments of gliomas by virtue of its ability to
reactivate the expression of epigenetically silenced genes. VPA induces the
unfolded protein response (UPR), an adaptive pathway displaying a dichotomic yin 
yang characteristic; it initially contributes in safeguarding the malignant cell 
survival, whereas long-lasting activation favors a proapoptotic response. By
triggering UPR, VPA might tip the balance between cellular adaptation and
programmed cell death via the deregulation of protein homeostasis and induction
of proteotoxicity. Here we aimed to investigate the impact of proteostasis on
glioma stem cells (GSC) using VPA treatment combined with subversion of SEL1L, a 
crucial protein involved in homeostatic pathways, cancer aggressiveness, and stem
cell state maintenance. We investigated the global expression of GSC lines
untreated and treated with VPA, SEL1L interference, and GSC line response to VPA 
treatment by analyzing cell viability via MTT assay, neurosphere formation, and
endoplasmic reticulum stress/UPR-responsive proteins. Moreover, SEL1L
immunohistochemistry was performed on primary glial tumors. The results show that
(i) VPA affects GSC lines viability and anchorage-dependent growth by inducing
differentiative programs and cell cycle progression, (ii) SEL1L down-modulation
synergy enhances VPA cytotoxic effects by influencing GSCs proliferation and
self-renewal properties, and (iii) SEL1L expression is indicative of glioma
proliferation rate, malignancy, and endoplasmic reticulum stress statuses.
Targeting the proteostasis network in association to VPA treatment may provide an
alternative approach to deplete GSC and improve glioma treatments.

PMCID: PMC3908415
PMID: 24311781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Neuro Oncol. 2014 Jan;16(1):29-37. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/not139. Epub 2013 Dec 4.

The mTORC1/mTORC2 inhibitor AZD2014 enhances the radiosensitivity of glioblastoma
stem-like cells.

Kahn J(1), Hayman TJ, Jamal M, Rath BH, Kramp T, Camphausen K, Tofilon PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Corresponding author: Philip J. Tofilon, PhD, National Cancer Institute, 10
Center Drive-MSC 1002, Building 10, B3B69B, Bethesda, MD 20892.
tofilonp@mail.nih.gov.

BACKGROUND: The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) has been suggested as a
target for radiosensitization. Given that radiotherapy is a primary treatment
modality for glioblastoma (GBM) and that mTOR is often dysregulated in GBM, the
goal of this study was to determine the effects of AZD2014, a dual mTORC1/2
inhibitor, on the radiosensitivity of GBM stem-like cells (GSCs).
METHODS: mTORC1 and mTORC2 activities were defined by immunoblot analysis. The
effects of this mTOR inhibitor on the in vitro radiosensitivity of GSCs were
determined using a clonogenic assay. DNA double strand breaks were evaluated
according to <U+03B3>H2AX foci. Orthotopic xenografts initiated from GSCs were used to
define the in vivo response to AZD2014 and radiation.
RESULTS: Exposure of GSCs to AZD2014 resulted in the inhibition of mTORC1 and 2
activities. Based on clonogenic survival analysis, addition of AZD2014 to culture
media 1 hour before irradiation enhanced the radiosensitivity of CD133+ and CD15+
GSC cell lines. Whereas AZD2014 treatment had no effect on the initial level of
<U+03B3>H2AX foci, the dispersal of radiation-induced <U+03B3>H2AX foci was significantly
delayed. Finally, the combination of AZD2014 and radiation delivered to mice
bearing GSC-initiated orthotopic xenografts significantly prolonged survival as
compared with the individual treatments.
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that AZD2014 enhances the radiosensitivity of
GSCs both in vitro and under orthotopic in vivo conditions and suggest that this 
effect involves an inhibition of DNA repair. Moreover, these results suggest that
this dual mTORC1/2 inhibitor may be a radiosensitizer applicable to GBM therapy.

PMCID: PMC3870843
PMID: 24311635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Radiol Oncol. 2013 Oct 8;47(4):330-7. doi: 10.2478/raon-2013-0063. eCollection
2013.

Expansive growth of two glioblastoma stem-like cell lines is mediated by bFGF and
not by EGF.

Podergajs N(1), Brekka N, Radlwimmer B, Herold-Mende C, Talasila KM, Tiemann K,
Rajcevic U, Lah TT, Bjerkvig R, Miletic H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Toxicology and Cancer Biology, National Institute of
Biology, Ljubljana, Slovenia.

BACKGROUND: Patient-derived glioblastoma (GBM) stem-like cells (GSCs) represent a
valuable model for basic and therapeutic research. GSCs are usually propagated in
serum-free Neural Basal medium supplemented with bFGF and EGF. Yet, the exact
influence of these growth factors on GSCs is still unclear. Recently it was
suggested that GBM stem-like cells with amplified EGFR should be cultured in stem
cell medium without EGF, as the presence of EGF induced rapid loss of EGFR
amplification. However, patient biopsies are usually taken into culture before
their genomic profiles are defined. Thus, an important question remains whether
GBM cells without EGFR amplification also can be cultured in stem cell medium
without EGF.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: [corrected] To address this question, we used two
heterogeneous glioblastoma GSC lines (NCH421k and NCH644) that lack EGFR
amplification.
RESULTS: Although both cell lines showed very low EGFR expression under standard 
growth conditions, bFGF stimulation induced higher expression of EGFR in NCH644. 
In both cell lines, expression of the stem cell markers nestin and CD133 was
higher upon stimulation with bFGF compared to EGF. Importantly, bFGF stimulated
the growth of both cell lines, whereas EGF had no effect. We verified that the
growth stimulation by bFGF was either mediated by proliferation (NCH421k) or
resistance to apoptosis (NCH644).
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate that GSC cultures without EGFR amplification can be
maintained and expanded with bFGF, while the addition of EGF has no significant
effect and therefore can be omitted.

PMCID: PMC3814277
PMID: 24294177  [PubMed]


325. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Dec 5;93(6):1135-42. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.10.027. Epub
2013 Nov 27.

SAMS, a syndrome of short stature, auditory-canal atresia, mandibular hypoplasia,
and skeletal abnormalities is a unique neurocristopathy caused by mutations in
Goosecoid.

Parry DA(1), Logan CV, Stegmann AP, Abdelhamed ZA, Calder A, Khan S, Bonthron DT,
Clowes V, Sheridan E, Ghali N, Chudley AE, Dobbie A, Stumpel CT, Johnson CA.

Author information: 
(1)Leeds Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Leeds, Leeds LS9 7TF, UK.

Short stature, auditory canal atresia, mandibular hypoplasia, and skeletal
abnormalities (SAMS) has been reported previously to be a rare,
autosomal-recessive developmental disorder with other, unique rhizomelic skeletal
anomalies. These include bilateral humeral hypoplasia, humeroscapular synostosis,
pelvic abnormalities, and proximal defects of the femora. To identify the genetic
basis of SAMS, we used molecular karyotyping and whole-exome sequencing (WES) to 
study small, unrelated families. Filtering of variants from the WES data included
segregation analysis followed by comparison of in-house exomes. We identified a
homozygous 306 kb microdeletion and homozygous predicted null mutations of GSC,
encoding Goosecoid homeobox protein, a paired-like homeodomain transcription
factor. This confirms that SAMS is a human malformation syndrome resulting from
GSC mutations. Previously, Goosecoid has been shown to be a determinant at the
Xenopus gastrula organizer region and a segment-polarity determinant in
Drosophila. In the present report, we present data on Goosecoid protein
localization in staged mouse embryos. These data and the SAMS clinical phenotype 
both suggest that Goosecoid is a downstream effector of the regulatory networks
that define neural-crest cell-fate specification and subsequent mesoderm cell
lineages in mammals, particularly during shoulder and hip formation. Our findings
confirm that Goosecoid has an essential role in human craniofacial and joint
development and suggest that Goosecoid is an essential regulator of mesodermal
patterning in mammals and that it has specific functions in neural crest cell
derivatives.

Copyright © 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3853132
PMID: 24290375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2013 Nov 4;6(11):1347-60. doi: 10.3390/ph6111347.

Metabolic Interactions of Purine Derivatives with Human ABC Transporter ABCG2:
Genetic Testing to Assess Gout Risk.

Ishikawa T(1), Aw W, Kaneko K.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku,
Yokohama 230-1145, Japan. toshi-i@gsc.riken.jp.

In mammals, excess purine nucleosides are removed from the body by breakdown in
the liver and excretion from the kidneys. Uric acid is the end product of purine 
metabolism in humans. Two-thirds of uric acid in the human body is normally
excreted through the kidney, whereas one-third undergoes uricolysis
(decomposition of uric acid) in the gut. Elevated serum uric acid levels result
in gout and could be a risk factor for cardiovascular disease and diabetes.
Recent studies have shown that human ATP-binding cassette transporter ABCG2 plays
a role of renal excretion of uric acid. Two non-synonymous single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs), i.e., 421C>A (major) and 376C>T (minor), in the ABCG2 gene 
result in impaired transport activity, owing to ubiquitination-mediated
proteosomal degradation and truncation of ABCG2, respectively. These genetic
polymorphisms are associated with hyperuricemia and gout. Allele frequencies of
those SNPs are significantly higher in Asian populations than they are in African
and Caucasian populations. A rapid and isothermal genotyping method has been
developed to detect the SNP 421C>A, where one drop of peripheral blood is
sufficient for the detection. Development of simple genotyping methods would
serve to improve prevention and early therapeutic intervention for high-risk
individuals in personalized healthcare.

PMCID: PMC3854015
PMID: 24287461  [PubMed]


327. Stem Cell Reports. 2013 Nov 7;1(5):411-24. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2013.09.007.
eCollection 2013.

The CCR4 deadenylase acts with Nanos and Pumilio in the fine-tuning of Mei-P26
expression to promote germline stem cell self-renewal.

Joly W(1), Chartier A, Rojas-Rios P, Busseau I, Simonelig M.

Author information: 
(1)mRNA Regulation and Development, Institute of Human Genetics, CNRS UPR1142,
141 Rue de la Cardonille, 34396 Montpellier Cedex 5, France.

Translational regulation plays an essential role in Drosophila ovarian germline
stem cell (GSC) biology. GSC self-renewal requires two translational repressors, 
Nanos (Nos) and Pumilio (Pum), which repress the expression of differentiation
factors in the stem cells. The molecular mechanisms underlying this translational
repression remain unknown. Here, we show that the CCR4 deadenylase is required
for GSC self-renewal and that Nos and Pum act through its recruitment onto
specific mRNAs. We identify mei-P26 mRNA as a direct and major target of
Nos/Pum/CCR4 translational repression in the GSCs. mei-P26 encodes a protein of
the Trim-NHL tumor suppressor family that has conserved functions in stem cell
lineages. We show that fine-tuning Mei-P26 expression by CCR4 plays a key role in
GSC self-renewal. These results identify the molecular mechanism of Nos/Pum
function in GSC self-renewal and reveal the role of CCR4-NOT-mediated
deadenylation in regulating the balance between GSC self-renewal and
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3841267
PMID: 24286029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. J Biomed Mater Res A. 2014 Nov;102(11):4027-36. doi: 10.1002/jbm.a.35039. Epub
2014 Jan 10.

Definitive endoderm differentiation of human-induced pluripotent stem cells using
signaling molecules and IDE1 in three-dimensional polymer scaffold.

Hoveizi E(1), Nabiuni M, Parivar K, Ai J, Massumi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, Shahid Chamran University, Ahvaz, 
Iran.

Human-induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) are considered to be potentially
able to differentiate into all human cell lineages and thus hold promise as an
unlimited source for cell replacement therapies in clinical applications.
Definitive endoderm (DE) formation is the first and crucial step in the
development of visceral organs such as liver, lung, pancreas and so forth.
Therefore, efficient generation of DE cells ensures the efficient generation of
eventual target cells used in cell therapy. In the present study, Matrigel-coated
poly(lactic acid)/gelatin (PLA/gelatin) nanofibrous scaffolds were utilized to
investigate the proliferation and differentiation of hiPSCs into DE cells.
Analyses of DE-specific markers including Sox17, FoxA2, and Gooscoid (Gsc) genes 
revealed higher levels of mRNA and protein expression in the differentiated
hiPSCs cells cultured on PLA/gelatin scaffolds than cells differentiated in
two-dimensional (2D) culture. Our results showed that three-dimensional (3D)
cultures could significantly promote DE differentiation in comparison with 2D
culture. Also using small molecules such as inducer of definitive endoderm 1
(IDE1) and signaling molecules such as Activin A and Wnt3a could enhance the DE
differentiation of hiPSCs with Activin A/Wnt3a being significantly more potent in
both 2D and 3D cultures compared to IDE1. The results of this study may have
impact in tissue engineering and cell replacement therapy of visceral
organs-related diseases.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24277503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Pathol Int. 2013 Nov;63(11):546-53. doi: 10.1111/pin.12109.

Fatty acid binding protein 7 as a marker of glioma stem cells.

Morihiro Y(1), Yasumoto Y, Vaidyan LK, Sadahiro H, Uchida T, Inamura A, Sharifi
K, Ideguchi M, Nomura S, Tokuda N, Kashiwabara S, Ishii A, Ikeda E, Owada Y,
Suzuki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Yamaguchi University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Ube, Japan.

Glioblastomas are the most aggressive brain tumors. Glioblastoma stem cells
(GSCs) are thought to be responsible for the recurrence, chemoresistance, and
poor prognosis of glioblastoma. Fatty acid binding protein 7 (FABP7), which is a 
cellular chaperone for a variety of omega-3 fatty acids, is a known marker for
neural stem cells. In this study, using a newly developed anti-FABP7 antibody and
patient-derived GSC lines, we evaluated the expression of FABP7 in GSCs. Using
immunocytochemistry, Western blotting, and qPCR analyses, FABP7 was found to be
highly enriched in GSCs and its localization was found in cytosol and nuclei.
FABP7 expression was significantly downregulated in differentiated GSCs induced
by the addition of serum. In the glioma surgical specimens, FABP7 was highly
expressed in the majority of glioblastoma. Double immunostaining for FABP7 and
Sox2 showed that FABP7(+) Sox2(+) tumor cells were significantly increased in
glioblastoma (grade IV) compared with diffuse astrocytoma (grade II) and
anaplastic astrocytoma (grade III). Our data introduces FABP7 as a marker for
GSCs and further highlights its possible significance for glioma diagnosis and
treatment.

© 2013 The Authors. Pathology International © 2013 Japanese Society of Pathology 
and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 24274717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Proteome Res. 2014 Jan 3;13(1):191-9. doi: 10.1021/pr400786s. Epub 2013 Dec 3.

Integrated chromosome 19 transcriptomic and proteomic data sets derived from
glioma cancer stem-cell lines.

Lichti CF(1), Liu H, Shavkunov AS, Mostovenko E, Sulman EP, Ezhilarasan R, Wang
Q, Kroes RA, Moskal JC, Fenyö D, Oksuz BA, Conrad CA, Lang FF, Berven FS, Végvári
A, Rezeli M, Marko-Varga G, Hober S, Nilsson CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, UTMB Cancer Center, University of
Texas Medical Branch , 301 University Boulevard, Galveston, Texas 77555, United
States.

One subproject within the global Chromosome 19 Consortium is to define chromosome
19 gene and protein expression in glioma-derived cancer stem cells (GSCs).
Chromosome 19 is notoriously linked to glioma by 1p/19q codeletions, and clinical
tests are established to detect that specific aberration. GSCs are
tumor-initiating cells and are hypothesized to provide a repository of cells in
tumors that can self-replicate and be refractory to radiation and
chemotherapeutic agents developed for the treatment of tumors. In this pilot
study, we performed RNA-Seq, label-free quantitative protein measurements in six 
GSC lines, and targeted transcriptomic analysis using a chromosome 19-specific
microarray in an additional six GSC lines. The data have been deposited to the
ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000563. Here we present insights into
differences in GSC gene and protein expression, including the identification of
proteins listed as having no or low evidence at the protein level in the Human
Protein Atlas, as correlated to chromosome 19 and GSC subtype. Furthermore, the
upregulation of proteins downstream of adenovirus-associated viral integration
site 1 (AAVS1) in GSC11 in response to oncolytic adenovirus treatment was
demonstrated. Taken together, our results may indicate new roles for chromosome
19, beyond the 1p/19q codeletion, in the future of personalized medicine for
glioma patients.

PMID: 24266786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Eur J Gen Pract. 2013 Dec;19(4):248-50. doi: 10.3109/13814788.2013.805198. Epub
2013 Jul 3.

An unexpected temporary suppression of lactation after a local corticosteroid
injection for tenosynovitis.

Babwah TJ(1), Nunes P, Maharaj RG.

Author information: 
(1)Princes Town District Health Facility , Princes Town, Trinidad and Tobago.

INTRODUCTION: Intra-lesional glucocorticosteroid (GCS) injections are used widely
for painful musculoskeletal conditions in general practice.
CASE: A 26 year old female, was given an intra-lesional injection of 24 mg methyl
prednisolone acetate (MPA) with 15 mg lidocaine for treatment of DeQuervain's
tenosynovitis. She was six weeks postpartum and predominantly breast feeding.
Lactation was suppressed at approximately 30 h post injection and this persisted 
for a period of approximately 36 h before spontaneous resumption of milk
production. Lactation returned to normal 90 h after the injection.
DISCUSSION: Studies done in lactating animals have shown that injected GCS have
led to a reduction of milk production, but there is limited data on these
injections in lactating humans. The dose of GCS administered and the site of the 
GCS injection appear to contribute to this phenomenon. Very large doses of GCS
have caused suppression of lactation in humans as opposed to low doses of GCS.
Injections of GCS into areas of the body subjected to high activity level like
the knee or wrist could lead to greater systemic absorption of GCS than GSC
administered to body sites with lower physical activity like the shoulder.
CONCLUSION: Local injection of MPA reversibly suppressed lactation in a young
woman for a period of 24-48 h. Doctors using injectable GCS in lactating women
should apprise patients of this possibility. Mothers can take precautions like
expressing and storing enough breast milk to cover this period prior to receiving
these injections.

PMID: 24261425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 18;8(11):e80397. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080397.
eCollection 2013.

Protective properties of radio-chemoresistant glioblastoma stem cell clones are
associated with metabolic adaptation to reduced glucose dependence.

Ye F(1), Zhang Y, Liu Y, Yamada K, Tso JL, Menjivar JC, Tian JY, Yong WH, Schaue 
D, Mischel PS, Cloughesy TF, Nelson SF, Liau LM, McBride W, Tso CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery/Surgical Oncology, David Geffen School of Medicine,
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of
America ; Department of Neurosurgery, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China.

Glioblastoma stem cells (GSC) are a significant cell model for explaining brain
tumor recurrence. However, mechanisms underlying their radiochemoresistance
remain obscure. Here we show that most clonogenic cells in GSC cultures are
sensitive to radiation treatment (RT) with or without temozolomide (TMZ). Only a 
few single cells survive treatment and regain their self-repopulating capacity.
Cells re-populated from treatment-resistant GSC clones contain more clonogenic
cells compared to those grown from treatment-sensitive GSC clones, and repeated
treatment cycles rapidly enriched clonogenic survival. When compared to sensitive
clones, resistant clones exhibited slower tumor development in animals.
Upregulated genes identified in resistant clones via comparative expression
microarray analysis characterized cells under metabolic stress, including blocked
glucose uptake, impaired insulin/Akt signaling, enhanced lipid catabolism and
oxidative stress, and suppressed growth and inflammation. Moreover, many
upregulated genes highlighted maintenance and repair activities, including
detoxifying lipid peroxidation products, activating lysosomal
autophagy/ubiquitin-proteasome pathways, and enhancing telomere maintenance and
DNA repair, closely resembling the anti-aging effects of caloric/glucose
restriction (CR/GR), a nutritional intervention that is known to increase
lifespan and stress resistance in model organisms. Although treatment-introduced 
genetic mutations were detected in resistant clones, all resistant and sensitive 
clones were subclassified to either proneural (PN) or mesenchymal (MES)
glioblastoma subtype based on their expression profiles. Functional assays
demonstrated the association of treatment resistance with energy stress,
including reduced glucose uptake, fatty acid oxidation (FAO)-dependent ATP
maintenance, elevated reactive oxygen species (ROS) production and autophagic
activity, and increased AMPK activity and NAD(+) levels accompanied by
upregulated mRNA levels of SIRT1/PGC-1a axis and DNA repair genes. These data
support the view that treatment resistance may arise from quiescent GSC
exhibiting a GR-like phenotype, and suggest that targeting stress response
pathways of resistant GSC may provide a novel strategy in combination with
standard treatment for glioblastoma.

PMCID: PMC3832364
PMID: 24260384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Oncol Lett. 2013 Dec;6(6):1649-1655. Epub 2013 Oct 11.

Identification of U251 glioma stem cells and their heterogeneous stem-like
phenotypes.

Zhang S(1), Xie R, Wan F, Ye F, Guo D, Lei T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery and Chinese-German Lab of Molecular Neurooncology, 
Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, Hebei 430030, P.R. China.

Glioblastoma, the most common and lethal type of intracranial tumor, is
characterized by extensive heterogeneity at the cellular and molecular levels.
The discovery of glioma stem cells (GSCs) lends support to a new paradigm in
tumor biology. In the present study, we aimed to clarify the validity of using
U251 glioma cells as a source of GSC culture and critically evaluate the
heterogeneous stem-like phenotypes of these cells when grown under various
culture conditions. The findings suggested that U251 cells (U251-Adh, U251-SC-Sph
and U251-SC-Adh) showed distinctive growth patterns and self-renewal capacity.
The U251 glioma cell line is endowed with certain GSC phenotypes that may be
moderately enriched in vitro when transferred into stem cell culture conditions, 
although this is not sustainable and reproducible in vivo. Notably, glioma cells 
are plastic in response to their environment. The reversible adaptive plasticity 
contributes to the GSC heterogeneity, which may lead to the heterogeneity of
glioblastoma and the differing responses to current therapies. Therefore, an
improved understanding of GSC heterogeneity is urgently required for designing
more effective therapies against this highly malignant brain tumor.

PMCID: PMC3834304
PMID: 24260059  [PubMed]


334. Mol Biol Cell. 2014 Jan;25(2):267-75. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E13-09-0541. Epub 2013 Nov
13.

Centrosome-dependent asymmetric inheritance of the midbody ring in Drosophila
germline stem cell division.

Salzmann V(1), Chen C, Chiang CY, Tiyaboonchai A, Mayer M, Yamashita YM.

Author information: 
(1)Life Sciences Institute, Center for Stem Cell Biology, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI 48109 Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI 48109 Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109 Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109.

Many stem cells, including Drosophila germline stem cells (GSCs), divide
asymmetrically, producing one stem cell and one differentiating daughter.
Cytokinesis is often asymmetric, in that only one daughter cell inherits the
midbody ring (MR) upon completion of abscission even in apparently symmetrically 
dividing cells. However, whether the asymmetry in cytokinesis correlates with
cell fate or has functional relevance has been poorly explored. Here we show that
the MR is asymmetrically segregated during GSC divisions in a centrosome
age-dependent manner: male GSCs, which inherit the mother centrosome, exclude the
MR, whereas female GSCs, which we here show inherit the daughter centrosome,
inherit the MR. We further show that stem cell identity correlates with the mode 
of MR inheritance. Together our data suggest that the MR does not inherently
dictate stem cell identity, although its stereotypical inheritance is under the
control of stemness and potentially provides a platform for asymmetric
segregation of certain factors.

PMCID: PMC3890347
PMID: 24227883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Biomed Res Int. 2013;2013:781896. doi: 10.1155/2013/781896. Epub 2013 Sep 16.

Gastric stump cancer: more than just another proximal gastric cancer and
demanding a more suitable TNM staging system.

Costa-Pinho A(1), Pinto-de-Sousa J, Barbosa J, Costa-Maia J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Centro Hospitalar S. João, Alameda Prof.
Hernani Monteiro, 4200-319 Porto, Portugal ; University of Porto Medical School, 
Alameda Prof. Hernani Monteiro, 4200-319 Porto, Portugal.

BACKGROUND: Considerable controversy persists about the biological behavior of
gastric stump cancer (GSC). The aim of this study is to clarify if this cancer is
just another proximal gastric cancer or if it emerges as a distinctive
clinicopathologic entity.
METHODS: This review of a prospectively collected gastric cancer database
identified 73 patients with GSC in a single institution between January 1980 and 
June 2012 and compared them with 328 patients with proximal gastric cancer (PGC) 
and 291 patients with esophagogastric junction cancer (EGJC).
RESULTS: Patients with GSC were predominantly males. Eighty-three percent of GSC 
penetrated the subserosal or the serosal layers. The median number of lymph nodes
retrieved in GSC patients was significantly lower than in PGC patients or in EGJC
patients. Cumulative survival curves were not different between GSC, PGC, or EGJC
patients. Unlike that observed in PGC and in EGJC, no significant differences in 
cumulative survival according to the TNM staging system were observed in GSC
cases.
CONCLUSIONS: The outcome of patients with GSC displayed significant differences
when compared to those with other proximal gastric cancers concerning the lack of
survival association with the TNM staging system. Therefore a more suitable
staging system should be designed for these unique cancers.

PMCID: PMC3787587
PMID: 24151622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. NMR Biomed. 2014 Feb;27(2):129-45. doi: 10.1002/nbm.3044. Epub 2013 Oct 21.

1H NMR detects different metabolic profiles in glioblastoma stem-like cells.

Guidoni L(1), Ricci-Vitiani L, Rosi A, Palma A, Grande S, Luciani AM, Pelacchi F,
di Martino S, Colosimo C, Biffoni M, De Maria R, Pallini R, Viti V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Technology and Health and INFN Sanità Group, Istituto Superiore 
di Sanità, Rome, Italy.

The metabolic profiles of glioblastoma stem-like cells (GSCs) growing in
neurospheres were examined by (1)H NMR spectroscopy. Spectra of two GSC lines,
labelled 1 and 83, from tumours close to the subventricular zone of the temporal 
lobe were studied in detail and compared with those of neural stem/progenitor
cells from the adult olfactory bulb (OB-NPCs) and of the T98G glioblastoma cell
line. In both GSCs, signals from myoinositol (Myo-I), UDP-hexosamines (UDP-Hex)
and glycine indicated an astrocyte/glioma metabolism. For line 1, the presence of
signals from N-acetyl aspartate, GABA and creatine pointed to a neuronal
fingerprint. These metabolites were almost absent from line 83 spectra, whereas
lipid signals, absent from normal neural lineages, were intense in line 83
spectra and remained low in those of line 1, irrespective of apoptotic fate.
Spectra of OB-NPC cells displayed strong similarities with those from line 1,
with low lipid signals and clearly detectable neuronal signals. In contrast, the 
spectral profile of line 83 was more similar to that of T98G, displaying high
lipids and nearly complete absence of the neuronal markers. A mixed
neural-astrocyte metabolic phenotype with a strong neuronal fingerprint was
therefore found in line 1, while an astrocytic/glioma-like metabolism prevailed
in line 83. We found a signal assigned to the amide proton of N-acetyl
galactosamine in GSC lines and in OB-NPC spectra, whereas it was absent from
those of T98G cells. This signal may be related to a stem-cell-specific protein
glycosylation pattern and is therefore suggested as a marker of cell
multipotency. Other GSC lines from patients with different clinical outcomes were
then examined. Unsupervised analysis of spectral data from 13 lines yielded two
clusters, with six lines resembling spectral features of line 1 and seven
resembling those of line 83, suggesting that distinct metabolic phenotypes may be
present in GSC lines.

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 24142746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Cell Signal. 2014 Jan;26(1):149-61. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2013.09.021. Epub 2013
Oct 16.

New insights into Notch1 regulation of the PI3K-AKT-mTOR1 signaling axis:
targeted therapy of <U+03B3>-secretase inhibitor resistant T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia.

Hales EC(1), Taub JW, Matherly LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI
48201, United States.

T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) is characterized as a high-risk
stratified disease associated with frequent relapse, chemotherapy resistance, and
a poorer prognostic outlook than B-precursor ALL. Many of the challenges in
treating T-ALL reflect the lack of prognostic cytogenetic or molecular
abnormalities on which to base therapy, including targeted therapy. Notch1
activating mutations were identified in more than 50% of T-ALL cases and can be
therapeutically targeted with <U+03B3>-secretase inhibitors (GSIs). Mutant Notch1 can
activate cMyc and PI3K-AKT-mTOR1 signaling in T-ALL. In T-ALLs with wild-type
phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome ten (PTEN), Notch1
transcriptionally represses PTEN, an effect reversible by GSIs. Notch1 also
promotes growth factor receptor (IGF1R and IL7Ra) signaling to PI3K-AKT. Loss of 
PTEN is common in primary T-ALLs due to mutation or posttranslational
inactivation and results in chronic activation of PI3K-AKT-mTOR1 signaling,
GSI-resistance, and repression of p53-mediated apoptosis. Notch1 itself might
regulate posttranslational inactivation of PTEN. PP2A is activated by Notch1 in
PTEN-null T-ALL cells, and GSIs reduce PP2A activity and increase phosphorylation
of AKT, AMPK, and p70S6K. This review focuses on the central role of the
PI3K-AKT-mTOR1 signaling in T-ALL, including its regulation by Notch1 and
potential therapeutic interventions, with emphasis on GSI-resistant T-ALL.

© 2013.

PMID: 24140475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Clin Sleep Med. 2013 Oct 15;9(10):1031-7. doi: 10.5664/jcsm.3076.

EEG power during waking and NREM sleep in primary insomnia.

Wu YM(1), Pietrone R, Cashmere JD, Begley A, Miewald JM, Germain A, Buysse DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Sleep Medicine Institute and Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA ; Kaiser Permanente Department of
Internal Medicine, Oakland, CA.

OBJECTIVE: Pathophysiological models of insomnia invoke the concept of 24-hour
hyperarousal, which could lead to symptoms and physiological findings during
waking and sleep. We hypothesized that this arousal could be seen in the waking
electroencephalogram (EEG) of individuals with primary insomnia (PI), and that
waking EEG power would correlate with non-REM (NREM) EEG.
METHODS: Subjects included 50 PI and 32 good sleeper controls (GSC). Five minutes
of eyes closed waking EEG were collected at subjects' usual bedtimes, followed by
polysomnography (PSG) at habitual sleep times. An automated algorithm and visual 
editing were used to remove artifacts from waking and sleep EEGs, followed by
power spectral analysis to estimate power from 0.5-32 Hz.
RESULTS: We did not find significant differences in waking or NREM EEG spectral
power of PI and GSC. Significant correlations between waking and NREM sleep power
were observed across all frequency bands in the PI group and in most frequency
bands in the GSC group.
CONCLUSIONS: The absence of significant differences between groups in waking or
NREM EEG power suggests that our sample was not characterized by a high degree of
cortical arousal. The consistent correlations between waking and NREM EEG power
suggest that, in samples with elevated NREM EEG beta activity, waking EEG power
may show a similar pattern.

PMCID: PMC3778174
PMID: 24127147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Dev Biol. 2013 Dec 1;384(1):1-12. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.10.001. Epub 2013 Oct
8.

The Drosophila putative histone acetyltransferase Enok maintains female germline 
stem cells through regulating Bruno and the niche.

Xin T(1), Xuan T, Tan J, Li M, Zhao G, Li M.

Author information: 
(1)MoE Key Laboratory of Developmental Genetics and Neuropsychiatric Diseases,
Bio-X Institutes, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, 200240 Shanghai, PR China.

Maintenance of adult stem cells is largely dependent on the balance between their
self-renewal and differentiation. The Drosophila ovarian germline stem cells
(GSCs) provide a powerful in vivo system for studying stem cell fate regulation. 
It has been shown that maintaining the GSC population involves both genetic and
epigenetic mechanisms. Although the role of epigenetic regulation in this process
is evident, the underlying mechanisms remain to be further explored. In this
study, we find that Enoki mushroom (Enok), a Drosophila putative MYST family
histone acetyltransferase controls GSC maintenance in the ovary at multiple
levels. Removal or knockdown of Enok in the germline causes a GSC maintenance
defect. Further studies show that the cell-autonomous role of Enok in maintaining
GSCs is not dependent on the BMP/Bam pathway. Interestingly, molecular studies
reveal an ectopic expression of Bruno, an RNA binding protein, in the GSCs and
their differentiating daughter cells elicited by the germline Enok deficiency.
Misexpression of Bruno in GSCs and their immediate descendants results in a GSC
loss that can be exacerbated by incorporating one copy of enok mutant allele.
These data suggest a role for Bruno in Enok-controlled GSC maintenance. In
addition, we observe that Enok is required for maintaining GSCs non-autonomously.
Compromised expression of enok in the niche cells impairs the niche maintenance
and BMP signal output, thereby causing defective GSC maintenance. This is the
first demonstration that the niche size control requires an epigenetic mechanism.
Taken together, studies in this paper provide new insights into the GSC fate
regulation.

© 2013 Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 24120347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. J Biomed Semantics. 2013 Oct 11;4(1):28. doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-4-28.

Evaluating gold standard corpora against gene/protein tagging solutions and
lexical resources.

Rebholz-Schuhmann D(1), Kafkas S, Kim JH, Li C, Jimeno Yepes A, Hoehndorf R,
Backofen R, Lewin I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Computational Linguistics, University of Zürich, CH-8050 Zürich, 
Switzerland. rebholz@ifi.uzh.ch.

MOTIVATION: The identification of protein and gene names (PGNs) from the
scientific literature requires semantic resources: Terminological and lexical
resources deliver the term candidates into PGN tagging solutions and the gold
standard corpora (GSC) train them to identify term parameters and contextual
features. Ideally all three resources, i.e. corpora, lexica and taggers, cover
the same domain knowledge, and thus support identification of the same types of
PGNs and cover all of them. Unfortunately, none of the three serves as a
predominant standard and for this reason it is worth exploring, how these three
resources comply with each other. We systematically compare different PGN taggers
against publicly available corpora and analyze the impact of the included lexical
resource in their performance. In particular, we determine the performance gains 
through false positive filtering, which contributes to the disambiguation of
identified PGNs.
RESULTS: In general, machine learning approaches (ML-Tag) for PGN tagging show
higher F1-measure performance against the BioCreative-II and Jnlpba GSCs (exact
matching), whereas the lexicon based approaches (LexTag) in combination with
disambiguation methods show better results on FsuPrge and PennBio. The ML-Tag
solutions balance precision and recall, whereas the LexTag solutions have
different precision and recall profiles at the same F1-measure across all
corpora. Higher recall is achieved with larger lexical resources, which also
introduce more noise (false positive results). The ML-Tag solutions certainly
perform best, if the test corpus is from the same GSC as the training corpus. As 
expected, the false negative errors characterize the test corpora and - on the
other hand - the profiles of the false positive mistakes characterize the tagging
solutions. Lex-Tag solutions that are based on a large terminological resource in
combination with false positive filtering produce better results, which, in
addition, provide concept identifiers from a knowledge source in contrast to
ML-Tag solutions.
CONCLUSION: The standard ML-Tag solutions achieve high performance, but not
across all corpora, and thus should be trained using several different corpora to
reduce possible biases. The LexTag solutions have different profiles for their
precision and recall performance, but with similar F1-measure. This result is
surprising and suggests that they cover a portion of the most common naming
standards, but cope differently with the term variability across the corpora. The
false positive filtering applied to LexTag solutions does improve the results by 
increasing their precision without compromising significantly their recall. The
harmonisation of the annotation schemes in combination with standardized lexical 
resources in the tagging solutions will enable their comparability and will pave 
the way for a shared standard.

PMCID: PMC4021975
PMID: 24112383  [PubMed]


341. BMC Genomics. 2013 Sep 30;14:665. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-665.

Comparison of RNA- or LNA-hybrid oligonucleotides in template-switching reactions
for high-speed sequencing library preparation.

Harbers M(1), Kato S, de Hoon M, Hayashizaki Y, Carninci P, Plessy C.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies, Division of Genomics Technologies,
Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. gyouseki@gsc.riken.jp.

BACKGROUND: Analyzing the RNA pool or transcription start sites requires
effective means to convert RNA into cDNA libraries for digital expression
counting. With current high-speed sequencers, it is necessary to flank the cDNAs 
with specific adapters. Adding template-switching oligonucleotides to reverse
transcription reactions is the most commonly used approach when working with very
small quantities of RNA even from single cells.
RESULTS: Here we compared the performance of DNA-RNA, DNA-LNA and DNA
oligonucleotides in template-switching during nanoCAGE library preparation. Test 
libraries from rat muscle and HeLa cell RNA were prepared in technical
triplicates and sequenced for comparison of the gene coverage and distribution of
the reads within transcripts. The DNA-RNA oligonucleotide showed the highest
specificity for capped 5' ends of mRNA, whereas the DNA-LNA provided similar gene
coverage with more reads falling within exons.
CONCLUSIONS: While confirming the cap-specific preference of DNA-RNA
oligonucleotides in template-switching reactions, our data indicate that DNA-LNA 
hybrid oligonucleotides could potentially find other applications in random RNA
sequencing.

PMCID: PMC3853366
PMID: 24079827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Biomed Semantics. 2013 Sep 13;4(1):19. doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-4-19.

Monitoring named entity recognition: the League Table.

Rebholz-Schuhmann D(1), Kafkas S, Kim JH, Jimeno Yepes A, Lewin I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computational Linguistics, University of Zurich, Zürich,
Switzerland. rebholz@ifi.uzh.ch.

BACKGROUND: Named entity recognition (NER) is an essential step in automatic text
processing pipelines. A number of solutions have been presented and evaluated
against gold standard corpora (GSC). The benchmarking against GSCs is crucial,
but left to the individual researcher. Herewith we present a League Table web
site, which benchmarks NER solutions against selected public GSCs, maintains a
ranked list and archives the annotated corpus for future comparisons.
RESULTS: The web site enables access to the different GSCs in a standardized
format (IeXML). Upon submission of the annotated corpus the user has to describe 
the specification of the used solution and then uploads the annotated corpus for 
evaluation. The performance of the system is measured against one or more GSCs
and the results are then added to the web site ("League Table"). It displays
currently the results from publicly available NER solutions from the Whatizit
infrastructure for future comparisons.
CONCLUSION: The League Table enables the evaluation of NER solutions in a
standardized infrastructure and monitors the results long-term. For access please
go to http://wwwdev.ebi.ac.uk/Rebholz-srv/calbc/assessmentGSC/.
CONTACT: rebholz@ifi.uzh.ch.

PMCID: PMC4015903
PMID: 24034148  [PubMed]


343. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Dev Biol. 2013 Mar-Apr;2(2):261-73. doi: 10.1002/wdev.60.
Epub 2012 May 7.

Control of germline stem cell self-renewal and differentiation in the Drosophila 
ovary: concerted actions of niche signals and intrinsic factors.

Xie T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, MO, USA; Department of
Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Kansas School of Medicine, Kansas City,
KS, USA. tgx@stowers.org.

In the Drosophila ovary, germline stem cells (GSCs) physically interact with
their niche composed of terminal filament cells, cap cells, and possibly
GSC-contacting escort cells (ECs). A GSC divides to generate a self-renewing stem
cell that remains in the niche and a differentiating daughter that moves away
from the niche. The GSC niche provides a bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signal 
that maintains GSC self-renewal by preventing stem cell differentiation via
repression of the differentiation-promoting gene bag of marbles (bam). In
addition, it expresses E-cadherin, which mediates cell adhesion for anchoring
GSCs in the niche, enabling continuous self-renewal. GSCs themselves also express
different classes of intrinsic factors, including signal transducers,
transcription factors, chromatin remodeling factors, translation regulators, and 
miRNAs, which control self-renewal by strengthening interactions with the niche
and repressing various differentiation pathways. Differentiated GSC daughters,
known as cystoblasts (CBs), also express distinct classes of intrinsic factors to
inhibit self-renewal and promote germ cell differentiation. Surprisingly, GSC
progeny are also dependent on their surrounding ECs for proper differentiation at
least partly by preventing BMP from diffusing to the differentiated germ cell
zone and by repressing ectopic BMP expression. Therefore, both GSC self-renewal
and CB differentiation are controlled by collaborative actions of extrinsic
signals and intrinsic factors.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24009036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. G Ital Dermatol Venereol. 2013 Oct;148(5):471-7.

Non steroid treatment for eczema: results from a controlled and randomized study.

De Waure C(1), Cadeddu C, Venditti A, Barcella A, Bigardi A, Masci S, Virno G,
Cammisa A, Ricciardi W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Public Health Sacro Cuore Catholic University, Rome, Italy -
chiara.dewaure@rm.unicatt.it.

AIM: This study assesses the efficacy of a new non steroid anti-inflammatory
product in comparison to Hydrocortisone Butyrate 0.1% Cream in healing eczematous
dermatitis.
METHODS: A bilateral controlled randomized pilot study was conducted in Italian
adults affected by eczema with at least two symmetric lesions at baseline,
respectively assigned to a non steroid cream or Hydrocortisone. The severity of
lesions was judged through the Global Clinical Score (GCS) and the recovery was
defined as a GSC equal to 0. The study investigated: 1) the differences in GCS
between four points in time during therapy (baseline, four, eight, twelve weeks),
according to medication received; 2) treatment efficacy.
RESULTS: The study showed that time, treatment and interaction between treatment 
and time were associated with GCS; moreover, lesions treated with Hydrocortisone 
went better on the whole but the post-hoc analysis showed a significant clinical 
improving at each point in time only for the non steroid cream. At the end of the
study, in the intention to treat analysis, lesions recovered in 76.1% and 40.3%
patients treated with Hydrocortisone and with the non steroid cream respectively;
in the per protocol population, recovery was achieved in 91.7% and 58.3% of
cases.
CONCLUSION: According to the results, the non steroid cream has been demonstrated
effective in reducing the severity of eczema and may be used with continuing
success in the long term treatment of the disease.

PMID: 24005139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Dev Biol. 2013 Nov 1;383(1):106-20. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.08.014. Epub 2013
Aug 26.

Smurf-mediated differential proteolysis generates dynamic BMP signaling in
germline stem cells during Drosophila testis development.

Chang YJ(1), Pi H, Hsieh CC, Fuller MT.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, Chang Gung
University, 259 Wen-Hwa 1st Road, Kwei-Shan, Tao-Yuan 333, Taiwan; Department of 
Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, 259 Wen-Hwa 1st 
Road, Kwei-Shan, Tao-Yuan 333, Taiwan.

Germline stem cells (GSCs) produce gametes throughout the reproductive life of
many animals, and intensive studies have revealed critical roles of BMP signaling
to maintain GSC self-renewal in Drospophila adult gonads. Here, we show that BMP 
signaling is downregulated as testes develop and this regulation controls testis 
growth, stem cell number, and the number of spermatogonia divisions.
Phosphorylated Mad (pMad), the activated Drosophila Smad in germ cells, was
restricted from anterior germ cells to GSCs and hub-proximal cells during early
larval development. pMad levels in GSCs were then dramatically downregulated from
early third larval instar (L3) to late L3, and maintained at low levels in pupal 
and adult GSCs. The spatial restriction and temporal down-regulation of pMad,
reflecting the germ cell response to BMP signaling activity, required action in
germ cells of E3 ligase activity of HECT domain protein Smurf. Analyses of Smurf 
mutant testes and dosage-dependent genetic interaction between Smurf and mad
indicated that pMad downregulation was required for both the normal decrease in
stem cell number during testis maturation in the pupal stage, and for normal
limit of four rounds of spermatogonia cell division for control of germ cell
numbers and testis size. Smurf protein was expressed at a constant low level in
GSCs and spermatogonia during development. Rescue experiments showed that
expression of exogenous Smurf protein in early germ cells promoted pMad
downregulation in GSCs in a stage-dependent but concentration-independent manner,
suggesting that the competence of Smurf to attenuate response to BMP signaling
may be regulated during development. Taken together, our work reveals a critical 
role for differential attenuation of the response to BMP signaling in GSCs and
early germ cells for control of germ cell number and gonad growth during
development.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4006845
PMID: 23988579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Cancer Cell Int. 2013 Aug 21;13(1):85. doi: 10.1186/1475-2867-13-85.

Disrupting the CXCL12/CXCR4 axis disturbs the characteristics of glioblastoma
stem-like cells of rat RG2 glioblastoma.

Lee CC(1), Lai JH, Hueng DY, Ma HI, Chung Y, Sun YY, Tsai YJ, Wu WB, Chen CL.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Fu-Jen Catholic University, Taipei, Taiwan.
059271@mail.fju.edu.tw.

BACKGROUND: Glioblastoma stem-like cells (GSC) have been shown to promote tumor
growth, tumor-associated neovascularization, therapeutic resistance, and
metastasis. CXCR4 receptors have been found involved in the proliferation,
metastasis, angiogenesis, and drug-resistant characteristics of glioblastoma.
However, the role of CXCR4 in modulating the stem-like cell properties of rat
glioblastoma remains ambiguous.
METHODS: To explore the role of the CXCL12/CXCR4 axis in maintaining rat GSC
properties, we disrupted the CXCR4 signaling by using small hairpin interfering
RNA (shRNA). To investigate the role of the CXCL12/CXCR4 axis in maintaining rat 
GSC properties, we used a spheroid formation assay to assess the stem cell
self-renewal properties. A western blot analysis and PCR arrays were used to
examine the genes involved in proliferation, self-renewal, and cancer drug
resistance. Finally, DNA content and flow cytometry, an immunohistochemical
analysis, and methylcellulose colony formation, in vitro invasive and
intracranial injection xenograft assays were employed to examine the disruptive
effect of CXCR4 on the characteristics of GSCs of the RG2 cell line.
RESULTS: Disrupting CXCR4 inhibited the proliferation of RG2 cells both in vitro 
and in vivo. The spheroid formation assay indicated that CXCR4 was vital for the 
self-renewal of RG2 GSCs. Disrupting the CXCL12/CXCR4 pathway also reduced the
expression of GSC cell markers, including Nestin, ABCG2, and musashi (Msi), and
the expression of genes involved in regulating stem cell properties, including
Oct4, Nanog, maternal embryonic leucine zipper kinase (MELK), MGMT, VEGF, MMP2,
and MMP9.
CONCLUSION: The chemokine receptor CXCR4 is crucial for maintaining the
self-renewal, proliferation, therapeutic resistance, and angiogenesis of GSCs of 
rat RG2 glioblastoma.

PMCID: PMC3765790
PMID: 23961808  [PubMed]


347. Methods Mol Biol. 2013;1035:9-23. doi: 10.1007/978-1-62703-508-8_2.

Genetic, immunofluorescence labeling, and in situ hybridization techniques in
identification of stem cells in male and female germline niches.

Singh SR(1), Liu Y, Kango-Singh M, Nevo E.

Author information: 
(1)Mouse Cancer Genetics Program, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Frederick, MD, 
USA.

Stem cells have an enormous capacity of self-renewal, as well as the ability to
differentiate into specialized cell types. Proper control of these two properties
of stem cells is crucial for animal development, growth control, and
reproduction. Germline stem cells (GSCs) are a self-renewing population of germ
cells, which generate haploid gametes (sperms or oocyte) that transmit genetic
information from generation to generation. In Drosophila testis and ovary, GSCs
are anchored around the niche cells. The cap cells cluster in females and hub
cells in males act as a niche to control GSC behavior. With highly sophisticated 
genetic techniques in Drosophila, tremendous progress has been made in
understanding the interactions between stem cells and niches at cellular and
molecular levels. Here, we provide details of genetic, immunofluorescence
labeling, and in situ hybridization techniques in identification and
characterization of stem cells in Drosophila male and female germline niches.

PMID: 23959978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Stem Cell Rev. 2014 Feb;10(1):103-13. doi: 10.1007/s12015-013-9465-0.

Sirtuin-2 activity is required for glioma stem cell proliferation arrest but not 
necrosis induced by resveratrol.

Sayd S(1), Thirant C, El-Habr EA, Lipecka J, Dubois LG, Bogeas A, Tahiri-Jouti N,
Chneiweiss H, Junier MP.

Author information: 
(1)Team Glial Plasticity, U894 Inserm, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France.

Glioblastomas, the most common form of primary brain tumors, are the fourth cause
of death by cancer in adults. Increasing evidences suggest that glioblastoma
resistance to existing radio- and chemotherapies rely on glioblastoma stem cells 
(GSCs). GSCs are endowed with a unique combination of stem-like properties alike 
to normal neural stem cells (NSCs), and of tumor initiating properties. The
natural polyphenol resveratrol is known to exert opposite actions on neural cells
according to their normal or cancerous status. Here, we used resveratrol to
explore the molecular mechanisms differing between GSCs and NSCs. We observed a
dual action of resveratrol on GSCs: resveratrol blocked GSC proliferation up to
150 µM and induced their necrosis at higher doses. On the opposite, resveratrol
had no effect on NSC behavior. To determine the mechanisms underlying resveratrol
effects, we focused our attention on the family of NAD-dependent deacetylases
sirtuins (SIRT). A member of this family, SIRT1, has been repetitively shown to
constitute a preferential resveratrol target, at least in normal cells. Western
blot analysis showed that SIRT1 and SIRT3 were expressed by both GSCs and NSCs
whereas SIRT2 expression was restricted to GSCs. Pharmacological blockade of
SIRT2 activity or down-regulation of SIRT2 expression with siRNAs counteracted
the inhibitory effect of resveratrol on cell proliferation. On the contrary,
inhibition of SIRT2 activity or expression did not counteract GSC necrosis
observed in presence of high doses of resveratrol. Our results highlight SIRT2 as
a novel target for altering GSC properties.

PMID: 23955573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2013 Oct 15;305(8):F1189-200. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00377.2013. Epub 2013 Aug 14.

Angiotensin II AT2 receptor activation attenuates AT1 receptor-induced increases 
in the glomerular filtration of albumin: a multiphoton microscopy study.

Schießl IM(1), Castrop H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology, Univ. of Regensburg, Universitätsstr. 31, 93040
Regensburg, Germany. hayo@castrop.com.

Comment in
    Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2014 Mar 15;306(6):F577-8.

In this study, we assessed the acute effects of angiotensin II on the albumin
glomerular sieving coefficient (GSC) using intravital microscopy. The experiments
were performed on Munich Wistar Froemter (MWF) rats. Alexa-Fluor-594 albumin was 
injected intravenously, and the fluorescence intensity in the glomerular
capillaries and Bowman's space was determined to calculate the albumin GSC. The
GSC was measured before and during the constant infusion of angiotensin II (10
ng·min(-1)·kg(-1) body wt). Baseline mean arterial pressure (MAP) was 99 ± 5 mmHg
and stabilized at 137 ± 5 mmHg during angiotensin II infusion. The baseline GSC
averaged 0.00044 ± 4.8 × 10(-5) and increased by 286 ± 44% after angiotensin II
infusion (P < 0.0001). The proximal tubular Alexa-Fluor-594 albumin uptake was
enhanced during angiotensin II infusion (518% of the baseline value during
angiotensin II vs. 218% in controls; P < 0.0001). No change in GSC was observed
when the AT1 antagonist losartan was injected before the start of angiotensin II 
infusion. The AT2 antagonist PD123319 increased the baseline GSC from 0.00052 ±
3.6 × 10(-5) to 0.00074 ± 8.2 × 10(-5) (P = 0.02) without altering the MAP.
During angiotensin II infusion with losartan, PD123319 increased the albumin GSC 
from 0.00037 ± 5.8 × 10(-5) to 0.00115 ± 0.00015 (P = 0.001). When the renal
perfusion pressure was mechanically controlled, the GSC increased from 0.0007 ±
0.00019 to 0.0025 ± 0.00063 during angiotensin II infusion (P = 0.047), similar
to what was observed when the renal perfusion pressure was allowed to increase.
In summary, AT1 activation acutely increases the albumin GSC. This effect appears
to be largely independent of changes in the renal perfusion pressure. The AT2
receptor partially attenuates the proteinuric effects of the AT1 receptor.

PMID: 23946289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. J Safety Res. 2013 Sep;46:21-30. doi: 10.1016/j.jsr.2013.03.005. Epub 2013 Mar
26.

Validation of the group nuclear safety climate questionnaire.

Navarro MF(1), Gracia Lerín FJ, Tomás I, Peiró Silla JM.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Tecnológico Autónomo de México (ITAM). Río Hondo, 1 (Ciudad de
México), México, USA. M.Felisa.Latorre@gmail.com

INTRODUCTION: Group safety climate is a leading indicator of safety performance
in high reliability organizations. Zohar and Luria (2005) developed a Group
Safety Climate scale (ZGSC) and found it to have a single factor.
METHOD: The ZGSC scale was used as a basis in this study with the researchers
rewording almost half of the items on this scale, changing the referents from the
leader to the group, and trying to validate a two-factor scale. The sample was
composed of 566 employees in 50 groups from a Spanish nuclear power plant. Item
analysis, reliability, correlations, aggregation indexes and CFA were performed.
RESULTS: Results revealed that the construct was shared by each unit, and our
reworded Group Safety Climate (GSC) scale showed a one-factor structure and
correlated to organizational safety climate, formalized procedures, safety
behavior, and time pressure.
IMPACT ON INDUSTRY: This validation of the one-factor structure of the Zohar and 
Luria (2005) scale could strengthen and spread this scale and measure group
safety climate more effectively.

Copyright © 2013 National Safety Council and Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23932682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Cancer Gene Ther. 2013 Sep;20(9):507-13. doi: 10.1038/cgt.2013.47. Epub 2013 Aug 
2.

Heterogeneous reovirus susceptibility in human glioblastoma stem-like cell
cultures.

van den Hengel SK(1), Balvers RK, Dautzenberg IJ, van den Wollenberg DJ,
Kloezeman JJ, Lamfers ML, Sillivis-Smit PA, Hoeben RC.

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, The Netherlands [2] Department of Neuro-Oncology, Brain Tumor Center,
Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Glioblastoma (GB) is a devastating disease for which new treatment modalities are
needed. Efficacious therapy requires the removal of stem-cell like cells, these
cells drive tumor progression because of their ability to self-renew and
differentiate. In glioblastoma, the GB stem-like cells (GSC) form a small
population of tumor cells and possess high resistance to chemo and radiation
therapies. To assess the sensitivity of GSC to reovirus-mediated cytolysis, a
panel of GSC cultures was exposed to wild-type reovirus Type 3 Dearing (T3D) and 
its junction adhesion molecule-A (JAM-A)-independent mutant, jin-1. Several
parameters were evaluated, including the fraction of cells expressing the JAM-A
reovirus receptor, the fraction of cells synthesizing reovirus proteins, the
number of infectious reovirus particles required to reduce cell viability, the
amount of infectious progeny reovirus produced and the capacity of the reoviruses
to infect the GSC in 3-dimensional (3D) tumor cell spheroids. Our data
demonstrate a marked heterogeneity in the susceptibility of the cultures to
reovirus-induced cytolysis. While in monolayer cultures the jin-1 reovirus was
generally more cytolytic than the wild-type reovirus T3D, in the 3D GSC
spheroids, these viruses were equally effective. Despite the variation in
reovirus sensitivity between the different GSC cultures, our data support the use
of reovirus as an oncolytic agent. It remains to be established whether the
variation in the reovirus sensitivity correlates with a patient's response to
reovirus therapy. Moreover, our data show that the expression of the JAM-A
receptor is not a major determinant of reovirus sensitivity in 3D GSC cultures.

PMID: 23907517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Dev Biol. 2013 Oct 1;382(1):124-35. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.07.018. Epub 2013
Jul 27.

FOXO/Fringe is necessary for maintenance of the germline stem cell niche in
response to insulin insufficiency.

Yang SA(1), Wang WD, Chen CT, Tseng CY, Chen YN, Hsu HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular and Organismic Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei 11529,
Taiwan.

The stem cell niche houses and regulates stem cells by providing both physical
contact and local factors that regulate stem cell identity. The stem cell niche
also plays a role in integrating niche-local and systemic signals, thereby
ensuring that the balance of stem cells meets the needs of the organism. However,
it is not clear how these signals are merged within the niche. Nutrient-sensing
insulin/FOXO signaling has been previously shown to directly control Notch
activation in the Drosophila female germline stem cell (GSC) niche, which
maintains the niche and GSC identity. Here, we demonstrate that FOXO directly
activates transcription of fringe, a gene encoding a glycosyltransferase that
modulates Notch glycosylation. Fringe facilitates Notch inactivation in the GSC
niche when insulin signaling is low. We also show that the Notch ligand
predominantly involved is GSC niche-derived Delta. These results reveal that
FOXO-mediated regulation of fringe links the insulin and Notch signaling pathways
in the GSC niche in response to nutrition, and emphasize that stem cells are
regulated by complex interactions between niche-local and systemic signals.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23895933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Curr Biol. 2013 Aug 5;23(15):1442-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2013.06.021. Epub 2013
Jul 25.

Drosophila piwi mutants exhibit germline stem cell tumors that are sustained by
elevated Dpp signaling.

Jin Z(1), Flynt AS, Lai EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Sloan-Kettering Institute, 1275 York
Avenue, Box 252, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Drosophila Piwi is the founding member of a gonadal clade of Argonaute proteins
that serve as silencing effectors for ~26-32 nt Piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs)
[1], and piwi mutants exhibit dramatically rudimentary ovaries [2]. It was
proposed that somatic Piwi maintains germline stem cells (GSCs) by promoting Dpp 
signaling, presumably via cap cells that form the somatic niche for GSCs [3-5].
However, we unexpectedly observed that piwi mutants exhibit high-frequency
GSC-like tumors that persist throughout adult life. Multiple readouts
demonstrated hyperactive Dpp signaling in piwi mutants, including the failure to 
express the germline differentiation factor bag-of-marbles (bam), and restoration
of bam expression relieved piwi GSC-like tumors. Tissue-specific rescue and
knockdown experiments indicate that Piwi is not required in cap cells, the source
of niche Dpp, but instead is required in gonadal intermingled cells (ICs, the
progenitor cells of escort cells). Adult-specific knockdown of dpp in escort
cells substantially rescued piwi tumors, demonstrating that they are driven by
excess Dpp signaling. However, the temporal requirement for piwi to restrict GSC 
numbers was much earlier, during the wandering third-instar larval stage. Indeed,
piwi mutant larval gonads exhibited defective morphology and loss of Bam. Our
data indicate that loss of Piwi causes defects in ICs and escort cells, leading
to ectopic Dpp signaling and consequent blockage of GSC differentiation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3740069
PMID: 23891114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. J Biol Chem. 2013 Sep 6;288(36):26188-200. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.487553. Epub
2013 Jul 24.

N-acetylaspartate (NAA) and N-acetylaspartylglutamate (NAAG) promote growth and
inhibit differentiation of glioma stem-like cells.

Long PM(1), Moffett JR, Namboodiri AM, Viapiano MS, Lawler SE, Jaworski DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Sciences, University of Vermont College of
Medicine, Burlington, Vermont 05405, USA.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2013 Nov 1;288(44):31916-7.

Metabolic reprogramming is a pathological feature of cancer and a driver of tumor
cell transformation. N-Acetylaspartate (NAA) is one of the most abundant amino
acid derivatives in the brain and serves as a source of metabolic acetate for
oligodendrocyte myelination and protein/histone acetylation or a precursor for
the synthesis of the neurotransmitter N-acetylaspartylglutamate (NAAG). NAA and
NAAG as well as aspartoacylase (ASPA), the enzyme responsible for NAA
degradation, are significantly reduced in glioma tumors, suggesting a possible
role for decreased acetate metabolism in tumorigenesis. This study sought to
examine the effects of NAA and NAAG on primary tumor-derived glioma stem-like
cells (GSCs) from oligodendroglioma as well as proneural and mesenchymal
glioblastoma, relative to oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (Oli-Neu). Although
the NAA dicarboxylate transporter NaDC3 is primarily thought to be expressed by
astrocytes, all cell lines expressed NaDC3 and, thus, are capable of NAA up-take.
Treatment with NAA or NAAG significantly increased GSC growth and suppressed
differentiation of Oli-Neu cells and proneural GSCs. Interestingly, ASPA was
expressed in both the cytosol and nuclei of GSCs and exhibited greatest nuclear
immunoreactivity in differentiation-resistant GSCs. Both NAA and NAAG elicited
the expression of a novel immunoreactive ASPA species in select GSC nuclei,
suggesting differential ASPA regulation in response to these metabolites.
Therefore, this study highlights a potential role for nuclear ASPA expression in 
GSC malignancy and suggests that the use of NAA or NAAG is not an appropriate
therapeutic approach to increase acetate bioavailability in glioma. Thus, an
alternative acetate source is required.

PMCID: PMC3764823
PMID: 23884408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Cancer Discov. 2013 Jul;3(7):OF22. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-RW2013-105. Epub
2013 May 16.

A spliceosome protein is essential for glioma stem cell viability.

[No authors listed]

PHF5A-mediated exon recognition is selectively required for GSC viability and
tumor formation.

PMID: 23847366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Cancer Discov. 2013 Jul;3(7):OF21. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-RW2013-112. Epub
2013 May 23.

Methylation by EZH2 activates STAT3 in glioblastoma.

[No authors listed]

Methylation of STAT3 by EZH2 is required for STAT3 activity in glioblastoma stem 
cells (GSC).

PMID: 23847365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Biomed Res Int. 2013;2013:102918. doi: 10.1155/2013/102918. Epub 2013 Jun 12.

Ethanol extract of Cordyceps militaris grown on germinated soybeans attenuates
dextran-sodium-sulfate- (DSS-) induced colitis by suppressing the expression of
matrix metalloproteinases and inflammatory mediators.

Park DK(1), Park HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Konkuk University, 1 Hwayang-dong,
Gwangjin-gu, Seoul 143-701, Republic of Korea.

The effect of Cordyceps militaris (CM) grown on germinated soybeans (GSC) in the 
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) model was studied. To demonstrate the preventive
effect of GSC extract in a dextran-sodium-sulfate- (DSS-) induced acute colitis
mouse model, GSC was administered 2 days before DSS coadministration. GSC
significantly suppressed DSS-induced disease activity index (DAI) as well as
histopathological scores, compared to control or CM-treated group. To elucidate
the anti-IBD activity of GSC, we checked the level of matrix metalloproteinases
(MMPs) and inflammatory mediators. GSC extract decreased the level of MMP-3 and
-9 mRNAs and p53 proteins. The level and activity of LPS-induced MMP-9 were
reduced in GSC-treated RAW264.7 cells. It also attenuated the level of inducible 
nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) and tumor necrosis factor- (TNF-) a mRNAs both in
colon tissue and in macrophage cells. These results suggest that GSC can be
applied as a protective agent against IBDs.

PMCID: PMC3694364
PMID: 23841050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 24;8(6):e68229. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0068229. Print 2013.

Extracellular sphingosine-1-phosphate: a novel actor in human glioblastoma stem
cell survival.

Riccitelli E(1), Giussani P, Di Vito C, Condomitti G, Tringali C, Caroli M, Galli
R, Viani P, Riboni L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine, University of 
Milan, LITA-Segrate, Milan, Italy.

Glioblastomas are the most frequent and aggressive intracranial neoplasms in
humans, and despite advances and the introduction of the alkylating agent
temozolomide in therapy have improved patient survival, resistance mechanisms
limit benefits. Recent studies support that glioblastoma stem-like cells (GSCs), 
a cell subpopulation within the tumour, are involved in the aberrant expansion
and therapy resistance properties of glioblastomas, through still unclear
mechanisms. Emerging evidence suggests that sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) a
potent onco-promoter able to act as extracellular signal, favours malignant and
chemoresistance properties in GSCs. Notwithstanding, the origin of S1P in the GSC
environment remains unknown. We investigated S1P metabolism, release, and role in
cell survival properties of GSCs isolated from either U87-MG cell line or a
primary culture of human glioblastoma. We show that both GSC models, grown as
neurospheres and expressing GSC markers, are resistant to temozolomide, despite
not expressing the DNA repair protein MGMT, a major contributor to
temozolomide-resistance. Pulse experiments with labelled sphingosine revealed
that both GSC types are able to rapidly phosphorylate the long-chain base, and
that the newly produced S1P is efficiently degraded. Of relevance, we found that 
S1P was present in GSC extracellular medium, its level being significantly higher
than in U87-MG cells, and that the extracellular/intracellular ratio of S1P was
about ten-fold higher in GSCs. The activity of sphingosine kinases was
undetectable in GSC media, suggesting that mechanisms of S1P transport to the
extracellular environment are constitutive in GSCs. In addition we found that an 
inhibitor of S1P biosynthesis made GSCs sensitive to temozolomide (TMZ), and that
exogenous S1P reverted this effect, thus involving extracellular S1P as a GSC
survival signal in TMZ resistance. Altogether our data implicate for the first
time GSCs as a pivotal source of extracellular S1P, which might act as an
autocrine/paracrine signal contributing to their malignant properties.

PMCID: PMC3691128
PMID: 23826381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Chem Phys. 2013 Jun 28;138(24):244113. doi: 10.1063/1.4811711.

Enhanced exchange algorithm without detailed balance condition for replica
exchange method.

Kondo HX(1), Taiji M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Computational Molecular Design, RIKEN QBiC (Quantitative
Biology Center), 1-6-5 Minatojima-Minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0047, Japan.
h_kondo@gsc.riken.jp

The replica exchange method (REM) is a powerful tool for the conformational
sampling of biomolecules. In this study, we propose an enhanced exchange
algorithm for REM not meeting the detailed balance condition (DBC), but
satisfying the balance condition in all considered exchanges between two
replicas. Breaking the DBC can minimize the rejection rate and make an exchange
process rejection-free as the number of replicas increases. To enhance the
efficiency of REM, all possible pairs--not only the nearest neighbor--were
considered in the exchange process. The test simulations of the alanine dipeptide
confirmed the correctness of our method. The average traveling distance of each
replica in the temperature distribution was also increased in proportion to an
increase in the exchange rate. Furthermore, we applied our algorithm to the
conformational sampling of the 10-residue miniprotein, chignolin, with an
implicit solvent model. The results showed a faster convergence in the
calculation of its free energy landscape, compared to that achieved using the
normal exchange method of adjacent pairs. This algorithm can also be applied to
the conventional near neighbor method and is expected to reduce the required
number of replicas.

PMID: 23822233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Sleep Med Rev. 2014 Jun;18(3):195-213.

Sleep changes in the disorder of insomnia: a meta-analysis of polysomnographic
studies.

Baglioni C, Regen W, Teghen A, Spiegelhalder K, Feige B, Nissen C, Riemann D.

Insomnia is a highly prevalent health problem worldwide. Primary insomnia (PI),
i.e., insomnia not due to another disorder or substance use, represents a model
to elucidate the pathophysiology of sleep. However, prior research in patients
with PI has failed to demonstrate consistent abnormalities in the
state-of-the-art assessment of sleep (polysomnography). The aim of this
meta-analysis was to clarify whether there are identifiable polysomnographic
sleep changes that correspond to the subjective complaints of patients with PI.
Medline and PsycInfo databases were searched from 1994 to 2012. Effects were
calculated as standardized mean differences. Studies were pooled with the
random-effects metaanalytic model. Twenty-three studies met inclusion criteria.
In total, 582 patients with PI and 485 good sleeper controls (GSC) were
evaluated. The results showed that patients with PI present a disruption of sleep
continuity and a significant reduction of slow wave sleep (SWS) and rapid eye
movement (REM) sleep compared to GSC. The observed changes in sleep architecture,
i.e., reductions in SWS and REM sleep, hitherto did not count among the typical
polysomnographic findings in patients with PI. An advanced knowledge of the
polysomnographic changes in PI may add to foster the understanding of the
pathophysiology of sleep and its bi-directional relationships with somatic and
mental disorders.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23809904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Semin Reprod Med. 2013 Jan;31(1):24-32. doi: 10.1055/s-0032-1331794. Epub 2013
Jan 17.

An evolutionary perspective on adult female germline stem cell function from
flies to humans.

Woods DC(1), Tilly JL.

Author information: 
(1)Vincent Center for Reproductive Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, 55
Fruit Street, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

The concept that oogenesis continues into reproductive life has been well
established in nonmammalian species. Recent studies of mice and women indicate
that oocyte formation is also not, as traditionally believed, restricted to the
fetal or perinatal periods. Analogous to de novo oocyte formation in flies and
fish, newly formed oocytes in adult mammalian ovaries arise from germline stem
cells (GSCs) or, more specifically, oogonial stem cells (OSCs). Studies of mice
have confirmed that isolated OSCs, once delivered back into adult ovaries, are
capable of generating fully functional eggs that fertilize to produce healthy
embryos and offspring. Parallel studies of OSCs recently purified from ovaries of
reproductive-age women indicate that these cells closely resemble their mouse
ovary-derived counterparts, although the fertilization competency of oocytes
generated by human OSCs awaits clarification. Despite the ability of OSCs to
produce new oocytes during adulthood, oogenesis will still ultimately cease with 
age, contributing to ovarian failure. The causal mechanisms behind these events
in mammals are unknown, but studies of flies have revealed that GSC niche
dysfunction plays a critical role in age-related oogenic failure. Such insights
derived from evaluation of nonmammalian species, in which postnatal oogenesis has
been studied in depth, may aid in development of new strategies to alleviate
ovarian failure and infertility in mammals.

Thieme Medical Publishers 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001, USA.

PMID: 23329633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Neuro Oncol. 2013 Mar;15(3):319-29. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/nos316. Epub 2013 Jan 17.

Nanofiber-mediated inhibition of focal adhesion kinase sensitizes glioma stemlike
cells to epidermal growth factor receptor inhibition.

Srikanth M(1), Das S, Berns EJ, Kim J, Stupp SI, Kessler JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
maya@fsm.northwestern.edu

BACKGROUND: Glioblastoma multiforme is the most common glioma in adults and
carries a poor prognosis, due to tumor recurrence despite aggressive treatment.
Such relapse has been attributed to the persistence of glioma stemlike cells
(GSCs), a subpopulation of glioma cells with stem cell properties. Thus,
targeting these cells will be critical to achieving meaningful improvement in
glioblastoma multiforme survival. We investigated the role of ß1-integrin
signaling as one such potential target.
METHODS: We used GSCs isolated from primary human gliomas and maintained in stem 
cell conditions. We manipulated ß1-integrin signaling using a self-assembling
peptide amphiphile (PA) displaying the IKVAV
(isoleucine-lysine-valine-alanine-valine) epitope as well as lentiviral
overexpression, and we assayed the effects on downstream effectors and apoptosis 
using immunofluorescence.
RESULTS: We show that ß1-integrin expression correlates with decreased survival
in glioma patients and that ß1-integrin is highly expressed by GSCs. The IKVAV PA
potently increases immobilized ß1-integrin at the GSC membrane, activating
integrin-linked kinase while inhibiting focal adhesion kinase (FAK). The IKVAV PA
induces striking apoptosis in GSCs via this FAK inhibition, which is enhanced in 
combination with inhibition of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR).
Conversely, lentiviral overexpression of ß1-integrin renders GSCs resistant to
EGFR inhibition, which was overcome by FAK inhibition.
CONCLUSIONS: These observations reveal a role for ß1-integrin signaling through
FAK in GSC treatment resistance and introduce self-assembling PAs as a novel new 
therapeutic approach for overcoming this resistance.

PMCID: PMC3578490
PMID: 23328812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Development. 2013 Feb 1;140(3):530-40. doi: 10.1242/dev.088583.

Cyclin E controls Drosophila female germline stem cell maintenance independently 
of its role in proliferation by modulating responsiveness to niche signals.

Ables ET(1), Drummond-Barbosa D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bloomberg School of Public
Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Stem cells must proliferate while maintaining 'stemness'; however, much remains
to be learned about how factors that control the division of stem cells influence
their identity. Multiple stem cell types display cell cycles with short G1
phases, thought to minimize susceptibility to differentiation factors. Drosophila
female germline stem cells (GSCs) have short G1 and long G2 phases, and
diet-dependent systemic factors often modulate G2. We previously observed that
Cyclin E (CycE), a known G1/S regulator, is atypically expressed in GSCs during
G2/M; however, it remained unclear whether CycE has cell cycle-independent roles 
in GSCs or whether it acts exclusively by modulating the cell cycle. In this
study, we detected CycE activity during G2/M, reflecting its altered expression
pattern, and showed that CycE and its canonical partner, Cyclin-dependent kinase 
2 (Cdk2), are required not only for GSC proliferation, but also for GSC
maintenance. In genetic mosaics, CycE- and Cdk2-deficient GSCs are rapidly lost
from the niche, remain arrested in a G1-like state, and undergo excessive growth 
and incomplete differentiation. However, we found that CycE controls GSC
maintenance independently of its role in the cell cycle; GSCs harboring specific 
hypomorphic CycE mutations are not efficiently maintained despite normal
proliferation rates. Finally, CycE-deficient GSCs have an impaired response to
niche bone morphogenetic protein signals that are required for GSC self-renewal, 
suggesting that CycE modulates niche-GSC communication. Taken together, these
results show unequivocally that the roles of CycE/Cdk2 in GSC division cycle
regulation and GSC maintenance are separable, and thus potentially involve
distinct sets of phosphorylation targets.

PMCID: PMC3561789
PMID: 23293285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2013;102:97-126. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-416024-8.00004-0.

Germline stem cells.

Wu J(1), Luo H, Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)Key laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and Neuropsychiatric
Disorders (Ministry of Education), Bio-X Institutes, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China. jiwu@sjtu.edu.cn

Stem cells support tissue maintenance by balancing self-renewal and
differentiation. Germline stem cells (GSCs) belong to a kind of stem cells that
are crucial to development and tissue homeostasis with their ability to both
differentiate into gametes and maintain an undifferentiated state by their
self-renewal property. The GSCs are unique in that they transmit genetic
information from parent to offspring. In this review, we concentrate on human and
mammalian models including rat and mouse, which are used to study GSCs, and
summarize current progress about the GSC origin, location, characteristics,
regulatory mechanisms, application, and role of GSCs in gametogenesis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23287031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e52892. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052892. Epub 2012 Dec 21.

Polycomb group genes Psc and Su(z)2 maintain somatic stem cell identity and
activity in Drosophila.

Morillo Prado JR(1), Chen X, Fuller MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, School of Medicine, Stanford University, 
Stanford, California, United States of America.

Adult stem cells are essential for the proper function of many tissues, yet the
mechanisms that maintain the proper identity and regulate proliferative capacity 
in stem cell lineages are not well understood. Polycomb group (PcG) proteins are 
transcriptional repressors that have recently emerged as important regulators of 
stem cell maintenance and differentiation. Here we describe the role of Polycomb 
Repressive Complex 1 (PRC1) genes Posterior sex combs (Psc) and Suppressor of
zeste two (Su(z)2) in restricting the proliferation and maintaining the identity 
of the Cyst Stem Cell (CySC) lineage in the Drosophila testis. In contrast, Psc
and Su(z)2 seem to be dispensable for both germline stem cell (GSC) maintenance
and germ cell development. We show that loss of Psc and Su(z)2 function in the
CySC lineage results in the formation of aggregates of mutant cells that
proliferate abnormally, and display abnormal somatic identity correlated with
derepression of the Hox gene Abdominal-B. Furthermore, we show that tumorigenesis
in the CySC lineage interferes non-cell autonomously with maintenance of GSCs
most likely by displacing them from their niche.

PMCID: PMC3528704
PMID: 23285219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e52113. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052113. Epub 2012 Dec 21.

A radial glia gene marker, fatty acid binding protein 7 (FABP7), is involved in
proliferation and invasion of glioblastoma cells.

De Rosa A(1), Pellegatta S, Rossi M, Tunici P, Magnoni L, Speranza MC, Malusa F, 
Miragliotta V, Mori E, Finocchiaro G, Bakker A.

Author information: 
(1)Siena Biotech Spa, Siena, Italy. aderosa@sienabiotech.it

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is among the most deadly cancers. A number of
studies suggest that a fraction of tumor cells with stem cell features (Glioma
Stem-like Cells, GSC) might be responsible for GBM recurrence and aggressiveness.
GSC similarly to normal neural stem cells, can form neurospheres (NS) in vitro,
and seem to mirror the genetic features of the original tumor better than glioma 
cells growing adherently in the presence of serum. Using cDNA microarray analysis
we identified a number of relevant genes for glioma biology that are
differentially expressed in adherent cells and neurospheres derived from the same
tumor. Fatty acid-binding protein 7 (FABP7) was identified as one of the most
highly expressed genes in NS compared to their adherent counterpart. We found
that down-regulation of FABP7 expression in NS by small interfering RNAs
significantly reduced cell proliferation and migration. We also evaluated the
potential involvement of FABP7 in response to radiotherapy, as this treatment may
cause increased tumor infiltration. Migration of irradiated NS was associated to 
increased expression of FABP7. In agreement with this, in vivo reduced
tumorigenicity of GBM cells with down-regulated expression of FABP7 was
associated to decreased expression of the migration marker doublecortin. Notably,
we observed that PPAR antagonists affect FABP7 expression and decrease the
migration capability of NS after irradiation. As a whole, the data emphasize the 
role of FABP7 expression in GBM migration and provide translational hints on the 
timing of treatment with anti-FABP7 agents like PPAR antagonists during GBM
evolution.

PMCID: PMC3528762
PMID: 23284888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Ann Neurol. 2012 Nov;72(5):766-78. doi: 10.1002/ana.23674.

Laminin alpha 2 enables glioblastoma stem cell growth.

Lathia JD(1), Li M, Hall PE, Gallagher J, Hale JS, Wu Q, Venere M, Levy E, Rani
MR, Huang P, Bae E, Selfridge J, Cheng L, Guvenc H, McLendon RE, Nakano I, Sloan 
AE, Phillips HS, Lai A, Gladson CL, Bredel M, Bao S, Hjelmeland AB, Rich JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, OH, USA. lathiaj@ccf.org

OBJECTIVE: Glioblastomas (GBMs) are lethal cancers that display cellular
hierarchies parallel to normal brain. At the apex are GBM stem cells (GSCs),
which are relatively resistant to conventional therapy. Interactions with the
adjacent perivascular niche are an important driver of malignancy and
self-renewal in GSCs. Extracellular matrix (ECM) cues instruct neural
stem/progenitor cell-niche interactions, and the objective of our study was to
elucidate its composition and contribution to GSC maintenance in the perivascular
niche.
METHODS: We interrogated human tumor tissue for immunofluorescence analysis and
derived GSCs from tumor tissues for functional studies. Bioinformatics analyses
were conducted by mining publicly available databases.
RESULTS: We find that laminin ECM proteins are localized to the perivascular GBM 
niche and inform negative patient prognosis. To identify the source of laminins, 
we characterized cellular elements within the niche and found that laminin a
chains were expressed by nonstem tumor cells and tumor-associated endothelial
cells (ECs). RNA interference targeting laminin a2 inhibited GSC growth and
self-renewal. In co-culture studies of GSCs and ECs, laminin a2 knockdown in ECs 
resulted in decreased tumor growth.
INTERPRETATION: Our studies highlight the contribution of nonstem tumor
cell-derived laminin juxtracrine signaling. As laminin a2 has recently been
identified as a molecular marker of aggressive ependymoma, we propose that the
brain vascular ECM promotes tumor malignancy through maintenance of the GSC
compartment, providing not only a molecular fingerprint but also a possible
therapeutic target.

Copyright © 2012 American Neurological Association.

PMCID: PMC3615417
PMID: 23280793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Cancer Res. 2013 Mar 1;73(5):1481-90. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3429. Epub
2012 Dec 26.

Acute and fractionated irradiation differentially modulate glioma stem cell
division kinetics.

Gao X(1), McDonald JT, Hlatky L, Enderling H.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Cancer Systems Biology, Steward Research Institute, St. Elizabeth's 
Medical Center, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02135, USA.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is one of the most aggressive human malignancies
with a poor patient prognosis. Ionizing radiation either alone or adjuvant after 
surgery is part of standard treatment for GBM but remains primarily noncurative. 
The mechanisms underlying tumor radioresistance are manifold and, in part,
accredited to a special subpopulation of tumorigenic cells. The so-called glioma 
stem cells (GSC) are bestowed with the exclusive ability to self-renew and
repopulate the tumor and have been reported to be less sensitive to
radiation-induced damage through preferential activation of DNA damage checkpoint
responses and increased capacity for DNA damage repair. During each fraction of
radiation, non-stem cancer cells (CC) die and GSCs become enriched and
potentially increase in number, which may lead to accelerated repopulation. We
propose a cellular Potts model that simulates the kinetics of GSCs and CCs in
glioblastoma growth and radiation response. We parameterize and validate this
model with experimental data of the U87-MG human glioblastoma cell line.
Simulations are conducted to estimate GSC symmetric and asymmetric division rates
and explore potential mechanisms for increased GSC fractions after irradiation.
Simulations reveal that in addition to their higher radioresistance, a shift from
asymmetric to symmetric division or a fast cycle of GSCs following fractionated
radiation treatment is required to yield results that match experimental
observations. We hypothesize a constitutive activation of stem cell division
kinetics signaling pathways during fractionated treatment, which contributes to
the frequently observed accelerated repopulation after therapeutic irradiation.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3594421
PMID: 23269274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Neuro Oncol. 2013 Feb;15(2):161-71. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/nos299. Epub 2012 Dec 20.

Wnt/ß-catenin signaling is a key downstream mediator of MET signaling in
glioblastoma stem cells.

Kim KH(1), Seol HJ, Kim EH, Rheey J, Jin HJ, Lee Y, Joo KM, Lee J, Nam DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Samsung Biomedical Research Institute, Samsung
Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Gangnam-gu, Seoul
135-710, South Korea.

BACKGROUND: Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most lethal and common type of primary
brain tumor. Recent evidence suggests that a subpopulation of GBM cells
(glioblastoma stem cells [GSCs]) is critical for tumor progression, invasion, and
therapeutic resistance. We and others have demonstrated that MET, a receptor
tyrosine kinase, positively regulates the stemness phenotype and radioresistance 
of GSCs. Here, we interrogated the downstream effector pathways of MET signaling 
in GSCs.
METHODS: We have established a series of GSCs and xenograft tumors derived from
freshly dissociated specimens from patients with GBM and characterized a
subpopulation enriched with MET activation (MET(high/+)). Through global
expression profiling and subsequent pathways analysis, we identified signaling
pathways that are enriched in MET(high/+) populations, one of which is
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway. To determine molecular interaction and the
biological consequences of MET and Wnt/ß-catenin signaling, we used
pharmacological and shRNA-mediated genetic inhibition and performed various
molecular and cellular analyses, including flow cytometry, immunohistochemistry, 
and clonogenicity assays.
RESULTS: We found that Wnt/ß-catenin signaling is highly active in MET(high/+)
cells, compared with bulk tumor cells. We also showed that Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling activities in GBM are directly modulated by the addition of
ligand-mediated MET activation or MET inhibition. Furthermore, the ectopic
expression of active-ß-catenin (S37A and S45Y) rescued the phenotypic effects
caused by MET inhibition.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that Wnt/ß-catenin signaling is a key downstream
effector of MET signaling and contributes to the maintenance of GSC and GBM
malignancy.

PMCID: PMC3548587
PMID: 23258844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Feb 1;19(3):631-42. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-0647.
Epub 2012 Dec 18.

Impairment of glioma stem cell survival and growth by a novel inhibitor for
Survivin-Ran protein complex.

Guvenc H(1), Pavlyukov MS, Joshi K, Kurt H, Banasavadi-Siddegowda YK, Mao P, Hong
C, Yamada R, Kwon CH, Bhasin D, Chettiar S, Kitange G, Park IH, Sarkaria JN, Li
C, Shakhparonov MI, Nakano I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH
43210, USA.

PURPOSE: Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is a devastating disease. Recent studies
suggest that the stem cell properties of GBM contribute to the development of
therapy resistance.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The expression of Survivin and Ran was evaluated by
immunohistochemistry with GBM tissues, and quantitative reverse transcriptase
(qRT)-PCR and immunocytochemistry with patient-derived GBM sphere cultures. With 
a computational structure-based drug design, 11 small-molecule compounds were
designed, synthesized, and evaluated as inhibitor candidates for the molecular
interaction of Survivin protein. The molecular mechanism of the lead compound,
LLP-3, was determined by Western blot, ELISA, in situ proximity ligation assay,
and immunocytochemistry. The effects of LLP-3 treatment on GSCs were evaluated
both in vitro and in vivo. Quantitative immunohistochemistry was carried out to
compare Survivin expression in tissues from 44 newly diagnosed and 31 recurrent
post-chemoradiation GBM patients. Lastly, the sensitivities of
temozolomide-resistant GBM spheres to LLP-3 were evaluated in vitro.
RESULTS: Survivin and Ran were strongly expressed in GBM tissues, particularly in
the perivasculature, and also in patient-derived GSC cultures. LLP-3 treatment
disrupted the Survivin-Ran protein complex in cancer cells and abolished the
growth of patient-derived GBM spheres in vitro and in vivo. This inhibition was
dependent on caspase activity and associated with p53 status of cells.
Immunohistochemistry showed that Survivin expression is significantly increased
in recurrent GBM compared with newly diagnosed tumors, and temozolomide-resistant
GBM spheres exhibited high sensitivities to LLP-3 treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Disruption of the Survivin-Ran complex by LLP-3 abolishes survival
and growth of GSCs both in vitro and in vivo, indicating an attractive novel
therapeutic approach for GBM.

PMCID: PMC4295559
PMID: 23251006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. J Gastrointest Surg. 2013 Feb;17(2):313-8. doi: 10.1007/s11605-012-2114-0. Epub
2012 Dec 12.

Clinicopathological characteristics and survival difference between gastric stump
carcinoma and primary upper third gastric cancer.

Tokunaga M(1), Sano T, Ohyama S, Hiki N, Fukunaga T, Yamada K, Yamaguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Cancer Institute Hospital, Japanese
Foundation for Cancer Research, 3-10-6 Ariake, Koto-ku, Tokyo, 135-8550, Japan.
m.tokunaga@scchr.jp

BACKGROUND: The increased incidence of early gastric cancer in several Asian
countries has been associated with an increase in gastric stump carcinoma (GSC)
following gastric cancer surgery. The clinicopathological characteristics of GSC 
remain unclear because of the limited number of patients with GSC.
METHODS: The clinicopathological characteristics, including the 5-year survival
rate of patients with GSC following distal gastrectomy (167 patients), were
compared with those of patients with primary upper third gastric cancer (PGC; 755
patients). The clinicopathological characteristics of patients with GSC were also
compared between those who had initial surgery for gastric cancer (GSC-M group,
78 patients) and for benign lesions (GSC-B group, 89 patients).
RESULTS: The GSC-B group has a greater male/female ratio (13.8 vs. 3.1) and a
longer interval between initial gastrectomy and surgery for GSC (31.0 vs.
9.4 years) than the GSC-M group. The 5-year survival rate was not significantly
different between the GSC-B group (49.0 %) and the GSC-M group (59.3 %,
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.359). A comparison between the GSC group and the PGC group revealed a
poorer 5-year survival rate for the GSC group (53.6 %) than the PGC group
(78.3 %, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001), and the same trend was observed even after stratification by
the pathological stage.
CONCLUSIONS: Stump carcinoma arises earlier following gastrectomy for malignant
disease than for benign disease. The prognosis was poor in patients with GSC
compared to those with PGC. Early detection of GSC is necessary and an
appropriate follow-up program should be established.

PMID: 23233273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Proteomics Clin Appl. 2013 Jan;7(1-2):79-90. doi: 10.1002/prca.201200102.

Critical multiple angiogenic factors secreted by glioblastoma stem-like cells
underline the need for combinatorial anti-angiogenic therapeutic strategies.

Thirant C(1), Gavard J, Junier MP, Chneiweiss H.

Author information: 
(1)Leukemia and Stem Cell Biology Laboratory, Department of Hematological
Medicine, Rayne Institute, King's College London, London, UK.

Glioblastomas are the most frequent adult primary brain tumors that still remain 
fatal despite major clinical efforts. As in other solid tumors, populations of
glioblastoma stem-like cells (GSCs) endowed with tumor initiating and therapeutic
resistance properties have been identified. Glioblastomas are highly vascularized
tumors resulting in a rich dialog between GSCs and endothelial cells. In one
direction, endothelial cells and their secreted proteins are able to sustain GSC 
properties while, in turn, GSCs can promote neoangiogenesis, modulate endothelial
cell functions and may even transdifferentiate into endothelial cells.
Accordingly, targeting tumor vasculature seems a promising issue despite
incomplete and transient results obtained from anti-vascular endothelial growth
factor therapeutic trials. Recent findings of novel GSC-secreted molecules with
pro-angiogenic properties (Semaphorin 3A, hepatoma-derived growth factor) open
the path to the design of a concerted attack of glioblastoma vasculature that
could overcome the development of resistance to single-targeted therapies while
keeping away the toxicity of the treatments.

© 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23229792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Dev Biol. 2013 Feb 15;374(2):308-18. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.12.003. Epub 2012 
Dec 7.

nanos3 maintains germline stem cells and expression of the conserved germline
stem cell gene nanos2 in the zebrafish ovary.

Beer RL(1), Draper BW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of California, Davis,
Davis, CA 95616, USA. rebeccalbeer@gmail.com

Female zebrafish have a prolific reproductive capacity, suggesting that a
germline stem cell (GSC) population drives oocyte production. However, a
zebrafish female GSC population has yet to be identified. Adult stem cells are
defined by their ability to both self-renew and differentiate, and by their
localization to a stem cell niche. We show here that mitotic and early meiotic
germ cells are present in the adult ovary and that the zebrafish homolog of the
conserved vertebrate GSC marker, nanos2, is expressed in a subset of pre-meiotic 
oogonia in the adult gonad. We propose that these nanos2(+) cells are GSCs.
Importantly, we find that mitotic, nanos2(+), and early meiotic germ cells
localize to the germinal zone, thus identifying this region as the probable
ovarian GSC niche in zebrafish. nanos3, which encodes a conserved RNA-binding
protein, is known to be required for the continued production of oocytes in the
zebrafish. Although mammalian homologs of nanos3 are expressed in early
spermatogonia, no study has defined the role of nanos3 in the regulation of
vertebrate GSCs. Here we demonstrate that nanos3 function is required for the
maintenance of GSCs, but not for their specification, and propose that nanos2 and
nanos3 are partially redundant in this role.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 23228893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Biol Reprod. 2013 Jan 31;88(1):27. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.112.104422. Print 2013
Jan.

Viral transduction of male germline stem cells results in transgene transmission 
after germ cell transplantation in pigs.

Zeng W(1), Tang L, Bondareva A, Honaramooz A, Tanco V, Dores C, Megee S, Modelski
M, Rodriguez-Sosa JR, Paczkowski M, Silva E, Wheeler M, Krisher RL, Dobrinski I.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, 22 Xi-Nong
Road, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, China.

Genetic modification of germline stem cells (GSCs) is an alternative approach to 
generate large transgenic animals where transgenic GSCs are transplanted into a
recipient testis to generate donor-derived transgenic sperm. The objective of the
present study was to explore the application of viral vectors in delivering an
enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) transgene into GSCs for production of
transgenic gametes through germ cell transplantation. Both adeno-associated virus
(AAV)- and lentivirus (LV)-based vectors were effective in transducing pig GSCs, 
resulting in the production of transgenic sperm in recipient boars. Twenty-one
boars treated with busulfan to deplete endogenous GSCs and nine nontreated boars 
received germ cell transplantation at 12 wk of age. Semen was collected from
recipient boars from 5 to 7 mo posttransplantation when boars became sexually
mature, and semen collection continued for as long as 5 yr for some boars. The
percentage of ejaculates that were positive for the EGFP transgene ranged from 0%
to 54.8% for recipients of AAV vector-transduced germ cells (n = 17) and from 0% 
to 25% for recipients of LV vector-transduced germ cells (n = 5). When semen from
two AAV recipients was used for in vitro fertilization (IVF), 9.09% and 64.3% of 
embryos were transgenic. Semen collected from two LV-vector recipients produced
7.7% and 26.3% transgenic IVF embryos. Here, we not only demonstrated
AAV-mediated GSC transduction in another large animal model (pigs) but also
showed, to our knowledge for the first time, that LV-mediated GSC transduction
resulted in transgene transmission in pigs.

PMCID: PMC4434942
PMID: 23221397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Ultrastruct Pathol. 2012 Dec;36(6):404-8. doi: 10.3109/01913123.2012.708011.

The ultrastructural difference between CD133-positive U251 glioma stem cells and 
normal U251 glioma cells.

Yang B(1), Wang Y, Yang C, Ouyang W, Zhou F, Zhou Y, Xie C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation and Medical Oncology, Zhongnan Hospital, Wuhan
University, Wuchang District, Wuhan, China.

Glioma stem cells (GSC) have higher tumorigenic potential and stronger
chemoresistance and radioresistance than normal glioma cells. The mechanisms
behind these phenomena have remained elusive. The authors have isolated
CD133-positive U251 GSCs from U251 glioma cells and detected the expression of
stem cell markers (CD133 and nestin) of U251 GSCs by immunofluorescence staining.
Then the ultrastructures of U251 GSCs and normal U251 glioma cells were observed 
by transmission electron microscopy and the ultrastructural differences between
them were compared. Increased cell nucleus atypia, rougher endoplasmic reticulum,
and more microvilli were observed in CD133-positive U251 GSCs than in normal U251
glioma cells. In summary, these ultrastructural differences support the
hypothesis that GSCs have stronger tumorigenic ability and resistance to
chemotherapy and radiotherapy.

PMID: 23216238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e49810. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049810. Epub 2012 Nov 27.

Drosophila Rbp6 is an orthologue of vertebrate Msi-1 and Msi-2, but does not
function redundantly with dMsi to regulate germline stem cell behaviour.

Siddall NA(1), Kalcina M, Johanson TM, Monk AC, Casagranda F, Been RP, McLaughlin
EA, Hime GR.

Author information: 
(1)Anatomy and Neuroscience, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia.

The vertebrate RNA-binding proteins, Musashi-1 (Msi-1) and Musashi-2 (Msi-2) are 
expressed in multiple stem cell populations. A role for Musashi proteins in
preventing stem cell differentiation has been suggested from genetic analysis of 
the Drosophila family member, dMsi, and both vertebrate Msi proteins function
co-operatively to regulate neural stem cell behaviour. Here we have identified a 
second Drosophila Msi family member, Rbp6, which shares more amino acid identity 
with vertebrate Msi-1 and Msi-2 than dMsi. We generated an antibody that detects 
most Rbp6 splice isoforms and show that Rbp6 is expressed in multiple tissues
throughout development. However, Rbp6 deletion mutants generated in this study
are viable and fertile, and show only minor defects. We used Drosophila
spermatogonial germline stem cells (GSC's) as a model to test whether Drosophila 
Msi proteins function redundantly to regulate stem cell behaviour. However, like 
vertebrate Msi-1 and Msi-2, Rbp6 and Msi do not appear to be co-expressed in
spermatogenic GSC's and do not function co-operatively in the regulation of GSC
maintenance. Thus while two Msi family members are present in Drosophila, the
function of the family members have diverged.

PMCID: PMC3507872
PMID: 23209605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. J Vis Exp. 2012 Nov 20;(69). pii: 4201. doi: 10.3791/4201.

Imaging glioma initiation in vivo through a polished and reinforced thin-skull
cranial window.

Zhang L(1), Lapierre A, Roy B, Lim M, Zhu J, Wang W, Sampson SB, Yun K, Lyons B, 
Li Y, Lin DT.

Author information: 
(1)The Jackson Laboratory.

Glioma is the one of the most lethal forms of human cancer. The most effective
glioma therapy to date-surgery followed by radiation treatment-offers patients
only modest benefits, as most patients do not survive more than five years
following diagnosis due to glioma relapse (1,2). The discovery of cancer stem
cells in human brain tumors holds promise for having an enormous impact on the
development of novel therapeutic strategies for glioma (3). Cancer stem cells are
defined by their ability both to self-renew and to differentiate, and are thought
to be the only cells in a tumor that have the capacity to initiate new tumors
(4). Glioma relapse following radiation therapy is thought to arise from
resistance of glioma stem cells (GSCs) to therapy (5-10). In vivo, GSCs are shown
to reside in a perivascular niche that is important for maintaining their stem
cell-like characteristics (11-14). Central to the organization of the GSC niche
are vascular endothelial cells (12). Existing evidence suggests that GSCs and
their interaction with the vascular endothelial cells are important for tumor
development, and identify GSCs and their interaction with endothelial cells as
important therapeutic targets for glioma. The presence of GSCs is determined
experimentally by their capability to initiate new tumors upon orthotopic
transplantation (15). This is typically achieved by injecting a specific number
of GBM cells isolated from human tumors into the brains of severely
immuno-deficient mice, or of mouse GBM cells into the brains of congenic host
mice. Assays for tumor growth are then performed following sufficient time to
allow GSCs among the injected GBM cells to give rise to new tumors-typically
several weeks or months. Hence, existing assays do not allow examination of the
important pathological process of tumor initiation from single GSCs in vivo.
Consequently, essential insights into the specific roles of GSCs and their
interaction with the vascular endothelial cells in the early stages of tumor
initiation are lacking. Such insights are critical for developing novel
therapeutic strategies for glioma, and will have great implications for
preventing glioma relapse in patients. Here we have adapted the PoRTS cranial
window procedure (16)and in vivo two-photon microscopy to allow visualization of 
tumor initiation from injected GBM cells in the brain of a live mouse. Our
technique will pave the way for future efforts to elucidate the key signaling
mechanisms between GSCs and vascular endothelial cells during glioma initiation.

PMCID: PMC3529512
PMID: 23207870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Stem Cells Transl Med. 2012 Apr;1(4):322-32. doi: 10.5966/sctm.2011-0035. Epub
2012 Mar 21.

Oncolytic herpes simplex virus counteracts the hypoxia-induced modulation of
glioblastoma stem-like cells.

Sgubin D(1), Wakimoto H, Kanai R, Rabkin SD, Martuza RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Brain Tumor Research Center, Massachusetts General
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.

Glioblastoma (GBM), a fatal malignant brain tumor, contains abundant hypoxic
regions that provide a "niche" to promote both the maintenance and enrichment of 
glioblastoma stem-like cells (GSCs) and confer resistance to chemo- and
radiotherapy. Since GSCs, with an ability to resist conventional therapies, may
be responsible for tumor recurrence, targeting GSCs located in such a hypoxic
environment may be critical to improving the therapeutic outcome for GBM
patients. Oncolytic viral therapies have been tested in the clinic as a promising
therapeutic approach for GBM. In this study, we analyzed and compared the
therapeutic effects of oncolytic herpes simplex virus (oHSV) type 1 G47<U+0394>
(<U+03B3>34.5(-)ICP6(-)LacZ(+)a47(-)) in patient-derived GSCs under normoxia (21%
oxygen) and hypoxia (1% oxygen). GSCs cultured in hypoxia showed an increased
ability to form neurospheres and expressed higher levels of the putative stem
cell marker CD133 compared with GSCs cultured in normoxia. G47<U+0394> exhibited a
comparable ability to infect, replicate, and kill GSCs in normoxia and hypoxia in
vitro. Importantly, G47<U+0394> could counteract hypoxia-mediated enhancement of the
stem-like properties of GSCs, inhibiting their self-renewal and stem cell marker 
expression. Using orthotopic human GSC xenografts in mice, we demonstrated that
intratumoral injection of G47<U+0394>Us11fluc, a newly developed G47<U+0394> derivative that
expresses firefly luciferase driven by a true late viral promoter, led to an
equivalent frequency of viral infection and replication in hypoxic and nonhypoxic
tumor areas. These findings suggest that oHSV G47<U+0394> represents a promising
therapeutic strategy to target and kill GSCs, not only in normoxic areas of GBM
but also within the hypoxic niche.

PMCID: PMC3659700
PMID: 23197811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2012;52(11):914-6.

[Guillain-Barré and Fisher syndromes: update on the pathophysiological role of
antiganglioside antibodies].

[Article in Japanese]

Kaida K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurology, Department of Internal Medicine 3, National Defense
Medical College.

There are growing experimental and clinical data on the pathophysiological roles 
of antiganglioside antibodies in Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) and Fisher
syndrome (FS). Antibodies to a ganglioside complex (GSC) consisting of two
different gangliosides are detected in some GBS and FS sera. Recently,
anti-GM1/GalNAc-GD1a complex antibodies, anti-GA1/GQ1b antibodies with no
reaction against GM1/GQ1b, and anti-GM1/LM1 antibodies have been detected in GBS 
or FS sera. The anti-GM1/GalNAc-GD1a antibodies correlated with pure motor GBS
characterized by antecedent respiratory infection and early CBs at intermediate
sites of motor nerves. Complement activation is considered to be a key process
causing nerve damage in GBS and FS with antiganglioside antibodies. A recent ex
vivo study indicates that antibodies to GM1/GD1a or GM1/GQ1b can induce
complement-mediated functional and morphological injury at mouse motor nerve
terminals. Complement-independent pathophysiology such as blockade of
voltage-gated Ca channels, the apoptotic mechanism of neurons, and alteration of 
microdomains in the nerve cell membrane should also be considered. Complex
glycolipid environments in the cell membrane may govern the accessibility and
avidity of antiganglioside antibodies for target gangliosides. Thus, the
pathogenic effect of antiganglioside antibodies may depend on the local
glycolipid environment in the nerve membrane, as well as on the antibody
specificity.

PMID: 23196466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e49958. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049958. Epub 2012 Nov 21.

Genetic basis for developmental homeostasis of germline stem cell niche number: a
network of Tramtrack-Group nuclear BTB factors.

Bartoletti M(1), Rubin T, Chalvet F, Netter S, Dos Santos N, Poisot E,
Paces-Fessy M, Cumenal D, Peronnet F, Pret AM, Théodore L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Génétique Moléculaire, Unité Propre de Recherche 3404 du Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

The potential to produce new cells during adult life depends on the number of
stem cell niches and the capacity of stem cells to divide, and is therefore under
the control of programs ensuring developmental homeostasis. However, it remains
generally unknown how the number of stem cell niches is controlled. In the insect
ovary, each germline stem cell (GSC) niche is embedded in a functional unit
called an ovariole. The number of ovarioles, and thus the number of GSC niches,
varies widely among species. In Drosophila, morphogenesis of ovarioles starts in 
larvae with the formation of terminal filaments (TFs), each made of 8-10 cells
that pile up and sort in stacks. TFs constitute organizers of individual germline
stem cell niches during larval and early pupal development. In the Drosophila
melanogaster subgroup, the number of ovarioles varies interspecifically from 8 to
20. Here we show that pipsqueak, Trithorax-like, batman and the bric-à-brac (bab)
locus, all encoding nuclear BTB/POZ factors of the Tramtrack Group, are involved 
in limiting the number of ovarioles in D. melanogaster. At least two different
processes are differentially perturbed by reducing the function of these genes.
We found that when the bab dose is reduced, sorting of TF cells into TFs was
affected such that each TF contains fewer cells and more TFs are formed. In
contrast, psq mutants exhibited a greater number of TF cells per ovary, with a
normal number of cells per TF, thereby leading to formation of more TFs per ovary
than in the wild type. Our results indicate that two parallel genetic pathways
under the control of a network of nuclear BTB factors are combined in order to
negatively control the number of germline stem cell niches.

PMCID: PMC3503823
PMID: 23185495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Development. 2013 Jan 1;140(1):56-65. doi: 10.1242/dev.086413. Epub 2012 Nov 22.

Hedgehog is required for CySC self-renewal but does not contribute to the GSC
niche in the Drosophila testis.

Amoyel M(1), Sanny J, Burel M, Bach EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, New York University School
of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.

The Drosophila testis harbors two types of stem cells: germ line stem cells
(GSCs) and cyst stem cells (CySCs). Both stem cell types share a physical niche
called the hub, located at the apical tip of the testis. The niche produces the
JAK/STAT ligand Unpaired (Upd) and BMPs to maintain CySCs and GSCs, respectively.
However, GSCs also require BMPs produced by CySCs, and as such CySCs are part of 
the niche for GSCs. Here we describe a role for another secreted ligand, Hedgehog
(Hh), produced by niche cells, in the self-renewal of CySCs. Hh signaling
cell-autonomously regulates CySC number and maintenance. The Hh and JAK/STAT
pathways act independently and non-redundantly in CySC self-renewal. Finally, Hh 
signaling does not contribute to the niche function of CySCs, as Hh-sustained
CySCs are unable to maintain GSCs in the absence of Stat92E. Therefore, the
extended niche function of CySCs is solely attributable to JAK/STAT pathway
function.

PMCID: PMC3513992
PMID: 23175633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Zygote. 2014 May;22(2):229-38. doi: 10.1017/S0967199412000482. Epub 2012 Nov 22.

Structural analysis of toad oviductal mucosa in relation to jelly components
secretion throughout the reproductive cycle.

Crespo CA(1), Ramos I(1), Medina MF(1), Cisint SB(1), Iruzubieta Villagra AL(1), 
Fernández SN(2).

Author information: 
(1)Superior Institute of Biological Research, National Council for Scientific and
Technical Research, National University of Tucumán, Chacabuco 461, Tucumán 4000, 
Argentina. (2)Superior Institute of Biological Research, National University of
Tucumán, Chacabuco 461, Tucumán 4000, Argentina.

In amphibians, the components of the jelly coats that surround the oocytes at the
time of fertilization and coordinate gamete interaction are secreted by the
oviduct. We analysed the histological variations in the mucosa of the oviductal
pars convoluta (PC) of Rhinella arenarum during the reproductive cycle and its
relationship with secretion. During the preovulatory period, the mucosa reaches a
high degree of morphological and functional development, with a large number of
epithelial (ESC) and glandular secretory cells (GSC) loaded with contents that
are secreted into the oviductal lumen. During the ovulatory period, the secretory
cells (SC) of both layers present maximum secretory activity through apocrinia
and merocrinia. While the ESC located at the tips of the folds release their
content directly in contact with the oocytes, the GSC secrete material from the
bottom of the epithelial folds that, by interaction with the secretion of the ESC
in the lateral faces, form a product with a certain degree of organization.
Secretion is a continuous process with formation of coats of increasing
complexity from the intermediate proximal zone (IPZ) to the pars convoluta (pc)
itself, and the passage of the oocyte is a requisite for the organization of the 
jelly coats around the gamete. During the early postovulatory period, although
there is a marked decrease in the number and volume of the SC, the ESC still
release material into the oviductal lumen. In the late postovulatory period the
morphological characteristics of the PC begin to recovery although there is no
evidence of secretion.

PMID: 23174084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Oncotarget. 2012 Oct;3(10):1124-36.

High-throughput chemical screens identify disulfiram as an inhibitor of human
glioblastoma stem cells.

Hothi P(1), Martins TJ, Chen L, Deleyrolle L, Yoon JG, Reynolds B, Foltz G.

Author information: 
(1)The Ben and Catherine Ivy Center for Advanced Brain Tumor Treatment, Swedish
Neuroscience Institute, Seattle, WA, USA.

Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) continues to have a poor patient prognosis despite 
optimal standard of care. Glioma stem cells (GSCs) have been implicated as the
presumed cause of tumor recurrence and resistance to therapy. With this in mind, 
we screened a diverse chemical library of 2,000 compounds to identify therapeutic
agents that inhibit GSC proliferation and therefore have the potential to extend 
patient survival. High-throughput screens (HTS) identified 78 compounds that
repeatedly inhibited cellular proliferation, of which 47 are clinically approved 
for other indications and 31 are experimental drugs. Several compounds (such as
digitoxin, deguelin, patulin and phenethyl caffeate) exhibited high cytotoxicity,
with half maximal inhibitory concentrations (IC50) in the low nanomolar range. In
particular, the FDA approved drug for the treatment of alcoholism, disulfiram
(DSF), was significantly potent across multiple patient samples (IC50 of 31.1
nM). The activity of DSF was potentiated by copper (Cu), which markedly increased
GSC death. DSF-Cu inhibited the chymotrypsin-like proteasomal activity in
cultured GSCs, consistent with inactivation of the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway
and the subsequent induction of tumor cell death. Given that DSF is a relatively 
non-toxic drug that can penetrate the blood-brain barrier, we suggest that DSF
should be tested (as either a monotherapy or as an adjuvant) in pre-clinical
models of human GBM. Data also support targeting of the ubiquitin-proteasome
pathway as a therapeutic approach in the treatment of GBM.

PMCID: PMC3717950
PMID: 23165409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Development. 2013 Jan 1;140(1):23-30. doi: 10.1242/dev.086397. Epub 2012 Nov 15.

MicroRNAs downregulate Bag of marbles to ensure proper terminal differentiation
in the Drosophila male germline.

Eun SH(1), Stoiber PM, Wright HJ, McMurdie KE, Choi CH, Gan Q, Lim C, Chen X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA.

In many adult stem cell lineages, the continuous production of functional
differentiated cells depends on the maintenance of progenitor cells in an
undifferentiated and proliferative state, as well as the subsequent commitment to
proper terminal differentiation. In the Drosophila male germline stem cell (GSC) 
lineage, a key differentiation factor, Bag of marbles (Bam), is required for the 
transition from proliferative spermatogonia to differentiating spermatocytes. We 
show that bam mRNA, but not Bam, is present in spermatocytes, suggesting that bam
is regulated post-transcriptionally. Consistent with this, repression of Bam
accumulation is achieved by microRNAs via the bam 3'UTR. When the bam 3'UTR was
substituted with the 3'UTR of a constitutively expressed a-Tubulin, Bam became
stabilized in spermatocytes. Moreover, such a persistent expression of Bam in
spermatocytes was recapitulated by specifically mutating the putative
miR-275/miR-306 recognition site at the bam 3'UTR. In addition, overexpression of
miR-275 or miR-306 in spermatogonial cells resulted in a delay of the
proliferation-to-differentiation transition and resembled the bam
loss-of-function phenotype, suggesting that these microRNAs are sufficient to
downregulate Bam. Finally, the failure of Bam downregulation in spermatocytes
affected spermatid terminal differentiation and resulted in increased male
sterility. Our results demonstrate that microRNAs control the stem cell
differentiation pathway through regulating Bam, the downregulation of which is
crucial for proper spermatid terminal differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3513990
PMID: 23154414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Science. 2012 Nov 2;338(6107):679-82. doi: 10.1126/science.1226028.

Asymmetric division of Drosophila male germline stem cell shows asymmetric
histone distribution.

Tran V(1), Lim C, Xie J, Chen X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA.

Stem cells can self-renew and generate differentiating daughter cells. It is not 
known whether these cells maintain their epigenetic information during asymmetric
division. Using a dual-color method to differentially label "old" versus "new"
histones in Drosophila male germline stem cells (GSCs), we show that preexisting 
canonical H3, but not variant H3.3, histones are selectively segregated to the
GSC, whereas newly synthesized histones incorporated during DNA replication are
enriched in the differentiating daughter cell. The asymmetric histone
distribution occurs in GSCs but not in symmetrically dividing progenitor cells.
Furthermore, if GSCs are genetically manipulated to divide symmetrically, this
asymmetric mode is lost. This work suggests that stem cells retain preexisting
canonical histones during asymmetric cell divisions, probably as a mechanism to
maintain their unique molecular properties.

PMCID: PMC3532436
PMID: 23118191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Nov 6;109(45):18477-81. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1215516109. Epub 2012 Oct 22.

Somatic cell lineage is required for differentiation and not maintenance of
germline stem cells in Drosophila testes.

Lim JG(1), Fuller MT.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Developmental Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Adult stem cells are believed to be maintained by a specialized microenvironment,
the niche, which provides short-range signals that either instruct stem cells to 
self-renew or inhibit execution of preprogrammed differentiation pathways. In
Drosophila testes, somatic cyst stem cells (CySCs) and the apical hub form the
niche for neighboring germline stem cells (GSCs), with CySCs as the proposed
source of instructive self-renewal signals [Leatherman JL, Dinardo S (2010) Nat
Cell Biol 12(8):806-811]. In contrast to this model, we show that early germ
cells with GSC characteristics can be maintained over time after ablation of
CySCs and their cyst cell progeny. Without CySCs and cyst cells, early germ cells
away from the hub failed to initiate differentiation. Our results suggest that
CySCs do not have a necessary instructive role in specifying GSC self-renewal and
that the differentiated progeny of CySCs provide an environment necessary to
trigger GSC differentiation. This work highlights the complex interaction between
different stem cell populations in the same niche and how the state of one stem
cell population can influence the fate of the other.

PMCID: PMC3494938
PMID: 23091022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Spermatogenesis. 2012 Jul 1;2(3):158-166.

Transcriptional regulation during Drosophila spermatogenesis.

Lim C(1), Tarayrah L, Chen X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology; The Johns Hopkins University; Baltimore, MD USA.

Drosophila spermatogenesis has become a paradigmatic system for the study of
mechanisms that regulate adult stem cell maintenance, proliferation and
differentiation. The dramatic cellular differentiation process from germline stem
cell (GSC) to mature sperm is accompanied by dynamic changes in gene expression, 
which are regulated at transcriptional, post-transcriptional (including
translational) and post-translational levels. Post-transcriptional regulation has
been proposed as a unique feature of germ cells. However, recent studies have
provided new insights into transcriptional regulation during Drosophila
spermatogenesis. Both signaling pathways and epigenetic mechanisms act to
orchestrate the transcriptional regulation of distinct genes at different germ
cell differentiation stages. Many of the regulatory pathways that control male
gamete differentiation in Drosophila are conserved in mammals. Therefore, studies
using Drosophila spermatogenesis will provide insight into the molecular
mechanisms that regulate mammalian germ cell differentiation pathways.

PMCID: PMC3469439
PMID: 23087835  [PubMed]


448. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Feb;1830(2):2496-508. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagen.2012.10.008. Epub 2012 Oct 16.

The cancer stem cell niche(s): the crosstalk between glioma stem cells and their 
microenvironment.

Filatova A(1), Acker T, Garvalov BK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuropathology, University of Giessen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The initiation and progression of various types of tumors, including 
glioma, are driven by a population of cells with stem cell properties. Glioma
stem cells (GSCs) are located in specialized microenvironments (niches) within
tumors. These niches represent the hallmarks of malignant gliomas (vascular
proliferations, hypoxia/necrosis) and bear analogy to the microenvironments in
which physiological stem cells in the brain are found.
SCOPE OF THE REVIEW: Here we review the progress that has been made towards
uncovering the function of the perivascular and the hypoxic niche and the
molecular pathways that control the properties of GSCs within them. We propose
models of how the different niches and GSC pools in them interact with each
other.
MAJOR CONCLUSIONS: GSCs are not merely passive residents of their niches, but
actively contribute to the shaping of the niches through a complex crosstalk with
different components of the microenvironment. For example, GSCs play a dominant
role in promoting new blood vessel formation through a variety of mechanisms,
including the hypoxia dependent stimulation of angiogenesis, recruitment of
endothelial progenitor cells and direct transdifferentiation into endothelial
cells. Recent work has also revealed that GSCs can recruit and modulate the
function of various immune cells to suppress anti-tumor immune responses and to
foster tumor-promoting inflammation, which in turn could support the maintenance 
of GSCs.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: These findings underscore the central role of the GSC
microenvironment in driving glioma progression making the GSC niche a prime
therapeutic target for the design of therapies aimed at eradicating GSCs. This
article is part of a Special Issue entitled Biochemistry of Stem Cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23079585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(10):e1002999. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002999. Epub 2012 Oct
11.

Cdon mutation and fetal ethanol exposure synergize to produce midline signaling
defects and holoprosencephaly spectrum disorders in mice.

Hong M(1), Krauss RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, New York, USA.

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is a remarkably common congenital anomaly characterized
by failure to define the midline of the forebrain and midface. HPE is associated 
with heterozygous mutations in Sonic hedgehog (SHH) pathway components, but
clinical presentation is extremely variable and many mutation carriers are
unaffected. It has been proposed that these observations are best explained by a 
multiple-hit model, in which the penetrance and expressivity of an HPE mutation
is enhanced by a second mutation or the presence of cooperating, but otherwise
silent, modifier genes. Non-genetic risk factors are also implicated in HPE, and 
gene-environment interactions may provide an alternative multiple-hit model to
purely genetic multiple-hit models; however, there is little evidence for this
contention. We report here a mouse model in which there is dramatic synergy
between mutation of a bona fide HPE gene (Cdon, which encodes a SHH co-receptor) 
and a suspected HPE teratogen, ethanol. Loss of Cdon and in utero ethanol
exposure in 129S6 mice give little or no phenotype individually, but together
produce defects in early midline patterning, inhibition of SHH signaling in the
developing forebrain, and a broad spectrum of HPE phenotypes. Our findings argue 
that ethanol is indeed a risk factor for HPE, but genetically predisposed
individuals, such as those with SHH pathway mutations, may be particularly
susceptible. Furthermore, gene-environment interactions are likely to be
important in the multifactorial etiology of HPE.

PMCID: PMC3469434
PMID: 23071453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Biochem Pharmacol. 2013 Mar 1;85(5):612-22. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2012.10.001. Epub 
2012 Oct 11.

Glioblastoma cancer stem cells: role of the microenvironment and therapeutic
targeting.

Persano L(1), Rampazzo E, Basso G, Viola G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Salute della Donna e del Bambino, Laboratorio di
Oncoematologia, University of Padova, Via Giustiniani 3, 35128 Padova, Italy.

It has been recently suggested that many types of cancer, including glioblastoma 
(GBM), contain functionally subsets of cells with stem-like properties named
"cancer stem cells" (CSCs). These are characterized by chemotherapy resistance
and considered one of the key determinants driving tumor relapse. Many studies
demonstrated that Glioma stem cells (GSCs) reside in particular tumor niches,
that are necessary to support their behavior. A hypoxic microenvironment has been
reported to play a crucial role in controlling GSC molecular and phenotypic
profile and in promoting the recruitment of vascular and stromal cells in order
to sustain tumor growth. Recent advances in the field allow researches to
generate models able to recapitulate, at least in part, the extreme heterogeneity
found within GBM tumors. These models try to account for the presence of GSCs and
more differentiated cells, the influence of different microenvironments enclosed 
within the mass, heterotypic interactions between GBM and stromal cells and
genetic aberrations. Understanding the mechanism of action of the
microenvironmental signals and the interplay between different cell types within 
the tumor mass, open new questions on how GSCs modulate GBM aggressiveness and
response to therapy. The definition of these tumor features will allow to setup
innovative multimodal therapies able to target GBM cells at multiple levels.
Here, we will discuss the major advances in the study of GSC role in GBM and the 
therapeutic implications resulting from them, thus reporting the latest
strategies applied to counteract and overcome GBM intrinsic resistance to therapy
for a better management of patients.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23063412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Toxicol Sci. 2013 Feb;131(2):447-57. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfs293. Epub 2012 Oct 5.

Establishment of a molecular embryonic stem cell developmental toxicity assay.

Panzica-Kelly JM(1), Brannen KC, Ma Y, Zhang CX, Flint OP, Lehman-McKeeman LD,
Augustine-Rauch KA.

Author information: 
(1)Discovery Toxicology, Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, Pennington, NJ 08534, USA.
julie.panzica@bms.com

The mouse embryonic stem cell test (EST) is a 10-day screen for teratogenic
potential developed to reduce animal use for embryotoxicity testing of chemicals 
(Spielmann, 2005; Spielmann et al., 1997). In this study, we used the
cytotoxicity IC(50) values and transcriptional expression changes as primary
endpoints in a shorter 4-day version of the EST, the molecular embryonic stem
cell assay. Mouse D3 embryonic stem cells were used for cytotoxicity assessment
(monolayers) or grown as embryoid bodies in low attachment plates for
transcriptional profiling. Sixty-five compounds with known in vivo teratogenicity
(33 teratogens and 32 nonteratogens) were evaluated to develop a model for
classifying compounds with teratogenic potential. The expression of 12
developmentally regulated gene targets (nanog, fgf5, gsc, cd34, axin2, apln,
chst7, lhx1, fgf8, sox17, foxa2, and cxcr4) was measured following exposure of
embryoid bodies to a single compound concentration (0.1 × the cytotoxicity
IC(20)) for 4 days. In the decision-tree model, compounds with IC(50) values < 22
µM were categorized as teratogens, whereas compounds in the two groups with
IC(50) values between 22-200 µM and > 200 µM were categorized as teratogens if = 
8 and 12 genes, respectively, were deregulated by at least 10%. Forty-seven of 65
compounds of the training set were correctly identified (72% total concordance). 
In a test set of 12 additional compounds (5 teratogens, 7 nonteratogens), 10 were
correctly classified by this approach (83% concordance). The false positive rate 
in the training and test sets was 24 and 0%, respectively, indicating that this
assay has potential to identify teratogens.

PMID: 23042729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Cancer Lett. 2013 Jan 28;328(2):235-42. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2012.09.005. Epub
2012 Sep 27.

Blockade of EGFR signaling promotes glioma stem-like cell invasiveness by
abolishing ID3-mediated inhibition of p27(KIP1) and MMP3 expression.

Jin X(1), Jin X, Sohn YW, Yin J, Kim SH, Joshi K, Nam DH, Nakano I, Kim H.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea University, Seoul 136-713,
Republic of Korea.

Aberrant epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling is a typical oncogenic
signature in glioblastoma. Here, we show that EGFR inhibition in primary glioma
stem cells (GSCs) with oncogenic EGFRvIII and EGFRvIII-transduced glioma
stem-like cells promotes invasion by decreasing ID3 levels. ID3 suppresses GSC
invasiveness by inhibiting p27(KIP1)-RhoA-dependent migration and MMP3
expression. Xenograft and human glioblastoma specimens show that ID3 localizes
within glioblastoma cores, whereas p27(KIP1) and MMP3 are predominantly expressed
in glioma cells in invasive fronts. Together, our findings show that EGFR
inhibition induces GSC invasiveness by abolishing ID3-mediated inhibition of
p27(KIP1) and MMP3 expression.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23022473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Dev Biol. 2012 Dec 1;372(1):5-16. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.09.009. Epub 2012 Sep
23.

Jak-STAT regulation of cyst stem cell development in the Drosophila testis.

Sinden D(1), Badgett M, Fry J, Jones T, Palmen R, Sheng X, Simmons A, Matunis E, 
Wawersik M.

Author information: 
(1)College of William & Mary, Biology Department, Williamsburg, VA 23185, USA.

Establishment and maintenance of functional stem cells is critical for organ
development and tissue homeostasis. Little is known about the mechanisms
underlying stem establishment during organogenesis. Drosophila testes are among
the most thoroughly characterized systems for studying stem cell behavior, with
germline stem cells (GSCs) and somatic cyst stem cells (CySCs) cohabiting a
discrete stem cell niche at the testis apex. GSCs and CySCs are arrayed around
hub cells that also comprise the niche and communication between hub cells, GSCs,
and CySCs regulates the balance between stem cell maintenance and
differentiation. Recent data has shown that functional, asymmetrically dividing
GSCs are first established at ~23 h after egg laying during Drosophila testis
morphogenesis (Sheng et al., 2009). This process correlates with coalescence of
the hub, but development of CySCs from somatic gonadal precursors (SGPs) was not 
examined. Here, we show that functional CySCs are present at the time of GSC
establishment, and that Jak-STAT signaling is necessary and sufficient for CySC
maintenance shortly thereafter. Furthermore, hyper-activation of Jak in CySCs
promotes expansion of the GSC population, while ectopic Jak activation in the
germline induces GSC gene expression in GSC daughter cells but does not prevent
spermatogenic differentiation. Together, these observations indicate that,
similar to adult testes, Jak-STAT signaling from the hub acts on both GSCs and
CySC to regulate their development and differentiation, and that additional
signaling from CySCs to the GSCs play a dominant role in controlling GSC
maintenance during niche formation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3481170
PMID: 23010510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Clin Toxicol (Phila). 2012 Nov;50(9):832-7. doi: 10.3109/15563650.2012.727093.
Epub 2012 Sep 21.

Glasgow coma scale score in the prognosis of acute carbamate insecticide
intoxication.

Moon JM(1), Chun BJ, Lee BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency medicine, Chonnam National University Hospital,
Gwangju, South Korea. emdrmjm@gmail.com

OBJECTIVES: Carbamate is a widely used insecticide, and fatality due to carbamate
insecticide intoxication has been reported. However, no studies have addressed
the factors associated with outcome of patients poisoned by carbamate
insecticide. The present study sought to identify the independent factors that
could help predict the development of medical complications as a result of
carbamate intoxication.
METHODS: Fifty two patients presenting with acute carbamate insecticide ingestion
at Chonnam National University Hospital were enrolled in this retrospective
observational case series. The morbidities that needed intensive treatment such
as hypotension, respiratory failure, and death were regarded as complications. To
identify the associated factors to these complications, objective variables that 
are easily assessed at presentation, such as age, initial Glasgow coma scale
(GSC) and corrected QT (QTc) prolongation, were analyzed by univariate and
multivariate stepwise logistic regression analyses.
RESULTS: Of the 52 patients, 35 (67.3%) had medical complications within 24 hours
after carbamate insecticide intoxication and seven (13.5%) died. Respiratory
failure was the most common medical complication. The significant factors
determined by univariate analysis were initial GCS, elevated lactate, and QTc
prolongation. However, initial GCS (=13) was the only independent factor
determined by multivariate analysis that was associated with serious
complications requiring intensive medical treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Carbamate insecticide intoxication is not a mild disease, as
previously thought, having a mortality rate of 13.8% and a morbidity rate of
67.3%. Initial GCS = 13 can be used as a significant factor to identify carbamate
insecticide-intoxicated patients who will experience complications.

PMID: 22995033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. J Neurosci. 2012 Sep 12;32(37):12950-60. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2017-12.2012.

Transdifferentiation of glioblastoma stem-like cells into mural cells drives
vasculogenic mimicry in glioblastomas.

Scully S(1), Francescone R, Faibish M, Bentley B, Taylor SL, Oh D, Schapiro R,
Moral L, Yan W, Shao R.

Author information: 
(1)Pioneer Valley Life Sciences Institute, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, 
Springfield, Massachusetts 01107, USA.

Recent evidence has shown that glioblastoma stem-like cells (GSCs) can
transdifferentiate into endothelial cells and vascular-like tumor cells. The
latter pattern of vascularization indicates an alternative microvascular
circulation known as vasculogenic mimicry (VM). However, it remains to be
clarified how the GSC-driven VM makes a significant contribution to tumor
vasculature. Here, we investigated 11 cases of glioblastomas and found that most 
of them consisted of blood-perfused vascular channels that coexpress mural cell
markers smooth muscle a-actin and platelet-derived growth factor receptor ß,
epidermal growth factor receptor, and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor
2 (Flk-1), but not CD31 or VE-cadherin. This microvasculature coexisted with
endothelial cell-associated vessels. GSCs derived from patients with
glioblastomas developed vigorous mural cell-associated vascular channels but few 
endothelial cell vessels in orthotopic animal models. Suppression of Flk-1
activity and gene expression abrogated GSC transdifferentiation and
vascularization in vitro, and inhibited VM in animal models. This study
establishes mural-like tumor cells differentiated from GSCs as a significant
contributor to microvasculature of glioblastoma and points to Flk-1 as a
potential target for therapeutic intervention that could complement current
anti-angiogenic treatment.

PMCID: PMC3461581
PMID: 22973019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Curr Med Chem. 2012;19(35):6050-5.

Targeting glioblastoma stem cells: cell surface markers.

He J(1), Liu Y, Lubman DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor, MI,
48109-0656, USA.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common primary brain tumor and among
the most lethal cancers. There is increasing evidence that cancer stem cells
within GBMs, which are often referred to as glioblastoma stem cells (GSCs), play 
a critical role in tumor initiation and maintenance. Identification of novel
markers for GSCs will lead to better targeting of GSCs which could have
tremendous impact on treatment of GBMs. Cell surface markers are particularly
suitable as therapeutic targets. Although several promising cell surface markers 
have successfully been used for enrichment of GSCs, their functional roles in
maintenance of GSC properties as well as in GBM formation and development remain 
to be characterized. In this review, we primarily summarize recent advances in
identification of GSC markers, with a particular focus on cell surface markers.

PMID: 22963566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Cell Tissue Res. 2012 Nov;350(2):385-94. doi: 10.1007/s00441-012-1479-4. Epub
2012 Aug 12.

Dmp53 is sequestered to nuclear bodies in spermatogonia of Drosophila
melanogaster.

Monk AC(1), Abud HE, Hime GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, University of Melbourne, Parkville,
Victoria, 3010, Australia.

p53 family members have been implicated in regulation of genomic integrity and
apoptosis in a variety of tissues. The Drosophila family member, Dmp53, primarily
functions to regulate apoptosis in developing and regenerating tissues but loss
of function mutants are viable and fertile. Dmp53 exhibits a striking expression 
pattern in the male germline with high levels found in nuclear bodies in
pre-meiotic germ cells. The localisation of Dmp53 to nuclear bodies is dependent 
upon Dmp53 complexes being able to bind DNA, and although dmp53 mutants do not
affect germline stem cell (GSC) maintenance or differentiation, GSCs are
sensitive to overexpression of Dmp53 but maturing spermatogonia are not. Dmp53
thus has differential effects depending upon the stage of male germline
maturation.

PMID: 22961348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Methods Mol Biol. 2012;917:497-513. doi: 10.1007/978-1-61779-992-1_28.

Mathematical modeling of gene regulatory networks in Xenopus development.

Saka Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Scotland, UK.
y.saka@abdn.ac.uk

Mathematical modeling has become increasingly indispensable for scientists who
study the dynamics of gene regulatory networks (GRN) that underlie cell
differentiation and pattern formation in animal development including Xenopus
embryogenesis. Here I outline a step-by-step procedure for constructing a
mathematical model of GRN based on ordinary differential equations (ODE), using
the network of Activin and its downstream target genes Xenopus Brachyury (Xbra)
and Goosecoid (Gsc) as an example. I also briefly explain methods to analyse the 
dynamics described by an ODE model.

PMID: 22956106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Oncogene. 2013 Jun 27;32(26):3119-29. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.331. Epub 2012 Sep 3.

Epigenetic regulation of CD133/PROM1 expression in glioma stem cells by Sp1/myc
and promoter methylation.

Gopisetty G(1), Xu J, Sampath D, Colman H, Puduvalli VK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuro-oncology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Tumor stem cells, postulated to be the source cells for malignancies, have been
identified in several cancers using cell-surface expression of markers including 
CD133, a pentaspan membrane protein. CD133+ve cells form neurospheres, exhibit
self-renewal and differentiation, and are tumorigenic. However, despite its
association with stem cells, a causal relationship of CD133 to tumorigenesis
remains to be defined. Hypothesizing that specific epigenetic and transcription
factors implicated in driving the stem cell state may concurrently regulate CD133
expression in stem cells, we analyzed the structure and regulation of CD133
promoter in glioma stem cells and glioma cell lines. Initially, a minimal
promoter region was identified by analyzing the activity of CD133 promoter-driven
luciferase-expressing 5'-and 3'-deletion-constructs upstream of the transcription
start site. This region contained a CpG island that was hypermethylated in
CD133-ve glioma stem cells (GSC) and glioma cells but unmethylated in CD133+ve
ones. Of several predicted TF-binding sites in this region, the role of tandem
Sp1 (-242 and -221) and two Myc (-541 and -25)-binding sites were examined.
Overexpression of Sp1 or Myc increased CD133 minimal promoter-driven luciferase
activity and CD133 levels in GSC and in glioma cell line. Mithramycin, a Sp1
inhibitor, decreased minimal promoter activity and downregulated CD133 levels in 
GSC. Gel-shift assays demonstrated direct binding of Sp1 to their predicted sites
that was competitively inhibited by oligonucleotide-binding-site sequences and
supershifted by anti-Sp1 confirming the interaction. Sp1 and Myc-antibody
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis in GSC showed enrichment of regions
with Sp1 and Myc-binding sites. In CD133-ve cells, ChIP analysis showed binding
of the methyl-DNA-binding proteins, MBD1, MBD2 and MeCP2 to the methylated CpG
island and repression of transcription. These results demonstrate that Sp1 and
Myc regulate CD133 transcription in GSC and that promoter methylation and
methyl-DNA-binding proteins cause repression of CD133 by excluding
transcription-factor binding.

PMCID: PMC3820114
PMID: 22945648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Sleep. 2012 Sep 1;35(9):1285-91. doi: 10.5665/sleep.2088.

Short-term stability of sleep and heart rate variability in good sleepers and
patients with insomnia: for some measures, one night is enough.

Israel B(1), Buysse DJ, Krafty RT, Begley A, Miewald J, Hall M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

STUDY OBJECTIVES: Quantify the short-term stability of multiple indices of sleep 
and nocturnal physiology in good sleeper controls and primary insomnia patients.
DESIGN: Intra-class correlation coefficients (ICC) were used to quantify the
short-term stability of study outcomes.
SETTING: Sleep laboratory.
PARTICIPANTS: Fifty-four adults with primary insomnia (PI) and 22 good sleeper
controls (GSC).
MEASUREMENTS: Visually scored sleep outcomes included indices of sleep duration, 
continuity, and architecture. Quantitative EEG outcomes included power in the
delta, theta, alpha, sigma, and beta bands during NREM sleep. Power spectral
analysis was used to estimate high-frequency heart rate variability (HRV) and the
ratio of low- to high-frequency HRV power during NREM and REM sleep.
RESULTS: With the exception of percent stage 3+4 sleep; visually scored sleep
outcomes did not exhibit short-term stability across study nights. Most QEEG
outcomes demonstrated short-term stability in both groups. Although power in the 
beta band was stable in the PI group (ICC = 0.75), it tended to be less stable in
GSCs (ICC = 0.55). Both measures of cardiac autonomic tone exhibited short-term
stability in GSCs and PIs during NREM and REM sleep.
CONCLUSIONS: Most QEEG bandwidths and HRV during sleep show high short-term
stability in good sleepers and patients with insomnia alike. One night of data
is, thus, sufficient to derive reliable estimates of these outcomes in studies
focused on group differences or correlates of QEEG and/or HRV. In contrast, one
night of data is unlikely to generate reliable estimates of PSG-assessed sleep
duration, continuity or architecture, with the exception of slow wave sleep.

PMCID: PMC3413806
PMID: 22942507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Mol Ther. 2013 Jan;21(1):68-77. doi: 10.1038/mt.2012.175. Epub 2012 Aug 28.

Multimechanistic tumor targeted oncolytic virus overcomes resistance in brain
tumors.

Tamura K(1), Wakimoto H, Agarwal AS, Rabkin SD, Bhere D, Martuza RL, Kuroda T,
Kasmieh R, Shah K.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurotherapy and Imaging Laboratory, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02129, USA.

Only a subset of cancer patients inoculated with oncolytic herpes simplex virus
(oHSV) type-1 has shown objective response in phase 1 and 2 clinical trials. This
has raised speculations whether resistance of tumor cells to oHSV therapy may be 
a limiting factor. In this study, we have identified established and patient
derived primary glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) stem cell lines (GSC) resistant to 
oHSV and also to tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) 
that has recently shown promise in preclinical and initial clinical studies. We
created a recombinant oHSV bearing a secretable TRAIL (oHSV-TRAIL) and
hypothesized that oHSV-TRAIL could be used as a cancer therapeutic to target a
broad spectrum of resistant tumors in a mechanism-based manner. Using the
identified resistant GBM lines, we show that oHSV-TRAIL downregulates
extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase (ERK)-mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) and upregulates c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and p38-MAPK
signaling, which primes resistant GBM cells to apoptosis via activation of
caspase-8, -9, and -3. We further show that oHSV-TRAIL inhibits tumor growth and 
invasiveness and increases survival of mice bearing resistant intracerebral
tumors without affecting the normal tissues. This study sheds new light on the
mechanism by which oHSV and TRAIL function in concert to overcome
therapeutic-resistance, and provides an oncolytic virus based platform to target 
a broad spectrum of different cancer types.

PMCID: PMC3538303
PMID: 22929661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Genesis. 2012 Dec;50(12):914-20. doi: 10.1002/dvg.22341. Epub 2012 Sep 12.

GAL4 enhancer traps that can be used to drive gene expression in developing
Drosophila spermatocytes.

Bunt SM(1), Monk AC, Siddall NA, Johnston NL, Hime GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville,
Victoria 3010, Australia.

The Drosophila testis has proven to be a valuable model organ for investigation
of germline stem cell (GSC) maintenance and differentiation as well as
elucidation of the genetic programs that regulate differentiation of daughter
spermatogonia. Development of germ cell specific GAL4 driver transgenes has
facilitated investigation of gene function in GSCs and spermatogonia but specific
GAL4 tools are not available for analysis of postmitotic spermatogonial
differentiation into spermatocytes. We have screened publically available pGT1
strains, a GAL4-encoding gene trap collection, to identify lines that can drive
gene expression in late spermatogonia and early spermatocytes. While we were
unable to identify any germline-specific drivers, we did identify an insertion in
the chiffon locus, which drove expression specifically in early spermatocytes
within the germline along with the somatic cyst cells of the testis.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22926963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Sep 14;426(1):141-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.08.053. Epub 2012 Aug 17.

CpG site-specific alteration of hydroxymethylcytosine to methylcytosine beyond
DNA replication.

Kubosaki A(1), Tomaru Y, Furuhata E, Suzuki T, Shin JW, Simon C, Ando Y, Hasegawa
R, Hayashizaki Y, Suzuki H.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Omics Science Center, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045,
Japan. kubosaki@gsc.riken.jp

Hydroxymethylcytosines (hmC), one of several reported cytosine modifications, was
recently found to be enriched in embryonic stem cells and neuronal cells, and
thought to play an important role in regulating gene expression and cell
specification. However, unlike methylcytosines (mC), the fate of hmC beyond DNA
replication is not well understood. Here, to monitor the status of hmC during DNA
replication, we prepared a stable episomal vector-based monitoring system called 
MoCEV in 293T cells. The MoCEV system containing fully hydroxymethylated-cytosine
fragments revealed a significant modification towards mC after several rounds of 
DNA replication. Strikingly this modification was specifically observed at the
CpG sites (71.9% of cytosines), whereas only 1.1% of modified cytosines were
detected at the non-CpG sites. Since the unmodified MoCEV did not undergo any DNA
methylation during cell division, the results strongly suggest that somatic cells
undergo hmC to mC specifically at the CpG sites during cell division.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22925887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Results Probl Cell Differ. 2012;55:303-19. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-30406-4_17.

Differentiation of definitive endoderm from mouse embryonic stem cells.

Kim PT(1), Ong CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

Efficient production of definitive endoderm from embryonic stem (ES) cells opens 
doors to the possibilities of differentiation of endoderm-derived tissues such as
the intestines, pancreas, and liver that could address the needs of people with
chronic diseases involving these organs. The lessons learned from developmental
biology have contributed significantly to in vitro differentiation of definitive 
endoderm. Gastrulation, a process that results in the production of all three
embryonic germ cell layers, definitive endoderm, mesoderm, and ectoderm, is an
important step in embryonic development. Gastrulation occurs as a result of the
events that are orchestrated by the signaling pathways involving Nodal, FGF, Wnt,
and BMP. Understanding these signaling pathways has led to the introduction of
key ingredients such as Activin A, FGF, Wnt, and BMP to the differentiation
protocols that have been able to produce definitive endoderm from ES cells.
Efficient production of definitive endoderm needs to meet the specific criteria
that include (a) increase in the production of markers of definitive endoderm
such as Sox 17, FOXA2, GSC, and Mixl1; (b) decrease in the production of markers 
of primitive/visceral/parietal endoderm, Sox 7 and OCT4; and (c) decrease in the 
mesoderm markers (Brachyury, MEOX) and ectoderm markers (Sox1 and ZIC1).

PMID: 22918814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Gene Ther. 2013 Apr;20(4):444-9. doi: 10.1038/gt.2012.62. Epub 2012 Aug 23.

Oncolytic measles virus strains have significant antitumor activity against
glioma stem cells.

Allen C(1), Opyrchal M, Aderca I, Schroeder MA, Sarkaria JN, Domingo E,
Federspiel MJ, Galanis E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common primary brain tumor in adults and has a
dismal prognosis despite multimodality treatment. Given the resistance of glioma 
stem cells (GSC) to chemotherapy and radiation therapy, their eradication could
prevent tumor recurrence. We sought to evaluate the antitumor activity of measles
virus (MV) derivatives against GSC. We generated neurosphere cultures from
patient-derived primary tumor GBM xenografts, and we characterized them for the
GSC markers CD133, SOX2, Nestin, ATF5 and OLIG2. Using the MV-strains MV-GFP,
MV-CEA and MV-NIS we demonstrated infection, viral replication and significant
cytopathic effect in vitro against GSC lines. In tumorigenicity experiments,
GBM44 GSC were infected with MV in vitro and subsequently implanted into the
right caudate nucleus of nude mice: significant prolongation of survival in mice 
implanted with infected GSC was observed, compared with mock-infected controls
(P=0.0483). In therapy experiments in GBM6 and GBM12 GSC xenograft models, there 
was significant prolongation of survival in MV-GFP-treated animals compared with 
inactivated virus-treated controls (GBM6 P=0.0021, GBM12 P=0.0416). Abundant
syncytia and viral replication was demonstrated in tumors of MV-treated mice.
Measles virus derivatives have significant antitumor activity against
glioma-derived stem cells in vitro and in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3509233
PMID: 22914495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. J Signal Transduct. 2012;2012:597915. doi: 10.1155/2012/597915. Epub 2012 Jul 17.

Angiogenic signalling pathways altered in gliomas: selection mechanisms for more 
aggressive neoplastic subpopulations with invasive phenotype.

Bulnes S(1), Bengoetxea H, Ortuzar N, Argandoña EG, Garcia-Blanco A, Rico-Barrio 
I, Lafuente JV.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Clinical and Experimental Neuroscience (LaNCE), Department of
Nursing I, University of the Basque Country, 48940 Leioa, Spain.

The angiogenesis process is a key event for glioma survival, malignancy and
growth. The start of angiogenesis is mediated by a cascade of intratumoural
events: alteration of the microvasculature network; a hypoxic microenvironment;
adaptation of neoplastic cells and synthesis of pro-angiogenic factors. Due to a 
chaotic blood flow, a consequence of an aberrant microvasculature, tissue hypoxia
phenomena are induced. Hypoxia inducible factor 1 is a major regulator in glioma 
invasiveness and angiogenesis. Clones of neoplastic cells with stem cell
characteristics are selected by HIF-1. These cells, called "glioma stem cells"
induce the synthesis of vascular endothelial growth factor. This factor is a
pivotal mediator of angiogenesis. To elucidate the role of these angiogenic
mediators during glioma growth, we have used a rat endogenous glioma model.
Gliomas induced by prenatal ENU administration allowed us to study angiogenic
events from early to advanced tumour stages. Events such as microvascular
aberrations, hypoxia, GSC selection and VEGF synthesis may be studied in depth.
Our data showed that for the treatment of gliomas, developing anti-angiogenic
therapies could be aimed at GSCs, HIF-1 or VEGF. The ENU-glioma model can be
considered to be a useful option to check novel designs of these treatment
strategies.

PMCID: PMC3407647
PMID: 22852079  [PubMed]


467. Pharmacogenomics. 2012 Jul;13(9):993-4. doi: 10.2217/pgs.12.74.

Genetic variants in the human SLCO1B1 gene and individual variations in
methotrexate clearance.

Ishikawa T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Omics Science Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho,
Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. toshi-i@gsc.riken.jp

Comment on
    Genome Res. 2012 Jan;22(1):1-8.

PMID: 22838946  [PubMed]


468. Pharmacogenomics. 2012 Jul;13(9):994-5. doi: 10.2217/pgs.12.100.

Identification of a novel locus associated with recurrence-free survival in
Japanese breast cancer patients receiving adjuvant tamoxifen therapy.

Ishikawa T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Omics Science Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho,
Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. toshi-i@gsc.riken.jp

Comment on
    Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Apr 1;21(7):1665-72.

PMID: 22838945  [PubMed]


469. Methods Mol Biol. 2012;910:267-78. doi: 10.1007/978-1-61779-965-5_11.

Human ABC transporter ABCG2 in cancer chemotherapy: drug molecular design to
circumvent multidrug resistance.

Ishikawa T(1), Saito H, Hirano H, Inoue Y, Ikegami Y.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of
Technology, Yokohama, Japan. Toshi-i@gsc.riken.jp

Human ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter ABCG2 (BCRP) is critically involved 
in multidrug resistance of human cancer. This transporter exhibits broad
substrate specificity toward structurally diverse compounds, as do other ABC
transporters, such as ABCB1 (P-glycoprotein/MDR1), ABCC1 (MRP1/GS-X pump), and
ABCC2 (MRP2/cMOAT). To gain insight into the relationship between the molecular
structure of compounds and the ABCG2-mediated transport activity, we have
developed a high-speed screening method to analyze the substrate specificity of
ABCG2. In addition, we have developed an algorithm that analyzes QSAR to evaluate
ABCG2-drug interactions. This chapter presents our strategy of transport
mechanism-based molecular design to circumvent multidrug resistance of cancer.

PMID: 22821599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. PLoS Biol. 2012;10(7):e1001357. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001357. Epub 2012 Jul 
3.

Niche-associated activation of rac promotes the asymmetric division of Drosophila
female germline stem cells.

Lu W(1), Casanueva MO, Mahowald AP, Kato M, Lauterbach D, Ferguson EL.

Author information: 
(1)Committee on Genetics, Genomics and Systems Biology, University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Drosophila female germline stem cells (GSCs) reside adjacent to a
cellular niche that secretes Bone Morphogenetic Protein (BMP) ligands and anchors
the GSCs through adherens junctions. The GSCs divide asymmetrically such that one
daughter remains in the niche as a GSC, while the other is born away from the
niche and differentiates. However, given that the BMP signal can be diffusible,
it remains unclear how a local extracellular asymmetry is sufficient to result in
a robust pattern of asymmetric division.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Here we show that GSCs are polarized with respect to the
cellular niche. We first use a modified biosensor to demonstrate that the small
GTPase Rac is asymmetrically activated within the GSC at the niche-GSC interface.
Experiments using loss-of-function and gain-of-function mutations in Rac indicate
that asymmetric Rac activity both localizes the microtubule binding protein Apc2 
to orient one GSC centrosome at the niche-GSC interface during interphase and
activates the Jun N-terminal kinase pathway to increase the ability of the GSC to
respond to BMP ligands. Other processes act in concert with each function of Rac.
Specifically, we demonstrate that the GSC cell cycle arrests at prometaphase if
centrosomes are misoriented.
CONCLUSIONS: Thus, the GSCs, an adult stem cell present in a cellular niche, have
a niche-associated polarity that couples control of the division plane with
increased response to an extracellular maintenance signal. Other processes work
in parallel with the Rac-mediated polarity to ensure a robust pattern of
asymmetric division. We suggest that all adult stem cells likely employ multiple,
independently acting mechanisms to ensure asymmetric division to maintain tissue 
homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC3389017
PMID: 22802725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Cell Signal. 2012 Nov;24(11):2076-84. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2012.07.002. Epub
2012 Jul 10.

Glioma stem cell invasion through regulation of the interconnected ERK, integrin 
a6 and N-cadherin signaling pathway.

Velpula KK(1), Rehman AA, Chelluboina B, Dasari VR, Gondi CS, Rao JS, Veeravalli 
KK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology and Pharmacology, University of Illinois College 
of Medicine at Peoria, Peoria, IL 61656, USA.

The recent characterization of glioma stem cells (GSCs) prompts a necessary
examination of the signaling pathways that facilitate invasiveness. Molecular
crosstalk between expression mechanisms has been identified in a range of
cancers, including glioblastoma multiforme. However, hardly any literature exists
that addresses whether cancer stem cells utilize these same interconnected
pathways. Protein factors commonly implicated in malignant tumors include
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), N-cadherin, and integrin a6.
Although studies have reported the molecular crosstalk involved among these
proteins, the present study illustrates the importance of the ERK transduction
pathway in N-cadherin and integrin a6 regulated invasion in GSCs. Conversely, the
data also suggests that GSCs rely on N-cadherin and integrin a6 interaction to
regulate ERK signaling. Moreover, confocal visualization revealed the
co-localization of N-cadherin and integrin a6 in GSCs and clinical surgical
biopsies extracted from glioma patients. Interestingly, ERK knockdown reduced
this co-localization. Upon co-culturing GSCs with human umbilical cord blood stem
cells (hUCBSCs), we observed a subsequent decrease in pERK, N-cadherin and
integrin a6 expression. In addition, co-culturing hUCBSCs with GSCs decreased
co-localization of N-cadherin and integrin a6 in GSCs. Our results demonstrate
the dynamic interplay among ERK, N-cadherin and integrin a6 in GSC invasion and
also reveal the therapeutic potential of hUCBSCs in treating the molecular
crosstalk observed in GSC-regulated invasion.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22789454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2012 Aug;4(8):4156-63. doi: 10.1021/am300889u. Epub
2012 Jul 25.

Graphene from sugar and its application in water purification.

Gupta SS(1), Sreeprasad TS, Maliyekkal SM, Das SK, Pradeep T.

Author information: 
(1)DST Unit on Nanoscience, Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of
Technology Madras, Chennai 600 036, India.

This paper describes a green method for the synthesis of graphenic material from 
cane sugar, a common disaccharide. A suitable methodology was introduced to
immobilize this material on sand without the need of any binder, resulting in a
composite, referred to as graphene sand composite (GSC). Raman spectroscopy
confirmed that the material is indeed graphenic in nature, having G and D bands
at 1597 and 1338 cm(-1), respectively. It effectively removes contaminants from
water. Here, we use rhodamine 6G (R6G) as a model dye and chloropyrifos (CP) as a
model pesticide to demonstrate this application. The spectroscopic and
microscopic analyses coupled with adsorption experiments revealed that physical
adsorption plays a dominant role in the adsorption process. Isotherm data in
batch experiments show an adsorption capacity of 55 mg/g for R6G and 48 mg/g for 
CP, which are superior to that of activated carbon. The adsorbent can be easily
regenerated using a suitable eluent. This quick and cost-effective technique for 
the into a commercial water filter with appropriate engineering.

PMID: 22788773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. World J Gastroenterol. 2012 Jul 7;18(25):3201-6. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v18.i25.3201.

Gastroenterostoma after Billroth antrectomy as a premalignant condition.

Sitarz R(1), Maciejewski R, Polkowski WP, Offerhaus GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Medical Centre, Utrecht, 3584 CX Utrecht, 
The Netherlands. r.sitarz@umlub.pl

Gastric stump carcinoma (GSC) following remote gastric surgery is widely
recognized as a separate entity within the group of various types of gastric
cancer. Gastrectomy is a well established risk factor for the development of GSC 
at a long time after the initial surgery. Both exo- as well as endogenous factors
appear to be involved in the etiopathogenesis of GSC, such as achlorhydria,
hypergastrinemia and biliary reflux, Epstein-Barr virus and Helicobacter pylori
infection, atrophic gastritis, and also some polymorphisms in interleukin-1ß and 
maybe cyclo-oxygenase-2. This review summarizes the literature of GSC, with
special reference to reliable early diagnostics. In particular, dysplasia can be 
considered as a dependable morphological marker. Therefore, close endoscopic
surveillance with multiple biopsies of the gastroenterostomy is recommended.
Screening starting at 15 years after the initial ulcer surgery can detect tumors 
at a curable stage. This approach can be of special interest in Eastern European 
countries, where surgery for benign gastroduodenal ulcers has remained a practice
for a much longer time than in Western Europe, and therefore GSC is found with
higher frequency.

PMCID: PMC3391756
PMID: 22783043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Hum Gene Ther. 2012 Oct;23(10):1043-53. doi: 10.1089/hum.2012.041. Epub 2012 Sep 
24.

Recognition of glioma stem cells by genetically modified T cells targeting
EGFRvIII and development of adoptive cell therapy for glioma.

Morgan RA(1), Johnson LA, Davis JL, Zheng Z, Woolard KD, Reap EA, Feldman SA,
Chinnasamy N, Kuan CT, Song H, Zhang W, Fine HA, Rosenberg SA.

Author information: 
(1)Surgery Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. rmorgan@mail.nih.gov

No curative treatment exists for glioblastoma, with median survival times of less
than 2 years from diagnosis. As an approach to develop immune-based therapies for
glioblastoma, we sought to target antigens expressed in glioma stem cells (GSCs).
GSCs have multiple properties that make them significantly more representative of
glioma tumors than established glioma cell lines. Epidermal growth factor
receptor variant III (EGFRvIII) is the result of a novel tumor-specific gene
rearrangement that produces a unique protein expressed in approximately 30% of
gliomas, and is an ideal target for immunotherapy. Using PCR primers spanning the
EGFRvIII-specific deletion, we found that this tumor-specific gene is expressed
in three of three GCS lines. Based on the sequence information of seven
EGFRvIII-specific monoclonal antibodies (mAbs), we assembled chimeric antigen
receptors (CARs) and evaluated the ability of CAR-engineered T cells to recognize
EGFRvIII. Three of these anti-EGFRvIII CAR-engineered T cells produced the
effector cytokine, interferon-<U+03B3>, and lysed antigen-expressing target cells. We
concentrated development on a CAR produced from human mAb 139, which specifically
recognized GSC lines and glioma cell lines expressing mutant EGFRvIII, but not
wild-type EGFR and did not recognize any normal human cell tested. Using the
139-based CAR, T cells from glioblastoma patients could be genetically engineered
to recognize EGFRvIII-expressing tumors and could be expanded ex vivo to large
numbers, and maintained their antitumor activity. Based on these observations, a 
<U+03B3>-retroviral vector expressing this EGFRvIII CAR was produced for clinical
application.

PMCID: PMC3472555
PMID: 22780919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Biochemistry. 2012 Aug 7;51(31):6056-67. Epub 2012 Jul 25.

Effect of thiazole orange doubly labeled thymidine on DNA duplex formation.

Kimura Y(1), Hanami T, Tanaka Y, de Hoon MJ, Soma T, Harbers M, Lezhava A,
Hayashizaki Y, Usui K.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Omics Science Center (OSC), RIKEN Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22
Suehiro-cho, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. y-kimura@gsc.riken.jp

Nucleic acid oligonucleotides are widely used in hybridization experiments for
specific detection of complementary nucleic acid sequences. For design and
application of oligonucleotides, an understanding of their thermodynamic
properties is essential. Recently, exciton-controlled hybridization-sensitive
fluorescent oligonucleotides (ECHOs) were developed as uniquely labeled DNA
oligomers containing commonly one thymidine having two covalently linked thiazole
orange dye moieties. The fluorescent signal of an ECHO is strictly
hybridization-controlled, where the dye moieties have to intercalate into
double-stranded DNA for signal generation. Here we analyzed the hybridization
thermodynamics of ECHO/DNA duplexes, and thermodynamic parameters were obtained
from melting curves of 64 ECHO/DNA duplexes measured by ultraviolet absorbance
and fluorescence. Both methods demonstrated a substantial increase in duplex
stability (<U+0394><U+0394>G°(37) ~ -2.6 ± 0.7 kcal mol(-1)) compared to that of DNA/DNA
duplexes of the same sequence. With the exception of T·G mismatches, this
increased stability was mostly unaffected by other mismatches in the position
opposite the labeled nucleotide. A nearest neighbor model was constructed for
predicting thermodynamic parameters for duplex stability. Evaluation of the
nearest neighbor parameters by cross validation tests showed higher predictive
reliability for the fluorescence-based than the absorbance-based parameters.
Using our experimental data, a tool for predicting the thermodynamics of
formation of ECHO/DNA duplexes was developed that is freely available at
http://genome.gsc.riken.jp/echo/thermodynamics/. It provides reliable
thermodynamic data for using the unique features of ECHOs in fluorescence-based
experiments.

PMID: 22765348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2012;30(1):33-48. doi: 10.1159/000339047. Epub 2012 Jun 8.

Inhibition of Na(+)-K(+)-2Cl(-) cotransporter isoform 1 accelerates
temozolomide-mediated apoptosis in glioblastoma cancer cells.

Algharabil J(1), Kintner DB, Wang Q, Begum G, Clark PA, Yang SS, Lin SH, Kahle
KT, Kuo JS, Sun D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.

The hallmark of apoptosis is a significant reduction in cell volume (AVD)
resulting from loss of K(+)(i) and Cl(-)(i). Loss of cell volume and lowering of 
ionic strength of intracellular K(+) and Cl(-) occur before any other detectable 
characteristics of apoptosis. In the present study, temozolomide (TMZ) triggered 
loss of K(+)(i) and Cl(-)(i) and AVD in primary glioblastoma multiforme (GBM)
cancer cells (GC) and GC cancer stem cells (GSC). We hypothesize that
Na(+)-K(+)-2Cl(-) cotransporter isoform 1 (NKCC1) counteracts AVD during
apoptosis in GBM cancer cells by regulating cell volume and Cl(-) homeostasis.
NKCC1 protein was expressed in both GC and GSC and played an essential role in
regulatory volume increase (RVI) in response to hypertonic cell shrinkage and
isotonic cell shrinkage. Blocking NKCC1 activity with its potent inhibitor
bumetanide abolished RVI. These cells maintained a basal [Cl(-)](i) (~ 68 mM)
above the electrochemical equilibrium for Cl(-)(i). NKCC1 also functioned to
replenish Cl(-)(i) levels following the loss of Cl(-)(i). TMZ-treated cells
exhibited increased phosphorylation of NKCC1 and its up-stream novel
Cl(-)/volume-sensitive regulatory kinase WNK1. Inhibition of NKCC1 activity with 
bumetanide accelerated AVD, early apoptosis, as well as activation of caspase-3
and caspase-8. Taken together, this study strongly suggests that NKCC1 is an
essential mechanism in GBM cells to maintain K(+), Cl(-), and volume homeostasis 
to counteract TMZ-induced loss of K(+), Cl(-) and AVD. Therefore, blocking NKCC1 
function augments TMZ-induced apoptosis in glioma cells.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC3603147
PMID: 22759954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Development. 2012 Aug;139(15):2663-9. doi: 10.1242/dev.075242. Epub 2012 Jun 28.

Hh signalling is essential for somatic stem cell maintenance in the Drosophila
testis niche.

Michel M(1), Kupinski AP, Raabe I, Bökel C.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Regenerative Therapies Dresden (CRTD.

In the Drosophila testis, germline stem cells (GSCs) and somatic cyst stem cells 
(CySCs) are arranged around a group of postmitotic somatic cells, termed the hub,
which produce a variety of growth factors contributing to the niche
microenvironment that regulates both stem cell pools. Here we show that CySC but 
not GSC maintenance requires Hedgehog (Hh) signalling in addition to Jak/Stat
pathway activation. CySC clones unable to transduce the Hh signal are lost by
differentiation, whereas pathway overactivation leads to an increase in
proliferation. However, unlike cells ectopically overexpressing Jak/Stat targets,
the additional cells generated by excessive Hh signalling remain confined to the 
testis tip and retain the ability to differentiate. Interestingly, Hh signalling 
also controls somatic cell populations in the fly ovary and the mammalian testis.
Our observations might therefore point towards a higher degree of organisational 
homology between the somatic components of gonads across the sexes and phyla than
previously appreciated.

PMID: 22745310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Transl Oncol. 2012 Jun;5(3):200-7. Epub 2012 Jun 1.

Hypoxia Moderates <U+03B3>(1)34.5-Deleted Herpes Simplex Virus Oncolytic Activity in
Human Glioma Xenoline Primary Cultures.

Friedman GK(1), Haas MC, Kelly VM, Markert JM, Gillespie GY, Cassady KA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Department of Pediatrics,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL.

Hypoxia plays a critical role in the tumor microenvironment of high-grade gliomas
by promoting the glioma stem cell (GSC)-like phenotype, which displays resistance
to standard therapies. We tested three glioblastoma multiforme xenograft lines
(xenolines) against <U+03B3>(1)34.5-deleted recombinant oncolytic herpes simplex virus
(oHSV) C101 under 1% (hypoxia) and 20.8% (normoxia) oxygen tension for effects on
oHSV infectivity, replication, and cytotoxicity in all tumor cells and CD133(+)
GSCs. Expression levels of CD133, a putative GSC marker, and CD111 (nectin-1), an
adhesion molecule that is the most efficient method for HSV entry, increased
significantly under hypoxia in all three xenolines. Despite increased CD111
expression under hypoxic conditions, oHSV infectivity, cytotoxicity and viral
recovery were not improved or were diminished in all three xenolines under
hypoxia. In contrast, wild-type HSV-1 equally infected xenoline cells in normoxia
and hypoxia, suggesting that the 34.5 mutation plays a role in the decreased C101
infectivity in hypoxia. Importantly, CD133(+) cells were not more resistant to
oHSV than CD133(-) tumor cells regardless of oxygen tension. Furthermore, CD133
expression decreased as viral dose increased in two of the xenolines suggesting
that up-regulation of CD133 in hypoxia was not the cause of reduced viral
efficacy. Our findings that oHSV infectivity and cytotoxicity were diminished
under hypoxia in several GBM xenolines likely have important implications for
clinical applications of oHSV therapies, especially considering the vital role of
hypoxia in the microenvironment of GBM tumors.

PMCID: PMC3384274
PMID: 22741039  [PubMed]


479. J Biol Chem. 2012 Aug 10;287(33):27396-406. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.359109. Epub
2012 Jun 26.

Contribution of microRNA-1275 to Claudin11 protein suppression via a
polycomb-mediated silencing mechanism in human glioma stem-like cells.

Katsushima K(1), Shinjo K, Natsume A, Ohka F, Fujii M, Osada H, Sekido Y, Kondo
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Oncology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, Nagoya
464-8681, Japan.

Glioblastomas show heterogeneous histological features, and tumor cells show
distinct phenotypic states that confer different functional attributes and an
aggressive character. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the
heterogeneity in this disease are poorly understood. Glioma stem-like cells
(GSCs) are considered able to aberrantly differentiate into diverse cell types
and may contribute to the establishment of tumor heterogeneity. Using a GSC
model, we investigated differentially expressed microRNAs (miRNAs) and associated
epigenetic mechanisms that regulate the differentiation of GSCs. miRNA profiling 
using microarray technology showed that 13 and 34 miRNAs were commonly
up-regulated and down-regulated in two independent GSC lines during
differentiation, respectively. Among this set of miRNAs, quantitative PCR
analysis showed that miRNA-1275 (miR-1275) was consistently down-regulated during
GSC differentiation, along with the up-regulation of its target, CLDN11, an
important protein during oligodendroglial lineage differentiation. Inhibition of 
miR-1275 with a specific antisense oligonucleotide (anti-miR-1275) in GSCs
increased the expression of CLDN11, together with significant growth suppression.
Epigenetic analysis revealed that gain of histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation
(H3K27me3) in the primary microRNA-1275 promoter was closely associated with
miR-1275 expression. Treatment with 3-deazaneplanocin A, an inhibitor of H3K27
methyltransferase, attenuated CLDN11 induction by serum stimulation in parallel
with sustained miR-1275 expression. Our results have illuminated the epigenetic
regulatory pathways of miR-1275 that are closely associated with oligodendroglial
differentiation, which may contribute to the tissue heterogeneity seen in the
formation of glioblastomas. Given that inhibition of miR-1275 induces expression 
of oligodendroglial lineage proteins and suppresses tumor cell proliferation,
this may be a potential therapeutic target for glioblastomas.

PMCID: PMC3431641
PMID: 22736761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Appl Radiat Isot. 2012 Aug;70(8):1526-30. doi: 10.1016/j.apradiso.2012.04.030.
Epub 2012 May 24.

Cyclotron produced 44gSc from natural calcium.

Severin GW(1), Engle JW, Valdovinos HF, Barnhart TE, Nickles RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Physics Department, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI
53706, United States. gwseverin@gmail.com

(44g)Sc was produced by 16MeV proton irradiation of unenriched calcium metal with
radionuclidic purity greater than 95%. The thick target yield at saturation for
(44g)Sc was 213 MBq/µA, dwarfing the yields of contaminants (43)Sc,(44 m)Sc,
(47)Sc and (48)Sc for practical bombardment times of 1-2h. Scandium was isolated 
from the dissolved calcium target by filtration, and reconstituted in small
volumes of dilute HCl. Reactions with the chelate
1,4,7,10-tetraazacyclododecane-1,4,7,10-tetraacetic acid (DOTA) indicated a
reactivity of 54 ± 14 Gbq/µmol at end-of-bombardment.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3393840
PMID: 22728844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Life Sci. 2012 Oct 15;91(13-14):634-7. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2012.06.007. Epub 2012 
Jun 19.

Chronic endothelin-1 infusion elevates glomerular sieving coefficient and
proximal tubular albumin reuptake in the rat.

Saleh MA(1), Sandoval RM, Rhodes GJ, Campos-Bilderback SB, Molitoris BA, Pollock 
DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Georgia Health Sciences University,
Augusta, GA 30912-2500, USA.

AIM: We have previously found that chronic endothelin-1 (ET-1) infusion in
Sprague-Dawley rats increases glomerular permeability to albumin (P(alb)) as
assessed in vitro independent of blood pressure with no observed albuminuria. In 
this study, we hypothesized that ET-1 increases glomerular albumin filtration
with accompanied increase in albumin uptake via the proximal tubule, which masks 
the expected increase in urinary albumin excretion.
MAIN METHODS: Nonfasting Munich-Wistar Fromter rats were surgically prepared for 
in vivo imaging (n=6). Rats were placed on the microscope stage with the exposed 
kidney placed in a cover slip-bottomed dish bathed in warm isotonic saline. Rats 
were then injected i.v. with rat serum albumin conjugated to Texas Red that was
observed to enter capillary loops of superficial glomeruli, move into Bowman's
space, bind to the proximal tubular cell brush border and reabsorbed across the
apical membrane. Glomerular sieving coefficient (GSC) was calculated as the ratio
of conjugated albumin within the glomerular capillary versus that in Bowman's
space. Rats were again studied after 2 weeks of chronic ET-1 (2 pmol/kg/min; i.v.
osmotic minipump).
KEY FINDINGS: Glomerular sieving coefficient was significantly increased in rats 
following chronic ET-1 infusion (0.025 ± 0.005 vs. 0.017 ± 0.003, p<0.05). Mean
fluorescence intensity for conjugated albumin within proximal tubules was
increased by ET-1 infusion: 118.40 ± 6.34 vs. 74.27 ± 4.45 pixel intensity
(p<0.01).
SIGNIFICANCE: These data provide in vivo evidence that ET-1 directly increases
glomerular permeability to albumin and that albuminuria is prevented by increased
PT albumin uptake in the rat.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3728660
PMID: 22727794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Stand Genomic Sci. 2012 Mar 19;6(1):136-44. doi: 10.4056/sigs.2485911. Epub 2012 
Mar 5.

Conceptualizing a Genomics Software Institute (GSI).

Gilbert JA, Catlett C, Desai N, Knight R, White O, Robbins R, Sankaran R, Sansone
SA, Field D, Meyer F.

Microbial ecology has been enhanced greatly by the ongoing 'omics revolution,
bringing half the world's biomass and most of its biodiversity into analytical
view for the first time; indeed, it feels almost like the invention of the
microscope and the discovery of the new world at the same time. With major
microbial ecology research efforts accumulating prodigious quantities of
sequence, protein, and metabolite data, we are now poised to address
environmental microbial research at macro scales, and to begin to characterize
and understand the dimensions of microbial biodiversity on the planet. What is
currently impeding progress is the need for a framework within which the research
community can develop, exchange and discuss predictive ecosystem models that
describe the biodiversity and functional interactions. Such a framework must
encompass data and metadata transparency and interoperation; data and results
validation, curation, and search; application programming interfaces for modeling
and analysis tools; and human and technical processes and services necessary to
ensure broad adoption. Here we discuss the need for focused community interaction
to augment and deepen established community efforts, beginning with the Genomic
Standards Consortium (GSC), to create a science-driven strategic plan for a
Genomic Software Institute (GSI).

PMCID: PMC3359878
PMID: 22675605  [PubMed]


483. J Opt Soc Am A Opt Image Sci Vis. 2012 Jun 1;29(6):892-900. doi:
10.1364/JOSAA.29.000892.

General state contrast imaging: an optimized polarimetric imaging modality
insensitive to spatial intensity fluctuations.

Anna G(1), Goudail F, Dolfi D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Charles Fabry, UMR 8501, Institut d'Optique, CNRS, University
Paris Sud 11, Palaiseau, France.

In active polarization imaging, one frequently needs to be insensitive to
noninformative spatial intensity fluctuations. We investigate a way of solving
this issue with general state contrast (GSC) imaging. It consists in acquiring
two scalar polarimetric images with optimized illumination and analysis
polarization states, then forming a ratio. We propose a method for maximizing the
discrimination ability between a target and a background in GSC images by
determining the optimal illumination and analysis states. A further advantage of 
this approach is to provide an objective way of quantifying the performance
improvement obtained by increasing the number of degrees of freedom of a GSC
imager. The efficiency of this approach is demonstrated on simulated and
real-world images.

PMID: 22673418  [PubMed]


484. Genes Dev. 2012 Jun 1;26(11):1247-62. doi: 10.1101/gad.193565.112.

Platelet-derived growth factor receptors differentially inform intertumoral and
intratumoral heterogeneity.

Kim Y(1), Kim E, Wu Q, Guryanova O, Hitomi M, Lathia JD, Serwanski D, Sloan AE,
Weil RJ, Lee J, Nishiyama A, Bao S, Hjelmeland AB, Rich JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA.

Growth factor-mediated proliferation and self-renewal maintain tissue-specific
stem cells and are frequently dysregulated in cancers. Platelet-derived growth
factor (PDGF) ligands and receptors (PDGFRs) are commonly overexpressed in
gliomas and initiate tumors, as proven in genetically engineered models. While
PDGFRa alterations inform intertumoral heterogeneity toward a proneural
glioblastoma (GBM) subtype, we interrogated the role of PDGFRs in intratumoral
GBM heterogeneity. We found that PDGFRa is expressed only in a subset of GBMs,
while PDGFRß is more commonly expressed in tumors but is preferentially expressed
by self-renewing tumorigenic GBM stem cells (GSCs). Genetic or pharmacological
targeting of PDGFRß (but not PDGFRa) attenuated GSC self-renewal, survival, tumor
growth, and invasion. PDGFRß inhibition decreased activation of the cancer stem
cell signaling node STAT3, while constitutively active STAT3 rescued the loss of 
GSC self-renewal caused by PDGFRß targeting. In silico survival analysis
demonstrated that PDGFRB informed poor prognosis, while PDGFRA was a positive
prognostic factor. Our results may explain mixed clinical responses of
anti-PDGFR-based approaches and suggest the need for integration of models of
cancer as an organ system into development of cancer therapies.

PMCID: PMC3371412
PMID: 22661233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Mol Pharmacol. 2012 Sep;82(3):400-7. doi: 10.1124/mol.112.078402. Epub 2012 May
30.

A new 2-pyrone derivative, 5-bromo-3-(3-hydroxyprop-1-ynyl)-2H-pyran-2-one,
suppresses stemness in glioma stem-like cells.

Kim RK(1), Kim MJ, Yoon CH, Lim EJ, Yoo KC, Lee GH, Kim YH, Kim H, Jin YB, Lee
YJ, Cho CG, Oh YS, Gye MC, Suh Y, Lee SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Research Institute for Natural Sciences, Hanyang
University, Seoul, Korea.

Glioma cells with stem cell properties, termed glioma stem-like cells (GSCs),
have been linked to tumor formation, maintenance, and progression and are
responsible for the failure of chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Because
conventional glioma treatments often fail to eliminate GSCs completely, residual 
surviving GSCs are able to repopulate the tumor. Compounds that target GSCs might
be helpful in overcoming resistance to anticancer treatments in human brain
tumors. In this study, we showed that
5-bromo-3-(3-hydroxyprop-1-ynyl)-2H-pyran-2-one (BHP), a new 2-pyrone derivative,
suppressed the maintenance of the GSC population in both a glioma cell line and
patient-derived glioma cells. Treatment of GSCs with BHP effectively inhibited
sphere formation and suppressed the CD133(+) cell population. Treatment with BHP 
also suppressed expression of the stemness-regulating transcription factors Sox2,
Notch2, and ß-catenin in sphere-cultured glioma cells. Treatment of GSCs with BHP
significantly suppressed two fundamental characteristics of cancer stem cells:
self-renewal and tumorigenicity. BHP treatment dramatically inhibited
clone-forming ability at the single-cell level and suppressed in vivo tumor
formation. BHP markedly inhibited both phosphoinositide 3-kinase/Akt and
Ras/Raf-1/extracellular signal-regulated kinase signaling, which suggests that
one or both of these pathways are involved in BHP-induced suppression of GSCs. In
addition, treatment with BHP effectively sensitized GSCs to chemotherapy and
radiotherapy. Taken together, these results indicate that BHP targets GSCs and
enhances their sensitivity to anticancer treatments and suggest that BHP
treatment may be useful for treating brain tumors by eliminating GSCs.

PMID: 22648970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jun 12;109(24):9465-70. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1120473109. Epub 2012 May 29.

Sex-lethal enables germline stem cell differentiation by down-regulating Nanos
protein levels during Drosophila oogenesis.

Chau J(1), Kulnane LS, Salz HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences, Case Western Reserve University
School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

Drosophila ovarian germ cells require Sex-lethal (Sxl) to exit from the stem cell
state and to enter the differentiation pathway. Sxl encodes a female-specific RNA
binding protein and in somatic cells serves as the developmental switch gene for 
somatic sex determination and X-chromosome dosage compensation. None of the known
Sxl target genes are required for germline differentiation, leaving open the
question of how Sxl promotes the transition from stem cell to committed daughter 
cell. We address the mechanism by which Sxl regulates this transition through the
identification of nanos as one of its target genes. Previous studies have shown
that Nanos protein is necessary for GSC self-renewal and is rapidly
down-regulated in the daughter cells fated to differentiate in the adult ovary.
We find that this dynamic expression pattern is limited to female germ cells and 
is under Sxl control. In the absence of Sxl, or in male germ cells, Nanos protein
is continuously expressed. Furthermore, this female-specific expression pattern
is dependent on the presence of canonical Sxl binding sites located in the nanos 
3' untranslated region. These results, combined with the observation that nanos
RNA associates with the Sxl protein in ovarian extracts and loss and gain of
function studies, suggest that Sxl enables the switch from germline stem cell to 
committed daughter cell by posttranscriptional down-regulation of nanos
expression. These findings connect sexual identity to the stem cell
self-renewal/differentiation decision and highlight the importance of
posttranscriptional gene regulatory networks in controlling stem cell behavior.

PMCID: PMC3386055
PMID: 22645327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Dev Biol. 2012 Sep 1;369(1):1-18. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.05.019. Epub 2012 May
25.

Gastrulation and pre-gastrulation morphogenesis, inductions, and gene expression:
similarities and dissimilarities between urodelean and anuran embryos.

Kaneda T(1), Motoki JY.

Author information: 
(1)Advanced Course for Biological Systems Engineering, and Department of
Biological and Chemical Systems Engineering, Kumamoto National College of
Technology, 2627 Hirayama Shin-Machi, Yatsushiro 866-8501, Japan.
kaneda@kumamoto-nct.ac.jp

Studies of meso-endoderm and neural induction and subsequent body plan formation 
have been analyzed using mainly amphibians as the experimental model. Xenopus is 
currently the predominant model, because it best enables molecular analysis of
these induction processes. However, much of the embryological information on
these inductions (e.g., those of the Spemann-Mangold organizer), and on the
morphogenetic movements of inductively interacting tissues, derives from research
on non-model amphibians, especially urodeles. Although the final body pattern is 
strongly conserved in vertebrates, and although many of the same developmental
genes are expressed, it has become evident that there are individually diverse
modes of morphogenesis and timing of developmental events. Whether or not this
diversity represents essential differences in the early induction processes
remains unclear. The aim of this review is to compare the gastrulation process,
induction processes, and gene expressions between a urodele, mainly Cynops
pyrrhogaster, and an anura, Xenopus laevis, thereby to clarify conserved and
diversified aspects. Cynops gastrulation differs significantly from that of
Xenopus in that specification of the regions of the Xenopus dorsal marginal zone 
(DMZ) are specified before the onset of gastrulation, as marked by blastopore
formation, whereas the equivalent state of specification does not occur in Cynops
until the middle of gastrulation. Detailed comparison of the germ layer structure
and morphogenetic movements during the pre-gastrula and gastrula stages shows
that the entire gastrulation process should be divided into two phases of
notochord induction and neural induction. Cynops undergoes these processes
sequentially after the onset of gastrulation, whereas Xenopus undergoes notochord
induction during a series of pre-gastrulation movements, and its traditionally
defined period of gastrulation only includes the neural induction phase.
Comparing the structure, fate, function and state of commitment of each domain of
the DMZ of Xenopus and Cynops has revealed that the true form of the
Spemann-Mangold organizer is suprablastoporal gsc-expressing endoderm that has
notochord-inducing activity. Gsc-expressing deep endoderm and/or superficial
endoderm in Xenopus is involved in inducing notochord during pre-gastrulation
morphogenesis, rather than both gsc- and bra-expressing tissues being induced at 
the same time.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22634398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Dev Biol. 2012 Aug 15;368(2):231-41. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.05.018. Epub 2012 
May 22.

Transcriptional integration of Wnt and Nodal pathways in establishment of the
Spemann organizer.

Reid CD(1), Zhang Y, Sheets MD, Kessler DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania,
School of Medicine, Room 1110 Biomedical Research Building 2/3, 421 Curie
Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6058, USA.

Signaling inputs from multiple pathways are essential for the establishment of
distinct cell and tissue types in the embryo. Therefore, multiple signals must be
integrated to activate gene expression and confer cell fate, but little is known 
about how this occurs at the level of target gene promoters. During early
embryogenesis, Wnt and Nodal signals are required for formation of the Spemann
organizer, which is essential for germ layer patterning and axis formation.
Signaling by both Wnt and Nodal pathways is required for the expression of
multiple organizer genes, suggesting that integration of these signals is
required for organizer formation. Here, we demonstrate transcriptional
cooperation between the Wnt and Nodal pathways in the activation of the organizer
genes Goosecoid (Gsc), Cerberus (Cer), and Chordin (Chd). Combined Wnt and Nodal 
signaling synergistically activates transcription of these organizer genes.
Effectors of both pathways occupy the Gsc, Cer and Chd promoters and effector
occupancy is enhanced with active Wnt and Nodal signaling. This suggests that, at
organizer gene promoters, a stable transcriptional complex containing effectors
of both pathways forms in response to combined Wnt and Nodal signaling.
Consistent with this idea, the histone acetyltransferase p300 is recruited to
organizer promoters in a Wnt and Nodal effector-dependent manner. Taken together,
these results offer a mechanism for spatial and temporal restriction of organizer
gene transcription by the integration of two major signaling pathways, thus
establishing the Spemann organizer domain.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3572767
PMID: 22627292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Anal Biochem. 2012 Aug 15;427(2):130-2. doi: 10.1016/j.ab.2012.05.007. Epub 2012 
May 19.

Tethering of proteins to RNAs using the bovine immunodeficiency virus-Tat peptide
and BIV-TAR RNA.

Wakiyama M(1), Kaitsu Y, Muramatsu R, Takimoto K, Yokoyama S.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Systems and Structural Biology Center, Tsurumi, Yokohama 230-0045,
Japan. waki@gsc.riken.jp

To study the functions of RNA-binding proteins independent of their RNA-binding
activity, tethering methods have been developed, based on the use of the
RNA-binding domain of a well-characterized RNA-binding protein and its target
RNA. Two bacteriophage proteins have mainly been used as tethers: the MS2 coat
protein and the lambda N protein. Here we report an alternative system using the 
Tat (trans-activator) peptide from the bovine immunodeficiency virus (BIV), which
binds to BIV-TAR (trans-activation response) RNA. We demonstrate the usefulness
of this system by applying it to the analysis of the TNRC6B protein, a component 
of the microRNA-induced silencing complex.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22617800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Cancer Res. 2012 Aug 1;72(15):3828-38. Epub 2012 May 22.

MET signaling regulates glioblastoma stem cells.

Joo KM(1), Jin J, Kim E, Ho Kim K, Kim Y, Gu Kang B, Kang YJ, Lathia JD, Cheong
KH, Song PH, Kim H, Seol HJ, Kong DS, Lee JI, Rich JN, Lee J, Nam DH.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Stem Cell Research Center, Department of Neurosurgery, Samsung Medical 
Center and Samsung Biomedical Research Institute, Sungkyunkwan University School 
of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Glioblastomas multiforme (GBM) contain highly tumorigenic, self-renewing
populations of stem/initiating cells [glioblastoma stem cells (GSC)] that
contribute to tumor propagation and treatment resistance. However, our knowledge 
of the specific signaling pathways that regulate GSCs is limited. The MET
tyrosine kinase is known to stimulate the survival, proliferation, and invasion
of various cancers including GBM. Here, we identified a distinct fraction of
cells expressing a high level of MET in human primary GBM specimens that were
preferentially localized in perivascular regions of human GBM biopsy tissues and 
were found to be highly clonogenic, tumorigenic, and resistant to radiation.
Inhibition of MET signaling in GSCs disrupted tumor growth and invasiveness both 
in vitro and in vivo, suggesting that MET activation is required for GSCs.
Together, our findings indicate that MET activation in GBM is a functional
requisite for the cancer stem cell phenotype and a promising therapeutic target.

©2012 AACR.

PMID: 22617325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Jul 1;18(13):3628-36. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-0339.
Epub 2012 May 15.

Differential expression of 2',3'-cyclic-nucleotide 3'-phosphodiesterase and
neural lineage markers correlate with glioblastoma xenograft infiltration and
patient survival.

Zorniak M(1), Clark PA, Leeper HE, Tipping MD, Francis DM, Kozak KR, Salamat MS, 
Kuo JS.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Training Program, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and 
Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin 53792, USA.

Comment in
    Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Jul 1;18(13):3495-8.

PURPOSE: Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is a poorly treated human brain cancer
with few established clinically useful molecular prognostic markers. We
characterized glioblastoma stem-like cells (GSC) according to developmental
neural lineage markers and correlated their expression with patient survival.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Immunoblot array of neural lineage markers classified five
independently isolated human GSC lines into three classes exhibiting differential
expression of oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPC), astrocyte progenitor cells 
(APC), and neural progenitor cells (NPC) markers. Immunodeficient mice were
orthotopically implanted with each cell line to evaluate tumor infiltration and
recipient survival. 2',3'-Cyclic-nucleotide 3'-phosphodiesterase (CNP) antigenic 
expression was used to evaluate a clinically annotated GBM tissue microarray with
115 specimens.
RESULTS: We report that molecular classification of patient-derived GSCs using
neural lineage markers show association with differential xenograft invasiveness,
and also show significant correlation to survival in both the mouse model and
human patients. Orthotopic implantation into immunodeficient mice showed Ki-67
proliferative index independent xenograft infiltration: class I GSCs (OPC and NPC
positive) established focal lesions, class II GSCs (NPC positive) formed
minimally invasive lesions, and class III GSCs (APC positive) established highly 
infiltrative lesions. The OPC marker, CNP also exhibited high expression in focal
xenografts versus low expression in invasive xenografts. Differential CNP
expression correlated with mouse model survival, and CNP immunoassay of a large
GBM tissue microarray also showed significant differential patient survival.
CONCLUSIONS: GSC classification with developmental neural lineage markers
revealed CNP as a novel and potentially useful clinical prognosis marker, and
suggests clinical importance for patient-specific GSC analysis.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3597469
PMID: 22589395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Mini Rev Med Chem. 2012 Jun;12(6):505-14.

Quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR) analysis to predict drug-drug
interactions of ABC transporter ABCG2.

Ishikawa T(1), Hirano H, Saito H, Sano K, Ikegami Y, Yamaotsu N, Hirono S.

Author information: 
(1)Omics Science Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho,
Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. toshi-i@gsc.riken.jp

Quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR) analysis is a practical
approach by which chemical structure is quantitatively correlated with biological
activity or chemical reactivity. Human ABC transporter ABCG2 exhibits broad
substrate specificity toward structurally diverse compounds. To gain insight into
the relationship between the molecular structures of compounds and the
interaction with ABCG2, we have developed an algorithm that analyzes QSAR to
evaluate ABCG2-drug interactions. In addition, to support QSAR analysis, we
developed a high-speed screening method for analyzing the drug-drug interactions 
of ABCG2. Based on both experimental results and computational QSAR analysis
data, we propose a hypothetical mechanism underlying ABC-mediated drug transport 
and its interaction with drugs.

PMID: 22587765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e36460. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036460. Epub 2012 May 7.

Control of germline stem cell division frequency--a novel, developmentally
regulated role for epidermal growth factor signaling.

Parrott BB(1), Hudson A, Brady R, Schulz C.

Author information: 
(1)Hollings Marine Laboratory, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, 
South Carolina, USA.

Exploring adult stem cell dynamics in normal and disease states is crucial to
both better understanding their in vivo role and better realizing their
therapeutic potential. Here we address the division frequency of Germline Stem
Cells (GSCs) in testes of Drosophila melanogaster. We show that GSC division
frequency is under genetic control of the highly conserved Epidermal Growth
Factor (EGF) signaling pathway. When EGF signaling was attenuated, we detected a 
two-fold increase in the percentage of GSCs in mitotic division compared to GSCs 
in control animals. Ex vivo and in vivo experiments using a marker for cells in
S-phase of the cell cycle showed that the GSCs in EGF mutant testes divide faster
than GSCs in control testes. The increased mitotic activity of GSCs in EGF
mutants was rescued by restoring EGF signaling in the GSCs, and reproduced in
testes from animals with soma-depleted EGF-Receptor (EGFR). Interestingly, EGF
attenuation specifically increased the GSC division frequency in adult testes,
but not in larval testes. Furthermore, GSCs in testes with tumors resulting from 
the perturbation of other conserved signaling pathways divided at normal
frequencies. We conclude that EGF signaling from the GSCs to the CySCs normally
regulates GSC division frequency. The EGF signaling pathway is bifurcated and
acts differently in adult compared to larval testes. In addition, regulation of
GSC division frequency is a specific role for EGF signaling as it is not affected
in all tumor models. These data advance our understanding concerning stem cell
dynamics in normal tissues and in a tumor model.

PMCID: PMC3346724
PMID: 22586473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2012 Feb;32(2):214-8.

[Effects of Ginseng and Sanchi Compositions on the Ras signal transduction
pathway of myocardial ischemic rats].

[Article in Chinese]

Du XJ(1), Yan L.

Author information: 
(1)Xiyuan Hospital of China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences, Beijing
(100091).

OBJECTIVE: To study the effects of Ginseng and Sanchi Compositions (GSC) on the
protein and mRNA expressions of Ras, extracellular signal-regulated Kinase1/2
(ERK1/2), and C-Raf-1 of ischemic myocardium of rats with acute myocardial
infarction (AMI).
METHODS: By adopting myocardial ischemia Wistar rat model with the ligation of
the left anterior descending coronary artery, the normal control group, the
sham-operation group, the model group, the Betaloc group, the high and low dose
GSC group were set up. The protein expressions of Ras, C-Raf-1, ERK1/2,and
phosphor-ERK1/2, p-ERK1/2 (p-ERK1/2) were detected by Western blot. The mRNA
expressions of Ras, C-Raf-1, ERK1, and ERK2 were detected using Real-time PCR.
RESULTS: The protein expressions of Ras, c-Raf-1, and p-ERK1/2 and their mRNA
expressions in the model group increased more than those in the normal control
group and the sham-operation group (P < 0.05). The protein expressions of Ras,
c-Raf-1, and p-ERK1/2 and their mRNA expressions in the high and low dose GSC
groups and the Betaloc group were significantly higher than those in the model
group (P < 0.05). The protein expressions of Ras, c-Raf-1, and p-ERK1/2 and their
mRNA expressions increased more obviously in the high dose GSC group than in the 
low dose GSC group (P < 0.05). The ERK1/2 protein expression was not
significantly different among all groups (P > 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: GSC could up-regulate the protein expressions and mRNA expressions
of Ras, C-Raf-1, and p-ERK1/2. It suggested that GSC might promote the
angiogenesis through Ras signal transduction pathway dose-dependently.

PMID: 22574596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Technol Cancer Res Treat. 2012 Oct;11(5):483-90. Epub 2012 May 7.

MicroRNA-34a suppresses cell proliferation and induces apoptosis in U87 glioma
stem cells.

Sun L(1), Wu Z, Shao Y, Pu Y, Miu W, Yao J, Wu Y, Yang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, the Affiliated Wuxi People's Hospital of Nanjing
Medical University, Wuxi 214023, PR China.

Tumor stem cells (TSCs) have been identified in many malignant tumors and are
unique in their self-renewal, multi-differentiation and tumor growth maintenance 
capabilities. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small endogenous, non-coding RNAs that
predominately modulate target gene expression at the post-transcriptional level. 
Accumulating evidence suggests that some miRNAs have an essential role in TSC
proliferation, growth, apoptosis, and differentiation. In particular, miR-34a has
been found to inhibit proliferation and induce apoptosis in stem cells. The
insensitivity of glioma to standard therapies combined with the hypothesis that
glioma stem cells (GSCs) are responsible for this chemorefractory nature suggests
that investigations exploring the function and mechanism of miR-34a in GSCs would
be of value. In our study, we found that miR-34a is down-regulated in
CD133-positive U87 cells. Furthermore, miR-34a could significantly suppress cell 
proliferation and induce apoptosis in GSCs. These findings suggest that miR-34a
acts as a tumor suppressor in U87 GSCs. Therefore, this observation highlights a 
new potential therapeutic agent for GSC-based glioma treatment.

PMID: 22568628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Stem Cells. 2012 Jul;30(7):1313-26. doi: 10.1002/stem.1120.

Numb regulates glioma stem cell fate and growth by altering epidermal growth
factor receptor and Skp1-Cullin-F-box ubiquitin ligase activity.

Jiang X(1), Xing H, Kim TM, Jung Y, Huang W, Yang HW, Song S, Park PJ, Carroll
RS, Johnson MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Glioblastoma contains a hierarchy of stem-like cancer cells, but how this
hierarchy is established is unclear. Here, we show that asymmetric Numb
localization specifies glioblastoma stem-like cell (GSC) fate in a manner that
does not require Notch inhibition. Numb is asymmetrically localized to CD133-hi
GSCs. The predominant Numb isoform, Numb4, decreases Notch and promotes a
CD133-hi, radial glial-like phenotype. However, upregulation of a novel Numb
isoform, Numb4 delta 7 (Numb4d7), increases Notch and AKT activation while
nevertheless maintaining CD133-hi fate specification. Numb knockdown increases
Notch and promotes growth while favoring a CD133-lo, glial progenitor-like
phenotype. We report the novel finding that Numb4 (but not Numb4d7) promotes
SCF(Fbw7) ubiquitin ligase assembly and activation to increase Notch degradation.
However, both Numb isoforms decrease epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
expression, thereby regulating GSC fate. Small molecule inhibition of EGFR
activity phenocopies the effect of Numb on CD133 and Pax6. Clinically, homozygous
NUMB deletions and low Numb mRNA expression occur primarily in a subgroup of
proneural glioblastomas. Higher Numb expression is found in classical and
mesenchymal glioblastomas and correlates with decreased survival. Thus, decreased
Numb promotes glioblastoma growth, but the remaining Numb establishes a
phenotypically diverse stem-like cell hierarchy that increases tumor
aggressiveness and therapeutic resistance.

Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC3963835
PMID: 22553175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. J Mol Neurosci. 2012 Jun;47(2):346-56. doi: 10.1007/s12031-012-9759-8. Epub 2012 
Apr 19.

MicroRNA-21 inhibitor sensitizes human glioblastoma U251 stem cells to
chemotherapeutic drug temozolomide.

Zhang S(1), Wan Y, Pan T, Gu X, Qian C, Sun G, Sun L, Xiang Y, Wang Z, Shi L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The First People's Hospital of Kunshan affiliated 
with Jiangsu University, Suzhou, 215300, People's Republic of China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small noncoding RNA molecules that regulate protein
expression by cleaving or repressing the translation of target mRNAs. In mammals,
their function mainly represses the target mRNA transcripts via imperfect
complementary sequences in the 3'UTR of target mRNAs. Several miRNAs have been
recently reported to be involved in modulation of glioma development, especially 
some upregulated miRNAs, such as microRNA-21 (miR-21), which has been found to
function as an oncogene in cultured glioblastoma multiforme cells. Temozolomide
(TMZ), an alkylating agent, is a promising chemotherapeutic agent for treating
glioblastoma. Although chemotherapy with temozolomide may contain tumor growth
for some months, invariable tumor recurrence suggests that cancer stem cells
maintaining these tumors persist. Previous research showed that TMZ could inhibit
the proliferation of human glioblastoma stem cells (GSC), but not induced
apoptosis, which could supply the chance for glioblastoma recurrence.
Accumulating evidence indicated that downregulation of miR-21 in glioblastoma
cells caused repression of growth and increased apoptosis, all of which could
theoretically enhance the chemotherapeutic effects of cancer therapy. In this
study, we aimed to explore whether miR-21 downregulation could enhance the
chemotherapeutic effects of TMZ and induce apoptosis on GSC. Interestingly, the
results demonstrated that either miR-21 inhibitor or TMZ could not induce
apoptosis on GSC. However, miR-21 inhibitor combined with TMZ significantly
enhanced GSC apoptosis. Taken together, a combination of miR-21 inhibitor and TMZ
could be an effective therapeutic strategy for GSC apoptosis to prevent potential
glioblastoma recurrence.

PMID: 22528454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. PLoS Biol. 2012;10(4):e1001298. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001298. Epub 2012 Apr 
3.

Cytoneme-mediated delivery of hedgehog regulates the expression of bone
morphogenetic proteins to maintain germline stem cells in Drosophila.

Rojas-Ríos P(1), Guerrero I, González-Reyes A.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo, CSIC/Universidad Pablo de Olavide, 
Sevilla, Spain.

Stem cells reside in specialised microenvironments, or niches, which often
contain support cells that control stem cell maintenance and proliferation.
Hedgehog (Hh) proteins mediate homeostasis in several adult niches, but a
detailed understanding of Hh signalling in stem cell regulation is lacking.
Studying the Drosophila female germline stem cell (GSC) niche, we show that Hh
acts as a critical juxtacrine signal to maintain the normal GSC population of the
ovary. Hh production in cap cells, a type of niche support cells, is regulated by
the Engrailed transcription factor. Hh is then secreted to a second, adjacent
population of niche cells, the escort cells, where it activates transcription of 
the GSC essential factors Decapentaplegic (Dpp) and Glass bottom boat (Gbb). In
wild-type niches, Hh protein decorates short filopodia that originate in the
support cap cells and that are functionally relevant, as they are required to
transduce the Hh pathway in the escort cells and to maintain a normal population 
of GSCs. These filopodia, reminiscent of wing disc cytonemes, grow several fold
in length if Hh signalling is impaired within the niche. Because these long
cytonemes project directionally towards the signalling-deficient region, cap
cells sense and react to the strength of Hh pathway transduction in the niche.
Thus, the GSC niche responds to insufficient Hh signalling by increasing the
range of Hh spreading. Although the signal(s) perceived by the cap cells and the 
receptor(s) involved are still unknown, our results emphasise the integration of 
signals necessary to maintain a functional niche and the plasticity of cellular
niches to respond to challenging physiological conditions.

PMCID: PMC3317903
PMID: 22509132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Development. 2012 May;139(9):1651-61. doi: 10.1242/dev.068395.

Dynamic in vivo binding of transcription factors to cis-regulatory modules of cer
and gsc in the stepwise formation of the Spemann-Mangold organizer.

Sudou N(1), Yamamoto S, Ogino H, Taira M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, University of
Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

How multiple developmental cues are integrated on cis-regulatory modules (CRMs)
for cell fate decisions remains uncertain. The Spemann-Mangold organizer in
Xenopus embryos expresses the transcription factors Lim1/Lhx1, Otx2, Mix1,
Siamois (Sia) and VegT. Reporter analyses using sperm nuclear transplantation and
DNA injection showed that cerberus (cer) and goosecoid (gsc) are activated by the
aforementioned transcription factors through CRMs conserved between X. laevis and
X. tropicalis. ChIP-qPCR analysis for the five transcription factors revealed
that cer and gsc CRMs are initially bound by both Sia and VegT at the late
blastula stage, and subsequently bound by all five factors at the gastrula stage.
At the neurula stage, only binding of Lim1 and Otx2 to the gsc CRM, among others,
persists, which corresponds to their co-expression in the prechordal plate. Based
on these data, together with detailed expression pattern analysis, we propose a
new model of stepwise formation of the organizer, in which (1) maternal VegT and 
Wnt-induced Sia first bind to CRMs at the blastula stage; then (2)
Nodal-inducible Lim1, Otx2, Mix1 and zygotic VegT are bound to CRMs in the dorsal
endodermal and mesodermal regions where all these genes are co-expressed; and (3)
these two regions are combined at the gastrula stage to form the organizer. Thus,
the in vivo dynamics of multiple transcription factors highlight their roles in
the initiation and maintenance of gene expression, and also reveal the stepwise
integration of maternal, Nodal and Wnt signaling on CRMs of organizer genes to
generate the organizer.

PMCID: PMC4074222
PMID: 22492356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Int J Cancer. 2012 Oct 1;131(7):E1067-77. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27588. Epub 2012 Apr
27.

The transient receptor potential vanilloid-2 cation channel impairs glioblastoma 
stem-like cell proliferation and promotes differentiation.

Morelli MB(1), Nabissi M, Amantini C, Farfariello V, Ricci-Vitiani L, di Martino 
S, Pallini R, Larocca LM, Caprodossi S, Santoni M, De Maria R, Santoni G.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Experimental Medicine, School of Pharmacy, University of Camerino, 
Camerino, Italy.

Malignant transformation of cells resulting from enhanced proliferation and
aberrant differentiation is often accompanied by changes in transient receptor
potential vanilloid (TRPV) channels expression. In gliomas, recent evidence
indicates that TRPV type 2 (TRPV2) negatively controls glioma cell survival and
proliferation. In addition, cannabinoids, the ligands of both cannabinoid and
TRPV2 receptors, promote glioblastoma stem-like cells (GSCs) differentiation and 
inhibit gliomagenesis. Herein, we provide evidence on the expression of TRPV2 in 
human GSCs and that GSCs differentiation reduces nestin and progressively
increases both the glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and TRPV2 expression.
Therefore, we evaluated the role of TRPV2 cation channel in GSC lines
differentiation. Treatment of GSC lines with the TRPV antagonist Ruthenium Red,
with ethylene glycol-bis(2-aminoethylether)-N,N,N',N'-tetraacetic acid or
knockdown of TRPV2 gene during differentiation, decreases GFAP and class III
beta-tubulin (ß(III)-tubulin) expression; conversely,
phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate stimulates GSCs proliferation, reduces TRPV2
expression and partially reverts astroglial differentiation. In addition, forced 
TRPV2 expression in GSC lines by stable TRPV2 transfection increases GFAP and
ß(III)-tubulin expression and parallelly reduces proliferation. Finally, TRPV2
overexpression inhibits GSCs proliferation in a xenograft mouse model, as shown
by reduced tumor diameter and mitotic index, and promotes the differentiation of 
GSCs toward a more mature glial phenotype. Overall, our results demonstrate that 
TRPV2 promotes in vitro and in vivo GSCs differentiation and inhibits their
proliferation. Better understanding of the molecular mechanisms that regulate the
balance between proliferation and differentiation of GSCs would lead to more
specific and efficacious pharmacological approaches.

Copyright © 2012 UICC.

PMID: 22492283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. J Athl Train. 2012 Mar-Apr;47(2):221-3.

Psychometric properties of self-report concussion scales and checklists.

McLeod TC(1), Leach C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Interdisciplinary Health Sciences, Arizona School of Health
Sciences, A.T. Still University, 5850 East Still Circle, Mesa, AZ 85206, USA.
tmcleod@atsu.edu

Comment on
    Br J Sports Med. 2009 May;43 Suppl 1:i3-12.

REFERENCE/CITATION: Alla S, Sullivan SJ, Hale L, McCrory P. Self-report
scales/checklists for the measurement of concussion symptoms: a systematic
review. Br J Sports Med. 2009;43 (suppl 1):i3-i12.
CLINICAL QUESTION: Which self-report symptom scales or checklists are
psychometrically sound for clinical use to assess sport-related concussion?
DATA SOURCES: Articles available in full text, published from the establishment
of each database through December 2008, were identified from PubMed, Medline,
CINAHL, Scopus, Web of Science, SPORTDiscus, PsycINFO, and AMED. Search terms
included brain concussion, signs or symptoms, and athletic injuries, in
combination with the AND Boolean operator, and were limited to studies published 
in English. The authors also hand searched the reference lists of retrieved
articles. Additional searches of books, conference proceedings, theses, and Web
sites of commercial scales were done to provide additional information about the 
psychometric properties and development for those scales when needed in articles 
meeting the inclusion criteria.
STUDY SELECTION: Articles were included if they identified all the items on the
scale and the article was either an original research report describing the use
of scales in the evaluation of concussion symptoms or a review article that
discussed the use or development of concussion symptom scales. Only articles
published in English and available in full text were included.
DATA EXTRACTION: From each study, the following information was extracted by the 
primary author using a standardized protocol: study design, publication year,
participant characteristics, reliability of the scale, and details of the scale
or checklist, including name, number of items, time of measurement, format, mode 
of report, data analysis, scoring, and psychometric properties. A quality
assessment of included studies was done using 16 items from the Downs and Black
checklist1 and assessed reporting, internal validity, and external validity.
MAIN RESULTS: The initial database search identified 421 articles. After 131
duplicate articles were removed, 290 articles remained and were added to 17
articles found during the hand search, for a total of 307 articles; of those, 295
were available in full text. Sixty articles met the inclusion criteria and were
used in the systematic review. The quality of the included studies ranged from 9 
to 15 points out of a maximum quality score of 17. The included articles were
published between 1995 and 2008 and included a collective total of 5864 concussed
athletes and 5032 nonconcussed controls, most of whom participated in American
football. The majority of the studies were descriptive studies monitoring the
resolution of concussive self-report symptoms compared with either a preseason
baseline or healthy control group, with a smaller number of studies (n = 8)
investigating the development of a scale. The authors initially identified 20
scales that were used among the 60 included articles. Further review revealed
that 14 scales were variations of the Pittsburgh Steelers postconcussion scale
(the Post-Concussion Scale, Post-Concussion Scale: Revised, Post-Concussion
Scale: ImPACT, Post-Concussion Symptom Scale: Vienna, Graded Symptom Checklist
[GSC], Head Injury Scale, McGill ACE Post-Concussion Symptoms Scale, and CogState
Sport Symptom Checklist), narrowing down to 6 core scales, which the authors
discussed further. The 6 core scales were the Pittsburgh Steelers Post-Concussion
Scale (17 items), Post-Concussion Symptom Assessment Questionnaire (10 items),
Concussion Resolution Index postconcussion questionnaire (15 items), Signs and
Symptoms Checklist (34 items), Sport Concussion Assessment Tool (SCAT)
postconcussion symptom scale (25 items), and Concussion Symptom Inventory (12
items). Each of the 6 core scales includes symptoms associated with sport-related
concussion; however, the number of items on each scale varied. A 7-point Likert
scale was used on most scales, with a smaller number using a dichotomous (yes/no)
classification. Only 7 of the 20 scales had published psychometric properties,
and only 1 scale, the Concussion Symptom Inventory, was empirically driven (Rasch
analysis), with development of the scale occurring before its clinical use.
Internal consistency (Cronbach a) was reported for the Post-Concussion Scale
(.87), Post-Concussion Scale: ImPACT 22-item (.88-.94), Head Injury Scale 9-item 
(.78), and Head Injury Scale 16-item (.84). Test-retest reliability has been
reported only for the Post-Concussion Scale (Spearman r = .55) and the
Post-Concussion Scale: ImPACT 21-item (Pearson r = .65). With respect to
validity, the SCAT postconcussion scale has demonstrated face and content
validity, the Post-Concussion Scale: ImPACT 22-item and Head Injury Scale 9-item 
have reported construct validity, and the Head Injury Scale 9-item and 16-item
have published factorial validity. Sensitivity and specificity have been reported
only with the GSC (0.89 and 1.0, respectively) and the Post-Concussion Scale:
ImPACT 21-item when combined with the neurocognitive component of ImPACT (0.819
and 0.849, respectively). Meaningful change scores were reported for the
Post-Concussion Scale (14.8 points), Post-Concussion Scale: ImPACT 22item (6.8
points), and Post-Concussion Scale: ImPACT 21-item (standard error of the
difference = 7.17; 80% confidence interval = 9.18).
CONCLUSIONS: Numerous scales exist for measuring the number and severity of
concussion-related symptoms, with most evolving from the neuropsychology
literature pertaining to head-injured populations. However, very few of these
were created in a systematic manner that follows scale development processes and 
have published psychometric properties. Clinicians need to understand these
limitations when choosing and using a symptom scale for inclusion in a concussion
assessment battery. Future authors should assess the underlying constructs and
measurement properties of currently available scales and use the ever-increasing 
prospective data pools of concussed athlete information to develop scales
following appropriate, systematic processes.

PMCID: PMC3418135
PMID: 22488289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2012 May;138(5):897-9. doi: 10.1007/s00432-012-1217-z.
Epub 2012 Apr 7.

Delayed formation of FancD2 foci in glioma stem cells treated with ionizing
radiation.

Cappelli E(1), Vecchio D, Frosina G.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Unit, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Glioblastoma multiforme (WHO grade IV) is a highly lethal brain
tumor. Its malignancy is in part due to cell populations refractory to
radiotherapy and chemotherapy, which in some patients display stem properties
(glioma stem cells-GSC). We and others have recently shown that a major mechanism
of resistance of GSC to therapies resides in their slow proliferation that in
turn is linked to constitutive activation of the DNA damage response. FancD2, a
central player of the Fanconi anemia pathway, is induced when replication forks
stall at DNA damage sites.
METHODS: We have analyzed the kinetics of FancD2 induction in two glioma cell
lines with pronounced (Borru) and poor (DR177) stem phenotypes, by fluorescence
analysis of nuclear foci.
RESULTS: FancD2 activation was significantly delayed in Borru, consistent with
the slow replication fork progression in these cells. On the contrary, no
significant difference between Borru and DR177 was observed for pH2AX nuclear
foci formation that hallmarks a number of DNA structure variations including
double-strand breaks.
CONCLUSION: GSC display reduced FancD2 activation following radiation damage,
most probably due to their elongated cell cycle.

PMID: 22484854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2012;2012:249217. doi: 10.1155/2012/249217.
Epub 2012 Mar 12.

Cordyceps militaris Grown on Germinated Soybean Induces G2/M Cell Cycle Arrest
through Downregulation of Cyclin B1 and Cdc25c in Human Colon Cancer HT-29 Cells.

Mollah ML(1), Park DK, Park HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Konkuk University, 1 Hwayang-dong,
Kwangjin-gu, Seoul 143-701, Republic of Korea.

Cordyceps militaris (CM) is an insect-borne fungus that has been used in
traditional Chinese medicine because of its wide range of pharmacological
activities. In this paper, we studied CM grown on germinated soybean (GSC) and
investigated the possible mechanisms underlying antiproliferative effect of GSC
on HT-29 human colon cancer cells. In comparison with CM extracts and germinated 
soybean (GS) BuOH extracts, BuOH extracts of GSC showed remarkable inhibitory and
antiproliferative effects on HT-29 colon cancer cells. After GSC treatment, HT-29
cells became smaller and irregular in shape. High G2/M phase cell populations
were observed in the GSC-treated group. The levels of cyclin B1 and Cdc25 in the 
GSC-treated group were lower than those in the control group. These findings
suggest that GSC BuOH extracts might act as an effective anti-proliferative agent
by inducing G2/M cell cycle arrest in colon cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3310170
PMID: 22474493  [PubMed]


4. Nat Commun. 2012 Mar 27;3:760. doi: 10.1038/ncomms1759.

Poly(ADP-ribose) controls DE-cadherin-dependent stem cell maintenance and oocyte 
localization.

Ji Y(1), Tulin AV.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Program, Epigenetics and Progenitor Cell Program, Fox Chase
Cancer Center, Philadephia 19111, USA.

Within the short span of the cell cycle, poly(ADP-ribose) (pADPr) can be rapidly 
produced by poly(ADP-ribose) polymerases and degraded by poly(ADP-ribose)
glycohydrolases. Here we show that changes in association between pADPr and
heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins (hnRNPs) regulate germline stem cell
(GSC) maintenance and egg chamber polarity during oogenesis in Drosophila. The
association of pADPr and Hrp38, an orthologue of human hnRNPA1, disrupts the
interaction of Hrp38 with the 5'-untranslated region of DE-cadherin messenger
RNA, thereby diminishing DE-cadherin translation in progenitor cells. Following
the reduction of DE-cadherin level, GSCs leave the stem cell niche and
differentiate. Defects in either pADPr catabolism or Hrp38 function cause a
decrease in DE-cadherin translation, leading to a loss of GSCs and
mislocalization of oocytes in the ovary. Taken together, our findings suggest
that Hrp38 and its association with pADPr control GSC self-renewal and oocyte
localization by regulating DE-cadherin translation.

PMCID: PMC3319983
PMID: 22453833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Int J Dev Biol. 2012;56(1-3):165-71. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.113433hn.

The Dr-nanos gene is essential for germ cell specification in the planarian
Dugesia ryukyuensis.

Nakagawa H(1), Ishizu H, Chinone A, Kobayashi K, Matsumoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Informatics, Keio University, Hiyoshi,
Kouhoku-ku, Yokohama, Japan.

Homologs of nanos are required for the formation and maintenance of germline stem
cell (GSC) systems and for gametogenesis in many metazoans. Planarians can change
their reproductive mode seasonally, alternating between asexual and sexual
reproduction; they develop and maintain their somatic stem cells (SSCs) and GCSs 
from pluripotent stem cells known as neoblasts. We isolated a nanos homolog,
Dr-nanos, from the expressed sequence tags (ESTs) of the sexualized form of
Dugesia ryukyuensis. We examined the expression of Dr-nanos in asexual and
sexualized planarians by in situ hybridization and analyzed its function using
RNA interference (RNAi) together with a planarian sexualization assay. A nanos
homolog, Dr-nanos, was identified in the planarian D. ryukyuensis. Dr-nanos
expression was observed in the ovarian primordial cells of the asexual worms.
This expression increased in proportion to sexualization and was localized in the
early germline cells of the ovaries and testes. In X-ray-irradiated worms, the
expression of Dr-nanos decreased to a large extent, indicating that Dr-nanos is
expressed in some subpopulations of stem cells, especially in GSCs. During the
sexualization process, worms in which Dr-nanos was knocked down by RNAi exhibited
decreased numbers of oogonia in the ovaries and failed to develop testes, whereas
the somatic sexual organs were not affected. We conclude that Dr-nanos is
essential for the development of germ cells in the ovaries and testes and may
have a function in the early stages of germ cell specification, but not in the
development of somatic sexual organs.

PMID: 22451004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Development. 2012 May;139(9):1547-56. doi: 10.1242/dev.077412. Epub 2012 Mar 21.

Mei-P26 regulates the maintenance of ovarian germline stem cells by promoting BMP
signaling.

Li Y(1), Maines JZ, Tastan OY, McKearin DM, Buszczak M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center at Dallas, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA.

In the Drosophila ovary, bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) ligands maintain
germline stem cells (GSCs) in an undifferentiated state. The activation of the
BMP pathway within GSCs results in the transcriptional repression of the
differentiation factor bag of marbles (bam). The Nanos-Pumilio translational
repressor complex and the miRNA pathway also help to promote GSC self-renewal.
How the activities of different transcriptional and translational regulators are 
coordinated to keep the GSC in an undifferentiated state remains uncertain. Data 
presented here show that Mei-P26 cell-autonomously regulates GSC maintenance in
addition to its previously described role of promoting germline cyst development.
Within undifferentiated germ cells, Mei-P26 associates with miRNA pathway
components and represses the translation of a shared target mRNA, suggesting that
Mei-P26 can enhance miRNA-mediated silencing in specific contexts. In addition,
disruption of mei-P26 compromises BMP signaling, resulting in the inappropriate
expression of bam in germ cells immediately adjacent to the cap cell niche. Loss 
of mei-P26 results in premature translation of the BMP antagonist Brat in
germline stem cells. These data suggest that Mei-P26 has distinct functions in
the ovary and participates in regulating the fates of both GSCs and their
differentiating daughters.

PMCID: PMC3317963
PMID: 22438571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Development. 2012 May;139(9):1662-9. doi: 10.1242/dev.075051. Epub 2012 Mar 21.

Axial patterning interactions in the sea urchin embryo: suppression of nodal by
Wnt1 signaling.

Wei Z(1), Range R, Angerer R, Angerer L.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Dental and Craniofacial Research, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, MD 20891, USA.

Wnt and Nodal signaling pathways are required for initial patterning of cell
fates along anterior-posterior (AP) and dorsal-ventral (DV) axes, respectively,
of sea urchin embryos during cleavage and early blastula stages. These mechanisms
are connected because expression of nodal depends on early Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling. Here, we show that an important subsequent function of Wnt signaling
is to control the shape of the nodal expression domain and maintain correct
specification of different cell types along the axes of the embryo. In the
absence of Wnt1, the posterior-ventral region of the embryo is severely altered
during early gastrulation. Strikingly, at this time, nodal and its downstream
target genes gsc and bra are expressed ectopically, extending posteriorly to the 
blastopore. They override the initial specification of posterior-ventral ectoderm
and endoderm fates, eliminating the ventral contribution to the gut and
displacing the ciliary band dorsally towards, and occasionally beyond, the
blastopore. Consequently, in Wnt1 morphants, the blastopore is located at the
border of the re-specified posterior-ventral oral ectoderm and by larval stages
it is in the same plane near the stomodeum on the ventral side. In normal
embryos, a Nodal-dependent process downregulates wnt1 expression in dorsal
posterior cells during early gastrulation, focusing Wnt1 signaling to the
posterior-ventral region where it suppresses nodal expression. These subsequent
interactions between Wnt and Nodal signaling are thus mutually antagonistic, each
limiting the range of the other's activity, in order to maintain and stabilize
the body plan initially established by those same signaling pathways in the early
embryo.

PMCID: PMC3317970
PMID: 22438568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Animal. 2012 Apr;6(4):624-32. doi: 10.1017/S1751731111002114.

Effects of alfalfa silage storage structure and roasting corn on ruminal
digestion and microbial CP synthesis in lactating dairy cows.

Krizsan SJ(1), Broderick GA, Promkot C, Colombini S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural Research for Northern Sweden, Swedish University of
Agricultural Sciences, Umeå, Sweden. sophie.krizsan@slu.se

The objective of this experiment was to quantify the effects of unroasted or
roasted ground-shelled corn (GSC), when fed with alfalfa ensiled in bag, bunker, 
or O2-limiting tower silos on ruminal digestion and microbial CP synthesis in
lactating dairy cows. The roasted corn was heat-treated in a propane-fired
roasting system. Alfalfa was harvested as second cutting from fields with
regrowth of the same maturity. A portion of each field was allotted to each silo.
The diets with 3 × 2 factorial arrangement of treatments were fed to six
multiparous rumen-cannulated Holstein cows in a cyclic change-over design with
five 21-day periods. Experimental diets were comparable and averaged (on dry
matter (DM) basis): 410 g/kg alfalfa silage (AS), 150 g/kg corn silage, 350 g/kg 
GSC, 50 g/kg soybean meal, 40 g/kg roasted soybeans, 177 g/kg CP, 264 g/kg NDF
and 250 g/kg starch. Nutrient flow was quantified by the omasal sampling
technique with use of three markers (Co, Yb and indigestible NDF). Continuous
infusion of 10% atom excess (15NH4)2SO4 was used to label microbial CP. None of
the interactions between storage structure of dietary AS and corn type were
significant. DM intake was not different among dietary treatments, averaging 24.5
kg/day across diets. Means of ADF digested in the rumen for cows fed diets with
AS from bag, bunker and O2-limiting tower silo were 2.1, 1.7 and 2.1 kg/day,
respectively, and was lower in cows fed AS from the bunker silo. This response
may partly be a reflection of the higher intake of ADF by cows fed AS ensiled in 
the O2-limiting tower silo compared with the bunker. There was a slightly greater
supply of fermentable substrates for cows fed diets with roasted compared with
unroasted GSC. The small increases in yield of milk protein and lactose observed 
in the previous production trial in cows fed diets containing roasted corn may
have occurred because of greater supply of fermentable substrates.

PMID: 22436279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. G3 (Bethesda). 2012 Mar;2(3):343-51. doi: 10.1534/g3.111.001651. Epub 2012 Mar 1.

Loss-of-Function Screen Reveals Novel Regulators Required for Drosophila Germline
Stem Cell Self-Renewal.

Xing Y(1), Kurtz I, Thuparani M, Legard J, Ruohola-Baker H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute for Stem Cell & Regenerative Medicine,
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98109.

The germline stem cells (GSCs) of Drosophila melanogaster ovary provide an
excellent model system to study the molecular mechanisms of stem cell
self-renewal. To reveal novel factors required for Drosophila female GSC
maintenance and/or division, we performed a loss-of-function screen in GSCs by
using a collection of P-element-induced alleles of essential genes. Mutations in 
genes of various functional groups were identified to cause defects in GSC
self-renewal. Here we report that a group of mutations affecting various
ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes cause significant GSCs loss, including Plenty of
SH3s (POSH), Ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme 10 (UbcD10), and pineapple eye (pie).
Ubiquitin-mediated protein degradation plays a variety of roles in the regulation
of many developmental processes, including mediating stem cell division through
degradation of cell cycle regulators. We demonstrated that pie, sharing highly
conserved RING domains with human E3 ubiquitin ligase G2E3 that are critical for 
early embryonic development, is specifically required for GSC maintenance,
possibly through regulation of bone morphogenetic protein signaling pathway.
Despite the previously reported role in imaginal disc cell survival, pie
loss-of-function induced GSC loss is not to the result of caspase-involved cell
death. Further efforts are needed to elucidate the functions of ubiquitin ligases
in GSC maintenance, which will ultimately contribute to a better understanding of
how the ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes regulate stem cell biology in mammalian
systems.

PMCID: PMC3291504
PMID: 22413088  [PubMed]


10. Crit Care. 2012 Dec 12;16(2):R44. doi: 10.1186/cc11243.

Impact of non-neurological complications in severe traumatic brain injury
outcome.

Corral L(1), Javierre CF, Ventura JL, Marcos P, Herrero JI, Mañez R.

Author information: 
(1)Intensive Care Unit, Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, Feixa Llarga s/n,
L'Hospitalet de Llobregat-08907, Barcelona, Spain. lcorral@bellvitgehospital.cat

Comment in
    Crit Care. 2012;16(3):128.

INTRODUCTION: Non-neurological complications in patients with severe traumatic
brain injury (TBI) are frequent, worsening the prognosis, but the pathophysiology
of systemic complications after TBI is unclear. The purpose of this study was to 
analyze non-neurological complications in patients with severe TBI admitted to
the ICU, the impact of these complications on mortality, and their possible
correlation with TBI severity.
METHODS: An observational retrospective cohort study was conducted in one
multidisciplinary ICU of a university hospital (35 beds); 224 consecutive adult
patients with severe TBI (initial Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) < 9) admitted to the
ICU were included. Neurological and non-neurological variables were recorded.
RESULTS: Sepsis occurred in 75% of patients, respiratory infections in 68%,
hypotension in 44%, severe respiratory failure (arterial oxygen pressure/oxygen
inspired fraction ratio (PaO2/FiO2) < 200) in 41% and acute kidney injury (AKI)
in 8%. The multivariate analysis showed that Glasgow Outcome Score (GOS) at one
year was independently associated with age, initial GCS 3 to 5, worst Traumatic
Coma Data Bank (TCDB) first computed tomography (CT) scan and the presence of
intracranial hypertension but not AKI. Hospital mortality was independently
associated with initial GSC 3 to 5, worst TCDB first CT scan, the presence of
intracranial hypertension and AKI. The presence of AKI regardless of GCS
multiplied risk of death 6.17 times (95% confidence interval (CI): 1.37 to 27.78)
(P < 0.02), while ICU hypotension increased the risk of death in patients with
initial scores of 3 to 5 on the GCS 4.28 times (95% CI: 1.22 to 15.07) (P <
0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Low initial GCS, worst first CT scan, intracranial hypertension and 
AKI determined hospital mortality in severe TBI patients. Besides the direct
effect of low GCS on mortality, this neurological condition also is associated
with ICU hypotension which increases hospital mortality among patients with
severe TBI. These findings add to previous studies that showed that
non-neurological complications increase the length of stay and morbidity in the
ICU but do not increase mortality, with the exception of AKI and hypotension in
low GCS (3 to 5).

PMCID: PMC3681369
PMID: 22410278  [PubMed - in process]


11. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Apr 15;18(8):2199-209. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-1669. 
Epub 2012 Mar 8.

Stem-like tumor-initiating cells isolated from IL13Ra2 expressing gliomas are
targeted and killed by IL13-zetakine-redirected T Cells.

Brown CE(1), Starr R, Aguilar B, Shami AF, Martinez C, D'Apuzzo M, Barish ME,
Forman SJ, Jensen MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Immunotherapy & Tumor Immunology and Hematology &
Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation, Pathology, and Neurosciences, Beckman
Research Institute, City of Hope National Medical Center, Duarte, California,
USA. cbrown@coh.org

PURPOSE: To evaluate IL13Ra2 as an immunotherapeutic target for eliminating
glioma stem-like cancer initiating cells (GSC) of high-grade gliomas, with
particular focus on the potential of genetically engineered IL13Ra2-specific
primary human CD8(+) CTLs (IL13-zetakine(+) CTL) to target this therapeutically
resistant glioma subpopulation.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: A panel of low-passage GSC tumor sphere (TS) and
serum-differentiated glioma lines were expanded from patient glioblastoma
specimens. These glioblastoma lines were evaluated for expression of IL13Ra2 and 
for susceptibility to IL13-zetakine(+) CTL-mediated killing in vitro and in vivo.
RESULTS: We observed that although glioma IL13Ra2 expression varies between
patients, for IL13Ra2(pos) cases this antigen was detected on both GSCs and more 
differentiated tumor cell populations. IL13-zetakine(+) CTL were capable of
efficient recognition and killing of both IL13Ra2(pos) GSCs and IL13Ra2(pos)
differentiated cells in vitro, as well as eliminating glioma-initiating activity 
in an orthotopic mouse tumor model. Furthermore, intracranial administration of
IL13-zetakine(+) CTL displayed robust antitumor activity against established
IL13Ra2(pos) GSC TS-initiated orthotopic tumors in mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Within IL13Ra2 expressing high-grade gliomas, this receptor is
expressed by GSCs and differentiated tumor populations, rendering both targetable
by IL13-zetakine(+) CTLs. Thus, our results support the potential usefullness of 
IL13Ra2-directed immunotherapeutic approaches for eradicating therapeutically
resistant GSC populations.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3578382
PMID: 22407828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Environ Monit Assess. 2013 Jan;185(1):707-18. doi: 10.1007/s10661-012-2586-0.
Epub 2012 Mar 10.

Determining the most suitable areas for artificial groundwater recharge via an
integrated PROMETHEE II-AHP method in GIS environment (case study: Garabaygan
Basin, Iran).

Nasiri H(1), Boloorani AD, Sabokbar HA, Jafari HR, Hamzeh M, Rafii Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Geography, Faculty of Geography, University of Tehran,
Tehran, Iran. hossien.nasiri@gmail.com

Flood spreading is a suitable strategy for controlling and benefiting from
floods. Selecting suitable areas for flood spreading and directing the floodwater
into permeable formations are amongst the most effective strategies in flood
spreading projects. Having combined geographic information systems (GIS) and
multi-criteria decision analysis approaches, the present study sought to locate
the most suitable areas for flood spreading operation in the Garabaygan Basin of 
Iran. To this end, the data layers relating to the eight effective factors were
prepared in GIS environment. This stage was followed by elimination of the
exclusionary areas for flood spreading while determining the potentially suitable
ones. Having closely examined the potentially suitable areas using the Preference
Ranking Organization Method for Enrichment Evaluations (PROMETHEE) II and
analytic hierarchy process (AHP) methods, the land suitability map for flood
spreading was produced. The PROMETHEE II and AHP were used for ranking all the
alternatives and weighting the criteria involved, respectively. The results of
the study showed that most suitable areas for the artificial groundwater recharge
are located in Quaternary Q(g) and Q(gsc) geologic units and in geomorphological 
units of pediment and Alluvial fans with slopes not exceeding 3%. Furthermore,
significant correspondence between the produced map and the control areas, where 
the flood spreading projects were successfully performed, provided further
evidence for the acceptable efficiency of the integrated PROMETHEE II-AHP method 
in locating suitable flood spreading areas.

PMID: 22402992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Exp Med. 2012 Mar 12;209(3):507-20. doi: 10.1084/jem.20111424. Epub 2012 Mar 5.

Autocrine VEGF-VEGFR2-Neuropilin-1 signaling promotes glioma stem-like cell
viability and tumor growth.

Hamerlik P(1), Lathia JD, Rasmussen R, Wu Q, Bartkova J, Lee M, Moudry P, Bartek 
J Jr, Fischer W, Lukas J, Rich JN, Bartek J.

Author information: 
(1)Danish Cancer Society Research Center and Centre for Genotoxic Stress
Research, DK-2100 Copenhagen, Denmark.

Although vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) receptor 2 (VEGFR2) is
traditionally regarded as an endothelial cell protein, evidence suggests that
VEGFRs may be expressed by cancer cells. Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is a
lethal cancer characterized by florid vascularization and aberrantly elevated
VEGF. Antiangiogenic therapy with the humanized VEGF antibody bevacizumab reduces
GBM tumor growth; however, the clinical benefits are transient and invariably
followed by tumor recurrence. In this study, we show that VEGFR2 is
preferentially expressed on the cell surface of the CD133(+) human glioma
stem-like cells (GSCs), whose viability, self-renewal, and tumorigenicity rely,
at least in part, on signaling through the VEGF-VEGFR2-Neuropilin-1 (NRP1) axis. 
We find that the limited impact of bevacizumab-mediated VEGF blockage may reflect
ongoing autocrine signaling through VEGF-VEGFR2-NRP1, which is associated with
VEGFR2-NRP1 recycling and a pool of active VEGFR2 within a cytosolic compartment 
of a subset of human GBM cells. Whereas bevacizumab failed to inhibit prosurvival
effects of VEGFR2-mediated signaling, GSC viability under unperturbed or
radiation-evoked stress conditions was attenuated by direct inhibition of VEGFR2 
tyrosine kinase activity and/or shRNA-mediated knockdown of VEGFR2 or NRP1. We
propose that direct inhibition of VEGFR2 kinase may block the highly dynamic
VEGF-VEGFR2-NRP1 pathway and inspire a GBM treatment strategy to complement the
currently prevalent ligand neutralization approach.

PMCID: PMC3302235
PMID: 22393126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Development. 2012 Apr;139(8):1381-90. doi: 10.1242/dev.070052. Epub 2012 Feb 29.

The receptor tyrosine phosphatase Lar regulates adhesion between Drosophila male 
germline stem cells and the niche.

Srinivasan S(1), Mahowald AP, Fuller MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford University, School of Medicine, 
Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

The stem cell niche provides a supportive microenvironment to maintain adult stem
cells in their undifferentiated state. Adhesion between adult stem cells and
niche cells or the local basement membrane ensures retention of stem cells in the
niche environment. Drosophila male germline stem cells (GSCs) attach to somatic
hub cells, a component of their niche, through E-cadherin-mediated adherens
junctions, and orient their centrosomes toward these localized junctional
complexes to carry out asymmetric divisions. Here we show that the transmembrane 
receptor tyrosine phosphatase Leukocyte-antigen-related-like (Lar), which is best
known for its function in axonal migration and synapse morphogenesis in the
nervous system, helps maintain GSCs at the hub by promoting E-cadherin-based
adhesion between hub cells and GSCs. Lar is expressed in GSCs and early
spermatogonial cells and localizes to the hub-GSC interface. Loss of Lar function
resulted in a reduced number of GSCs at the hub. Lar function was required
cell-autonomously in germ cells for proper localization of Adenomatous polyposis 
coli 2 and E-cadherin at the hub-GSC interface and for the proper orientation of 
centrosomes in GSCs. Ultrastructural analysis revealed that in Lar mutants the
adherens junctions between hub cells and GSCs lack the characteristic dense
staining seen in wild-type controls. Thus, the Lar receptor tyrosine phosphatase 
appears to polarize and retain GSCs through maintenance of localized
E-cadherin-based adherens junctions.

PMCID: PMC3308176
PMID: 22378638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Curr Biol. 2012 Mar 20;22(6):515-21. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2012.01.056. Epub 2012
Feb 23.

The niche-dependent feedback loop generates a BMP activity gradient to determine 
the germline stem cell fate.

Xia L(1), Zheng X, Zheng W, Zhang G, Wang H, Tao Y, Chen D.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Datun Road, Chaoyang, Beijing 100101, P.R. China.

Stem cells interact with surrounding stromal cells (or niche) via signaling
pathways to precisely balance stem cell self-renewal and differentiation.
However, little is known about how niche signals are transduced dynamically and
differentially to stem cells and their intermediate progeny and how the fate
switch of stem cell to differentiating cell is initiated. The Drosophila ovarian 
germline stem cells (GSCs) have provided a heuristic model for studying the stem 
cell and niche interaction. Previous studies demonstrated that the
niche-dependent BMP signaling is essential for GSC self-renewal via silencing bam
transcription in GSCs. We recently revealed that the Fused (Fu)/Smurf complex
degrades the BMP type I receptor Tkv allowing for bam expression in
differentiating cystoblasts (CBs). However, how the Fu is differentially
regulated in GSCs and CBs remains unclear. Here we report that a niche-dependent 
feedback loop involving Tkv and Fu produces a steep gradient of BMP activity and 
determines GSC fate. Importantly, we show that Fu and graded BMP activity
dynamically develop within an intermediate cell, the precursor of CBs, during
GSC-to-CB transition. Our mathematic modeling reveals a bistable behavior of the 
feedback-loop system in controlling the bam transcriptional on/off switch and
determining GSC fate.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22365848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2012;99:79-113. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-387038-4.00004-5.

Small RNAs in germ cell development.

Banisch TU(1), Goudarzi M, Raz E.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Biology of Inflammation, Institute of Cell Biology,
University of Münster, Münster, Germany.

The identification of small RNA molecules and the elucidation of their functions 
in the cell enhanced our understanding of the mechanisms controlling gene
expression at the posttranscriptional level. Here, we review findings concerning 
the role small RNA molecules play in the development of the germline in various
organisms. In this context, microRNAs (miRNAs) function predominantly in
regulating mRNA expression and turnover and direct the expression of specific
proteins to founders of the germline, the primordial germ cells (PGCs). miRNA
function is then important for the maintenance of germline stem cells (GSCs) in
their niche and for coordinating GSC differentiation into the gametes. The second
family of small RNA molecules, the short endo-siRNAs, regulate gene expression
posttranscriptionally as well but are also important for transposable elements
regulation and thus for genome stability. Last, the Piwi-interacting small RNAs
(piRNAs) are specifically expressed in the germline, where they primarily control
transposon activity, guarding the genome from potential damage associated with
excessive transposition. Together, the function of these three groups of small
RNAs ensures proper development and continuation of the germline through the
generations.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22365736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Mol Biol Cell. 2012 Apr;23(8):1524-32. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E11-12-0999. Epub 2012
Feb 22.

Centrosome misorientation mediates slowing of the cell cycle under limited
nutrient conditions in Drosophila male germline stem cells.

Roth TM(1), Chiang CY, Inaba M, Yuan H, Salzmann V, Roth CE, Yamashita YM.

Author information: 
(1)Life Sciences Institute, Center for Stem Cell Biology, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Drosophila male germline stem cells (GSCs) divide asymmetrically, balancing
self-renewal and differentiation. Although asymmetric stem cell division balances
between self-renewal and differentiation, it does not dictate how frequently
differentiating cells must be produced. In male GSCs, asymmetric GSC division is 
achieved by stereotyped positioning of the centrosome with respect to the stem
cell niche. Recently we showed that the centrosome orientation checkpoint
monitors the correct centrosome orientation to ensure an asymmetric outcome of
the GSC division. When GSC centrosomes are not correctly oriented with respect to
the niche, GSC cell cycle is arrested/delayed until the correct centrosome
orientation is reacquired. Here we show that induction of centrosome
misorientation upon culture in poor nutrient conditions mediates slowing of GSC
cell proliferation via activation of the centrosome orientation checkpoint.
Consistently, inactivation of the centrosome orientation checkpoint leads to lack
of cell cycle slowdown even under poor nutrient conditions. We propose that
centrosome misorientation serves as a mediator that transduces nutrient
information into stem cell proliferation, providing a previously unappreciated
mechanism of stem cell regulation in response to nutrient conditions.

PMCID: PMC3327310
PMID: 22357619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Stem Cells. 2012 May;30(5):845-53. doi: 10.1002/stem.1062.

Differential proteomic analysis of human glioblastoma and neural stem cells
reveals HDGF as a novel angiogenic secreted factor.

Thirant C(1), Galan-Moya EM, Dubois LG, Pinte S, Chafey P, Broussard C, Varlet P,
Devaux B, Soncin F, Gavard J, Junier MP, Chneiweiss H.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U894, Psychiatry and Neuroscience Center, Glial Plasticity Team, Cochin
Institute, Paris Descartes University, Paris, France.

Presence in glioblastomas of cancer cells with normal neural stem cell (NSC)
properties, tumor initiating capacity, and resistance to current therapies
suggests that glioblastoma stem-like cells (GSCs) play central roles in
glioblastoma development. We cultured human GSCs endowed with all features of
tumor stem cells, including tumor initiation after xenograft and
radio-chemoresistance. We established proteomes from four GSC cultures and their 
corresponding whole tumor tissues (TTs) and from human NSCs. Two-dimensional
difference gel electrophoresis and tandem mass spectrometry revealed a twofold
increase of hepatoma-derived growth factor (HDGF) in GSCs as compared to TTs and 
NSCs. Western blot analysis confirmed HDGF overexpression in GSCs as well as its 
presence in GSC-conditioned medium, while, in contrast, no HDGF was detected in
NSC secretome. At the functional level, GSC-conditioned medium induced migration 
of human cerebral endothelial cells that can be blocked by anti-HDGF antibodies. 
In vivo, GSC-conditioned medium induced neoangiogenesis, whereas HDGF-targeting
siRNAs abrogated this effect. Altogether, our results identify a novel candidate,
by which GSCs can support neoangiogenesis, a high-grade glioma hallmark. Our
strategy illustrates the usefulness of comparative proteomic analysis to decipher
molecular pathways, which underlie GSC properties.

Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 22331796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2012 Feb 10;3(1):5. doi: 10.1186/scrt96.

Interleukin-1ß and transforming growth factor-ß cooperate to induce neurosphere
formation and increase tumorigenicity of adherent LN-229 glioma cells.

Wang L(1), Liu Z, Balivada S, Shrestha T, Bossmann S, Pyle M, Pappan L, Shi J,
Troyer D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Physiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Kansas
State University, Manhattan, KS 66506, USA. leiwang@vet.k-state.edu

INTRODUCTION: Glioma stem cells (GSCs) have the property of self-renewal and
appear to be a driving force for the initiation and recurrence of gliomas. We
recently found that the human tumorigenic LN-229 glioma cell line failed to form 
neurospheres in serum-free conditions and generated mostly small tumors in vivo, 
suggesting that either LN-229 GSCs are not active in these conditions or GSCs are
absent in the LN-229 cell line.
METHODS: Using self-renewal assay, soft-agar colony assay, cell proliferation
assay, invasion assay, real time PCR analysis, ELISA and in vivo tumorigenic
assay, we investigated the effects of interleukin (IL)-1ß and transforming growth
factor (TGF)-ß on the development of GSCs from LN-229 cells.
RESULTS: Here, we demonstrate that the combination of IL-1ß and TGF-ß can induce 
LN-229 cells to form neurospheres in serum-free medium. IL-1ß/TGF-ß-induced
neurospheres display up-regulated expression of stemness factor genes (nestin,
Bmi-1, Notch-2 and LIF), and increased invasiveness, drug resistance and tumor
growth in vivo: hallmarks of GSCs. These results indicate that IL-1ß and TGF-ß
cooperate to induce a GSC phenotype in the LN-229 cell line. Induction of nestin,
LIF and Notch-2 by IL-1ß/TGF-ß can be reverted after cytokine withdrawal.
Remarkably, however, up-regulated Bmi-1 levels remained unchanged after cytokine 
withdrawal; and the cytokine-withdrawn cells maintained strong clonogenicity,
suggesting that Bmi-1 may play a crucial role in tumorigenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our finding indicates that glioma cells without self-renewal
capability in standard conditions could also contribute to glioma malignancy when
cytokines, such as IL-1ß and TGF-ß, are present in the tumor environment.
Targeting GSC-promoting cytokines that are highly expressed in glioblastomas may 
contribute to the development of more effective glioma therapies.

PMCID: PMC3340549
PMID: 22330721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Agric Food Chem. 2012 Mar 7;60(9):2309-15. doi: 10.1021/jf205199j. Epub 2012
Feb 21.

Antiallergic activity of novel isoflavone methyl-glycosides from Cordyceps
militaris grown on germinated soybeans in antigen-stimulated mast cells.

Park DK(1), Choi WS, Park HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Konkuk University, Seoul, Republic
of Korea.

Isoflavones are known to possess immunomodulating and antiallergic activities.
Previously we identified novel isoflavone methyl-glycosides (daidzein
7-O-ß-d-glucoside 4<U+2033>-O-methylate (CDGM), glycitein 7-O-ß-D-glucoside
4<U+2033>-O-methylate (CGLM), genistein 7-O-ß-D-glucoside 4<U+2033>-O-methylate (CGNMI) and
genistein 4'-O-ß-D-glucoside 4<U+2033>-O-methylate (CGNMII)) from Cordyceps militaris
grown on germinated soybeans (GSC). The biological activity of novel isoflavone
methyl-glycosides, however, remains unknown. In this study, CGNMII showed the
strongest inhibition of degranulation. Additionally, the release of interleukin
(IL)-4 and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-a was decreased by CGNMII in
antigen-stimulated RBL-2H3 cells. To elucidate the antiallergic mechanism of
CGNMII, we examined whether it affected levels of signaling molecules responsible
for degranulation. The levels of activated Lyn, Syk, PLC<U+03B3>1 and LAT proteins were 
reduced in CGNMII treated RBL-2H3 cells. CGNMII also inhibited the activation of 
AKT and ERK1/2 proteins. These results suggest that CGNMII might be used as a
therapeutic agent for allergic diseases.

PMID: 22296272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. BMC Bioinformatics. 2012 Jan 30;13:17. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-13-17.

Training text chunkers on a silver standard corpus: can silver replace gold?

Kang N(1), van Mulligen EM, Kors JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Informatics, Erasmus University Medical Center, P,O, Box
2040, 3000 CA Rotterdam, The Netherlands. n.kang@erasmusmc.nl

BACKGROUND: To train chunkers in recognizing noun phrases and verb phrases in
biomedical text, an annotated corpus is required. The creation of gold standard
corpora (GSCs), however, is expensive and time-consuming. GSCs therefore tend to 
be small and to focus on specific subdomains, which limits their usefulness. We
investigated the use of a silver standard corpus (SSC) that is automatically
generated by combining the outputs of multiple chunking systems. We explored two 
use scenarios: one in which chunkers are trained on an SSC in a new domain for
which a GSC is not available, and one in which chunkers are trained on an
available, although small GSC but supplemented with an SSC.
RESULTS: We have tested the two scenarios using three chunkers, Lingpipe,
OpenNLP, and Yamcha, and two different corpora, GENIA and PennBioIE. For the
first scenario, we showed that the systems trained for noun-phrase recognition on
the SSC in one domain performed 2.7-3.1 percentage points better in terms of
F-score than the systems trained on the GSC in another domain, and only 0.2-0.8
percentage points less than when they were trained on a GSC in the same domain as
the SSC. When the outputs of the chunkers were combined, the combined system
showed little improvement when using the SSC. For the second scenario, the
systems trained on a GSC supplemented with an SSC performed considerably better
than systems that were trained on the GSC alone, especially when the GSC was
small. For example, training the chunkers on a GSC consisting of only 10
abstracts but supplemented with an SSC yielded similar performance as training
them on a GSC of 100-250 abstracts. The combined system even performed better
than any of the individual chunkers trained on a GSC of 500 abstracts.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that an SSC can be a viable alternative for or a
supplement to a GSC when training chunkers in a biomedical domain. A combined
system only shows improvement if the SSC is used to supplement a GSC. Whether the
approach is applicable to other systems in a natural-language processing pipeline
has to be further investigated.

PMCID: PMC3280170
PMID: 22289351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Wiley Interdiscip Rev RNA. 2012 Mar-Apr;3(2):229-46. doi: 10.1002/wrna.1107. Epub
2012 Jan 25.

Structural insight into RNA recognition motifs: versatile molecular Lego building
blocks for biological systems.

Muto Y(1), Yokoyama S.

Author information: 
(1)Systems and Structural Biology Center, RIKEN, Tsurumi, Japan.
ymuto@gsc.riken.go.jp

'RNA recognition motifs (RRMs)' are common domain-folds composed of 80-90
amino-acid residues in eukaryotes, and have been identified in many cellular
proteins. At first they were known as RNA binding domains. Through discoveries
over the past 20 years, however, the RRMs have been shown to exhibit versatile
molecular recognition activities and to behave as molecular Lego building blocks 
to construct biological systems. Novel RNA/protein recognition modes by RRMs are 
being identified, and more information about the molecular recognition by RRMs is
becoming available. These RNA/protein recognition modes are strongly correlated
with their biological significance. In this review, we would like to survey the
recent progress on these versatile molecular recognition modules.

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 22278943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2012 May;69(5):1205-12. doi:
10.1007/s00280-012-1823-0. Epub 2012 Jan 19.

Correlation between low-level expression of the tumor suppressor gene TAp73 and
the chemoresistance of human glioma stem cells.

Hu X(1), Wu N, Xia P, Yu S, Sun F, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical University,
Chongqing 400038, China.

OBJECTIVE: Glioma stem cells (GSCs) are regarded as the root of glioma growth and
recurrence. Chemoresistance is one of the characteristics of GSCs that increases 
the difficulties in eradicating the cells by anticancer drugs.
PURPOSE: The objective of this study is to investigate the correlation between
expression of the tumor suppressor gene TAp73 and the chemoresistance of human
GSCs.
METHODS: MTT and tumor sphere formation assays were used to analyze the
chemoresistance phenotype of GSCs derived from primary human glioma specimens
under cisplatin exposure. Reverse transcription real-time PCR was applied for
assaying mRNA levels of TAp73. Protein levels of TAp73, p21, Bax, and cleared
caspase 3 were assayed by western blot. Cell apoptosis was analyzed by flow
cytometry after the annexin V fluorescence staining.
RESULTS: GSCs exhibited increased chemoresistance compared to differentiated
glioma cells (DGCs) derived from the same tumor specimen. The expression of TAp73
was lower in GSCs and was not sensitive to cisplatin treatment as compared to
DGCs. Overexpression of TAp73 by transfection increased the apoptosis of GSCs in 
the presence of cisplatin and reduced the chemoresistance of GSC. TAp73 knockdown
by siRNA in DGCs reduced cisplatin-induced apoptosis and increased the resistance
to cisplatin.
CONCLUSION: These findings indicate that TAp73 silencing is hallmark of GSC to
maintain their chemoresistance phenotype. Thus, targeting TAp73 may provide a
novel strategy to eradicating GSCs.

PMID: 22258403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Brain Pathol. 2012 Sep;22(5):677-88. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2012.00566.x. Epub 
2012 Feb 21.

Characterization of glioma stem cells through multiple stem cell markers and
their specific sensitization to double-strand break-inducing agents by
pharmacological inhibition of ataxia telangiectasia mutated protein.

Raso A(1), Vecchio D, Cappelli E, Ropolo M, Poggi A, Nozza P, Biassoni R,
Mascelli S, Capra V, Kalfas F, Severi P, Frosina G.

Author information: 
(1)Neurosurgery Unit, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy.

Previous studies have shown that tumor-driving glioma stem cells (GSC) may
promote radio-resistance by constitutive activation of the DNA damage response
started by the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) protein. We have investigated 
whether GSC may be specifically sensitized to ionizing radiation by inhibiting
the DNA damage response. Two grade IV glioma cell lines (BORRU and DR177) were
characterized for a number of immunocytochemical, karyotypic, proliferative and
differentiative parameters. In particular, the expression of a panel of nine stem
cell markers was quantified by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) and flow cytometry. Overall, BORRU and DR177 displayed pronounced and
poor stem phenotypes, respectively. In order to improve the therapeutic efficacy 
of radiation on GSC, the cells were preincubated with a nontoxic concentration of
the ATM inhibitors KU-55933 and KU-60019 and then irradiated. BORRU cells were
sensitized to radiation and radio-mimetic chemicals by ATM inhibitors whereas
DR177 were protected under the same conditions. No sensitization was observed
after cell differentiation or to drugs unable to induce double-strand breaks
(DSB), indicating that ATM inhibitors specifically sensitize glioma cells
possessing stem phenotype to DSB-inducing agents. In conclusion, pharmacological 
inhibition of ATM may specifically sensitize GSC to DSB-inducing agents while
sparing nonstem cells.

© 2012 The Authors; Brain Pathology © 2012 International Society of
Neuropathology.

PMID: 22257080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. BMC Dev Biol. 2012 Jan 17;12:4. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-12-4.

Fine scale analysis of gene expression in Drosophila melanogaster gonads reveals 
Programmed cell death 4 promotes the differentiation of female germline stem
cells.

Cash AC(1), Andrews J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University, Myers Hall, 915 East Third St,,
Bloomington, IN 47403, USA.

BACKGROUND: Germline stem cells (GSCs) are present in the gonads of Drosophila
females and males, and their proper maintenance, as well as their correct
differentiation, is essential for fertility and fecundity. The molecular
characterization of factors involved in maintenance and differentiation is a
major goal both in Drosophila and stem cell research. While genetic studies have 
identified many of these key factors, the use of genome-wide expression studies
holds the potential to greatly increase our knowledge of these pathways.
RESULTS: Here we report a genome-wide expression study that uses laser cutting
microdissection to isolate germline stem cells, somatic niche cells, and early
differentiating germ cells from female and male gonads. Analysis of this data, in
association with two previously published genome-wide GSC data sets, revealed
sets of candidate genes as putatively expressed in specific cell populations.
Investigation of one of these genes, CG10990 the Drosophila ortholog of mammalian
Programmed cell death 4 (Pdcd4), reveals expression in female and male germline
stem cells and early differentiating daughter cells. Functional analysis
demonstrates that while it is not essential for oogenesis or spermatogenesis, it 
does function to promote the differentiation of GSCs in females. Furthermore, in 
females, Pdcd4 genetically interacts with the key differentiation gene bag of
marbles (bam) and the stem cell renewal factor eIF4A, suggesting a possible
pathway for its function in differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: We propose that Pdcd4 promotes the differentiation of GSC daughter
cells by relieving the eIF4A-mediated inhibition of Bam.

PMCID: PMC3322342
PMID: 22252300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Food Funct. 2012 Mar;3(3):302-11. doi: 10.1039/c2fo10203j. Epub 2012 Jan 12.

Surface-active solid lipid nanoparticles as Pickering stabilizers for
oil-in-water emulsions.

Gupta R(1), Rousseau D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biology, Ryerson University, Toronto, Canada.

Oil-in-water (O/W) emulsions solely stabilized by surface-active solid lipid
nanoparticles (SLNs) were developed. The SLNs were generated by quench-cooling
hot O/W nanoemulsions consisting of 7.5% glyceryl stearyl citrate (GSC) dispersed
in water. Their initial volume-weighted mean particle diameter (~152 nm) and zeta
potential (ca.-49 mV) remained unchanged for 24 weeks. O/W emulsions (oil phase
volume fraction: 0.2) containing 7.5% (w/w) GSC SLNs in the aqueous phase were
kinetically-stable for 12 weeks and did not visually phase-separate over 24
weeks. The O/W emulsions generated with solid-state GSC SLNs had a
volume-weighted mean oil droplet diameter of ~459 nm and a zeta potential of
ca.-43 mV. Emulsion microstructure evaluated with TEM revealed dispersed oil
droplets sparsely covered with adsorbed Pickering-type SLNs as well aggregated
SLNs present in the continuous phase. Gradual emulsion destabilization resulted
from GSC SLN dissolution during the experimental timeframe. Overall,
surface-active SLNs developed via nanoemulsions effectively kinetically
stabilized O/W emulsions.

PMID: 22237667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Mar 1;18(5):1268-80. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-1795.
Epub 2012 Jan 9.

Telomestatin impairs glioma stem cell survival and growth through the disruption 
of telomeric G-quadruplex and inhibition of the proto-oncogene, c-Myb.

Miyazaki T(1), Pan Y, Joshi K, Purohit D, Hu B, Demir H, Mazumder S, Okabe S,
Yamori T, Viapiano M, Shin-ya K, Seimiya H, Nakano I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, Dardinger, Center for Neuro-oncology,
James Cancer Hospital and The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

PURPOSE: Glioma stem cells (GSC) are a critical therapeutic target of
glioblastoma multiforme (GBM).
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The effects of a G-quadruplex ligand, telomestatin, were
evaluated using patient-derived GSCs, non-stem tumor cells (non-GSC), and normal 
fetal neural precursors in vitro and in vivo. The molecular targets of
telomestatin were determined by immunofluorescence in situ hybridization (iFISH) 
and cDNA microarray. The data were then validated by in vitro and in vivo
functional assays, as well as by immunohistochemistry against 90 clinical
samples.
RESULTS: Telomestatin impaired the maintenance of GSC stem cell state by inducing
apoptosis in vitro and in vivo. The migration potential of GSCs was also impaired
by telomestatin treatment. In contrast, both normal neural precursors and
non-GSCs were relatively resistant to telomestatin. Treatment of GSC-derived
mouse intracranial tumors reduced tumor sizes in vivo without a noticeable cell
death in normal brains. iFISH revealed both telomeric and non-telomeric DNA
damage by telomestatin in GSCs but not in non-GSCs. cDNA microarray identified a 
proto-oncogene, c-Myb, as a novel molecular target of telomestatin in GSCs, and
pharmacodynamic analysis in telomestatin-treated tumor-bearing mouse brains
showed a reduction of c-Myb in tumors in vivo. Knockdown of c-Myb phenocopied
telomestatin-treated GSCs both in vitro and in vivo, and restoring c-Myb by
overexpression partially rescued the phenotype. Finally, c-Myb expression was
markedly elevated in surgical specimens of GBMs compared with normal tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that telomestatin potently eradicates GSCs
through telomere disruption and c-Myb inhibition, and this study suggests a novel
GSC-directed therapeutic strategy for GBMs.

PMCID: PMC3896097
PMID: 22230766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Stem Cells. 2012 Mar;30(3):405-14. doi: 10.1002/stem.1020.

REST regulates oncogenic properties of glioblastoma stem cells.

Kamal MM(1), Sathyan P, Singh SK, Zinn PO, Marisetty AL, Liang S, Gumin J,
El-Mesallamy HO, Suki D, Colman H, Fuller GN, Lang FF, Majumder S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics,The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Erratum in
    Stem Cells. 2012 May;30(5):1049.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) tumors are the most common malignant primary brain 
tumors in adults. Although many GBM tumors are believed to be caused by
self-renewing, glioblastoma-derived stem-like cells (GSCs), the mechanisms that
regulate self-renewal and other oncogenic properties of GSCs are only now being
unraveled. Here we showed that GSCs derived from GBM patient specimens express
varying levels of the transcriptional repressor repressor element 1 silencing
transcription factor (REST), suggesting heterogeneity across different GSC lines.
Loss- and gain-of-function experiments indicated that REST maintains self-renewal
of GSCs. High REST-expressing GSCs (HR-GSCs) produced tumors histopathologically 
distinct from those generated by low REST-expressing GSCs (LR-GSCs) in orthotopic
mouse brain tumor models. Knockdown of REST in HR-GSCs resulted in increased
survival in GSC-transplanted mice and produced tumors with higher apoptotic and
lower invasive properties. Conversely, forced expression of exogenous REST in
LR-GSCs produced decreased survival in mice and produced tumors with lower
apoptotic and higher invasive properties, similar to HR-GSCs. Thus, based on our 
results, we propose that a novel function of REST is to maintain self-renewal and
other oncogenic properties of GSCs and that REST can play a major role in
mediating tumorigenicity in GBM.

Copyright © 2011 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4039365
PMID: 22228704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2012 Mar;23(3):447-57. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2011070666. Epub 2012
Jan 5.

Multiple factors influence glomerular albumin permeability in rats.

Sandoval RM(1), Wagner MC, Patel M, Campos-Bilderback SB, Rhodes GJ, Wang E, Wean
SE, Clendenon SS, Molitoris BA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Indiana Center for Biological 
Microscopy, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Comment in
    J Am Soc Nephrol. 2012 Mar;23(3):373-5.

Different laboratories recently reported incongruous results describing the
quantification of albumin filtration using two-photon microscopy. We investigated
the factors that influence the glomerular sieving coefficient for albumin
(GSC(A)) in an effort to explain these discordant reports and to develop standard
operating procedures for determining GSC(A). Multiple factors influenced GSC(A), 
including the kidney depth of image acquisition (10-20 µm was appropriate), the
selection of fluorophore (probes emitting longer wavelengths were superior), the 
selection of plasma regions for fluorescence measurements, the size and molecular
dispersion characteristics of dextran polymers if used, dietary status, and the
genetic strain of rat. Fasting reduced the GSC(A) in Simonsen Munich Wistar rats 
from 0.035±0.005 to 0.016±0.004 (P<0.01). Frömter Munich Wistar rats had a much
lower GSC(A) in both the fed and the fasted states. Finally, we documented
extensive albumin transcytosis with vesicular and tubular delivery to and fusion 
with the basolateral membrane in S1 proximal tubule cells. In summary, these
results help explain the previously conflicting microscopy and micropuncture data
describing albumin filtration and highlight the dynamic nature of glomerular
albumin permeability.

PMCID: PMC3294301
PMID: 22223875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. PLoS Genet. 2011 Dec;7(12):e1002426. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002426. Epub 2011
Dec 22.

Histone H3K9 trimethylase Eggless controls germline stem cell maintenance and
differentiation.

Wang X(1), Pan L, Wang S, Zhou J, McDowell W, Park J, Haug J, Staehling K, Tang
H, Xie T.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, Missouri, United States
of America.

Epigenetic regulation plays critical roles in the regulation of cell
proliferation, fate determination, and survival. It has been shown to control
self-renewal and lineage differentiation of embryonic stem cells. However,
epigenetic regulation of adult stem cell function remains poorly defined.
Drosophila ovarian germline stem cells (GSCs) are a productive adult stem cell
system for revealing regulatory mechanisms controlling self-renewal and
differentiation. In this study, we show that Eggless (Egg), a H3K9
methyltransferase in Drosophila, is required in GSCs for controlling self-renewal
and in escort cells for regulating germ cell differentiation. egg mutant ovaries 
primarily exhibit germ cell differentiation defects in young females and
gradually lose GSCs with time, indicating that Egg regulates both germ cell
maintenance and differentiation. Marked mutant egg GSCs lack expression of
trimethylated H3K9 (H3k9me3) and are rapidly lost from the niche, but their
mutant progeny can still differentiate into 16-cell cysts, indicating that Egg is
required intrinsically to control GSC self-renewal but not differentiation.
Interestingly, BMP-mediated transcriptional repression of differentiation factor 
bam in marked egg mutant GSCs remains normal, indicating that Egg is dispensable 
for BMP signaling in GSCs. Normally, Bam and Bgcn interact with each other to
promote GSC differentiation. Interestingly, marked double mutant egg bgcn GSCs
are still lost, but their progeny are able to differentiate into 16-cell cysts
though bgcn mutant GSCs normally do not differentiate, indicating that Egg
intrinsically controls GSC self-renewal through repressing a Bam/Bgcn-independent
pathway. Surprisingly, RNAi-mediated egg knockdown in escort cells leads to their
gradual loss and a germ cell differentiation defect. The germ cell
differentiation defect is at least in part attributed to an increase in BMP
signaling in the germ cell differentiation niche. Therefore, this study has
revealed the essential roles of histone H3K9 trimethylation in controlling stem
cell maintenance and differentiation through distinct mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3245301
PMID: 22216012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Genes Genet Syst. 2011;86(4):221-9.

Discovery of the "RNA continent" through a contrarian's research strategy.

Hayashizaki Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Omics Science Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Kanagawa, Japan.
yosihide@gsc.riken.jp

The International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium completed the decoding of
the human genome sequence in 2003. Readers will be aware of the paradigm shift
which has occurred since then in the field of life science research. At last,
mankind has been able to focus on a complete picture of the full extent of the
genome, on which is recorded the basic information that controls all life.
Meanwhile, another genome project, centered on Japan and known as the mouse
genome encyclopedia project, was progressing with participation from around the
world. Led by our research group at RIKEN, it was a full-length cDNA project
which aimed to decode the whole RNA (transcriptome) using the mouse as a model.
The basic information that controls all life is recorded on the genome, but in
order to obtain a complete picture of this extensive information, the decoding of
the genome alone is far from sufficient. These two genome projects established
that the number of letters in the genome, which is the blueprint of life, is
finite, that the number of RNA molecules derived from it is also finite, and that
the number of protein molecules derived from the RNA is probably finite too. A
massive number of combinations is still involved, but we are now able to
understand one section of the network formed by these data. Once an object of
study has been understood to be finite, establishing an image of the whole is
certain to lead us to an understanding of the whole. Omics is an approach that
views the information controlling life as finite and seeks to assemble and
analyze it as a whole. Here, I would like to present our transcriptome research
while making reference to our unique research strategy.

PMID: 22214591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Insects. 2012 Jun 19;3(2):573-92. doi: 10.3390/insects3020573.

Influences of Plant Traits on Immune Responses of Specialist and Generalist
Herbivores.

Lampert E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Gainesville State College, Oakwood, GA
30566, USA. elampert@gsc.edu.

Specialist and generalist insect herbivore species often differ in how they
respond to host plant traits, particularly defensive traits, and these responses 
can include weakened or strengthened immune responses to pathogens and parasites.
Accurate methods to measure immune response in the presence and absence of
pathogens and parasites are necessary to determine whether susceptibility to
these natural enemies is reduced or increased by host plant traits. Plant
chemical traits are particularly important in that host plant metabolites may
function as antioxidants beneficial to the immune response, or interfere with the
immune response of both specialist and generalist herbivores. Specialist
herbivores that are adapted to process and sometimes accumulate specific plant
compounds may experience high metabolic demands that may decrease immune
response, whereas the metabolic demands of generalist species differ due to more 
broad-substrate enzyme systems. However, the direct deleterious effects of plant 
compounds on generalist herbivores may weaken their immune responses. Further
research in this area is important given that the ecological relevance of plant
traits to herbivore immune responses is equally important in natural systems and 
agroecosystems, due to potential incompatibility of some host plant species and
cultivars with biological control agents of herbivorous pests.

PMCID: PMC4553612
PMID: 26466545  [PubMed]


33. Expert Opin Biol Ther. 2012 Feb;12(2):165-78. doi: 10.1517/14712598.2012.648180. 
Epub 2011 Dec 26.

Immunotherapy targeting glioma stem cells--insights and perspectives.

Li Z(1), Lee JW, Mukherjee D, Ji J, Jeswani SP, Black KL, Yu JS.

Author information: 
(1)Maxine Dunitz Neurosurgical Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 8361 West 
Third Street, Suite 800 E, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most aggressive and lethal
primary malignant brain tumor. Although progress has been made in current
conventional therapies for GBM patients, the effect of these advances on clinical
outcomes has been disappointing. Recent research into the origin of cancers
suggest that GBM cancer stem cells (GSC) are the source of initial tumor
formation, resistance to current conventional therapeutics and eventual patient
relapse. Currently, there are very few studies that apply immunotherapy to target
GSC.
AREAS COVERED: CD133, a cell surface protein, is used extensively as a surface
marker to identify and isolate GSC in malignant glioma. We discuss biomarkers
such as CD133, L1-cell adhesion molecule (L1-CAM), and A20 of GSC. We review
developing novel treatment modalities, including immunotherapy strategies, to
target GSC.
EXPERT OPINION: There are very few reports of preclinical studies targeting GSC. 
Identification and validation of unique molecular signatures and elucidation of
signaling pathways involved in survival, proliferation and differentiation of GSC
will significantly advance this field and provide a framework for the rational
design of a new generation of antigen-specific, anti-GSC immunotherapy- and
nanotechnology-based targeted therapyies. Combined with other therapeutic
avenues, GSC-targeting therapies may represent a new paradigm to treat GBM
patients.

PMID: 22200324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Cell. 2011 Dec 23;147(7):1511-24. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.11.032.

A poised chromatin platform for TGF-ß access to master regulators.

Xi Q(1), Wang Z, Zaromytidou AI, Zhang XH, Chow-Tsang LF, Liu JX, Kim H, Barlas
A, Manova-Todorova K, Kaartinen V, Studer L, Mark W, Patel DJ, Massagué J.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology and Genetics Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center,
New York, NY 10065, USA.

Specific chromatin marks keep master regulators of differentiation silent yet
poised for activation by extracellular signals. We report that nodal TGF-ß
signals use the poised histone mark H3K9me3 to trigger differentiation of
mammalian embryonic stem cells. Nodal receptors induce the formation of companion
Smad4-Smad2/3 and TRIM33-Smad2/3 complexes. The PHD-Bromo cassette of TRIM33
facilitates binding of TRIM33-Smad2/3 to H3K9me3 and H3K18ac on the promoters of 
mesendoderm regulators Gsc and Mixl1. The crystal structure of this cassette,
bound to histone H3 peptides, illustrates that PHD recognizes K9me3, and Bromo
binds an adjacent K18ac. The interaction between TRIM33-Smad2/3 and H3K9me3
displaces the chromatin-compacting factor HP1<U+03B3>, making nodal response elements
accessible to Smad4-Smad2/3 for Pol II recruitment. In turn, Smad4 increases K18 
acetylation to augment TRIM33-Smad2/3 binding. Thus, nodal effectors use the
H3K9me3 mark as a platform to switch master regulators of stem cell
differentiation from the poised to the active state.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3582033
PMID: 22196728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Dev Biol. 2012 Feb 1;362(1):94-103. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.11.017. Epub 2011
Dec 6.

EVEN-SKIPPED HOMEOBOX 1 controls human ES cell differentiation by directly
repressing GOOSECOID expression.

Kalisz M(1), Winzi M, Bisgaard HC, Serup P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Hagedorn Research Institute, Gentofte,
Denmark. pas@hagedorn.dk

TGFß signaling patterns the primitive streak, yet little is known about
transcriptional effectors that mediate the cell fate choices during streak-like
development in mammalian embryos and in embryonic stem (ES) cells. Here we
demonstrate that cross-antagonistic actions of EVEN-SKIPPED HOMEOBOX 1 (EVX1) and
GOOSECOID (GSC) regulate cell fate decisions in streak-like progenitors derived
from human ES cells exposed to BMP4 and/or activin. We found that EVX1 repressed 
GSC expression and promoted formation of posterior streak-like progeny in
response to BMP4, and conversely that GSC repressed EVX1 expression and was
required for development of anterior streak-like progeny in response to activin. 
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed that EVX1 bound to the GSC
5'-flanking region in BMP4 treated human ES cells, and band shift assays
identified two EVX1 binding sites in the GSC 5'-region. Significantly, we found
that intact EVX1 binding sites were required for BMP4-mediated repression of GSC 
reporter constructs. We conclude that BMP4-induced EVX1 repress GSC directly and 
the two genes form the core of a gene regulatory network (GRN) controlling cell
fates in streak-like human ES cell progeny.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22178155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2012 Jan 4;104(1):42-55. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djr509. Epub 2011 
Dec 15.

Oncolytic virus-mediated manipulation of DNA damage responses: synergy with
chemotherapy in killing glioblastoma stem cells.

Kanai R(1), Rabkin SD, Yip S, Sgubin D, Zaupa CM, Hirose Y, Louis DN, Wakimoto H,
Martuza RL.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Tumor Research Center, Department of Neurosurgery, Massachusetts General
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114 , USA.

BACKGROUND: Although both the alkylating agent temozolomide (TMZ) and oncolytic
viruses hold promise for treating glioblastoma, which remains uniformly lethal,
the effectiveness of combining the two treatments and the mechanism of their
interaction on cancer stem cells are unknown.
METHODS: We investigated the efficacy of combining TMZ and the oncolytic herpes
simplex virus (oHSV) G47<U+0394> in killing glioblastoma stem cells (GSCs), using
Chou-Talalay combination index analysis, immunocytochemistry and fluorescence
microscopy, and neutral comet assay. The role of treatment-induced DNA
double-strand breaks, activation of DNA damage responses, and virus replication
in the cytotoxic interaction between G47<U+0394> and TMZ was examined with a panel of
pharmacological inhibitors and short-hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated knockdown of
DNA repair pathways. Comparisons of cell survival and virus replication were
performed using a two-sided t test (unpaired). The survival of athymic mice (n = 
6-8 mice per group) bearing GSC-derived glioblastoma tumors treated with the
combination of G47<U+0394> and TMZ was analyzed by the Kaplan-Meier method and evaluated
with a two-sided log-rank test.
RESULTS: The combination of G47<U+0394> and TMZ acted synergistically in killing GSCs
but not neurons, with associated robust induction of DNA damage. Pharmacological 
and shRNA-mediated knockdown studies suggested that activated ataxia
telangiectasia mutated (ATM) is a crucial mediator of synergy. Activated ATM
relocalized to HSV DNA replication compartments where it likely enhanced oHSV
replication and could not participate in repairing TMZ-induced DNA damage.
Sensitivity to TMZ and synergy with G47<U+0394> decreased with
O(6)-methylguanine-DNA-methyltransferase (MGMT) expression and MSH6 knockdown.
Combined G47<U+0394> and TMZ treatment extended survival of mice bearing GSC-derived
intracranial tumors, achieving long-term remission in four of eight mice (median 
survival = 228 days; G47<U+0394> alone vs G47<U+0394> + TMZ, hazard ratio of survival = 7.1,
95% confidence interval = 1.9 to 26.1, P = .003) at TMZ doses attainable in
patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The combination of G47<U+0394> and TMZ acts synergistically in killing GSCs
through oHSV-mediated manipulation of DNA damage responses. This strategy is
highly efficacious in representative preclinical models and warrants clinical
translation.

PMCID: PMC3250384
PMID: 22173583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Biomed Semantics. 2011 Oct 6;2 Suppl 5:S11. doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-2-S5-S11.

Assessment of NER solutions against the first and second CALBC Silver Standard
Corpus.

Rebholz-Schuhmann D(1), Jimeno Yepes A, Li C, Kafkas S, Lewin I, Kang N, Corbett 
P, Milward D, Buyko E, Beisswanger E, Hornbostel K, Kouznetsov A, Witte R,
Laurila JB, Baker CJ, Kuo CJ, Clematide S, Rinaldi F, Farkas R, Móra G, Hara K,
Furlong LI, Rautschka M, Neves ML, Pascual-Montano A, Wei Q, Collier N, Chowdhury
MF, Lavelli A, Berlanga R, Morante R, Van Asch V, Daelemans W, Marina JL, van
Mulligen E, Kors J, Hahn U.

Author information: 
(1)EMBL Outstation, European Bioinformatics Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, CB10
1SD, U,K.

BACKGROUND: Competitions in text mining have been used to measure the performance
of automatic text processing solutions against a manually annotated gold standard
corpus (GSC). The preparation of the GSC is time-consuming and costly and the
final corpus consists at the most of a few thousand documents annotated with a
limited set of semantic groups. To overcome these shortcomings, the CALBC project
partners (PPs) have produced a large-scale annotated biomedical corpus with four 
different semantic groups through the harmonisation of annotations from automatic
text mining solutions, the first version of the Silver Standard Corpus (SSC-I).
The four semantic groups are chemical entities and drugs (CHED), genes and
proteins (PRGE), diseases and disorders (DISO) and species (SPE). This corpus has
been used for the First CALBC Challenge asking the participants to annotate the
corpus with their text processing solutions.
RESULTS: All four PPs from the CALBC project and in addition, 12 challenge
participants (CPs) contributed annotated data sets for an evaluation against the 
SSC-I. CPs could ignore the training data and deliver the annotations from their 
genuine annotation system, or could train a machine-learning approach on the
provided pre-annotated data. In general, the performances of the annotation
solutions were lower for entities from the categories CHED and PRGE in comparison
to the identification of entities categorized as DISO and SPE. The best
performance over all semantic groups were achieved from two annotation solutions 
that have been trained on the SSC-I.The data sets from participants were used to 
generate the harmonised Silver Standard Corpus II (SSC-II), if the participant
did not make use of the annotated data set from the SSC-I for training purposes. 
The performances of the participants' solutions were again measured against the
SSC-II. The performances of the annotation solutions showed again better results 
for DISO and SPE in comparison to CHED and PRGE.
CONCLUSIONS: The SSC-I delivers a large set of annotations (1,121,705) for a
large number of documents (100,000 Medline abstracts). The annotations cover four
different semantic groups and are sufficiently homogeneous to be reproduced with 
a trained classifier leading to an average F-measure of 85%. Benchmarking the
annotation solutions against the SSC-II leads to better performance for the CPs' 
annotation solutions in comparison to the SSC-I.

PMCID: PMC3239301
PMID: 22166494  [PubMed]


38. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e28394. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028394. Epub 2011 Dec 2.

Brachyury and related Tbx proteins interact with the Mixl1 homeodomain protein
and negatively regulate Mixl1 transcriptional activity.

Pereira LA(1), Wong MS, Lim SM, Sides A, Stanley EG, Elefanty AG.

Author information: 
(1)Differentiation and Transcription Laboratory, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre
and the Pathology Department, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia.

Mixl1 is a homeodomain transcription factor required for mesoderm and endoderm
patterning during mammalian embryogenesis. Despite its crucial function in
development, co-factors that modulate the activity of Mixl1 remain poorly
defined. Here we report that Mixl1 interacts physically and functionally with the
T-box protein Brachyury and related members of the T-box family of transcription 
factors. Transcriptional and protein analyses demonstrated overlapping expression
of Mixl1 and Brachyury during embryonic stem cell differentiation. In vitro
protein interaction studies showed that the Mixl1 with Brachyury associated via
their DNA-binding domains and gel shift assays revealed that the Brachyury T-box 
domain bound to Mixl1-DNA complexes. Furthermore, luciferase reporter experiments
indicated that association of Mixl1 with Brachyury and related T-box factors
inhibited the transactivating potential of Mixl1 on the Gsc and Pdgfra promoters.
Our results indicate that the activity of Mixl1 can be modulated by
protein-protein interactions and that T-box factors can function as negative
regulators of Mixl1 activity.

PMCID: PMC3229578
PMID: 22164283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e28508. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028508. Epub 2011 Dec 6.

Differential roles of HOW in male and female Drosophila germline differentiation.

Monk AC(1), Siddall NA, Fraser B, McLaughlin EA, Hime GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville,
Victoria, Australia.

The adult gonads in both male and female Drosophila melanogaster produce gametes 
that originate from a regenerative pool of germline stem cells (GSCs). The
differentiation programme that produces gametes must be co-ordinated with GSC
maintenance and proliferation in order to regulate tissue regeneration. The HOW
RNA-binding protein has been shown to maintain mitotic progression of male GSCs
and their daughters by maintenance of Cyclin B expression as well as suppressing 
accumulation of the differentiation factor Bam. Loss of HOW function in the male 
germline results in loss of GSCs due to a delay in G2 and subsequent apoptosis.
Here we show that female how mutant GSCs do not have any cell cycle defects
although HOW continues to bind bam mRNA and suppress Bam expression. The role of 
HOW in suppressing germ cell Bam expression appears to be conserved between
sexes, leading to different cellular outcomes in how mutants due to the different
functions of Bam. In addition the role in maintaining Cyclin B expression has not
been conserved so female how GSCs differentiate rather than arrest.

PMCID: PMC3232228
PMID: 22163028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Cell Cycle. 2012 Jan 1;11(1):26-32. doi: 10.4161/cc.11.1.18700. Epub 2012 Jan 1.

Modulation of WNT signaling activity is key to the formation of the embryonic
head.

Fossat N(1), Jones V, Garcia-Garcia MJ, Tam PP.

Author information: 
(1)Embryology Unit, Children's Medical Research Institute, University of Sydney, 
Westmead, Australia.

The formation of the embryonic head begins with the assembly of the progenitor
tissues of the brain, the head and face primordia and the foregut that are
derived from the primary germ layers during gastrulation. Specification of the
anterior-posterior polarity of major body parts and the morphogenesis of the head
and brain specifically is driven by inductive signals including those mediated by
BMP, Nodal, FGF and WNT. A critical role of ß-catenin dependent WNT signalling
activity for head morphogenesis has been revealed through the analysis of the
phenotypic impact of loss of function mutation of an antagonist: DKK1, a
transcriptional repressor: GSC; and the outcome of interaction of Dkk1 with genes
coding three components of the canonical signalling pathway: the ligand WNT3, the
co-receptor LRP6 and the transcriptional co-factor, ß-catenin. The findings
highlight the requirement of a stringent control of the timing, domain and level 
of canonical WNT signalling activity for the formation of the embryonic head.

PMID: 22157093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Food Chem Toxicol. 2012 Mar;50(3-4):567-74. doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2011.11.027. Epub 
2011 Nov 26.

Effect of garlic sulfur compounds on neutrophil infiltration and damage to the
intestinal mucosa by endotoxin in rats.

Lee SH(1), Liu YT, Chen KM, Lii CK, Liu CT.

Author information: 
(1)School of Nutrition, Department of Parasitology, Chung Shan Medical
University, and Department of Nutrition, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, 
Taichung 402, Taiwan.

We investigated the protective effects of garlic sulfur compounds (GSCs),
specifically, diallyl sulfide (DAS), diallyl disulfide (DADS), and diallyl
trisulfide (DATS), on endotoxin-induced intestinal damage. Wistar rats received
by gavage 0.125 or 0.025 mmol/kg body wt of each GSC or the vehicle (corn oil; 2 
mL/kg body wt) every other day for 2 weeks before being injected with endotoxin
(ip, 5 mg/kg body wt). Control rats were administered corn oil and were injected 
with sterile saline. Rats were killed at 18 h after injection. Both doses of DAS 
suppressed endotoxin-induced neutrophilia, serum levels of sICAM-1 and CINC-1,
cellular CD11b on neutrophils, and intestinal contents of ICAM-1, CINC-1,
TNF-alpha, and IL-1beta (p<0.05). DADS suppressed endotoxin-induced intestinal
contents of ICAM-1, TNF-alpha, and IL-1beta at both doses, but only suppressed
the serum sICAM-1 level and cellular CD11b on neutrophils at the low dose
(p<0.05). DATS did not ameliorate the endotoxin-induced serum level of sICAM-1 or
CINC-1 but suppressed intestinal IL-1beta at both doses. The low but not the high
dose of DATS also ameliorated the intestinal contents of ICAM-1 and TNF-alpha
(p<0.05). All GSCs reversed endotoxin-induced neutrophil infiltration and damage 
in the intestine, and the order of the effects of these GSCs to normalize
intestinal morphology was DAS>DADS>DATS.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22138247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. PLoS Biol. 2011 Nov;9(11):e1001202. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001202. Epub 2011 
Nov 22.

Coordinated regulation of niche and stem cell precursors by hormonal signaling.

Gancz D(1), Lengil T, Gilboa L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Regulation, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot,
Israel.

Stem cells and their niches constitute units that act cooperatively to achieve
adult body homeostasis. How such units form and whether stem cell and niche
precursors might be coordinated already during organogenesis are unknown. In
fruit flies, primordial germ cells (PGCs), the precursors of germ line stem cells
(GSCs), and somatic niche precursors develop within the larval ovary. Together
they form the 16-20 GSC units of the adult ovary. We show that ecdysone receptors
are required to coordinate the development of niche and GSC precursors. At early 
third instar, ecdysone receptors repress precocious differentiation of both
niches and PGCs. Early repression is required for correct morphogenesis of the
ovary and for protecting future GSCs from differentiation. At mid-third instar,
ecdysone signaling is required for niche formation. Finally, and concurrent with 
the initiation of wandering behavior, ecdysone signaling initiates PGC
differentiation by allowing the expression of the differentiation gene bag of
marbles in PGCs that are not protected by the newly formed niches. All the
ovarian functions of ecdysone receptors are mediated through early repression,
and late activation, of the ecdysone target gene broad. These results show that, 
similar to mammals, a brain-gland-gonad axis controls the initiation of oogenesis
in insects. They further exemplify how a physiological cue coordinates the
formation of a stem cell unit within an organ: it is required for niche
establishment and to ensure that precursor cells to adult stem cells remain
undifferentiated until the niches can accommodate them. Similar principles might 
govern the formation of additional stem cell units during organogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3222635
PMID: 22131903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Neuro Oncol. 2012 Feb;14(2):132-44. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/nor195. Epub 2011 Nov 7.

Maintenance of primary tumor phenotype and genotype in glioblastoma stem cells.

Wakimoto H(1), Mohapatra G, Kanai R, Curry WT Jr, Yip S, Nitta M, Patel AP,
Barnard ZR, Stemmer-Rachamimov AO, Louis DN, Martuza RL, Rabkin SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, 
USA. hwakimoto@partners.org

The clinicopathological heterogeneity of glioblastoma (GBM) and the various
genetic and phenotypic subtypes in GBM stem cells (GSCs) are well described.
However, the relationship between GSCs and the corresponding primary tumor from
which they were isolated is poorly understood. We have established GSC-enriched
neurosphere cultures from 15 newly diagnosed GBM specimens and examined the
relationship between the histopathological and genomic features of GSC-derived
orthotopic xenografts and those of the respective patient tumors. GSC-initiated
xenografts recapitulate the distinctive cytological hallmarks and diverse
histological variants associated with the corresponding patient GBM, including
giant cell and gemistocytic GBM, and primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET)-like 
components. This indicates that GSCs generate tumors that preserve
patient-specific disease phenotypes. The majority of GSC-derived intracerebral
xenografts (11 of 15) demonstrated a highly invasive behavior crossing the
midline, whereas the remainder formed discrete nodular and vascular masses. In
some cases, GSC invasiveness correlated with preoperative MRI, but not with the
status of PI3-kinase/Akt pathways or O(6)-methylguanine methyltransferase
expression. Genome-wide screening by array comparative genomic hybridization and 
fluorescence in situ hybridization revealed that GSCs harbor unique genetic copy 
number aberrations. GSCs acquiring amplifications of the myc family genes
represent only a minority of tumor cells within the original patient tumors.
Thus, GSCs are a genetically distinct subpopulation of neoplastic cells within a 
GBM. These studies highlight the value of GSCs for preclinical modeling of
clinically relevant, patient-specific GBM and, thus, pave the way for testing
novel anti-GSC/GBM agents for personalized therapy.

PMCID: PMC3266381
PMID: 22067563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Nov 15;108(46):18760-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1106676108. Epub 2011 Nov 7.

Separation of stem cell maintenance and transposon silencing functions of Piwi
protein.

Klenov MS(1), Sokolova OA, Yakushev EY, Stolyarenko AD, Mikhaleva EA, Lavrov SA, 
Gvozdev VA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics of the Cell, Institute of Molecular Genetics,
Russian Academy of Science, Moscow 123182, Russia.

Piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) and Piwi proteins have the evolutionarily
conserved function of silencing of repetitive genetic elements in germ lines. The
founder of the Piwi subfamily, Drosophila nuclear Piwi protein, was also shown to
be required for the maintenance of germ-line stem cells (GSCs). Hence, null
mutant piwi females exhibit two types of abnormalities, overexpression of
transposons and severely underdeveloped ovaries. It remained unknown whether the 
failure of GSC maintenance is related to transposon derepression or if GSC
self-renewal and piRNA silencing are two distinct functions of the Piwi protein. 
We have revealed a mutation, piwi(Nt), removing the nuclear localization signal
of the Piwi protein. piwi(Nt) females retain the ability of GSC self-renewal and 
a near-normal number of egg chambers in the ovarioles but display a drastic
transposable element derepression and nuclear accumulation of their transcripts
in the germ line. piwi(Nt) mutants are sterile most likely because of the
disturbance of piRNA-mediated transposon silencing. Analysis of chromatin
modifications in the piwi(Nt) ovaries indicated that Piwi causes chromatin
silencing only of certain types of transposons, whereas others are repressed in
the nuclei without their chromatin modification. Thus, Piwi nuclear localization 
that is required for its silencing function is not essential for the maintenance 
of GSCs. We suggest that the Piwi function in GSC self-renewal is independent of 
transposon repression and is normally realized in the cytoplasm of GSC niche
cells.

PMCID: PMC3219103
PMID: 22065765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Feb;40(4):1424-37. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr903. Epub 2011 Nov
3.

pre-miRNA profiles obtained through application of locked nucleic acids and deep 
sequencing reveals complex 5'/3' arm variation including concomitant cleavage and
polyuridylation patterns.

Burroughs AM(1), Kawano M, Ando Y, Daub CO, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Omics Science Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho,
Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama-shi, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. burrough@gsc.riken.jp

Recent research hints at an underappreciated complexity in pre-miRNA processing
and regulation. Global profiling of pre-miRNA and its potential to increase
understanding of the pre-miRNA landscape is impeded by overlap with highly
expressed classes of other non coding (nc) RNA. Here, we present a data set
excluding these RNA before sequencing through locked nucleic acids (LNA), greatly
increasing pre-miRNA sequence counts with no discernable effect on pre-miRNA or
mature miRNA sequencing. Analysis of profiles generated in total, nuclear and
cytoplasmic cell fractions reveals that pre-miRNAs are subject to a wide range of
regulatory processes involving loci-specific 3'- and 5'-end variation entailing
complex cleavage patterns with co-occurring polyuridylation. Additionally,
examination of nuclear-enriched flanking sequences of pre-miRNA, particularly
those derived from polycistronic miRNA transcripts, provides insight into miRNA
and miRNA-offset (moRNA) production, specifically identifying novel classes of
RNA potentially functioning as moRNA precursors. Our findings point to
particularly intricate regulation of the let-7 family in many ways reminiscent of
DICER1-independent, pre-mir-451-like processing, introduce novel and unify known 
forms of pre-miRNA regulation and processing, and shed new light on overlooked
products of miRNA processing pathways.

PMCID: PMC3287202
PMID: 22058130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Chin Med J (Engl). 2011 Oct;124(19):3118-26.

Comparative study on the stem cell phenotypes of C6 cells under different culture
conditions.

Zhang SJ(1), Ye F, Xie RF, Hu F, Wang BF, Wan F, Guo DS, Lei T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery and Neuro-Oncology Molecular Biology Laboratory,
Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430030, China.

BACKGROUND: Glioma stem cell (GSC) hypothesis posits that a subpopulation of
cells within gliomas have true clonogenic and tumorigenic potential.
Significantly, a more controversial correlate to GSC is that cells in different
culture conditions might display distinct stem cell properties. Considering these
possibilities, we applied an approach comparing stem cell characteristics of C6
glioma cells under different culture conditions.
METHODS: C6 cells were cultured under three different growth conditions, i.e.,
adherent growth in conventional 10% serum medium, non-adherent spheres growth in 
serum-free medium, as well as adherent growth on laminin-coated flask in
serum-free medium. Growth characteristics were detected contrastively through
neurosphere formation assay and cell cycle analysis. Markers were determined by
immunofluorescence, relative-quantitative reverse transcription (RT)-PCR, Western
blotting and flow cytometry. Side population cells were analyzed via flow
cytometry. Tumor models were detected by magnetic resonance imaging and
hematoxylin & eosin staining. Data analyses were performed with SPSS software
(17.0).
RESULTS: C6 cells (C6-Adh, C6-SC-Sph and C6-SC-Adh) showed distinctive growth
patterns and proliferation capacity. Compared to suspending C6-SC-Sph, adherent
C6-Adh and C6-SC-Adh displayed higher growth ratio. C6-SC-Sph and C6-SC-Adh
showed enhanced capability of neurosphere formation and self-renewal. High side
population ratio was detected in C6-SC-Sph and C6-SC-Adh. CD133 was not detected 
in all three kinds of cells. Conversely, Nestin and ß-III-tubulin were
demonstrated positive, nonetheless with no statistical significance (P > 0.05).
Interestingly, lower expression of glial fibrillary acidic protein was
demonstrated in C6-SC-Sph and C6-SC-Adh. C6-Adh, C6-SC-Sph and C6-SC-Adh were all
displayed in situ oncogenicity, while statistical difference of survival time was
not confirmed.
CONCLUSIONS: C6 glioma cell line is endowed with some GSC phenotypes that can be 
moderately enriched in vitro when transferred into stem cell culture condition.
The resultant tumor-spheres may be not a prerequisite or sound source of GSCs and
adherent culture in stem cell medium is not a growth condition in favor of GSCs
expanding in vivo.

PMID: 22040566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Development. 2011 Dec;138(23):5087-97. doi: 10.1242/dev.067850. Epub 2011 Oct 26.

Self-maintained escort cells form a germline stem cell differentiation niche.

Kirilly D(1), Wang S, Xie T.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, 1000 East 50th Street, Kansas City, MO
64110, USA.

Stem cell self-renewal is controlled by concerted actions of niche signals and
intrinsic factors in a variety of systems. In the Drosophila ovary, germline stem
cells (GSCs) in the niche continuously self-renew and generate differentiated
germ cells that interact physically with escort cells (ECs). It has been proposed
that escort stem cells (ESCs), which directly contact GSCs, generate
differentiated ECs to maintain the EC population. However, it remains unclear
whether the differentiation status of germ cells affects EC behavior and how the 
interaction between ECs and germ cells is regulated. In this study, we have found
that ECs can undergo slow cell turnover regardless of their positions, and the
lost cells are replenished by their neighboring ECs via self-duplication rather
than via stem cells. ECs extend elaborate cellular processes that exhibit
extensive interactions with differentiated germ cells. Interestingly, long
cellular processes of ECs are absent when GSC progeny fail to differentiate,
suggesting that differentiated germ cells are required for the formation or
maintenance of EC cellular processes. Disruption of Rho functions leads to the
disruption of long EC cellular processes and the accumulation of
ill-differentiated single germ cells by increasing BMP signaling activity outside
the GSC niche, and also causes gradual EC loss. Therefore, our findings indicate 
that ECs interact extensively with differentiated germ cells through their
elaborate cellular processes and control proper germ cell differentiation. Here, 
we propose that ECs form a niche that controls GSC lineage differentiation and is
maintained by a non-stem cell mechanism.

PMCID: PMC3210492
PMID: 22031542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Science. 2011 Nov 18;334(6058):990-2. doi: 10.1126/science.1209609. Epub 2011 Oct
20.

Wolbachia enhance Drosophila stem cell proliferation and target the germline stem
cell niche.

Fast EM(1), Toomey ME, Panaram K, Desjardins D, Kolaczyk ED, Frydman HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Wolbachia are widespread maternally transmitted intracellular bacteria that
infect most insect species and are able to alter the reproduction of innumerous
hosts. The cellular bases of these alterations remain largely unknown. Here, we
report that Drosophila mauritiana infected with a native Wolbachia wMau strain
produces about four times more eggs than the noninfected counterpart. Wolbachia
infection leads to an increase in the mitotic activity of germline stem cells
(GSCs), as well as a decrease in programmed cell death in the germarium. Our
results suggest that up-regulation of GSC division is mediated by a tropism of
Wolbachia for the GSC niche, the cellular microenvironment that supports GSCs.

PMCID: PMC4030408
PMID: 22021671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Mol Cancer Res. 2011 Dec;9(12):1668-85. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-10-0563. Epub 
2011 Oct 19.

Autocrine endothelin-3/endothelin receptor B signaling maintains cellular and
molecular properties of glioblastoma stem cells.

Liu Y(1), Ye F, Yamada K, Tso JL, Zhang Y, Nguyen DH, Dong Q, Soto H, Choe J,
Dembo A, Wheeler H, Eskin A, Schmid I, Yong WH, Mischel PS, Cloughesy TF,
Kornblum HI, Nelson SF, Liau LM, Tso CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery/Surgical Oncology, University of California Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.

Glioblastoma stem cells (GSC) express both radial glial cell and neural crest
cell (NCC)-associated genes. We report that endothelin 3 (EDN3), an essential
mitogen for NCC development and migration, is highly produced by GSCs.
Serum-induced proliferative differentiation rapidly decreased EDN3 production and
downregulated the expression of stemness-associated genes, and reciprocally, two 
glioblastoma markers, EDN1 and YKL-40 transcripts, were induced. Correspondingly,
patient glioblastoma tissues express low levels of EDN3 mRNA and high levels of
EDN1 and YKL-40 mRNA. Blocking EDN3/EDN receptor B (EDNRB) signaling by an EDNRB 
antagonist (BQ788), or EDN3 RNA interference (siRNA), leads to cell apoptosis and
functional impairment of tumor sphere formation and cell spreading/migration in
culture and loss of tumorigenic capacity in animals. Using exogenous EDN3 as the 
sole mitogen in culture does not support GSC propagation, but it can rescue GSCs 
from undergoing cell apoptosis. Molecular analysis by gene expression profiling
revealed that most genes downregulated by EDN3/EDNRB blockade were those involved
in cytoskeleton organization, pause of growth and differentiation, and DNA damage
response, implicating the involvement of EDN3/EDNRB signaling in maintaining GSC 
migration, undifferentiation, and survival. These data suggest that autocrine
EDN3/EDNRB signaling is essential for maintaining GSCs. Incorporating
END3/EDNRB-targeted therapies into conventional cancer treatments may have
clinical implication for the prevention of tumor recurrence.

PMCID: PMC3245317
PMID: 22013079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Dec 1;17(23):7383-93. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-1762.
Epub 2011 Oct 5.

Enhanced antitumor efficacy of low-dose Etoposide with oncolytic herpes simplex
virus in human glioblastoma stem cell xenografts.

Cheema TA(1), Kanai R, Kim GW, Wakimoto H, Passer B, Rabkin SD, Martuza RL.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Tumor Research Center, Department of Neurosurgery, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, USA.

PURPOSE: Glioblastoma (GBM) inevitably recurs despite surgery, radiation, and
chemotherapy. A subpopulation of tumor cells, GBM stem cells (GSC), has been
implicated in this recurrence. The chemotherapeutic agent etoposide is generally 
reserved for treating recurrent tumors; however, its effectiveness is limited due
to acute and cumulative toxicities to normal tissues. We investigate a novel
combinatorial approach of low-dose etoposide with an oncolytic HSV to enhance
antitumor activity and limit drug toxicity.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: In vitro, human GBM cell lines and GSCs were treated with
etoposide alone, oncolytic herpes simplex virus (oHSV) G47<U+0394> alone, or the
combination. Cytotoxic interactions were analyzed using the Chou-Talalay method, 
and changes in caspase-dependent apoptosis and cell cycle were determined. In
vivo, the most etoposide-resistant human GSC, BT74, was implanted intracranially 
and treated with either treatment alone or the combination. Analysis included
effects on survival, therapy-associated adverse events, and histologic detection 
of apoptosis.
RESULTS: GSCs varied in their sensitivity to etoposide by over 50-fold in vitro, 
whereas their sensitivity to G47<U+0394> was similar. Combining G47<U+0394> with low-dose
etoposide was moderately synergistic in GSCs and GBM cell lines. This combination
did not enhance virus replication, but significantly increased apoptosis. In
vivo, the combination of a single cycle of low-dose etoposide with G47<U+0394>
significantly extended survival of mice-bearing etoposide-insensitive
intracranial human GSC-derived tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: The combination of low-dose etoposide with G47<U+0394> increases survival
of mice-bearing intracranial human GSC-derived tumors without adverse side
effects. These results establish this as a promising combination strategy to
treat resistant and recurrent GBM.

©2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3229640
PMID: 21976549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Cancer Res. 2011 Nov 15;71(22):7125-34. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1330. Epub 
2011 Oct 5.

EGFR-AKT-Smad signaling promotes formation of glioma stem-like cells and tumor
angiogenesis by ID3-driven cytokine induction.

Jin X(1), Yin J, Kim SH, Sohn YW, Beck S, Lim YC, Nam DH, Choi YJ, Kim H.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea University, Seoul, Republic
of Korea. jinx2354@korea.ac.kr

Aberrant activation of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTK) is causally linked to the 
pathobiological traits of glioblastoma and genesis of glioma stem-like cells
(GSC), but the underlying mechanism is still unknown. Here, we show that
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling regulates the proliferation,
angiogenesis, and acquisition of GSC characteristics by inducing inhibitor of
differentiation 3 (ID3) and ID3-regulated cytokines [GRO1 and interleukins (IL)-6
and 8] induction. We found that EGFR-mediated ID3 expression was regulated by
Smad5, which was directly phosphorylated by AKT. Furthermore, ID3 alone imparted 
GSC features to primary astrocytes derived from Ink4a/Arf-deficient mouse, and
EGFR-ID3-IL-6 signaling axis gave rise to tumor cell heterogeneity. Conversely,
EGFR inhibitors suppressed EGFR-AKT-Smad5-driven induction of ID3, which led to a
decrease in the tumorsphere forming ability of GSCs and U87MG cells that possess 
an active mutant EGFR, EGFRvIII, without obvious cytotoxic effects. However,
these cells seemed to regain colonogenic ability after removal of the EGFR
inhibitors. Together, the results delineate a novel integrative molecular
mechanism in which the RTK-ID signaling pathway governs genesis and maintenance
of GBM histopathologic features, such as GSCs-based tumor initiation,
progression, and angiogenesis.

©2011 AACR

PMID: 21975932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Bioresour Technol. 2011 Nov;102(22):10180-6. doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2011.09.025.
Epub 2011 Sep 13.

Enzymatic synthesis of fructooligosaccharides with high 1-kestose concentrations 
using response surface methodology.

Vega R(1), Zúniga-Hansen ME.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biochemical Engineering, Pontificia Universidad Católica de
Valparaíso, Avenida Brasil 2147, Valparaíso, Chile.

Response surface methodology was used as an optimization tool for the production 
of short chain fructooligosaccharides (sc-FOS) using the commercial cellulolytic 
enzyme preparation, Rohapect CM. Three independent variables, temperature,
concentrations of sucrose and enzyme were tested in the reaction medium. The
responses of the design were, yield (gsc-FOS/100 g initial sucrose), 1-kestose
(g/100 g sc-FOS) and volumetric productivity (gsc-FOS/Lh). Significant effects on
the three responses included a quadratic effect (temperature), a linear effect
(sucrose and enzyme concentrations) and an interaction between temperature and
sucrose concentration. The cost-effective conditions to support the process in a 
high competitive market were 50 °C, 6.6 TU/mL enzyme, 2.103 M sucrose in 50 mM
acetate buffer at pH 5.5, and the synthesis for a 5 h reaction time. Under these 
conditions, a high YP/S (63.8%), QP (91.9 g/Lh) and sGF2 (68.2%) was achieved.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21974879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e25087. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025087. Epub 2011 Sep 16.

Nucleoporin98-96 function is required for transit amplification divisions in the 
germ line of Drosophila melanogaster.

Parrott BB(1), Chiang Y, Hudson A, Sarkar A, Guichet A, Schulz C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biology, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, United
States of America.

Production of specialized cells from precursors depends on a tightly regulated
sequence of proliferation and differentiation steps. In the gonad of Drosophila
melanogaster, the daughters of germ line stem cells (GSC) go through precisely
four rounds of transit amplification divisions to produce clusters of 16
interconnected germ line cells before entering a stereotypic differentiation
cascade. Here we show that animals harbouring a transposon insertion in the
center of the complex nucleoporin98-96 (nup98-96) locus had severe defects in the
early steps of this developmental program, ultimately leading to germ cell loss
and sterility. A phenotypic analysis indicated that flies carrying the transposon
insertion, designated nup98-96(2288), had dramatically reduced numbers of germ
line cells. In contrast to controls, mutant testes contained many solitary germ
line cells that had committed to differentiation as well as abnormally small
clusters of two, four or eight differentiating germ line cells. This indicates
that mutant GSCs rather differentiated than self-renewed, and that these GSCs and
their daughters initiated the differentiation cascade after zero, or less than
four rounds of amplification divisions. This phenotype remained unaffected by
hyper-activation of signalling pathways that normally result in excessive
proliferation of GSCs and their daughters. Expression of wildtype nup98-96
specifically in the germ line cells of mutant animals fully restored development 
of the GSC lineage, demonstrating that the effect of the mutation is
cell-autonomous. Nucleoporins are the structural components of the nucleopore and
have also been implicated in transcriptional regulation of specific target genes.
The nuclear envelopes of germ cells and general nucleocytoplasmic transport in
nup98-96 mutant animals appeared normal, leading us to propose that Drosophila
nup98-96 mediates the transport or transcription of targets required for the
developmental timing between amplification and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3174998
PMID: 21949861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e24797. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024797. Epub 2011 Sep 13.

CDinFusion--submission-ready, on-line integration of sequence and contextual
data.

Hankeln W(1), Wendel NJ, Gerken J, Waldmann J, Buttigieg PL, Kostadinov I,
Kottmann R, Yilmaz P, Glöckner FO.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology, Bremen, Germany.

State of the art (DNA) sequencing methods applied in "Omics" studies grant
insight into the 'blueprints' of organisms from all domains of life. Sequencing
is carried out around the globe and the data is submitted to the public
repositories of the International Nucleotide Sequence Database Collaboration.
However, the context in which these studies are conducted often gets lost,
because experimental data, as well as information about the environment are
rarely submitted along with the sequence data. If these contextual or metadata
are missing, key opportunities of comparison and analysis across studies and
habitats are hampered or even impossible. To address this problem, the Genomic
Standards Consortium (GSC) promotes checklists and standards to better describe
our sequence data collection and to promote the capturing, exchange and
integration of sequence data with contextual data. In a recent community effort
the GSC has developed a series of recommendations for contextual data that should
be submitted along with sequence data. To support the scientific community to
significantly enhance the quality and quantity of contextual data in the public
sequence data repositories, specialized software tools are needed. In this work
we present CDinFusion, a web-based tool to integrate contextual and sequence data
in (Multi)FASTA format prior to submission. The tool is open source and available
under the Lesser GNU Public License 3. A public installation is hosted and
maintained at the Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology at
http://www.megx.net/cdinfusion. The tool may also be installed locally using the 
open source code available at http://code.google.com/p/cdinfusion.

PMCID: PMC3172294
PMID: 21935468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Glycobiology. 2012 Mar;22(3):352-60. doi: 10.1093/glycob/cwr139. Epub 2011 Sep
14.

Anti-GM1/GD1a complex antibodies in GBS sera specifically recognize the hybrid
dimer GM1-GD1a.

Mauri L(1), Casellato R, Ciampa MG, Uekusa Y, Kato K, Kaida K, Motoyama M,
Kusunoki S, Sonnino S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Chemistry, Biochemistry and Biotechnology, University of
Milan, Via Fratelli Cervi 93, 20090 Segrate, Italy.

It is now emerging the new concept that the antibodies from some patients with
Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) recognize an antigenic epitope formed by two
different gangliosides, a ganglioside complex (GSC). We prepared the dimeric
GM1-GD1a hybrid ganglioside derivative that contains two structurally different
oligosaccharide chains to mimic the GSC. We use this compound to analyze sera
from GBS patients by high-performance thin-layer chromatography immunostaining
and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. We also synthesized the dimeric GM1-GM1
and GD1a-GD1a compounds that were used in control experiments together with
natural gangliosides. The hybrid dimeric GM1-GD1a was specifically recognized by 
human sera from GBS patients that developed anti-oligosaccharide antibodies
specific for grouped complex oligosaccharides, confirming the information that
GBS patients developed antibodies against a GSC. High-resolution (1)H-(13)C
heteronuclear single-quantum coherence-nuclear overhauser effect spectroscopy
nuclear magnetic resonance experiments showed an interaction between the IV
Gal-H1 of GM1 and the IV Gal-H2 of GD1a suggesting that the two oligosaccharide
chains of the dimeric ganglioside form a single epitope recognized by a
single-antibody domain. The availability of a method capable to prepare several
hybrid gangliosides, and the availability of simple analytical approaches, opens 
new perspectives for the understanding and the therapy of several neuropathies.

PMID: 21921061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Cell Death Dis. 2011 Sep 1;2:e200. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2011.80.

Distribution of CD133 reveals glioma stem cells self-renew through symmetric and 
asymmetric cell divisions.

Lathia JD(1), Hitomi M, Gallagher J, Gadani SP, Adkins J, Vasanji A, Liu L, Eyler
CE, Heddleston JM, Wu Q, Minhas S, Soeda A, Hoeppner DJ, Ravin R, McKay RD,
McLendon RE, Corbeil D, Chenn A, Hjelmeland AB, Park DM, Rich JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Lerner Research
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. lathiaj@ccf.org

Malignant gliomas contain a population of self-renewing tumorigenic stem-like
cells; however, it remains unclear how these glioma stem cells (GSCs) self-renew 
or generate cellular diversity at the single-cell level. Asymmetric cell division
is a proposed mechanism to maintain cancer stem cells, yet the modes of cell
division that GSCs utilize remain undetermined. Here, we used single-cell
analyses to evaluate the cell division behavior of GSCs. Lineage-tracing analysis
revealed that the majority of GSCs were generated through expansive symmetric
cell division and not through asymmetric cell division. The majority of
differentiated progeny was generated through symmetric pro-commitment divisions
under expansion conditions and in the absence of growth factors, occurred mainly 
through asymmetric cell divisions. Mitotic pair analysis detected asymmetric
CD133 segregation and not any other GSC marker in a fraction of mitoses, some of 
which were associated with Numb asymmetry. Under growth factor withdrawal
conditions, the proportion of asymmetric CD133 divisions increased, congruent
with the increase in asymmetric cell divisions observed in the lineage-tracing
studies. Using single-cell-based observation, we provide definitive evidence that
GSCs are capable of different modes of cell division and that the generation of
cellular diversity occurs mainly through symmetric cell division, not through
asymmetric cell division.

PMCID: PMC3186899
PMID: 21881602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Biomaterials. 2011 Nov;32(33):8518-28. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2011.07.048.
Epub 2011 Aug 30.

Identification of a peptide that interacts with Nestin protein expressed in brain
cancer stem cells.

Beck S(1), Jin X, Yin J, Kim SH, Lee NK, Oh SY, Jin X, Kim MK, Kim EB, Son JS,
Kim SC, Nam DH, Kim SH, Kang SK, Kim H, Choi YJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Agricultural Biotechnology, Seoul National University, Seoul
152-742, Republic of Korea.

Glioma stem cells (GSCs) are presumably major culprits for brain tumor
initiation, progression, and recurrence after conventional therapies. Thus,
selective targeting and eradication of GSCs may provide a promising and effective
therapeutic approach. Here, we isolated a GSC-targeting (GSCT) peptide that
demonstrated selective binding affinity for many undifferentiated GSCs using in
vitro phage display technology. This GSCT peptide binds to isotypes of Nestin
proteins specifically expressed in GSCs, enabling it to target Nestin-positive
cells in human glioblastoma tissues. In human glioblastoma tissue specimens, the 
fluorescence-conjugated GSCT peptide could visualize putative GSC populations,
showing its possible use as a diagnostic agent. GSCT peptide is also internalized
into undifferentiated GSCs specifically in vitro, and moreover, intravenously
injected GSCT peptide effectively penetrated into tissues, specifically
accumulated in gliomas that arise from subcutaneous and orthotopic implantation, 
and predominantly targeted Nestin-positive cells in these tumors. Thus, our GSCT 
peptide may be useful for the development of more promising therapeutic and
diagnostic modalities that target GSCs in brain tumors.

Crown Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21880363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Cancer Invest. 2011 Oct;29(8):511-20. doi: 10.3109/07357907.2011.605412. Epub
2011 Aug 30.

Cisplatin restores TRAIL apoptotic pathway in glioblastoma-derived stem cells
through up-regulation of DR5 and down-regulation of c-FLIP.

Ding L(1), Yuan C, Wei F, Wang G, Zhang J, Bellail AC, Zhang Z, Olson JJ, Hao C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology & Oncology, The First Hospital of Jilin University,
Changchun, People's Republic of China.

Glioblastoma-derived stem cells (GSCs) are responsible for the cancer resistance 
to therapies. We show here that GSC-enriched neurospheres are resistant to the
treatment of tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) due 
to the insufficient expression of the death receptor DR4 and DR5 and the
overexpression of cellular Fas-associated death domain-like
interleukin-1ß-converting enzyme-inhibitory protein (c-FLIP). However, treatment 
with cisplatin leads to the upregulation of DR5 and downregulation of c-FLIP and 
restores TRAIL apoptotic pathway in the neurospheres. This study suggests that
the combined treatment of TRAIL and cisplatin can induce apoptosis in GSCs and
thus provide an effective treatment of glioblastomas.

PMCID: PMC3255792
PMID: 21877938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2011 Dec;21(6):684-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gde.2011.07.008. Epub
2011 Aug 19.

Restricting self-renewal signals within the stem cell niche: multiple levels of
control.

Chen S(1), Wang S, Xie T.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute of Medical Research, 1000 East 50th Street, Kansas City, MO 
64110, USA.

Germline stem cells (GSCs) were the first stem cells demonstrated to be regulated
by the microenvironment or niche in the Drosophila ovary a decade ago. In the
Drosophila ovary, as a stem cell divides, one daughter remaining in the niche
continues to self-renew, and the other daughter positioned outside the niche
undergoes differentiation. The niche produces bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) 
that only act within one cell diameter to ensure that at every division only one 
of two GSC daughters self-renews and thus maintains a stable GSC pool. Within the
past decade, great progress has been made toward understanding how functions of
BMP niche signals are restricted to GSCs. In this review, we have discussed
multiple levels of control underlying the restriction of BMP signals within the
niche. Because the niche mechanism has been shown to regulate stem cells in
various organisms including mammals, the knowledge gained from the Drosophila GSC
niche should help gain a better understanding of how niche signals are controlled
in other stem cell systems.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21862315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 May 20;21(8):1250-63. doi: 10.1089/scd.2010.0578. Epub 2011 
Oct 19.

A model of early human embryonic stem cell differentiation reveals inter- and
intracellular changes on transition to squamous epithelium.

Galat V(1), Malchenko S, Galat Y, Ishkin A, Nikolsky Y, Kosak ST, Soares BM,
Iannaccone P, Crispino JD, Hendrix MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, iPS and Human Stem Cell Core Facility,
Children's Memorial Research Center, Northwestern University, Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60614-3394, USA. v-galat@northwestern.edu

The molecular events leading to human embryonic stem cell (hESC) differentiation 
are the subject of considerable scrutiny. Here, we characterize an in vitro model
that permits analysis of the earliest steps in the transition of hESC colonies to
squamous epithelium on basic fibroblast growth factor withdrawal. A set of
markers (GSC, CK18, Gata4, Eomes, and Sox17) point to a mesendodermal nature of
the epithelial cells with subsequent commitment to definitive endoderm (Sox17,
Cdx2, nestin, and Islet1). We assayed alterations in the transcriptome in
parallel with the distribution of immunohistochemical markers. Our results
indicate that the alterations of tight junctions in pluripotent culture precede
the beginning of differentiation. We defined this cell population as "specified,"
as it is committed toward differentiation. The transitional zone between
"specified" pluripotent and differentiated cells displays significant
up-regulation of keratin-18 (CK18) along with a decrease in the functional
activity of gap junctions and the down-regulation of 2 gap junction proteins,
connexin 43 (Cx43) and connexin 45 (Cx45), which is coincidental with substantial
elevation of intracellular Ca2+ levels. These findings reveal a set of cellular
changes that may represent the earliest markers of in vitro hESC transition to an
epithelial phenotype, before the induction of gene expression networks that guide
hESC differentiation. Moreover, we hypothesize that these events may be common
during the primary steps of hESC commitment to functionally varied epithelial
tissue derivatives of different embryological origins.

PMCID: PMC3353739
PMID: 21861759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Clin J Sport Med. 2011 Sep;21(5):411-5. doi: 10.1097/JSM.0b013e318223f3a4.

Presence of headache does not influence sideline neurostatus or balance in high
school football athletes.

Sabin MJ(1), Van Boxtel BA, Nohren MW, Broglio SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Exercise and Sport Science, Eastern Kentucky University,
Richmond, Kentucky 40475, USA. mnmsabin@yahoo.com

OBJECTIVE: Headache is the primary self-reported symptom used to indicate
concussion. Thus, we examined the relationship between reports of
nonconcussion-induced headache after contact sport participation and scores on
common concussion assessment measures.
DESIGN: Two-group repeated measures. SETTIN:: Secondary school.
PARTICIPANTS: One hundred five athletes from 3 area football teams completed a
baseline evaluation. Sixteen athletes reported headaches after a practice/game
and were compared with 16 gender-matched, age-matched, height-matched,
weight-matched, and position-matched controls.
INDEPENDENT VARIABLE: Self-report headache.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Symptom severity and endorsement reported on the Graded
Symptoms Checklist (GSC), neurostatus measured using the Standard Assessment of
Concussion (SAC), and postural control evaluated with the Balance Error Scoring
System (BESS).
RESULTS: Total symptom severity significantly increased (P < 0.01; 8.06 ± 2.22 to
16.06 ± 3.82) in the headache group and significantly decreased in the
nonheadache group (P = 0.01; 6.81 ± 1.85 to 3.00 ± 1.08). Symptom endorsement
increased in the headache group (P = 0.06; 3.25 ± 0.80 to 5.25 ± 1.08) and
significantly decreased in the nonheadache group (P = 0.01; 3.19 ± 0.78 to 1.69 ±
0.58). Both groups showed nonsignificant (P > 0.05) changes in SAC scores
(headache, 24.75 ± 0.73 to 24.81 ± 0.75; nonheadache, 24.50 ± 0.73 to 24.87 ±
1.20). Errors of the BESS significantly increased in both the groups at
postgame/postpractice evaluation (headache, P = 0.01; 14.94 ± 1.86 to 20.31 ±
2.23; nonheadache, P < 0.01; 13.31 ± 1.68 to 18.13 ± 1.69). The presence of
headache was significantly correlated with symptom reports (P > 0.05) but not SAC
or BESS performance.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate that the use of headache, exclusively or in 
combination with other concussion-related symptoms, does not indicate performance
on common concussion tools. This supports previous works, suggesting that
clinicians must adopt a multifaceted approach to concussion assessment.

PMID: 21860349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Mech Dev. 2011 Sep-Dec;128(7-10):412-27. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2011.08.001. Epub
2011 Aug 10.

Activin, BMP and FGF pathways cooperate to promote endoderm and pancreatic
lineage cell differentiation from human embryonic stem cells.

Xu X(1), Browning VL, Odorico JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Transplantation, University of
Wisconsin-Madison School of Medicine and Public Health, Wisconsin Institute of
Medical Research, 600 Highland Ave., Madison, WI 53792, USA. xxu@surgery.wisc.edu

The study of how human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) differentiate into
insulin-producing beta cells has twofold significance: first, it provides an in
vitro model system for the study of human pancreatic development, and second, it 
serves as a platform for the ultimate production of beta cells for
transplantation into patients with diabetes. The delineation of growth factor
interactions regulating pancreas specification from hESCs in vitro is critical to
achieving these goals. In this study, we describe the roles of growth factors
bFGF, BMP4 and Activin A in early hESC fate determination. The entire
differentiation process is carried out in serum-free chemically-defined media
(CDM) and results in reliable and robust induction of pancreatic endoderm cells, 
marked by PDX1, and cell clusters co-expressing markers characteristic of beta
cells, including PDX1 and insulin/C-peptide. Varying the combinations of growth
factors, we found that treatment of hESCs with bFGF, Activin A and BMP4 (FAB)
together for 3-4days resulted in strong induction of primitive-streak and
definitive endoderm-associated genes, including MIXL1, GSC, SOX17 and FOXA2.
Early proliferative foregut endoderm and pancreatic lineage cells marked by PDX1,
FOXA2 and SOX9 expression are specified in EBs made from FAB-treated hESCs, but
not from Activin A alone treated cells. Our results suggest that important tissue
interactions occur in EB-based suspension culture that contribute to the complete
induction of definitive endoderm and pancreas progenitors. Further
differentiation occurs after EBs are embedded in Matrigel and cultured in
serum-free media containing insulin, transferrin, selenium, FGF7, nicotinamide,
islet neogenesis associated peptide (INGAP) and exendin-4, a long acting GLP-1
agonist. 21-28days after embedding, PDX1 gene expression levels are comparable to
those of human islets used for transplantation, and many PDX1(+) clusters are
formed. Almost all cells in PDX1(+) clusters co-express FOXA2, HNF1ß, HNF6 and
SOX9 proteins, and many cells also express CPA1, NKX6.1 and PTF1a. If cells are
then switched to medium containing B27 and nicotinamide for 7-14days, then the
number of insulin(+) cells increases markedly. Our study identifies a new
chemically defined culture protocol for inducing endoderm- and pancreas-committed
cells from hESCs and reveals an interplay between FGF, Activin A and BMP
signaling in early hESC fate determination.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3225072
PMID: 21855631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Cancer Sci. 2011 Nov;102(11):1958-66. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2011.02064.x. Epub
2011 Sep 16.

Targeting glioma stem cells: a novel framework for brain tumors.

Binello E(1), Germano IM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New
York, USA.

The past decade has seen a dramatic increase in stem cell research that focuses
on glioma stem cells (GSC) and their mechanisms of action, revealing multiple
potential targets for primary malignant brain tumors. Herein, we present a novel 
framework for considering GSC targets based on direct and indirect strategies.
Direct strategies target GSC molecular pathways to overcome their resistance to
radiation and chemotherapy, block their function or induce their differentiation.
Indirect strategies target the microenvironment of the GSC, namely the
perivascular, hypoxic and immune niches. Progress made on GSC targets is reviewed
in detail and specific pathways are identified in context of the proposed
framework. The potential barriers for translation to the clinical setting are
also discussed. Overall, targeting GSC provides an unprecedented opportunity for 
revolutionary approaches to treat high-grade gliomas that continue to have a poor
patient prognosis.

© 2011 Japanese Cancer Association.

PMCID: PMC4021040
PMID: 21848914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Cell Death Differ. 2012 Mar;19(3):428-39. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2011.109. Epub 2011
Aug 12.

Hypoxia-induced mixed-lineage leukemia 1 regulates glioma stem cell tumorigenic
potential.

Heddleston JM(1), Wu Q, Rivera M, Minhas S, Lathia JD, Sloan AE, Iliopoulos O,
Hjelmeland AB, Rich JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Cleveland Clinic,
9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

Normal stem cells reside in functional niches critical for self-renewal and
maintenance. Neural and hematopoietic stem cell niches, in particular, are
characterized by restricted availability of oxygen and the resulting regulation
by hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs). Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most
common malignant brain tumor and also contains high degrees of hypoxia.
Heterogeneity within the neoplastic compartment has been well characterized in
GBM and may be derived from genetic and epigenetic sources that co-evolve during 
malignant progression. Recent experimental evidence has supported the importance 
of hypoxia in glioma stem cell (GSC) niches. We hypothesized that HIFs require
epigenetic-modifying proteins to promote tumor malignancy in GBM. Here we
demonstrate that in GBM the histone methyltransferase mixed-lineage leukemia 1
(MLL1) is induced by hypoxia and enhances hypoxic responses. Loss of MLL1 reduces
the expression of HIF transcripts and HIF2a protein. Targeting MLL1 by RNA
interference inhibited the expression of HIF2a and target genes, including
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). GSCs expressed higher levels of MLL1
than matched non-stem tumor cells and depletion of MLL1 reduced GSC self-renewal,
growth, and tumorigenicity. These studies have uncovered a novel mechanism
mediating tumor hypoxic responses linking microenvironmental regulation of
epigenetic-modifying proteins to cellular heterogeneity and provide rationale for
the design of more sophisticated clinical approaches targeting epigenetic
regulation.

PMCID: PMC3229666
PMID: 21836617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Curr Pharm Des. 2011;17(23):2370-85.

Collateral damage control in cancer therapy: defining the stem identity in
gliomas.

Hsieh D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Arizona Cancer Center, The University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, USA.
dhs.zfs@gmail.com

The discovery of discrete functional components in cancer systems advocates a
paradigm shift in therapeutic design towards the targeted destruction of critical
cellular constituents that fuel tumorigenic potential. In astrocytomas, malignant
growth can be propagated and sustained by glioma stem cells (GSCs) endowed with
highly efficient clonogenic and tumor initiation capacities. Given their
disproportionate oncogenic contribution, GSCs are often considered the optimal
targets for curative treatment because their eradication may subvert the
refractory nature of GBMs. However, the close affinity of GSCs and normal neural 
stem cells (NSCs) is a cautionary note for off-target effects of GSC-based
therapies. In fact, many parallels can be drawn between GSC and NSC functions,
which ostensibly rely on a communal collection of stem cell-promoting
transcription factors (TFs). Only through rigorous scrutiny of nuances in the
stemness program of GSCs and NSCs may we clarify the pathogenic mechanisms of
stemness factors and reveal processes exploited by cancer cells to co-opt stem
cell traits. Importantly, discerning the specific requirements for GSC and NSC
maintenance may be an essential requisite when assessing molecular targets for
discriminatory targeting of GSCs with minimal sequelae.

PMID: 21827417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Curr Pharm Des. 2011;17(23):2386-401.

Glioma stem cell maintenance: the role of the microenvironment.

Heddleston JM(1), Hitomi M, Venere M, Flavahan WA, Yang K, Kim Y, Minhas S, Rich 
JN, Hjelmeland AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Lerner Research
Institute, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Glioblastomas are highly lethal cancers for which conventional therapies provide 
only palliation. The cellular heterogeneity of glioblastomas is manifest in
genetic and epigenetic variation with both stochastic and hierarchical models
informing cellular phenotypes. At the apex of the hierarchy is a self-renewing,
tumorigenic, cancer stem cell (CSC). The significance of CSCs is underscored by
their resistance to cytotoxic therapies, invasive potential, and promotion of
angiogenesis. Thus, targeting CSCs may offer therapeutic benefit and sensitize
tumors to conventional treatment, demanding elucidation of CSC regulation.
Attention has been paid to intrinsic cellular systems in CSCs, but recognition of
extrinsic factors is evolving. Glioma stem cells (GSCs) are enriched in
functional niches--prominently the perivascular space and hypoxic regions. These 
niches provide instructive cues to maintain GSCs and induce cellular plasticity
towards a stem-like phenotype. GSC-maintaining niches may therefore offer novel
therapeutic targets but also signal additional complexity with perhaps different 
pools of GSCs governed by different molecular mechanisms that must be targeted
for tumor control.

PMCID: PMC3615428
PMID: 21827414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Biotechnol Lett. 2011 Dec;33(12):2361-6. doi: 10.1007/s10529-011-0721-6. Epub
2011 Aug 9.

Inducible protein expression in Drosophila Schneider 2 cells using the lac
operator-repressor system.

Wakiyama M(1), Muramatsu R, Kaitsu Y, Ikeda M, Yokoyama S.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Systems and Structural Biology Center, Tsurumi, Yokohama 230-0045,
Japan. waki@gsc.riken.jp

Schneider line 2 cells, derived from Drosophila melanogaster, can be used as a
highly versatile gene expression system. Two powerful promoters derived from the 
actin5C (Ac5) and metallothionein (Mtn) genes are available. The Mtn promoter can
be used for the inducible expression of heterologous proteins unsuitable for
constitutive expression. However, to circumvent using CuSO(4) or CdCl(2) as
inducers of the Mtn promoter, we created a modified Ac5 promoter, Ac5LacO, in
which two short lac operator sequences are embedded. Expression from the Ac5LacO 
promoter was regulated with co-expression of the lac repressor and IPTG. More
than 25-fold induction of firefly luciferase expression was achieved in transient
transfection experiments. Furthermore, we demonstrated that the lac
operator-repressor regulatory system functioned in chromosomally integrated cell 
lines.

© Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2011

PMID: 21826399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Cell Death Differ. 2012 Feb;19(2):284-94. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2011.95. Epub 2011 Aug
5.

HIF-1a is critical for hypoxia-mediated maintenance of glioblastoma stem cells by
activating Notch signaling pathway.

Qiang L(1), Wu T, Zhang HW, Lu N, Hu R, Wang YJ, Zhao L, Chen FH, Wang XT, You
QD, Guo QL.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Intervention, China
Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing 210009, People's Republic of China.

Hypoxia induces the expansion of glioblastoma stem cells (GSCs), but the
mechanism underlying it is still unclear. Here, we supply evidence that
hypoxia-inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a) induced activation of Notch pathway is
essential for hypoxia-mediated maintenance of GSC. Either depletion of HIF-1a or 
inactivation of Notch signaling partly inhibits the hypoxia-mediated maintenance 
of GSC. Further data suggest a role for HIF-1a in the interaction and
stabilization of intracellular domain of Notch (NICD), and activation of Notch
signaling. The mRNA level of HIF-1a and Notch target gene FABP7 was elevated in
GSC. And the STAT3 pathway responsible for the HIF-1a gene transcription, the
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-Akt and ERK1/2, both of which are contributed to
HIF-1a protein translation, are also preferentially activated in GSC. Inhibition 
of these pathways partly reduces the hypoxia-induced activation of the Notch
pathway and subsequent GSC maintenance. Taken together, our findings suggest that
HIF-1a requires Notch pathway to drive the maintenance of GSC. The activated
regulation of HIF-1a makes GSC more sensitive to hypoxia-mediated maintenance.
These findings enhance our understanding of mechanism of hypoxia-mediated GSC
expansion and provide HIF-1a as an attractive target for glioblastoma therapy.

PMCID: PMC3263503
PMID: 21818118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2011 Nov 1;3(11):a002642. doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a002642.

Germline stem cells.

Spradling A(1), Fuller MT, Braun RE, Yoshida S.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute Research Laboratories, Department of
Embryology, Carnegie Institution, Baltimore, Maryland 21218, USA.

Sperm and egg production requires a robust stem cell system that balances
self-renewal with differentiation. Self-renewal at the expense of differentiation
can cause tumorigenesis, whereas differentiation at the expense of self-renewal
can cause germ cell depletion and infertility. In most organisms, and sometimes
in both sexes, germline stem cells (GSCs) often reside in a defined anatomical
niche. Factors within the niche regulate a balance between GSC self-renewal and
differentiation. Asymmetric division of the germline stem cell to form daughter
cells with alternative fates is common. The exception to both these tendencies is
the mammalian testis where there does not appear to be an obvious anatomical
niche and where GSC homeostasis is likely accomplished by a stochastic balance of
self-renewal and differentiation and not by regulated asymmetric cell division.
Despite these apparent differences, GSCs in all organisms share many common
mechanisms, although not necessarily molecules, to guarantee survival of the
germline.

PMCID: PMC3220357
PMID: 21791699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Brain Pathol. 2012 Mar;22(2):159-74. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2011.00515.x. Epub 
2011 Sep 16.

Human glioblastoma stem-like cells are more sensitive to allogeneic NK and T
cell-mediated killing compared with serum-cultured glioblastoma cells.

Avril T(1), Vauleon E, Hamlat A, Saikali S, Etcheverry A, Delmas C, Diabira S,
Mosser J, Quillien V.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biologie, Centre Eugène Marquis, Rennes, France.
t.avril@rennes.unicancer.fr

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most dramatic primary brain cancer with a
very poor prognosis because of inevitable disease recurrence. The median overall 
survival is less than 1 year after diagnosis. Cancer stem cells have recently
been disclosed in GBM. GBM stem-like cells (GSCs) exhibit resistance to
radio/chemotherapeutic treatments and are therefore considered to play an
important role in disease recurrence. GSCs are thus appealing targets for new
treatments for GBM patients. In this study, we show that GBM cells with stem cell
characteristics are resistant to lysis mediated by resting natural killer (NK)
cells because of the expression of MHC class I molecules. However, GSCs are
killed by lectin-activated NK cells. Furthermore, in experiments using the
therapeutic antibody CetuximAb, we show that GSCs are sensitive to
antibody-mediated cytotoxicity. We confirm the sensitivity of GSC to cytotoxicity
carried out by IL2-activated NK cells and tumor-specific T cells. More
importantly, we show that GSCs are more sensitive to NK and T cell-mediated lysis
relatively to their corresponding serum-cultured GBM cells obtained from the same
initial tumor specimen. Altogether, these results demonstrate the sensitivity of 
GSC to immune cell cytotoxicity and, therefore, strongly suggest that GSCs are
suitable target cells for immunotherapy of GBM patients.

© 2011 The Authors. Brain Pathology © 2011 International Society of
Neuropathology.

PMID: 21790828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Oncol Rep. 2011 Nov;26(5):1305-13. doi: 10.3892/or.2011.1393. Epub 2011 Jul 18.

Expression of glioma stem cell marker CD133 and O6-methylguanine-DNA
methyltransferase is associated with resistance to radiotherapy in gliomas.

He J(1), Shan Z, Li L, Liu F, Liu Z, Song M, Zhu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Wuxi Tumor Research Institute, Fourth Affiliated
Hospital of Soochow University, 200 Huihe Road, Wuxi 214062, Jiangsu, PR China.
hejie2009wuxi@gmail.com

In the present study, we investigated the prognostic roles of the
O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) gene methylation status, the
protein profiles of MGMT, and the glioma stem cell (GSC) marker CD133 in
malignant glioma resistance to radiotherapy. The proliferation of glioma cells
was assessed using a clonogenic survival assay and flow cytometry. CD133
expression was assessed in SHG-44-GSCs using RT-PCR and flow cytometry. MGMT
exhibited resistance to radiation in the SHG-44-GSCs using siRNA transfection.
The effects of the siRNA on mRNA and protein expression of MGMT in SHG-44-GSCs
were detected using semi-quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction (qRT-PCR) and Western blotting. MGMT methylation status, MGMT and CD133 
expression profiles were assessed in 59 malignant glioma patients using
methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP), and immunohistochemistry.
In vitro, SHG-44-GSCs exhibited a characteristic resistance to radiation that was
not observed in SHG-44 cells. This resistance was attributed to the unmethylated 
status of the MGMT promoter and to high expression levels of MGMT mRNA in the
glioma cells. In these patients, the CD133 marker, but not MGMT promoter
methylation or MGMT protein level, was associated with resistance to radiotherapy
(n=59; hazard ratio=2.838; 95% CI, 1.725-7.597; p=0.001). The median
progression-free survival (PFS) among patients with the CD133 marker was 14
months, whereas it was 35 months in patients without CD133 (p=0.001). Notably,
co-expression of the methylated MGMT promoter and the CD133 marker was associated
with the poorest outcome in patients with gliomas treated by radiotherapy; in
these patients, PFS was 7 months. These results suggest that assessment of GSC
MGMT and CD133 levels will guide future clinical targeted therapies and stratify 
glioma patient treatment regimens. High expression levels of the CD133 protein
could be used as a predictor for poor survival in patients treated with
radiotherapy.

PMID: 21769436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Development. 2011 Aug;138(16):3357-66. doi: 10.1242/dev.067942. Epub 2011 Jul 13.

no child left behind encodes a novel chromatin factor required for germline stem 
cell maintenance in males but not females.

Casper AL(1), Baxter K, Van Doren M.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA.

Male and female germ cells follow distinct developmental paths with respect to
germline stem cell (GSC) production and the types of differentiated progeny they 
produce (sperm versus egg). An essential aspect of germline development is how
sexual identity is used to differentially regulate the male and female germ cell 
genomes to allow for these distinct outcomes. Here, we identify a gene, no child 
left behind (nclb), that plays very different roles in the male versus female
germline in Drosophila. In particular, nclb is required for GSC maintenance in
males, but not in females. Male GSCs mutant for nclb are rapidly lost from the
niche, and begin to differentiate but cannot complete spermatogenesis. We further
find that nclb encodes a member of a new family of conserved chromatin-associated
proteins. NCLB interacts with chromatin in a specific manner and is associated
with sites of active transcription. Thus, NCLB appears to be a novel chromatin
regulator that exhibits very different effects on the male and female germ cell
genomes.

PMCID: PMC3143560
PMID: 21752937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Development. 2011 Aug;138(16):3367-76. doi: 10.1242/dev.065797. Epub 2011 Jul 13.

Live imaging of the Drosophila spermatogonial stem cell niche reveals novel
mechanisms regulating germline stem cell output.

Sheng XR(1), Matunis E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Adult stem cells modulate their output by varying between symmetric and
asymmetric divisions, but have rarely been observed in living intact tissues.
Germline stem cells (GSCs) in the Drosophila testis are anchored to somatic hub
cells and were thought to exclusively undergo oriented asymmetric divisions,
producing one stem cell that remains hub-anchored and one daughter cell displaced
out of the stem cell-maintaining micro-environment (niche). We developed extended
live imaging of the Drosophila testis niche, allowing us to track individual
germline cells. Surprisingly, new wild-type GSCs are generated in the niche
during steady-state tissue maintenance by a previously undetected event we term
'symmetric renewal', where interconnected GSC-daughter cell pairs swivel such
that both cells contact the hub. We also captured GSCs undergoing direct
differentiation by detaching from the hub. Following starvation-induced GSC loss,
GSC numbers are restored by symmetric renewals. Furthermore, upon more severe
(genetically induced) GSC loss, both symmetric renewal and de-differentiation
(where interconnected spermatogonia fragment into pairs while moving towards then
establishing contact with the hub) occur simultaneously to replenish the GSC
pool. Thus, stereotypically oriented stem cell divisions are not always
correlated with an asymmetric outcome in cell fate, and changes in stem cell
output are governed by altered signals in response to tissue requirements.

PMCID: PMC3143561
PMID: 21752931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Dev Biol. 2011 Sep 1;357(1):202-10. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.06.022. Epub 2011
Jun 24.

magu is required for germline stem cell self-renewal through BMP signaling in the
Drosophila testis.

Zheng Q(1), Wang Y, Vargas E, DiNardo S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, School of Arts and Sciences, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 19104, USA.

Understanding how stem cells are maintained in their microenvironment (the niche)
is vital for their application in regenerative medicine. Studies of Drosophila
male germline stem cells (GSCs) have served as a paradigm in niche-stem cell
biology. It is known that the BMP and JAK-STAT pathways are necessary for the
maintenance of GSCs in the testis (Kawase et al., 2004; Kiger et al., 2001;
Schulz et al., 2004; Shivdasani and Ingham, 2003; Tulina and Matunis, 2001).
However, our recent work strongly suggests that BMP signaling is the primary
pathway leading to GSC self-renewal (Leatherman and DiNardo, 2010). Here we show 
that magu controls GSC maintenance by modulating the BMP pathway. We found that
magu was specifically expressed from hub cells, and accumulated at the testis
tip. Testes from magu mutants exhibited a reduced number of GSCs, yet maintained 
a normal population of somatic stem cells and hub cells. Additionally, BMP
pathway activity was reduced, whereas JAK-STAT activation was retained in mutant 
testes. Finally, GSC loss caused by the magu mutation could be suppressed by
overactivating the BMP pathway in the germline.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3431605
PMID: 21723859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. PLoS Biol. 2011 Jun;9(6):e1001088. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001088. Epub 2011
Jun 21.

The Genomic Standards Consortium.

Field D(1), Amaral-Zettler L, Cochrane G, Cole JR, Dawyndt P, Garrity GM, Gilbert
J, Glöckner FO, Hirschman L, Karsch-Mizrachi I, Klenk HP, Knight R, Kottmann R,
Kyrpides N, Meyer F, San Gil I, Sansone SA, Schriml LM, Sterk P, Tatusova T,
Ussery DW, White O, Wooley J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Ecology & Hydrology, Maclean Building, Crowmarsh Gifford,
Wallingford, Oxfordshire, United Kingdom. dfield@ceh.ac.uk

A vast and rich body of information has grown up as a result of the world's
enthusiasm for 'omics technologies. Finding ways to describe and make available
this information that maximise its usefulness has become a major effort across
the 'omics world. At the heart of this effort is the Genomic Standards Consortium
(GSC), an open-membership organization that drives community-based
standardization activities, Here we provide a short history of the GSC, provide
an overview of its range of current activities, and make a call for the
scientific community to join forces to improve the quality and quantity of
contextual information about our public collections of genomes, metagenomes, and 
marker gene sequences.

PMCID: PMC3119656
PMID: 21713030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Stand Genomic Sci. 2011 Apr 29;4(2):286-92. doi: 10.4056/sigs.1344279.

Data shopping in an open marketplace: Introducing the Ontogrator web application 
for marking up data using ontologies and browsing using facets.

Morrison N, Hancock D, Hirschman L, Dawyndt P, Verslyppe B, Kyrpides N, Kottmann 
R, Yilmaz P, Glöckner FO, Grethe J, Booth T, Sterk P, Nenadic G, Field D.

In the future, we hope to see an open and thriving data market in which users can
find and select data from a wide range of data providers. In such an open access 
market, data are products that must be packaged accordingly. Increasingly,
eCommerce sellers present heterogeneous product lines to buyers using faceted
browsing. Using this approach we have developed the Ontogrator platform, which
allows for rapid retrieval of data in a way that would be familiar to any online 
shopper. Using Knowledge Organization Systems (KOS), especially ontologies,
Ontogrator uses text mining to mark up data and faceted browsing to help users
navigate, query and retrieve data. Ontogrator offers the potential to impact
scientific research in two major ways: 1) by significantly improving the
retrieval of relevant information; and 2) by significantly reducing the time
required to compose standard database queries and assemble information for
further research. Here we present a pilot implementation developed in
collaboration with the Genomic Standards Consortium (GSC) that includes content
from the StrainInfo, GOLD, CAMERA, Silva and Pubmed databases. This
implementation demonstrates the power of ontogration and highlights that the
usefulness of this approach is fully dependent on both the quality of data and
the KOS (ontologies) used. Ideally, the use and further expansion of this
collaborative system will help to surface issues associated with the underlying
quality of annotation and could lead to a systematic means for accessing
integrated data resources.

PMCID: PMC3111990
PMID: 21677865  [PubMed]


77. Stand Genomic Sci. 2011 Apr 29;4(2):271-85. doi: 10.4056/sigs.621069.

Enriching public descriptions of marine phages using the Genomic Standards
Consortium MIGS standard.

Duhaime MB, Kottmann R, Field D, Glöckner FO.

In any sequencing project, the possible depth of comparative analysis is
determined largely by the amount and quality of the accompanying contextual data.
The structure, content, and storage of this contextual data should be
standardized to ensure consistent coverage of all sequenced entities and
facilitate comparisons. The Genomic Standards Consortium (GSC) has developed the 
"Minimum Information about Genome/Metagenome Sequences (MIGS/MIMS)" checklist for
the description of genomes and here we annotate all 30 publicly available marine 
bacteriophage sequences to the MIGS standard. These annotations build on existing
International Nucleotide Sequence Database Collaboration (INSDC) records, and
confirm, as expected that current submissions lack most MIGS fields. MIGS fields 
were manually curated from the literature and placed in XML format as specified
by the Genomic Contextual Data Markup Language (GCDML). These "machine-readable" 
reports were then analyzed to highlight patterns describing this collection of
genomes. Completed reports are provided in GCDML. This work represents one step
towards the annotation of our complete collection of genome sequences and shows
the utility of capturing richer metadata along with raw sequences.

PMCID: PMC3111985
PMID: 21677864  [PubMed]


78. Curr Neurovasc Res. 2011 Aug 1;8(3):210-9.

CD133+ glioblastoma stem-like cells induce vascular mimicry in vivo.

Chiao MT(1), Yang YC, Cheng WY, Shen CC, Ko JL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.

Glioblastoma is one of the most angiogenic malignancy, the neoplastic vessels of 
which are likely to arise by angiogenesis and vasculogenesis. An alternative
mechanism of tumor vasculature is described, termed vasculogenic mimicry, by
which highly aggressive tumor cells can form vessel-like structures themselves,
by virtue of their high cellular plasticity. Evidence suggests that cancer stem
cells acquire a multi-potent plastic phenotype and show vasculogenic potential.
In this study, we report that glioblastoma stem-like cells (GSCs) can form
vasculogenic mimicry in tumor xenografts and express pro-vascular molecules. We
isolated GSCs from resected human glioblastoma tissues and demonstrated their
stemness, differentiation, and in vivo tumor-initiating potential. Through a
limiting dilution assay, CD133+ (CD133(+)-GSC) and CD133- (CD133(-)-GSC)
subpopulation of GSCs were obtained. Orthotopic xenotransplantation study
revealed that these two subpopulations of GSCs shared similar efficacy in tumor
formation but showed distinct intratumor vasculature. In comparison with
CD133(-)-GSC, a highly vascularized anaplastic tumor, mimicking vasculogenic
mimicry, was found in CD133(+)-GSC-derived tumor xenografts. Subsets of
CD133(+)-GSC but not CD133(-)-GSC were capable of vascular smooth muscle-like
cell differentiation, in vitro and in vivo. In tumor xenografts,
endothelium-associated CD31 gene was detected in implanted CD133(-)-GSC and
exclusively dispersed within the tumor tissues. Although the detailed action
mechanisms required further investigation, this study demonstrated the
vasculogenic capacity of brain GSCs and their cellular plasticity. The results of
expression of pro-vascular molecules and differentiation of vascular-like cells
suggest that GSCs may contribute to form vessel-like structures and provide a
blood supply for glioblastoma cells.

PMID: 21675958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Pathol. 2011 Jul;224(3):344-54. doi: 10.1002/path.2908. Epub 2011 May 27.

The chemokine CXCL12 and its receptor CXCR4 promote glioma stem cell-mediated
VEGF production and tumour angiogenesis via PI3K/AKT signalling.

Ping YF(1), Yao XH, Jiang JY, Zhao LT, Yu SC, Jiang T, Lin MC, Chen JH, Wang B,
Zhang R, Cui YH, Qian C, Wang Jm, Bian XW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology and Southwest Cancer Center, Southwest Hospital, Third 
Military Medical University, Chongqing 400038, China.

Chemokines and their receptors are actively involved in inflammation, immune
responses, and cancer development. Here we report the detection of CD133(+)
glioma stem-like cells (GSCs) co-expressing a chemokine receptor CXCR4 in human
primary glioma tissues. These GSCs were located in areas adjacent to tumour
vascular capillaries, suggesting an association between GSCs and tumour
angiogenesis. To test this hypothesis, we isolated CD133(+) GSCs from surgical
specimens of human primary gliomas and glioma cell lines. As compared to CD133(-)
cells, CD133(+) GSCs expressed significantly higher levels of CXCR4 mRNA and
protein, and migrated more efficiently in response to the CXCR4 ligand CXCL12. In
addition, CXCL12 induced vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) production by 
CD133(+) GSCs via activation of the PI3K/AKT signalling pathway. Furthermore,
knocking down of CXCR4 using RNA interference or inhibition of CXCR4 function by 
an antagonist AMD3100 not only reduced VEGF production by CD133(+) GSCs in vitro,
but also attenuated the growth and angiogenesis of tumour xenografts in vivo
formed by CD133(+) GSCs in SCID mice. These results indicate that CXCL12 and its 
receptor CXCR4 promote GSC-initiated glioma growth and angiogenesis by
stimulating VEGF production.

Copyright © 2011 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 21618540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Vis Exp. 2011 May 13;(51). pii: 2537. doi: 10.3791/2537.

Dissection and staining of Drosophila larval ovaries.

Maimon I(1), Gilboa L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Regulation, Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel.

Many organs depend on stem cells for their development during embryogenesis and
for maintenance or repair during adult life. Understanding how stem cells form,
and how they interact with their environment is therefore crucial for
understanding development, homeostasis and disease. The ovary of the fruit fly
Drosophila melanogaster has served as an influential model for the interaction of
germ line stem cells (GSCs) with their somatic support cells (niche) (1, 2). The 
known location of the niche and the GSCs, coupled to the ability to genetically
manipulate them, has allowed researchers to elucidate a variety of interactions
between stem cells and their niches (3-12). Despite the wealth of information
about mechanisms controlling GSC maintenance and differentiation, relatively
little is known about how GSCs and their somatic niches form during development. 
About 18 somatic niches, whose cellular components include terminal filament and 
cap cells (Figure 1), form during the third larval instar (13-17). GSCs originate
from primordial germ cells (PGCs). PGCs proliferate at early larval stages, but
following the formation of the niche a subgroup of PGCs becomes GSCs (7, 16, 18, 
19). Together, the somatic niche cells and the GSCs make a functional unit that
produces eggs throughout the lifetime of the organism. Many questions regarding
the formation of the GSC unit remain unanswered. Processes such as coordination
between precursor cells for niches and stem cell precursors, or the generation of
asymmetry within PGCs as they become GSCs, can best be studied in the larva.
However, a methodical study of larval ovary development is physically
challenging. First, larval ovaries are small. Even at late larval stages they are
only 100µm across. In addition, the ovaries are transparent and are embedded in a
white fat body. Here we describe a step-by-step protocol for isolating ovaries
from late third instar (LL3) Drosophila larvae, followed by staining with
fluorescent antibodies. We offer some technical solutions to problems such as
locating the ovaries, staining and washing tissues that do not sink, and making
sure that antibodies penetrate into the tissue. This protocol can be applied to
earlier larval stages and to larval testes as well.

PMCID: PMC3197100
PMID: 21610675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Development. 2011 Jun;138(12):2441-50. doi: 10.1242/dev.056572.

Sequential changes at differentiation gene promoters as they become active in a
stem cell lineage.

Chen X(1), Lu C, Morillo Prado JR, Eun SH, Fuller MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Johns Hopkins University, 3400 North Charles Street,
Baltimore, MD 21218-2685, USA. xchen32@jhu.edu

Transcriptional silencing of terminal differentiation genes by the Polycomb group
(PcG) machinery is emerging as a key feature of precursor cells in stem cell
lineages. How, then, is this epigenetic silencing reversed for proper cellular
differentiation? Here, we investigate how the developmental program reverses
local PcG action to allow expression of terminal differentiation genes in the
Drosophila male germline stem cell (GSC) lineage. We find that the silenced
state, set up in precursor cells, is relieved through developmentally regulated
sequential events at promoters once cells commit to spermatocyte differentiation.
The programmed events include global downregulation of Polycomb repressive
complex 2 (PRC2) components, recruitment of hypophosphorylated RNA polymerase II 
(Pol II) to promoters, as well as the expression and action of testis-specific
homologs of TATA-binding protein-associated factors (tTAFs). In addition, action 
of the testis-specific meiotic arrest complex (tMAC), a tissue-specific version
of the MIP/dREAM complex, is required both for recruitment of tTAFs to target
differentiation genes and for proper cell type-specific localization of PRC1
components and tTAFs within the spermatocyte nucleolus. Together, the action of
the tMAC and tTAF cell type-specific chromatin and transcription machinery leads 
to loss of Polycomb and release of stalled Pol II from the terminal
differentiation gene promoters, allowing robust transcription.

PMCID: PMC3100706
PMID: 21610025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Zhonghua Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2011 Mar 1;49(3):204-7.

[A retrospective analysis of clinicopathological characteristics and prognostic
factors of gastric stump cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Li FX(1), Zhang RP, Zhao JZ, Wang G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastric Cancer, Cancer Institute and Hospital of Tianjin Medical
University, Tianjin 300060, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the clinicopathological characteristics and prognostic
factors of gastric stump cancer(GSC).
METHODS: The clinical data of 138 patients with GSC treated from January 1992 to 
July 2008 were reviewed and analyzed. The patients included 122 males and 16
females with a mean age of 61.5 years, and the mean interval between the initial 
operation and second diagnosis was 21.9 years.
RESULTS: The endoscopy and pathological examination showed Borrmann III/IV in 127
(92.7%) patients and undifferentiated carcinoma in 115 (83.3%) patients. The
resectability and radical resectability rate were 72.4% and 59.4%. The 1-, 3- and
5-year survival rates was 59.2%, 30.1% and 14.2%, respectively. The median
overall survival time was 19.4 months. Univariate Log-rank test indicated that
Borrmann type, histological type, tumor diameter, TNM stage, depth of invasion,
number of metastatic lymph node, distant metastasis and option of treatment were 
significant prognostic factors for GSC. While TNM stage, depth of invasion,
distant metastasis and option of treatment were prognostic factors on
multivariable analysis. The median survival time of patients underwent radical
resection was significantly longer (36 months) than that of patients received
palliative resection (8 months, P < 0.05) and chemotherapy only (5 months, P <
0.05). Among patients with a tumor of T4 stage, the median survival time was
statistically prolonged by combined evisceration (18.6 months) when compared with
the patients received palliative surgery.
CONCLUSIONS: TNM stage, depth of invasion, distant metastasis and option of
treatment are independent prognostic factors for GSC. Early diagnosis and radical
resection may play an important role in improving the prognosis of GSC.

PMID: 21609561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Birth Defects Res B Dev Reprod Toxicol. 2011 Jun;92(3):189-94. doi:
10.1002/bdrb.20294. Epub 2011 May 18.

Expression analysis of some genes regulated by retinoic acid in controls and
triadimefon-exposed embryos: is the amphibian Xenopus laevis a suitable model for
gene-based comparative teratology?

Di Renzo F(1), Rossi F, Bacchetta R, Prati M, Giavini E, Menegola E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Università di Milano, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The use of nonmammal models in teratological studies is a matter of
debate and seems to be justified if the embryotoxic mechanism involves conserved 
processes. Published data on mammals and Xenopus laevis suggest that azoles are
teratogenic by altering the endogenous concentration of retinoic acid (RA). The
expression of some genes (Shh, Ptch-1, Gsc, and Msx2) controlled by retinoic acid
is downregulated in rat embryos exposed at the phylotypic stage to the triazole
triadimefon (FON). In order to propose X. laevis as a model for gene-based
comparative teratology, this work evaluates the expression of Shh, Ptch-1, Gsc,
and Msx2 in FON-exposed X. laevis embryos.
METHODS: Embryos, exposed to a high concentration level (500<U+2009>µM) of FON from
stage 13 till 17, were examined at stages 17, 27, and 47. Stage 17 and 27 embryos
were processed to perform quantitative RT-PCR.
RESULTS: The developmental rate was never affected by FON at any considered
stage. FON-exposed stage 47 larvae showed the typical craniofacial malformations.
A significant downregulation of Gsc was observed in FON-exposed stage 17 embryos.
Shh, Ptch-1, Msx2 showed a high fluctuation of expression both in control and in 
FON-exposed samples both at stages 17 and 27.
CONCLUSION: The downregulation of Gsc mimics the effects of FON on rat embryos,
showing for this gene a common effect of FON in the two vertebrate classes. The
high fluctuation observed in the gene expression of the other genes, however,
suggests that X. laevis at this stage has limited utility for gene-based
comparative teratology.

© 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21594970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Nat Biotechnol. 2011 May;29(5):415-20. doi: 10.1038/nbt.1823.

Minimum information about a marker gene sequence (MIMARKS) and minimum
information about any (x) sequence (MIxS) specifications.

Yilmaz P(1), Kottmann R, Field D, Knight R, Cole JR, Amaral-Zettler L, Gilbert
JA, Karsch-Mizrachi I, Johnston A, Cochrane G, Vaughan R, Hunter C, Park J,
Morrison N, Rocca-Serra P, Sterk P, Arumugam M, Bailey M, Baumgartner L, Birren
BW, Blaser MJ, Bonazzi V, Booth T, Bork P, Bushman FD, Buttigieg PL, Chain PS,
Charlson E, Costello EK, Huot-Creasy H, Dawyndt P, DeSantis T, Fierer N, Fuhrman 
JA, Gallery RE, Gevers D, Gibbs RA, San Gil I, Gonzalez A, Gordon JI, Guralnick
R, Hankeln W, Highlander S, Hugenholtz P, Jansson J, Kau AL, Kelley ST, Kennedy
J, Knights D, Koren O, Kuczynski J, Kyrpides N, Larsen R, Lauber CL, Legg T, Ley 
RE, Lozupone CA, Ludwig W, Lyons D, Maguire E, Methé BA, Meyer F, Muegge B,
Nakielny S, Nelson KE, Nemergut D, Neufeld JD, Newbold LK, Oliver AE, Pace NR,
Palanisamy G, Peplies J, Petrosino J, Proctor L, Pruesse E, Quast C, Raes J,
Ratnasingham S, Ravel J, Relman DA, Assunta-Sansone S, Schloss PD, Schriml L,
Sinha R, Smith MI, Sodergren E, Spo A, Stombaugh J, Tiedje JM, Ward DV, Weinstock
GM, Wendel D, White O, Whiteley A, Wilke A, Wortman JR, Yatsunenko T, Glöckner
FO.

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Genomics and Bioinformatics Group, Max Planck Institute for Marine
Microbiology, Bremen, Germany.

Here we present a standard developed by the Genomic Standards Consortium (GSC)
for reporting marker gene sequences--the minimum information about a marker gene 
sequence (MIMARKS). We also introduce a system for describing the environment
from which a biological sample originates. The 'environmental packages' apply to 
any genome sequence of known origin and can be used in combination with MIMARKS
and other GSC checklists. Finally, to establish a unified standard for describing
sequence data and to provide a single point of entry for the scientific community
to access and learn about GSC checklists, we present the minimum information
about any (x) sequence (MIxS). Adoption of MIxS will enhance our ability to
analyze natural genetic diversity documented by massive DNA sequencing efforts
from myriad ecosystems in our ever-changing biosphere.

PMCID: PMC3367316
PMID: 21552244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Cancer Res. 2011 May 1;71(9):3410-21. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-3340.

ID4 imparts chemoresistance and cancer stemness to glioma cells by derepressing
miR-9*-mediated suppression of SOX2.

Jeon HM(1), Sohn YW, Oh SY, Kim SH, Beck S, Kim S, Kim H.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea University, Seoul, Republic
of Korea.

Erratum in
    Cancer Res. 2011 Jun 15;71(12):4325.
    Cancer Res. 2011 Sep 15;71(18):6085. Oh, Se-Young [corrected to Oh, Se-Yeong].

Glioma stem cells (GSC) possess tumor-initiating potential and are relatively
resistant to conventional chemotherapy and irradiation. Thus, they are considered
to be major drivers for glioma initiation, progression, and recurrence. However, 
the precise mechanism governing acquisition of their drug resistance remains to
be elucidated. Our previous study has shown that inhibitor of differentiation 4
(ID4) dedifferentiates Ink4a/Arf(-/-) mouse astrocytes and human glioma cells to 
glioma stem-like cells (induced GSCs or iGSCs). In this article, we report that
ID4-driven iGSCs exhibit chemoresistant behavior to anticancer drugs through
activation of ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters. We found that ID4 enhanced
SOX2 protein expression by suppressing microRNA-9* (miR-9*), which can repress
SOX2 by targeting its 3'-untranslated region. Consequently, ID4-mediated SOX2
induction enhanced ABCC3 and ABCC6 expression through direct transcriptional
regulation, indicating that ID4 regulates the chemoresistance of iGSCs by
promoting SOX2-mediated induction of ABC transporters. Furthermore, we found that
short hairpin RNA-mediated knockdown of SOX2 in ID4-driven iGSCs resulted in loss
of cancer stemness. Moreover, ectopic expression of SOX2 could dedifferentiate
Ink4a/Arf(-/-) astrocytes and glioma cells to iGSCs, indicating a crucial role of
SOX2 in genesis and maintenance of GSCs. Finally, we found that the significance 
of the ID4-miR-9*-SOX2-ABCC3/ABCC6 regulatory pathway is recapitulated in GSCs
derived from patients with glioma. Together, our results reveal a novel
regulatory mechanism by which ID4-driven suppression of miR-9* induces SOX2,
which imparts stemness potential and chemoresistance to glioma cells and GSCs.

PMID: 21531766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Stem Cell Res. 2011 May;6(3):262-75. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2011.02.003. Epub 2011
Feb 27.

Activation of FGFR(IIIc) isoforms promotes activin-induced mesendoderm
development in mouse embryonic stem cells and reduces Sox17 coexpression in
EpCAM+ cells.

Peterslund JM(1), Serup P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology, Hagedorn Research Institute, Niels Steensens 
Vej 6, DK-2820 Gentofte, Denmark.

Activin induces the formation of definitive endoderm from mouse ES cells
dependent on active fibroblast growth factor (Fgf) signaling. Here we report that
Fgf4 is dispensable for activin A-induced differentiation of mouse ES cells into 
endoderm. We find that Fgf4(-/-) cells readily differentiate into definitive
endoderm without exogenous administration of Fgf4. Additionally, we investigate
the spatio-temporal dynamics of Fgf receptor (FGFR) isoform distribution in
activin A-treated ES cell cultures and find that FGFR(III)c isoforms are
expressed in DE as well as non-DE populations, whereas FGFR2(III)b and FGFR4 are 
found specifically enriched in the DE fraction. Ligands that preferentially
activate the FGFR(III)c isoforms induce mesendoderm markers T and Gsc, but reduce
expression of the DE marker Sox17 in activin-induced EpCAM(+) cells. In contrast,
ligands specifically activating FGFR(III)b isoforms have no effect on either
population. Activation of FGFR(III)c isoforms results in a strong mitogenic
effect on activin A-induced ES cell progeny early in the differentiation period
whereas activation of FGFR(III)b isoforms has only a moderate mitogenic effect
confined to the late differentiation period. We conclude that FGFR(III)c-isoform 
activation selectively drives the differentiation of mES cells toward mesendoderm
and that Fgf4 is dispensable for the differentiation into definitive endoderm.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21513905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Clin Sleep Med. 2011 Apr 15;7(2):196-203.

Clinical and physiological correlates of caffeine and caffeine metabolites in
primary insomnia.

Youngberg MR(1), Karpov IO, Begley A, Pollock BG, Buysse DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Sleep Medicine Institute and Neuroscience Clinical and Translational Research 
Center, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

OBJECTIVES: To explore the relationship between plasma concentrations of caffeine
and subjective and polysomnographic measures of sleep in both good sleeper
controls (GSC) and individuals with primary insomnia (PI), following the
consumption of low-moderate quantities of caffeine in the home environment.
METHODS: 65 PI and 29 GSC, each consuming < 4 four coffee cup equivalents of
caffeine daily, were recruited. Subjects completed a diary detailing sleep habits
and caffeine consumption, one night of polysomnography, and a blood sample for
measurement of plasma caffeine and its metabolites at bedtime. Plasma
concentrations of caffeine, its primary metabolite, paraxanthine, and other
metabolites were determined for each subject and correlated with self-report and 
polysomnographic measures.
RESULTS: No statistically significant differences were found between GSC and PI
with respect to number of caffeinated beverages consumed (p = 0.91), estimated
absolute caffeine ingestion (p = 0.48), time of caffeine consumption (p = 0.22), 
or plasma concentrations of caffeine (p = 0.92) or paraxanthine (p = 0.88).
Significant correlations were found between plasma concentrations of
caffeine/paraxanthine and endorsed caffeine intake (r = 0.58, p < 0.05) and
estimated absolute caffeine ingestion (r = 0.57, p < 0.05). Plasma
caffeine/paraxanthine was significantly correlated with percent stage 1 sleep (r 
= 0.32, p < 0.05). However, plasma concentrations of caffeine/paraxanthine were
not significantly correlated with other subjective or polysomnographic measures
of sleep disturbance in either GSC or PI.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that low-moderate amounts of caffeine consumed in
the home environment, and mostly during morning hours, have little effect on
subjective or polysomnographic measures of sleep in GSC or PI.

PMCID: PMC3077349
PMID: 21509336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Jun 1;17(11):3686-96. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-3142.
Epub 2011 Apr 19.

A novel oncolytic herpes simplex virus that synergizes with phosphoinositide
3-kinase/Akt pathway inhibitors to target glioblastoma stem cells.

Kanai R(1), Wakimoto H, Martuza RL, Rabkin SD.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Tumor Research Center, Department of Neurosurgery, Massachusetts General
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

PURPOSE: To develop a new oncolytic herpes simplex virus (oHSV) for glioblastoma 
(GBM) therapy that will be effective in glioblastoma stem cells (GSC), an
important and untargeted component of GBM. One approach to enhance oHSV efficacy 
is by combination with other therapeutic modalities.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: MG18L, containing a U(S)3 deletion and an inactivating LacZ 
insertion in U(L)39, was constructed for the treatment of brain tumors. Safety
was evaluated after intracerebral injection in HSV-susceptible mice. The efficacy
of MG18L in human GSCs and glioma cell lines in vitro was compared with other
oHSVs, alone or in combination with phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt
inhibitors (LY294002, triciribine, GDC-0941, and BEZ235). Cytotoxic interactions 
between MG18L and PI3K/Akt inhibitors were determined using Chou-Talalay
analysis. In vivo efficacy studies were conducted using a clinically relevant
mouse model of GSC-derived GBM.
RESULTS: MG18L was severely neuroattenuated in mice, replicated well in GSCs, and
had anti-GBM activity in vivo. PI3K/Akt inhibitors displayed significant but
variable antiproliferative activities in GSCs, whereas their combination with
MG18L synergized in killing GSCs and glioma cell lines, but not human astrocytes,
through enhanced induction of apoptosis. Importantly, synergy was independent of 
inhibitor sensitivity. In vivo, the combination of MG18L and LY294002
significantly prolonged survival of mice, as compared with either agent alone,
achieving 50% long-term survival in GBM-bearing mice.
CONCLUSIONS: This study establishes a novel therapeutic strategy: oHSV
manipulation of critical oncogenic pathways to sensitize cancer cells to
molecularly targeted drugs. MG18L is a promising agent for the treatment of GBM, 
being especially effective when combined with PI3K/Akt pathway-targeted agents.

©2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3107877
PMID: 21505062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Development. 2011 May;138(9):1687-96. doi: 10.1242/dev.057364.

lines and bowl affect the specification of cyst stem cells and niche cells in the
Drosophila testis.

Dinardo S(1), Okegbe T, Wingert L, Freilich S, Terry N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine and the Penn Institute for Regenerative Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6048, USA. sdinardo@zimbra.upenn.edu

To function properly, tissue-specific stem cells must reside in a niche. The
Drosophila testis niche is one of few niches studied in vivo. Here, a single
niche, comprising ten hub cells, maintains both germline stem cells (GSC) and
somatic stem cells (CySC). Here, we show that lines is an essential CySC factor. 
Surprisingly, lines-depleted CySCs adopted several characteristics of hub cells, 
including the recruitment of new CySCs. This led us to examine the developmental 
relationship between CySCs and hub cells. In contrast to a previous report, we
did not observe significant conversion of steady-state CySC progeny to hub fate. 
However, we found that these two cell types derive from a common precursor pool
during gonadogenesis. Furthermore, lines mutant embryos exhibited gonads
containing excess hub cells, indicating that lines represses hub cell fate during
gonadogenesis. In many tissues, lines acts antagonistically to bowl, and we found
that this is true for hub specification, establishing bowl as a positively acting
factor in the development of the testis niche.

PMCID: PMC3074445
PMID: 21486923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Apr 26;108(17):7064-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1015874108. Epub 2011 Apr 11.

Loss of lysine-specific demethylase 1 nonautonomously causes stem cell tumors in 
the Drosophila ovary.

Eliazer S(1), Shalaby NA, Buszczak M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA.

Specialized microenvironments called niches keep stem cells in an
undifferentiated and self-renewing state. Dedicated stromal cells form niches by 
producing a variety of factors that act directly on stem cells. The size and
signaling output of niches must be finely tuned to ensure proper tissue
homeostasis. Although advances have been made in identifying factors that promote
niche cell fate, the mechanisms that restrict niche cell formation during
development and limit niche signaling output in adults remain poorly understood. 
Here, we show that the histone lysine-specific demethylase 1 (Lsd1) regulates the
size of the germline stem cell (GSC) niche in Drosophila ovaries. GSC maintenance
depends on bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signals produced by a small cluster
of cap cells located at the anterior tip of the germarium. Lsd1 null mutant
ovaries carry small germline tumors containing an expanded number of GSC-like
cells with round fusomes that display ectopic BMP signal responsiveness away from
the normal niche. Clonal analysis and cell type-specific rescue experiments
demonstrate that Lsd1 functions within the escort cells (ECs) that reside
immediately adjacent to cap cells and prevents them from ectopically producing
niche-specific signals. Temporally restricted gene knockdown experiments suggest 
that Lsd1 functions both during development, to specify EC fate, and in
adulthood, to prevent ECs from forming ectopic niches independent of changes in
cell fate. Further analysis shows that Lsd1 functions to repress decapentaplegic 
(dpp) expression in adult germaria. The role of Lsd1 in regulating niche-specific
signals may have important implications for understanding how disruption of its
mammalian homolog contributes to cancer and metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3084046
PMID: 21482791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Cancer Cell. 2011 Apr 12;19(4):498-511. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2011.03.004.

Nonreceptor tyrosine kinase BMX maintains self-renewal and tumorigenic potential 
of glioblastoma stem cells by activating STAT3.

Guryanova OA(1), Wu Q, Cheng L, Lathia JD, Huang Z, Yang J, MacSwords J, Eyler
CE, McLendon RE, Heddleston JM, Shou W, Hambardzumyan D, Lee J, Hjelmeland AB,
Sloan AE, Bredel M, Stark GR, Rich JN, Bao S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Lerner Research
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Glioblastomas display cellular hierarchies containing tumor-propagating
glioblastoma stem cells (GSCs). STAT3 is a critical signaling node in GSC
maintenance but molecular mechanisms underlying STAT3 activation in GSCs are
poorly defined. Here we demonstrate that the bone marrow X-linked (BMX)
nonreceptor tyrosine kinase activates STAT3 signaling to maintain self-renewal
and tumorigenic potential of GSCs. BMX is differentially expressed in GSCs
relative to nonstem cancer cells and neural progenitors. BMX knockdown potently
inhibited STAT3 activation, expression of GSC transcription factors, and growth
of GSC-derived intracranial tumors. Constitutively active STAT3 rescued the
effects of BMX downregulation, supporting that BMX signals through STAT3 in GSCs.
These data demonstrate that BMX represents a GSC therapeutic target and
reinforces the importance of STAT3 signaling in stem-like cancer phenotypes.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3076106
PMID: 21481791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Chem Ecol. 2011 May;37(5):496-9. doi: 10.1007/s10886-011-9941-4. Epub 2011 Apr 
8.

A comparison of sample preparation techniques for quantifying iridoid glycosides 
sequestered by lepidopteran larvae.

Lampert EC(1), Bowers MD.

Author information: 
(1)Museum of Natural History, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, USA.
elampert@gsc.edu

This study compared different methods of tissue preparation for extraction of
iridoid glycosides sequestered by three species of lepidopteran larvae. Junonia
coenia is a specialist on plant species that produce iridoid glycosides, while
the arctiids Estigmene acrea and Spilosoma congrua are both polyphagous and will 
eat plants that produce iridoid glycosides. Larvae of all three species were
reared on leaves of Plantago lanceolata, which produces two primary iridoid
glycosides, aucubin and catalpol. Three methods of preparing the specimens before
extraction in methanol were compared in all three species: 1) larvae were
flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen, 2) larvae were macerated fresh in boiling
methanol, or 3) larvae were macerated fresh in room temperature methanol. A set
of J. coenia larvae was oven-dried before maceration as an additional treatment
for this species only. Junonia coenia sequestered the most iridoid glycosides,
while E. acrea sequestered the least, and S. congrua was intermediate. Estigmene 
acrea was poor at sequestering catalpol. Tissue preparation method only
significantly influenced iridoid glycoside recovery from S. congrua, with
maceration in room-temperature methanol being the most effective of the three
methods. This study shows that treatment of insects prior to iridoid glycoside
extraction can influence recovery of the compounds, and that the effects of
treatment may vary among different species.

PMID: 21475987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Cell Reprogram. 2011 Apr;13(2):133-44. doi: 10.1089/cell.2010.0047.

Pluripotent male germline stem cells from goat fetal testis and their survival in
mouse testis.

Hua J(1), Zhu H, Pan S, Liu C, Sun J, Ma X, Dong W, Liu W, Li W.

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Shaanxi Centre of Stem Cells Engineering &
Technology, Key Lab for Reproductive Physiology & Embryo
Biotechnology-Agriculture Ministry of China, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 
Shaanxi, People's Republic of China. jinlianhua@nwsuaf.edu.cn

Male germline stem cells (mGSCs) are stem cells present in male testis
responsible for spermatogenesis during their whole life. Studies have shown that 
mGSCs can be derived in vitro and resemble embryonic stem cells (ESCs) properties
both in the mouse and humans. However, little is know about these cells in
domestic animals. Here we report the first successful establishment of goat GSCs 
derived from 2-5-month fetal testis, and developmental potential assay of these
cells both in vitro and in vivo. These cells express pluripotent markers such as 
Oct4, Sox2, C-myc, and Tert when cultured as human ESCs conditions. Embryoid
bodies (EBs) formed by goat mGSCs were induced with 2<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-6) M retinoic acid
(RA). Immunofluorescence analysis showed that some cells inside of the EBs were
positive for meiosis marker-SCP3, STRA8, and germ cell marker-VASA, and haploid
marker-FE-J1, PRM1, indicating their germ cell lineage differentiation. Some
cells become elongated sperm-like cells after induction. Approximately 34.88%
(30/86) embryos showed cleavage and four embryos were cultured on murine
fibroblast feeder and formed small embryonic stem like colonies. However, most
stalled at four-cell stage after intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) of these
cells. Transplantation of DAPI labeled mGSCs into the seminiferous tubules of
busulfan-treated mice, and showed that mGSCs can colonize, self-renew, and
differentiate into germ cells. Thus, we have established a goat GSC cell line and
these cells could be differentiated into sperm-like cells in vivo and sperms in
vitro, providing a promising platform for generation of transgenic goat for
production of specific humanized proteins.

PMID: 21473690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. PLoS Genet. 2011 Mar;7(3):e1001349. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001349. Epub 2011 
Mar 24.

A role for Set1/MLL-related components in epigenetic regulation of the
Caenorhabditis elegans germ line.

Li T(1), Kelly WG.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Rollins Research Center, Emory University, Atlanta,
Georgia, United States of America.

The methylation of lysine 4 of Histone H3 (H3K4me) is an important component of
epigenetic regulation. H3K4 methylation is a consequence of transcriptional
activity, but also has been shown to contribute to "epigenetic memory"; i.e., it 
can provide a heritable landmark of previous transcriptional activity that may
help promote or maintain such activity in subsequent cell descendants or
lineages. A number of multi-protein complexes that control the addition of H3K4me
have been described in several organisms. These Set1/MLL or COMPASS complexes
often share a common subset of conserved proteins, with other components
potentially contributing to tissue-specific or developmental regulation of the
methyltransferase activity. Here we show that the normal maintenance of H3K4 di- 
and tri-methylation in the germ line of Caenorhabditis elegans is dependent on
homologs of the Set1/MLL complex components WDR-5.1 and RBBP-5. Different
methylation states that are each dependent on wdr-5.1 and rbbp-5 require
different methyltransferases. In addition, different subsets of conserved
Set1/MLL-like complex components appear to be required for H3K4 methylation in
germ cells and somatic lineages at different developmental stages. In adult germ 
cells, mutations in wdr-5.1 or rbbp-5 dramatically affect both germ line stem
cell (GSC) population size and proper germ cell development. RNAi knockdown of
RNA Polymerase II does not significantly affect the wdr-5.1-dependent maintenance
of H3K4 methylation in either early embryos or adult GSCs, suggesting that the
mechanism is not obligately coupled to transcription in these cells. A separate, 
wdr-5.1-independent mode of H3K4 methylation correlates more directly with
transcription in the adult germ line and in embryos. Our results indicate that
H3K4 methylation in the germline is regulated by a combination of Set1/MLL
component-dependent and -independent modes of epigenetic establishment and
maintenance.

PMCID: PMC3063756
PMID: 21455483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Cell Res. 2011 Jun;21(6):911-21. doi: 10.1038/cr.2011.47. Epub 2011 Mar 22.

Smek promotes histone deacetylation to suppress transcription of Wnt target gene 
brachyury in pluripotent embryonic stem cells.

Lyu J(1), Jho EH, Lu W.

Author information: 
(1)The Eli and Edythe Broad Center for Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell
Research, University of Southern California, Keck School of Medicine, Los
Angeles, CA 90033, USA. kohono@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp

In embryonic stem cells (ESCs), Wnt-responsive development-related genes are
silenced to maintain pluripotency and their expression is activated during
differentiation. Acetylation of histones by histone acetyltransferases stimulates
transcription, whereas deacetylation of histones by HDACs is correlated with
transcriptional repression. Although Wnt-mediated gene transcription has been
intimately linked to the acetylation or deacetylation of histones, how Wnt
signaling regulates this type of histone modification is poorly understood. Here,
we report that Smek, a regulatory subunit of protein phosphatase 4 (PP4) complex,
plays an important role in histone deacetylation and silencing of the
Wnt-responsive gene, brachyury, in ESCs. Smek mediates recruitment of PP4c and
HDAC1 to the Tcf/Lef binding site of the brachyury promoter and inhibits
brachyury expression in ESCs. Activation of Wnt signaling during differentiation 
causes disruption of the Smek/PP4c/HDAC1 complex, resulting in an increase in
histones H3 and H4 acetylation at the brachyury gene locus. These results suggest
that the Smek-containing PP4 complex represses transcription of Wnt-responsive
development-related genes through histone deacetylation, and that this complex is
essential for ESC pluripotency maintenance.

PMCID: PMC3203701
PMID: 21423269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Mol Ther. 2011 Jun;19(6):1161-9. doi: 10.1038/mt.2011.28. Epub 2011 Mar 8.

hMSC-mediated concurrent delivery of endostatin and carboxylesterase to mouse
xenografts suppresses glioma initiation and recurrence.

Yin J(1), Kim JK, Moon JH, Beck S, Piao D, Jin X, Kim SH, Lim YC, Nam DH, You S, 
Kim H, Choi YJ.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Laboratory of Animal Cell Biotechnology, School of
Agricultural Biotechnology, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Glioma stem cells (GSCs) are known to be maintained within a "vascular niche";
thereby, disruption of this microenvironment using antiangiogenesis agents is a
promising therapeutic modality. However, this regimen leads to treatment failure 
and tumor recurrence in patients with glioblastoma multiforme (GBM). Therefore,
more effective therapeutic approaches that can eradicate GSCs and the bulk tumors
are needed. Toward this goal, we examined the antitumor effects of an
antiangiogenesis approach combined with conventional chemotherapy on suppressing 
glioma xenograft growth. We established three genetically engineered mesenchymal 
stem cell (MSC) lines (GE-AF-MSCs) by stably transducing the gene encoding
endostatin (an antiangiogenesis factor), the gene encoding secretable form of
carboxylesterase 2 (sCE2, a prodrug-activating enzyme), or a mixture of both
genes. Among the three GE-AF-MSC cell lines, injection of amniotic fluid
(AF)-MSCs-endostatin-sCE2 cells into U87MG-EGFRvIII-driven orthotopic brain tumor
and postsurgery tumor recurrence models, and subsequent CPT11 treatment yielded
the strongest antitumor responses, including diminished angiogenesis, increased
cell death, and a reduced Nestin-positive GSC population. Therefore, our
antitumor strategy provides a novel basis for designing stem cell-mediated
therapeutic approaches to target and eradicate GSCs and the bulk tumors.

PMCID: PMC3129799
PMID: 21386822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Mar 25;406(4):643-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.02.123. Epub 2011 Mar 1.

Elevated invasive potential of glioblastoma stem cells.

Cheng L(1), Wu Q, Guryanova OA, Huang Z, Huang Q, Rich JN, Bao S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental Research, The First People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai, China.

Glioblastomas (GBMs) are the most lethal and common types of primary brain
tumors. The hallmark of GBMs is their highly infiltrative nature. The cellular
and molecular mechanisms underlying the aggressive cancer invasion in GBMs are
poorly understood. GBM displays remarkable cellular heterogeneity and hierarchy
containing self-renewing glioblastoma stem cells (GSCs). Whether GSCs are more
invasive than non-stem tumor cells and contribute to the invasive phenotype in
GBMs has not been determined. Here we provide experimental evidence supporting
that GSCs derived from GBM surgical specimens or xenografts display greater
invasive potential in vitro and in vivo than matched non-stem tumor cells.
Furthermore, we identified several invasion-associated proteins that were
differentially expressed in GSCs relative to non-stem tumor cells. One of such
proteins is L1CAM, a cell surface molecule shown to be critical to maintain GSC
tumorigenic potential in our previous study. Immunohistochemical staining showed 
that L1CAM is highly expressed in a population of cancer cells in the invasive
fronts of primary GBMs. Collectively, these data demonstrate the invasive nature 
of GSCs, suggesting that disrupting GSCs through a specific target such as L1CAM 
may reduce GBM cancer invasion and tumor recurrence.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3065536
PMID: 21371437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Genet Genomics. 2011 Feb;38(2):55-61. doi: 10.1016/j.jcg.2011.01.002. Epub 2011
Feb 23.

Distinct effects of nuclear membrane localization on gene transcription silencing
in Drosophila S2 cells and germ cells.

Sui L(1), Yang Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.

Nuclear envelope proteins have important roles in chromatin organization and
signal-dependent transcriptional regulation. A previous study reported that the
inner nuclear membrane protein, Otefin (Ote), was essential for germline stem
cell (GSC) maintenance via interaction with Smad complex. The interaction of Ote 
with the Smad complex recruits the bam locus to the nuclear periphery and
subsequently results in bam transcriptional silencing, revealing that nuclear
peripheral localization is essential for bam gene regulation. However, it remains
unknown whether the nuclear peripheral localization is sufficient for bam
silencing. To address this issue, we have established a tethering system, in
which the Gal4 DNA binding domain (DBD) of the Flag:Gal4 DBD:Ote<U+25B5>LEM fusion
protein physically interacts with the Gal4 binding sites upstream of bamP-gfp to 
artificially recruit the reporter gene gfp to the nuclear membrane. Our data
demonstrated that the nuclear peripheral localization seemed to affect the
expression of the target naked gene in S2 cells. By contrast, in Drosophila germ 
cells, the nuclear membrane localization was not sufficient for gene silencing.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 21356524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Cancer Biother Radiopharm. 2011 Feb;26(1):77-83. doi: 10.1089/cbr.2010.0857.

Bone morphogenetic protein 4 inhibits cell proliferation and induces apoptosis in
glioma stem cells.

Zhou Z(1), Sun L, Wang Y, Wu Z, Geng J, Miu W, Pu Y, You Y, Yang Z, Liu N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The Affiliated Wuxi People's Hospital of Nanjing
Medical University, Wuxi, People's Republic of China.

Glioma stem cells (GSCs), which are originated from transformed neural stem
cells, are tumor-initiating cells of glioma, the most common primary malignant
neoplasm of the central nervous system. Extensive studies have shown that bone
morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4) plays an important role in the differentiation and
proliferation of neural stem cells. To seek the functions and mechanisms of BMP4 
in GSCs, GSCs isolated from U87 human glioma cells by using vincristine were
exposed to BMP4 protein. This study shows that BMP4 inhibited U87 GSC
proliferation (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01) via downregulation of cyclin D1 level and promoted GSC
apoptosis through induction of Bax expression and inhibition of Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL 
levels. Thus, these results indicate a new approach of GSC-based glioma
treatment.

PMID: 21355779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Neurology. 2011 Mar 29;76(13):1126-34. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e318212a89f. Epub
2011 Feb 23.

Neural stem/progenitors and glioma stem-like cells have differential sensitivity 
to chemotherapy.

Gong X(1), Schwartz PH, Linskey ME, Bota DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, UC Irvine School of Medicine, Orange, CA, USA.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2011 Mar 29;76(13):1118-20.
    Neurology. 2011 Mar 29;76(13):e69-70.
    Neurology. 2011 Nov 29;77(22):e135; author reply e135-6.

OBJECTIVES: New data suggest that glioma stem-like cells (GSCs) and neural
stem/progenitor cells (NSCs) may share common origins. GSCs drive tumor
proliferation and appear to be resistant to classic chemotherapy, while the
effects of chemotherapy on NSCs are not well studied. As the role of NSCs in
learning and memory is increasingly recognized, we need to identify drugs that
reduce neurotoxicity but are still effective against glial tumors.
METHODS: We treated 3 human NSC cultures and multiple low- and high-grade GSC
cultures with the commonly used agents temozolomide (TMZ) and cisplatin (CIS),
and with 2 newer, promising drugs: the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib (BTZ) and 
the epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor erlotinib (ERL).
We measured cell survival, proliferation, cell death induction, and drug
resistance markers.
RESULTS: TMZ decreased NSC viability, while minimally affecting GSCs. TMZ induced
NSC death, which was partially compensated for by increased proliferation. CIS
had similar effects. The NSC's sensitivity to TMZ and CIS correlated with low
expression of the multidrug resistance gene ABCG2, but not of MGMT or MSH1/MLH2. 
BTZ caused an 80%decrease in GSCs, while minimally affecting NSCs. GSCs had lower
proteasome levels and activity after BTZ treatment. ERL treatment also decreased 
GSC numbers, but not NSC viability, which correlated with low EGFR expression in 
NSCs compared to GSCs.
CONCLUSIONS: Newer chemotherapy agents ERL and BTZ are effective against GSCs yet
produce minimal effects on NSCs, while the older drugs TMZ and CIS are more toxic
for NSCs than for GSCs. The identification and testing of more selective drugs is
clearly warranted.

PMCID: PMC3269770
PMID: 21346220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Cell Sci. 2011 Mar 15;124(Pt 6):933-9. doi: 10.1242/jcs.079798. Epub 2011 Feb
15.

Drosophila male germline stem cells do not asymmetrically segregate chromosome
strands.

Yadlapalli S(1), Cheng J, Yamashita YM.

Author information: 
(1)Life Sciences Institute, Center for Stem Cell Biology, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Comment in
    J Cell Sci. 2011 Dec 15;124(Pt 24):4137; author reply 4138-9.

Adult stem cells continuously supply differentiated cells throughout the life of 
organisms. This increases the risk of replicative senescence or neoplastic
transformation due to mutations that accumulate over many rounds of DNA
replication. The immortal strand hypothesis proposes that stem cells reduce the
accumulation of replication-induced mutations by retaining the older template DNA
strands. Other models have also been proposed in which stem cells asymmetrically 
segregate chromosome strands for other reasons, such as retention of epigenetic
memories. Recently, the idea has emerged that the mother centrosome, which is
stereotypically retained within some asymmetrically dividing stem cells, might be
utilized as a means of asymmetrically segregating chromosome strands. We have
tested this hypothesis in germline stem cells (GSCs) from Drosophila melanogaster
testis, which undergo asymmetric divisions marked by the asymmetric segregation
of centrosomes and the acquisition of distinct daughter cell fates (stem cell
self-renewal versus differentiation). Using 5-bromo-2-deoxyuridine labeling
combined with direct visualization of GSC-gonialblast (differentiating daughter) 
pairs, we directly scored the outcome of chromosome strand segregation. Our data 
show that, in male GSCs in the Drosophila testis, chromosome strands are not
asymmetrically segregated, despite asymmetrically segregating centrosomes. Our
data demonstrate that asymmetric centrosome segregation in stem cells does not
necessarily lead to asymmetric chromosome strand segregation.

PMCID: PMC3048890
PMID: 21325028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 May;39(9):e59. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr041. Epub 2011 Feb 9.

Optimization of turn-back primers in isothermal amplification.

Kimura Y(1), de Hoon MJ, Aoki S, Ishizu Y, Kawai Y, Kogo Y, Daub CO, Lezhava A,
Arner E, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Omics Science Center (OSC), RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Yokohama,
Kanagawa, 230-0045, Japan.

The application of isothermal amplification technologies is rapidly expanding and
currently covers different areas such as infectious disease, genetic disorder and
drug dosage adjustment. Meanwhile, many of such technologies have complex
reaction processes and often require a fine-tuned primer set where existing
primer design tools are not sufficient. We have developed a primer selection
system for one important primer, the turn-back primer (TP), which is commonly
used in loop-mediated amplification (LAMP) and smart amplification process
(SmartAmp). We chose 78 parameters related to the primer and target sequence, and
explored their relationship to amplification speed using experimental data for
1344 primer combinations. We employed the least absolute shrinkage and selection 
operator (LASSO) method for parameter selection and estimation of their numerical
coefficients. We subsequently evaluated our prediction model using additional
independent experiments and compared to the LAMP primer design tool, Primer
Explorer version4 (PE4). The evaluation showed that our approach yields a
superior primer design in isothermal amplification and is robust against
variations in the experimental setup. Our LASSO regression analysis revealed that
availability of the 3'- and 5'-end of the primer are particularly important
factors for efficient isothermal amplification. Our computer script is freely
available at: http://gerg.gsc.riken.jp/TP_optimization/.

© The Author(s) 2011. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMCID: PMC3089485
PMID: 21310714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Stand Genomic Sci. 2010 Dec 15;3(3):235-9. doi: 10.4056/sigs.1333437.

Meeting report: GSC M5 roundtable at the 13th International Society for Microbial
Ecology meeting in Seattle, WA, USA August 22-27, 2010.

Gilbert JA, Meyer F, Knight R, Field D, Kyrpides N, Yilmaz P, Wooley J.

This report summarizes the proceedings of the Metagenomics, Metadata,
Metaanalysis, Models and Metainfrastructure (M5) Roundtable at the 13th
International Society for Microbial Ecology Meeting in Seattle, WA, USA August
22-27, 2010. The Genomic Standards Consortium (GSC) hosted this meeting as a
community engagement exercise to describe the GSC to the microbial ecology
community during this important international meeting. The roundtable included
five talks given by members of the GSC, and was followed by audience
participation in the form of a roundtable discussion. This report summarizes this
event. Further information on the GSC and its range of activities can be found at
http://www.gensc.org.

PMCID: PMC3035306
PMID: 21304725  [PubMed]


104. Stand Genomic Sci. 2010 Dec 4;3(3):232-4. doi: 10.4056/sigs.1383476.

Meeting Report: Metagenomics, Metadata and MetaAnalysis (M3) at ISMB 2010.

Field D, Sansone S, Delong EF, Sterk P, Friedberg I, Kottmann R, Hirschman L,
Garrity G, Cochrane G, Wooley J, Meyer F, Hunter S, White O.

This report summarizes the proceedings of the first day of the Metagenomics,
Metadata and MetaAnalysis (M3) workshop held at the Intelligent Systems for
Molecular Biology 2010 conference. The second day, which was dedicated to the
inaugural meeting of the BioSharing initiative is presented in a separate report.
The Genomic Standards Consortium (GSC) hosted the first day of this Special
Interest Group (SIG) at ISMB to continue exploring the bottlenecks and emerging
solutions for obtaining biological insights through large-scale comparative
analysis of metagenomic datasets. The M3 SIG included invited and selected talks 
and a panel discussion at the end of the day involving the plenary speakers.
Further information about the GSC and its range of activities can be found at
http://gensc.org. Information about the newly established BioSharing effort can
be found at http://biosharing.org/.

PMCID: PMC3035302
PMID: 21304724  [PubMed]


105. Stand Genomic Sci. 2010 Dec 25;3(3):225-31. doi: 10.4056/sigs.1423520.

Meeting Report from the Genomic Standards Consortium (GSC) Workshop 10.

Glass E, Meyer F, Gilbert JA, Field D, Hunter S, Kottmann R, Kyrpides N, Sansone 
S, Schriml L, Sterk P, White O, Wooley J.

This report summarizes the proceedings of the 10th workshop of the Genomic
Standards Consortium (GSC), held at Argonne National Laboratory, IL, USA. It was 
the second GSC workshop to have open registration and attracted over 60
participants who worked together to progress the full range of projects ongoing
within the GSC. Overall, the primary focus of the workshop was on advancing the
M5 platform for next-generation collaborative computational infrastructures.
Other key outcomes included the formation of a GSC working group focused on
MIGS/MIMS/MIENS compliance using the ISA software suite and the formal launch of 
the GSC Developer Working Group. Further information about the GSC and its range 
of activities can be found at http://gensc.org/.

PMCID: PMC3035307
PMID: 21304723  [PubMed]


106. Stand Genomic Sci. 2010 Dec 4;3(3):216-24. doi: 10.4056/sigs.1353455.

Meeting Report from the Genomic Standards Consortium (GSC) Workshop 9.

Davidsen T, Madupu R, Sterk P, Field D, Garrity G, Gilbert J, Glöckner FO,
Hirschman L, Kolker E, Kottmann R, Kyrpides N, Meyer F, Morrison N, Schriml L,
Tatusova T, Wooley J.

This report summarizes the proceedings of the 9th workshop of the Genomic
Standards Consortium (GSC), held at the J. Craig Venter Institute, Rockville, MD,
USA. It was the first GSC workshop to have open registration and attracted over
90 participants. This workshop featured sessions that provided overviews of the
full range of ongoing GSC projects. It included sessions on Standards in Genomic 
Sciences, the open access journal of the GSC, building standards for genome
annotation, the M5 platform for next-generation collaborative computational
infrastructures, building ties with the biodiversity research community and two
discussion panels with government and industry participants. Progress was made on
all fronts, and major outcomes included the completion of the MIENS specification
for publication and the formation of the Biodiversity working group.

PMCID: PMC3035308
PMID: 21304722  [PubMed]


107. Stand Genomic Sci. 2010 Jun 15;2(3):357-60. doi: 10.4056/sigs.802738.

Meeting Report: "Metagenomics, Metadata and Meta-analysis" (M3) Workshop at the
Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing 2010.

Hirschman L, Sterk P, Field D, Wooley J, Cochrane G, Gilbert J, Kolker E,
Kyrpides N, Meyer F, Mizrachi I, Nakamura Y, Sansone SA, Schriml L, Tatusova T,
White O, Yilmaz P.

This report summarizes the M3 Workshop held at the January 2010 Pacific Symposium
on Biocomputing. The workshop, organized by Genomic Standards Consortium members,
included five contributed talks, a series of short presentations from
stakeholders in the genomics standards community, a poster session, and, in the
evening, an open discussion session to review current projects and examine future
directions for the GSC and its stakeholders.

PMCID: PMC3035291
PMID: 21304719  [PubMed]


108. Stand Genomic Sci. 2010 Aug 20;3(1):93-6. doi: 10.4056/sigs.1022942.

Meeting Report from the Genomic Standards Consortium (GSC) Workshop 8.

Kyrpides N, Field D, Sterk P, Kottmann R, Glöckner FO, Hirschman L, Garrity GM,
Cochrane G, Wooley J.

This report summarizes the proceedings of the 8th meeting of the Genomic
Standards Consortium held at the Department of Energy Joint Genome Institute in
Walnut Creek, CA, USA on September 9-11, 2009. This three-day workshop marked the
maturing of Genomic Standards Consortium from an informal gathering of
researchers interested in developing standards in the field of genomic and
metagenomics to an established community with a defined governance mechanism, its
own open access journal, and a family of established standards for describing
genomes, metagenomes and marker studies (i.e. ribosomal RNA gene surveys). There 
will be increased efforts within the GSC to reach out to the wider scientific
community via a range of new projects. Further information about the GSC and its 
activities can be found at http://gensc.org/.

PMCID: PMC3035271
PMID: 21304696  [PubMed]


109. Development. 2011 Mar;138(5):831-7. doi: 10.1242/dev.057901.

Asymmetric division of cyst stem cells in Drosophila testis is ensured by
anaphase spindle repositioning.

Cheng J(1), Tiyaboonchai A, Yamashita YM, Hunt AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Center for Ultrafast Optical Science,
1101 Beal Ave., Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Many stem cells divide asymmetrically to balance self-renewal and
differentiation. In Drosophila testes, two stem cell populations, germline stem
cells (GSCs) and somatic cyst stem cells (CySCs), cohere and regulate one
another. Here, we report that CySCs divide asymmetrically through repositioning
the mitotic spindle around anaphase. CySC spindle repositioning requires
functional centrosomes, Dynein and the actin-membrane linker Moesin. Anaphase
spindle repositioning is required to achieve high-fidelity asymmetric divisions
in CySCs, thus maintaining both GSC and CySC numbers. We propose that dynamic
spindle repositioning allows CySCs to divide asymmetrically while accommodating
the structure of the GSCs they encapsulate.

PMCID: PMC3035088
PMID: 21303845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Brain Res. 2011 Apr 12;1384:9-14. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2011.01.105. Epub 2011 
Feb 25.

The different HMGA1 expression of total population of glioblastoma cell line U251
and glioma stem cells isolated from U251.

Fan H(1), Guo H, Zhang IY, Liu B, Luan L, Xu S, Hou X, Liu W, Zhang R, Wang X,
Pang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong
University, Jinan 250021, PR China.

The high-mobility group A1 (HMGA1) protein is a non-histone architectural nuclear
factor and participates in diverse biological processes, including gene
transcription, embryogenesis, cell cycle regulation, apoptosis, and even
neoplastic transformation. In our study, glioma stem cells (GSCs) expressing the 
surface marker CD133 from human glioblastoma cell line U251 were isolated using
MACS column and were analyzed using immunofluorescence and flow cytometry (FCM). 
The different expression of HMGA1 was detected using real-time RT-PCR and Western
blot at transcriptional and translational levels between U251 and isolated GSCs. 
The results show that GSCs were successfully isolated from U251 and cultured in
serum-free medium (SMF). The percentage of GSCs in U251 was 0.32%±0.07%. HMGA1
expression was significantly higher in GSCs than in glioblastoma cells (P<0.05), 
up to 6.13±0.25-fold and 2.75±0.99-fold at transcriptional and translational
levels, respectively. These results indicated HMGA1 is overexpressed in GSCs as
compared to glioblastoma cell line U251, which points to the expression of HMGA1 
being closely related to malignant proliferation, invasion, and differentiation
of tumors from the prospective of tumor stem cells (TSCs). We conclude that HMGA1
may be a potential biomarker and rational therapeutic target for glioblastoma and
GSC.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 21300033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Dev Biol. 2011 Apr 15;352(2):367-81. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.01.034. Epub 2011 
Feb 3.

Siamois and Twin are redundant and essential in formation of the Spemann
organizer.

Bae S(1), Reid CD, Kessler DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, 1110 Biomedical Research Building 2/3, 421 Curie Boulevard,
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6058, USA. swbae@kcch.re.kr

The Spemann organizer is an essential signaling center in Xenopus germ layer
patterning and axis formation. Organizer formation occurs in dorsal blastomeres
receiving both maternal Wnt and zygotic Nodal signals. In response to stabilized 
ßcatenin, dorsal blastomeres express the closely related transcriptional
activators, Siamois (Sia) and Twin (Twn), members of the paired homeobox family. 
Sia and Twn induce organizer formation and expression of organizer-specific
genes, including Goosecoid (Gsc). In spite of the similarity of Sia and Twn
sequence and expression pattern, it is unclear whether these factors function
equivalently in promoter binding and subsequent transcriptional activation, or if
Sia and Twn are required for all aspects of organizer function. Here we report
that Sia and Twn activate Gsc transcription by directly binding to a conserved P3
site within the Wnt-responsive proximal element of the Gsc promoter. Sia and Twn 
form homodimers and heterodimers by direct homeodomain interaction and dimer
forms are indistinguishable in both DNA-binding and activation functions.
Sequential chromatin immunoprecipitation reveals that the endogenous Gsc promoter
can be occupied by either Sia or Twn homodimers or Sia-Twn heterodimers.
Knockdown of Sia and Twn together, but not individually, results in a failure of 
organizer gene expression and a disruption of axis formation, consistent with a
redundant role for Sia and Twn in organizer formation. Furthermore, simultaneous 
knockdown of Sia and Twn blocks axis induction in response to ectopic Wnt
signaling, demonstrating an essential role for Sia and Twn in mediating the
transcriptional response to the maternal Wnt pathway. The results demonstrate the
functional redundancy of Sia and Twn and their essential role in direct
transcriptional responses necessary for Spemann organizer formation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3065516
PMID: 21295564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. BMC Med Genet. 2011 Feb 4;12:20. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-12-20.

Evaluation of four novel genetic variants affecting hemoglobin A1c levels in a
population-based type 2 diabetes cohort (the HUNT2 study).

Hertel JK(1), Johansson S, Ræder H, Platou CG, Midthjell K, Hveem K, Molven A,
Njølstad PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.

BACKGROUND: Chronic hyperglycemia confers increased risk for long-term
diabetes-associated complications and repeated hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) measures
are a widely used marker for glycemic control in diabetes treatment and
follow-up. A recent genome-wide association study revealed four genetic loci,
which were associated with HbA1c levels in adults with type 1 diabetes. We aimed 
to evaluate the effect of these loci on glycemic control in type 2 diabetes.
METHODS: We genotyped 1,486 subjects with type 2 diabetes from a Norwegian
population-based cohort (HUNT2) for single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
located near the BNC2, SORCS1, GSC and WDR72 loci. Through regression models, we 
examined their effects on HbA1c and non-fasting glucose levels individually and
in a combined genetic score model.
RESULTS: No significant associations with HbA1c or glucose levels were found for 
the SORCS1, BNC2, GSC or WDR72 variants (all P-values > 0.05). Although the
observed effects were non-significant and of much smaller magnitude than
previously reported in type 1 diabetes, the SORCS1 risk variant showed a
direction consistent with increased HbA1c and glucose levels, with an observed
effect of 0.11% (P = 0.13) and 0.13 mmol/l (P = 0.43) increase per risk allele
for HbA1c and glucose, respectively. In contrast, the WDR72 risk variant showed a
borderline association with reduced HbA1c levels (ß = -0.21, P = 0.06), and
direction consistent with decreased glucose levels (ß = -0.29, P = 0.29). The
allele count model gave no evidence for a relationship between increasing number 
of risk alleles and increasing HbA1c levels (ß = 0.04, P = 0.38).
CONCLUSIONS: The four recently reported SNPs affecting glycemic control in type 1
diabetes had no apparent effect on HbA1c in type 2 diabetes individually or by
using a combined genetic score model. However, for the SORCS1 SNP, our findings
do not rule out a possible relationship with HbA1c levels. Hence, further studies
in other populations are needed to elucidate whether these novel sequence
variants, especially rs1358030 near the SORCS1 locus, affect glycemic control in 
type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3044669
PMID: 21294870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. RNA Biol. 2011 Jan-Feb;8(1):158-77. Epub 2011 Jan 1.

Deep-sequencing of human Argonaute-associated small RNAs provides insight into
miRNA sorting and reveals Argonaute association with RNA fragments of diverse
origin.

Burroughs AM(1), Ando Y, de Hoon MJ, Tomaru Y, Suzuki H, Hayashizaki Y, Daub CO.

Author information: 
(1)Omics Science Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Yokohama-shi, Kanagawa, Japan.
burrough@gsc.riken.jp

While several studies have focused on the relationship between individual miRNA
loci or classes of small RNA with human Argonaute (AGO) proteins, a
comprehensive, global analysis of the RNA content associating with different AGO 
proteins has yet to be performed. We have compared the content of deep sequenced 
RNA extracted from immunoprecipitation experiments with the AGO1, AGO2, and AGO3 
proteins. Consistent with previous observations, sequence tags derived from miRNA
loci globally associate in approximately equivalent amounts with AGO1, AGO2, and 
AGO3. Exceptions include miR-182, miR-222, and miR-223*, which could be coupled
to processes targeting the loci for interaction with specific AGO proteins. A
closer inspection of the data, however, supports the presence of an unusual
sorting mechanism wherein a subset of miRNA loci give rise to distinct isomirs
which preferentially associate with distinct AGO proteins in a significantly
differential manner. We also identify the complete set of short RNA derived from 
non-miRNA sources including tRNA, snRNA, snoRNA, vRNA, and mRNA associating with 
the AGO proteins, many of which are predicted to play roles in
post-transcriptional gene silencing. We also observe enrichment of tags mapping
to promoter regions of genes, suggesting that a fraction of the
recently-identified promoter-associated small RNAs in humans could function
through interaction with AGO proteins. Finally, we observe antisense miRNA
transcripts are frequently present in low copy numbers across a range of diverse 
miRNA loci and these transcripts appear to associate with AGO proteins.

PMCID: PMC3127082
PMID: 21282978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Aging Cell. 2011 Jun;10(3):392-402. doi: 10.1111/j.1474-9726.2011.00682.x. Epub
2011 Mar 22.

Age-dependent remodelling of ionotropic signalling in cortical astroglia.

Lalo U(1), Palygin O, North RA, Verkhratsky A, Pankratov Y.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Leicester, UK.

Cortical astrocytes express fast ionotropic receptors for glutamate and ATP,
although their role in neurone-glia communication remains controversial.
Stimulation of neuronal afferents in mice neocortex triggers complex glial
synaptic currents (GSCs) mediated by NMDA, P2X and AMPA receptors and glutamate
transporters. In addition, astrocytes demonstrate spontaneous 'miniature' GSCs
resulting from quantal release of neurotransmitters. Here, we demonstrate that
maturation and aging of the brain of mice (from 1 to 21 months) affect the
density of ionotropic receptors in astrocytes and their role in GSCs generation. 
The AMPA-receptor-mediated component is the largest in young animals and
progressively declines with age. The P2X and NMDA components of GSC are smallest 
in young, maximal in adult (3 and 6 months old) and once more decrease in old
mice, probably reflecting the remodelling of neuronal-glial circuitry. Our
results demonstrate that fast synaptic transmission between neurones and
astrocytes in neocortex that may be involved in information processing in
neuronal-glial networks undergoes remodelling during brain maturation and aging.

© 2011 The Authors. Aging Cell © 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd/Anatomical Society
of Great Britain and Ireland.

PMID: 21272193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Sichuan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2010 Nov;41(6):923-6.

[Initial study on zili functions to the development of the germ layers during
zebrafish early embryogenesis].

[Article in Chinese]

Li D(1), Sun HQ, Zhao J, Lu YL, Deng WQ, Ma YX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West China
Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the role for piwil2 gene (zili) in the development of the
ectoderm, mesoderm and endoderm during early embryogenesis of zebrafish.
METHODS: zili morpholino antisense oligonucleotide and 5 mis-pair control
morpholino were used in this study. zili was cloned into expression vector. zili 
mRNA was synthesized in vitro. The antisense RNA probes of gsc, evel and sox17
were synthesized. zili-MO, zili-cMO and zili mRNA was microinjected into one-cell
embryos, respectively. Whole-mount in situ hybridization was used to monitor the 
expressions of marker genes.
RESULTS: Microinjection of zili-MO, which knocked down the expression of zili,
downregulated the expression of the ectodermal and mesodermal marker gene gsc,
promoting the expression of the ectodermal marker gene evel and resulting in the 
decrease of endodermal cell expressed sox17. The overexpression of zili,
promoting the expression of gsc, inhibiting the expression of eve1 and resulting 
in the decrease of endodermal cell expressed sox17 were observed after
microinjection of zili-mRNA.
CONCLUSION: zili might have some effect on the formation of the ectoderm,
mesoderm and endoderm during early embryogenesis and might be important for
normal embryonic development.

PMID: 21265086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Birth Defects Res B Dev Reprod Toxicol. 2011 Feb;92(1):77-81. doi:
10.1002/bdrb.20284. Epub 2011 Jan 19.

Early genetic control of craniofacial development is affected by the in vitro
exposure of rat embryos to the fungicide triadimefon.

Di Renzo F(1), Rossi F, Prati M, Giavini E, Menegola E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Università di Milano, Milan, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Previous published experiments reported that in vitro exposure of
postimplantation rat embryos to the triazole fungicide triadimefon (FON) resulted
in specific abnormalities at the branchial apparatus and that the sensitive
period is restricted to the first 24 hr of culture and is associated with the
abnormal expression of TGF family genes (some of a large panel of genes regulated
by retinoic acid (RA) and involved in branchial arch morphogenesis). The aim of
this study is the determination of the sensitive window to FON-induced
abnormalities during in vitro development and the evaluation of the expression of
some genes controlled by RA and involved in early branchial arch morphogenesis
(Gsc, Msx1, Msx2, Dlx1, Dlx2, Shh, Patched (the main Shh receptor)).
METHODS: Rat embryos were exposed in vitro to the FON under condition known to be
able to induce 100% of abnormal embryos (250<U+2009> µM) at different stages and
examined after 48 hr of culture. The sensitive window for FON-induced
abnormalities was during the hours E9 h8.00 PM-E10 h8.00 AM. To evaluate the
expression of selected genes, embryos exposed during the sensitive stages were
processed to perform quantitative PCR after 18 and 24 hr of culture.
RESULTS: FON was able to affect the expression of some genes in a stage-specific 
manner: earlier embryos were characterized by the downregulation of Msx2 and Gsc,
later embryos showed the downregulation of Gsc, Shh, and Patched. The obtained
data suggest that FON-induced abnormalities are mediated, at least in part,
through the imbalance of the expression of RA-related signals.

© 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21254369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Dev Cell. 2011 Jan 18;20(1):72-83. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2010.11.019.

Brat promotes stem cell differentiation via control of a bistable switch that
restricts BMP signaling.

Harris RE(1), Pargett M, Sutcliffe C, Umulis D, Ashe HL.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester
M13 9PT, UK.

Drosophila ovarian germline stem cells (GSCs) are maintained by Dpp signaling and
the Pumilio (Pum) and Nanos (Nos) translational repressors. Upon division, Dpp
signaling is extinguished, and Nos is downregulated in one daughter cell, causing
it to switch to a differentiating cystoblast (CB). However, downstream effectors 
of Pum-Nos remain unknown, and how CBs lose their responsiveness to Dpp is
unclear. Here, we identify Brain Tumor (Brat) as a potent differentiation factor 
and target of Pum-Nos regulation. Brat is excluded from GSCs by Pum-Nos but
functions with Pum in CBs to translationally repress distinct targets, including 
the Mad and dMyc mRNAs. Regulation of both targets simultaneously lowers cellular
responsiveness to Dpp signaling, forcing the cell to become refractory to the
self-renewal signal. Mathematical modeling elucidates bistability of cell fate in
the Brat-mediated system, revealing how autoregulation of GSC number can arise
from Brat coupling extracellular Dpp regulation to intracellular interpretation.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3178012
PMID: 21238926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. BMC Genomics. 2011 Jan 13;12:29. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-29.

Gene expression profiling of rat spermatogonia and Sertoli cells reveals
signaling pathways from stem cells to niche and testicular cancer cells to
surrounding stroma.

Ryser S(1), Glauser D, Vigier M, Zhang YQ, Tachini P, Schlegel W, Durand P,
Irminger-Finger I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Gynecology and Obstetrics Laboratory, Geneva University Hospitals,
Geneva, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Stem cells and their niches are studied in many systems, but
mammalian germ stem cells (GSC) and their niches are still poorly understood. In 
rat testis, spermatogonia and undifferentiated Sertoli cells proliferate before
puberty, but at puberty most spermatogonia enter spermatogenesis, and Sertoli
cells differentiate to support this program. Thus, pre-pubertal spermatogonia
might possess GSC potential and pre-pubertal Sertoli cells niche functions. We
hypothesized that the different stem cell pools at pre-puberty and maturity
provide a model for the identification of stem cell and niche-specific genes. We 
compared the transcript profiles of spermatogonia and Sertoli cells from
pre-pubertal and pubertal rats and examined how these related to genes expressed 
in testicular cancers, which might originate from inappropriate communication
between GSCs and Sertoli cells.
RESULTS: The pre-pubertal spermatogonia-specific gene set comprised known stem
cell and spermatogonial stem cell (SSC) markers. Similarly, the pre-pubertal
Sertoli cell-specific gene set comprised known niche gene transcripts. A large
fraction of these specifically enriched transcripts encoded trans-membrane,
extra-cellular, and secreted proteins highlighting stem cell to niche
communication. Comparing selective gene sets established in this study with
published gene expression data of testicular cancers and their stroma, we
identified sets expressed genes shared between testicular tumors and pre-pubertal
spermatogonia, and tumor stroma and pre-pubertal Sertoli cells with statistic
significance.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that SSC and their niche specifically express
complementary factors for cell communication and that the same factors might be
implicated in the communication between tumor cells and their micro-environment
in testicular cancer.

PMCID: PMC3033334
PMID: 21232125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Protein Cell. 2010 Jul;1(7):638-55. doi: 10.1007/s13238-010-0078-y. Epub 2010 Jul
29.

Cancer stem cells in glioblastoma--molecular signaling and therapeutic targeting.

Huang Z(1), Cheng L, Guryanova OA, Wu Q, Bao S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Lerner Research
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Glioblastomas (GBMs) are highly lethal primary brain tumors. Despite current
therapeutic advances in other solid cancers, the treatment of these malignant
gliomas remains essentially palliative. GBMs are extremely resistant to
conventional radiation and chemotherapies. We and others have demonstrated that a
highly tumorigenic subpopulation of cancer cells called GBM stem cells (GSCs)
promotes therapeutic resistance. We also found that GSCs stimulate tumor
angiogenesis by expressing elevated levels of VEGF and contribute to tumor
growth, which has been translated into a useful therapeutic strategy in the
treatment of recurrent or progressive GBMs. Furthermore, stem cell-like cancer
cells (cancer stem cells) have been shown to promote metastasis. Although GBMs
rarely metastasize beyond the central nervous system, these highly infiltrative
cancers often invade into normal brain tissues preventing surgical resection, and
GSCs display an aggressive invasive phenotype. These studies suggest that
targeting GSCs may effectively reduce tumor recurrence and significantly improve 
GBM treatment. Recent studies indicate that cancer stem cells share core
signaling pathways with normal somatic or embryonic stem cells, but also display 
critical distinctions that provide important clues into useful therapeutic
targets. In this review, we summarize the current understanding and advances in
glioma stem cell research, and discuss potential targeting strategies for future 
development of anti-GSC therapies.

PMID: 21203936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Pharmaceutics. 2011 Sep 14;3(3):615-35. doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics3030615.

Transporter-Mediated Drug Interaction Strategy for 5-Aminolevulinic Acid
(ALA)-Based Photodynamic Diagnosis of Malignant Brain Tumor: Molecular Design of 
ABCG2 Inhibitors.

Ishikawa T(1), Takahashi K, Ikeda N, Kajimoto Y, Hagiya Y, Ogura S, Miyatake S,
Kuroiwa T.

Author information: 
(1)Omics Science Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho,
Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, 230-0045, Japan. toshi-i@gsc.riken.jp.

Photodynamic diagnosis (PDD) is a practical tool currently used in surgical
operation of aggressive brain tumors, such as glioblastoma. PDD is achieved by a 
photon-induced physicochemical reaction which is induced by excitation of
protoporphyrin IX (PpIX) exposed to light. Fluorescence-guided gross-total
resection has recently been developed in PDD, where 5-aminolevulinic acid (ALA)
or its ester is administered as the precursor of PpIX. ALA induces the
accumulation of PpIX, a natural photo-sensitizer, in cancer cells. Recent studies
provide evidence that adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-binding cassette (ABC)
transporter ABCG2 plays a pivotal role in regulating the cellular accumulation of
porphyrins in cancer cells and thereby affects the efficacy of PDD. Protein
kinase inhibitors are suggested to potentially enhance the PDD efficacy by
blocking ABCG2-mediated porphyrin efflux from cancer cells. It is of great
interest to develop potent ABCG2-inhibitors that can be applied to PDD for brain 
tumor therapy. This review article addresses a pivotal role of human ABC
transporter ABCG2 in PDD as well as a new approach of quantitative
structure-activity relationship (QSAR) analysis to design potent
ABCG2-inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC3857086
PMID: 24310600  [PubMed]


181. PLoS Biol. 2010 Feb 23;8(2):e1000319. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000319.

Targeting A20 decreases glioma stem cell survival and tumor growth.

Hjelmeland AB(1), Wu Q, Wickman S, Eyler C, Heddleston J, Shi Q, Lathia JD,
Macswords J, Lee J, McLendon RE, Rich JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Lerner Research
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America.
hjelmea@ccf.org

Glioblastomas are deadly cancers that display a functional cellular hierarchy
maintained by self-renewing glioblastoma stem cells (GSCs). GSCs are regulated by
molecular pathways distinct from the bulk tumor that may be useful therapeutic
targets. We determined that A20 (TNFAIP3), a regulator of cell survival and the
NF-kappaB pathway, is overexpressed in GSCs relative to non-stem glioblastoma
cells at both the mRNA and protein levels. To determine the functional
significance of A20 in GSCs, we targeted A20 expression with lentiviral-mediated 
delivery of short hairpin RNA (shRNA). Inhibiting A20 expression decreased GSC
growth and survival through mechanisms associated with decreased cell-cycle
progression and decreased phosphorylation of p65/RelA. Elevated levels of A20 in 
GSCs contributed to apoptotic resistance: GSCs were less susceptible to
TNFalpha-induced cell death than matched non-stem glioma cells, but A20 knockdown
sensitized GSCs to TNFalpha-mediated apoptosis. The decreased survival of GSCs
upon A20 knockdown contributed to the reduced ability of these cells to
self-renew in primary and secondary neurosphere formation assays. The tumorigenic
potential of GSCs was decreased with A20 targeting, resulting in increased
survival of mice bearing human glioma xenografts. In silico analysis of a glioma 
patient genomic database indicates that A20 overexpression and amplification is
inversely correlated with survival. Together these data indicate that A20
contributes to glioma maintenance through effects on the glioma stem cell
subpopulation. Although inactivating mutations in A20 in lymphoma suggest A20 can
act as a tumor suppressor, similar point mutations have not been identified
through glioma genomic sequencing: in fact, our data suggest A20 may function as 
a tumor enhancer in glioma through promotion of GSC survival. A20 anticancer
therapies should therefore be viewed with caution as effects will likely differ
depending on the tumor type.

PMCID: PMC2826371
PMID: 20186265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Clin Dysmorphol. 2010 Apr;19(2):51-5. doi: 10.1097/MCD.0b013e328335c133.

Exclusion of MYF5, GSC, RUNX2, and TCOF1 mutation in a case of
cerebro-costo-mandibular syndrome.

Su PH(1), Chen JY, Chiang CL, Ng YY, Chen SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, Taichung,
Taiwan.

Cerebro-costo-mandibular syndrome (CCMS) is an uncommon multiple congenital
anomaly syndrome characterized by severe micrognathia, posterior rib-gap defects,
and developmental delay. The cause of CCMS is unknown. Genes hypothesized to have
a causal role in CCMS, include myogenic factor 5 (MYF5), goosecoid homeobox (GSC)
and runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2) [formerly known as core-binding
factor (CBFA1)]. We report an infant with typical features of CCMS who, on
prenatal ultrasound, was found to have severe micrognathia. We present the first 
image by three-dimensional computed tomography of posterior rib-defect, and we
exclude mutations of the MYF5, GSC, RUNX2, and TCOF1 genes in our patient.
Further molecular studies are needed to evaluate the cause of CCMS.

PMID: 20177378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Aging (Albany NY). 2009 Dec 12;1(12):971-8.

Aged mouse ovaries possess rare premeiotic germ cells that can generate oocytes
following transplantation into a young host environment.

Niikura Y(1), Niikura T, Tilly JL.

Author information: 
(1)Vincent Center for Reproductive Biology, Vincent Obstetrics and Gynecology
Service, Massachusetts General Hospital/Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114,
USA.

Comment in
    Aging (Albany NY). 2010;2(1):1-2.

Of all the major organ systems in the body, the ovaries of females are the first 
to exhibit impaired function with advancing age. Until recently, traditional
thinking was that female mammals are provided with a non-renewable pool of
oocyte-containing follicles at birth that are depleted during postnatal life to
exhaustion, driving ovarian failure. However, a growing body of evidence,
including the isolation of germline stem cells (GSC) from adult mouse ovaries
that produce developmentally-competent oocytes, has challenged this belief. In
addition, rare germline stem-like cells capable of generating oocytes in vitro
that undergo parthenogenesis to form blastocyst-like structures have recently
been identified in postmenopausal human ovaries. Here we show that the
germline-specific meiosis-commitment genes,Stimulated by retinoic acid gene 8
(Stra8) and Deleted in azoospermia-like (Dazl), are highly expressed in aged
mouse ovaries. However, histological and marker analyses fail to demonstrate the 
presence of oocytes, supporting that Stra8 and Dazl are expressed in premeiotic
germ cells that do not undergo further differentiation. Through the use of aged
germline-specific GFP-expressing transgenic mice, we further show that these germ
cells can generate GFP-positive oocytes that co-express the primordial oocyte
marker NOBOX and form follicles when grafted into young adult wild-type female
hosts. Thus, aged mouse ovaries possess a rare population of premeiotic germ
cells that retain the capacity to form oocytes if exposed to a young host
environment.

PMCID: PMC2815754
PMID: 20157580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Pharmacol Ther. 2010 Apr;126(1):69-81. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2010.01.005.
Epub 2010 Feb 4.

Emerging new technologies in Pharmacogenomics: rapid SNP detection, molecular
dynamic simulation, and QSAR analysis methods to validate clinically important
genetic variants of human ABC Transporter ABCB1 (P-gp/MDR1).

Ishikawa T(1), Sakurai A, Hirano H, Lezhava A, Sakurai M, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of
Technology, Yokohama, 225-8501, Japan. toshi-i@gsc.riken.jp

Pharmacogenomics, the study of the influence of genetic factors on drug action,
is increasingly important for predicting pharmacokinetics profiles and/or adverse
reactions to drugs. Drug transporters as well as drug-metabolism play pivotal
roles in determining the pharmacokinetic profiles of drugs and, by extension,
their overall pharmacological effects. There are an increasing number of reports 
addressing genetic polymorphisms of drug transporters. A key requirement for the 
development of individualized medicine or personalized therapy is the ability to 
rapidly and conveniently test patients for genetic polymorphisms and/or
mutations. We have recently developed a rapid and cost-effective method for
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) detection, named Smart Amplification Process
2 (SmartAmp2), which enables us to detect genetic polymorphisms or mutations in
30 to 45min under isothermal conditions without DNA isolation and PCR
amplification. Furthermore, high-speed functional screening, quantitative
structure-activity relationship (QSAR) analysis, and molecular dynamic (MD)
simulation methods have been developed to study the substrate specificity of ABC 
transporters and to evaluate the effect of genetic polymorphisms on their
function and substrate specificity. These methods would provide powerful and
practical tools for screening synthetic and natural compounds, and the deduced
data can be applied to the molecular design of new drugs. This review addresses
such new methods for validating genetic polymorphisms of human ABC transporter
ABCB1 (P-gp/MDR1) which is critically involved in the pharmacokinetics of drugs.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20138191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Feb 9;107(6):2521-6. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0914396107.
Epub 2010 Jan 21.

Setdb2 restricts dorsal organizer territory and regulates left-right asymmetry
through suppressing fgf8 activity.

Xu PF(1), Zhu KY, Jin Y, Chen Y, Sun XJ, Deng M, Chen SJ, Chen Z, Liu TX.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics, Shanghai Institute of Hematology,
RuiJin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai
200025, China.

Dorsal organizer formation is one of the most critical steps in early embryonic
development. Several genes and signaling pathways that positively regulate the
dorsal organizer development have been identified; however, little is known about
the factor(s) that negatively regulates the organizer formation. Here, we show
that Setdb2, a SET domain-containing protein possessing potential histone H3K9
methyltransferase activity, restricts dorsal organizer development and regulates 
left-right asymmetry by suppressing fibroblast growth factor 8 (fgf8) expression.
Knockdown of Setdb2 results in a massive expansion of dorsal organizer markers
floating head (flh), goosecoid (gsc), and chordin (chd), as well as a significant
increase of fgf8, but not fgf4 mRNAs. Consequently, disrupted midline patterning 
and resultant randomization of left-right asymmetry are observed in
Setdb2-deficient embryos. These characteristic changes induced by Setdb2
deficiency can be nearly corrected by either overexpression of a
dominant-negative fgf receptor or knockdown of fgf8, suggesting an essential role
for Setdb2-Fgf8 signaling in restricting dorsal organizer territory and
regulating left-right asymmetry. These results provide unique evidence that a SET
domain-containing protein potentially involved in the epigenetic control
negatively regulates dorsal organizer formation during early embryonic
development.

PMCID: PMC2823908
PMID: 20133783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Development. 2010 Feb;137(4):661-70. doi: 10.1242/dev.042044.

Differential requirements for STRAD in LKB1-dependent functions in C. elegans.

Narbonne P(1), Hyenne V, Li S, Labbé JC, Roy R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, McGill University, Québec, Canada.

The protein kinase LKB1 is a crucial regulator of cell growth/proliferation and
cell polarity and is the causative gene in the cancer-predisposing disease
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS). The activity of LKB1 is greatly enhanced following 
its association with the Ste20-like adapter protein STRAD. Unlike LKB1 however,
mutations in STRAD have not been identified in PJS patients and thus, the key
tumour suppressive role(s) of LKB1 might be STRAD independent. Here, we report
that Caenorhabditis elegans strd-1/STRAD mutants recapitulate many phenotypes
typical of par-4/LKB1 loss of function, showing defects during early embryonic
and dauer development. Interestingly, although the growth/proliferation defects
in severe par-4 and strd-1 mutant dauers are comparable, strd-1 mutant embryos do
not share the polarity defects of par-4 embryos. We demonstrate that most of
par-4-dependent regulation of germline stem cell (GSC) quiescence occurs through 
AMPK, whereby PAR-4 requires STRD-1 to phosphorylate and activate AMPK.
Consistent with this, even though AMPK plays a major role in the regulation of
cell proliferation, like strd-1 it does not affect embryonic polarity. Instead,
we found that the PAR-4-mediated phosphorylation of polarity regulators such as
PAR-1 and MEX-5 in the early embryo occurs in the absence of STRD-1. Thus, PAR-4 
requires STRD-1 to phosphorylate AMPK to regulate cell growth/proliferation under
reduced insulin signalling conditions, whereas PAR-4 can promote phosphorylation 
of key proteins, including PAR-1 and MEX-5, to specify early embryonic polarity
independently of STRD-1. Our results therefore identify a key
strd-1/STRAD-independent function of par-4/LKB1 in polarity establishment that is
likely to be important for tumour suppression in humans.

PMID: 20110331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Pediatr Orthop. 2009 Oct-Nov;29(7):771-8. doi: 10.1097/BPO.0b013e3181b76a7c.

Outcomes of gastrocnemius-soleus complex lengthening for isolated equinus
contracture in children with cerebral palsy.

Tylkowski CM(1), Horan M, Oeffinger DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Shriners Hospital for Children, and Department of Orthopedics, University of
Kentucky, Chandler Medical Center, College of Medicine, Lexington, KY 40502, USA.
ctylkowski@shrinenet.org

BACKGROUND: The goal of the gastrocnemius-soleus complex (GSC) lengthenings in
children with cerebral palsy (CP) is to achieve a plantigrade foot and normalize 
kinematics during gait. The study purpose was to evaluate the results of GSC
lengthening for isolated equinus contracture in individuals with CP. It was
hypothesized that GSC lengthenings would normalize passive ankle range of motion,
kinematic, kinetic, and temporal spatial parameters.
METHODS: Gait data from 15 able-bodied participants from the laboratory normal
database and passive range of motion, kinematic, kinetic, and temporal spatial
gait parameters, and oxygen cost were collected and analyzed for 27 individuals
with CP (36 limbs) with isolated equinus contracture who received GSC
lengthenings. Data were compared between preoperative and postoperative
assessments.
RESULTS: Mean age at baseline was 11.4 years (+/-3.2 y). Mean time between
surgery and postoperative gait analysis was 1.3 years (+/-0.3 y). Passive range
of motion measurements were obtained. Kinematic and kinetic data for the hip,
knee and ankle, and temporal spatial parameters were obtained from a
representative gait trial preoperatively and postoperatively. Paired t tests
(P<0.05) determined whether preoperative data differed from postoperative data or
from able-bodied data. The passive range of motion at the ankle was improved and 
normalized postoperatively. Ankle kinematics normalized without compensatory
changes occurring at the knee or hip kinematics. Ankle moments and powers become 
more normal but did not completely normalize. Kinematics and kinetics of the hip 
and knee were not adversely affected. No changes in the temporal spatial data or 
oxygen cost occurred postoperatively.
CONCLUSIONS: These data support the finding that with appropriate patient
selection isolated GSC lengthening does not result in overcorrection.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Retrospective comparative study; level 3.

PMID: 20104161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo). 2010 Jan;58(1):66-75.

HUMAN FAMSD-BASE: high quality protein structure model database for the human
genome using the FAMSD homology modeling method.

Kanou K(1), Hirata T, Iwadate M, Terashi G, Umeyama H, Takeda-Shitaka M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Kitasato University, Tokyo, Japan.

Almost all proteins express their biological functions through the structural
conformation of their specific amino acid sequences. Therefore, acquiring the
three-dimensional structures of proteins is very important to elucidate the role 
of a particular protein. We had built protein structure model databases, which is
called RIKEN FAMSBASE (http://famshelp.gsc.riken.jp/famsbase/). The RIKEN
FAMSBASE is a genome-wide protein structure model database that contains a large 
number of protein models from many organisms. The HUMAN FAMSBASE that is one part
of the RIKEN FAMSBASE contains many protein models for human genes, which are
significant in the pharmaceutical and medicinal fields. We have now implemented
an update of the human protein modeling database consisting of 242918 constructed
models against the number of 20743 human protein sequences with an improved
modeling method called Full Automatic protein Modeling System Developed (FAMSD). 
The results of our benchmark test of the FAMSD method indicated that it has an
excellent capability to pack amino acid side-chains with correct torsion angles
in addition to the main-chain, while avoiding the formation of atom-atom
collisions that are not found in experimental structures. This new protein
structure model database for human genes, which is named HUMAN FAMSD-BASE, is
open to the public as a component part of the RIKEN FAMSBASE at
http://mammalia.gsc.riken.jp/human_famsd/. A significant improvement of the HUMAN
FAMSD-BASE in comparison with the preceding HUMAN FAMSBASE was verified in the
benchmark test of this paper. The HUMAN FAMSD-BASE will have an important impact 
on the progress of biological science.

PMID: 20045969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Sensors (Basel). 2010;10(9):8424-36. doi: 10.3390/s100908424. Epub 2010 Sep 9.

Combined simulation of a micro permanent magnetic linear contactless displacement
sensor.

Gao J(1), Müller WF, Greiner F, Eicher D, Weiland T, Schlaak HF.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School Computational Engineering, TU Darmstadt, Dolivostraße 15,
D-64293 Darmstadt Germany. gao@gsc.tu-darmstadt.de

The permanent magnetic linear contactless displacement (PLCD) sensor is a new
type of displacement sensor operating on the magnetic inductive principle. It has
many excellent properties and has already been used for many applications. In
this article a Micro-PLCD sensor which can be used for microelectromechanical
system (MEMS) measurements is designed and simulated with the CST EM STUDIO(®)
software, including building a virtual model, magnetostatic calculations, low
frequency calculations, steady current calculations and thermal calculations. The
influence of some important parameters such as air gap dimension, working
frequency, coil current and eddy currents etc. is studied in depth.

PMCID: PMC3231219
PMID: 22163663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Morphol. 2010 May;271(5):634-40. doi: 10.1002/jmor.10824.

Female germline stem cell niches of earwigs are structurally simple and different
from those of Drosophila melanogaster.

Tworzydlo W(1), Kloc M, Bilinski SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systematic Zoology, Institute of Zoology, Jagiellonian
University, Krakow, Poland.

Stem cells function in niches, which consist of somatic cells that control the
stem cells' self-renewal, proliferation, and differentiation. Drosophila ovary
germline niche consists of the terminal filament (TF) cells, cap cells, and
escort stem cells; signaling from the TF cells and the cap cells is essential for
maintenance of germline stem cells (GSCs). Here, we show that in the earwig
Opisthocosmia silvestris, the female GSC niche is morphologically simple and
consist of the TF cells and several structurally uniform escort cells. The most
posterior cell of the TF (the basal cell of the TF) differs from remaining TF
cells and is separated from the anterior region of the germarium by the processes
of the escort cells, and consequently, does not contact the GSCs directly. We
also show that between somatic cells of earwig niche argosome-like vesicles and
cytoneme-like extensions are present.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20029934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Psychol Addict Behav. 2009 Dec;23(4):672-83. doi: 10.1037/a0016636.

Randomized controlled trial of a cognitive-behavioral motivational intervention
in a group versus individual format for substance use disorders.

Sobell LC(1), Sobell MB, Agrawal S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Psychological Studies, Nova Southeastern University, Ft.
Lauderdale, FL 33314, USA. sobelll@nova.edu

Comment in
    Int J Group Psychother. 2012 Oct;62(4):655-60.

Although group therapy is widely used for individuals with substance use
disorders (SUDs), randomized clinical trials (RCTs) comparing the same treatment 
in a group versus individual format are rare. This paper presents the results of 
a RCT comparing guided self-change (GSC) treatment, a cognitive-behavioral
motivational intervention, conducted in a group versus individual format with 212
alcohol abusers and 52 drug abusers who voluntarily sought outpatient treatment. 
Treatment outcomes demonstrated significant and large reductions in clients'
alcohol and drug use during treatment and at the 12-month follow-up, with no
significant differences between the group and individual therapy conditions. A
therapist time ratio analysis found that it took 41.4% less therapist time to
treat clients using the group versus the individual format. Participants'
end-of-treatment group cohesion scores characterized the groups as having high
engagement, low levels of interpersonal conflict, and low avoidance of group
work, all desirable group characteristics. These findings suggest that the GSC
treatment model was effectively integrated into a brief group treatment format.
Health care cost containment compels further evaluations of the efficacy of group
treatments for SUDs.

Copyright 2009 APA

PMID: 20025373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Mol Reprod Dev. 2010 Mar;77(3):273-84. doi: 10.1002/mrd.21144.

Molecular cloning and characterization of the germ cell-related nuclear orphan
receptor in chickens.

Lee SI(1), Kim JK, Park HJ, Jang HJ, Lee HC, Min T, Song G, Han JY.

Author information: 
(1)WCU Biomodulation Major, Department of Agricultural Biotechnology and Research
Institute for Agriculture and Life Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul,
Korea.

Nuclear receptor subfamily 6, group A, member 1 (NR6A1), also known as germ cell 
nuclear factor/retinoid receptor-related testis-associated receptor and neuronal 
cell nuclear factor, is a member of the nuclear orphan receptor superfamily.
NR6A1 has been cloned in various species including humans and mice, but it has
been scarcely investigated in avian species. In the present study, we cloned the 
chicken NR6A1 (cNR6A1) from a testis cDNA library. The cloned cNR6A1 sequence was
mapped to chromosome 17 and contained an open reading frame of 1.4 kb encoding
445 amino acids. Multiple alignment analysis of the cNR6A1 protein-coding
sequence with NR6A1s from humans, mice, boars, rats, zebrafish, and Xenopus
showed high degrees of homology, 89%, 90%, 89%, 88%, 83%, and 87%, respectively. 
Using RNA interference, changes in the expression of pluripotency-, germ cell-,
and differentiation-related key genes by silencing of cNR6A1 were validated in
chicken blastoderm-derived embryonic stem cells. Among those genes, the relative 
expression levels of POU5F1, CRIPTO, DAZL, DDX4, BMP15, GSC, and SOX7 changed
significantly compared to the control group. We also confirmed that the activity 
of alkaline phosphatase, known as a pluripotency marker, was maintained by cNR6A1
gene silencing in chicken blastodermal cells. Collectively, our data suggest that
cNR6A1 may play an important role during chicken embryonic development and
differentiation.

PMID: 20020523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Genesis. 2010 Jan;48(1):20-30. doi: 10.1002/dvg.20578.

The zebrafish dyrk1b gene is important for endoderm formation.

Mazmanian G(1), Kovshilovsky M, Yen D, Mohanty A, Mohanty S, Nee A, Nissen RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, California State University Los Angeles,
5151 State University Drive, Los Angeles, CA 90032, USA.

Nodal-signaling is required for specification of mesoderm, endoderm, establishing
left-right asymmetry, and craniofacial development. Wdr68 is a WD40-repeat
domain-containing protein recently shown to be required for endothelin-1 (edn1)
expression and subsequent lower jaw development. Previous reports detected the
Wdr68 protein in multiprotein complexes containing mammalian members of the
dual-specificity tyrosine-regulated kinase (dyrk) family. Here we describe the
characterization of the zebrafish dyrk1b homolog. We report the detection of a
physical interaction between Dyrk1b and Wdr68. We also found perturbations of
nodal signaling in dyrk1b antisense morpholino knockdown (dyrk1b-MO) animals.
Specifically, we found reduced expression of lft1 and lft2 (lft1/2) during
gastrulation and a near complete loss of the later asymmetric lft1/2 expression
domains. Although wdr68-MO animals did not display lft1/2 expression defects
during gastrulation, they displayed a near complete loss of the later asymmetric 
lft1/2 expression domains. While expression of ndr1 was not substantially
effected during gastrulation, ndr2 expression was moderately reduced in dyrk1b-MO
animals. Analysis of additional downstream components of the nodal signaling
pathway in dyrk1b-MO animals revealed modestly expanded expression of the dorsal 
axial mesoderm marker gsc while the pan-mesodermal marker bik was largely
unaffected. The endodermal markers cas and sox17 were also moderately reduced in 
dyrk1b-MO animals. Notably, and similar to defects previously reported for wdr68 
mutant animals, we also found reduced expression of the pharyngeal pouch marker
edn1 in dyrk1b-MO animals. Taken together, these data reveal a role for dyrk1b in
endoderm formation and craniofacial patterning in the zebrafish.

PMCID: PMC2806492
PMID: 20014342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2009;2009:444-50. doi:
10.1109/IEMBS.2009.5334787.

Gradient-driven beamforming for biomedical ultrasound.

Khezerloo S(1), Rakhmatov D.

Author information: 
(1)Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Victoria, 3800
Finnerty Road, Victoria, British Columbia, V8P 5C2, Canada.

Adaptive beamforming can significantly improve the image quality in biomedical
ultrasound by reducing the clutter due to interfering signals arriving from
undesired directions. We consider the conventional linearly constrained minimum
variance (LCMV) adaptive beamformer and propose an alternative based on the
well-known generalized sidelobe canceller (GSC) whose adaptation relies on
unconstrained gradient-driven optimization. The GSC, coupled with iterative
optimization methods, allows for a tradeoff between computational complexity of
beamforming and the image quality. To the authors' knowledge, this is the first
time a GSC-based gradient-driven approach has been applied and evaluated in the
context of ultrasound beamforming.

PMID: 19964935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Genes Dev. 2009 Dec 1;23(23):2742-52. doi: 10.1101/gad.1820709.

Vasa promotes Drosophila germline stem cell differentiation by activating mei-P26
translation by directly interacting with a (U)-rich motif in its 3' UTR.

Liu N(1), Han H, Lasko P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Developmental Biology Research Initiative, and Goodman 
Cancer Centre, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3A 1B1, Canada.

Vasa (Vas) is a DEAD-box RNA-binding protein required in Drosophila at several
steps of oogenesis and for primordial germ cell (PGC) specification. Vas
associates with eukaryotic initiation factor 5B (eIF5B), and this interaction has
been implicated in translational activation of gurken mRNA in the oocyte. Vas is 
expressed in all ovarian germline cells, and aspects of the vas-null phenotype
suggest a function in regulating the balance between germline stem cells (GSCs)
and their fate-restricted descendants. We used a biochemical approach to recover 
Vas-associated mRNAs and obtained mei-P26, whose product represses microRNA
activity and promotes GSC differentiation. We found that vas and mei-P26 mutants 
interact, and that mei-P26 translation is substantially reduced in vas mutant
cells. In vitro, Vas protein bound specifically to a (U)-rich motif in the
mei-P26 3' untranslated region (UTR), and Vas-dependent regulation of GFP-mei-P26
transgenes in vivo was dependent on the same (U)-rich 3' UTR domain. The ability 
of Vas to activate mei-P26 expression in vivo was abrogated by a mutation that
greatly reduces its interaction with eIF5B. Taken together, our data support the 
conclusion that Vas promotes germ cell differentiation by directly activating
mei-P26 translation in early-stage committed cells.

PMCID: PMC2788330
PMID: 19952109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Cell Biol. 2009 Nov 16;187(4):473-80. doi: 10.1083/jcb.200904118. Epub 2009 Nov
9.

Drosophila glypicans regulate the germline stem cell niche.

Hayashi Y(1), Kobayashi S, Nakato H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology, and Development, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Stem cells are maintained in vivo by short-range signaling systems in specialized
microenvironments called niches, but the molecular mechanisms controlling the
physical space of the stem cell niche are poorly understood. In this study, we
report that heparan sulfate (HS) proteoglycans (HSPGs) are essential regulators
of the germline stem cell (GSC) niches in the Drosophila melanogaster gonads.
GSCs were lost in both male and female gonads of mutants deficient for HS
biosynthesis. dally, a Drosophila glypican, is expressed in the female GSC niche 
cells and is responsible for maintaining the GSC niche. Ectopic expression of
dally in the ovary expanded the niche area, showing that dally is required for
restriction of the GSC niche space. Interestingly, the other glypican,
dally-like, plays a major role in regulating male GSC niche maintenance. We
propose that HSPGs define the physical space of the niche by serving as trans
coreceptors, mediating short-range signaling by secreted factors.

PMCID: PMC2779228
PMID: 19948496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2009 Oct;124(4):1157-64. doi: 10.1097/PRS.0b013e3181b454d8.

Environmental and genetic factors associated with congenital microtia: a
case-control study in Jiangsu, China, 2004 to 2007.

Zhang QG(1), Zhang J, Yu P, Shen H.

Author information: 
(1)Plastic Surgery Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Science, Beijing, China. 
zhangji@ecu.edu

BACKGROUND: The objectives of this study were to filter out the environmental and
genetic risk factors in microtia patients and to demonstrate the relationship
between environmental and inherited factors in congenital microtia.
METHODS: A case-control study was carried out in 121 congenital microtia patients
and 152 controls. Epidemiologic data related to environmental exposure were
gathered through personal interviews with the target group. Polymerase chain
reaction and DNA sequence analysis were performed to analyze the Gsc gene and
BMP5 gene mutation in the case and control groups. The logistic regression model 
was used to analyze environmental and genetic risk factors and their
relationships to microtia.
RESULTS: The main risk factors were disease during pregnancy (odds ratio, 5.890; 
95 percent CI, 2.358 to 14.715), toxicity exposure during pregnancy (odds ratio, 
4.764; 95 percent CI, 1.659 to 13.680), and resident area (odds ratio, 5.114; 95 
percent CI, 2.086 to 12.535). The synthetic attributable risks amount to 0.7185. 
As to the Gsc gene, six of these patients had a same-sense mutation C-->T on 197 
bp in exon 2; a missense mutation on A-->G 125 bp in exon 3 occurred in two
cases; and amino acid changes from glutamic acid to glutamine. A heterozygosity
on 196 TTT-->ACA resulting in missense mutation was detected in four patients,
causing the amino acid to change from phenylalanine to threonine in BMP5 maternal
peptide gene. However, no mutations were detected in the control subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggested that both environmental and genetic factors
contribute to congenital microtia. The Gsc gene and the BMP5 maternal peptide
gene may act as the predisposing genes of microtia. Further research is needed to
clarify the relationship between the risk factors and microtia.

PMID: 19935299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Nucl Med. 2009 Dec;50(12):2082-9. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.109.064808. Epub 2009 Nov
12.

Targeting of CCK-2 receptor-expressing tumors using a radiolabeled divalent
gastrin peptide.

Sosabowski JK(1), Matzow T, Foster JM, Finucane C, Ellison D, Watson SA, Mather
SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular Oncology and Imaging, Institute of Cancer, Barts and the 
London, Queen Mary's School of Medicine and Dentistry, London, United Kingdom.
j.k.sosabowski@qmul.ac.uk

Gastrin/cholecystokinin subtype 2 receptors (CCK-2Rs) are overexpressed in
several tumor types and are, thus, a potential target for peptide receptor
radionuclide therapy (PRRT) of cancer. To improve the in vivo performance of
CCK-2R binding peptides, we have previously synthesized and screened a series of 
divalent gastrin peptides for improved biochemical and biologic characteristics. 
In this study, we explore in more detail the most promising of these compounds
and compare its performance with a previously described monomeric
peptide.METHODS: From six (111)In-labeled
1,4,7,10-tetraazacyclododecane-N,N',N'',N'''-tetraacetic acid (DOTA)-conjugated
divalent gastrin peptides based on the C-terminal sequence of minigastrin, the
maleimide-linked compound
DOTA-GSC(succinimidopropionyl-EAYGWNleDF-NH(2))-EAYGWNleDF-NH(2) (MGD5) was
selected. The in vitro stability, receptor binding, and internalization of
(111)In-MGD5 were studied and compared with those of monomer compound
(111)In-APH070. In vivo biodistribution and imaging using a SPECT/CT camera were 
also performed.
RESULTS: More than 90% of the labeled divalent peptide remained intact after 20 h
of incubation in plasma. The inhibitory concentration of 50% of the divalent
peptide was 1.0 versus 5.6 nM for the monomer, and the dissociation constant was 
0.7 versus 2.9 nM. The rate of internalization of the divalent peptide was twice 
that of the monomer. Tumor uptake of the divalent peptide in vivo was about 6
times that of the monomer. The rate of washout of the divalent peptide from the
tumor was lower than that of the monomer.
CONCLUSION: Dimerization of the CCK-2R binding site results in an increase in
binding affinity and an increase in tumor uptake both in vitro and in vivo. It is
likely that these increases would result in improved tumor-targeting efficiency
in patients with CCK-2R-positive tumors.

PMID: 19910426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Development. 2009 Dec;136(24):4133-42. doi: 10.1242/dev.039032. Epub 2009 Nov 11.

Effete-mediated degradation of Cyclin A is essential for the maintenance of
germline stem cells in Drosophila.

Chen D(1), Wang Q, Huang H, Xia L, Jiang X, Kan L, Sun Q, Chen D.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Biology and State Key Laboratory of
Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Datun Road, Chaoyang, Beijing 100101, P.R. China.

Increasing evidence supports the idea that the regulation of stem cells requires 
both extrinsic and intrinsic mechanisms. However, much less is known about how
intrinsic signals regulate the fate of stem cells. Studies on germline stem cells
(GSCs) in the Drosophila ovary have provided novel insights into the regulatory
mechanisms of stem cell maintenance. In this study, we demonstrate that a
ubiquitin-dependent pathway mediated by the Drosophila eff gene, which encodes
the E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme Effete (Eff), plays an essential role in GSC 
maintenance. We show that Eff both physically and genetically interacts with
dAPC2, a key component of the anaphase-promoting complex (APC), which acts as a
multisubunit E3 ligase and plays an essential role in targeting mitotic
regulators for degradation during exit from mitosis. This interaction indicates
that Eff regulates the APC/C-mediated proteolysis pathway in GSCs. Moreover, we
show that expression of a stable form of Cyclin A, but not full-length Cyclin A, 
results in GSC loss. Finally we show that, in common with APC2, Eff is required
for the ubiquitylation of Cyclin A, and overexpression of full-length Cyclin A
accelerates the loss of GSCs in the eff mutant background. Collectively, our data
support the idea that Effete/APC-mediated degradation of Cyclin A is essential
for the maintenance of germline stem cells in Drosophila. Given that the
regulation of mitotic Cyclins is evolutionarily conserved between flies and
mammals, our study also implies that a similar mechanism may be conserved in
mammals.

PMID: 19906849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Exp Anim. 2009 Oct;58(5):443-50.

Introduction to the Japan Mouse Clinic at the RIKEN BioResource Center.

Wakana S(1), Suzuki T, Furuse T, Kobayashi K, Miura I, Kaneda H, Yamada I, Motegi
H, Toki H, Inoue M, Minowa O, Noda T, Waki K, Tanaka N, Masuya H, Obata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Technology and Development Team for Mouse Phenotype Analysis, RIKEN
BioResource Center, Tsukuba City, Ibaraki, Japan.

A systematic and comprehensive phenotyping platform has been developed by the
RIKEN ENU-mutagenesis project between 1999 and 2007. As a result of phenotype
screening on this platform, we have discovered about 400 mutants as animal models
for human diseases. All information regarding these mouse mutants is now
available to the public through our home page
(http://www.brc.riken.jp/lab/gsc/mouse/indexJ.html). In 2008, we reconstructed
the existing phenotyping platform and built a new platform. The new system has a 
hierarchical structure, consisting of a fundamental pipeline that utilizes the
existing platform and an additional pipeline, which is optimized for more
in-depth phenotyping assays. Using this system, we have started to perform more
comprehensive phenotyping of mouse mutants. We have opened this system to
Japanese scientists as the Japanese Mouse Clinic. It is anticipated that existing
mouse mutants will be reevaluated as disease models by identifying novel
phenotypes on the new platform. We will share detailed information about the
standard operating procedures (SOPs) of our phenotyping analyses with other
related large-scale projects, such as the European Mouse Disease Clinic (EUMODIC)
and the German Mouse Clinic (GMC). Moreover, we will contribute to international 
efforts to standardize mouse phenotype data by sharing annotation of mutant
phenotypes, which are made by internationally standardized methods, with other
related projects.

PMID: 19897927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Genome Biol. 2009;10(11):R121. doi: 10.1186/gb-2009-10-11-r121. Epub 2009 Nov 2.

Regulatory interdependence of myeloid transcription factors revealed by Matrix
RNAi analysis.

Tomaru Y(1), Simon C, Forrest AR, Miura H, Kubosaki A, Hayashizaki Y, Suzuki M.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Omics Science Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho,
Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. tomaru@gsc.riken.jp

BACKGROUND: With the move towards systems biology, we need sensitive and reliable
ways to determine the relationships between transcription factors and their
target genes. In this paper we analyze the regulatory relationships between 78
myeloid transcription factors and their coding genes by using the matrix RNAi
system in which a set of transcription factor genes are individually knocked down
and the resultant expression perturbation is quantified.
RESULTS: Using small interfering RNAs we knocked down the 78 transcription factor
genes in monocytic THP-1 cells and monitored the perturbation of the expression
of the same 78 transcription factors and 13 other transcription factor genes as
well as 5 non-transcription factor genes by quantitative real-time RT-PCR,
thereby building a 78 x 96 matrix of perturbation and measurement. This approach 
identified 876 cases where knockdown of one transcription factor significantly
affected the expression of another (from a potential 7,488 combinations). Our
study also revealed cell-type-specific transcriptional regulatory networks in two
different cell types.
CONCLUSIONS: By considering whether the targets of a given transcription factor
are naturally up- or downregulated during phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate-induced
differentiation, we could classify these edges as pro-differentiative (229),
anti-differentiative (76) or neither (571) using expression profiling data
obtained in the FANTOM4 study. This classification analysis suggested that
several factors could be involved in monocytic differentiation, while others such
as MYB and the leukemogenic fusion MLL-MLLT3 could help to maintain the initial
undifferentiated state by repressing the expression of pro-differentiative
factors or maintaining expression of anti-differentiative factors.

PMCID: PMC2810662
PMID: 19883503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Diabetes. 2010 Feb;59(2):539-49. doi: 10.2337/db09-0653. Epub 2009 Oct 29.

A genome-wide association study identifies a novel major locus for glycemic
control in type 1 diabetes, as measured by both A1C and glucose.

Paterson AD(1), Waggott D, Boright AP, Hosseini SM, Shen E, Sylvestre MP, Wong I,
Bharaj B, Cleary PA, Lachin JM; MAGIC (Meta-Analyses of Glucose and
Insulin-related traits Consortium), Below JE, Nicolae D, Cox NJ, Canty AJ, Sun L,
Bull SB; Diabetes Control and Complications Trial/Epidemiology of Diabetes
Interventions and Complications Research Group.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Genetics and Genome Biology, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto,
Canada. andrew.paterson@utoronto.ca

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2010 Feb;59(2):332-4.

OBJECTIVE: Glycemia is a major risk factor for the development of long-term
complications in type 1 diabetes; however, no specific genetic loci have been
identified for glycemic control in individuals with type 1 diabetes. To identify 
such loci in type 1 diabetes, we analyzed longitudinal repeated measures of A1C
from the Diabetes Control and Complications Trial.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We performed a genome-wide association study using
the mean of quarterly A1C values measured over 6.5 years, separately in the
conventional (n = 667) and intensive (n = 637) treatment groups of the DCCT. At
loci of interest, linear mixed models were used to take advantage of all the
repeated measures. We then assessed the association of these loci with capillary 
glucose and repeated measures of multiple complications of diabetes.
RESULTS: We identified a major locus for A1C levels in the conventional treatment
group near SORCS1 (10q25.1, P = 7 x 10(-10)), which was also associated with mean
glucose (P = 2 x 10(-5)). This was confirmed using A1C in the intensive treatment
group (P = 0.01). Other loci achieved evidence close to genome-wide significance:
14q32.13 (GSC) and 9p22 (BNC2) in the combined treatment groups and 15q21.3
(WDR72) in the intensive group. Further, these loci gave evidence for association
with diabetic complications, specifically SORCS1 with hypoglycemia and BNC2 with 
renal and retinal complications. We replicated the SORCS1 association in Genetics
of Diabetes in Kidneys (GoKinD) study control subjects (P = 0.01) and the BNC2
association with A1C in nondiabetic individuals.
CONCLUSIONS: A major locus for A1C and glucose in individuals with diabetes is
near SORCS1. This may influence the design and analysis of genetic studies
attempting to identify risk factors for long-term diabetic complications.

PMCID: PMC2809960
PMID: 19875614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Bioinformatics. 2010 Jan 1;26(1):125-6. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btp611. Epub 
2009 Oct 24.

NGSView: an extensible open source editor for next-generation sequencing data.

Arner E(1), Hayashizaki Y, Daub CO.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Omics Science Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho,
Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. arner@gsc.riken.jp

SUMMARY: High-throughput sequencing technologies introduce novel demands on tools
available for data analysis. We have developed NGSView (Next Generation Sequence 
View), a generally applicable, flexible and extensible next-generation sequence
alignment editor. The software allows for visualization and manipulation of
millions of sequences simultaneously on a desktop computer, through a graphical
interface. NGSView is available under an open source license and can be extended 
through a well documented API.
AVAILABILITY: http://ngsview.sourceforge.net

PMCID: PMC2796816
PMID: 19855106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Prog Mol Subcell Biol. 2010;50:85-97. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-03103-8_6.

MicroRNA-mediated mRNA deadenylation and repression of protein synthesis in a
mammalian cell-free system.

Wakiyama M(1), Yokoyama S.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN, Systems and Structural Biology Center, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi,
Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. waki@gsc.riken.jp

Cell-free systems are valuable tools for analyses of a post-transcriptional gene 
expression. The biochemical aspects of RNA interference have been extensively
studied by using extracts prepared from Drosophila embryos. However, the
mechanism by which microRNAs regulate protein synthesis is still elusive. We
established a mammalian cell-free system that recapitulates let-7
microRNA-mediated repression of protein synthesis. Using this system, we found
that a target mRNA was deadenylated when it was translationally repressed. The
experimental data strongly suggested that the deadenylation was a cause, but not 
a result, of translational repression. In this chapter, we describe our cell-free
system and discuss the significance of microRNA-mediated mRNA deadenylation in
the repression of protein synthesis.

PMID: 19841883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Biomaterials. 2010 Jan;31(1):58-66. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2009.09.026. Epub
2009 Oct 17.

Reversible hydrogel formation driven by protein-peptide-specific interaction and 
chondrocyte entrapment.

Ito F(1), Usui K, Kawahara D, Suenaga A, Maki T, Kidoaki S, Suzuki H, Taiji M,
Itoh M, Hayashizaki Y, Matsuda T.

Author information: 
(1)CREST, Japan Science and Technology Agency, 4-1-8 Honcho, Kawaguchi, Saitama
332-0012, Japan. rgscerg@gsc.riken.jp

We developed a hydrogel self-assembling method driven by the interaction between 
recombinant tax-interactive protein-1 (TIP1) with the PDZ domain in a molecule,
which is fused to each end of the triangular trimeric CutA protein (CutA-TIP1),
and a PDZ domain-recognizable peptide which is covalently bound to each terminus 
of four-armed poly(ethylene glycol) (PDZ-peptide-PEG). Genetic manipulation based
on molecular-dynamic simulation generated a cell-adhesive RGD tripeptidyl
sequence in the CutA loop region [CutA(RGD)-TIP1]. Spontaneous viscoelastic
hydrogel formation occurred when either CutA-TIP1- or CutA(RGD)-TIP1-containing
buffer solution and PDZ-peptide-PEG-containing buffer solutions were
stoichiometrically mixed. Dynamic viscoelasticity measurement revealed shear
stress-dependent reversible-phase transformation: a spontaneous viscoelastic
hydrogel was formed at low shear stress, but it was transformed into a sol at
high shear stress. Upon the cessation of shear, hydrogel was restored. When
chondrocytes were pre-mixed with one of these two components containing buffer
solutions, the stoichiometric mixed solution was also spontaneously gelled.
Individual rounded cells and multicellular aggregates were entrapped within both 
hydrogels without substantial cellular impairment regardless of the presence or
absence of RGD motif in the CutA-TIP1 molecule. The potential use of such a
shear-sensitive hydrogel for injectable cell delivery into diseased or lost
cartilage tissue is discussed.

PMID: 19836832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Exp Ther Oncol. 2009;8(1):5-24.

Human ABC transporter ABCG2 in cancer chemotherapy and pharmacogenomics.

Ishikawa T(1), Nakagawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of
Technology, Nagatsuta 4259-B-60, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan. toshi-i@gsc.riken.jp

The ability of cancer cells to acquire resistance to multiple anticancer agents, 
termed multidrug resistance, is often mediated by overexpression of ATP-binding
cassette (ABC) transporters that remove drugs out of the cell against a
concentration gradient. ABCG2, or breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP), is an 
ABC transporter that has been the subject of intense study since its discovery a 
decade ago. While ABCG2 overexpression has been demonstrated in cancer cells
after in vitro drug treatment, endogenous ABCG2 expression in certain cancers is 
considered as a reflection of the differentiated phenotype of the cell of origin 
and likely contributes to intrinsic drug resistance. Notably, ABCG2 is often
expressed in stem cell populations, where it plays a critical role in cellular
protection. ABCG2 exhibits a broad range of substrate specificity. New
technologies of high-speed screening and quantitative
structure-activity-relationship (QSAR) analysis have been developed to analyze
the interactions of drugs with ABCG2. As ABCG2 reportedly transports porphyrins, 
its contribution to photodynamic therapy of human cancer is also implicated.
Protein expression levels of ABCG2 in cancer cells are regulated by both
transcriptional activation and protein degradation. The ABCG2 protein undergoes
endosomal and/or ubiquitin-mediated proteasomal degradations. Furthermore,
genetic polymorphisms in the ABCG2 gene are important factors in cancer
chemotherapy to circumvent adverse effects and/or to enhance the efficacy of
anticancer drugs. The present review article addresses recent advances in
molecular pharmacology and pharmacogenomics of ABCG2 and provides novelideas to
improve cancer chemotherapy.

PMID: 19827267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. PLoS Comput Biol. 2009 Oct;5(10):e1000528. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000528.
Epub 2009 Oct 9.

High-performance drug discovery: computational screening by combining docking and
molecular dynamics simulations.

Okimoto N(1), Futatsugi N, Fuji H, Suenaga A, Morimoto G, Yanai R, Ohno Y, Narumi
T, Taiji M.

Author information: 
(1)High-performance Molecular Simulation Team, Computational Systems Biology
Research Group, Advanced Computational Sciences Department, RIKEN Advanced
Science Institute, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan. okimoto@gsc.riken.jp

Virtual compound screening using molecular docking is widely used in the
discovery of new lead compounds for drug design. However, this method is not
completely reliable and therefore unsatisfactory. In this study, we used massive 
molecular dynamics simulations of protein-ligand conformations obtained by
molecular docking in order to improve the enrichment performance of molecular
docking. Our screening approach employed the molecular
mechanics/Poisson-Boltzmann and surface area method to estimate the binding free 
energies. For the top-ranking 1,000 compounds obtained by docking to a target
protein, approximately 6,000 molecular dynamics simulations were performed using 
multiple docking poses in about a week. As a result, the enrichment performance
of the top 100 compounds by our approach was improved by 1.6-4.0 times that of
the enrichment performance of molecular dockings. This result indicates that the 
application of molecular dynamics simulations to virtual screening for lead
discovery is both effective and practical. However, further optimization of the
computational protocols is required for screening various target proteins.

PMCID: PMC2746282
PMID: 19816553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Development. 2009 Nov;136(21):3627-35. doi: 10.1242/dev.036939. Epub 2009 Sep 30.

The glypican Dally is required in the niche for the maintenance of germline stem 
cells and short-range BMP signaling in the Drosophila ovary.

Guo Z(1), Wang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular and Developmental Biology, Institute of Genetics
and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beichen Xilu #1, Beijing 
100101, P.R. China.

The Drosophila ovary is an excellent system with which to study germline stem
cell (GSC) biology. Two or three female GSCs are maintained in a structure called
a niche at the anterior tip of the ovary. The somatic niche cells surrounding the
GSCs include terminal filament cells, cap cells and escort stem cells. Mounting
evidence has demonstrated that BMP-like morphogens are the immediate upstream
signals to promote GSC fate by preventing the expression of Bam, a key
differentiation factor. In contrast to their morphogenic long-range action in
imaginal epithelia, BMP molecules in the ovarian niche specify GSC fate at
single-cell resolution. How this steep gradient of BMP response is achieved
remains elusive. In this study, we found that the glypican Dally is essential for
maintaining GSC identity. Dally is highly expressed in cap cells. Cell-specific
Dally-RNAi, mutant clonal analysis and cell-specific rescue of the GSC-loss
phenotype suggest that Dally acts in the cap cells adjacent to the GSCs. We
confirmed that Dally facilitated BMP signaling in GSCs by examining its
downstream targets in various dally mutants. Conversely, when we overexpressed
Dally in somatic cells outside the niche, we increased the number of GSC-like
cells apparently by expanding the pro-GSC microenvironment. Furthermore, in a
genetic setting we revealed a BMP-sensitivity distinction between germline and
somatic cells, namely that Dally is required for short-range BMP signaling in
germline but not in somatic cells. We propose that Dally ensures high-level BMP
signaling in the ovarian niche and thus female GSC determination.

PMID: 19793889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Reproduction. 2010 Jan;139(1):113-9. doi: 10.1530/REP-09-0265.

The reversible developmental unipotency of germ cells in chicken.

Jung JG(1), Lee YM, Kim JN, Kim TM, Shin JH, Kim TH, Lim JM, Han JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural Biotechnology and Research Institute for
Agriculture and Life Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-921, Republic
of Korea.

We recently developed bimodal germline chimera production approaches by transfer 
of primordial germ cells (PGCs) or embryonic germ cells (EGCs) into embryos and
by transplantation of spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs) or germline stem cells
(GSCs) into adult testes. This study was undertaken to investigate the reversible
developmental unipotency of chicken germ cells using our established germline
chimera production systems. First, we transferred freshly isolated SSCs from
adult testis or in vitro cultured GSCs into stage X and stage 14-16 embryos, and 
we found that these transferred SSCs/GSCs could migrate to the recipient
embryonic gonads. Of the 527 embryos that received SSCs or GSCs, 135 yielded
hatchlings. Of 17 sexually mature males (35.3%), six were confirmed as germline
chimeras through testcross analysis resulting in an average germline transmission
efficiency of 1.3%. Second, PGCs/EGCs, germ cells isolated from embryonic gonads 
were transplanted into adult testes. The EGC transplantation induced germline
transmission, whereas the PGC transplantation did not. The germline transmission 
efficiency was 12.5 fold higher (16.3 vs 1.3%) in EGC transplantation into testis
(EGCs to adult testis) than that in SSC/GSC transfer into embryos (testicular
germ cells to embryo stage). In conclusion, chicken germ cells from different
developmental stages can (de)differentiate into gametes even after the germ cell 
developmental clock is set back or ahead. Use of germ cell reversible unipotency 
might improve the efficiency of germ cell-mediated germline transmission.

PMID: 19776100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Methods Mol Biol. 2009;578:437-51. doi: 10.1007/978-1-60327-411-1_28.

Detection of SNP by the isothermal smart amplification method.

Lezhava A(1), Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Exploration Research Group, Genomic Sciences Center (GSC), RIKEN
Yokohama Institute, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan.

The complexity of molecular diagnostic assays is a significant barrier to
employment in point-of-care diagnostics, despite the growing need for such
technologies. We have developed a sensitive, accurate, rapid, and simple DNA
amplification scheme that shows potential for translational medicine from
pharmacogenomics-based drug discovery through to point-of-care diagnostics.
Called the "Smart Amplification process 2" (SmartAmp 2), the method is
isothermal, and employs a unique primer design and background suppression
technology that can amplify target sequences from crude cell lysates. The
specificity of the SmartAmp 2 assay enables detection of single-nucleotide
differences such as somatic mutations in tumors and single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) variants. Because mismatch amplification can be completely
suppressed in SmartAmp 2, a reliable diagnostic result can be achieved based
exclusively on amplification alone. Furthermore, mutation detection and SNP
genotypes can be obtained in as little as 30-40 min from sample preparation of
raw blood or tissue specimens.

PMID: 19768611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Dev Cell. 2009 Sep;17(3):417-24. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2009.07.017.

Drosophila maelstrom ensures proper germline stem cell lineage differentiation by
repressing microRNA-7.

Pek JW(1), Lim AK, Kai T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Temasek Lifesciences Laboratory,
Germline Biology Laboratory, 1 Research Link, The National University of
Singapore, Singapore 117604.

Nuage is a germline-unique perinuclear structure conserved throughout the animal 
kingdom. Maelstrom (Mael) is an unusual nuage component, as it is also found in
the nucleus. Mael contains a High Mobility Group box, known to mediate DNA
binding. We show that Mael nuclear function is required for proper
differentiation in the Drosophila germline stem cell (GSC) lineage. In mael
mutant testes, transit-amplifying cysts fail to differentiate into primary
spermatocytes, instead breaking down into ectopic GSCs and smaller cysts, due to 
a depletion of Bag-of-marbles (Bam) protein. Mael regulates Bam via repression of
miR-7. Mael binds the miR-7 promoter and is required for the local accumulation
of HP1 and H3K9me3. miR-7 targets bam directly at its 3'UTR, and a reduction in
miR-7 expression can rescue germline differentiation defects found in mael
mutants by alleviating Bam repression. We propose that Mael ensures proper
differentiation in the GSC lineage by repressing miR-7.

PMID: 19758565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Bioinformatics. 2009 Nov 1;25(21):2839-40. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btp527.
Epub 2009 Sep 7.

TagDust--a program to eliminate artifacts from next generation sequencing data.

Lassmann T(1), Hayashizaki Y, Daub CO.

Author information: 
(1)Omics Science Center, Riken Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho,
Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. timolassmann@gmail.com

MOTIVATION: Next-generation parallel sequencing technologies produce large
quantities of short sequence reads. Due to experimental procedures various types 
of artifacts are commonly sequenced alongside the targeted RNA or DNA sequences. 
Identification of such artifacts is important during the development of novel
sequencing assays and for the downstream analysis of the sequenced libraries.
RESULTS: Here we present TagDust, a program identifying artifactual sequences in 
large sequencing runs. Given a user-defined cutoff for the false discovery rate, 
TagDust identifies all reads explainable by combinations and partial matches to
known sequences used during library preparation. We demonstrate the quality of
our method on sequencing runs performed on Illumina's Genome Analyzer platform.
AVAILABILITY: Executables and documentation are available from
http://genome.gsc.riken.jp/osc/english/software/.
CONTACT: timolassmann@gmail.com.

PMCID: PMC2781754
PMID: 19737799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Prog Lipid Res. 2010 Jan;49(1):87-95. doi: 10.1016/j.plipres.2009.09.001. Epub
2009 Sep 6.

Heteromeric glycolipid complexes as modulators of autoantibody and lectin
binding.

Rinaldi S(1), Brennan KM, Willison HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Neurosciences, Glasgow Biomedical Research Centre, 120
University Place, Glasgow G12 8TA, UK.

Glycolipids act as receptors for a wide range of antibodies, lectins and
microbes. It has long been recognised that the local topography of glycolipids in
the plasma membrane is critical to these recognition events, although the
biological basis for this has been relatively under-investigated. Within the last
five years, emerging evidence indicates that hetero-dimeric clusters of different
glycolipids can form highly distinct and specific epitopes for antibody and
lectin binding. The initial observation that these ganglioside complexes (GSC)
could either dramatically enhance or equally well inhibit the binding of
neuropathy sera has now been reproduced for a number of other lectins, including 
siglecs and bacterial toxins. Here we review the initial discovery of GSC as
antibody binding domains and the subsequent studies delineating their broader
functional importance. Potential mechanisms underlying these effects are
considered, although much remains to be investigated and explained. However, the 
implications for this field are potentially widespread, ranging from glycoarray
design, structural biology and membrane biophysics, through to the biological
consequences of glycolipid complex organisation in plasma membranes.

PMID: 19735674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Int J Cancer. 2010 Feb 15;126(4):919-29. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24851.

Identification of HLA-A2- and A24-restricted T-cell epitopes derived from SOX6
expressed in glioma stem cells for immunotherapy.

Ueda R(1), Ohkusu-Tsukada K, Fusaki N, Soeda A, Kawase T, Kawakami Y, Toda M.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroimmunology Research Group, Keio University School of Medicine,
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Malignant gliomas are the most aggressive human primary brain tumors and are
currently incurable. Immunotherapies have the potential to target glioma and
glioma stem cells (GSCs) that are resistant to conventional therapies. We
previously identified SOX6 as a human glioma antigen and demonstrated that
vaccination with SOX6 DNA induced cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) specific for
glioma, thereby exerting therapeutic antitumor responses in glioma-bearing mice. 
In this study, we attempted to identify SOX6-derived peptides as specific targets
for effective and safe T-cell-mediated immunotherapy targeting SOX6-positive
glioma and GSCs. In vitro stimulation with human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-A*2402
(A24)-restricted peptides, RFENLGPQL (SOX6(504)) and PYYEEQARL (SOX6(628)) or the
HLA-A*0201 (A2)-restricted peptide, ALFGDQDTV (SOX6(447)) was capable of inducing
SOX6 peptide-specific CTLs in peripheral blood mononuclear cells derived from
healthy donors and glioma patients. These CTLs were able to lyse a majority of
glioma cell lines and a GSC line derived from human glioblastoma in an HLA Class 
I-restricted and an antigen-dependent manner. Furthermore, peptide vaccines of
SOX6(628), which was conserved in the murine SOX6 protein and expected to bind to
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) H-2(d), induced CTLs specific for
SOX6(628) in H-2(d) mice. Normal autologous cells from mice, in which
SOX6-specific immune responses were generated, were not destroyed. These results 
suggest that these SOX6 peptides are potnetially immunogenic in HLA-A24 or -A2
positive glioma patients and should be considered as a promising strategy for
safe and effective T-cell-based immunotherapy of patients with gliomas.

PMID: 19728337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Stem Cells. 2009 Dec;27(12):2884-95. doi: 10.1002/stem.203.

Transcriptional activation by the Mixl1 homeodomain protein in differentiating
mouse embryonic stem cells.

Zhang H(1), Fraser ST, Papazoglu C, Hoatlin ME, Baron MH.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of MedicineMount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York,
USA.

Members of the Mix/Bix family of paired class homeobox genes play important roles
in the development of vertebrate mesoderm and endoderm. The single Mix/Bix family
member identified in the mouse, Mix-like 1 (Mixl1), is required for mesendoderm
patterning during gastrulation and promotes mesoderm formation and hematopoiesis 
in embryonic stem cell (ESC)-derived embryoid bodies. Despite its crucial
functions the transcriptional activity and targets of Mixl1 have not been well
described. To investigate the molecular mechanisms of Mixl1-mediated
transcriptional regulation, we have characterized the DNA-binding specificity and
transcriptional properties of this homeodomain protein in differentiating ESCs.
Mixl1 binds preferentially as a dimer to an 11-base pair (bp) Mixl1 binding
sequence (MBS) that contains two inverted repeats separated by a 3-bp spacer. The
MBS mediates transcriptional activation by Mixl1 in both NIH 3T3 cells and in a
new application of an inducible ESC differentiation system. Consistent with our
previous observation that early induction of Mixl1 expression in ESCs results in 
premature activation of Goosecoid (Gsc), we have found that Mixl1 occupies two
variant MBSs within and activates transcription from the Gsc promoter in vitro
and in vivo. These results strongly suggest that Gsc is a direct target gene of
Mixl1 during embryogenesis. STEM CELLS 2009;27:2884-2895.

PMCID: PMC3562714
PMID: 19711456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Surg Oncol. 2009 Nov 1;100(6):472-6. doi: 10.1002/jso.21370.

Progression and prognosis of gastric stump cancer.

Hu X(1), Tian DY, Cao L, Yu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital, Dalian Medical
University, Dalian 116011, China. yui79@hotmail.com

Erratum in
    J Surg Oncol. 2009 Nov 1;100(6):523. Yi, Yu [corrected to Yu, Yi].

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: The incidence of gastric stump cancer (GSC) is
increasing. The aim of this study is to determine the clinicopathologic feature
and the differences of surgical outcome between GSC after partial gastrectomy for
benign diseases (GSC-B) and GSC after partial gastrectomy for malignant tumors
(GSC-M).
METHODS: Medical records of 42 patients with GSC-B and 47 patients with GSC-M who
underwent surgical treatment were studied and analyzed retrospectively.
Clinicopathologic parameters, the 5-year survival rate after operation and
prognostic factors, were analyzed retrospectively.
RESULTS: GSC was frequently detected in anastomotic site. Poorly differentiated
cancer was common. No difference was found between patients with GSC-B and
patients with GSC-M in terms of histologic type, tumor location, and distribution
of tumor stage. GSC-B patients had a higher incidence in No. 7, 8, 9 lymph nodes 
than GSC-M patients. In contrast, the patients with GSC-M had higher incidence of
metastasis to jejunal mesentery lymph nodes and No. 10, 11 lymph nodes. The
overall 5-year survival rates were 38.1% for GSC-B and 10.4% for GSC-M, with
significant difference (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: GSC has a particular pattern in lymph node metastasis and organs
invasion. Surgical resection is considered an effective therapeutic strategy for 
GSC.

PMID: 19697396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Nat Cell Biol. 2009 Sep;11(9):1121-7. doi: 10.1038/ncb1926. Epub 2009 Aug 9.

Organizer restriction through modulation of Bozozok stability by the E3 ubiquitin
ligase Lnx-like.

Ro H(1), Dawid IB.

Author information: 
(1)Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-2425, USA.

The organizer anchors the primary embryonic axis, and balance between dorsal
(organizer) and ventral domains is fundamental to body patterning. LNX (ligand of
Numb protein-X) is a RING finger and four PDZ domain-containing E3 ubiquitin
ligase. LNX serves as a binding platform and may have a role in cell fate
determination, but its in vivo functions are unknown. Here we show that Lnx-l
(Lnx-like) functions as a critical regulator of dorso-ventral axis formation in
zebrafish. Depletion of Lnx-l using specific antisense morpholinos (MOs) caused
strong embryonic dorsalization. We identified Bozozok (Boz, also known as Dharma 
or Nieuwkoid) as a binding partner and substrate of Lnx-l. Boz is a
homeodomain-containing transcriptional repressor induced by canonical Wnt
signalling that is critical for dorsal organizer formation. Lnx-l induced
K48-linked polyubiquitylation of Boz, leading to its proteasomal degradation in
human 293T cells and in zebrafish embryos. Dorsalization induced by Boz
overexpression was suppressed by raising the level of Lnx-l, but Lnx-l failed to 
counteract dorsalization caused by mutant Boz lacking a critical motif for Lnx-l 
binding. Furthermore, dorsalization induced by depletion of Lnx-l was alleviated 
by attenuation of Boz expression. We conclude that Lnx-l modulates Boz activity
to prevent the invasion of ventral regions of the embryo by organizer tissue.
These studies introduce a ubiquitin ligase, Lnx-l, as a balancing modulator of
axial patterning in the zebrafish embryo.

PMCID: PMC2759713
PMID: 19668196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Stem Cells. 2009 Oct;27(10):2393-404. doi: 10.1002/stem.188.

Targeting interleukin 6 signaling suppresses glioma stem cell survival and tumor 
growth.

Wang H(1), Lathia JD, Wu Q, Wang J, Li Z, Heddleston JM, Eyler CE, Elderbroom J, 
Gallagher J, Schuschu J, MacSwords J, Cao Y, McLendon RE, Wang XF, Hjelmeland AB,
Rich JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina, USA.

Glioblastomas are the most common and most lethal primary brain tumor. Recent
studies implicate an important role for a restricted population of neoplastic
cells (glioma stem cells (GSCs)) in glioma maintenance and recurrence. We now
demonstrate that GSCs preferentially express two interleukin 6 (IL6) receptors:
IL6 receptor alpha (IL6R alpha) and glycoprotein 130 (gp130). Targeting IL6R
alpha or IL6 ligand expression in GSCs with the use of short hairpin RNAs
(shRNAs) significantly reduces growth and neurosphere formation capacity while
increasing apoptosis. Perturbation of IL6 signaling in GSCs attenuates signal
transducers and activators of transcription three (STAT3) activation, and small
molecule inhibitors of STAT3 potently induce GSC apoptosis. These data indicate
that STAT3 is a downstream mediator of prosurvival IL6 signals in GSCs. Targeting
of IL6R alpha or IL6 expression in GSCs increases the survival of mice bearing
intracranial human glioma xenografts. IL6 is clinically significant because
elevated IL6 ligand and receptor expression are associated with poor glioma
patient survival. The potential utility of anti-IL6 therapies is demonstrated by 
decreased growth of subcutaneous human GSC-derived xenografts treated with IL6
antibody. Together, our data indicate that IL6 signaling contributes to glioma
malignancy through the promotion of GSC growth and survival, and that targeting
IL6 may offer benefit for glioma patients.

PMCID: PMC2825688
PMID: 19658188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Dev Biol. 2009 Oct 15;334(2):335-44. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.07.031. Epub 2009 
Jul 28.

Jak-STAT regulation of male germline stem cell establishment during Drosophila
embryogenesis.

Sheng XR(1), Posenau T, Gumulak-Smith JJ, Matunis E, Van Doren M, Wawersik M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, 725 N. Wolfe Street, The Johns Hopkins University,
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Germline stem cells (GSCs) in Drosophila are descendants of primordial germ cells
(PGCs) specified during embryogenesis. The precise timing of GSC establishment in
the testis has not been determined, nor is it known whether mechanisms that
control GSC maintenance in the adult are involved in GSC establishment. Here, we 
determine that PGCs in the developing male gonad first become GSCs at the embryo 
to larval transition. This coincides with formation of the embryonic hub; the
critical signaling center that regulates adult GSC behavior within the stem cell 
microenvironment (niche). We find that the Jak-STAT signaling pathway is
activated in a subset of PGCs that associate with the newly-formed embryonic hub.
These PGCs express GSC markers and function like GSCs, while PGCs that do not
associate with the hub begin to differentiate. In the absence of Jak-STAT
activation, PGCs adjacent to the hub fail to exhibit the characteristics of GSCs,
while ectopic activation of the Jak-STAT pathway prevents differentiation. These 
findings show that stem cell formation is closely linked to development of the
stem cell niche, and suggest that Jak-STAT signaling is required for initial
establishment of the GSC population in developing testes.

PMCID: PMC2777977
PMID: 19643104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. BMC Res Notes. 2009 Jul 27;2:153. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-2-153.

High-resolution analysis of aberrant regions in autosomal chromosomes in human
leukemia THP-1 cell line.

Adati N(1), Huang MC, Suzuki T, Suzuki H, Kojima T.

Author information: 
(1)Computational Systems Biology Research Group, RIKEN Advanced Science
Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.
ada@gsc.riken.jp

BACKGROUND: THP-1 is a human monocytic leukemia cell line derived from a patient 
with acute monocytic leukemia. The cell line differentiates into macrophage-like 
cells by stimulation with phorbol myristate acetate (PMA). Although it has been
used frequently as a model for macrophage differentiation in research including
the FANTOM4/Genome Network Project, there are few reports on its genomic
constitution. Therefore, we attempted to reveal the genomic aberrations in these 
cells with the microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH)
technique.
FINDINGS: We report large aberrations, including deletions 6p, 12p, 17p, and
trisomy 8, and revealed breakpoints in the MLL and MLLT3 genes. Moreover, we
found novel genomic aberrations such as a hemizygous narrow deletion partially
containing the TP73 gene and homozygous deletions, including the CDKN2A, CDKN2B
and PTEN genes.
CONCLUSION: In this study, we identified 119 aberrant regions in autosomal
chromosomes, and at least 16 of these aberrations were less than 100 kb, most of 
which were undetectable in the previous works. We also revealed a total of 4.6 Mb
of homozygous deleted regions. Our results will provide a base to precisely
understand studies involving the THP-1 cell line, especially the huge amount of
data generated from the FANTOM4/Genome Network Project.

PMCID: PMC2729307
PMID: 19635138  [PubMed]


221. J Neuroimmunol. 2009 Sep 29;214(1-2):125-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2009.06.017. 
Epub 2009 Jul 24.

Antibodies to ganglioside complexes consisting of asialo-GM1 and GQ1b or GT1a in 
Fisher and Guillain-Barré syndromes.

Ogawa G(1), Kaida K, Kusunoki S, Ueda M, Kimura F, Kamakura K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurology, Department of Internal Medicine 3, National Defense
Medical College, Tokorozawa, Saitama 359-8513, Japan.

To determine the epitopes of ganglioside complexes (GSCs) containing GQ1b or
GT1a, we investigated their reactivity to GSCs consisting of asialo-GM1 (GA1) and
GQ1b or GT1a using IgG anti-GQ1b- or anti-GT1a-positive sera. Nine
anti-GQ1b-positive sera had higher activity to GA1/GQ1b than to GQ1b, only five
of which reacted with GM1/GQ1b and GD1b/GQ1b. Five of 14 sera positive for
GA1/GT1a and GM1/GT1a were negative for GA1/GQ1b and GM1/GQ1b. Sialic acids
attached to the internal galactose of gangliotetraose can influence the
reactivity of anti-GSC antibodies. Screening for antibodies to GSCs containing
GA1 is useful for elucidation of the antibody-mediated pathophysiology.

PMID: 19631994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Ai Zheng. 2009 May;28(5):511-4.

[Surgical treatment and prognosis of gastric stump cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhou LX(1), Zhang ZW, Xu ZY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Pancreatic and Gastric Surgery, Zhejiang Cancer
Hospital, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. zhoulxin8k@126.com

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Gastric stump cancer (GSC) has unique biological
behaviors and poor prognosis. The surgical treatment for GSC is complex. This
study was to explore the clinical characteristics of GSC and the effect of
operation patterns on long-term survival, and investigate its prognostic factors.
METHODS: The clinical data of 81 GSC patients, treated in Zhejiang Cancer
Hospital from January 1990 to December 2007, were analyzed. Patients' survival
was analyzed by Kaplan-Meier method; the prognosis was analyzed by Cox
multivariate regression model.
RESULTS: Of the 81 patients, 47 (58.0%) received radical resection, 34 received
non-radical operation (including palliative operation, short circuit or
fistulation and exploration). The overall 1-, 3-, and 5-year survival rates were 
69.1%, 24.3%, and 11.8% in the whole group. The 1-, 3-, and 5-year survival rates
were significantly higher in radical resection group than in non-radical
operation group (93.6% vs. 35.3%, 42.0% vs. 5.9%, 20.8% vs. 0, P<0.05). Cox
multivariate regression analysis showed that clinical stage, pathologic
classification, radical resection, peritoneal seeding and liver metastasis were
related with the survival of GSC patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Radical resection may help to improve the prognosis of GSC. Clinical
stage, pathologic classification, radical resection, peritoneal seeding and liver
metastasis are independent prognosis factors of GSC.

PMID: 19624880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Bioinformatics. 2009 Oct 1;25(19):2613-4. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btp438.
Epub 2009 Jul 15.

Probabilistic resolution of multi-mapping reads in massively parallel sequencing 
data using MuMRescueLite.

Hashimoto T(1), de Hoon MJ, Grimmond SM, Daub CO, Hayashizaki Y, Faulkner GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Omics Science Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi,
Yokohama 230-0045, Japan.

Multi-mapping sequence tags are a significant impediment to short-read sequencing
platforms. These tags are routinely omitted from further analysis, leading to
experimental bias and reduced coverage. Here, we present MuMRescueLite, a
low-resource requirement version of the MuMRescue software that has been used by 
several next generation sequencing projects to probabilistically reincorporate
multi-mapping tags into mapped short read data.AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION:
MuMRescueLite is written in Python; executables and documentation are available
from http://genome.gsc.riken.jp/osc/english/software/.

PMID: 19605420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Phys Chem B. 2009 Jul 30;113(30):10196-209. doi: 10.1021/jp902883q.

Aqueous phase behavior of lipids with isoprenoid type hydrophobic chains.

Hato M(1), Yamashita J, Shiono M.

Author information: 
(1)Nanotechnology Research Institute, AIST, Tsukuba Central-5, Higashi 1-1-1,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8565, Japan. hato-m@gsc.riken.jp

Aqueous phase behavior of lipids with isoprenoid type hydrophobic chains
(hereafter referred to as "isoprenoid-chained lipids") as functions of the chain 
length and the hydrophilic headgroup type has been examined over a chain length
span from 12 to 16 carbon atoms long and a temperature range from -40 to 65
degrees C by using optical microscopy, DSC (differential scanning calorimetry),
and SAXS (small-angle X-ray scattering) techniques. Characteristic phase behavior
that arises from the unique "isoprenoid-chain" structure was discussed. This work
together with previous studies (Prog. Colloid Polym. Sci. 2004, 123, 56-60 and J.
Phys. Chem. B 2008, 112, 12286-12296) has clarified the molecular correlation of 
the aqueous phase behavior of "isoprenoid-chained lipids" over the chain lengths 
from 12 to 18 carbon atoms and introduced a new lipid library which can form a
range of liquid crystals, such as an HII (an inverted hexagonal phase), a QII (an
inverted cubic phase), and an Lalpha (a lamellar phase), that are stable over a
wide temperature span from 0 degrees C.

PMID: 19572621  [PubMed]


225. Cell Stem Cell. 2009 Jul 2;5(1):87-96. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2009.05.025.

Induction of pluripotency in adult unipotent germline stem cells.

Ko K(1), Tapia N, Wu G, Kim JB, Bravo MJ, Sasse P, Glaser T, Ruau D, Han DW,
Greber B, Hausdörfer K, Sebastiano V, Stehling M, Fleischmann BK, Brüstle O,
Zenke M, Schöler HR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Max Planck Institute for
Molecular Biomedicine, Münster 48149, Germany.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2009 Jul 2;5(1):3-4.

Mouse and human stem cells with features similar to those of embryonic stem cells
have been derived from testicular cells. Although pluripotent stem cells have
been obtained from defined germline stem cells (GSCs) of mouse neonatal testis,
only multipotent stem cells have been obtained so far from defined cells of mouse
adult testis. In this study we describe a robust and reproducible protocol for
obtaining germline-derived pluripotent stem (gPS) cells from adult unipotent
GSCs. Pluripotency of gPS cells was confirmed by in vitro and in vivo
differentiation, including germ cell contribution and transmission. As determined
by clonal analyses, gPS cells indeed originate from unipotent GSCs. We propose
that the conversion process requires a GSC culture microenvironment that depends 
on the initial number of plated GSCs and the length of culture time.

PMID: 19570517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Jul 14;106(28):11623-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0903325106. Epub 2009 Jun 25.

eIF4A controls germline stem cell self-renewal by directly inhibiting BAM
function in the Drosophila ovary.

Shen R(1), Weng C, Yu J, Xie T.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, MO 64110, USA.

Stem cell self-renewal is controlled by concerted actions of extrinsic niche
signals and intrinsic factors in a variety of systems. Drosophila ovarian
germline stem cells (GSCs) have been one of the most productive systems for
identifying the factors controlling self-renewal. The differentiation factor BAM 
is necessary and sufficient for GSC differentiation, but it still remains
expressed in GSCs at low levels. However, it is unclear how its function is
repressed in GSCs to maintain self-renewal. Here, we report the identification of
the translation initiation factor eIF4A for its essential role in self-renewal by
directly inactivating BAM function. eIF4A can physically interact with BAM in
Drosophila S2 cells and yeast cells. eIF4A exhibits dosage-specific interactions 
with bam in the regulation of GSC differentiation. It is required intrinsically
for controlling GSC self-renewal and proliferation but not survival. In addition,
it is required for maintaining E-cadherin expression but not BMP signaling
activity. Furthermore, BAM and BGCN together repress translation of E-cadherin
through its 3' UTR in S2 cells. Therefore, we propose that BAM functions as a
translation repressor by interfering with translation initiation and eIF4A
maintains self-renewal by inhibiting BAM function and promoting E-cadherin
expression.

PMCID: PMC2710669
PMID: 19556547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Mol Hum Reprod. 2009 Jul;15(7):393-8. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gap036. Epub 2009 Jun
9.

Purification of germline stem cells from adult mammalian ovaries: a step closer
towards control of the female biological clock?

Tilly JL(1), Telfer EE.

Author information: 
(1)Vincent Center for Reproductive Biology, Vincent Obstetrics and Gynecology
Service, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. jtilly@partners.org

For decades it was believed that a non-renewable pool of oocyte-containing
follicles is established in female mammals at birth. This cornerstone of
reproductive biology was challenged 5 years ago by a study reporting on the
presence of mitotically-active germ cells in juvenile and adult mouse ovaries.
Additional findings presented in this study and others that followed further
suggested that mammals retain the capacity to generate oocytes during adulthood; 
however, isolation of oocyte-producing germline stem cells (GSC) as unequivocal
proof of their existence remained elusive. This piece of information now appears 
to have been provided by Ji Wu and colleagues. In addition to showing that
proliferative germ cells resembling male spermatogonial stem cells can be
purified from neonatal or adult mouse ovaries and maintained in vitro for months,
transplantation studies demonstrated that these cells generate oocytes in ovaries
of chemotherapy-sterilized recipients that fertilize and produce viable
offspring. Although these findings do not establish that oogenesis occurs in
adult females under physiological conditions, they strongly support the existence
of GSC in adult mouse ovaries. If equivalent cells can be found in human ovaries,
stem cell-based rejuvenation of the oocyte reserve in ovaries on the verge of
failure may one day be realized.

PMCID: PMC2696346
PMID: 19509111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Cell Stem Cell. 2009 Jun 5;4(6):466-7. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2009.05.013.

Glioma stem cells: better flat than round.

Woolard K(1), Fine HA.

Author information: 
(1)Neuro-Oncology Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA.

Comment on
    Cell Stem Cell. 2009 Jun 5;4(6):568-80.

Glioma-initiating cells/glioma stem cells (GIC/GSCs) are grown in vitro using a
cumbersome and inefficient spheroid assay. In this issue of Cell Stem Cell,
Pollard and coworkers present a protocol for the efficient derivation of GIC/GSC 
lines that may greatly improve the isolation and the potential clinical
application of these cells.

PMID: 19497271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Androl. 2009 Nov-Dec;30(6):690-702. doi: 10.2164/jandrol.108.007401. Epub 2009 
May 28.

Identification of the major proteins produced by cultured germline stem cells in 
chicken.

Han BK(1), Jung JG, Nam J, Moon JK, Kim JN, Lee SI, Kim JK, Kim H, Han JY.

Author information: 
(1)Avicore Biotechnology Institute, Optifarm Solution Inc, Geumjeong-Dong,
Gyeonggi-Do, Korea.

Although chicken spermatogonial stem cells (SCs) are important in spermatogenesis
and transgenic research, little is known about these cells. Recently, our group
constructed an in vitro culture system to establish germline stem cells (GSCs).
To examine the mechanism of chicken spermatogonial SC development, we constructed
a proteome map of GSCs from 4-week-old chicken testes. Soluble extracts of the
GSCs were fractionated by 2-dimensional gel electrophoresis (pH 4-7). Several
protein spots, including those that displayed significantly high levels, were
identified by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time of flight mass
spectrometry and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Of the 82/250
GSC spots examined, 56 yielded mass spectra that matched avian proteins found in 
the on-line databases. All of the identified proteins were classified into
functional groups. This type of proteome map is an important resource for
research on spermatogenesis and transgenesis.

PMID: 19478331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Jun 9;106(23):9304-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0901452106. Epub 2009 May 22.

Bam and Bgcn antagonize Nanos-dependent germ-line stem cell maintenance.

Li Y(1), Minor NT, Park JK, McKearin DM, Maines JZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

The balance between germ-line stem cell (GSC) self-renewal and differentiation in
Drosophila ovaries is mediated by the antagonistic relationship between the Nanos
(Nos)-Pumilio translational repressor complex, which promotes GSC self-renewal,
and expression of Bam, a key differentiation factor. Here, we find that Bam and
Nos proteins are expressed in reciprocal patterns in young germ cells. Repression
of Nos in Bam-expressing cells depends on sequences in the nos 3'-UTR, suggesting
that Nos is regulated by translational repression. Ectopic Bam causes
differentiation of GSCs, and this activity depends on the endogenous nos 3'-UTR
sequence. Previous evidence showed that Bgcn is an obligate factor for the
ability of Bam to drive differentiation, and we now report that Bam forms a
complex with Bgcn, a protein related to the RNA-interacting DExH-box
polypeptides. Together, these observations suggest that Bam-Bgcn act together to 
antagonize Nos expression; thus, derepressing cystoblast-promoting factors. These
findings emphasize the importance of translational repression in balancing stem
cell self-renewal and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2695086
PMID: 19470484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Nat Cell Biol. 2009 Jun;11(6):685-93. doi: 10.1038/ncb1874. Epub 2009 May 10.

Live-imaging of single stem cells within their niche reveals that a U3snoRNP
component segregates asymmetrically and is required for self-renewal in
Drosophila.

Fichelson P(1), Moch C, Ivanovitch K, Martin C, Sidor CM, Lepesant JA, Bellaiche 
Y, Huynh JR.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Jacques Monod, CNRS, Universités Paris 6 et 7, 2, place Jussieu,
F-75251 Paris, Cedex 05, France.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2009 Jun;11(6):678-9.

Stem cells generate self-renewing and differentiating progeny over many rounds of
asymmetric divisions. How stem cell growth rate and size are maintained over time
remains unknown. We isolated mutations in a Drosophila melanogaster gene, wicked 
(wcd), which induce premature differentiation of germline stem cells (GSCs). Wcd 
is a member of the U3 snoRNP complex required for pre-ribosomal RNA maturation.
This general function of Wcd contrasts with its specific requirement for GSC
self-renewal. However, live imaging of GSCs within their niche revealed a pool of
Wcd-forming particles that segregate asymmetrically into the GSCs on mitosis,
independently of the Dpp signal sent by the niche. A fraction of Wcd also
segregated asymmetrically in dividing larval neural stem cells (NSCs). In the
absence of Wcd, NSCs became smaller and produced fewer neurons. Our results show 
that regulation of ribosome synthesis is a crucial parameter for stem cell
maintenance and function.

PMID: 19430468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. BMC Bioinformatics. 2009 May 7;10:133. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-10-133.

SDRF2GRAPH: a visualization tool of a spreadsheet-based description of
experimental processes.

Kawaji H(1), Hayashizaki Y, Daub CO.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Omics Science Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Yokohama, Kanagawa,
Japan. kawaji@gsc.riken.jp

BACKGROUND: As larger datasets are produced with the development of genome-scale 
experimental techniques, it has become essential to explicitly describe the
meta-data (information describing the data) generated by an experiment. The
experimental process is a part of the meta-data required to interpret the
produced data, and SDRF (Sample and Data Relationship Format) supports its
description in a spreadsheet or tab-delimited file. This format was primarily
developed to describe microarray studies in MAGE-tab, and it is being applied in 
a broader context in ISA-tab. While the format provides an explicit framework to 
describe experiments, increase of experimental steps makes it less obvious to
understand the content of the SDRF files.
RESULTS: Here, we describe a new tool, SDRF2GRAPH, for displaying experimental
steps described in an SDRF file as an investigation design graph, a directed
acyclic graph representing experimental steps. A spreadsheet, in Microsoft Excel 
for example, which is used to edit and inspect the descriptions, can be directly 
input via a web-based interface without converting to tab-delimited text. This
makes it much easier to organize large contents of SDRF described in multiple
spreadsheets.
CONCLUSION: SDRF2GRAPH is applicable for a wide range of SDRF files for not only 
microarray-based analysis but also other genome-scale technologies, such as next 
generation sequencers. Visualization of the Investigation Design Graph (IDG)
structure leads to an easy understanding of the experimental process described in
the SDRF files even if the experiment is complicated, and such visualization also
encourages the creation of SDRF files by providing prompt visual feedback.

PMCID: PMC2689195
PMID: 19422683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. PLoS Biol. 2009 May;7(5):e1000101. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000101. Epub 2009
May 5.

Visualisation and quantification of morphogen gradient formation in the
zebrafish.

Harvey SA(1), Smith JC.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust/CR-UK Gurdon Institute and Department of Zoology, The
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

During embryonic development, signalling molecules known as morphogens act in a
concentration-dependent manner to provide positional information to responding
tissues. In the early zebrafish embryo, graded signalling by members of the nodal
family induces the formation of mesoderm and endoderm, thereby patterning the
embryo into three germ layers. Nodal signalling has also been implicated in the
establishment of the dorso-ventral axis of the embryo. Although one can infer the
existence of nodal gradients by comparing gene expression patterns in wild-type
embryos and embryos in which nodal signalling is diminished or augmented, real
understanding can only come from directly observing the gradients. One approach
is to determine local ligand concentrations in the embryo, but this is
technically challenging, and the presence of inhibitors might cause the effective
concentration of a ligand to differ from its actual concentration. We have
therefore taken two approaches to visualise a direct response to nodal
signalling. In the first, we have used transgenic embryos to study the nuclear
accumulation of a Smad2-Venus fusion protein, and in the second we have used
bimolecular fluorescence complementation to visualise the formation of a complex 
between Smad2 and Smad4. This has allowed us to visualise, in living embryos, the
formation of a graded distribution of nodal signalling activity. We have
quantified the formation of the gradient in time and space, and our results not
only confirm that nodal signalling patterns the embryo into three germ layers,
but also shed light on its role in patterning the dorso-ventral axis and
highlight unexpected complexities of mesodermal patterning.

PMCID: PMC2675906
PMID: 19419239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Eur J Cell Biol. 2009 Jul;88(7):397-408. doi: 10.1016/j.ejcb.2009.03.001. Epub
2009 Apr 22.

The germline stem cells of Drosophila melanogaster partition DNA non-randomly.

Karpowicz P(1), Pellikka M, Chea E, Godt D, Tepass U, van der Kooy D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics and Microbiology, University of Toronto, 160
College Street, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 3E1. phillip.karpowicz@utoronto.ca

Comment in
    DNA Repair (Amst). 2010 Oct 5;9(10):1021-3; author reply 1024-5.

The Immortal Strand Hypothesis proposes that asymmetrically dividing stem cells
cosegregate chromatids to retain ancestral DNA templates. Using both pulse-chase 
and label retention assays, we show that non-random partitioning of DNA occurs in
germline stem cells (GSCs) in the Drosophila ovary as these divide asymmetrically
to generate a new GSC and a differentiating cystoblast. This process is disrupted
when GSCs are forced to differentiate through the overexpression of Bag of
Marbles, a factor that impels the terminal differentiation of cystoblasts. When
Decapentaplegic, a ligand which maintains the undifferentiated state of GSCs, is 
expressed ectopically the non-random partitioning of DNA is similarly disrupted. 
Our data suggest asymmetric chromatid segregation is coupled to mechanisms
specifying cellular differentiation via asymmetric stem cell division.

PMID: 19395121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Cell Struct Funct. 2009;34(1):61-9. Epub 2009 Apr 21.

Male germline stem cell division and spermatocyte growth require insulin
signaling in Drosophila.

Ueishi S(1), Shimizu H, H Inoue Y.

Author information: 
(1)Drosophila Genetic Resource Center, Kyoto Institute of Technology, Ukyo-ku,
Kyoto, Japan.

Spermatogenesis in Drosophila commences with cell division of germline stem cells
(GSCs) to produce male germline cells at the tip of the testis. However,
molecular mechanisms inducing division of male GSCs have not been reported.
Insulin-like peptides are known to play an essential role in stimulation of
proliferation and growth of somatic cells, and it has recently been reported that
such peptides promote cell division in female Drosophila GSCs. However, their
effects on male germline cells have not been characterized. We found that
inhibition of insulin production and insulin signaling mutations resulted in
decreased numbers of germline cells in Drosophila testes. GSC numbers were
maintained in young mutant males, with a gradual decrease in abundance of GSCs
with age. Furthermore, in mutants, fewer germline cysts originated from GSCs and 
a lower frequency of GSC division was seen. Insulin signaling was found to
promote cell cycle progression of the male GSCs at the G(2)/M phase. The cell
volume of spermatocytes increases up to 25 times before initiation of meiosis in 
Drosophila. We examined whether insulin signaling extrinsically induces the
greatest cell growth in Drosophila diploid cells and found that spermatocyte
growth was affected in mutants. The results indicate that in addition to its
function in somatic cells, insulin signaling plays an essential role in cell
proliferation and growth during male Drosophila gametogenesis and that sperm
production is regulated by hormonal control via insulin-like peptides.

PMID: 19384053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Genome Biol. 2009;10(4):R40. doi: 10.1186/gb-2009-10-4-r40. Epub 2009 Apr 19.

The FANTOM web resource: from mammalian transcriptional landscape to its dynamic 
regulation.

Kawaji H(1), Severin J, Lizio M, Waterhouse A, Katayama S, Irvine KM, Hume DA,
Forrest AR, Suzuki H, Carninci P, Hayashizaki Y, Daub CO.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Omics Science Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho
Tsurumi-ku Yokohama, Kanagawa, 230-0045 Japan. kawaji@gsc.riken.jp

In FANTOM4, an international collaborative research project, we collected a wide 
range of genome-scale data, including 24 million mRNA 5'-reads (CAGE tags) and
microarray expression profiles along a differentiation time course of the human
THP-1 cell line and under 52 systematic siRNA perturbations. In addition, data
regarding chromatin status derived from ChIP-chip to elucidate the
transcriptional regulatory interactions are included. Here we present these data 
to the research community as an integrated web resource.

PMCID: PMC2688931
PMID: 19374775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Genome Biol. 2009;10(4):R39. doi: 10.1186/gb-2009-10-4-r39. Epub 2009 Apr 19.

FANTOM4 EdgeExpressDB: an integrated database of promoters, genes, microRNAs,
expression dynamics and regulatory interactions.

Severin J(1), Waterhouse AM, Kawaji H, Lassmann T, van Nimwegen E, Balwierz PJ,
de Hoon MJ, Hume DA, Carninci P, Hayashizaki Y, Suzuki H, Daub CO, Forrest AR.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Omics Science Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho
Tsurumi-ku Yokohama, Kanagawa, 230-0045 Japan. severin@gsc.riken.jp

EdgeExpressDB is a novel database and set of interfaces for interpreting
biological networks and comparing large high-throughput expression datasets that 
requires minimal development for new data types and search patterns. The FANTOM4 
EdgeExpress database http://fantom.gsc.riken.jp/4/edgeexpress summarizes gene
expression patterns in the context of alternative promoter structures and
regulatory transcription factors and microRNAs using intuitive gene-centric and
sub-network views. This is an important resource for gene regulation in acute
myeloid leukemia, monocyte/macrophage differentiation and human transcriptional
networks.

PMCID: PMC2688930
PMID: 19374773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Development. 2009 May;136(10):1675-85. doi: 10.1242/dev.031161. Epub 2009 Apr 15.

Short- and long-range functions of Goosecoid in zebrafish axis formation are
independent of Chordin, Noggin 1 and Follistatin-like 1b.

Dixon Fox M(1), Bruce AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Systems Biology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
M5S 3G5, Canada.

The organizer is essential for dorsal-ventral (DV) patterning in vertebrates.
Goosecoid (Gsc), a transcriptional repressor found in the organizer, elicits
partial secondary axes when expressed ventrally in Xenopus, similar to an
organizer transplant. Although gsc is expressed in all vertebrate organizers
examined, knockout studies in mouse suggested that it is not required for DV
patterning. Moreover, experiments in Xenopus and zebrafish suggest a role in head
formation, although a function in axial mesoderm formation is less clear. To
clarify the role of Gsc in vertebrate development, we used gain- and
loss-of-function approaches in zebrafish. Ventral injection of low doses of gsc
produced incomplete secondary axes, which we propose results from short-range
repression of BMP signaling. Higher gsc doses resulted in complete secondary axes
and long-range signaling, correlating with repression of BMP and Wnt signals. In 
striking contrast to Xenopus, the BMP inhibitor Chordin (Chd) is not required for
Gsc function. Gsc produced complete secondary axes in chd null mutant embryos and
gsc-morpholino knockdown in chd mutants enhanced the mutant phenotype, suggesting
that Gsc has Chd-independent functions in DV patterning. Even more striking was
that Gsc elicited complete secondary axes in the absence of three secreted BMP
antagonists, Chd, Follistatin-like 1b and Noggin 1, suggesting that Gsc functions
in parallel with secreted BMP inhibitors. Our findings suggest that Gsc has dose 
dependent effects on axis induction and provide new insights into molecularly
distinct short- and long-range signaling activities of the organizer.

PMID: 19369398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Dev Biol. 2009 Jun 15;330(2):286-304. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.03.026. Epub 2009
Apr 7.

A late requirement for Wnt and FGF signaling during activin-induced formation of 
foregut endoderm from mouse embryonic stem cells.

Hansson M(1), Olesen DR, Peterslund JM, Engberg N, Kahn M, Winzi M, Klein T,
Maddox-Hyttel P, Serup P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Hagedorn Research Institute, Niels
Steensens Vej 6, DK-2820 Gentofte, Denmark.

Here we examine how BMP, Wnt, and FGF signaling modulate activin-induced
mesendodermal differentiation of mouse ES cells grown under defined conditions in
adherent monoculture. We monitor ES cells containing reporter genes for markers
of primitive streak (PS) and its progeny and extend previous findings on the
ability of increasing concentrations of activin to progressively induce more ES
cell progeny to anterior PS and endodermal fates. We find that the number of
Sox17- and Gsc-expressing cells increases with increasing activin concentration
while the highest number of T-expressing cells is found at the lowest activin
concentration. The expression of Gsc and other anterior markers induced by
activin is prevented by treatment with BMP4, which induces T expression and
subsequent mesodermal development. We show that canonical Wnt signaling is
required only during late stages of activin-induced development of
Sox17-expressing endodermal cells. Furthermore, Dkk1 treatment is less effective 
in reducing development of Sox17(+) endodermal cells in adherent culture than in 
aggregate culture and appears to inhibit nodal-mediated induction of Sox17(+)
cells more effectively than activin-mediated induction. Notably, activin
induction of Gsc-GFP(+) cells appears refractory to inhibition of canonical Wnt
signaling but shows a dependence on early as well as late FGF signaling.
Additionally, we find a late dependence on FGF signaling during induction of
Sox17(+) cells by activin while BMP4-induced T expression requires FGF signaling 
in adherent but not aggregate culture. Lastly, we demonstrate that
activin-induced definitive endoderm derived from mouse ES cells can incorporate
into the developing foregut endoderm in vivo and adopt a mostly anterior foregut 
character after further culture in vitro.

PMCID: PMC2730582
PMID: 19358838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Development. 2009 May;136(9):1497-507. doi: 10.1242/dev.025999. Epub 2009 Mar 31.

Dicer-1-dependent Dacapo suppression acts downstream of Insulin receptor in
regulating cell division of Drosophila germline stem cells.

Yu JY(1), Reynolds SH, Hatfield SD, Shcherbata HR, Fischer KA, Ward EJ, Long D,
Ding Y, Ruohola-Baker H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

It is important to understand the regulation of stem cell division because
defects in this process can cause altered tissue homeostasis or cancer. The
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor Dacapo (Dap), a p21/p27 homolog, acts
downstream of the microRNA (miRNA) pathway to regulate the cell cycle in
Drosophila melanogaster germline stem cells (GSCs). Tissue-extrinsic signals,
including insulin, also regulate cell division of GSCs. We report that intrinsic 
and extrinsic regulators intersect in GSC division control; the Insulin receptor 
(InR) pathway regulates Dap levels through miRNAs, thereby controlling GSC
division. Using GFP-dap 3'UTR sensors in vivo, we show that in GSCs the dap 3'UTR
is responsive to Dicer-1, an RNA endonuclease III required for miRNA processing. 
Furthermore, the dap 3'UTR can be directly targeted by miR-7, miR-278 and miR-309
in luciferase assays. Consistent with this, miR-278 and miR-7 mutant GSCs are
partially defective in GSC division and show abnormal cell cycle marker
expression, respectively. These data suggest that the GSC cell cycle is regulated
via the dap 3'UTR by multiple miRNAs. Furthermore, the GFP-dap 3'UTR sensors
respond to InR but not to TGF-beta signaling, suggesting that InR signaling
utilizes Dap for GSC cell cycle regulation. We further demonstrate that the
miRNA-based Dap regulation may act downstream of InR signaling; Dcr-1 and Dap are
required for nutrition-dependent cell cycle regulation in GSCs and reduction of
dap partially rescues the cell cycle defect of InR-deficient GSCs. These data
suggest that miRNA- and Dap-based cell cycle regulation in GSCs can be controlled
by InR signaling.

PMCID: PMC2674257
PMID: 19336466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Braz J Microbiol. 2009 Apr;40(2):411-6. doi: 10.1590/S1517-838220090002000036.
Epub 2009 Jun 1.

Structural and Functional Analysis of Giant Strong Component of Bacillus
thuringiensis Metabolic Network.

Ding DW(1), Ding YR, Li LN, Cai YJ, Xu WB.

Author information: 
(1)School of Information Technology, Jiangnan University , Wuxi 214036 , China ; 
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Chizhou College , Chizhou 247000 
, China.

The purpose of this work was to study the giant strong component (GSC) of B.
thuringiensis metabolic network by structural and functional analysis. Based on
so-called "bow tie" structure, we extracted and studied GSC with its functional
significance. Global structural properties such as degree distribution and
average path length were computed and indicated that the GSC is also a
small-world and scale-free network. Furthermore, the GSC was decomposed and
functional significant for metabolism of these divisions were investigated by
comparing to KEGG metabolic pathways.

PMCID: PMC3769732
PMID: 24031381  [PubMed]


242. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2009 Jun;296(6):F1255-7. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00144.2009. Epub 2009 Mar 18.

Independent two-photon measurements of albumin GSC give low values.

Peti-Peterdi J.

Comment on
    Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2009 Jun;296(6):F1258-65.

PMCID: PMC2692442
PMID: 19297453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Methods Mol Biol. 2009;533:69-107. doi: 10.1007/978-1-60327-136-3_5.

Preparation of full-length cDNA libraries: focus on metazoans.

Harada M(1), Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Exploration Research Group, Genomic Sciences Center (GSC), RIKEN,
Yokohama, Japan.

Critical steps in a cDNA library preparation include efficient cDNA synthesis,
selection of full-length cDNAs, normalizing their abundance, and the subtraction 
of redundant transcripts. The use of trehalose and sorbiol stabilizes the
activity of the reverse transcriptase leading to efficient cDNA synthesis and the
cap-trapping method is used for efficient full-length cDNA selection. Through the
incorporation of additional normalization and subtraction steps that eliminate
the size bias and expressed gene frequency, it is possible to attain cDNA
libraries that include larger or rarely expressed genes. This chapter describes
an efficient method to construct a full-length cDNA library, with a focus on
metazoan samples.

PMID: 19277561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Pediatr Surg. 2009 Feb;44(2):368-72. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2008.10.089.

The effect of delay in rehabilitation on outcome of severe traumatic brain
injury.

Tepas JJ 3rd(1), Leaphart CL, Pieper P, Beaulieu CL, Spierre LR, Tuten JD, Celso 
BG.

Author information: 
(1)University of Florida College of Medicine/Surgery, Jacksonville, FL 32209,
USA. jjt@jax.ufl.edu

BACKGROUND: Expeditious care within minutes of severe injury improves outcome and
is the driving force for development of trauma care systems. Transition from
hospital care to rehabilitation is an important step in recovery after
trauma-related injury. We hypothesize that delay in the transition from acute
care to rehabilitation adversely affects outcome and diminishes recovery after
traumatic brain injury (TBI).
METHODS: After institutional review board approval, the trauma registry of our
regional level I pediatric trauma center was queried for all children with severe
blunt TBI (initial Glasgow Coma Scale score </=8) that required inpatient
rehabilitation. Records were stratified as severe TBI (Glasgow Coma Scale [GCS]
scores 3, 4, 5) and moderate TBI (GSC scores 6, 7, 8). Intensity of acute care
was defined by need for mechanical ventilation and length of intensive care unit 
stay. Outcome was defined by functional independence measurement (FIM) scores at 
time of transfer to inpatient rehabilitation. Linear regression was used to
compare time in days between discharge from intensive care and admission to
inpatient rehabilitation (delay) to rehabilitation efficiency (RE), defined as
the ratio of FIM score improvement to length of stay for inpatient
rehabilitation. Functional improvement was determined by analysis of FIM score
improvement (DeltaFIM) between initiation and completion of inpatient
rehabilitation.
RESULTS: Between January 2000 and December 2006, 60 children (38 males, mean age,
11.2 years; 22 females, mean age, 10.6 years) with blunt TBI and an initial GCS
score of 8 or lower required resuscitation, comprehensive critical care, and
inpatient rehabilitation. Mean length of stay in the intensive care unit was 11.1
+/- 7.4 days. Fifty-two children required an average of 9.4 +/- 6.8 ventilator
days. Delay ranged between 0 and 24 days (mean, 4.1 days) and was significantly
correlated with RE and DeltaFIM (correlation coefficient = -0.346, P = .0068).
For children with the highest potential for salvage (GCS scores 6, 7, 8), RE
correlation increased to -0.457 (P = .011), whereas those with most severe injury
(GCS scores 3, 4, 5) demonstrated a weaker correlation that was not significant. 
For children with most severe injury (GCS scores 3,4,5), the correlation of
DeltaFIM was significant (-0.38; P = .035); however, RE was not.
CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate the price of delay of comprehensive
rehabilitation, especially for the most vulnerable TBI children with best
potential for salvage. The "golden hour," which has become the mantra for
continued refinement of systems of emergency and trauma care, must progress
without interruption to the "golden day," during which comprehensive critical
care seamlessly transitions to timely and aggressive rehabilitation to effect the
greatest functional recovery.

PMID: 19231536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2009 Jun;296(6):F1258-65. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.90638.2008. Epub 2009 Feb 11.

Glomerular sieving coefficient of serum albumin in the rat: a two-photon
microscopy study.

Tanner GA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Integrative Physiology, Indiana Univ. School of
Medicine, 635 Barnhill Drive, MS 332, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.
gtanner@iupui.edu

Comment in
    Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2009 Jun;296(6):F1255-7.

Recent studies of the sieving of serum albumin in the rat kidney using a
two-photon microscope suggested that the glomerular sieving coefficient (GSC) of 
albumin is 0.034, much higher than earlier micropuncture determinations. In the
present study, we critically evaluated the use of the two-photon microscope to
measure the GSC of albumin in the Munich-Wistar rat in vivo. The albumin GSC
averaged 0.004 (SD 0.004), n = 34 glomeruli, when determined with a Zeiss
two-photon microscope system and 0.002 (SD 0.002), n = 5, when determined with an
Olympus two-photon microscope system. These values are close to the lower limit
of detection of GSC, which we estimate to be approximately 0.001-0.003. We
identified several factors that were likely responsible for the higher albumin
GSCs reported earlier using two-photon microscopy. These include animal
conditions (i.e., low glomerular filtration rate) and failure to recognize the
role of out-of-focus fluorescence in contaminating the fluorescence signal from
the urinary space of Bowman's capsule. We observed that hypothermia plus
dehydration or a low blood pressure led to an increased albumin GSC. High levels 
of illumination (high laser outputs) resulted in a falsely elevated albumin GSC. 
Use of external, instead of internal, photodetectors resulted in an exaggerated
albumin GSC because of greater collection of out-of-focus fluorescence. In
conclusion, the albumin concentration in the glomerular filtrate of the normal
rat, determined by two-photon microscopy, is exceedingly low (5-10 mg/dl).

PMID: 19211688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Apr;37(5):1616-27. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp001. Epub 2009 Jan
16.

Unconventional decoding of the AUA codon as methionine by mitochondrial tRNAMet
with the anticodon f5CAU as revealed with a mitochondrial in vitro translation
system.

Takemoto C(1), Spremulli LL, Benkowski LA, Ueda T, Yokogawa T, Watanabe K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biotechnology, Graduate School of Engineering,
University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan. chie@gsc.riken.jp

Mitochondrial (mt) tRNA(Met) has the unusual modified nucleotide 5-formylcytidine
(f(5)C) in the first position of the anticodon. This tRNA must translate both AUG
and AUA as methionine. By constructing an in vitro translation system from bovine
liver mitochondria, we examined the decoding properties of the native mt
tRNA(Met) carrying f(5)C in the anticodon compared to a transcript that lacks the
modification. The native mt Met-tRNA could recognize both AUA and AUG codons as
Met, but the corresponding synthetic tRNA(Met) lacking f(5)C (anticodon CAU),
recognized only the AUG codon in both the codon-dependent ribosomal binding and
in vitro translation assays. Furthermore, the Escherichia coli elongator
tRNA(Met)(m) with the anticodon ac(4)CAU (ac(4)C = 4-acetylcytidine) and the
bovine cytoplasmic initiator tRNA(Met) (anticodon CAU) translated only the AUG
codon for Met on mt ribosome. The codon recognition patterns of these tRNAs were 
the same on E. coli ribosomes. These results demonstrate that the f(5)C
modification in mt tRNA(Met) plays a crucial role in decoding the nonuniversal
AUA codon as Met, and that the genetic code variation is compensated by a change 
in the tRNA anticodon, not by a change in the ribosome. Base pairing models of
f(5)C-G and f(5)C-A based on the chemical properties of f(5)C are presented.

PMCID: PMC2655697
PMID: 19151083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Jan 27;106(4):1117-21. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0809144106. Epub 2009 Jan 9.

Insulin levels control female germline stem cell maintenance via the niche in
Drosophila.

Hsu HJ(1), Drummond-Barbosa D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, TN 37232-8240, USA.

Stem cell maintenance depends on local signals provided by specialized
microenvironments, or niches, in which they reside. The potential role of
systemic factors in stem cell maintenance, however, has remained largely
unexplored. Here, we show that insulin signaling integrates the effects of diet
and age on germline stem cell (GSC) maintenance through the dual regulation of
cap cell number (via Notch signaling) and cap cell-GSC interaction (via
E-cadherin) and that the normal process of GSC and niche cell loss that occurs
with age can be suppressed by increased levels of insulin-like peptides. These
results underscore the importance of systemic factors for the regulation of stem 
cell niches and, thereby, of stem cell numbers.

PMCID: PMC2633547
PMID: 19136634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Stem Cells Cloning. 2009 Dec 22;3:13-27.

Current protocols in the generation of pluripotent stem cells: theoretical,
methodological and clinical considerations.

Swelstad BB(1), Kerr CL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cell Engineering, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MA, USA.

Pluripotent stem cells have been derived from various embryonic, fetal and adult 
sources. Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and parthenogenic ESCs (pESCs) are derived
from the embryo proper while embryonic germ cells (EGCs), embryonal carcinoma
cells (ECCs), and germ-line stem cells (GSC) are produced from germ cells. ECCs
were the first pluripotent stem cell lines established from adult testicular
tumors while EGCs are generated in vitro from primordial germ cells (PGCs)
isolated in late embryonic development. More recently, studies have also
demonstrated the ability to produce GSCs from adult germ cells, known as
spermatogonial stem cells. Unlike ECCs, the source of GSCs are normal,
non-cancerous adult tissue. The study of these unique cell lines has provided
information that has led to the ability to reprogram somatic cells into an
ESC-like state. These cells, called induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), have 
been derived from a number of human fetal and adult origins. With the promises
pluripotent stem cells bring to cell-based therapies there remain several
considerations that need to be carefully studied prior to their clinical use.
Many of these issues involve understanding key factors regulating their
generation, including those which define pluripotency. In this regard, the
following article discusses critical aspects of pluripotent stem cell derivation 
and current issues about their therapeutic potential.

PMCID: PMC3781729
PMID: 24198508  [PubMed]


249. Stand Genomic Sci. 2009 Dec 29;1(3):278-82. doi: 10.4056/sigs.641096.

Meeting Report: "Metagenomics, Metadata and Meta-analysis" (M3) Special Interest 
Group at ISMB 2009.

Field D, Friedberg I, Sterk P, Kottmann R, Glöckner FO, Hirschman L, Garrity GM, 
Cochrane G, Wooley J, Gilbert J.

This report summarizes the proceedings of the "Metagenomics, Metadata and
Meta-analysis" (M3) Special Interest Group (SIG) meeting held at the Intelligent 
Systems for Molecular Biology 2009 conference. The Genomic Standards Consortium
(GSC) hosted this meeting to explore the bottlenecks and emerging solutions for
obtaining biological insights through large-scale comparative analysis of
metagenomic datasets. The M3 SIG included 16 talks, half of which were selected
from submitted abstracts, a poster session and a panel discussion involving
members of the GSC Board. This report summarizes this one-day SIG, attempts to
identify shared themes and recapitulates community recommendations for the future
of this field. The GSC will also host an M3 workshop at the Pacific Symposium on 
Biocomputing (PSB) in January 2010. Further information about the GSC and its
range of activities can be found at http://gensc.org/.

PMCID: PMC3035241
PMID: 21304668  [PubMed]


250. Stand Genomic Sci. 2009 Jul 20;1(1):87-90. doi: 10.4056/sigs.26218.

Extending Standards for Genomics and Metagenomics Data: A Research Coordination
Network for the Genomic Standards Consortium (RCN4GSC).

Wooley JC, Field D, Glöckner FO.

Through a newly established Research Coordination Network for the Genomic
Standards Consortium (RCN4GSC), the GSC will continue its leadership in
establishing and integrating genomic standards through community-based efforts.
These efforts, undertaken in the context of genomic and metagenomic research aim 
to ensure the electronic capture of all genomic data and to facilitate the
achievement of a community consensus around collecting and managing relevant
contextual information connected to the sequence data. The GSC operates as an
open, inclusive organization, welcoming inspired biologists with a commitment to 
community service. Within the collaborative framework of the ongoing,
international activities of the GSC, the RCN will expand the range of research
domains engaged in these standardization efforts and sustain scientific
networking to encourage active participation by the broader community. The
RCN4GSC, funded for five years by the US National Science Foundation, will
primarily support outcome-focused working meetings and the exchange of
early-career scientists between GSC research groups in order to advance key
standards contributions such as GCDML. Focusing on the timely delivery of the
extant GSC core projects, the RCN will also extend the pioneering efforts of the 
GSC to engage researchers active in developing ecological, environmental and
biodiversity data standards. As the initial goals of the GSC are increasingly
achieved, promoting the comprehensive use of effective standards will be
essential to ensure the effective use of sequence and associated data, to provide
access for all biologists to all of the information, and to create
interdisciplinary opportunities for discovery. The RCN will facilitate these
implementation activities through participation in major scientific conferences
and presentations on scientific advances enabled by community usage of genomic
standards.

PMCID: PMC3035207
PMID: 21304642  [PubMed]


251. Stand Genomic Sci. 2009 Jul 20;1(1):68-71. doi: 10.4056/sigs.25165.

Meeting Report from the Genomic Standards Consortium (GSC) Workshops 6 and 7.

Field D, Sterk P, Kyrpides N, Kottmann R, Glöckner FO, Hirschman L, Garrity GM,
Wooley J, Gilna P.

This report summarizes the proceedings of the 6th and 7th workshops of the
Genomic Standards Consortium (GSC), held back-to-back in 2008. GSC 6 focused on
furthering the activities of GSC working groups, GSC 7 focused on outreach to the
wider community. GSC 6 was held October 10-14, 2008 at the European
Bioinformatics Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom and included a two-day
workshop focused on the refinement of the Genomic Contextual Data Markup Language
(GCDML). GSC 7 was held as the opening day of the International Congress on
Metagenomics 2008 in San Diego California. Major achievements of these combined
meetings included an agreement from the International Nucleotide Sequence
Database Consortium (INSDC) to create a "MIGS" keyword for capturing "Minimum
Information about a Genome Sequence" compliant information within INSDC
(DDBJ/EMBL /Genbank) records, launch of GCDML 1.0, MIGS compliance of the first
set of "Genomic Encyclopedia of Bacteria and Archaea" project genomes, approval
of a proposal to extend MIGS to 16S rRNA sequences within a "Minimum Information 
about an Environmental Sequence", finalization of plans for the GSC eJournal,
"Standards in Genomic Sciences" (SIGS), and the formation of a GSC Board.
Subsequently, the GSC has been awarded a Research Co-ordination Network (RCN4GSC)
grant from the National Science Foundation, held the first SIGS workshop and
launched the journal. The GSC will also be hosting outreach workshops at both
ISMB 2009 and PSB 2010 focused on "Metagenomics, Metadata and MetaAnalysis"
(M(3)). Further information about the GSC and its range of activities can be
found at http://gensc.org, including videos of all the presentations at GSC 7.

PMCID: PMC3035212
PMID: 21304639  [PubMed]


252. Sleep Hypn. 2009 Jan 1;11(1). pii: 219.

The Sleep of the Bereaved.

Monk TH(1), Germain A, Buysse DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Clinical and Translational Research Center Western Psychiatric
Institute and Clinic University of Pittsburgh Medical Center.

OBJECTIVE: Sleep disruption is common in widow(er)s. The objective of this study 
was to characterize the sleep of Spousally Bereaved (SB) seniors (60y+) studied
within 4-19 months of being widowed. METHOD: Subjective (PSQI, 2-weeks diary) and
objective (2-weeks actigraphy) baseline sleep measures were obtained in 47 (38f, 
9m) Spousally Bereaved (SB) seniors, 33 (25f, 8m) Good Sleeper Controls (GSC),
and 47 (38f, 9m) Older Adults with Insomnia (OAI); each group with the same mean 
age (72y). OAI subjects passed formal diagnostic criteria for primary or
co-morbid insomnia. GSC subjects had no diagnosis of insomnia. At baseline
(pre-treatment), all subjects completed 2 weeks of detailed sleep diary and wrist
actigraphy, and completed the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) among other
measures. RESULTS: Significant group effects appeared in PSQI (GSC: 2.4, SB: 6.7,
OAI: 10.5; Effect Sizes [ES]>1) and diary measures. In diary measures, for Total 
Sleep Time, Sleep Efficiency and Wake After Sleep Onset, SB were better than OAI 
and worse than GSC (0.47<ES<1.19). For Sleep Latency, SB were worse than GSC
(ES=0.57), but similar to OAI. However, actigraphy results indicated no
significant SB vs. GSC, or SB vs. OAI, differences in any of the sleep measures
considered. CONCLUSION: The sleep disruption of bereaved seniors appears to be
intermediate between GSC and OAI, as reported either retrospectively using the
PSQI, or prospectively using a sleep diary. Only in diary sleep latency, were SB 
and OAI values similar. This pattern was not, however, observed when parallel
objective actigraphic measures were considered.

PMCID: PMC2929135
PMID: 20802799  [PubMed]


253. Dev Biol. 2009 Feb 15;326(2):295-304. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.11.024. Epub 2008
Dec 7.

C. elegans RNA-binding proteins PUF-8 and MEX-3 function redundantly to promote
germline stem cell mitosis.

Ariz M(1), Mainpal R, Subramaniam K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of
Technology, Kanpur, India.

Maintenance of mitotically cycling germline stem cells (GSCs) is vital for
continuous production of gametes. In worms and insects, signaling from
surrounding somatic cells play an essential role in the maintenance of GSCs by
preventing premature differentiation. In addition, germ cell proteins such as the
Drosophila Pumilio and Caenorhabditis elegans FBF, both members of the PUF family
translational regulators, contribute to GSC maintenance. FBF functions by
suppressing GLD-1, which promotes meiotic entry. However, factors that directly
promote GSC proliferation, rather than prevent differentiation, are not known.
Here we show that PUF-8, another C. elegans member of the PUF family and MEX-3, a
KH domain translational regulator, function redundantly to promote GSC mitosis.
We find that PUF-8 protein is highly enriched in mitotic germ cells, which is
similar to the expression pattern of MEX-3 described earlier. The puf-8(-)
mex-3(-) double mutant gonads contain far fewer germ cells than both single
mutants and wild-type. While these cells lack mitotic, meiotic and sperm markers,
they retain the germ cell-specific P granules, and are capable of gametogenesis
if GLP-1, which normally blocks meiotic entry, is removed. Significantly, we find
that at least one of these two proteins is essential for germ cell proliferation 
even in meiotic entry-defective mutants, which otherwise produce germ cell
tumors. We conclude PUF-8 and MEX-3 contribute to GSC maintenance by promoting
mitotic proliferation rather than by blocking meiotic entry.

PMCID: PMC2680957
PMID: 19100255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Clin Neurosci. 2009 Feb;16(2):202-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2008.01.009. Epub 2008
Dec 18.

Pituitary insufficiency after traumatic brain injury.

Wachter D(1), Gündling K, Oertel MF, Stracke H, Böker DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University Hospital, Giessen-Marburg,
Klinikstrasse 29, 35385 Giessen, Germany.

After traumatic brain injury (TBI), patients present with psychological disorders
that may be explained by post-traumatic pituitary insufficiency (PI). The goal of
this study was to determine the relationship between hypopituitarism,
neuropsychological changes and findings on CT scans after TBI. Hospital charts of
55 TBI patients were screened for age, Glasgow Coma Scale (GSC) score, hypoxia or
hypotension. The first two CT scans were analyzed for hemorrhagic lesions. Basal 
levels of the following hormones were recorded: cortisol, prolactin, estradiol,
testosterone, insulin-like growth factor 1 and free thyroxine. Hormonal
stimulation tests were performed either if the basal hormone screening revealed
an abnormality or if the patient answered "yes" to at least one question in the
non-evaluated neuropsychological questionnaire. Overall, 14 out of 55 patients
(25.4%) presented with PI; one of them with two hormonal deficits. Growth hormone
deficit, hypothyroidism and hypocortisolism were found in one, one and two
patients, respectively. Neuropsychological complaints were present in 67% of the 
patients and were associated with intracerebral hemorrhagic lesions and not PI.
Neuropsychological complaints after TBI are more frequent than PI. Brain tissue
damage is most important than PI in the development of psychological changes
after TBI.

PMID: 19097906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Sleep. 2008 Dec;31(12):1673-82.

EEG spectral analysis in primary insomnia: NREM period effects and sex
differences.

Buysse DJ(1), Germain A, Hall ML, Moul DE, Nofzinger EA, Begley A, Ehlers CL,
Thompson W, Kupfer DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Clinical and Translational Research Center and Sleep Medicine
Institute, University ofPittsburgh School ofMedicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
buyssedj@upmc.edu

STUDY OBJECTIVES: To compare NREM EEG power in primary insomnia (PI) and good
sleeper controls (GSC), examining both sex and NREM period effects; to examine
relationships between EEG power, clinical characteristics, and self-reports of
sleep.
DESIGN: Overnight polysomnographic study.
SETTING: Sleep laboratory.
PARTICIPANTS: PI (n=48; 29 women) and GSC (n=25; 15 women).
INTERVENTIONS: None.
MEASUREMENTS: EEG power from 1-50 Hz was computed for artifact-free sleep epochs 
across four NREM periods. Repeated measures mixed effect models contrasted
differences between groups, EEG frequency bands, and NREM periods. EEG
power-frequency curves were modeled using regressions with fixed knot splines.
RESULTS: Mixed models showed no significant group (PI vs. GSC) differences;
marginal sex differences (delta and theta bands); significant differences across 
NREM periods; and group*sex and group*NREM period interactions, particularly in
beta and gamma bands. Modeled power-frequency curves showed no group difference
in whole-night NREM, but PI had higher power than GSC from 18-40 Hz in the first 
NREM period. Among women, PI had higher 16 to 44-Hz power than GSC in the first 3
NREM periods, and higher 3 to 5-Hz power across all NREM periods. PI and GSC men 
showed no consistent differences in EEG power. High-frequency EEG power was not
related to clinical or subjective sleep ratings in PI.
CONCLUSIONS: Women with PI, but not men, showed increased high-frequency and
low-frequency EEG activity during NREM sleep compared to GSC, particularly in
early NREM periods. Sex and NREM period may moderate quantitative EEG differences
between PI and GSC.

PMCID: PMC2603490
PMID: 19090323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Neurosurgery. 2008 Dec;63(6):1022-33; discussion 1033-4. doi:
10.1227/01.NEU.0000335792.85142.B0.

A comparison between stem cells from the adult human brain and from brain tumors.

Varghese M(1), Olstorn H, Sandberg C, Vik-Mo EO, Noordhuis P, Nistér M,
Berg-Johnsen J, Moe MC, Langmoen IA.

Author information: 
(1)Vilhelm Magnus Laboratory, Institute for Surgical Research, University of
Oslo, Oslo, Norway. mercy.varghese@medisin.uio.no

OBJECTIVE: To directly compare stem cells from the normal adult human brain
(adult human neural stem cells [AHNSC]), Grade II astrocytomas (AC II), and
glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), with respect to proliferative and tumor-forming
capacity and differentiation potential.
METHODS: Cells were isolated from tissue obtained during epilepsy surgery
(AHNSCs) or tumor surgery (glioma stem cells [GSC]). They were cultured and
investigated in vitro or after transplantation in immunodeficient mice.
RESULTS: Under identical experimental conditions, the following were found: 1)
GBM stem cells formed tumors after orthotopic transplantation; AHNSCs showed no
sign of tumor formation; 2) GSCs showed a significantly higher growth rate and
self-renewal capacity; 3) both the growth rate and telomerase expression were
high in GSCs and correlated with malignancy grade (GBM higher than AC II); AHNSCs
had low telomerase expression; 4) GSCs invaded normal neurospheres, not vice
versa; 5) both AHNSCs and stem cells from AC II and GBM responded to
differentiation cues with a dramatic decrease in the proliferation index (Ki-67);
6) GSCs differentiated faster than AHNSCs; 7) upon differentiation, AHNSCs
produced normal glia and neurons; GSCs produced morphologically aberrant cells
often expressing both glial and neuronal antigens; and 8) differentiation of
AHNSCs resulted in 2 typical functional phenotypes: neurons (high electrical
membrane resistance, ability to generate action potentials) and glial cells (low 
membrane resistance, no action potentials). In contrast, GSCs resulted in only 1 
functional phenotype: cells with high electrical resistance and active membrane
properties capable of generating action potentials.
CONCLUSION: AHNSCs and stem cells from AC II and GBM differ with respect to
proliferation, tumor-forming capacity, and rate and pattern of differentiation.

PMID: 19057315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Trop Anim Health Prod. 2009 Jan;41(1):85-93. doi: 10.1007/s11250-008-9159-9. Epub
2008 Mar 30.

Chemical composition and some anti-nutrient content of raw and processed bitter
vetch (Vicia ervilia) seed for use as feeding stuff in poultry diet.

Sadeghi G(1), Pourreza J, Samei A, Rahmani H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, College of Argiculture, University of
Kurdistan, Kurdistan, Iran. ghorbanalis@yahoo.com

An experiment was conducted to determine chemical composition of raw and treated 
bitter vetch seed for use in poultry diets. Processing methods were: soaked in
water for 12 h, then autoclaved and dried (SA); coarsely ground, soaked in water 
for 24 h, autoclaved and dried (GSA); coarsely ground, soaked in water for 47 h
with exchange of water every 12 h, cooked and dried (GSC); coarsely ground,
soaked in solution of 1% acetic acid for 24 h at 60 degrees C and dried (GAA).
Raw bitter vetch seed was contained 94.52, 26.56, 0.4, 58.86, 3.38, 5.32, 12.28
and 14.20 percent DM, CP, EE, NFE, Ash, CF, ADF and NDF, respectively. Its GE,
AME, AMEn, TME and TMEn values were 18.10, 13.15, 14.38, 14.10 and 14.69 MJ/kg,
respectively. Results indicated that bitter vetch is a good source of Fe (340
ppm) and Cu (46.7 ppm). It s amino acid profile was suitable and methionine was
the first limiting amino acid when compared with broiler and layer chicks
requirements. Its canavanine and tannin content were 0.78 and 6.7 mg/kgDM,
respectively. Processing methods improved CP and in some cases AMEn. All
processing methods especially GSC resulted in a significant (P < 0.05) reduction 
in canavanine and tannin.

PMID: 19052906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Ann Anat. 2009 Jan;191(1):13-22. doi: 10.1016/j.aanat.2008.09.003. Epub 2008 Oct 
22.

Automated microscopic quantification of adipogenic differentiation of human gland
stem cells.

Gorjup E(1), Peter L, Wien S, von Briesen H, Schmitt D.

Author information: 
(1)Fraunhofer Institute for Biomedical Engineering, Ensheimer Str. 48, D-66386
St. Ingbert, Germany.

Detection of differentiation in general and adipogenesis specifically is
conventionally practised by taking only the few cells into account which are
visible in the field of view provided by optical microscopy using high-resolution
objectives. Other methods of quantification of adipogenic differentiation such as
real time PCR, measurement of glycerophosphate dehydrogenase activity or
adipogenesis assays only provide integral information lacking spatial resolution 
and information on the fraction of differentiated cells. Here we used
high-resolution scanning and automated image processing to automatically analyze 
and quantify cell numbers in the range of 20,000. For optimisation of the
approach, human gland stem cells (GSC) were differentiated to the adipogenic
phenotype comprising inclusion of lipid vesicles. Oil red O and
4',6'-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) staining made it possible to derive the
number of differentiated cells in relation to the total number of cells. For
evaluation of the image processing software we verified our results using
adipogenesis assay and phase contrast based cell counting. We developed a method 
of determining differentiation efficiencies covering the range from 10% down to
100ppm with the same image processing and an identical set of parameters,
matching the results of the adipogenesis assay. Our approach is based on a
statistically significant number of cells and shows high sensitivity taking into 
account the heterogeneous differentiation pattern of adipogenesis in GSC and
other stem cells.

PMID: 19046627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. J Chem Phys. 2008 Oct 21;129(15):154908. doi: 10.1063/1.2993136.

Dynamics of a stretched nonlinear polymer chain.

Febbo M(1), Milchev A, Rostiashvili V, Dimitrov D, Vilgis TA.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research, Ackermannweg 10, D-55128 Mainz,
Germany. mfebbo@uns.edu.ar

We study the relaxation dynamics of a coarse-grained polymer chain at different
degrees of stretching by both analytical means and numerical simulations. The
macromolecule is modeled as a string of beads, connected by anharmonic springs,
subject to a tensile force applied at the end monomer of the chain while the
other end is fixed at the origin of coordinates. The impact of bond nonlinearity 
on the relaxation dynamics of the polymer at different degrees of stretching is
treated analytically within the Gaussian self-consistent (GSC) approach and then 
compared to simulation results derived from two different methods: Monte Carlo
(MC) and Molecular Dynamics (MD). At low and medium degrees of chain elongation
we find good agreement between GSC predictions and the MC simulations. However,
for strongly stretched chains, the MD method, which takes into account inertial
effects, reveals two important aspects of the nonlinear interaction between
monomers: (i) a coupling and energy transfer between the damped, oscillatory
normal modes of the chain and (ii) the appearance of nonvanishing contributions
of a continuum of frequencies around the characteristic modes in the power
spectrum of the normal mode correlation functions.

PMID: 19045230  [PubMed]


260. Stem Cells. 2009 Feb;27(2):363-74. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2008-1008.

Enforced expression of Mixl1 during mouse ES cell differentiation suppresses
hematopoietic mesoderm and promotes endoderm formation.

Lim SM(1), Pereira L, Wong MS, Hirst CE, Van Vranken BE, Pick M, Trounson A,
Elefanty AG, Stanley EG.

Author information: 
(1)Monash Immunology and Stem Cell Laboratories, Monash University, Clayton,
Victoria, Australia.

The Mixl1 gene encodes a homeodomain transcription factor that is required for
normal mesoderm and endoderm development in the mouse. We have examined the
consequences of enforced Mixl1 expression during mouse embryonic stem cell (ESC) 
differentiation. We show that three independently derived ESC lines
constitutively expressing Mixl1 (Mixl1(C) ESCs) differentiate into embryoid
bodies (EBs) containing a higher proportion of E-cadherin (E-Cad)(+) cells. Our
analysis also shows that this differentiation occurs at the expense of
hematopoietic mesoderm differentiation, with Mixl1(C) ESCs expressing only low
levels of Flk1 and failing to develop hemoglobinized cells. Immunohistochemistry 
and immunofluorescence studies revealed that Mixl1(C) EBs have extensive areas
containing cells with an epithelial morphology that express E-Cad, FoxA2, and
Sox17, consistent with enhanced endoderm formation. Luciferase reporter
transfection experiments indicate that Mixl1 can transactivate the Gsc, Sox17,
and E-Cad promoters, supporting the hypothesis that Mixl1 has a direct role in
definitive endoderm formation. Taken together, these studies suggest that high
levels of Mixl1 preferentially allocate cells to the endoderm during ESC
differentiation.

PMID: 19038793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 2008;73:39-47. doi: 10.1101/sqb.2008.73.014.
Epub 2008 Nov 6.

Interactions between stem cells and their niche in the Drosophila ovary.

Xie T(1), Song X, Jin Z, Pan L, Weng C, Chen S, Zhang N.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, Missouri 64110, USA.

The Drosophila ovary contains at least three types of active stem cells, namely, 
germ-line stem cells (GSCs), escort stem cells (ESCs), and follicular stem cells 
(FSCs), which work together to efficiently assemble egg chambers. Among the three
stem cell types, the GSC is among the first shown to be controlled by the niche
due to its easy identification and welldefined surrounding cells. We have shown
that the niche controls GSC self-renewal, anchorage, aging, and competition, and 
the GSC also signals back to the niche for its maintenance. The FSC is an
attractive model for studying epithelial stem cell regulation and signal
integration because we have shown that it resembles mammalian epithelial stem
cells and requires multiple signaling pathways for its self-renewal. In this
chapter, we have highlighted the findings of our studies on interactions between 
Drosophila ovarian stem cells and their niches during normal development and
aging and on stem cell competition for niche occupancy. We further discuss their 
implications in general stem cell biology and future directions in this exciting 
area.

PMID: 19022749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Neurology. 2008 Nov 18;71(21):1683-90. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000335160.72184.7d.

GM1/GalNAc-GD1a complex: a target for pure motor Guillain-Barre syndrome.

Kaida K(1), Sonoo M, Ogawa G, Kamakura K, Ueda-Sada M, Arita M, Motoyoshi K,
Kusunoki S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurology, Department of Internal Medicine 3, National Defense
Medical College, Saitama-ken, Japan.

BACKGROUND: GM1 and GalNAc-GD1a are located on the axolemma of the motor nerves
and are believed to be the antigens associated with pure motor Guillain-Barré
syndrome (GBS). Furthermore, GM1 and GalNAc-GD1a may exist nearby and colocalize 
on the axolemma. Ganglioside complex (GSC) antigens associated with GM1 or
GalNAc-GD1a can be target antigens in pure motor GBS. We investigated GBS sera
for antibodies to a GSC consisting of GM1 and GalNAc-GD1a (GM1/GalNAc-GD1a) and
analyzed the clinical and electrophysiologic findings of patients with antibodies
to GM1/GalNAc-GD1a.
METHODS: Sera from 224 patients with GBS were surveyed for antibodies to GSCs
consisting of two of nine gangliosides (GM1, GM2, GM3, GD1a, GD3, GT1a, GT1b,
GQ1b, and GalNAc-GD1a). We analyzed the clinical and electrophysiologic features 
of patients with IgG antibodies to the GM1/GalNAc-GD1a complex.
RESULTS: Ten patients with GBS had IgG antibodies to the GM1/GalNAc-GD1a complex.
The clinical findings of the 10 patients with GBS were characterized by preserved
sensory system and infrequent cranial nerve deficits. According to the criteria
established by Hadden et al., electrodiagnostic studies showed a demyelinating
pattern in four patients and axonal neuropathy pattern in two. Early motor
conduction block at intermediate nerve segments was found in five patients.
CONCLUSIONS: GM1 and GalNAc-GD1a may form a complex in the axolemma at nodes of
Ranvier or paranodes of the motor nerves, and may be a target antigen in pure
motor Guillain-Barré syndrome, especially in the form of acute motor conduction
block neuropathy.

PMID: 19015484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Science. 2008 Nov 7;322(5903):957-60. doi: 10.1126/science.1162011.

Fat metabolism links germline stem cells and longevity in C. elegans.

Wang MC(1), O'Rourke EJ, Ruvkun G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, and
Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2008 Nov 7;322(5903):865-6.

Fat metabolism, reproduction, and aging are intertwined regulatory axes; however,
the mechanism by which they are coupled remains poorly understood. We found that 
germline stem cells (GSCs) actively modulate lipid hydrolysis in Caenorhabditis
elegans, which in turn regulates longevity. GSC arrest promotes systemic
lipolysis via induction of a specific fat lipase. Subsequently, fat mobilization 
is promoted and life span is prolonged. Constitutive expression of this lipase in
fat storage tissue generates lean and long-lived animals. This lipase is a key
factor in the lipid hydrolysis and increased longevity that are induced by
decreased insulin signaling. These results suggest a link between C. elegans fat 
metabolism and longevity.

PMCID: PMC2760269
PMID: 18988854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Talanta. 1998 May;46(1):45-51.

Gas chromatographic characteristics and application studies of the stationary
phase of CH-B-15-C-5.

Xiaotian Q(1), Zaide Z, Minggui X, Yongchang Z, Ying T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, North Sichuan Medical College, Nanchong 637000,
People's Republic of China.

In this paper, separations of organic compounds, such as, n-alkanes, alcohols,
ethyl asters of C(1)-C(8) carboxylic acid, halogen derivatives, position-isomers 
of the replacement aromatic hydrocarbon, optical isomers of ethyl lactate and
isoamyl alcohol, etc. were studied using 4'-cholestenoxycarbonyl-benzo-15-crown-5
liquid crystal crown ether (CH-B-15-C-5) as stationary phase in gas-solid
chromatography (GSC), general gas-liquid chromatography (GLC) and crown ether
liquid crystal gas-liquid chromatography (CL-GLC). Also, the chromatographic
characteristics, such as the chemical stability, thermal stability, selectivity, 
polarity and operating temperature range, of the CH-B-15-C-5 as stationary phase 
for GSC, GLC and CL-GLC systems were studied. The results showed that the
polarity of this chromatographic column is mean-weak; the chemical and thermal
stabilities and the selectivity are good and the operating temperature range is
wide. The results of separations of organic compounds are satisfactory.

PMID: 18967126  [PubMed]


265. Mamm Genome. 2008 Oct-Dec;19(10-12):667-74. doi: 10.1007/s00335-008-9146-5. Epub 
2008 Oct 29.

An epigenetic aberration increased in intergenic regions of cloned mice.

Nishida H(1), Kondo S, Suzuki T, Tsujimura Y, Komatsu S, Wakayama T, Hayashizaki 
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center (GSC),
Yokohama, Japan. hnishida@iu.a.u-tokyo.ac.jp

The causes of frequent abnormal phenotypes and low success rate in mammalian
cloning are poorly understood. Although epigenetic aberration is suspected to be 
a cause, its connection to the phenotypes has yet to be investigated. To measure 
the level of reprogramming of an epigenetic mark, acetylation at lysine 9 of
histone H3 (H3K9Ac), in cloned mice, we examined its conservation between two
cloned mice derived from distinct cell nuclei and their natural donors by
utilizing whole-genome tiling arrays and quantitative PCR. Pairwise comparison of
the H3K9Ac enrichment profile between the four mice revealed that H3K9Ac is less 
conserved in intergenic regions than in promoter regions of protein-coding genes.
Intriguingly, the variation of H3K9Ac enrichment in intergenic regions is the
most prominent in comparison of the two clones, possibly reflecting an additive
effect of aberrant reprogramming of this epigenetic information occurring
specifically in each of the two clones.

PMID: 18958525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. BMC Res Notes. 2008 Oct 28;1:95. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-1-95.

Identification and classification of genes regulated by phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase- and TRKB-mediated signalling pathways during neuronal differentiation
in two subtypes of the human neuroblastoma cell line SH-SY5Y.

Nishida Y(1), Adati N, Ozawa R, Maeda A, Sakaki Y, Takeda T.

Author information: 
(1)Computational and Experimental Systems Biology Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences
Centre, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.
ynishida@gsc.riken.jp

BACKGROUND: SH-SY5Y cells exhibit a neuronal phenotype when treated with
all-trans retinoic acid (RA), but the molecular mechanism of activation in the
signalling pathway mediated by phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) is unclear.
To investigate this mechanism, we compared the gene expression profiles in
SK-N-SH cells and two subtypes of SH-SY5Y cells (SH-SY5Y-A and SH-SY5Y-E), each
of which show a different phenotype during RA-mediated differentiation.
FINDINGS: SH-SY5Y-A cells differentiated in the presence of RA, whereas
RA-treated SH-SY5Y-E cells required additional treatment with brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) for full differentiation. After exposing cells to a
PI3K inhibitor, LY294002, we identified 386 genes and categorised these genes
into two clusters dependent on the PI3K signalling pathway during RA-mediated
differentiation in SH-SY5Y-A cells. Transcriptional regulation of the gene
cluster, including 158 neural genes, was greatly reduced in SK-N-SH cells and
partially impaired in SH-SY5Y-E cells, which is consistent with a defect in the
neuronal phenotype of these cells. Additional stimulation with BDNF induced a set
of neural genes that were down-regulated in RA-treated SH-SY5Y-E cells but were
abundant in differentiated SH-SY5Y-A cells.
CONCLUSION: We identified gene clusters controlled by PI3K- and TRKB-mediated
signalling pathways during the differentiation of two subtypes of SH-SY5Y cells. 
The TRKB-mediated bypass pathway compensates for impaired neural function
generated by defects in several signalling pathways, including PI3K in SH-SY5Y-E 
cells. Our expression profiling data will be useful for further elucidation of
the signal transduction-transcriptional network involving PI3K or TRKB.

PMCID: PMC2615028
PMID: 18957096  [PubMed]


267. J Bioinform Comput Biol. 2008 Oct;6(5):905-17.

Objective evaluation measures of genetic marker selection in large-scale SNP
genotyping.

Kaminuma E(1), Masuya H, Miura I, Motegi H, Takahasi KR, Nakazawa M, Matsui M,
Gondo Y, Noda T, Shiroishi T, Wakana S, Toyoda T.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics and Systems Engineering Division, RIKEN Yokohama Institute,
1-7-22, Suehiro, Tsurumi, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. eli@gsc.riken.jp

High-throughput single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotyping systems provide
two kinds of fluorescent signals detected from different alleles. In current
technologies, the process of genotype discrimination requires subjective
judgments by expert operators, even when using clustering algorithms. Here, we
propose two evaluation measures to manage fluorescent scatter data with nonclear 
plot aggregation. The first is the marker ranking measure, which provides a
ranking system for the SNP markers based on the distance between the scatter plot
distribution and a user-defined ideal distribution. The second measure, called
individual genotype membership, uses the membership probability of each genotype 
related to an individual plot in the scatter data. In verification experiments,
the marker ranking measure determined the ranking of SNP markers correlated with 
the subjective order of SNP markers judged by an expert operator. The experiment 
using the individual genotype membership measure clarified that the total number 
of unclassified individuals was remarkably reduced compared to that of manually
unclassified ones. These two evaluation measures were implemented as the GTAssist
software. GTAssist provides objective standards and avoids subjective biases in
SNP genotyping workflows.

PMID: 18942158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. BMC Cancer. 2008 Oct 22;8:304. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-8-304.

Glioma stem cells are more aggressive in recurrent tumors with malignant
progression than in the primary tumor, and both can be maintained long-term in
vitro.

Huang Q(1), Zhang QB, Dong J, Wu YY, Shen YT, Zhao YD, Zhu YD, Diao Y, Wang AD,
Lan Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery and Brain Tumor Research Laboratory, Second
Affiliated Hospital of Suzhou University, Suzhou 215004, PR China.
hq1936@yahoo.com.cn

BACKGROUND: Despite the advances made during decades of research, the mechanisms 
by which glioma is initiated and established remain elusive. The discovery of
glioma stem cells (GSCs) may help to elucidate the processes of gliomagenesis
with respect to their phenotype, differentiation and tumorigenic capacity during 
initiation and progression. Research on GSCs is still in its infancy, so no
definitive conclusions about their role can yet be drawn. To understand the
biology of GSCs fully, it is highly desirable to establish permanent and
biologically stable GSC lines.
METHODS: In the current study, GSCs were isolated from surgical specimens of
primary and recurrent glioma in a patient whose malignancy had progressed during 
the previous six months. The GSCs were cryopreserved and resuscitated
periodically during long-term maintenance to establish glioma stem/progenitor
cell (GSPC) lines, which were characterized by immunofluorescence, flow cytometry
and transmission electronic microscopy. The primary and recurrent GSPC lines were
also compared in terms of in vivo tumorigenicity and invasiveness. Molecular
genetic differences between the two lines were identified by array-based
comparative genomic hybridization and further validated by real-time PCR.
RESULTS: Two GSPC lines, SU-1 (primary) and SU-2 (recurrent), were maintained in 
vitro for more than 44 months and 38 months respectively. Generally, the
potentials for proliferation, self-renewal and multi-differentiation remained
relatively stable even after a prolonged series of alternating episodes of
cryopreservation and resuscitation. Intracranial transplantation of SU-1 cells
produced relatively less invasive tumor mass in athymic nude mice, while SU-2
cells led to much more diffuse and aggressive lesions strikingly recapitulated
their original tumors. Neither SU-1 nor SU-2 cells reached the terminal
differentiation stage under conditions that would induce terminal differentiation
in neural stem cells. The differentiation of most of the tumor cells seemed to be
blocked at the progenitor cell phase: most of them expressed nestin but only a
few co-expressed differentiation markers. Transmission electron microscopy showed
that GSCs were at a primitive stage of differentiation with low autophagic
activity. Array-based comparative genomic hybridization revealed genetic
alterations common to both SU-1 and SU-2, including amplification of the oncogene
EGFR and deletion of the tumor suppressor PTEN, while some genetic alterations
such as amplification of MTA1 (metastasis associated gene 1) only occurred in
SU-2.
CONCLUSION: The GSPC lines SU-1 and SU-2 faithfully retained the characteristics 
of their original tumors and provide a reliable resource for investigating the
mechanisms of formation and recurrence of human gliomas with progressive
malignancy. Such investigations may eventually have major impacts on the
understanding and treatment of gliomas.

PMCID: PMC2584338
PMID: 18940013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. J Biol Chem. 2008 Dec 5;283(49):34168-77. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M803532200. Epub 2008 
Oct 15.

Oct25 represses transcription of nodal/activin target genes by interaction with
signal transducers during Xenopus gastrulation.

Cao Y(1), Siegel D, Oswald F, Knöchel W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.

The balance between differentiation signals and signals maintaining the
undifferentiated state of embryonic cells ensures proper formation of germ
layers. The nodal/activin pathway represents one of the major signaling chains
responsible for the differentiation of embryonic cells into mesodermal and
endodermal germ layers, while Oct4 is one of the major players in the maintenance
of an undifferentiated state. Here we show that Oct25, an Oct4 homologue in
Xenopus, antagonizes the activity of nodal/activin signaling by inhibiting the
transcription of its target genes, Gsc and Mix2. The inhibitory effect is
achieved by forming repression complexes on the promoters of Gsc and Mix2 between
Oct25 and the signal transducers of the nodal/activin pathway, WBSCR11, FAST1,
and Smad2. We have analyzed the significance of the Oct binding site for its
inhibitory effect within the Gsc promoter. Albeit VP16-Oct25 fusion protein
demonstrated a stimulating effect and EVE-Oct25 revealed a repression effect on
an artificial reporter that is composed of eight repeats of Oct binding motifs,
both fusions, like wild-type Oct25, inhibited mesendoderm formation and the
activity of Gsc and Mix2 promoters. These results suggest that the regulatory
effect of Oct25 on the expression of Gsc and Mix2 is mediated by specific
protein/protein interactions. Furthermore, we demonstrate that histone
deacetylase activities are not required for the inhibitory effect of Oct25. Our
results provide a novel view in that Oct25 controls the nodal/activin pathway and
thus maintains the undifferentiated state of embryonic cells in preventing them
from premature differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2662234
PMID: 18922797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Oct 21;105(42):16061-2. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0809225105. Epub 2008 Oct 15.

Why Earth became so hot 50 million years ago and why it then cooled.

Irving E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Natural Resources, Geological Survey of Canada, P. O. Box 6000, 
North Saanich, BC, Canada. tirving@pgc-gsc.nrcan.gc.ca

Comment on
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Oct 21;105(42):16065-70.

PMCID: PMC2570997
PMID: 18922768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Fly (Austin). 2007 Sep-Oct;1(5):303-4. Epub 2007 Sep 5.

The Genetics Society of Canada takes a flight with Drosophila to celebrate its
50th year.

Lasko P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
Paul.Lasko@mcgill.ca

The Genetics Society of Canada (GSC) held its 50th Anniversary Celebration June
18-21, 2007 in the New Residence Hall of McGill University in Montreal in
conjunction with the 9(th) Canadian Drosophila Research Conference (CanFly),
which is held in odd-numbered years. The meeting was a huge success with nearly
200 participants, and outstanding research presentations from all parts of Canada
and beyond. The Canadian Drosophila research community is very vibrant: there are
approximately 50 research labs in the country that work entirely or mostly in the
Drosophila system, and a search of FlyBase for Canadian addresses yields a total 
of 248.

PMID: 18836310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. BMC Syst Biol. 2008 Sep 22;2:81. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-2-81.

Employing conservation of co-expression to improve functional inference.

Daub CO(1), Sonnhammer EL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, 171 77
Stockholm, Sweden. daub@gsc.riken.jp

BACKGROUND: Observing co-expression between genes suggests that they are
functionally coupled. Co-expression of orthologous gene pairs across species may 
improve function prediction beyond the level achieved in a single species.
RESULTS: We used orthology between genes of the three different species S.
cerevisiae, D. melanogaster, and C. elegans to combine co-expression across two
species at a time. This led to increased function prediction accuracy when we
incorporated expression data from either of the other two species and even
further increased when conservation across both of the two other species was
considered at the same time. Employing the conservation across species to
incorporate abundant model organism data for the prediction of protein
interactions in poorly characterized species constitutes a very powerful
annotation method.
CONCLUSION: To be able to employ the most suitable co-expression distance measure
for our analysis, we evaluated the ability of four popular gene co-expression
distance measures to detect biologically relevant interactions between pairs of
genes. For the expression datasets employed in our co-expression conservation
analysis above, we used the GO and the KEGG PATHWAY databases as gold standards. 
While the differences between distance measures were small, Spearman correlation 
showed to give most robust results.

PMCID: PMC2561017
PMID: 18808668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Cell Biol. 2008 Sep 8;182(5):963-77. doi: 10.1083/jcb.200711046. Epub 2008 Sep 
1.

RanBPM regulates cell shape, arrangement, and capacity of the female germline
stem cell niche in Drosophila melanogaster.

Dansereau DA(1), Lasko P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Experiments in cultured cells with Ran-binding protein M (RanBPM) suggest that it
links cell surface receptors and cell adhesion proteins. In this study, we
undertake a genetic study of RanBPM function in the germline stem cell (GSC)
niche of Drosophila melanogaster ovaries. We find that two RanBPM isoforms are
produced from alternatively spliced transcripts, the longer of which is
specifically enriched in the GSC niche, a cluster of somatic cells that
physically anchors GSCs and expresses signals that maintain GSC fate. Loss of the
long isoform from the niche causes defects in niche organization and cell size
and increases the number of GSCs attached to the niche. In genetic mosaics for a 
null RanBPM allele, we find a strong bias for GSC attachment to mutant cap cells 
and observe abnormal accumulation of the adherens junction component Armadillo
(beta-catenin) and the membrane skeletal protein Hu-li tai shao in mutant
terminal filament cells. These results implicate RanBPM in the regulation of
niche capacity and adhesion.

PMCID: PMC2528568
PMID: 18762575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. J Mol Biol. 2008 Oct 31;383(1):10-23. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.08.004. Epub 2008
Aug 7.

DNA wrapping and distortion by an oligomeric homeodomain protein.

Williams H(1), Jayaraman PS, Gaston K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medical Sciences, University of Bristol,
Bristol, UK.

Many transcription factors alter DNA or chromatin structure. Changes in chromatin
structure are often brought about by the recruitment of chromatin-binding
proteins, chromatin-modifying proteins, or other transcription co-activator or
co-repressor proteins. However, some transcription factors form oligomeric
assemblies that may themselves induce changes in DNA conformation and chromatin
structure. The proline-rich homeodomain (PRH/Hex) protein is a transcription
factor that regulates cell differentiation and cell proliferation, and has
multiple roles in embryonic development. Earlier, we showed that PRH can repress 
transcription by multiple mechanisms, including the recruitment of co-repressor
proteins belonging to the TLE family of chromatin-binding proteins. Our in vivo
crosslinking studies have shown that PRH forms oligomeric complexes in cells and 
a variety of biophysical techniques suggest that the protein forms octamers.
However, as yet we have little knowledge of the role played by PRH
oligomerisation in the regulation of promoter activity or of the architecture of 
promoters that are regulated directly by PRH in cells. Here, we compare the
binding of PRH and the isolated PRH homeodomain to DNA fragments with single and 
multiple PRH sites, using gel retardation assays and DNase I and chemical
footprinting. We show that the PRH oligomer binds to multiple sites within the
human Goosecoid promoter with high affinity and that the binding of PRH brings
about DNA distortion. We suggest that PRH octamers wrap DNA in order to bring
about transcriptional repression.

PMID: 18755198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. J Cell Biochem. 2008 Oct 15;105(3):801-13. doi: 10.1002/jcb.21883.

Regulatory expression of Brachyury and Goosecoid in P19 embryonal carcinoma
cells.

Nakaya K(1), Murakami M, Funaba M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Azabu University School of Veterinary
Medicine, Sagamihara 229-8501, Japan.

Mouse P19 embryonal carcinoma cells can differentiate into various cell types
depending on culture conditions. Here we show that the expression of the
mesodermal genes Brachyury (Bra) and Goosecoid (Gsc) are under regulatory control
in P19 cells. When P19 cells were cultured in a tissue culture dish in the
presence of serum, Bra and Gsc were unexpectedly expressed. Expression of Bra and
Gsc was greatly reduced with culture time, and expression levels at 144 h of
culture were below 25% those at 48 h of culture. Members of the Tgf-beta family
such as Activin and Nodal have been known to up-regulate expression of mesodermal
genes. Treatment with SB431542, an Alk4/5/7 inhibitor, decreased Bra and Gsc in a
dose-dependent manner, whereas it induced the expression of the neuroectodermal
genes Mash-1 and Pax-6. Quantitative RT-PCR and dsRNAi transfection indicated
Nodal as a possible ligand responsible for the regulation of Bra and Gsc. In
addition, exogenous Nodal increased expression of Bra and Gsc in a dose-dependent
manner. Serum concentration in culture medium positively related to expression of
Nodal, Bra, Gsc, and Cripto, which encodes a membrane-tethered protein required
for Nodal signaling. Addition of the culture supernatant of P19 cells at 144 h of
culture to medium decreased expression of these genes. The present study reveals 
that stimulation and inhibition of the Nodal pathway increases mesodermal genes
and neuroectodermal genes, respectively, indicating the importance of control of 
Nodal and Cripto expression for mesodermal formation and neurogenesis.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18729134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Dev Biol. 2008 Oct 15;322(2):425-34. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.07.036. Epub 2008 
Aug 7.

The surprising complexity of the transcriptional regulation of the spdri gene
reveals the existence of new linkages inside sea urchin's PMC and Oral Ectoderm
Gene Regulatory Networks.

Mahmud AA(1), Amore G.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Evolution Group, Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn, Napoli, Villa
Comunale Napoli, Italy.

During sea urchin embryogenesis the spdri gene participates in two separate Gene 
Regulatory Networks (GRNs): the Primary Mesenchyme Cells' (PMCs) and the Oral
Ectoderm's one. In both cases, activation of the gene follows initial
specification events [Amore, G., Yavrouian, R., Peterson, K., Ransick, A.,
McClay, D., Davidson, E., 2003. Spdeadringer, a sea urchin embryo gene required
separately in skeletogenic and oral ectoderm gene regulatory networks. Dev. Biol.
261, 55-81.]. We identified a portion of genomic DNA ("4.7IL" -3456;+389) which
is sufficient to replicate sdpri's expression pattern in experiments of
transgenesis, using a GFP reporter. In our experiments, the activation kinetic of
4.7IL-GFP was similar to that of the endogenous gene and the reporter responded
to known spdri's transcriptional regulators (Ets1, Alx1, Gsc and Dri). Here we
present a dissection of this regulatory region and a description of the modules
involved in spdri's transcriptional regulation. Both in the PMCs' and Oral
Ectoderm's expression phases, activation of spdri is obtained through the
integration of three kinds of inputs: positive and globally distributed ones;
negative ones (that prevent ectopic expression); positive and tissue-specific
ones. Our results allow to expand the map of the regulatory connections at the
spdri node, both in the PMCs and in the Oral Ectoderm Gene Regulatory Networks
(GRNs).

PMID: 18718463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Natl Med Assoc. 2008 Jun;100(6):737-9.

Metastatic gastric stump cancer occurring six years after a partial gastrectomy
for gastric ulcer.

Laiyemo AO(1), Smoot DT.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Prevention Fellowship Program, Biometry Research Group, Division of
Cancer Prevention, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
laiyemoa@mail.nih.gov

Gastric stump cancer (GSC) is known to occur following partial gastrectomy for
benign diseases. The risk is believed to increase four-to-five-fold 20 years
after gastrectomy. We report a 41-year-old man with metastatic adenocarcinoma of 
the gastric stump six years after he underwent a partial gastrectomy for a
gastric ulcer, following a major rebleeding episode. We highlight the need for
identification of patients at risk of developing gastric stump cancer-especially 
as it has now been described in patients who underwent gastric bypass surgery for
obesity-a population that continues to increase.

PMID: 18595579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Cell Stem Cell. 2008 Jul 3;3(1):44-54. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2008.05.001.

Zfh-1 controls somatic stem cell self-renewal in the Drosophila testis and
nonautonomously influences germline stem cell self-renewal.

Leatherman JL(1), Dinardo S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The ability of adult stem cells to maintain their undifferentiated state depends 
upon residence in their niche. While simple models of a single self-renewal
signal are attractive, niche-stem cell interactions are likely to be more
complex. Many niches have multiple cell types, and the Drosophila testis is one
such complex niche with two stem cell types, germline stem cells (GSCs) and
somatic cyst progenitor cells (CPCs). These stem cells require chemokine
activation of Jak/STAT signaling for self-renewal. We identified the
transcriptional repressor Zfh-1 as a presumptive somatic target of Jak/STAT
signaling, demonstrating that it is necessary and sufficient to maintain CPCs.
Surprisingly, sustained zfh-1 expression or intrinsic STAT activation in somatic 
cells caused neighboring germ cells to self-renew outside their niche. In
contrast, germline-intrinsic STAT activation was insufficient for GSC renewal.
These data reveal unexpected complexity in cell interactions in the niche,
implicating CPCs in GSC self-renewal.

PMCID: PMC2601693
PMID: 18593558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Dev Biol. 2008 Aug 1;320(1):19-29. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.03.045. Epub 2008
Apr 15.

TGF-beta type I receptor Alk5 regulates tooth initiation and mandible patterning 
in a type II receptor-independent manner.

Zhao H(1), Oka K, Bringas P, Kaartinen V, Chai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Craniofacial Molecular Biology, School of Dentistry, University of 
Southern California, 2250 Alcazar Street, CSA 103, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

TGF-beta superfamily members signal through a heteromeric receptor complex to
regulate craniofacial development. TGF-beta type II receptor appears to bind only
TGF-beta, whereas TGF-beta type I receptor (ALK5) also binds to ligands in
addition to TGF-beta. Our previous work has shown that conditional inactivation
of Tgfbr2 in the neural crest cells of mice leads to severe craniofacial bone
defects. In this study, we examine and compare the defects of TGF-beta type II
receptor (Wnt1-Cre;Tgfbr2(fl/fl)) and TGF-beta type I receptor/Alk5
(Wnt1-Cre;Alk5(fl)(/fl)) conditional knockout mice. Loss of Alk5 in the neural
crest tissue resulted in phenotypes not seen in the Tgfbr2 mutant, including
delayed tooth initiation and development, defects in early mandible patterning
and altered expression of key patterning genes including Msx1, Bmp4, Bmp2, Pax9, 
Alx4, Lhx6/7 and Gsc. Alk5 controls the survival of CNC cells by regulating
expression of Gsc and other genes in the proximal aboral region of the developing
mandible. We conclude that ALK5 regulates tooth initiation and early mandible
patterning through a pathway independent of Tgfbr2. There is an intrinsic
requirement for Alk5 signal in regulating the fate of CNC cells during tooth and 
mandible development.

PMCID: PMC3629921
PMID: 18572160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. OMICS. 2008 Jun;12(2):157-60. doi: 10.1089/omi.2008.A2B2.

Toward a standards-compliant genomic and metagenomic publication record.

Garrity GM(1), Field D, Kyrpides N, Hirschman L, Sansone SA, Angiuoli S, Cole JR,
Glöckner FO, Kolker E, Kowalchuk G, Moran MA, Ussery D, White O.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology & Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University, East Lansing,
Michigan, USA. garrity@msu.edu

Increasingly, we are aware as a community of the growing need to manage the
avalanche of genomic and metagenomic data, in addition to related data types like
ribosomal RNA and barcode sequences, in a way that tightly integrates contextual 
data with traditional literature in a machine-readable way. It is for this reason
that the Genomic Standards Consortium (GSC) formed in 2005. Here we suggest that 
we move beyond the development of standards and tackle standards compliance and
improved data capture at the level of the scientific publication. We are
supported in this goal by the fact that the scientific community is in the midst 
of a publishing revolution. This revolution is marked by a growing shift away
from a traditional dichotomy between "journal articles" and "database entries"
and an increasing adoption of hybrid models of collecting and disseminating
scientific information. With respect to genomes and metagenomes and related data 
types, we feel the scientific community would be best served by the immediate
launch of a central repository of short, highly structured "Genome Notes" that
must be standards compliant. This could be done in the context of an existing
journal, but we also suggest the more radical solution of launching a new
journal. Such a journal could be designed to cater to a wide range of
standards-related content types that are not currently centralized in the
published literature. It could also support the demand for centralizing aspects
of the "gray literature" (documents developed by institutions or communities)
such as the call by the GSC for a central repository of Standard Operating
Procedures describing the genomic annotation pipelines of the major sequencing
centers. We argue that such an "eJournal," published under the Open Access
paradigm by the GSC, could be an attractive publishing forum for a broader range 
of standardization initiatives within, and beyond, the GSC and thereby fill an
unoccupied yet increasingly important niche within the current research
landscape.

PMID: 18564916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. OMICS. 2008 Jun;12(2):109-13. doi: 10.1089/omi.2008.A3B3.

Meeting report: the fifth Genomic Standards Consortium (GSC) workshop.

Field D(1), Garrity GM, Sansone SA, Sterk P, Gray T, Kyrpides N, Hirschman L,
Glöckner FO, Kottmann R, Angiuoli S, White O, Dawyndt P, Thomson N, Gil IS,
Morrison N, Tatusova T, Mizrachi I, Vaughan R, Cochrane G, Kagan L, Murphy S,
Schriml L; Genomic Standards Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)NERC Center for Ecology and Hydrology, Oxford, United Kingdom.
dfield@ceh.ac.uk

This meeting report summarizes the proceedings of the fifth Genomic Standards
Consortium (GSC) workshop held December 12-14, 2007, at the European
Bioinformatics Institute (EBI), Cambridge, UK. This fifth workshop served as a
milestone event in the evolution of the GSC (launched in September 2005); the key
outcome of the workshop was the finalization of a stable version of the MIGS
specification (v2.0) for publication. This accomplishment enables, and also in
some cases necessitates, downstream activities, which are described in the
multiauthor, consensus-driven articles in this special issue of OMICS produced as
a direct result of the workshop. This report briefly summarizes the workshop and 
overviews the special issue. In particular, it aims to explain how the various
GSC-led projects are working together to help this community achieve its stated
mission of further standardizing the descriptions of genomes and metagenomes and 
implementing improved mechanisms of data exchange and integration to enable more 
accurate comparative analyses. Further information about the GSC and its range of
activities can be found at http://gensc.org.

PMID: 18564915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. OMICS. 2008 Jun;12(2):101-8. doi: 10.1089/omi.2008.0014.

Meeting report: the fourth Genomic Standards Consortium (GSC) workshop.

Field D(1), Glöckner FO, Garrity GM, Gray T, Sterk P, Cochrane G, Vaughan R,
Kolker E, Kottmann R, Kyrpides N, Angiuoli S, Dawyndt P, Guralnick R, Goldstein
P, Hall N, Hirschman L, Kravitz S, Lister AL, Markowitz V, Thomson N, Whetzel T.

Author information: 
(1)NERC Centre for Ecology and Hydrology, Mansfield Road, Oxford, OX1 3SR United 
Kingdom. dfield@ceh.ac.uk

This meeting report summarizes the proceedings of the "eGenomics: Cataloguing our
Complete Genome Collection IV" workshop held June 6-8, 2007, at the National
Institute for Environmental eScience (NIEeS), Cambridge, United Kingdom. This
fourth workshop of the Genomic Standards Consortium (GSC) was a mix of short
presentations, strategy discussions, and technical sessions. Speakers provided
progress reports on the development of the "Minimum Information about a Genome
Sequence" (MIGS) specification and the closely integrated "Minimum Information
about a Metagenome Sequence" (MIMS) specification. The key outcome of the
workshop was consensus on the next version of the MIGS/MIMS specification (v1.2).
This drove further definition and restructuring of the MIGS/MIMS XML schema
(syntax). With respect to semantics, a term vetting group was established to
ensure that terms are properly defined and submitted to the appropriate ontology 
projects. Perhaps the single most important outcome of the workshop was a
proposal to move beyond the concept of "minimum" to create a far richer XML
schema that would define a "Genomic Contextual Data Markup Language" (GCDML)
suitable for wider semantic integration across databases. GCDML will contain not 
only curated information (e.g., compliant with MIGS/MIMS), but also be extended
to include a variety of data processing and calculations. Further information
about the Genomic Standards Consortium and its range of activities can be found
at http://gensc.org.

PMID: 18564914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci. 2008 May;63(3):P146-55.

Assessing age-related patterns in strategy selection on a mathematical
problem-solving task.

Lamson N(1), Rogers WA.

Author information: 
(1)Gainesville State College-Oconee Campus, Watkinsville, GA 30677, USA.
nlamson@gsc.edu

We examined age-related differences in strategy-choice behavior in 27 younger and
28 older adults. Participants solved 4 two-digit by two-digit multiplication
problems. We expected them to initially calculate the answers but eventually
switch to a retrieval strategy, recalling answers from memory. Three groups
emerged: younger adults who met the criterion (20 consecutive, correct, retrieval
trials selected and answered in time), older adults who met the criterion, and
older adults who did not meet the criterion. Younger and older adults who met the
criterion had similar performance patterns. Some older adults who did not meet
the criterion were slower to learn, whereas others seemed to be averse to the
retrieval strategy. Thus, older adult patterns in strategy choice are
considerably more varied than younger adult patterns, suggesting different
explanations for differences in memory performance.

PMID: 18559679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Solid State Nucl Magn Reson. 2008 May;33(4):88-94. doi:
10.1016/j.ssnmr.2008.04.001. Epub 2008 Apr 11.

Determination of the orientations for the 17O NMR tensors in a polycrystalline
l-alanine hydrochloride.

Yamada K(1), Shimizu T, Yamazaki T, Ohki S.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Materials Science, 3-13 Sakura, Tsukuba 305-0003,
Japan. kyamada@gsc.riken.jp

We report a solid-state 17O NMR study of the 17O electric-field-gradient (EFG)
and chemical shielding (CS) tensors for the carboxyl oxygen in an l-alanine
hydrochloride. Using [17O]- and [13C,17O]-L-alanine hydrochlorides, both the
magnitudes and the orientations in the molecular frame of the 17O EFG and CS
tensors could be determined by the analysis of the 17O magic-angle spinning (MAS)
and stationary NMR spectra. For the carbonyl oxygen, the smallest EFG tensor
component, V(XX), and the largest EFG component, V(ZZ), roughly lies in the
carboxyl molecular plane and the direction of V(XX) is parallel to the dipolar
vector between 13C and 17O, that is, the direction of CO bond. The angles between
the intermediate EFG component, VYY, and delta33 component, and between delta22
component and VZZ are found to be approximately 10 degrees and 35 degrees ,
respectively. We also present the results of the quantum chemical calculations
for a theoretical hydrogen-bonding model, indicating that hydrogen-bonding
strengths make it possible to vary both magnitudes and orientations of the
carbonyl 17O EFG tensors in amino acid hydrochlorides.

PMID: 18524548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. PLoS One. 2008 May 21;3(5):e2234. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002234.

dSETDB1 and SU(VAR)3-9 sequentially function during germline-stem cell
differentiation in Drosophila melanogaster.

Yoon J(1), Lee KS, Park JS, Yu K, Paik SG, Kang YK.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Regenerative Medicine, Korean Research Institute of Bioscience and 
Biotechnology, Daejeon, Korea.

Germline-stem cells (GSCs) produce gametes and are thus true "immortal stem
cells". In Drosophila ovaries, GSCs divide asymmetrically to produce daughter
GSCs and cystoblasts, and the latter differentiate into germline cysts. Here we
show that the histone-lysine methyltransferase dSETDB1, located in pericentric
heterochromatin, catalyzes H3-K9 trimethylation in GSCs and their immediate
descendants. As germline cysts differentiate into egg chambers, the dSETDB1
function is gradually taken over by another H3-K9-specific methyltransferase,
SU(VAR)3-9. Loss-of-function mutations in dsetdb1 or Su(var)3-9 abolish both
H3K9me3 and heterochromatin protein-1 (HP1) signals from the anterior germarium
and the developing egg chambers, respectively, and cause localization of H3K9me3 
away from DNA-dense regions in most posterior germarium cells. These results
indicate that dSETDB1 and SU(VAR)3-9 act together with distinct roles during
oogenesis, with dsetdb1 being of particular importance due to its GSC-specific
function and more severe mutant phenotype.

PMCID: PMC2377335
PMID: 18493619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Sleep Res. 2008 Jun;17(2):180-90. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2869.2008.00651.x.

Does REM sleep contribute to subjective wake time in primary insomnia? A
comparison of polysomnographic and subjective sleep in 100 patients.

Feige B(1), Al-Shajlawi A, Nissen C, Voderholzer U, Hornyak M, Spiegelhalder K,
Kloepfer C, Perlis M, Riemann D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Medical Center,
Freiburg, Germany. Bernd.Feige@uniklinik-freiburg.de

Erratum in
    J Sleep Res. 2012 Aug;21(4):484.

Primary insomnia (PI) is characterized by low subjective sleep quality which
cannot always be verified using polysomnography (PSG). To shed light on this
discrepancy, subjective estimates of sleep and PSG variables were compared in
patients with PI and good sleeper controls (GSC). 100 patients with PI (age:
42.57 +/- 12.50 years, medication free for at least 14 days) and 100 GSC (41.12
+/- 13.99 years) with a sex distribution of 46 men and 54 women in each group
were included. Both PSG and questionnaire variables showed clear impairments of
sleep quality in PI compared with GSC. The arousal index within total sleep time 
was increased, which was mainly because of a strong increase within rapid eye
movement (REM) sleep. Subjectively, more PI than GSC subjects estimated wake
times longer than obtained from PSG. Linear modeling analysis of subjective wake 
time in terms of PSG parameters revealed that in addition to PSG defined wake
time, REM sleep time contributed significantly to subjective wake time. This REM 
sleep contribution was larger for PI than for GSC subjects. The findings suggest 
that REM sleep-related processes might contribute to subjectively disturbed sleep
and the perception of waking time in patients with PI.

PMID: 18482106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. OMICS. 2008 Jun;12(2):123-7. doi: 10.1089/omi.2008.0020.

Laying the foundation for a Genomic Rosetta Stone: creating information hubs
through the use of consensus identifiers.

Van Brabant B(1), Gray T, Verslyppe B, Kyrpides N, Dietrich K, Glöckner FO, Cole 
J, Farris R, Schriml LM, De Vos P, De Baets B, Field D, Dawyndt P; Genomic
Standards Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Microbiology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.

Given the growing wealth of downstream information, the integration of molecular 
and non-molecular data on a given organism has become a major challenge. For
micro-organisms, this information now includes a growing collection of sequenced 
genes and complete genomes, and for communities of organisms it includes
metagenomes. Integration of the data is facilitated by the existence of
authoritative, community-recognized, consensus identifiers that may form the
heart of so-called information knuckles. The Genomic Standards Consortium (GSC)
is building a mapping of identifiers across a group of federated databases with
the aim to improve navigation across these resources and to enable the
integration of their information in the near future. In particular, this is
possible because of the existence of INSDC Genome Project Identifiers (GPIDs) and
accession numbers, and the ability of the community to define new consensus
identifiers such as the culture identifiers used in the StrainInfo.net bioportal.
Here we outline (1) the general design of the Genomic Rosetta Stone project, (2) 
introduce example linkages between key databases (that cover information about
genomes, 16S rRNA gene sequences, and microbial biological resource centers), and
(3) make an open call for participation in this project providing a vision for
its future use.

PMID: 18479205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. OMICS. 2008 Jun;12(2):115-21. doi: 10.1089/omi.2008.0A10.

A standard MIGS/MIMS compliant XML Schema: toward the development of the Genomic 
Contextual Data Markup Language (GCDML).

Kottmann R(1), Gray T, Murphy S, Kagan L, Kravitz S, Lombardot T, Field D,
Glöckner FO; Genomic Standards Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Genomics Group, Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology and
Jacobs University Bremen, 28359 Bremen, Germany. rkottman@mpi-bremen.de

The Genomic Contextual Data Markup Language (GCDML) is a core project of the
Genomic Standards Consortium (GSC) that implements the "Minimum Information about
a Genome Sequence" (MIGS) specification and its extension, the "Minimum
Information about a Metagenome Sequence" (MIMS). GCDML is an XML Schema for
generating MIGS/MIMS compliant reports for data entry, exchange, and storage.
When mature, this sample-centric, strongly-typed schema will provide a diverse
set of descriptors for describing the exact origin and processing of a biological
sample, from sampling to sequencing, and subsequent analysis. Here we describe
the need for such a project, outline design principles required to support the
project, and make an open call for participation in defining the future content
of GCDML. GCDML is freely available, and can be downloaded, along with
documentation, from the GSC Web site (http://gensc.org).

PMID: 18479204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2008 Jun;20(3):274-80. doi: 10.1016/j.ceb.2008.03.008. Epub 
2008 May 28.

Multifaceted mammalian transcriptome.

Carninci P(1), Yasuda J, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Science Laboratory, Discovery and Research Institute, RIKEN Wako
Institute, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan. rgscerg@gsc.riken.jp

Despite surprisingly a small number of protein-coding gene in mammalian genomes, 
a large variety of different RNAs is being produced. These RNAs are amazingly
different in their number, size, cell localization, and mechanism of actions.
Although new classes of short RNAs (sRNAs) are being continuously discovered, it 
is not yet obvious how many of the sRNAs are originated. Altogether, the research
in the recent few years has identified an unexpectedly rich variety of mechanisms
by which noncoding RNAs act, suggesting that we have identified probably only few
of the many potential functional mechanism and more investigation will be needed 
to comprehensively understand the complex nature and biology of mammalian RNAome.
Here, we focus on various aspects of the diversity of the biological role of
these nonprotein-coding RNAs (ncRNAs), with emphasis on functional mechanisms
recently elucidated.

PMID: 18468878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Comput Biol Chem. 2008 Oct;32(5):332-7. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2008.03.014. 
Epub 2008 Apr 8.

Mitochondrial SNPs associated with Japanese centenarians, Alzheimer's patients,
and Parkinson's patients.

Takasaki S(1).

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center (GSC), Bessho 2-10-3-104, Hachiouji-shi, Tokyo, 
Japan. takasaki@khh.biglobe.ne.jp

In this paper we examined the relations between three classes of people (96
Japanese centenarians, 96 Japanese Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients and 96
Japanese Parkinson's disease (PD) patients) and their mitochondrial single
nucleotide polymorphism (mtSNP) frequencies at individual mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) positions of the entire mt-genome by using the radial basis function
(RBF) networks. As a result, we got new findings of mtSNPs for representing
characteristics of individual classes. These mtSNPs show distinct differences for
three classes of people. That is, individual classes of people are characterized 
by unique mtSNPs. Interestingly, Japanese centenarians are closely associated
with haplogroup D4, Japanese AD patients with haplogroup G2a, and Japanese PD
patients with haplogroup M7a. These characteristics of mtSNPs are different from 
those of previously reported works. As the amino acid replacement mtSNPs were at 
four mtDNA positions, it is indicated that mtSNPs of synonymous nucleotide
substitutions as well as those of nonsynonymous nucleotide substitutions may play
important roles in mitochondrial functions.

PMID: 18468491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Nat Biotechnol. 2008 May;26(5):541-7. doi: 10.1038/nbt1360.

The minimum information about a genome sequence (MIGS) specification.

Field D(1), Garrity G, Gray T, Morrison N, Selengut J, Sterk P, Tatusova T,
Thomson N, Allen MJ, Angiuoli SV, Ashburner M, Axelrod N, Baldauf S, Ballard S,
Boore J, Cochrane G, Cole J, Dawyndt P, De Vos P, DePamphilis C, Edwards R,
Faruque N, Feldman R, Gilbert J, Gilna P, Glöckner FO, Goldstein P, Guralnick R, 
Haft D, Hancock D, Hermjakob H, Hertz-Fowler C, Hugenholtz P, Joint I, Kagan L,
Kane M, Kennedy J, Kowalchuk G, Kottmann R, Kolker E, Kravitz S, Kyrpides N,
Leebens-Mack J, Lewis SE, Li K, Lister AL, Lord P, Maltsev N, Markowitz V,
Martiny J, Methe B, Mizrachi I, Moxon R, Nelson K, Parkhill J, Proctor L, White
O, Sansone SA, Spiers A, Stevens R, Swift P, Taylor C, Tateno Y, Tett A, Turner
S, Ussery D, Vaughan B, Ward N, Whetzel T, San Gil I, Wilson G, Wipat A.

Author information: 
(1)Natural Environmental Research Council Centre for Ecology and Hydrology,
Oxford OX1 3SR, UK. dfield@ceh.ac.uk

With the quantity of genomic data increasing at an exponential rate, it is
imperative that these data be captured electronically, in a standard format.
Standardization activities must proceed within the auspices of open-access and
international working bodies. To tackle the issues surrounding the development of
better descriptions of genomic investigations, we have formed the Genomic
Standards Consortium (GSC). Here, we introduce the minimum information about a
genome sequence (MIGS) specification with the intent of promoting participation
in its development and discussing the resources that will be required to develop 
improved mechanisms of metadata capture and exchange. As part of its wider goals,
the GSC also supports improving the 'transparency' of the information contained
in existing genomic databases.

PMCID: PMC2409278
PMID: 18464787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. OMICS. 2008 Jun;12(2):143-9. doi: 10.1089/omi.2008.0019.

The first RSBI (ISA-TAB) workshop: "can a simple format work for complex
studies?".

Sansone SA(1), Rocca-Serra P, Brandizi M, Brazma A, Field D, Fostel J, Garrow AG,
Gilbert J, Goodsaid F, Hardy N, Jones P, Lister A, Miller M, Morrison N, Rayner
T, Sklyar N, Taylor C, Tong W, Warner G, Wiemann S; Members of the RSBI Working
Group.

Author information: 
(1)EMBL-EBI The European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, 
Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom. sansone@ebi.ac.uk

This article summarizes the motivation for, and the proceedings of, the first
ISA-TAB workshop held December 6-8, 2007, at the EBI, Cambridge, UK. This
exploratory workshop, organized by members of the Microarray Gene Expression Data
(MGED) Society's Reporting Structure for Biological Investigations (RSBI) working
group, brought together a group of developers of a range of collaborative systems
to discuss the use of a common format to address the pressing need of reporting
and communicating data and metadata from biological, biomedical, and
environmental studies employing combinations of genomics, transcriptomics,
proteomics, and metabolomics technologies along with more conventional
methodologies. The expertise of the participants comprised database development, 
data management, and hands-on experience in the development of data communication
standards. The workshop's outcomes are set to help formalize the proposed
Investigation, Study, Assay (ISA)-TAB tab-delimited format for representing and
communicating experimental metadata. This article is part of the special issue of
OMICS on the activities of the Genomics Standards Consortium (GSC).

PMID: 18447634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Biologicals. 2008 Jul;36(4):234-8. doi: 10.1016/j.biologicals.2008.01.003. Epub
2008 Apr 28.

Sensitive detection of EGFR mutations using a competitive probe to suppress
background in the SMart Amplification Process.

Kawai Y(1), Kikuchi T, Mitani Y, Kogo Y, Itoh M, Usui K, Kanamori H, Kaiho A,
Takakura H, Hoshi K, Cizdziel PE, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Exploration Research Group (Genome Network Project Core Group), Genomic
Sciences Center (GSC), RIKEN Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, 
Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. yukikawai@gsc.riken.jp

In a previous study, a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) diagnostic system
named the SMart Amplification Process version 2 (SMAP 2) was reported, which
enabled rapid gene diagnostics from crude samples such as whole blood. The
asymmetric primer design and use of Taq MutS were reported as innovative
background suppression technologies employed by SMAP 2, but Taq MutS is known to 
display differential affinities for various mismatch combinations, and hence may 
not be entirely effective for all possible applications. To address this issue we
developed another approach using a competitive probe (CP) to enhance background
suppression technology instead of Taq MutS. CP is a 3'-end aminated
oligonucleotide that competes with 3'-end of a discrimination primer or the
self-priming elongation site on intermediate product 2 (IM2) for non-target
sequences, such as the alternative allele. The preferred hybridization kinetics
for the full-match CP on the non-target sequence results in effective background 
suppression in SMAP 2 assays. By using a CP, we demonstrated the sensitive
detection of EGFR gene mutations in purified genomic DNA from mixed cell
populations. The CP approach is another tool enhancing the effectiveness and
versatility of SMAP 2 assays, expanding its potential applications, and
reinforcing its position as a highly effective technology for molecular
diagnostics.

PMID: 18440823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. J Vasc Res. 2008;45(6):457-68. doi: 10.1159/000127437. Epub 2008 Apr 23.

Altered transforming growth factor-beta signaling in a murine model of thoracic
aortic aneurysm.

Jones JA(1), Barbour JR, Stroud RE, Bouges S, Stephens SL, Spinale FG, Ikonomidis
JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery Research, Medical
University of South Carolina, Ralph H. Johnson Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Charleston, SC 29425, USA. jonesja@musc.edu

OBJECTIVE: Thoracic aortic aneurysms (TAAs) develop by a multifactorial process
involving maladaptive signaling pathways that alter the aortic vascular
environment. Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) has been implicated in
regulating the structure and composition of the extracellular matrix by
differential activation of various intracellular signaling pathways. However,
whether and to what degree TGF-beta signaling contributes to TAA development
remains unclear. Accordingly, the hypothesis that alterations in TGF-beta
signaling occur during aneurysm formation was tested in a murine model of TAA.
METHODS: TAAs were surgically induced in mice (C57BL/6J) and aortas were analyzed
at predetermined time points (1, 2, and 4 weeks post-TAA induction). Quantitative
real-time PCR (QPCR) was performed to evaluate the expression of 84 relevant
TGF-beta superfamily genes, and the protein levels of key signaling intermediates
were measured by immunoblotting. Results were compared to unoperated reference
control mice.
RESULTS: QPCR revealed increased expression of TGF-beta superfamily ligands
(Gdf-2, -6, -7, Inhba), ligand inhibitors (Bmper, Chrd, Gsc), and transcriptional
regulators (Dlx2, Evi1), among other genes (Cdkn2b, Igf1, IL-6). Protein levels
of TGF-beta receptor(II), Smad2, Smad1/5/8, phospho-Smad1/5/8, and Smurf1 were
increased from control values post-TAA induction. Both TGF-beta receptor(I) and
Smad4 were decreased from control values, while ALK-1 levels remained unchanged.
CONCLUSIONS: These alterations in the TGF-beta pathway suggest a mechanism by
which primary signaling is switched from a TGF-betaR(I)/Smad2-dependent response,
to an ALK-1/Smad1/5/8 response, representing a significant change in signaling
outcome, which may enhance matrix degradation.

Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC2574785
PMID: 18434745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Dev Biol. 2008 Jun 1;318(1):73-81. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.03.001. Epub 2008
Mar 14.

Expression and functional analysis of Gm114, a putative mammalian ortholog of
Drosophila bam.

Tang H(1), Ross A, Capel B.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Box 3471,
Genome Science Research Building II, Room 4026, Research Drive, Durham, NC 27710,
USA.

In the testis, the continuous production of sperm is maintained by a small
population of stem cells called germ line stem cells (GSCs) in Drosophila, or
spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs) in mammals. This stem cell population can
self-renew or produce daughter cells that differentiate into mature sperm. In
Drosophila, BMP signals inhibit GSC differentiation by blocking transcription of 
the gene bag of marbles (bam). Once bam is activated, germ cells initiate
differentiation. We identified a novel gene in mouse, Gm114, that shows homology 
to Drosophila bam. In male germ cells, expression of Gm114 begins at 12.5-13.5
days post coitum (dpc), the stage in mice when germ cells cease proliferation and
begin differentiation into prospermatogonia. In the adult testis, Gm114 is highly
expressed in differentiated spermatocytes and spermatids but not in
undifferentiated spermatogonia, strongly suggesting that, similar to Bam, GM114
plays an important role in mammalian germ line stem cell self-renewal and
differentiation. Interestingly, deletion of the majority of the GM114 protein
does not affect mouse viability or fertility. This suggests that either there is 
a function for the remaining N-terminal of GM114, or that there are alternative
mechanisms in the mammalian system that control germ cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2480617
PMID: 18423593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. OMICS. 2008 Jun;12(2):129-36. doi: 10.1089/omi.2008.0016.

Habitat-Lite: a GSC case study based on free text terms for environmental
metadata.

Hirschman L(1), Clark C, Cohen KB, Mardis S, Luciano J, Kottmann R, Cole J,
Markowitz V, Kyrpides N, Morrison N, Schriml LM, Field D; Novo Project.

Author information: 
(1)Information Technology Center, The MITRE Corporation, Bedford, Massachusetts
01730, USA. lynette@mitre.org

There is an urgent need to capture metadata on the rapidly growing number of
genomic, metagenomic and related sequences, such as 16S ribosomal genes. This
need is a major focus within the Genomic Standards Consortium (GSC), and Habitat 
is a key metadata descriptor in the proposed "Minimum Information about a Genome 
Sequence" (MIGS) specification. The goal of the work described here is to provide
a light-weight, easy-to-use (small) set of terms ("Habitat-Lite") that captures
high-level information about habitat while preserving a mapping to the recently
launched Environment Ontology (EnvO). Our motivation for building Habitat-Lite is
to meet the needs of multiple users, such as annotators curating these data,
database providers hosting the data, and biologists and bioinformaticians alike
who need to search and employ such data in comparative analyses. Here, we report 
a case study based on semiautomated identification of terms from GenBank and
GOLD. We estimate that the terms in the initial version of Habitat-Lite would
provide useful labels for over 60% of the kinds of information found in the
GenBank isolation_source field, and around 85% of the terms in the GOLD habitat
field. We present a revised version of Habitat-Lite defined within the EnvO
Environmental Ontology through a new category, EnvO-Lite-GSC. We invite the
community's feedback on its further development to provide a minimum list of
terms to capture high-level habitat information and to provide classification
bins needed for future studies.

PMID: 18416669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Dev Cell. 2008 Apr;14(4):494-506. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2008.02.018.

Otefin, a nuclear membrane protein, determines the fate of germline stem cells in
Drosophila via interaction with Smad complexes.

Jiang X(1), Xia L, Chen D, Yang Y, Huang H, Yang L, Zhao Q, Shen L, Wang J, Chen 
D.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, Institute of
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 25 Beisihuanxi Road, Haidian, Beijing,
100080, China.

Erratum in
    Dev Cell. 2008 May;14(5):810.

Nuclear envelope proteins play important roles in chromatin organization, gene
regulation, and signal transduction; however, the physiological role of these
proteins remains elusive. We found that otefin (ote), which encodes a nuclear
lamin-binding protein [corrected], is essential for germline stem cell (GSC)
maintenance. We show that Ote, as an intrinsic factor, is both necessary and
sufficient to regulate GSC fate. Furthermore, we demonstrate that ote is required
for the Dpp/BMP signaling pathway to silence bam transcription. By
structure-function analysis, we demonstrate that the nuclear membrane
localization of Ote is essential for its role in GSC maintenance. Finally, we
show that Ote physically interacts with Medea/Smad4 at the bam silencer element
to regulate GSC fate. Thus, we demonstrate that specific nuclear membrane
components mediate signal-dependent transcriptional effects to control stem cell 
behavior.

PMID: 18410727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. OMICS. 2008 Jun;12(2):151-6. doi: 10.1089/omi.2008.0015.

Defining linkages between the GSC and NSF's LTER program: how the Ecological
Metadata Language (EML) relates to GCDML and other outcomes.

Gil IS(1), Sheldon W, Schmidt T, Servilla M, Aguilar R, Gries C, Gray T, Field D,
Cole J, Pan JY, Palanisamy G, Henshaw D, O'Brien M, Kinkel L, McMahon K, Kottmann
R, Amaral-Zettler L, Hobbie J, Goldstein P, Guralnick RP, Brunt J, Michener WK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, LTER Network Office, University of New Mexico,
Albuquerque, New Mexico 87131, USA. isangil@lternet.edu

The Genomic Standards Consortium (GSC) invited a representative of the Long-Term 
Ecological Research (LTER) to its fifth workshop to present the Ecological
Metadata Language (EML) metadata standard and its relationship to the Minimum
Information about a Genome/Metagenome Sequence (MIGS/MIMS) and its
implementation, the Genomic Contextual Data Markup Language (GCDML). The LTER is 
one of the top National Science Foundation (NSF) programs in biology since 1980, 
representing diverse ecosystems and creating long-term, interdisciplinary
research, synthesis of information, and theory. The adoption of EML as the LTER
network standard has been key to build network synthesis architectures based on
high-quality standardized metadata. EML is the NSF-recognized metadata standard
for LTER, and EML is a criteria used to review the LTER program progress. At the 
workshop, a potential crosswalk between the GCDML and EML was explored. Also,
collaboration between the LTER and GSC developers was proposed to join efforts
toward a common metadata cataloging designer's tool. The community adoption
success of a metadata standard depends, among other factors, on the tools and
trainings developed to use the standard. LTER's experience in embracing EML may
help GSC to achieve similar success. A possible collaboration between LTER and
GSC to provide training opportunities for GCDML and the associated tools is being
explored. Finally, LTER is investigating EML enhancements to better accommodate
genomics data, possibly integrating the GCDML schema into EML. All these action
items have been accepted by the LTER contingent, and further collaboration
between the GSC and LTER is expected.

PMID: 18407745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Dev Dyn. 2008 May;237(5):1307-20. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21522.

Control of gastrula cell motility by the Goosecoid/Mix.1/ Siamois network: basic 
patterns and paradoxical effects.

Luu O(1), Nagel M, Wacker S, Lemaire P, Winklbauer R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Systems Biology, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

In the vegetal half of the Xenopus gastrula, cell populations differ with respect
to migration on fibronectin substratum. We show that the paired-class homeodomain
transcription factors Goosecoid (Gsc), Mix.1, and Siamois (Sia) are involved in
the modulation of migration velocity and cell polarity. Mix.1 is expressed in the
whole vegetal half and serves as a competence factor that is necessary, but not
sufficient, for rapid cell migration and polarization. In the head mesoderm, Gsc 
and Sia are coexpressed with Mix.1, promoting rapid cell migration and
polarization. Ectopic expression of Gsc and Sia in both vegetal and ventral
regions often generates paradoxical effects; if a factor activates a certain
motility trait in one region, it inhibits it in the other. Migration velocity and
cell polarity are regulated independently. Fast and efficiently migrating
multipolar cells and slow-moving polarized cells can be obtained by ectopic
expression of these transcription factors in different combinations.

PMID: 18407556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. BMC Genomics. 2008 Apr 10;9:157. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-9-157.

Hidden layers of human small RNAs.

Kawaji H(1), Nakamura M, Takahashi Y, Sandelin A, Katayama S, Fukuda S, Daub CO, 
Kai C, Kawai J, Yasuda J, Carninci P, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Science Laboratory, Discovery and Research Institute, RIKEN Wako Main
Campus, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan. kawaji@gsc.riken.jp

BACKGROUND: Small RNA attracts increasing interest based on the discovery of RNA 
silencing and the rapid progress of our understanding of these phenomena.
Although recent studies suggest the possible existence of yet undiscovered types 
of small RNAs in higher organisms, many studies to profile small RNA have focused
on miRNA and/or siRNA rather than on the exploration of additional classes of
RNAs.
RESULTS: Here, we explored human small RNAs by unbiased sequencing of RNAs with
sizes of 19-40 nt. We provide substantial evidences for the existence of
independent classes of small RNAs. Our data shows that well-characterized
non-coding RNA, such as tRNA, snoRNA, and snRNA are cleaved at sites specific to 
the class of ncRNA. In particular, tRNA cleavage is regulated depending on tRNA
type and tissue expression. We also found small RNAs mapped to genomic regions
that are transcribed in both directions by bidirectional promoters, indicating
that the small RNAs are a product of dsRNA formation and their subsequent
cleavage. Their partial similarity with ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) suggests
unrevealed functions of ribosomal DNA or interstitial rRNA. Further examination
revealed six novel miRNAs.
CONCLUSION: Our results underscore the complexity of the small RNA world and the 
biogenesis of small RNAs.

PMCID: PMC2359750
PMID: 18402656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Acta Crystallogr Sect F Struct Biol Cryst Commun. 2008 Apr 1;64(Pt 4):233-8. doi:
10.1107/S1744309108004995. Epub 2008 Mar 21.

Structural analysis of the complex of Keap1 with a prothymosin alpha peptide.

Padmanabhan B(1), Nakamura Y, Yokoyama S.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Sciences Center, Yokohama Institute, RIKEN, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho,
Tsurumi, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. paddy@gsc.riken.jp

The Nrf2 transcription factor, which plays important roles in oxidative and
xenobiotic stress, is negatively regulated by the cytoplasmic repressor Keap1.
The beta-propeller/Kelch domain of Keap1, which is formed by the double-glycine
repeat and C-terminal region domains (Keap1-DC), interacts directly with the Neh2
domain of Nrf2. The nuclear oncoprotein prothymosin alpha (ProTalpha) also
interacts directly with Keap1 and may play a role in the dissociation of the
Keap1-Nrf2 complex. The structure of Keap1-DC complexed with a ProTalpha peptide 
(amino acids 39-54) has been determined at 1.9 A resolution. The Keap1-bound
ProTalpha peptide possesses a hairpin conformation and binds to the Keap1 protein
at the bottom region of the beta-propeller domain. Complex formation occurs as a 
consequence of their complementary electrostatic interactions. A comparison of
the present structure with recently reported Keap1-DC complex structures revealed
that the DLG and ETGE motifs of the Neh2 domain of Nrf2 and the ProTalpha peptide
bind to Keap1 in a similar manner but with different binding potencies.

PMCID: PMC2374262
PMID: 18391415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Cell Stem Cell. 2008 Jan 10;2(1):39-49. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2007.10.021.

Differentiation-defective stem cells outcompete normal stem cells for niche
occupancy in the Drosophila ovary.

Jin Z(1), Kirilly D, Weng C, Kawase E, Song X, Smith S, Schwartz J, Xie T.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, 1000 East 50th Street, Kansas City, MO
64110, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2008 Jan 10;2(1):3-4.

Rapid progress has recently been made regarding how the niche controls stem cell 
function, but little is yet known about how stem cells in the same niche interact
with one another. In this study, we show that differentiation-defective
Drosophila ovarian germline stem cells (GSCs) can outcompete normal ones for
niche occupancy in a cadherin-dependent manner. The differentiation-defective bam
or bgcn mutant GSCs invade the niche space of neighboring wild-type GSCs and
gradually push them out of the niche by upregulating E-cadherin expression.
Furthermore, the bam/bgcn-mediated GSC competition requires E-cadherin and normal
GSC division, but not the self-renewal-promoting BMP niche signal, while
different E-cadherin levels can sufficiently stimulate GSC competition.
Therefore, we propose that GSCs have a competitive relationship for niche
occupancy, which may serve as a quality control mechanism to ensure that
accidentally differentiated stem cells are rapidly removed from the niche and
replaced by functional ones.

PMID: 18371420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Cell Stem Cell. 2007 Oct 11;1(4):470-8. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2007.08.002.

Decline in self-renewal factors contributes to aging of the stem cell niche in
the Drosophila testis.

Boyle M(1), Wong C, Rocha M, Jones DL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla,
CA 92037, USA.

Aging is characterized by compromised organ and tissue function. A decrease in
stem cell number and/or activity could lead to the aging-related decline in
tissue homeostasis. We have analyzed how the process of aging affects germ line
stem cell (GSC) behavior in the Drosophila testis and report that significant
changes within the stem cell microenvironment, or niche, occur that contribute to
a decline in stem cell number over time. Specifically, somatic niche cells in
testes from older males display reduced expression of the cell adhesion molecule 
DE-cadherin and a key self-renewal signal unpaired (upd). Loss of upd correlates 
with an overall decrease in stem cells residing within the niche. Conversely,
forced expression of upd within niche cells maintains GSCs in older males.
Therefore, our data indicate that age-related changes within stem cell niches may
be a significant contributing factor to reduced tissue homeostasis and
regeneration in older individuals.

PMID: 18371382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Cell Stem Cell. 2007 Oct 11;1(4):458-69. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2007.09.010.

Stem cell aging is controlled both intrinsically and extrinsically in the
Drosophila ovary.

Pan L(1), Chen S, Weng C, Call G, Zhu D, Tang H, Zhang N, Xie T.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, 1000 East 50th Street, Kansas City, MO
64110, USA.

It is widely postulated that tissue aging could be, at least partially, caused by
reduction of stem cell number, activity, or both. However, the mechanisms of
controlling stem cell aging remain largely a mystery. Here, we use Drosophila
ovarian germline stem cells (GSCs) as a model to demonstrate that age-dependent
decline in the functions of stem cells and their niche contributes to overall
stem cell aging. BMP signaling activity from the niche significantly decreases
with age, and increasing BMP signaling can prolong GSC life span and promote
their proliferation. In addition, the age-dependent E-cadherin decline in the
stem cell-niche junction also contributes to stem cell aging. Finally,
overexpression of SOD, an enzyme that helps eliminate free oxygen species, in
either GSCs or their niche alone can prolong GSC life span and increase GSC
proliferation. Therefore, this study demonstrates that stem cell aging is
controlled extrinsically and intrinsically in the Drosophila ovary.

PMID: 18371381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Methods Mol Biol. 2008;450:71-94. doi: 10.1007/978-1-60327-214-8_5.

Structural polarity and dynamics of male germline stem cells in an insect
(milkweed bug Oncopeltus fasciatus).

Dorn DC(1), Dorn A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Hematopoiesis, Cell Biology Program, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.

Knowing the structure opens a door for a better understanding of function because
there is no function without structure. Male germline stem cells (GSCs) of the
milkweed bug (Oncopeltus fasciatus) exhibit a very extraordinary structure and a 
very special relationship with their niche, the apical cells. This structural
relationship is strikingly different from that known in the fruit fly (Drosophila
melanogaster) -- the most successful model system, which allowed deep insights
into the signaling interactions between GSCs and niche. The complex structural
polarity of male GSCs in the milkweed bug combined with their astonishing
dynamics suggest that cell morphology and dynamics are causally related with the 
most important regulatory processes that take place between GSCs and niche and
ensure maintenance, proliferation, and differentiation of GSCs in accordance with
the temporal need of mature sperm. The intricate structure of the GSCs of the
milkweed bug (and probably of some other insects, i.e., moths) is only accessible
by electron microscopy. But, studying singular sections through the apical
complex (i.e., GSCs and apical cells) is not sufficient to obtain a full picture 
of the GSCs; especially, the segregation of projection terminals is not tangible.
Only serial sections and their overlay can establish whether membrane ingrowths
merely constrict projections or whether a projection terminal is completely cut
off. To sequence the GSC dynamics, it is necessary to include juvenile stages,
when the processes start and the GSCs occur in small numbers. The fine structural
analysis of segregating projection terminals suggests that these terminals
undergo autophagocytosis. Autophagosomes can be labeled by markers. We
demonstrated acid phosphatase and thiamine pyrophosphatase (TPPase). Both
together are thought to identify autophagosomes. Using the appropriate substrate 
of the enzymes and cerium chloride, the precipitation of electron-dense cerium
phosphate granules indicates the presence of enzymes and their location. Because 
the granules are very fine, they can be easily assigned to distinct cell
organelles as the autophagosomes. Two methods, electron microscopy and
immunocytochemistry, have pointed out a structural polarity and dynamics that are
unprecedented for stem cells. We propose that these dynamics indicate a novel
type of signal exchange and transduction between stem cells and their niche.

PMID: 18370052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2008 Oct;79(10):1148-52. doi:
10.1136/jnnp.2007.142950. Epub 2008 Mar 13.

Ganglioside complexes containing GQ1b as targets in Miller Fisher and
Guillain-Barre syndromes.

Kanzaki M(1), Kaida K, Ueda M, Morita D, Hirakawa M, Motoyoshi K, Kamakura K,
Kusunoki S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurology, Internal Medicine 3, National Defense Medical College, 
Saitama, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Serum antibodies to GQ1b are associated with Miller Fisher syndrome
(MFS) and Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) with ophthalmoplegia. Antibodies to
ganglioside complexes (GSCs) have not yet been examined in a large population of 
patients with MFS or GBS. This study aimed to determine the clinical significance
of antibodies to GSCs in MFS and GBS.
METHODS: The study investigated serum anti-GSC antibodies and the clinical
features in 64 MFS patients, 53 GBS patients with ophthalmoplegia (GBS-OP(+)) and
53 GBS patients without ophthalmoplegia (GBS-OP(-)).
RESULTS: Thirty patients with MFS (47%), 25 with GBS-OP(+) (47%) and none with
GBS-OP(-) had antibodies to GSCs containing GQ1b or GT1a. Patients with MFS and
GBS-OP(+) were subdivided according to the antibody reactivities; patients with
antibodies specific to GQ1b and/or GT1a (without anti-GSCs antibodies) were
placed in Group 1, those with antibodies against GSCs with a total of two sialic 
acids in the terminal residues, such as GQ1b/GM1, were placed in Group 2, and
those with antibodies against GSCs with a total of three sialic acids in the
terminal residue, such as GQ1b/GD1a, were placed in Group 3. In MFS, sensory
disturbances were infrequent in Group 2 compared with the other groups
(p<0.0001). Antibodies specific to GQ1b were observed more often in MFS than in
GBS-OP(+) (p = 0.0002).
CONCLUSIONS: IgG antibodies to GSCs containing GQ1b or GT1a were closely
associated with the development of ophthalmoplegia in GBS, as well as MFS. Both
GQ1b and clustered epitopes of GSCs containing GQ1b or GT1a may be prime target
antigens for MFS and GBS-OP(+).

PMID: 18339728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Exp Cell Res. 2008 Apr 15;314(7):1585-94. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2008.01.023. Epub 
2008 Feb 9.

Sumoylation differentially regulates Goosecoid-mediated transcriptional
repression.

Izzi L(1), Narimatsu M, Attisano L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biophysics, Donnelly Centre for Cellular and
Biomolecular Research, University of Toronto, 160 College Street, Toronto,
Ontario Canada M5S 3E1.

Goosecoid (Gsc), a paired-like homeobox gene expressed in the vertebrate
organizer, functions as a transcriptional repressor either by direct DNA binding 
to paired TAAT homeodomain sites or through recruitment by the forkhead/winged
helix transcription factor Foxh1. Here, we report that Gsc is
post-translationally modified by small ubiquitin-like modifier proteins (SUMO).
Members of the PIAS family of proteins enhance Gsc sumoylation and this
modification occurs on at least six lysine residues. Stable expression of a
SUMO-defective Gsc mutant (Gsc 6Km) in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells results in 
morphological changes giving rise to cells with increased cell area. We
demonstrate that Gsc 6Km can effectively repress Foxh1-mediated induction of the 
Mixl1 promoter, indicating that sumoylation is not required for Gsc-mediated
repression of promoters where recruitment occurs through Foxh1. In contrast, Gsc 
6Km exhibits a decreased ability to repress the induction of promoters to which
it is directly recruited through paired-homeodomain binding sites, including its 
own promoter and that of the Xenopus Brachyury gene. Taken together, our data
suggests that regulation of Gsc repressive activity by SUMO modification is
promoter specific and may serve to differentially regulate genes that function to
control cell morphology during early development and cancer.

PMID: 18336814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. J Cell Biol. 2008 Feb 25;180(4):721-8. doi: 10.1083/jcb.200711022. Epub 2008 Feb 
18.

The JAK/STAT pathway positively regulates DPP signaling in the Drosophila
germline stem cell niche.

Wang L(1), Li Z, Cai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Temasek Lifesciences Laboratory, National University of Singapore, Singapore.

The stem cell niche, formed by surrounding stromal cells, provides extrinsic
signals that maintain stem cell self-renewal. However, it remains unclear how
these extrinsic signals are regulated. In the Drosophila female germline stem
cell (GSC) niche, Decapentaplegic (DPP) is an important niche factor for GSC
self-renewal. The exact source of the DPP and how its transcription is regulated 
in this niche remain unclear. We show that dpp is expressed in somatic cells of
the niche including the cap cells, a subtype of niche cells. Furthermore, our
data show that the Janus kinase/signal transducer and activator of transcription 
(JAK/STAT) pathway positively regulates dpp expression in the cap cells,
suggesting that JAK/STAT activity is required in somatic niche cells to prevent
precocious GSC differentiation. Our data suggest that the JAK/STAT pathway
functions downstream/independently of cap cell formation induced by Notch
signaling. JAK/STAT signaling may also regulate dpp expression in the male GSC
niche, suggesting a common origin of female and male GSC niches.

PMCID: PMC2265565
PMID: 18283115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Aging Cell. 2008 Jun;7(3):344-54. doi: 10.1111/j.1474-9726.2008.00379.x. Epub
2008 Feb 11.

Age-related changes of germline stem cell activity, niche signaling activity and 
egg production in Drosophila.

Zhao R(1), Xuan Y, Li X, Xi R.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Biological Sciences, Beijing 102206, China.

Adult stem cells are important in replenishing aged cells to maintain tissue
homeostasis. Aging in turn may exert profound effects on stem cell's regenerative
potential, but to date the mechanisms of such stem cell aging are poorly
understood, and it is not clear to what extent stem cell aging contributes to
tissue or organ aging. Here we show in female Drosophila that germline stem cell 
(GSC) division rate progressively declines with age, which is accompanied by
reduced decapentaplegic (dpp) niche signaling pathway activation within GSCs. Egg
production also rapidly declines with age, which is accompanied by both decreased
stem cell division and increased incidence of cell death of developing eggs,
especially in the oldest females. Genetically increasing dpp expression delays
GSC activity decline and transiently increases egg production. We conclude that
age-related decline of reproduction is caused by both decreased GSC activity and 
increased incidence of cell death during oogenesis, while decreased GSC activity 
is attributed to declined signaling from the regulatory niche. We suggest that
niche functional decay may be an important mechanism for stem cell aging and
system failure.

PMID: 18267001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Mar Biotechnol (NY). 2008 Jul-Aug;10(4):404-15. doi: 10.1007/s10126-007-9077-2.
Epub 2008 Feb 12.

Design process of an area-efficient photobioreactor.

Zijffers JW(1), Janssen M, Tramper J, Wijffels RH.

Author information: 
(1)Food and Bioprocess Engineering Group, Wageningen University, 6700 EV,
Wageningen, the Netherlands. jan-willem.zijffers@wur.nl

This article describes the design process of the Green Solar Collector (GSC), an 
area-efficient photobioreactor for the outdoor cultivation of microalgae. The
overall goal has been to design a system in which all incident sunlight on the
area covered by the reactor is delivered to the algae at such intensities that
the light energy can be efficiently used for biomass formation. A statement of
goals is formulated and constraints are specified to which the GSC needs to
comply. Specifications are generated for a prototype which form and function
achieve the stated goals and satisfy the specified constraints. This results in a
design in which sunlight is captured into vertical plastic light guides. Sunlight
reflects internally in the guide and eventually scatters out of the light guide
into flat-panel photobioreactor compartments. Sunlight is focused on top of the
light guides by dual-axis positioning of linear Fresnel lenses. The shape and
material of the light guide is such that light is maintained in the guides when
surrounded by air. The bottom part of a light guide is sandblasted to obtain a
more uniform distribution of light inside the bioreactor compartment and is
triangular shaped to ensure the efflux of all light out of the guide. Dimensions 
of the guide are such that light enters the flat-panel photobioreactor
compartment at intensities that can be efficiently used by the biomass present.
The integration of light capturing, transportation, distribution and usage is
such that high biomass productivities per area can be achieved.

PMCID: PMC2440935
PMID: 18266033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Stem Cells Dev. 2008 Feb;17(1):67-80. doi: 10.1089/scd.2007.0077.

Identification of transcripts commonly expressed in both hematopoietic and
germ-line stem cells.

Mizukami T(1), Kuramitsu M, Takizawa K, Momose H, Masumi A, Naito S, Iwama A,
Ogawa T, Noce T, Hamaguchi I, Yamaguchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Safety Research on Blood and Biological Products, National
Institute of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo, Japan.

Germ-line stem cells (GSCs) constitute a stem cell population with remarkable
stability and proliferative potential in vitro and are a useful model for
studying the mechanism of self-renewal and "stemness" function of committed
tissue stem cells. To identify GSC-specific genes, we performed subtractive
hybridization using cDNA from GSCs, testis, and embryonic stem (ES) cells, and
successfully identified 11 genes highly expressed in GSCs. Histological analysis 
confirmed expression of Cry alpha b, Mcpt8, Cxcl5, Fth1, Ctla2 alpha, and Spp1 in
undifferentiated spermatogonia on the basement membrane area of the seminiferous 
epithelium of the testis, where the GSC niche is thought to be located. Among
GSC-specific genes, quantitative PCR analysis showed seven genes-Fth1, Cry alpha 
b, Spp1, Bcap31, Arhgap1, Ctla2 alpha, and Serpina3g-to be common transcripts
highly expressed in hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). Histological analysis
confirmed that Ctla2 alpha-, Serpina3g-, and Spp1-expressing cells were observed 
in the trabecular bone region of the bone marrow, where the HSC niche is located.
Furthermore, histological analysis revealed that only Spp1 was expressed in the
hair follicle bulge in the area of the hair follicle stem cell niche. Thus,
identifying stemness genes by comparative analysis to GSCs is a powerful tool
with which to explore the fundamental commonalities of HSCs and other stem cell
types.

PMID: 18240954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Cell Stem Cell. 2007 Dec 13;1(6):698-709. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2007.11.007.

Stage-specific differences in the requirements for germline stem cell maintenance
in the Drosophila ovary.

Shcherbata HR(1), Ward EJ, Fischer KA, Yu JY, Reynolds SH, Chen CH, Xu P, Hay BA,
Ruohola-Baker H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

In this study, we uncover a role for microRNAs in Drosophila germline stem cell
(GSC) maintenance. Disruption of Dicer-1 function in GSCs during adult life
results in GSC loss. Surprisingly, however, loss of Dicer-1 during development
does not result in a GSC maintenance defect, although a defect is seen if both
Dicer-1 and Dicer-2 function are disrupted. Loss of the bantam microRNA mimics
the Dicer-1 maintenance defect when induced in adult GSCs, suggesting that bantam
plays a key role in GSC self-renewal. Mad, a component of the TGF-beta pathway,
behaves similarly to Dicer-1: adult GSC maintenance requires Mad if it is lost
during adult life, but not if it is lost during pupal development. Overall, these
results show stage-specific differential sensitivity of GSC maintenance to
certain perturbations, and suggest that there may be Dcr-2 dependent redundancy
of GSC maintenance mechanisms during development that is lost in later life.

PMCID: PMC2211735
PMID: 18213359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Mar 28;368(1):43-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.01.041. Epub 2008 Jan 22.

Expression analysis for inverted effects of serotonin transporter inactivation.

Ichikawa M(1), Okamura-Oho Y, Shimokawa K, Kondo S, Nakamura S, Yokota H, Himeno 
R, Lesch KP, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center (GSC), RIKEN 
Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, 
Japan.

Inactivation of serotonin transporter (HTT) by pharmacologically in the neonate
or genetically increases risk for depression in adulthood, whereas
pharmacological inhibition of HTT ameliorates symptoms in depressed patients. The
differing role of HTT function during early development and in adult brain
plasticity in causing or reversing depression remains an unexplained paradox. To 
address this we profiled the gene expression of adult Htt knockout (Htt KO) mice 
and HTT inhibitor-treated mice. Inverted profile changes between the two
experimental conditions were seen in 30 genes. Consistent results of the upstream
regulatory element search and the co-localization search of these genes indicated
that the regulation may be executed by Pax5, Pax7 and Gata3, known to be involved
in the survival, proliferation, and migration of serotonergic neurons in the
developing brain, and these factors are supposed to keep functioning to regulate 
downstream genes related to serotonin system in the adult brain.

PMID: 18211820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2009;25:355-76. doi:
10.1146/annurev.cellbio.24.110707.175327.

The biogenesis and function of PIWI proteins and piRNAs: progress and prospect.

Thomson T(1), Lin H.

Author information: 
(1)Yale Stem Cell Center, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06511, USA.

The evolutionarily conserved Argonaute/PIWI (AGO/PIWI, also known as PAZ-PIWI
domain or PPD) family of proteins is crucial for the biogenesis and function of
small noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs). This family can be divided into AGO and PIWI
subfamilies. The AGO proteins are ubiquitously present in diverse tissues. They
bind to small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) and microRNAs (miRNAs). In contrast, the 
PIWI proteins are predominantly present in the germline and associate with a
novel class of small RNAs known as PIWI-interacting RNAs (piRNAs). Tens of
thousands of piRNA species, typically 24-32 nucleotide (nt) long, have been found
in mammals, zebrafish, and Drosophila. Most piRNAs appear to be generated from a 
small number of long single-stranded RNA precursors that are often encoded by
repetitive intergenic sequences in the genome. PIWI proteins play crucial roles
during germline development and gametogenesis of many metazoan species, from
germline determination and germline stem cell (GSC) maintenance to meiosis,
spermiogenesis, and transposon silencing. These diverse functions may involve
piRNAs and may be achieved via novel mechanisms of epigenetic and
posttranscriptional regulation.

PMCID: PMC2780330
PMID: 19575643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. J Bioinform Comput Biol. 2007 Dec;5(6):1173-91.

Phenosite: a web database integrating the mouse phenotyping platform and the
experimental procedures in mice.

Masuya H(1), Yoshikawa S, Heida N, Toyoda T, Wakana S, Shiroishi T.

Author information: 
(1)Mouse Functional Genomics Research Group, RIKEN GSC, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan. 
hmasuya@gsc.riken.jp

Recently, a number of collaborative large-scale mouse mutagenesis programs have
been launched. These programs aim for a better understanding of the roles of all 
individual coding genes and the biological systems in which these genes
participate. In international efforts to share phenotypic data among
facilities/institutes, it is desirable to integrate information obtained from
different phenotypic platforms reliably. Since the definitions of specific
phenotypes often depend on a tacit understanding of concepts that tends to vary
among different facilities, it is necessary to define phenotypes based on the
explicit evidence of assay results. We have developed a website termed PhenoSITE 
(Phenome Semantics Information with Terminology of Experiments:
http://www.gsc.riken.jp/Mouse/), in which we are trying to integrate
phenotype-related information using an experimental-evidence-based approach. The 
site's features include (1) a baseline database for our phenotyping platform; (2)
an ontology associating international phenotypic definitions with experimental
terminologies used in our phenotyping platform; (3) a database for standardized
operation procedures of the phenotyping platform; and (4) a database for mouse
mutants using data produced from the large-scale mutagenesis program at RIKEN
GSC. We have developed two types of integrated viewers to enhance the
accessibility to mutant resource information. One viewer depicts a matrix view of
the ontology-based classification and chromosomal location of each gene; the
other depicts ontology-mediated integration of experimental protocols, baseline
data, and mutant information. These approaches rely entirely upon
experiment-based evidence, ensuring the reliability of the integrated data from
different phenotyping platforms.

PMID: 18172924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Clin Med Oncol. 2008;2:109-12. Epub 2008 Mar 27.

Signet-ring cell carcinoma arising in the gastric stump after
duodenopancreatectomy for ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas: a case report.

Kassahun WT(1), Lamesch P, Wittekind C, Neid M, Schneider JP, Mössner J, Hauss J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery II, University of Leipzig, Liebig Strasse 20, 04103
Leipzig, Germany.

The development of malignancy in the gastric stump following surgery for peptic
ulcer disease is well recognized. There are also few reports on carcinomas
occurring after surgery for malignant gastric disease. However, carcinoma of the 
gastric stump after duodenopancreatectomy is extremely rare. We describe what we 
believe to be an unusual case of signet-ring cell carcinoma of the gastric stump 
developing at the anastomotic site 5 years after duodenopancreatectomy for ductal
adenocarcinoma of the pancreatic head. We performed remnant gastrectomy and
Roux-en-Y gastrojejunostomy as a curative resection. This experience clearly
underlies that g astric stump carcinoma (GSC) may mimic metastatic disease
recurrence leading to diagnostic confusion after surgery for malignancy. Although
an increased risk of gastric stump carcinoma after pancreatoduodenectomy for
pancreatic cancer has not been established, the possibility of such a
complication should be kept in mind when evaluating patients after gastric
resection who present with symptoms of metastatic disease recurrence years after 
the primary operation. Investigations should be independent of the entity of the 
primary disease or its localization, since GSC may well be amenable to surgical
cure as demonstrated in the presented case. Outpatient follow up results of the
last four years indicated no recurrence in this case.

PMCID: PMC3161654
PMID: 21892272  [PubMed]


317. Brain Res. 2008 Jan 29;1191:136-47. Epub 2007 Nov 1.

Glucosylceramide synthase decrease in frontal cortex of Alzheimer brain
correlates with abnormal increase in endogenous ceramides: consequences to
morphology and viability on enzyme suppression in cultured primary neurons.

Marks N(1), Berg MJ, Saito M, Saito M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurochemistry, Nathan S. Kline Institute for Psychiatric
Research, 140 Old Orangeburg Road Orangeburg, NY 10962 USA. marks@nki.rfmh.org

Abnormal increase in native long-chain ceramides (lcCer) in AD implicates roles
in neuronal atrophy and cognitive dysfunction especially in view of divergent
roles this second messenger plays in cell function. Since clearance is mediated
by glucosylceramide synthase (GCS, EC 2.4.1.80) levels of the enzyme were
compared for 18 samples of AD Brodmann area 9/10 frontal cortex with 11
age-matched controls. Western analysis for (ir)GCS showed a significant decrease 
in AD brain (p<0.01) consistent with the hypothesis that enzyme dysfunction
contributes to neuronal decay. To examine kinetics and consequences to
morphology, cerebellar granule cells were treated in vitro with d-threo-P4 (P4). 
This potent inhibitor of GCS induced a time- and concentration-dependent increase
in lcCer parallel to loss of viability and dramatic changes in neuron/neurite
morphology via caspase-independent pathways distinct from those of apoptosis or
necrosis. Fluorescent labeling with NBD-sphingolipids or immunostaining with
anti-synaptic or cytoskeletal markers showed unusual formation of globular
swellings along neurites rich in synaptophysin that may resemble formation of
dystrophic neurites in AD. Effects of the inhibitor were verified by changes in
lcCer mass and turnover of (14)[C]-acetate and -galactose or NBD-labeled anabolic
products. Addition of a panel of inhibitors of other pathways confirms GCS as the
major route for clearance in the present model. Pretreatment with GM(1) whose
turnover is compromised was protective and pointed to useful therapeutic
applications by supplementing existing membrane stores prior to GSC dysfunction.

PMID: 18155680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Am J Med Genet A. 2008 Jan 1;146A(1):117-23.

A child with deletion (14)(q24.3q32.13) and auditory neuropathy.

Schlade-Bartusiak K(1), Macintyre G, Zunich J, Cox DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.

An interstitial deletion in the middle and distal part of chromosome 14 is a rare
chromosomal abnormality characterized by a wide spectrum of phenotypic
manifestations. We present a patient with a nearly 20 Mb interstitial deletion of
chromosome 14q24.3q32.13 determined by FISH, that is associated with minor
dysmorphic features, developmental delay, absent speech and auditory neuropathy. 
The deleted region contains 130 known genes, among them 48 with reported function
or association with human disease. The patient's phenotype is compared with
interstitial deletions of the distal part of chromosome 14 reported previously.
We hypothesize, that there is (are) a gene (genes) in the 14q32.11-q32.13 that is
(are) important for the hearing process and for which haploinsufficiency can
cause auditory neuropathy. Several genes in the region, among them calmodulin,
chromogranin A, the goosecoid and FOXN3, can contribute to the observed
phenotype. Detailed mapping in additional patients with 14q32 deletions and
hearing loss could further define the candidate region.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18074379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Dev Biol. 2008 Jan 15;313(2):700-12. Epub 2007 Nov 17.

Diet controls normal and tumorous germline stem cells via insulin-dependent and
-independent mechanisms in Drosophila.

Hsu HJ(1), LaFever L, Drummond-Barbosa D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, 4120B Medical Research Building 
III, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 465 21st Avenue South, Nashville, TN
37232-8240, USA.

The external environment influences stem cells, but this process is poorly
understood. Our previous work showed that germline stem cells (GSCs) respond to
diet via neural insulin-like peptides (DILPs) that act directly on the germ line 
to upregulate stem cell division and cyst growth under a protein-rich diet in
Drosophila. Here, we report that DILPs specifically control the G2 phase of the
GSC cell cycle via phosphoinositide-3 kinase (PI3K) and dFOXO, and that a
separate diet mediator regulates the G1 phase. Furthermore, GSC tumors, which
escape the normal stem cell regulatory microenvironment, or niche, still respond 
to diet via both mechanisms, indicating that niche signals are not required for
GSCs to sense or respond to diet. Our results document the effects of diet and
insulin-like signals on the cell cycle of stem cells within an intact organism
and demonstrate that the response to diet requires multiple signals. Moreover,
the retained ability of GSC tumors to respond to diet parallels the long known
connections between diet, insulin signaling, and cancer risk in humans.

PMCID: PMC2254938
PMID: 18068153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Brief Funct Genomic Proteomic. 2007 Sep;6(3):171-9. Epub 2007 Nov 19.

Transcriptomics resources for functional genomics.

Kawai J(1), Carninci P, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Exploration Research Group, Genomic Sciences Center (GSC), RIKEN
Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, 
Japan.

For the past decade, extensive efforts have been made for establishing cDNA clone
resources for various species. The most striking breakthrough has been
full-length cDNA technology allowing cloning of intact RNA molecules as cDNA.
These transcriptomics resources are providing researchers with essential tools
for studies of functional genomics. Here, the importance of quality and
availability of these resources is discussed.

PMID: 18029381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Biotechniques. 2007 Oct;43(4):479-84.

Use of a competitive probe in assay design for genotyping of the UGT1A1 *28
microsatellite polymorphism by the smart amplification process.

Watanabe J(1), Mitani Y, Kawai Y, Kikuchi T, Kogo Y, Oguchi-Katayama A, Kanamori 
H, Usui K, Itoh M, Cizdziel PE, Lezhava A, Tatsumi K, Ichikawa Y, Togo S, Shimada
H, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN, Yokohama, Japan. nabe-jun@gsc.riken.jp

A key feature of the smart amplification process version 2 (SMAP-2) is the
ability to suppress mismatch amplification by using a unique asymmetric primer
design and Thermus aquaticus MutS (Taq MutS). However we report here that use of 
SMAP-2 for polymorphism determination of the UGT1A1 *28 allele required a further
ancillary approach for complete background suppression. The UGT1A1 *28 allele is 
a microsatellite copy number polymorphism. This is the first reported SMAP-2
assay designed for genotyping genetic variations of microsatellites. We found
that by the addition of a primer to the amplification reaction, called a
competitive probe (CP), assay specificity could be significantly enhanced.
Including sample preparation time and use of a CP-enhanced SMAP-2 assay, we could
rapidly detect the UGT1A1 *28 polymorphism within 60 min. To test our method, we 
compared results from PCR sequencing and the CP-enhanced SMAP-2 assay on 116
human blood samples for UGT1A1 *28 polymorphism and demonstrated perfect
concordance. These results illustrate the versatility of SMAP-2 for molecular
diagnostics and provide a new approach for enhancing SMAP-2 assay specificity.

PMID: 18019339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Development. 2007 Dec;134(23):4265-72.

Argonaute 1 regulates the fate of germline stem cells in Drosophila.

Yang L(1), Chen D, Duan R, Xia L, Wang J, Qurashi A, Jin P, Chen D.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, Institute of
Zoology.

The Argonaute-family proteins play crucial roles in small-RNA-mediated gene
regulation. In Drosophila, previous studies have demonstrated that Piwi, one
member of the PIWI subfamily of Argonaute proteins, plays an essential role in
regulating the fate of germline stem cells (GSCs). However, whether other
Argonaute proteins also play similar roles remains elusive. Here, we show that
overexpression of Argonaute 1 (AGO1) protein, another subfamily (AGO) of the
Argonaute proteins, leads to GSC overproliferation, whereas loss of Ago1 results 
in the loss of GSCs. Combined with germline clonal analyses of Ago1, these
findings strongly support the argument that Ago1 plays an essential and intrinsic
role in the maintenance of GSCs. In contrast to previous observations of Piwi
function in the maintenance of GSCs, we show that AGO1 is not required for bag of
marbles (bam) silencing and probably acts downstream or parallel of bam in the
regulation of GSC fate. Given that AGO1 serves as a key component of the miRNA
pathway, we propose that an AGO1-dependent miRNA pathway probably plays an
instructive role in repressing GSC/cystoblast differentiation.

PMID: 17993467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Molecules. 2006 Aug 23;11(8):627-40.

Development of fluorous Lewis acid-catalyzed reactions.

Yoshida A(1), Hao X, Yamazaki O, Nishikido J.

Author information: 
(1)The Noguchi Institute, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo 173-0003, Japan.
ayoshida@noguchi.or.jp

Organic synthetic methodology in the 21st century aims to conform to the
principles of green sustainable chemistry (GSC) and we may expect that in the
future, the realization of GSC will be an important objective for chemical
industries. An important aim of synthetic organic chemistry is to implement
waste-free and environmentally-benign industrial processes using Lewis acids as
versatile as aluminum chloride. A key technological objective of our work in this
area has been to achieve a "catalyst recycling system that utilizes the high
activity and structural features of fluorous Lewis acid catalysts". Thus, we have
developed a series of novel fluorous Lewis acid catalysts, namely the
ytterbium(III), scandium(III), tin(IV) or hafnium(IV)
bis(perfluoroalkanesulfonyl)amides or tris(perfluoro- alkanesulfonyl)methides.
Our catalysts are recyclable and effective for acylations of alcohols and
aromatics, Baeyer-Villiger reactions, direct esterifications and
transesterifications in a fluorous biphasic system (FBS), in supercritical carbon
dioxide and on fluorous silica gel supports.

PMID: 17971735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. J Neurotrauma. 2007 Oct;24(10):1558-69.

Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging improves outcome prediction in
adult traumatic brain injury.

Hou DJ(1), Tong KA, Ashwal S, Oyoyo U, Joo E, Shutter L, Obenaus A.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada.

In patients with traumatic brain injury (TBI), diffuse axonal injury (DAI)
accounts for a significant amount of parenchymal injury. Diffusion weighted
magnetic resonance imaging (DWI) is known to be sensitive for detecting visible
DAI lesions. We focused on detection of non-visible, quantifiable diffusion
changes in specific normal-appearing brain regions, using apparent diffusion
coefficient (ADC) maps. Thirty-seven adults with TBI were compared to 35
age-matched control patients. DWI was performed and ADC maps were generated.
Thirty-one regions of interest (ROI) were manually drawn on ADC maps and ADC
values extracted. Brain ROIs were categorized into five zones: peripheral gray
matter, peripheral white matter, deep gray matter, deep white matter, and
posterior fossa. ADC results were compared with the severity of injury based on
the admission Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS 3-8; severe; GSC 9-15 mild/moderate) and
with long-term outcome (6-12 months after injury) using the Glasgow Outcome Scale
(GOS 1-3, unfavorable; GOS: 4-5, favorable) score. Mean ADC values in all five
brain zones were significantly different between TBI subjects and controls
(p<or=0.05). Patients with more severe injury (i.e., GCS 3-8) had significantly
different mean ADC values than control patients (p<or=0.05) and patients with
unfavorable outcomes had significantly higher mean deep gray and white matter ADC
values compared to those with favorable outcomes and to controls (p<or=0.05).
Thus, ADC maps can be used to detect non-visible DAI lesions. In addition,
injuries in the deep gray and white matter may be useful to predict outcome in
adult TBI patients.

PMID: 17970619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. J Chem Theory Comput. 2007 Nov;3(6):2347-56. doi: 10.1021/ct700029q.

Prediction of the Structure of Complexes Comprised of Proteins and
Glycosaminoglycans Using Docking Simulation and Cluster Analysis.

Takaoka T(1), Mori K(1), Okimoto N(1), Neya S(1), Hoshino T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chiba University, Chiba 263-8522, 
Japan, Bioinformatics Group, GSC, RIKEN, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0046, Japan, and 
PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Kawaguchi, Saitama 332-0012, Japan.

A typical docking simulation provides information on the structure of
ligand-receptor complexes and their binding affinity in terms of a docking
energy. We have developed a potent method combining a docking simulation with
cluster analysis to extract adequate docking structures from the many possible
output structures of the simulation. First, we tried to predict the structure of 
basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) bound to heparin, using the docking
simulation program AutoDock 3.0. Two X-ray crystal structures had already been
obtained for bFGF. One was a complex of the protein and heparin, a kind of
glycosaminoglycan, and the other, only the protein itself, hereafter called a
simplex. We docked a heparin molecule onto the protein simplex and generated many
trial structures for the bFGF-heparin complex. The structures of those docked
complexes were optimized through energy minimization by AMBER8. Although neither 
the docking energy calculated by AMBER8 nor that calculated by AutoDock 3.0 could
be used satisfactorily by themselves to select a proper heparin-binding complex
from the output structures, the majority of the structures generated by AutoDock 
3.0 were fairly close to each other in atom geometry, and the averaged geometry
over these structures was also close to that of the crystal. Hence, we utilized
only the atom geometry for evaluation and carried out cluster analysis with the
collection of geometries. This procedure enabled selection of a structure
considerably close to the crystal's. We applied this approach to two other
heparin-binding proteins:<U+2009> antithrombin and annexin V. Two crystal structures, a 
complex and a simplex, had been elucidated for these proteins as well as for
bFGF. Our trials gave an exact prediction of the heparin-binding structures of
these proteins, showing the approach in this study is effective in studying the
docking of ligands that have a variety of docking conformations due to the
presence of multiple rotatable bonds and charged chemical groups.

PMID: 26636224  [PubMed]


326. Development. 2007 Dec;134(23):4209-18. Epub 2007 Oct 24.

Nuclear accumulation of Smad complexes occurs only after the midblastula
transition in Xenopus.

Saka Y(1), Hagemann AI, Piepenburg O, Smith JC.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute and Department of Zoology, 
University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge CB2 1QN, UK.

Activin and the Nodal-related proteins induce mesendodermal tissues during
Xenopus development. These signals act through specific receptors to cause the
phosphorylation, at their carboxyl termini, of Smad2 and Smad3. The
phosphorylated Smad proteins form heteromeric complexes with Smad4 and
translocate into the nucleus to activate the transcription, after the midblastula
transition, of target genes such as Xbra and goosecoid (gsc). In this paper we
use bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC) to study complex formation
between Smad proteins both in vivo and in response to exogenous proteins. The
technique has allowed us to detect Smad2-Smad4 heteromeric interactions during
normal Xenopus development and Smad2 and Smad4 homo- and heteromers in isolated
Xenopus blastomeres. Smad2-Smad2 and Smad2-Smad4 complexes accumulate rapidly in 
the nuclei of responding cells following Activin treatment, whereas Smad4
homomeric complexes remain cytoplasmic. When cells divide, Smad2-Smad4 complexes 
associate with chromatin, even in the absence of ligand. Our observation that
Smad2-Smad4 complexes accumulate in the nucleus only after the midblastula
transition, irrespective of the stage at which cells were treated with Activin,
may shed light on the mechanisms of developmental timing.

PMCID: PMC2435607
PMID: 17959720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Bioconjug Chem. 2007 Nov-Dec;18(6):1935-45. Epub 2007 Oct 17.

A Multipurpose receptor composed of promiscuous proteins. Analyte detection
through pattern recognition.

Viljanen J(1), Larsson J, Larsson A, Broo KS.

Author information: 
(1)IFM, Linköping University, S-581 83, Linköping, Sweden.

A multipurpose receptor akin to the "electronic nose" was composed of
coumarin-labeled mutants of human glutathione transferase A1. We have previously 
constructed a kit for site-specific modification of a lysine residue (A216K)
using a thiol ester of glutathione (GSC-Cou bio) as a modifying reagent. In the
present investigation, we scrambled the hydrophobic binding site (H-site) of the 
protein scaffold through mutations at position M208 via random mutagenesis and
isolated a representative library of 11 A216K/M208X mutants. All of the double
mutants could be site-specifically labeled to form the K216 Cou conjugates. The
labeled proteins responded to the addition of different analytes with signature
changes in their fluorescence spectra resulting in a matrix of 96 data points per
analyte. Ligands as diverse as n-valeric acid, fumaric acid monoethyl ester,
lithocholic acid, 1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene (CDNB), glutathione (GSH),
S-methyl-GSH, S-hexyl-GSH, and GS-DNB all gave rise to signals that potentially
can be interpreted through pattern recognition. The measured K d values range
from low micromolar to low millimolar. The cysteine residue C112 was used to
anchor the coumarin-labeled protein to a PEG-based hydrogel chip in order to
develop surface-based biosensing systems. We have thus initiated the development 
of a multipurpose, artificial receptor composed of an array of promiscuous
proteins where detection of the analyte occurs through pattern recognition of
fluorescence signals. In this system, many relatively poor binders each
contribute to detailed readout in a truly egalitarian fashion.

PMID: 17939729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Stem Cell Rev. 2007 Fall;3(3):192-200.

Aging and the germ line: where mortality and immortality meet.

Jones DL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla,
San Diego, CA 92037, USA. ljones@salk.edu

Germ cells are highly specialized cells that form gametes, and they are the only 
cells within an organism that contribute genes to offspring. Germline stem cells 
(GSCs) sustain gamete production, both oogenesis (egg production) and
spermatogenesis (sperm production), in many organisms. Since the genetic
information contained within germ cells is passed from generation to generation, 
the germ line is often referred to as immortal. Therefore, it is possible that
germ cells possess unique strategies to protect and transmit the genetic
information contained within them indefinitely. However, aging often leads to a
dramatic decrease in gamete production and fecundity. In addition, single gene
mutations affecting longevity often have a converse effect on reproduction.
Recent studies examining age-related changes in GSC number and activity, as well 
as changes to the stem cell microenvironment, provide insights into the
mechanisms underlying the observed reduction in gametogenesis over the lifetime
of an organism.

PMID: 17917132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. J Biosci. 2007 Aug;32(5):1005-8.

The next step in biology: a periodic table?

Dhar PK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Synthetic Genomics, Systems Biology Group, E209, RIKEN Genomic Sciences
Centre, 1-7-22, Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama,Kanagawa 230- 0045, Japan.
pkdhar@gsc.riken.jp

Systems biology is an approach to explain the behaviour of a system in relation
to its individual components. Synthetic biology uses key hierarchical and modular
concepts of systems biology to engineer novel biological systems. In my opinion
the next step in biology is to use molecule-to-phenotype data using these
approaches and integrate them in the form a periodic table. A periodic table in
biology would provide chassis to classify, systematize and compare diversity of
component properties vis-a-vis system behaviour. Using periodic table it could be
possible to compute higher- level interactions from component properties. This
paper examines the concept of building a bio-periodic table using protein fold as
the fundamental unit.

PMID: 17914242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Gene. 2007 Nov 15;403(1-2):188-93. Epub 2007 Aug 30.

Splicing bypasses 3' end formation signals to allow complex gene architectures.

Frith MC(1), Carninci P, Kai C, Kawai J, Bailey TL, Hayashizaki Y, Mattick JS.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Exploration Research Group (Genome Network Project Core Group), RIKEN
Genomic Sciences Centre (GSC), RIKEN Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho,
Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa, 230-0045, Japan.

Many genes are arranged in complex overlapping and interlaced patterns in
eukaryotic genomes. It is unclear whether or how such genes can avoid
interference from each other's RNA processing signals and retain distinct
identities. This puzzle applies particularly to 3' end formation sites, which
inherently terminate the transcript, and thus act as boundaries between adjacent 
genes. We hypothesise that the transcript processing machinery can bypass 3' end 
formation sites by splicing out an intron surrounding the site. We confirm a
prediction of this hypothesis: the likelihood of transcripts extending beyond 3' 
end sites depends on the strength of 3' end formation signals located in exons in
the mature transcript, but not of those in introns that are spliced out of the
transcript. This bypassing mechanism permits nested and interleaved gene
architectures, as well as fusion transcripts that combine exons from adjacent
genes.

PMID: 17897791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. BMC Syst Biol. 2007 Sep 20;1:43.

Computational cell model based on autonomous cell movement regulated by cell-cell
signalling successfully recapitulates the "inside and outside" pattern of cell
sorting.

Maeda TT(1), Ajioka I, Nakajima K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Keio University School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi,
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan. ttmaeda@gsc.riken.jp

BACKGROUND: Development of multicellular organisms proceeds from a single
fertilized egg as the combined effect of countless numbers of cellular
interactions among highly dynamic cells. Since at least a reminiscent pattern of 
morphogenesis can be recapitulated in a reproducible manner in reaggregation
cultures of dissociated embryonic cells, which is known as cell sorting, the
cells themselves must possess some autonomous cell behaviors that assure specific
and reproducible self-organization. Understanding of this self-organized dynamics
of heterogeneous cell population seems to require some novel approaches so that
the approaches bridge a gap between molecular events and morphogenesis in
developmental and cell biology. A conceptual cell model in a computer may answer 
that purpose. We constructed a dynamical cell model based on autonomous cell
behaviors, including cell shape, growth, division, adhesion, transformation, and 
motility as well as cell-cell signaling. The model gives some insights about what
cellular behaviors make an appropriate global pattern of the cell population.
RESULTS: We applied the model to "inside and outside" pattern of cell-sorting, in
which two different embryonic cell types within a randomly mixed aggregate are
sorted so that one cell type tends to gather in the central region of the
aggregate and the other cell type surrounds the first cell type. Our model can
modify the above cell behaviors by varying parameters related to them. We
explored various parameter sets with which the "inside and outside" pattern could
be achieved. The simulation results suggested that direction of cell movement
responding to its neighborhood and the cell's mobility are important for this
specific rearrangement.
CONCLUSION: We constructed an in silico cell model that mimics autonomous cell
behaviors and applied it to cell sorting, which is a simple and appropriate
phenomenon exhibiting self-organization of cell population. The model could
predict directional cell movement and its mobility are important in the "inside
and outside" pattern of cell sorting. Those behaviors are altered by signal
molecules and consequently affect the global pattern of the cell sorting. Our
model is also applicable to other developmental processes beyond cell sorting.

PMCID: PMC2100066
PMID: 17883828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Dairy Sci. 2007 Oct;90(10):4793-804.

Effect of alfalfa silage storage structure and roasting corn on production and
ruminal metabolism of lactating dairy cows.

Krizsan SJ(1), Broderick GA, Muck RE, Promkot C, Colombini S, Randby AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Aquacultural Sciences, Norwegian University of Life
Sciences, NO-1432 As, Norway. sophie.krizsan@umb.no

The objective of this study was to determine if feeding roasted corn would
improve production and nutrient utilization when supplemented to lactating cows
fed 1 of 3 different alfalfa silages (AS). Forty-two lactating Holstein cows (6
fitted with ruminal cannulas) averaging 77 d in milk and 43 kg of milk/d pretrial
were assigned to 2 cyclic changeover designs. Treatments were AS ensiled in bag, 
bunker, or O2-limiting tower silos and supplemented with ground shelled corn
(GSC) or roasted GSC (RGSC). Silages were prepared from second-cutting alfalfa,
field-wilted an average of 24 h, and ensiled over 2 d. Production and N
utilization were evaluated in 36 cows during four 28-d periods, and ruminal
fermentation was evaluated with 6 cows during five 21-d periods. Experimental
diets contained 40% AS, 15% corn silage, and 35% of either GSC or RGSC on a dry
matter basis. No significant interactions between AS and corn sources were
detected for any production trait. Although the chemical composition of the 3 AS 
was similar, feeding AS from the O2-limited tower silo elicited positive
production responses. Yields of 3.5% fat-corrected milk and fat were increased
1.7 kg/ d and 150 g/d, and milk fat content was increased 0.3% when cows were fed
diets based on AS from the O2-limiting silo compared with the other 2 silages.
The responses in milk fat were paralleled by an average increase in acid
detergent fiber digestibility of 270 g/d for cows fed AS from the O2-limiting
tower silo. However, ruminal concentrations of lipogenic volatile fatty acids
were unchanged with AS source. Cows fed RGSC consumed 0.6 kg/d more dry matter
and yielded 30 g/ d more protein and 50 g/d more lactose than cows fed GSC diets.
There was no evidence of increased total tract digestibility of organic matter or
starch, or reduced ruminal NH(3) concentration, when feeding RGSC. Free amino
acids increased, and isovalerate decreased in rumen fluid from cows fed RGSC
diets. However, responses in production with roasted corn were mainly due to
increased dry matter intake, which increased the supply of energy and nutrients
available for synthesis of milk and milk components.

PMID: 17881702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2007 Oct 15;17(20):5582-5. Epub 2007 Aug 22.

Cytostatic evaluations of nucleoside analogs related to unnatural base pairs for 
a genetic expansion system.

Kimoto M(1), Moriyama K, Yokoyama S, Hirao I.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center (GSC), 1-7-22
Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.

The introduction of an unnatural base pair into DNA enables the expansion of
genetic information. To apply unnatural base pairs to in vivo systems, we
evaluated the cytostatic toxicity of several nucleoside analogs by an MTT assay. 
Several nucleoside analogs based on two types of unnatural base pairs were
tested. One is a hydrogen-bonded base pair between 2-amino-6-(2-thienyl)purine
(s) and pyridin-2-one (y), and the other is a hydrophobic base pair between
7-(2-thienyl)imidazo[4,5-b]pyridine (Ds) and pyrrole-2-carbaldehyde (Pa). Among
the nucleoside analogs, the ribonucleoside of 6-(2-thienyl)purine possessed the
highest cytostatic activity against CCRF-CEM and especially HT-1080, as well as
the normal fibroblast cell line, WI-38. The other analogs, including its
2'-deoxy, 2-amino, and 1-deazapurine nucleoside derivatives, were less active
against CCRF-CEM and HT-1080, and the toxicity of these nucleosides toward WI-38 
was low. The nucleosides of y and Pa were inactive against CCRF-CEM, HT-1080, and
WI-38. In addition, no cytostatic synergism was observed with the combination of 
the pairing nucleosides of s and y or Ds and Pa.

PMID: 17804231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Curr Biol. 2007 Sep 4;17(17):1498-503. Epub 2007 Aug 23.

From stem cell to embryo without centrioles.

Stevens NR(1), Raposo AA, Basto R, St Johnston D, Raff JW.

Author information: 
(1)The Gurdon Institute, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge, UK.

Centrosome asymmetry plays a key role in ensuring the asymmetric division of
Drosophila neural stem cells (neuroblasts [NBs]) and male germline stem cells
(GSCs) [1-3]. In both cases, one centrosome is anchored close to a specific
cortical region during interphase, thus defining the orientation of the spindle
during the ensuing mitosis. To test whether asymmetric centrosome behavior is a
general feature of stem cells, we have studied female GSCs, which divide
asymmetrically, producing another GSC and a cystoblast. The cystoblast then
divides and matures into an oocyte, a process in which centrosomes exhibit a
series of complex behaviors proposed to play a crucial role in oogenesis [4-6].
We show that the interphase centrosome does not define spindle orientation in
female GSCs and that DSas-4 mutant GSCs [7], lacking centrioles and centrosomes, 
invariably divide asymmetrically to produce cystoblasts that proceed normally
through oogenesis-remarkably, oocyte specification, microtubule organization, and
mRNA localization are all unperturbed. Mature oocytes can be fertilized, but
embryos that cannot support centriole replication arrest very early in
development. Thus, centrosomes are dispensable for oogenesis but essential for
early embryogenesis. These results reveal that asymmetric centrosome behavior is 
not an essential feature of stem cell divisions.

PMCID: PMC1971134
PMID: 17716897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Development. 2007 Oct;134(19):3413-8. Epub 2007 Aug 22.

Rab11 maintains connections between germline stem cells and niche cells in the
Drosophila ovary.

Bogard N(1), Lan L, Xu J, Cohen RS.

Author information: 
(1)University of Kansas, Department of Molecular Biosciences, 1200 Sunnyside
Avenue, Lawrence, KS 66045, USA.

All stem cells have the ability to balance their production of self-renewing and 
differentiating daughter cells. The germline stem cells (GSCs) of the Drosophila 
ovary maintain such balance through physical attachment to anterior niche cap
cells and stereotypic cell division, whereby only one daughter remains attached
to the niche. GSCs are attached to cap cells via adherens junctions, which also
appear to orient GSC division through capture of the fusome, a germline-specific 
organizer of mitotic spindles. Here we show that the Rab11 GTPase is required in 
the ovary to maintain GSC-cap cell junctions and to anchor the fusome to the
anterior cortex of the GSC. Thus, rab11-null GSCs detach from niche cap cells,
contain displaced fusomes and undergo abnormal cell division, leading to an early
arrest of GSC differentiation. Such defects are likely to reflect a role for
Rab11 in E-cadherin trafficking as E-cadherin accumulates in Rab11-positive
recycling endosomes (REs) and E-cadherin and Armadillo (beta-catenin) are both
found in reduced amounts on the surface of rab11-null GSCs. The Rab11-positive
REs through which E-cadherin transits are tightly associated with the fusome. We 
propose that this association polarizes the trafficking by Rab11 of E-cadherin
and other cargoes toward the anterior cortex of the GSC, thus simultaneously
fortifying GSC-niche junctions, fusome localization and asymmetric cell division.
These studies bring into focus the important role of membrane trafficking in stem
cell biology.

PMID: 17715175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Dev Growth Differ. 2007 Oct;49(8):635-45. Epub 2007 Aug 16.

A new triple staining method for double in situ hybridization in combination with
cell lineage tracing in whole-mount Xenopus embryos.

Koga M(1), Kudoh T, Hamada Y, Watanabe M, Kageura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Earth System Science, Faculty of Science, Fukuoka University,
Fukuoka 814-0180, Japan. kogamasa@fukuoka-u.ac.jp

To analyze cell to cell interaction effects on cell differentiation, we developed
a new triple staining method for double in situ hybridization with cell lineage
tracing in whole-mount Xenopus embryos. The method provides high color contrast
views, and also enabled us to examine inside the embryos. Wild-type embryos whose
blastomere(s) had been injected with a cell lineage tracer were cultured, fixed, 
hemisectioned when necessary, and first served for the double in situ
hybridization, with two sequential chromogenic reactions. They were postfixed,
and the labeled cells were retraced immunohistochemically. Finally, the pigment
of the embryos was bleached to obtain a clear view. We applied this method to a
blastomere transplantation experiment to examine whether the spatial gene
expression patterns along the anteroposterior axis can be induced by cell to cell
interactions. The presumptive organizer of a 32-cell embryo was replaced by the
labeled presumptive epidermis of another synchronous embryo. The resultant
triple-stained late gastrula showed quite similar anteroposterior expression
patterns of gsc and Xbra to those of a normal embryo in the axial mesoderm
derived from the transplanted presumptive epidermis, indicating that cell to cell
interactions had induced these patterns.

PMID: 17711476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Hum Mol Genet. 2007 Oct 1;16(19):2366-75. Epub 2007 Jul 26.

A novel dominant-negative mutation in Gdf5 generated by ENU mutagenesis impairs
joint formation and causes osteoarthritis in mice.

Masuya H(1), Nishida K, Furuichi T, Toki H, Nishimura G, Kawabata H, Yokoyama H, 
Yoshida A, Tominaga S, Nagano J, Shimizu A, Wakana S, Gondo Y, Noda T, Shiroishi 
T, Ikegawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Mouse Functional Genomics Research Group, RIKEN GSC, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan. 
hmasuya@gsc.riken.jp

Growth and differentiation factor 5 (GDF5) has been implicated in chondrogenesis 
and joint formation, and an association of GDF5 and osteoarthritis (OA) has been 
reported recently. However, the in vivo function of GDF5 remains mostly
unclarified. Although various human GDF5 mutations and their phenotypic
consequences have been described, only loss-of-function mutations that cause
brachypodism (shortening and joint ankylosis of the digits) have been reported in
mice. Here, we report a new Gdf5 allele derived from a large-scale
N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea mutagenesis screen. This allele carries an amino acid
substitution (W408R) in a highly conserved region of the active signaling domain 
of the GDF5 protein. The mutation is semi-dominant, showing brachypodism and
ankylosis in heterozygotes and much more severe brachypodism, ankylosis of the
knee joint and malformation with early-onset OA of the elbow joint in
homozygotes. The mutant GDF5 protein is secreted and dimerizes normally, but
inhibits the function of the wild-type GDF5 protein in a dominant-negative
fashion. This study further highlights a critical role of GDF5 in joint formation
and the development of OA, and this mouse should serve as a good model for OA.

PMID: 17656374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2007 Aug;132(31-32):1613-8.

[Short questionnaire for detecting abnormal eating behavior (binge eating). Test 
results in 320 persons with normal weight and overweight/obesity].

[Article in German]

Wernze H(1), Rühl H.

Author information: 
(1)Internistische Praxis, Würzburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Abnormal eating behavior (binge eating) is widespread, yet very often
remains undetected in general medical practice because of the secretiveness of
the affected person. A screening questionnaire (KFzE, 8 items, range 0-6) was
developed to diagnose this specific eating disorder. Questions relating to or
implying psychopathological aspects were excluded to avoid any stigmatization.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A partial score (TSc3) was calculated from the ratings of
three core symptoms (1. uncontrollable urge to eat; 2. thinking of food; 3.
feeling of satiety). In addition, the ratings of five symptoms depicting more
nonspecific aspects of eating abnormalities were added to calculate a total score
(GSc8).
RESULTS: Based on the score values and cut-off points (the latter derived from
the frequency distributions of TSc and GSc), patients suffering from bulimia
nervosa without overweight or obesity (BN, group I, n = 51, BMI<25 kg/m2) as well
as those with binge eating syndrome very often (91%) associated with overweight
or obesity (BES, group II, n = 80, BMI>25 kg/m2) were clearly distinguishable
from overweight or obese persons without binge eating (group III, n = 70) and
healthy female controls (group IV, n = 119). The small differences in the mean
scores between patients with BN and those with BES confirm earlier results
obtained with other questionnaires. Moreover, results of the BITE questionnaire
(Bulimia Investigatory Test Edinburgh), a proven method for diagnosing binge
eating from its symptom subscale (30 items), correspond well with the results
obtained from the KFzE for both groups of patients. The KFzE shows good
psychometric characteristics such as test-retest reliability (0,92) and internal 
consistency (a= 0,87)
DISCUSSION: The described method gives medical practitioners a simple way of
screening a large number of patients of normal weight, overweight or obesity who 
need careful and early evaluation of a previously unrecognized eating disorder.
It can be used for ongoing monitoring as well as for following any type of
therapeutic approach in persons with binge eating.

PMID: 17654413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2007 Sep;79(9):642-51.

Molecular changes associated with teratogen-induced cyclopia.

Loucks EJ(1), Schwend T, Ahlgren SC.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Memorial Research Center Program in Developmental Biology, Chicago,
Illinois, USA.

BACKGROUND: Exposure of zebrafish embryos to a number of teratogens results in
cyclopia, but little is known about the underlying molecular changes.
METHODS: Using zebrafish embryos, we compare the effects cyclopamine, forskolin, 
and ethanol delivered starting just before gastrulation, on gene expression in
early axial tissues and forebrain development.
RESULTS: Although all three teratogens suppress gli1 expression, they do so with 
variable kinetics, suggesting that while suppression of Shh signaling is a common
outcome of these three teratogens, it is not a common cause of the cyclopia.
Instead, all teratogens studied produce a series of changes in the expression of 
gsc and six3b present in early axial development, as well as a later suppression 
of neural crest cell marker dlx3b. Ethanol and forskolin, but not cyclopamine,
exposure reduced anterior markers, which most likely contributes to the cyclopic 
phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that each teratogen exposure leads to a unique
set of molecular changes that underlie the single phenotype of cyclopia.

PMID: 17647295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Med Sci (Paris). 2007 Jun-Jul;23(6-7):611-8.

[Regulation of germline stem cells: the niche expands in Drosophila].

[Article in French]

Jagut M(1), Huynh JR.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Jacques-Monod, CNRS, Universités Paris 6 et 7, 2, place Jussieu,
F-75251 Paris Cedex 05, France.

Our fascination for stem cells originates from their ability to divide
asymmetrically in order to self-renew and produce daughter cells which can
differentiate and replenish tissues. Stem cells could thus represent an unlimited
source of differentiated cells that could be used to repair malformed, damaged or
ageing tissues. Understanding how their behaviour is regulated is then of
paramount medical interest. Specific microenvironments surrounding the stem
cells, termed "niches", were proposed to play a major role in the balance between
self-renewal and differentiation. However, it is only recently, in the case of
the stem cells producing the germline (GSGs) in Drosophila, that the cells and
signals creating a niche were identified for the first time. Here, we review how 
this niche has been defined at the cellular and functional levels in vivo, thanks
to the powerful genetic tools available in Drosophila. Such studies have revealed
adhesive interactions, cell-cycle modifications and intercellular signals that
control the GSC behavior. Extracellular signals from the niche activate the BMP
or JAK-STAT pathways in the GSCs and are necessary for their maintenance.
Strikingly, both signaling pathways are also sufficient to convert differentiated
germ cells into functional GSCs, demonstrating in vivo that a niche has the
capacity to regenerate stem cells from differentiated cells. Rapid progresses
have further identified direct links between these signaling pathways and the
transcriptional regulation of the GSCs, providing a simple paradigm for stem
cells regulation. Many of these features and signals are conserved in stem cells 
niches from Drosophila to mammals. We can thus hope that research on the GSCs in 
Drosophila will benefit therapeutic approaches to human degenerative diseases.

PMID: 17631836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Clin J Sport Med. 2007 Jul;17(4):282-8.

The effects of headache on clinical measures of neurocognitive function.

Register-Mihalik J(1), Guskiewicz KM, Mann JD, Shields EW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Exercise and Sports Science, Sports Medicine Research
Laboratory, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.
johnakay@email.unc.edu

OBJECTIVE: To examine effects of preseason baseline headache and posttraumatic
headache (PTH) on neurocognitive function.
DESIGN: Retrospective repeated measures study with headache groups formed
regarding baseline headache score (0 = negative headache; 1-6 = positive
headache) and day 1 postinjury headache score (0 = no headache; 1-2 = mild
headache; 3-6 = moderate-severe headache).
SETTING: Clinical athletic training setting and sports medicine research
laboratory.
PARTICIPANTS: High-school and collegiate athletes with a concussion.
INDEPENDENT VARIABLES: Preseason baseline headache, PTH, test-day.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: A Graded Symptom Checklist (GSC) was used to assess
symptoms. The Automated Neuropsychological Assessment Metrics (ANAM) and the
Standardized Assessment of Concussion (SAC) were used to assess
neuropsychological function and mental status. The Balance Error Scoring System
(BESS) was used to assess postural stability.
RESULTS: Both baseline headache groups displayed a higher symptom endorsement and
higher symptom severity at day 1 postinjury and improved by day 7 postinjury. The
positive headache group reported an even greater increase in symptom severity and
presence (P < 0.05). ANAM revealed deficits in both groups 1 day postinjury. All 
PTH headache groups displayed a difference in symptom number and severity with
the increase being magnified by headache severity (P < 0.05). Individuals
reporting moderate-severe PTH displayed increased deficits subacutely but
improved by 5-7 days postinjury on overall neuropsychological performance,
reaction time, and working memory (P < 0.05). Deficits were observed for all ANAM
measures except simple reaction time 1 (SRT 1) and match to sample subacutely and
improved over time (P < 0.05). The SAC yielded an interaction (P < 0.05) for
baseline headache. The BESS yielded no significant findings.
CONCLUSIONS: Clinicians should consider headache when assessing concussion and
during preseason baseline assessments because headache may affect symptom
presence and other clinical measures of concussion.

PMID: 17620782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. BMC Mol Biol. 2007 Jun 20;8:52.

Mutational pattern and frequency of induced nucleotide changes in mouse ENU
mutagenesis.

Takahasi KR(1), Sakuraba Y, Gondo Y.

Author information: 
(1)Population and Quantitative Genomics Team, RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center,
Yokohama, Japan. kenzi@gsc.riken.jp <kenzi@gsc.riken.jp>

BACKGROUND: With the advent of sequence-based approaches in the mutagenesis
studies, it is now possible to directly evaluate the genome-wide pattern of
experimentally induced DNA sequence changes for a diverse array of organisms. To 
gain a more comprehensive understanding of the mutational bias inherent in mouse 
ENU mutagenesis, this study describes a detailed evaluation of the induced
mutational pattern obtained from a sequence-based screen of ENU-mutagenized mice.
RESULTS: Based on a large-scale screening data, we derive the sequence-based
estimates of the nucleotide-specific pattern and frequency of ENU-induced base
replacement mutation in the mouse germline, which are then combined with the
pattern of codon usage in the mouse coding sequences to infer the spectrum of
amino acid changes obtained by ENU mutagenesis. We detect a statistically
significant difference between the mutational patterns in phenotype- versus
sequence-based screens, which presumably reflects differential phenotypic effects
caused by different amino acid replacements. We also demonstrate that the
mutations exhibit strong strand asymmetry, and that this imbalance is generated
by transcription, most likely as a by-product of transcription-coupled DNA repair
in the germline.
CONCLUSION: The results clearly illustrate the biased nature of ENU-induced
mutations. We expect that a precise understanding of the mutational pattern and
frequency of induced nucleotide changes would be of practical importance when
designing sequence-based screening strategies to generate mutant mouse strains
harboring amino acid variants at specific loci. More generally, by enhancing the 
collection of experimentally induced mutations in unambiguously defined genomic
regions, sequence-based mutagenesis studies will further illuminate the molecular
basis of mutagenic and repair mechanisms that preferentially produce a certain
class of mutational changes over others.

PMCID: PMC1914352
PMID: 17584492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Dev Biol. 2007 Aug 1;308(1):144-57. Epub 2007 May 24.

mef2ca is required in cranial neural crest to effect Endothelin1 signaling in
zebrafish.

Miller CT(1), Swartz ME, Khuu PA, Walker MB, Eberhart JK, Kimmel CB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, 1254 University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA.
ctm@stanford.edu

Mef2 genes encode highly conserved transcription factors involved in somitic and 
cardiac mesoderm development in diverse bilaterians. Vertebrates have multiple
mef2 genes. In mice, mef2c is required for heart and vascular development. We
show that a zebrafish mef2c gene (mef2ca) is required in cranial neural crest
(CNC) for proper head skeletal patterning. mef2ca mutants have head skeletal
phenotypes resembling those seen upon partial loss-of-function of endothelin1
(edn1). Furthermore, mef2ca interacts genetically with edn1, arguing that mef2ca 
functions within the edn1 pathway. mef2ca is expressed in CNC and this expression
does not require edn1 signaling. Mosaic analyses reveal that mef2ca is required
in CNC for pharyngeal skeletal morphogenesis. Proper expression of many
edn1-dependent target genes including hand2, bapx1, and gsc, depends upon mef2ca 
function. mef2ca plays a critical role in establishing the proper nested
expression patterns of dlx genes. dlx5a and dlx6a, known Edn1 targets, are
downregulated in mef2ca mutant pharyngeal arch CNC. Surprisingly, dlx4b and dlx3b
are oppositely affected in mef2ca mutants. dlx4b expression is abolished while
the edn1-dependent dlx3b is ectopically expressed in more dorsal CNC. Together
our results support a model in which CNC cells require mef2ca downstream of edn1 
signaling for proper craniofacial development.

PMCID: PMC2148033
PMID: 17574232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Cytotherapy. 2007;9(4):362-78.

In vitro differentiation of human cord blood-derived unrestricted somatic stem
cells towards an endodermal pathway.

Sensken S(1), Waclawczyk S, Knaupp AS, Trapp T, Enczmann J, Wernet P, Kogler G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Transplantation Diagnostics and Cell Therapeutics, University of
Duesseldorf Medical School, Duesseldorf, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Pluripotent unrestricted somatic stem cells (USSC) from UC blood can 
differentiate into hepatic cells in the in utero sheep model, resulting in 20%
human albumin-producing parenchymal hepatic cells without cell fusion or
tumor-formation events. Additionally, we have shown in vitro differentiation of
USSC by hepatocyte growth factor and oncostatin M induction, causing changes in
the gene expression towards the endodermal lineage. Positive glycogen synthase
expression and a positive periodic acid-schiff reaction demonstrated a functional
production of polysaccharides in the cells.
METHODS: We describe the in vitro differentiation of USSC towards an endodermal
pathway using different matrices, growth factors and organic substances. Also,
co-cultures of USSC with primary cells of endodermal tissue were prepared to
mimic the biologic niche. We investigated the effect of direct co-culture of USSC
with primary rat hepatocytes or with sheep tissue of endodermal origin. Direct
co-cultures were set up to ensure cell-cell contacts. For co-cultures without
cell-cell contacts, transwell inlays with 1-microm membranes were used to
separate the cells. Furthermore, the effect of endodermally conditioned medium
was investigated. Changes in the gene expression patterns were analyzed by
RT-PCR.
RESULTS: We have shown that USSC can differentiate in vitro into an
endodermal-like cell with a phenotype similar to hepatic cells. Differentiation
of USSC with growth factors, retinoic acid, matrigel matrix and different
co-cultures led to an increased expression of albumin and also to the detection
of GSC, SOX 17, Cyp2B6, Cyp3A4, Gys2, HNF4a, ISL-1 and Nkx6.1. In addition,
functional albumin secretion was observed.
DISCUSSION: Although the differentiation assays demonstrated here produce only an
immature hepatocyte-like cell, endodermaly differentiated USSC might be a useful 
alternative for cell replacement in the future.

PMID: 17573612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. EMBO J. 2007 Jul 11;26(13):3132-43. Epub 2007 Jun 14.

Foxh1 recruits Gsc to negatively regulate Mixl1 expression during early mouse
development.

Izzi L(1), Silvestri C, von Both I, Labbé E, Zakin L, Wrana JL, Attisano L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

Mixl1 is a member of the Mix/Bix family of paired-like homeodomain proteins and
is required for proper axial mesendoderm morphogenesis and endoderm formation
during mouse development. Mix/Bix proteins are transcription factors that
function in Nodal-like signaling pathways and are themselves regulated by Nodal. 
Here, we show that Foxh1 forms a DNA-binding complex with Smads to regulate
transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta)/Nodal-dependent Mixl1 gene expression. 
Whereas Foxh1 is commonly described as a transcriptional activator, we observed
that Foxh1-null embryos exhibit expanded and enhanced Mixl1 expression during
gastrulation, indicating that Foxh1 negatively regulates expression of Mixl1
during early mouse embryogenesis. We demonstrate that Foxh1 associates with the
homeodomain-containing protein Goosecoid (Gsc), which in turn recruits histone
deacetylases to repress Mixl1 gene expression. Ectopic expression of Gsc in
embryoid bodies represses endogenous Mixl1 expression and this effect is
dependent on Foxh1. As Gsc is itself induced in a Foxh1-dependent manner, we
propose that Foxh1 initiates positive and negative transcriptional circuits to
refine cell fate decisions during gastrulation.

PMCID: PMC1914101
PMID: 17568773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Am J Surg. 2007 Jul;194(1):63-7.

Treatment and prognosis of gastric stump carcinoma in comparison with primary
proximal gastric cancer.

Schaefer N(1), Sinning C, Standop J, Overhaus M, Hirner A, Wolff M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The intention of this study was to evaluate the outcome of patients
with gastric stump cancer (GSC) in comparison with patients treated for primary
proximal gastric cancer (PPGC).
METHODS: Nineteen patients with GSC undergoing surgery between January 1989 and
August 2005 were compared with 194 PPGC patients treated during the same time
period. Various factors such as epidemiologic data, type of treatment, and
histopathologic data were evaluated in the analysis.
RESULTS: The overall 5-year disease-specific survival was 42% for resected GSC
patients in comparison with 37% for resected PPGC patients. There was no
statistically significant difference in the survival rate detected between these 
2 groups. On multivariate analysis the infiltration of the gastrojejunal
anastomosis by the carcinoma was shown to be a significant predictor for the
outcome of patients with GSC.
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, no significant difference in the outcome between GSC and
PPGC has been detected.

PMID: 17560911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Diabetes. 2007 Aug;56(8):1977-85. Epub 2007 May 29.

The SUMO conjugating enzyme Ubc9 is a regulator of GLUT4 turnover and targeting
to the insulin-responsive storage compartment in 3T3-L1 adipocytes.

Liu LB(1), Omata W, Kojima I, Shibata H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Institute for Molecular and Cellular Regulation,
Gunma University, Showa-machi, Maebashi, Japan.

The small ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO) conjugating enzyme Ubc9 has been
shown to upregulate GLUT4 in L6 myoblast cells, although the mechanism of action 
has remained undefined. Here we investigated the physiological significance of
Ubc9 in GLUT4 turnover and subcellular targeting by adenovirus vector-mediated
overexpression and by small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated gene silencing of
Ubc9 in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. Overexpression of Ubc9 resulted in an inhibition of
GLUT4 degradation and promoted its targeting to the unique insulin-responsive
GLUT4 storage compartment (GSC), leading to an increase in GLUT4 amount and
insulin-responsive glucose transport in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. Overexpression of Ubc9
also antagonized GLUT4 downregulation and its selective loss in GSC induced by
long-term insulin stimulation. By contrast, siRNA-mediated depletion of Ubc9
accelerated GLUT4 degradation and decreased the amount of the transporter,
concurrent with its selective loss in GSC, which resulted in attenuated
insulin-responsive glucose transport. Intriguingly, overexpression of the
catalytically inactive mutant Ubc9-C93A produced effects indistinguishable from
those with wild-type Ubc9, suggesting that Ubc9 regulates GLUT4 turnover and
targeting to GSC by a mechanism independent of its catalytic activity. Thus, Ubc9
is a pivotal regulator of the insulin sensitivity of glucose transport in
adipocytes.

PMID: 17536066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Magn Reson Chem. 2007 Jul;45(7):547-56.

Solid-state 17O NMR study of the electric-field-gradient and chemical shielding
tensors in polycrystalline amino acids.

Yamada K(1), Shimizu T, Tansho M, Nemoto T, Asanuma M, Yoshida M, Yamazaki T,
Hirota H.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center, 1-7-22 Suehiro, Tsurumi, Yokohama, 230-0045
Japan. kyamada@gsc.riken.jp

We have presented a systematic experimental investigation of carboxyl oxygen
electric-field-gradient (EFG) and chemical shielding (CS) tensors in crystalline 
amino acids. Three 17O-enriched amino acids were prepared: L-aspartic acid,
L-threonine, and L-tyrosine. Analysis of two-dimensional 17O multiple-quantum
magic-angle spinning (MQMAS), MAS, and stationary NMR spectra yields the 17O CS, 
EFG tensors and the relative orientations between the two tensors for the amino
acids. The values of quadrupolar coupling constants (CQ) are found to be in the
range of 6.70-7.60 MHz. The values of deltaiso lie in the range of 268-292 ppm,
while those of the delta11 and delta22 components vary from 428 to 502 ppm, and
from 303 to 338 ppm, respectively. There is a significant correlation between the
magnitudes of delta22 components and C--O bond lengths. Since C--O bond length
may be related to hydrogen-bonding environments, solid-state 17O NMR has
significant potential to provide insights into important aspects of hydrogen
bonds in biological systems.

Copyright (c) 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 17534877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Novartis Found Symp. 2007;281:25-34; discussion 34-7, 50-3, 208-9.

The RIKEN mouse transcriptome: lessons learned and implications for the
regulation of immune reactions.

Schönbach C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Immunoinformatics Research Team, Advanced Genome Information Technology Group,
RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center (GSC), 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi, Yokohama
230-0045, Japan.

Notably, the technology and analysis methods of the RIKEN mouse full-length cDNA 
project have contributed a lot to the capture of the transcriptional output of
the mouse genome and the description of its combinatorial nature. However, one
corollary of this large scale transcript resource is the dichotomy of vast and
missing information. As such, the transcriptional and translational output of yet
unknown size following non-canonical principles remains to be established and
interpreted. The importance of identifying immune-related transcripts and
establishing their molecular functions in context of complex immune system
diseases is clear: knowledge about the transcriptome can advance the
understanding of immune system regulation. Decipher ing the logic of
transcriptomes is critical for understanding the ontogeny and effector functions 
of immune cells, but it is not sufficient. The next challenge will lie in the
combined sampling and integrated analysis of genomic elements, transcripts,
proteins and metabolites.

PMID: 17534063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. EMBO J. 2007 Jun 20;26(12):2955-65. Epub 2007 May 24.

The opposing homeobox genes Goosecoid and Vent1/2 self-regulate Xenopus
patterning.

Sander V(1), Reversade B, De Robertis EM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Biological Chemistry,
University of California-Los Angeles, 675 Charles Young Drive South, Los Angeles,
CA 90095, USA.

We present a loss-of-function study using antisense morpholino (MO) reagents for 
the organizer-specific gene Goosecoid (Gsc) and the ventral genes Vent1 and
Vent2. Unlike in the mouse Gsc is required in Xenopus for mesodermal patterning
during gastrulation, causing phenotypes ranging from reduction of head
structures-including cyclopia and holoprosencephaly-to expansion of ventral
tissues in MO-injected embryos. The overexpression effects of Gsc mRNA require
the expression of the BMP antagonist Chordin, a downstream target of Gsc.
Combined Vent1 and Vent2 MOs strongly dorsalized the embryo. Unexpectedly,
simultaneous depletion of all three genes led to a rescue of almost normal
development in a variety of embryological assays. Thus, the phenotypic effects of
depleting Gsc or Vent1/2 are caused by the transcriptional upregulation of their 
opposing counterparts. A principal function of Gsc and Vent1/2 homeobox genes
might be to mediate a self-adjusting mechanism that restores the basic body plan 
when deviations from the norm occur, rather than generating individual cell
types. The results may shed light on the molecular mechanisms of genetic
redundancy.

PMCID: PMC1894760
PMID: 17525737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Hepatogastroenterology. 2007 Mar;54(74):377-81.

p53 genetic abnormalities and P-glycoprotein expression in stump and primary
gastric carcinomas.

Oliver I(1), Lacueva J, Barberá V, Caldés T, Teruel A, Costa D, Medrano J,
Pérez-Vázquez T, Quesada P, Ferragut J, Calpena R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Surgery, School of Medicine, Miguel Hernandez
University, Elche, Spain. israel.oliver@umh.es

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Genetic abnormalities of the p53 gene may play a major role in
the carcinogenesis of gastric stump carcinomas (GSC) and intestinal-type primary 
gastric carcinomas (IPGC). Also, they may modulate P-gp expression producing
chemoresistance. The aim of this article is to analyze p53 genetic abnormalities 
and the influence of p53 gene status on P-gp expression in both types of
carcinomas.
METHODOLOGY: Forty-two paraffin-embedded samples of gastric carcinomas
corresponding to 17 GSC and 25 IPGC were studied. P53 genetic abnormalities in
exon 5-9 were screened by direct sequencing of PCR products. P53 and
P-glycoprotein (P-gp) were assessed by a standard streptavidin-biotin
immunoperoxidase method. Anti-p53 DO7 and anti-P-gp C494 were used as primary
antibodies.
RESULTS: Fourteen p53 mutations were found, 5 in GSC (29%) and 9 in IPGC (36%).
Thirteen mutations were base-pair substitutions that produced a change in the
amino acid sequence. Eight mutations were located at exon 7 (57%). P53 nuclear
immunopositivity was observed in 12 GSC (71%) and 15 IPGC (60%). Only two
carcinomas (1 IPGC and 1 GSC) harboring a p53 mutation did not show any p53
expression. All except one of the gastric carcinomas having a p53 mutation showed
medium or high P-gp expression. However, there was no difference in P-gp
expression between tumors with and without p53 mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: The p53 genetic alterations found in GSC and IPGC could originate
from a similar pathogenetic pathway. No association was demonstrated between p53 
gene status and P-gp expression, although most of the carcinomas harboring a p53 
mutation showed medium or high P-gp expression.

PMID: 17523278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Hum Mol Genet. 2007 Aug 1;16(15):1814-20. Epub 2007 May 21.

Fragile X mental retardation protein modulates the fate of germline stem cells in
Drosophila.

Yang L(1), Duan R, Chen D, Wang J, Chen D, Jin P.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, Institute of
Zoology, Emory University School of Medicine, 615 Michael Street, Suite 301,
Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Fragile X syndrome, a common form of inherited mental retardation, is caused by
the loss of fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP). FMRP, which may regulate
translation in neurons, associates not only with specific mRNAs and microRNAs
(miRNA), but also with components of the miRNA pathway, including Dicer and
Argonaute proteins. In Drosophila, dFmr1 is also known to be involved in germ
cell and oocyte specification; however, the question of whether dFmr1 is required
for controlling the fate of germline stem cells (GSCs) has gone unanswered. Here 
we show that dFmr1 is required for both GSC maintenance and repressing
differentiation. Furthermore, we demonstrate that in Drosophila ovary, dFmr1
protein interacts with Argonaute protein 1 (AGO1), a key component of the miRNA
pathway. Thus dFmr1 could modulate the fate of GSCs, likely via the miRNA
pathway. Our results provide the first evidence that FMRP might be involved in
the regulation of adult stem cells.

PMID: 17519221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. BMC Bioinformatics. 2007 May 21;8:161.

Large-scale clustering of CAGE tag expression data.

Shimokawa K(1), Okamura-Oho Y, Kurita T, Frith MC, Kawai J, Carninci P,
Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center, RIKEN
Yokohama Institute, Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan.
kazsi@gsc.riken.jp

BACKGROUND: Recent analyses have suggested that many genes possess multiple
transcription start sites (TSSs) that are differentially utilized in different
tissues and cell lines. We have identified a huge number of TSSs mapped onto the 
mouse genome using the cap analysis of gene expression (CAGE) method. The
standard hierarchical clustering algorithm, which gives us easily understandable 
graphical tree images, has difficulties in processing such huge amounts of TSS
data and a better method to calculate and display the results is needed.
RESULTS: We use a combination of hierarchical and non-hierarchical clustering to 
cluster expression profiles of TSSs based on a large amount of CAGE data to
profit from the best of both methods. We processed the genome-wide expression
data, including 159,075 TSSs derived from 127 RNA samples of various organs of
mouse, and succeeded in categorizing them into 70-100 clusters. The clusters
exhibited intriguing biological features: a cluster supergroup with a ubiquitous 
expression profile, tissue-specific patterns, a distinct distribution of
non-coding RNA and functional TSS groups.
CONCLUSION: Our approach succeeded in greatly reducing the calculation cost, and 
is an appropriate solution for analyzing large-scale TSS usage data.

PMCID: PMC1890301
PMID: 17517134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. BMC Dev Biol. 2007 May 16;7:47.

A mechanism for the sharp transition of morphogen gradient interpretation in
Xenopus.

Saka Y(1), Smith JC.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute and Department of Zoology, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. yasushi.saka@ibl.fr

BACKGROUND: One way in which positional information is established during
embryonic development is through the graded distribution of diffusible
morphogens. Unfortunately, little is known about how cells interpret different
concentrations of morphogen to activate different genes or how thresholds are
generated in a morphogen gradient.
RESULTS: Here we show that the concentration-dependent induction of the T-box
transcription factor Brachyury (Xbra) and the homeobox-containing gene Goosecoid 
(Gsc) by activin in Xenopus can be explained by the dynamics of a simple network 
consisting of three elements with a mutual negative feedback motif that can
function to convert a graded signal (activin) into a binary output (Xbra on and
Gsc off, or vice versa). Importantly, such a system can display sharp thresholds.
Consistent with the predictions of our model, Xenopus ectodermal cells display a 
binary response at the single cell level after treatment with activin.
CONCLUSION: This kind of simple network with mutual negative feedback might
provide a general mechanism for selective gene activation in response to
different levels of a single external signal. It provides a mechanism by which a 
sharp boundary might be created between domains of different cell types in
response to a morphogen gradient.

PMCID: PMC1885807
PMID: 17506890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Nat Rev Genet. 2007 Jun;8(6):424-36. Epub 2007 May 8.

Mammalian RNA polymerase II core promoters: insights from genome-wide studies.

Sandelin A(1), Carninci P, Lenhard B, Ponjavic J, Hayashizaki Y, Hume DA.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Exploration Research Group (Genome Network Project Core Group), RIKEN
Genomic Sciences Center (GSC), RIKEN Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22, Suehiro-cho,
Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa, 230-0045, Japan.

The identification and characterization of mammalian core promoters and
transcription start sites is a prerequisite to understanding how RNA polymerase
II transcription is controlled. New experimental technologies have enabled
genome-wide discovery and characterization of core promoters, revealing that most
mammalian genes do not conform to the simple model in which a TATA box directs
transcription from a single defined nucleotide position. In fact, most genes have
multiple promoters, within which there are multiple start sites, and alternative 
promoter usage generates diversity and complexity in the mammalian transcriptome 
and proteome. Promoters can be described by their start site usage distribution, 
which is coupled to the occurrence of cis-regulatory elements, gene function and 
evolutionary constraints. A comprehensive survey of mammalian promoters is a
major step towards describing and understanding transcriptional control networks.

PMID: 17486122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Chem Asian J. 2007 May 4;2(5):591-8.

Folding dynamics of 10-residue beta-hairpin peptide chignolin.

Suenaga A(1), Narumi T, Futatsugi N, Yanai R, Ohno Y, Okimoto N, Taiji M.

Author information: 
(1)High-Performance Molecular Simulation Team, Computational and Experimental
System Biology Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center, 61-1 Ono-cho, Tsurumi,
Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0046, Japan. suenaga@gsc.riken.jp

Short peptides that fold into beta-hairpins are ideal model systems for
investigating the mechanism of protein folding because their folding process
shows dynamics typical of proteins. We performed folding, unfolding, and
refolding molecular dynamics simulations (total of 2.7 micros) of the 10-residue 
beta-hairpin peptide chignolin, which is the smallest beta-hairpin structure
known to be stable in solution. Our results revealed the folding mechanism of
chignolin, which comprises three steps. First, the folding begins with
hydrophobic assembly. It brings the main chain together; subsequently, a nascent 
turn structure is formed. The second step is the conversion of the nascent turn
into a tight turn structure along with interconversion of the hydrophobic packing
and interstrand hydrogen bonds. Finally, the formation of the hydrogen-bond
network and the complete hydrophobic core as well as the arrangement of
side-chain-side-chain interactions occur at approximately the same time. This
three-step mechanism appropriately interprets the folding process as involving a 
combination of previous inconsistent explanations of the folding mechanism of the
beta-hairpin, that the first event of the folding is formation of hydrogen bonds 
and the second is that of the hydrophobic core, or vice versa.

PMID: 17465405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. J Exp Biol. 2007 May;210(Pt 9):1497-506.

Constructing the landscape of the mammalian transcriptome.

Carninci P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Genome Science Laboratory, Discovery and Research Institute, RIKEN Wako
Institute, Wako, Saitama, Japan. rgscerg@gsc.riken.jp

The principal route to understanding the biological significance of the genome
sequence comes from discovery and characterization of that portion of the genome 
that is transcribed into RNA products. We now know that this ;transcriptome' is
unexpectedly complex and its precise definition in any one species requires
multiple technical approaches and an ability to work on a very large scale. A key
step is the development of technologies able to capture snapshots of the
complexity of the various kinds of RNA generated by the genome. As the human,
mouse and other model genome sequencing projects approach completion,
considerable effort has been focused on identifying and annotating the
protein-coding genes as the principal output of the genome. In pursuing this aim,
several key technologies have been developed to generate large numbers and highly
diverse sets of full-length cDNAs and their variants. However, the search has
identified another hidden transcriptional universe comprising a wide variety of
non-protein coding RNA transcripts. Despite initial scepticism, various
experiments and complementary technologies have demonstrated that these RNAs are 
dynamically transcribed and a subset of them can act as sense-antisense RNAs,
which influence the transcriptional output of the genome. Recent experimental
evidence suggests that the list of non-protein coding RNAs is still largely
incomplete and that transcription is substantially more complex even than
currently thought.

PMID: 17449815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Microb Ecol. 2007 Apr;53(3):507-11. Epub 2007 Apr 12.

The positive role of the ecological community in the genomic revolution.

Field D(1), Kyrpides N.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Evolution and Bioinformatics Section, Oxford Centre for Ecology and 
Hydrology, Oxford, UK. dfield@ceh.ac.uk

The exponential increase of genomic and metagenomic data, fueled in part by
recent advancements in sequencing technology, are greatly expanding our
understanding of the phylogenetic diversity and metabolic capacity present in the
environment. Two of the central challenges that bioinformaticians and ecologists 
alike must face are the design of bioinformatic resources that facilitate the
analysis of genomic and metagenomic data in a comparative context and the
efficient capture and organization of the plethora of descriptive information
required to usefully describe these data sets. In this commentary, we review
three initiatives presented in the "new frontiers" session of the second SCOPE
meeting on Microbial Environmental Genomics (MicroEnGen-II, Shanghai, June 12-15,
2006). These are (1) the Integrated Microbial Genomes Resources (IMG), (2) the
Genomic Standards Consortium (GSC), and (3) the Natural Environment Research
Council (NERC) Environmental Bioinformatics Centre (NEBC). These integrative
bioinformatics and data management initiatives underscore the increasingly
important role ecologists have to play in the genomic (metagenomic) revolution.

PMID: 17436031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Chem Phys. 2007 Apr 7;126(13):134501.

Zero-field nuclear magnetic resonance in high field by modulated rf sequences.

Nishiyama Y(1), Yamazaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Sciences Center, RIKEN Institute, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. 
nishi@gsc.riken.jp

The authors propose a novel approach to design and evaluate sequences for
zero-field NMR spectra in high field (ZFHF) by using amplitude and phase
modulated rf sequences. ZFHF provide sharp peaks for the dipolar interaction
between two nuclear spins even if the orientation of the molecules is
distributed. The internuclear distance r can be directly obtained from the peak
position which is proportional to r-3. Numerous ZFHF sequences are obtained. A
sequence is selected from them by the systematic evaluation of the sequences. The
new ZFHF sequence is less affected by chemical shift anisotropy (CSA) than the
previous sequences; the sequence can be used for systems with large CSA such as a
dipolar coupled 13C-pair system under realistically high field. 13C ZFHF spectra 
of 13C2 diammonium succinate and 13C2 diammonium oxalate were observed under the 
9.4 T field.

PMID: 17430041  [PubMed]


360. Genetics. 2007 May;176(1):501-11. Epub 2007 Apr 3.

Evolution of coadaptation in a subdivided population.

Takahasi KR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Population and Quantitative Genomics Team, Genomic Sciences Center, RIKEN,
Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. kenzi@gsc.riken.jp

The interplay between population subdivision and epistasis is investigated by
studying the fixation probability of a coadapted haplotype in a subdivided
population. Analytical and simulation models are developed to study the
evolutionary fate of two conditionally neutral mutations that interact
epistatically to enhance fitness. We find that the fixation probability of a
coadapted haplotype shows a marked increase when the population is genetically
subdivided and subpopulations are loosely connected by migration. Moderate
migration and isolation allow the propagation of the mutant alleles across
subpopulations, while at the same time preserving the favorable allelic
combination established within each subpopulation. Together they create the
condition most favorable for the ultimate fixation of the coadapted haplotype. On
the basis of the analytical and simulation results, we discuss the fundamental
role of population subdivision and restricted gene flow in promoting the
evolution of functionally integrated systems, with some implications for the
shifting-balance theory of evolution.

PMCID: PMC1893032
PMID: 17409093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Dev Growth Differ. 2007 Apr;49(3):205-14.

Tip-1 induces filopodia growth and is important for gastrulation movements during
zebrafish development.

Besser J(1), Leito JT, van der Meer DL, Bagowski CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Moleclar Cellular Biology, University of Leiden, 2333 AL Leiden,
The Netherlands.

Wnt signaling is essential during animal development and also plays important
roles in pathological conditions. Two mayor pathways have been described: the
beta-catenin-dependent canonical (or classical) pathway and the
beta-catenin-independent non-canonical Wnt pathway. Recent binding studies
suggest links between the small PDZ protein TIP-1 (Tax-1 interacting protein) to 
components of both Wnt pathways. We have cloned and characterized the zebrafish
tip-1 gene. Whole mount in situ hybridization and semiquantitative reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) indicated that zebrafish tip-1
is present as a maternal RNA and is ubiquitously expressed during early
development. After 24 h of development, tip-1 expression was high in the central 
nervous system (CNS) whereas only weak expression was detected in the caudal
regions of the zebrafish embryo. Tip-1 knockdown using antisense morpholino
oligonucleotides, as well as ectopic tip-1 expression, led to elongation defects 
in zebrafish embryos and larvae. Both knockdown and overexpression of tip-1
resulted in a widened goosecoid (gsc) expression domain in shield stage embryos, 
led to an abbreviated prechordal plate, and to reduced convergent extension
movements during gastrulation. We constructed a green fluorescence protein
(GFP)/TIP-1 fusion protein which, when expressed in cultured fibroblasts
(ZF4-cells), induced filopodia growth. Our observations indicate a role for TIP-1
in gastrulation movements and in filopodia growth induction.

PMID: 17394599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Sleep Med. 2007 Apr;8(3):198-208. Epub 2007 Mar 23.

Daytime symptoms in primary insomnia: a prospective analysis using ecological
momentary assessment.

Buysse DJ(1), Thompson W, Scott J, Franzen PL, Germain A, Hall M, Moul DE,
Nofzinger EA, Kupfer DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Clinical and Translational Research Center, Department of
Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh, School of Medicine, USA. buyssedj@upmc.edu

OBJECTIVES: To prospectively characterize and compare daytime symptoms in primary
insomnia (PI) and good sleeper control (GSC) subjects using ecological momentary 
assessment; to examine relationships between daytime symptom factors,
retrospective psychological and sleep reports, and concurrent sleep diary
reports.
METHODS: Subjects included 47 PI and 18 GSC. Retrospective self-reports of
daytime and sleep symptoms were collected. Daytime symptoms and sleep diary
information were then collected for 1 week on hand-held computers. The Daytime
Insomnia Symptom Scale (DISS) consisted of 19 visual analog scales completed four
times per day. Factors for the DISS were derived using functional principal
components analysis. Nonparametric tests were used to contrast DISS,
retrospective symptom ratings, and sleep diary results in PI and GSC subjects,
and to examine relationships among them.
RESULTS: Four principal components were identified for the DISS: Alert Cognition,
Negative Mood, Positive Mood, and Sleepiness/Fatigue. PI scored significantly
worse than GSC on all four factors (p<0.0003 for each). Among PI subjects DISS
scales and retrospective psychological symptoms were related to each other in
plausible ways. DISS factors were also related to self-report measures of sleep, 
whereas retrospective psychological symptom measures were not.
CONCLUSIONS: Daytime symptom factors of alertness, positive and negative mood,
and sleepiness/fatigue, collected with ecological momentary assessment, showed
impairment in PI versus GSC. DISS factors showed stronger relationships to
retrospective sleep symptoms and concurrent sleep diary reports than
retrospective psychological symptoms. The diurnal pattern of symptoms may inform 
studies of the pathophysiology and treatment outcome of insomnia.

PMCID: PMC1899354
PMID: 17368098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Development. 2007 Apr;134(8):1471-9. Epub 2007 Mar 7.

Stonewalling Drosophila stem cell differentiation by epigenetic controls.

Maines JZ(1), Park JK, Williams M, McKearin DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center at Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA.

During Drosophila oogenesis, germline stem cell (GSC) identity is maintained
largely by preventing the expression of factors that promote differentiation.
This is accomplished via the activity of several genes acting either in the GSC
or in its niche. The translational repressors Nanos and Pumilio act in GSCs to
prevent differentiation, probably by inhibiting the translation of early
differentiation factors, whereas niche signals prevent differentiation by
silencing transcription of the differentiation factor Bam. We have found that the
DNA-associated protein Stonewall (Stwl) is also required for GSC maintenance.
stwl is required cell-autonomously; clones of stwl(-) germ cells were lost by
differentiation, and ectopic Stwl caused an expansion of GSCs. stwl mutants acted
as Suppressors of variegation, indicating that stwl normally acts in
chromatin-dependent gene repression. In contrast to several previously described 
GSC maintenance factors, Stwl probably functions epigenetically to prevent GSC
differentiation. Stwl-dependent transcriptional repression does not target bam,
but rather Stwl represses the expression of many genes, including those that may 
be targeted by Nanos and Pumilio translational inhibition.

PMID: 17344229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Mar Biotechnol (NY). 2007 May-Jun;9(3):370-6. Epub 2007 Mar 7.

Establishment, characterization, and virus susceptibility of a new marine cell
line from red spotted grouper (Epinephelus akaara).

Zhou GZ(1), Li ZQ, Yuan XP, Zhang QY.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Graduate school of the Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Wuhan, 430072, China.

A marine fish cell line from the snout of red spotted grouper Epinephelus akaara,
a protogynous hermaphrodite, was established, characterized, and subcultured with
more than 60 passages. The grouper snout cell line (GSC) cells multiplied well in
Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) medium supplemented with 10% fetal
bovine serum. The optimal growth temperature was 25 degrees C, and
morphologically the cells were fibroblastic. Chromosome analysis revealed that
the GSC cell line has a normal diploid karyotype with 2n = 8st + 40t. A virus
titration study indicated that the cells were susceptible to turbot Scophthalmus 
Maximus rhabdovirus (SMRV) (10(8.5) TCID(50) ml(-1)), while the viral titer of
frog Rana grylio virus 9807 (RGV(9807)) reached 10(3.5) TCID(50) ml(-1). The
infection was confirmed by cytopathic effect (CPE), immunofluorescence, and
electron microscopy experiments, which detected the viral particles in the
cytoplasm of virus-infected cells, respectively. Further, significant fluorescent
signals were observed when the GSC cells were transfected with pEGFP vector DNA, 
indicating their potential utility for transgenic and genetic manipulation
studies.

PMID: 17342554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Nat Methods. 2007 Mar;4(3):257-62. Epub 2007 Feb 18.

Rapid SNP diagnostics using asymmetric isothermal amplification and a new
mismatch-suppression technology.

Mitani Y(1), Lezhava A, Kawai Y, Kikuchi T, Oguchi-Katayama A, Kogo Y, Itoh M,
Miyagi T, Takakura H, Hoshi K, Kato C, Arakawa T, Shibata K, Fukui K, Masui R,
Kuramitsu S, Kiyotani K, Chalk A, Tsunekawa K, Murakami M, Kamataki T, Oka T,
Shimada H, Cizdziel PE, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Exploration Research Group (Genome Network Project Core Group), RIKEN
Genomic Sciences Center (GSC), RIKEN Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho,
Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa, 230-0045, Japan.

We developed a rapid single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) detection system named 
smart amplification process version 2 (SMAP 2). Because DNA amplification only
occurred with a perfect primer match, amplification alone was sufficient to
identify the target allele. To achieve the requisite fidelity to support this
claim, we used two new and complementary approaches to suppress exponential
background DNA amplification that resulted from mispriming events. SMAP 2 is
isothermal and achieved SNP detection from whole human blood in 30 min when
performed with a new DNA polymerase that was cloned and isolated from
Alicyclobacillus acidocaldarius (Aac pol). Furthermore, to assist the scientific 
community in configuring SMAP 2 assays, we developed software specific for SMAP 2
primer design. With these new tools, a high-precision and rapid DNA amplification
technology becomes available to aid in pharmacogenomic research and
molecular-diagnostics applications.

PMID: 17322893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Curr Biol. 2007 Mar 20;17(6):533-8. Epub 2007 Feb 22.

The miRNA pathway intrinsically controls self-renewal of Drosophila germline stem
cells.

Park JK(1), Liu X, Strauss TJ, McKearin DM, Liu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, Texas 75390.

Stem cells uniquely self-renew and maintain tissue homoeostasis by
differentiating into different cell types to replace aged or damaged cells [1].
During oogenesis of Drosophila melanogaster, self-renewal of germline stem cells 
(GSCs) requires both intrinsic signaling mechanisms and extrinsic signals from
neighboring niche cells [2]. Emerging evidence suggests that microRNA
(miRNA)-mediated translational regulation may also control Drosophila GSC
self-renewal [3, 4]. It is unclear, however, whether the miRNA pathway functions 
within stem cells or niche cells to maintain GSCs. In Drosophila, Dicer-1 (Dcr-1)
and the double-stranded RNA binding protein Loquacious (Loqs) catalyze miRNA
biogenesis [3-5]. Here, we generate loqs knockout (loqs(KO)) flies by ends-out
homologous recombination and show that loqs is essential for embryonic viability 
and ovarian GSC maintenance. Both developmental and miRNA processing defects are 
rescued by transgenic expression of Loqs-PB, but not Loqs-PA. Furthermore, mosaic
germline analysis indicates that Loqs is required intrinsically for GSC
maintenance. Consistently, GSCs are restored in loqs mutant ovaries by germline
expression, but not somatic expression, of Loqs-PB. Together, these results
demonstrate that Loqs-PB, but not Loqs-PA, is necessary and sufficient for
Drosophila development and the miRNA pathway. Our study strongly suggests that
miRNAs play an intrinsic, but not extrinsic, role in Drosophila female GSC
self-renewal.

PMID: 17320391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2007 Apr;17(2):139-44. Epub 2007 Feb 20.

Noncoding RNA transcription beyond annotated genes.

Carninci P(1), Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center, RIKEN
Yokohama Institute, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa, 230-0045, Japan.
rgscerg@gsc.riken.jp

Recent analyses based on high-throughput transcriptome data have revealed that
the fraction of the genome that is transcribed largely exceeds the fraction
encoding protein. Transcription of unconventional genes into noncoding RNAs is
widespread and, in mammals, these RNAs comprise at least half the total number of
RNAs transcribed by RNA polymerase II. Although the function of the majority of
noncoding RNAs has yet to be discovered, many of them are transcribed from both
strands of the genome, and evidence points towards a regulatory function for many
noncoding RNAs in mammalian cells.

PMID: 17317145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Differentiation. 2007 Feb;75(2):133-46.

Ciliation and gene expression distinguish between node and posterior notochord in
the mammalian embryo.

Blum M(1), Andre P, Muders K, Schweickert A, Fischer A, Bitzer E, Bogusch S,
Beyer T, van Straaten HW, Viebahn C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Zoology, University of Hohenheim, D-70593 Stuttgart, Germany.
mblum@uni-hohenheim.de

The mammalian node, the functional equivalent of the frog dorsal blastoporal lip 
(Spemann's organizer), was originally described by Viktor Hensen in 1876 in the
rabbit embryo as a mass of cells at the anterior end of the primitive streak.
Today, the term "node" is commonly used to describe a bilaminar epithelial groove
presenting itself as an indentation or "pit" at the distal tip of the mouse egg
cylinder, and cilia on its ventral side are held responsible for molecular
laterality (left-right) determination. We find that Hensen's node in the rabbit
is devoid of cilia, and that ciliated cells are restricted to the notochordal
plate, which emerges from the node rostrally. In a comparative approach, we use
the organizer marker gene Goosecoid (Gsc) to show that a region of densely packed
epithelium-like cells at the anterior end of the primitive streak represents the 
node in mouse and rabbit and is covered ventrally by a hypoblast (termed
"visceral endoderm" in the mouse). Expression of Nodal, a gene intricately
involved in the determination of vertebrate laterality, delineates the wide
plate-like posterior segment of the notochord in the rabbit and mouse, which in
the latter is represented by the indentation frequently termed "the node."
Similarly characteristic ciliation and nodal expression exists in Xenopus neurula
embryos in the gastrocoel roof plate (GRP), i.e., at the posterior end of the
notochord anterior to the blastoporal lip. Our data suggest that (1) a posterior 
segment of the notochord, here termed PNC (for posterior notochord), is
characterized by features known to be involved in laterality determination, (2)
the GRP in Xenopus is equivalent to the mammalian PNC, and (3) the mammalian node
as defined by organizer gene expression is devoid of cilia and most likely not
directly involved in laterality determination.

PMID: 17316383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Mol Biosyst. 2007 Mar;3(3):195-207. Epub 2007 Jan 23.

Functional screening revisited in the postgenomic era.

Tochitani S(1), Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)RNA Resource Exploration Laboratory, Functional RNA Research Program, Frontier
Research System, RIKEN, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan. st0111@gsc.riken.jp

Functional screening can reveal a hidden function of a gene. cDNA library-based
functional screening has flourished in various fields of biology so far, such as 
cancer biology, developmental biology and neuroscience. In the postgenomic era,
however, various sequence database and public full-length cDNA resources are
available, which now allow us to perform more straightforward, gene-oriented
screening. Furthermore, the advent of RNA interference techniques has made it
possible to perform effective loss-of-function screening. Gene-based functional
screening is able to bridge the gap between genes and biological phenomena and
raise important biological questions which should be tackled by integration of
'omic' datasets. These possible roles of functional screening will become more
and more important in modern molecular biology moving toward the system level
understanding of living organisms.

PMID: 17308666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Curr Biol. 2007 Mar 20;17(6):539-44. Epub 2007 Feb 15.

Dcr-1 maintains Drosophila ovarian stem cells.

Jin Z(1), Xie T.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, Missouri 64110, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) regulate gene expression by controlling the turnover,
translation, or both of specific mRNAs. In Drosophila, Dicer-1 (Dcr-1) is
essential for generating mature miRNAs from their corresponding precursors.
Because miRNAs are known to modulate developmental events, such as cell fate
determination and maintenance in many species, we investigated whether a lack of 
Dcr-1 would affect the maintenance of stem cells (germline stem cells, GSCs;
somatic stem cells, SSCs) in the Drosophila ovary by specifically removing its
function from the stem cells. Our results show that dcr-1 mutant GSCs cannot be
maintained and are lost rapidly from the niche without discernable features of
cell death, indicating that Dcr-1 controls GSC self-renewal but not survival. bag
of marbles (bam), the gene that encodes an important differentiating factor in
the Drosophila germline, however, is not upregulated in dcr-1 mutant GSCs, and
its removal does not slow down dcr-1 mutant GSC loss, suggesting that Dcr-1
controls GSC self-renewal by repressing a Bam-independent differentiation
pathway. Furthermore, Dcr-1 is also essential for the maintenance of SSCs in the 
Drosophila ovary. Our data suggest that miRNAs produced by Dcr-1 are required for
maintaining two types of stem cells in the Drosophila ovary.

PMID: 17306537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Development. 2007 Mar;134(6):1191-201. Epub 2007 Feb 14.

Head regeneration in wild-type hydra requires de novo neurogenesis.

Miljkovic-Licina M(1), Chera S, Ghila L, Galliot B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Animal Biology, University of Geneva, Sciences III, 
30 Quai Ernest Ansermet, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

Because head regeneration occurs in nerve-free hydra mutants, neurogenesis was
regarded as dispensable for this process. Here, in wild-type hydra, we tested the
function of the ParaHox gsx homolog gene, cnox-2, which is a specific marker for 
bipotent neuronal progenitors, expressed in cycling interstitial cells that give 
rise to apical neurons and gastric nematoblasts (i.e. sensory mechanoreceptor
precursors). cnox-2 RNAi silencing leads to a dramatic downregulation of hyZic,
prdl-a, gsc and cnASH, whereas hyCOUP-TF is upregulated. cnox-2 indeed acts as an
upstream regulator of the neuronal and nematocyte differentiation pathways, as
cnox-2(-) hydra display a drastic reduction in apical neurons and gastric
nematoblasts, a disorganized apical nervous system and a decreased body size.
During head regeneration, the locally restricted de novo neurogenesis that
precedes head formation is cnox-2 dependent: cnox-2 expression is induced in
neuronal precursors and differentiating neurons that appear in the regenerating
tip; cnox-2 RNAi silencing reduces this de novo neurogenesis and delays head
formation. Similarly, the disappearance of cnox-2(+) cells in sf-1 mutants also
correlates with head regeneration blockade. Hence in wild-type hydra, head
regeneration requires the cnox-2 neurogenic function. When neurogenesis is
missing, an alternative, slower and less efficient, head developmental program is
possibly activated.

PMID: 17301084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Development. 2007 Mar;134(6):1071-80. Epub 2007 Feb 7.

Notch signaling controls germline stem cell niche formation in the Drosophila
ovary.

Song X(1), Call GB, Kirilly D, Xie T.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, 1000 East 50th Street, Kansas City, MO
64110, USA.

Stem cells, which can self-renew and generate differentiated cells, have been
shown to be controlled by surrounding microenvironments or niches in several
adult tissues. However, it remains largely unknown what constitutes a functional 
niche and how niche formation is controlled. In the Drosophila ovary, germline
stem cells (GSCs), which are adjacent to cap cells and two other cell types, have
been shown to be maintained in the niche. In this study, we show that Notch
signaling controls formation and maintenance of the GSC niche and that cap cells 
help determine the niche size in the Drosophila ovary. Expanded Notch activation 
causes the formation of more cap cells and bigger niches, which support more
GSCs, whereas compromising Notch signaling during niche formation decreases the
cap cell number and niche size and consequently the GSC number. Furthermore, the 
niches located away from their normal location can still sufficiently sustain GSC
self-renewal by maintaining high local BMP signaling and repressing bam as in
normal GSCs. Finally, loss of Notch function in adults results in rapid loss of
the GSC niche, including cap cells and thus GSCs. Our results indicate that Notch
signaling is important for formation and maintenance of the GSC niche, and that
cap cells help determine niche size and function.

PMID: 17287246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Differentiation. 2007 Jun;75(5):393-403. Epub 2007 Feb 5.

Early molecular effects of ethanol during vertebrate embryogenesis.

Yelin R(1), Kot H, Yelin D, Fainsod A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry and Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine,
Hebrew University, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD) is the combination of developmental,
morphological, and neurological defects that result from exposing human embryos
to ethanol (EtOH). Numerous embryonic structures are affected, leading to a
complex viable phenotype affecting among others, the anterior/posterior axis,
head, and eye formation. Recent studies have provided evidence suggesting that
EtOH teratogenesis is mediated in part through a reduction in retinoic acid (RA) 
levels, targeting mainly the embryonic organizer (Spemann's organizer) and its
subsequent functions. EtOH-treated Xenopus embryos were subjected to an analysis 
of gene expression patterns. Analysis of organizer-specific genes revealed a
transient delay in the invagination of gsc- and chordin-positive cells that
eventually reach their normal rostro-caudal position. Dorsal midline genes show
defects along the rostro-caudal axis, lacking either their rostral (Xbra and
Xnot2) or caudal (FoxA4b and Shh) expression domains. Head-specific markers like 
Otx2, en2, and Shh show abnormal expression patterns. Otx2 exhibits a reduction
in expression levels, while en2 becomes restricted along the dorsal/ventral axis.
During neurula stages, Shh becomes up-regulated in the rostral region and it is
expressed in an abnormal pattern. These results and histological analysis suggest
the existence of malformations in the brain region including a lack of the normal
fore brain ventricle. An increase in the size of both the prechordal plate and
the notochord was observed, while the spinal cord is narrower. The reduction in
head and eye size was accompanied by changes in the eye markers, Pax6 and Tbx3.
Our results provide evidence for the early molecular changes induced by EtOH
exposure during embryogenesis, and may explain some of the structural changes
that are part of the EtOH teratogenic phenotype also in FASD individuals.

PMID: 17286601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. J R Soc Interface. 2007 Aug 22;4(15):669-74.

Recent network evolution increases the potential for large epidemics in the
British cattle population.

Robinson SE(1), Everett MG, Christley RM.

Author information: 
(1)Epidemiology Group, Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, University of 
Liverpool, Leahurst, Neston, Wirral CH64 7TE, UK. s.e.robinson@liv.ac.uk

Following the foot and mouth disease epidemic in Great Britain (GB) in 2001,
livestock movement bans were replaced with mandatory periods of standstill for
livestock moving between premises. It was anticipated that these movement
restrictions would limit each individual's contact networks, the extent of
livestock movements and thus the spread of future disease outbreaks. However, the
effect of behaviour changes on the global network in adapting to these
restrictions is currently unknown. Here, we take a novel approach using GB cattle
movement data to construct week-by-week contact networks between animal holdings 
(AH) to explore the evolution of the network since this policy was introduced,
the first time network theory has been used for this purpose. We show that the
number of AH moving cattle as part of the giant strong component (GSC),
representing the region of maximal connectivity, has been increasing linearly
over time. This is of epidemiological significance as the size of the GSC
indicates the number of holdings potentially exposed to disease, thus giving a
lower bound of maximum epidemic size. Therefore, despite restriction of cattle
movements, emergent behaviour in this self-organizing system has potentially
increased the size of infectious disease epidemics within the cattle industry.

PMCID: PMC2373390
PMID: 17284415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2004;2:990-3.

MEG source estimation in the presence of low-rank interference using
cross-spectral metrics.

Gutierrez D(1), Nehorai A, Dogandzic A.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Bioeng., Illinois Univ., Chicago, IL, USA.

We estimate a source current dipole at a known location in the presence of
low-rank interference using magnetoencephalography (MEG). We present a space-time
processor for MEG data based on the generalized sidelobe canceler (GSC). We
extend the classical vector beamformer to a matrix structure without making any
assumptions on the rank of the covariance matrix of noise and interference, or
constraint matrices. Furthermore, we define the cross-spectral metrics (CSM) in
their most general form. The CSM method is known to approximate the performance
of the matched filter for the case of unknown covariance matrix. In our case, the
CSM also allows to reduce the complexity of the filtering problem without
significant loss of performance in the signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio
(SINR). Our results show that good estimates of the dipole sources can be
achieved by only using a few eigenvalues, namely, those corresponding to the
largest CSM.

PMID: 17271847  [PubMed]


376. EMBO J. 2007 Feb 7;26(3):835-45. Epub 2007 Jan 25.

Novel peroxisomal protease Tysnd1 processes PTS1- and PTS2-containing enzymes
involved in beta-oxidation of fatty acids.

Kurochkin IV(1), Mizuno Y, Konagaya A, Sakaki Y, Schönbach C, Okazaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Immunoinformatics Team, Advanced Genome Information Group, RIKEN Genomic
Sciences Center, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan. igork@gsc.riken.jp.jp

Peroxisomes play an important role in beta-oxidation of fatty acids. All
peroxisomal matrix proteins are synthesized in the cytosol and
post-translationally sorted to the organelle. Two distinct peroxisomal signal
targeting sequences (PTSs), the C-terminal PTS1 and the N-terminal PTS2, have
been defined. Import of precursor PTS2 proteins into the peroxisomes is
accompanied by a proteolytic removal of the N-terminal targeting sequence.
Although the PTS1 signal is preserved upon translocation, many PTS1 proteins
undergo a highly selective and limited cleavage. Here, we demonstrate that
Tysnd1, a previously uncharacterized protein, is responsible both for the removal
of the leader peptide from PTS2 proteins and for the specific processing of PTS1 
proteins. All of the identified Tysnd1 substrates catalyze peroxisomal
beta-oxidation. Tysnd1 itself undergoes processing through the removal of the
presumably inhibitory N-terminal fragment. Tysnd1 expression is induced by the
proliferator-activated receptor alpha agonist bezafibrate, along with the
increase in its substrates. A model is proposed where the Tysnd1-mediated
processing of the peroxisomal enzymes promotes their assembly into a
supramolecular complex to enhance the rate of beta-oxidation.

PMCID: PMC1794383
PMID: 17255948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. BMC Bioinformatics. 2006 Dec 18;7 Suppl 5:S22.

Selecting effective siRNA sequences by using radial basis function network and
decision tree learning.

Takasaki S(1), Kawamura Y, Konagaya A.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center, Suehiro-cho 1-7-22-E216, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, 
Kanagawa, 230-0045, Japan. takasaki@gsc.riken.jp

BACKGROUND: Although short interfering RNA (siRNA) has been widely used for
studying gene functions in mammalian cells, its gene silencing efficacy varies
markedly and there are only a few consistencies among the recently reported
design rules/guidelines for selecting siRNA sequences effective for mammalian
genes. Another shortcoming of the previously reported methods is that they cannot
estimate the probability that a candidate sequence will silence the target gene.
RESULTS: We propose two prediction methods for selecting effective siRNA target
sequences from many possible candidate sequences, one based on the supervised
learning of a radial basis function (RBF) network and other based on decision
tree learning. They are quite different from the previous score-based siRNA
design techniques and can predict the probability that a candidate siRNA sequence
will be effective. The proposed methods were evaluated by applying them to
recently reported effective and ineffective siRNA sequences for various genes (15
genes, 196 siRNA sequences). We also propose the combined prediction method of
the RBF network and decision tree learning. As the average prediction
probabilities of gene silencing for the effective and ineffective siRNA sequences
of the reported genes by the proposed three methods were respectively 65% and
32%, 56.6% and 38.1%, and 68.5% and 28.1%, the methods imply high estimation
accuracy for selecting candidate siRNA sequences.
CONCLUSION: New prediction methods were presented for selecting effective siRNA
sequences. As the proposed methods indicated high estimation accuracy for
selecting candidate siRNA sequences, they would be useful for many other genes.

PMCID: PMC1764479
PMID: 17254307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. BMC Bioinformatics. 2006 Dec 18;7 Suppl 5:S10.

Trends in life science grid: from computing grid to knowledge grid.

Konagaya A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Sciences Center, RIKEN, Yokohama, Japan. konagaya@gsc.riken.jp

BACKGROUND: Grid computing has great potential to become a standard
cyberinfrastructure for life sciences which often require high-performance
computing and large data handling which exceeds the computing capacity of a
single institution.
RESULTS: This survey reviews the latest grid technologies from the viewpoints of 
computing grid, data grid and knowledge grid. Computing grid technologies have
been matured enough to solve high-throughput real-world life scientific problems.
Data grid technologies are strong candidates for realizing "resourceome" for
bioinformatics. Knowledge grids should be designed not only from sharing explicit
knowledge on computers but also from community formulation for sharing tacit
knowledge among a community.
CONCLUSION: Extending the concept of grid from computing grid to knowledge grid, 
it is possible to make use of a grid as not only sharable computing resources,
but also as time and place in which people work together, create knowledge, and
share knowledge and experiences in a community.

PMCID: PMC1764466
PMID: 17254294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Mol Biosyst. 2007 Feb;3(2):111-6. Epub 2006 Dec 18.

System properties of ErbB receptor signaling for the understanding of cancer
progression.

Hatakeyama M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cellular Systems Biology Team, RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center, 1-7-22
Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. marikoh@gsc.riken.jp

An intracellular signal transduction network constitutes an assembled machinery
to control the dynamics of kinase-phosphatase cascade and gene expression.
Spatio-temporal analyses of the cellular process can explain the biochemical role
of the receptor tyrosine kinases in cancer development from a system point of
view.

PMID: 17245490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. BMC Bioinformatics. 2006 Dec 12;7 Suppl 4:S20.

Particle simulation approach for subcellular dynamics and interactions of
biological molecules.

Azuma R(1), Kitagawa T, Kobayashi H, Konagaya A.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center, 1-7-22 Suehiro Tsurumi, Yokohama, Kanagawa,
230-0045, Japan. azuma@gsc.riken.jp

BACKGROUND: Spatio-temporal dynamics within cells can now be visualized at
appropriate resolution, due to the advances in molecular imaging technologies.
Even single-particle tracking (SPT) and single fluorophore video imaging (SFVI)
are now being applied to observation of molecular-level dynamics. However, little
is known concerning how molecular-level dynamics affect properties at the
cellular level.
RESULTS: We propose an algorithm designed for three-dimensional simulation of the
reaction-diffusion dynamics of molecules, based on a particle model. Chemical
reactions proceed through the interactions of particles in space, with activation
energies determining the rates of these chemical reactions at each interaction.
This energy-based model can include the cellular membrane, membranes of other
organelles, and cytoskeleton. The simulation algorithm was tested for a
reversible enzyme reaction model and its validity was confirmed. Snapshot images 
taken from simulated molecular interactions on the cell-surface revealed
clustering domains (size approximately 0.2 microm) associated with rafts. Sample 
trajectories of raft constructs exhibited "hop diffusion". These domains
corralled the diffusive motion of membrane proteins.
CONCLUSION: These findings demonstrate that our approach is promising for
modelling the localization properties of biological phenomena.

PMCID: PMC1780110
PMID: 17217513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Cell Res. 2007 Jan;17(1):15-25.

The Drosophila ovary: an active stem cell community.

Kirilly D(1), Xie T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, Biological Research Centre of the Hungarian Academy of 
Sciences, Temesvári krt. 62, Szeged 6726, Hungary.

Erratum in
    Cell Res. 2007 Mar;17(3):271.

Only a small number of cells in adult tissues (the stem cells) possess the
ability to self-renew at every cell division, while producing differentiating
daughter cells to maintain tissue homeostasis for an organism's lifetime. The
Drosophila ovary harbors three different types of stem cell populations (germline
stem cell (GSC), somatic stem cell (SSC) and escort stem cell (ESC)) located in a
simple anatomical structure known as germarium, rendering it one of the best
model systems for studying stem cell biology due to reliable stem cell
identification and available sophisticated genetic tools for manipulating gene
functions. Particularly, the niche for the GSC is among the first and best
studied ones, and studies on the GSC and its niche have made many unique
contributions to a better understanding of relationships between stem cells and
their niche. So far, both the GSC and the SSC have been shown to be regulated by 
extrinsic factors originating from their niche and intrinsic factors functioning 
within. Multiple signaling pathways are required for controlling GSC and SSC
self-renewal and differentiation, which provide unique opportunities to
investigate how multiple signals from the niche are interpreted in the stem cell.
Since the Drosophila ovary contains three types of stem cells, it also provides
outstanding opportunities to study how multiple stem cells in a given tissue work
collaboratively to contribute to tissue function and maintenance. This review
highlights recent major advances in studying Drosophila ovarian stem cells and
also discusses future directions and challenges.

PMID: 17199109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. J Am Chem Soc. 2006 Dec 20;128(50):16338-44.

Conformational preference of polyglycine in solution to elongated structure.

Ohnishi S(1), Kamikubo H, Onitsuka M, Kataoka M, Shortle D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, The Johns Hopkins University, School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA. ohnishi@gsc.riken.jp

Do polypeptide chains ever behave like a random coil? In this report we
demonstrate that glycine, the residue with the fewest backbone restrictions,
exhibits a strong preference for an extended conformation in solution when
polymerized in short segments of polyglycine. A model peptide system comprised of
two unique tripeptide units, between which 1 to 18 glycine residues are inserted,
is characterized by NMR and by small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS). The residual 
dipolar coupling (RDC) values of the two tripeptide units are insensitive to
changes in number of intervening glycines, suggesting that extension of the
linker does not alter the average angular relationship between the tripeptides.
Polyglycine segments longer than nine residues form insoluble aggregates. SAXS
measurements using synchrotron radiation provide direct evidence that polyglycine
peptides adopt elongated conformations. In particular, the construct with a
linker with six glycines showed a scattering profile indicative of a monomeric
state with a radius of gyration and the maximum dimension of 9.1 A and
approximately 34 A, respectively. The ensemble averaged global structure of this 
12-mer peptide can best be approximated by a cylinder with a radius of 4 A and a 
length of approximately 33 A, making it intermediate in extension between a beta 
strand and an alpha helix.

PMID: 17165789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Am J Surg. 2006 Dec;192(6):738-42.

Physical examination as a reliable tool to predict intra-abdominal injuries in
brain-injured children.

Miller D(1), Garza J, Tuggle D, Mantor C, Puffinbarger N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Section of Pediatric Surgery, The University of
Oklahoma College of Medicine, 940 NE 13th St, Room 2403, Oklahoma City, OK 73104,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Brain-injured children have been thought to have an unreliable
abdominal examination. This study evaluates the reliability of physical
examination in the prediction of intra-abdominal injury in brain-injured
children.
METHODS: Pediatric patients with a traumatic brain injury or Glasgow Coma Scale
(GCS) <15 and intra-abdominal organ injuries were selected. Admission data were
reviewed, and findings were tabulated.
RESULTS: Fifty patients had an abnormal abdominal examination. Nineteen of 71
patients with head injury and intra-abdominal organ injuries required laparotomy.
These 19 patients had abdominal tenderness, distention, abrasions, and/or a
positive focused abdominal sonography for trauma (FAST) scan. Seven of 19
patients had a GCS of 3. Of the 12 patients requiring surgery with GSC 4 to 14,
all patients had abnormal physical examinations.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients who required an operation presented with an abnormal
examination and/or a positive FAST. These data suggest that examination and/or
FAST may reliably identify patients with intra-abdominal organ injuries in need
of an operation.

PMID: 17161085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Genesis. 2006 Dec;44(12):584-8.

Targeted gene expression in the zebrafish prechordal plate.

Inbal A(1), Topczewski J, Solnica-Krezel L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee
37235-1634, USA.

Targeted gene expression is a powerful tool for understanding gene function in
vivo. In zebrafish, overexpression of gene products is typically accomplished
ubiquitously, without temporal and spatial specificity. However, the yeast
Gal4/UAS system can be used for targeted gene expression in zebrafish. Here we
describe the generation and characterization of Tg[gsc: Gal4-VP16] transgenic
zebrafish lines that harbor a construct encoding Gal4-VP16 transcriptional
activator under the control of a fragment of the goosecoid gene promoter.
Tg[gsc:Gal4-VP16] embryos express Gal4-VP16 RNA in presumptive prechordal plate
mesendoderm during late blastula and throughout gastrulation. By crossing these
fish to Tg[UAS-GFP] transgenic fish, we show that the gsc:Gal4-VP16 transgene is 
capable of driving strong expression of a target gene in the prechordal plate and
its derivatives during gastrulation and segmentation. Thus, the use of
Tg[gsc:Gal4-VP16] fish can help in understanding gene function in the prechordal 
plate, an embryonic structure that is crucial for normal neural patterning.

Published 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17133414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. RNA Biol. 2005 Jan;2(1):21-7. Epub 2005 Jan 5.

Selecting effective siRNA target sequences for mammalian genes.

Takasaki S(1), Kotani S, Konagaya A.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center (GSC), Tsurumiku, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan.
takasaki@gsc.riken.jp

Short interfering RNA (siRNA) has been widely used for studying gene functions in
mammalian cells but varies markedly in its gene-silencing efficacy in mammalian
genes. The recently reported guidelines for selecting effective siRNA target
sequences are not always useful for selecting highly effective siRNA sequences
for many other mammalian genes because there are only a few consistencies among
them. Hypothesizing that the positional nucleotide occurrence trends play an
important role in effective gene-silencing, we examined 361 effective siRNA
sequences from 227 different mammalian cDNAs in the literature and found got
several nucleotide features different from the ones used in the previous
guidelines. Here we first explain the problems concerning the previous guidelines
from the qualitative and quantitative points of view. Then after clarifying the
requirements for effective siRNA designs, we describe a new method based on a
gene degradation measure defined by positional features of specific significant
nucleotides. Testing the method on human cyclin B1 confirmed that it selected
highly effective gene-silencing sequences and also indicated that it would be
useful for other genes. It will therefore be useful for selecting new siRNA
target sequences for mammalian genes.

PMID: 17132936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Mech Dev. 2007 Feb;124(2):157-165. Epub 2006 Oct 10.

Genetic interaction of Gsc and Dkk1 in head morphogenesis of the mouse.

Lewis SL(1), Khoo PL, Andrea De Young R, Bildsoe H, Wakamiya M, Behringer RR,
Mukhopadhyay M, Westphal H, Tam PP.

Author information: 
(1)Embryology Unit, Childrens Medical Research Institute, Locked Bag 23,
Wentworthville, NSW 2145, Australia.

Mouse embryos lacking Gsc and Dkk1 function display severe deficiencies in
craniofacial structures which are not found in either Dkk1 homozygous null or Gsc
homozygous null mutant embryos. Loss of Gsc has a dosage-related effect on the
severity of head truncation phenotype in Dkk1 heterozygous embryos. The
synergistic effect of these mutations in enhancing head truncation provides
direct evidence of a genetic interaction between Gsc and Dkk1, which display
overlapping expression in the prechordal mesoderm. In the absence of Gsc
activity, the expression of Dkk1, WNT genes and a transgenic reporter for WNT
signalling are altered. Our results show that Gsc and Dkk1 functions are
non-redundant in the anterior mesendoderm for normal anterior development and Gsc
may influence Wnt signalling as a negative regulator.

PMID: 17127040  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


387. RNA Biol. 2006 Jan-Mar;3(1):40-8. Epub 2006 Apr 3.

Discrimination of non-protein-coding transcripts from protein-coding mRNA.

Frith MC(1), Bailey TL, Kasukawa T, Mignone F, Kummerfeld SK, Madera M, Sunkara
S, Furuno M, Bult CJ, Quackenbush J, Kai C, Kawai J, Carninci P, Hayashizaki Y,
Pesole G, Mattick JS.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Exploration Research Group (Genome Network Project Core Group), RIKEN
Genomic Sciences Center (GSC), RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Kanagawa, Japan.

Several recent studies indicate that mammals and other organisms produce large
numbers of RNA transcripts that do not correspond to known genes. It has been
suggested that these transcripts do not encode proteins, but may instead function
as RNAs. However, discrimination of coding and non-coding transcripts is not
straightforward, and different laboratories have used different methods, whose
ability to perform this discrimination is unclear. In this study, we examine ten 
bioinformatic methods that assess protein-coding potential and compare their
ability and congruency in the discrimination of non-coding from coding sequences,
based on four underlying principles: open reading frame size, sequence similarity
to known proteins or protein domains, statistical models of protein-coding
sequence, and synonymous versus non-synonymous substitution rates. Despite these 
different approaches, the methods show broad concordance, suggesting that coding 
and non-coding transcripts can, in general, be reliably discriminated, and that
many of the recently discovered extra-genic transcripts are indeed non-coding.
Comparison of the methods indicates reasons for unreliable predictions, and
approaches to increase confidence further. Conversely and surprisingly, our
analyses also provide evidence that as much as approximately 10% of entries in
the manually curated protein database Swiss-Prot are erroneous translations of
actually non-coding transcripts.

PMID: 17114936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. J Neuroimmunol. 2007 Jan;182(1-2):212-8. Epub 2006 Nov 16.

Anti-ganglioside complex antibodies associated with severe disability in GBS.

Kaida K(1), Morita D, Kanzaki M, Kamakura K, Motoyoshi K, Hirakawa M, Kusunoki S.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, National Defense Medical College, 3-2
Namiki, Saitama-ken, 359-8513, Japan.

Ganglioside complexes (GSCs) are known as target antigens in Guillain-Barré
syndrome (GBS). To elucidate the clinical importance of the anti-GSC antibodies
in GBS, we investigated serum antibodies to GSCs containing two of the
gangliosides, GM1, GD1a, GD1b and GT1b, and analyzed clinical features of
anti-GSC-positive GBS patients. Thirty-nine (17%) of 234 GBS patients had IgG
anti-GSC antibodies. Anti-GSC-positive GBS had antecedent gastrointestinal
infection and lower cranial nerve deficits more frequently than control GBS. The 
presence of antibody specificity to GD1a/GD1b and/or GD1b/GT1b was significantly 
associated with severe disability and a requirement for mechanical ventilation.

PMID: 17113161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Plant Cell Environ. 2006 Dec;29(12):2168-84.

Low stomatal and internal conductance to CO2 versus Rubisco deactivation as
determinants of the photosynthetic decline of ageing evergreen leaves.

Ethier GJ(1), Livingston NJ, Harrison DL, Black TA, Moran JA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Forest Biology, Department of Biology, University of Victoria,
Victoria, B.C. V8W 3 N5, Canada. ethierg@uvic.ca

A novel A-Ci curve (net CO2 assimilation rate of a leaf -An- as a function of its
intercellular CO2 concentration -Ci) analysis method (Plant, Cell & Environment
27, 137-153, 2004) was used to estimate the CO2 transfer conductance (gi) and the
maximal carboxylation (Vcmax) and electron transport (Jmax) potentials of ageing,
non-senescing Pseudotsuga menziesii leaves in relation to their nitrogen (N)
content and protein and pigment composition. Both gi and the stomatal conductance
(gsc) of leaves were closely coupled to Vcmax, Jmax and An with all variables
decreasing with increasing leaf age. Consequently, both Ci and Cc (chloroplastic 
CO2 concentration) remained largely conserved through successive growing seasons.
The N content of leaves, as well as the amount of ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate
carboxylase/oxygenase (Rubisco) and other sodium dodecyl sulfate-soluble
proteins, increased during the first three growing seasons, then stabilized or
decreased only slightly afterwards. Thus, the age-related photosynthetic nitrogen
use efficiency (PNUE) decline of leaves was not a consequence of decreased
allocation of N towards Rubisco and other proteins involved in bioenergetics and 
light harvesting. Rather, loss of photosynthetic capacity was the result of the
decreased activation state of Rubisco and proportional down-regulation of
electron transport towards the photosynthetic carbon reduction (PCR) and
photorespiratory (PCO) cycles in response to a reduction of CO2 supply to the
chloroplasts' stroma. This study emphasizes the regulatory potential and
homeostaticity of Cc- rather than photosynthetic metabolites or Ci- in relation
to the commonly observed correlation between photosynthesis and gsc.

PMID: 17081250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Bioinformatics. 2007 Feb 15;23(4):524-6. Epub 2006 Oct 31.

OmicBrowse: a browser of multidimensional omics annotations.

Toyoda T(1), Mochizuki Y, Player K, Heida N, Kobayashi N, Sakaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Sciences Center, Yokohama Institute, RIKEN, 1-77-22, Suehiro, Tsurumi,
Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan. toyop@gsc.riken.go.jp

OmicBrowse is a browser to explore multiple datasets coordinated in the
multidimensional omic space integrating omics knowledge ranging from genomes to
phenomes and connecting evolutional correspondences among multiple species.
OmicBrowse integrates multiple data servers into a single omic space through
secure peer-to-peer server communications, so that a user can easily obtain an
integrated view of distributed data servers, e.g. an integrated view of numerous 
whole-genome tiling-array data retrieved from a user's in-house private-data
server, along with various genomic annotations from public internet servers.
OmicBrowse is especially appropriate for positional-cloning purposes. It displays
both genetic maps and genomic annotations within wide chromosomal intervals and
assists a user to select candidate genes by filtering their annotations or
associated documents against user-specified keywords or ontology terms. We also
show that an omic-space chart effectively represents schemes for integrating
multiple datasets of multiple species.AVAILABILITY: OmicBrowse is developed by
the Genome-Phenome Superbrain Project and is released as free open-source
software under the GNU General Public License at http://omicspace.riken.jp.

PMID: 17077097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Solid State Nucl Magn Reson. 2006 Oct;30(3-4):182-91. Epub 2006 Sep 30.

Both experimental and theoretical investigations of solid-state 17O NMR for
L-valine and L-isoleucine.

Yamada K(1), Nemoto T, Asanuma M, Honda H, Yamazaki T, Hirota H.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center, 1-7-22 Suehiro, Tsurumi, Yokohama 230-0045,
Japan. kyamada@gsc.riken.jp

We have presented an experimental investigation of the carboxyl oxygen NMR
parameters for four distinct sites in l-valine and l-isoleucine. The carboxyl
(17)O quadrupolar coupling constant, C(Q), and isotropic chemical shift,
delta(iso), for these compounds are obtained by analyzing two-dimensional (17)O
multiple-quantum magic-angle spinning (MQMAS) and/or 1D MAS spectra. The values
of C(Q) and delta(iso) found to be in the range of 7.00-7.85 MHz, and 264-314
ppm, respectively. Extensive quantum chemical calculations at the density
functional levels have been performed for a full cluster of l-valine molecules
and a few theoretical models. The calculated results indicated that there was a
correlation between the (17)O NMR parameters and C-O bond lengths, which was
helpful for the spectral assignment. They also demonstrated that the torsion
angle of l-valine plays an important role in determining the magnitudes of (17)O 
NMR parameters.

PMID: 17074470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2007 Mar;33(2):133-9. Epub 2006 Oct 30.

Gastric stump carcinoma - epidemiology and current concepts in pathogenesis and
treatment.

Sinning C(1), Schaefer N, Standop J, Hirner A, Wolff M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Bonn, Sigmund-Freud-Strasse 25, Bonn
D-53105, Germany.

AIM: The aim of this article is to review the aetiology, pathology and treatment 
of gastric stump carcinoma (GSC). GSC is an uncommon tumour; however, the
incidence is not declining, so this tumour entity will be encountered in the
years to come.
METHODS: The electronic literature search was performed in the MEDLINE database
to identify relevant studies concerning epidemiology, prognosis, treatment,
aetiology and pathology of GSC. The references reported in these studies were
used to complete the literature search.
RESULTS: Patients subjected to distal gastric resection have a 4-7-fold increased
risk of developing GSC, which is attributed mainly to gastroduodenal reflux.
Denervation during partial gastrectomy may also contribute to the risk of
developing GSC. Gastroduodenal ulcers were the main reason for partial
gastrectomy. Both ulcer locations have an increased risk of developing GSC after 
20 years. In GSC, Helicobacter pylori seems not to be an important risk factor,
contrary to primary gastric cancer, because gastroduodenal reflux impairs the
growth of Helicobacter pylori.
CONCLUSION: The treatment of choice for GSC should be the total removal of the
gastric remnant including at least D2 lymphadenectomy. The pattern of lymph node 
metastases in GSC may differ from primary gastric cancer, as lymph node
metastases have been reported in the jejunal mesentery and the lower mediastinum.
Therefore, GSC may require a modified lymphadenectomy to include all important
lymph node stations. After radical remnant gastrectomy, GSC has a prognosis not
different from primary proximal gastric cancer.

PMID: 17071041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Genomics. 2007 Feb;89(2):207-14. Epub 2006 Oct 13.

A series of ENU-induced single-base substitutions in a long-range cis-element
altering Sonic hedgehog expression in the developing mouse limb bud.

Masuya H(1), Sezutsu H, Sakuraba Y, Sagai T, Hosoya M, Kaneda H, Miura I,
Kobayashi K, Sumiyama K, Shimizu A, Nagano J, Yokoyama H, Kaneko S, Sakurai N,
Okagaki Y, Noda T, Wakana S, Gondo Y, Shiroishi T.

Author information: 
(1)Mouse Functional Genomics Research Group, RIKEN GSC 3-1-1 Kouyadai, Tsukuba,
Ibaraki 305-0074, Japan.

Mammal-fish-conserved-sequence 1 (MFCS1) is a highly conserved sequence that acts
as a limb-specific cis-acting regulator of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) expression,
residing 1 Mb away from the Shh coding sequence in mouse. Using gene-driven
screening of an ENU-mutagenized mouse archive, we obtained mice with three new
point mutations in MFCS1: M101116, M101117, and M101192. Phenotype analysis
revealed that M101116 mice exhibit preaxial polydactyly and ectopic Shh
expression at the anterior margin of the limb buds like a previously identified
mutant, M100081. In contrast, M101117 and M101192 show no marked abnormalities in
limb morphology. Furthermore, transgenic analysis revealed that the M101116 and
M100081 sequences drive ectopic reporter gene expression at the anterior margin
of the limb bud, in addition to the normal posterior expression. Such ectopic
expression was not observed in the embryos carrying a reporter transgene driven
by M101117. These results suggest that M101116 and M100081 affect the negative
regulatory activity of MFCS1, which suppresses anterior Shh expression in
developing limb buds. Thus, this study shows that gene-driven screening for
ENU-induced mutations is an effective approach for exploring the function of
conserved, noncoding sequences and potential cis-regulatory elements.

PMID: 17049204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Solid State Nucl Magn Reson. 2006 Oct;30(3-4):162-70. Epub 2006 Sep 7.

Solid-state 17O NMR study of the electric-field-gradient and chemical shielding
tensors in polycrystalline gamma-glycine.

Yamada K(1), Honda H, Yamazaki T, Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)NMR Spectroscopy Team, RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center, Tsurumi, Yokohama-shi,
Kanagawa-ken 230-0045, Japan. kyamada@gsc.riken.jp

We report the first experimental determination of the carboxylate oxygen
electric-field-gradient (EFG) and chemical shielding (CS) tensors in
polycrystalline gamma-glycine. Analysis of magic-angle spinning (MAS) and
stationary (17)O NMR spectra of [(17)O]-gamma-glycine obtained at 9.4, 14.1,
16.4, and 18.8 T yields the magnitudes of the (17)O EFG and CS tensors and the
relative orientations between the two tensors. Extensive quantum chemical
calculations at both the restricted Hartree-Fock and density functional levels
have been performed to present the absolute tensor orientations in term of the
molecular frame. We have demonstrated that (17)O NMR tensor information could be 
unambiguously derived by the multiple field analyses of stationary (17)O NMR
spectra.

PMID: 17045787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Bioessays. 2006 Nov;28(11):1087-90.

Genome-wide prediction of genetic interactions in a metazoan.

Onami S(1), Kitano H.

Author information: 
(1)Computational and Experimental Systems Biology Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences
Center, Tsurumi, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. sonami@gsc.riken.jp

Genetic interactions provide information about genes and processes with
overlapping functions in biological systems. For Saccharomyces cerevisiae,
computational integration of multiple types of functional genomic data is used to
generate genome-wide predictions of genetic interactions. However, this
methodology cannot be applied to the vastly more complex genome of metazoans, and
only recently has the first metazoan genome-wide prediction of genetic
interactions been reported. The prediction for Caenorhabditis elegans was
generated by computationally integrating functional genomic data from S.
cerevisiae, C. elegans and Drosophila melanogaster. This achievement is an
important step toward system-level understanding of biological systems and human 
diseases.

(c) 2006 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 17041895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Int J Food Microbiol. 2007 Feb 15;113(3):346-50. Epub 2006 Sep 25.

A preliminary study of caffeine degradation by Pseudomonas sp. GSC 1182.

Gokulakrishnan S(1), Chandraraj K, Gummadi SN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology-Madras, Chennai
600 036, India.

Several microorganisms isolated from soil were tested for their ability to
utilize caffeine as the sole carbon and nitrogen source. The isolate identified
as Pseudomonas sp. GSC 1182 showed 80% degradation of caffeine in 48 h when
caffeine was used as the sole carbon and nitrogen source. In the presence of
sucrose (5 g/l), 100% degradation of caffeine was achieved within 36-40 h. The
degradation rate was also found to increase when fructose, lactose and galactose 
were used as carbon source. The isolate showed decreased level (<10%) of caffeine
degradation in the presence of glucose. At an initial pH of 6.0, the complete
degradation of caffeine was attained in 24 h. The addition of urea and ammonium
sulfate as external nitrogen source decreased the caffeine degradation to 35% and
70% respectively.

PMID: 16996632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. OMICS. 2006 Summer;10(2):127-37.

Concept of sample in OMICS technology.

Morrison N(1), Cochrane G, Faruque N, Tatusova T, Tateno Y, Hancock D, Field D.

Author information: 
(1)School of Computer Science, University of Manchester, United Kingdom.

Fundamental biological processes can now be studied by applying the full range of
OMICS technologies (genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics, and
beyond) to the same biological sample. Clearly, it would be desirable if the
concept of sample were shared among these technologies, especially as up until
the time a biological sample is prepared for use in a specific OMICS assay, its
description is inherently technology independent. Sharing a common informatic
representation would encourage data sharing (rather than data replication),
thereby reducing redundant data capture and the potential for error. This would
result in a significant degree of harmonization across different OMICS data
standardization activities, a task that is critical if we are to integrate data
from these different data sources. Here, we review the current concept of sample 
in OMICS technologies as it is being dealt with by different OMICS
standardization initiatives and discuss the special role that the newly formed
Genomic Standards Consortium (GSC) might have to play in this domain.

PMID: 16901217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. OMICS. 2006 Summer;10(2):100-4.

Meeting report: eGenomics: Cataloguing our Complete Genome Collection II.

Field D(1), Morrison N, Selengut J, Sterk P.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Evolution & Bioinformatics Section, Oxford Centre for Ecology and
Hydrology, Oxford, United Kingdom. dfield@ceh.ac.uk

This article summarizes the proceedings of the "eGenomics: Cataloguing our
Complete Genome Collection II" workshop held November 10-11, 2005, at the
European Bioinformatics Institute. This exploratory workshop, organized by
members of the Genomic Standards Consortium (GSC), brought together researchers
from the genomic, functional OMICS, and computational biology communities to
discuss standardization activities across a range of projects. The workshop
proceedings and outcomes are set to help guide the development of the GSC's
Minimal Information about a Genome Sequence (MIGS) specification.

PMID: 16901213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Neurogenetics. 2006 Nov;7(4):247-57. Epub 2006 Aug 10.

Behavior of mice with mutations in the conserved region deleted in
velocardiofacial/DiGeorge syndrome.

Long JM(1), LaPorte P, Merscher S, Funke B, Saint-Jore B, Puech A, Kucherlapati
R, Morrow BE, Skoultchi AI, Wynshaw-Boris A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego School of
Medicine, La Jolla, CA 92093-0627, USA.

Velocardiofacial/DiGeorge syndrome (VCFS/DGS) is a developmental disorder caused 
by a 1.5 to 3-Mb hemizygous 22q11.2 deletion. VCFS/DGS patients display
malformations in multiple systems, as well as an increased frequency of
neuropsychiatric defects including schizophrenia. Haploinsufficiency of TBX1
appears to be responsible for these physical malformations in humans and mice,
but the genes responsible for the neuropsychiatric defects are unknown. In this
study, two mouse models of VCFS/DGS, a deletion mouse model (Lgdel/+) and a
single gene model (Tbx1 +/-), as well as a third mouse mutant (Gscl -/-) for a
gene within the Lgdel deletion, were tested in a large behavioral battery
designed to assess gross physical features, sensorimotor reflexes, motor activity
nociception, acoustic startle, sensorimotor gating, and learning and memory.
Lgdel/+ mice contain a 1.5-Mb hemizygous deletion of 27 genes in the orthologous 
region on MMU 16 and present with impairment in sensorimotor gating, grip
strength, and nociception. Tbx1 +/- mice were impaired in grip strength similar
to Lgdel/+ mice and movement initiation. Gscl -/- mice were not impaired in any
of the administered tests, suggesting that redundant function of other Gsc family
members may compensate for the loss of Gscl. Thus, although deletion of the genes
in the Lgdel region in mice may recapitulate some of the behavioral phenotypes
seen in humans with VCFS/DGS, these phenotypes are not found in mice with
complete loss of Gscl or in mice with heterozygous loss of Tbx1, suggesting that 
the neuropsychiatric and physical malformations of VCFS/DGS may act by different 
genetic mechanisms.

PMID: 16900388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006 Aug 8;34(13):e97.

A RecA-mediated exon profiling method.

Hasegawa Y(1), Fukuda S, Shimokawa K, Kondo S, Maeda N, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center (GSC), RIKEN 
Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045,
Japan.

We have developed a RecA-mediated simple, rapid and scalable method for
identifying novel alternatively spliced full-length cDNA candidates. This method 
is based on the principle that RecA proteins allow to carry radioisotope-labeled 
probe DNAs to their homologous sequences, resulting in forming triplexes. The
resulting complex is easily detected by mobility difference on electrophoresis.
We applied this exon profiling method to four selected mouse genes as a
feasibility study. To design probes for detection, the information on known
exonic regions was extracted from public database, RefSeq. Concerning the
potentially transcribed novel exonic regions, RNA mapping experiment using
Affymetrix tiling array was performed. As a result, we were able to identify
alternative splice variants of Thioredoxin domain containing 5, Interleukin1beta,
Interleukin 1 family 6 and glutamine-rich hypothetical protein. In addition,
full-length sequencing demonstrated that our method could profile exon structures
with >90% accuracy. This reliable method can allow us to screen novel splice
variants from a huge number of cDNA clone set effectively.

PMCID: PMC1540731
PMID: 16896013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Biotechniques. 2006 Jul;41(1):44, 46, 48 passim.

Constructing ORFeome resources with removable termination codons.

Itoh M(1), Yasunishi A, Imamura K, Kanamori-Katayama M, Suzuki H, Suzuki M,
Carninci P, Kawai J, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN DRI, Wako, RIKEN GSC, Yokohama, Japan. rgscerg@gsc.riken.jp

PMID: 16869512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Trends Genet. 2006 Sep;22(9):501-10. Epub 2006 Jul 21.

Tagging mammalian transcription complexity.

Carninci P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Genome Science Laboratory, Discovery and Research Institute, RIKEN Wako
Institute, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0198 Japan. rgscerg@gsc.riken.jp

The nature of the 'transcriptome' is more complex than first realized. Although
CAGE, various tagging technologies and tiling arrays show that most of the
mammalian genome is transcribed, a large proportion of transcripts do not encode 
proteins and are either poorly polyadenylated, involved in sense-antisense pairs 
or never leave the nucleus. In this article, I review the various techniques and 
data sets that are currently used to measure gene transcription and the evidence 
that reveals the true extent of transcription in mammalian genomes. The next few 
years will see efforts to identify novel transcripts systematically and decipher 
their function. A deeper understanding of transcriptional complexity might even
lead us to redefine what we mean by the term 'gene'.

PMID: 16859803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2006 Aug;15(8):963-79.

Therapeutic potential of selectin antagonists in psoriasis.

Bock D(1), Philipp S, Wolff G.

Author information: 
(1)Revotar Biopharmaceuticals AG, Neuendorfstrasse 24a, 16761 Hennigsdorf,
Germany. d.bock@revotar-ag.de

Psoriasis is a systemic chronic inflammatory disorder. One of the major
characteristics is an excess of infiltration of inflammatory cells, mainly
lymphocytes, into the skin. Because the adhesion family of selectins is suggested
to play a relevant role in this process, selectins have emerged as an interesting
target for drug discovery and development in psoriasis. Different strategies
targeting selectins have been described. This review discusses these approaches
and summarises the current development of selectin antagonists for the treatment 
of psoriasis. An expert opinion will give the authors' personal opinion about
selectin antagonism in psoriasis and which approach might be preferable.

PMID: 16859397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Physiol. 2006 Sep 1;575(Pt 2):373-7. Epub 2006 Jul 13.

Protein-protein interactions in the mammalian brain.

Suzuki H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center (GSC), 1-7-22
Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan.

Recent genome-wide high-throughput (HTS) analyses of protein-protein interactions
(PPIs) provide molecular-based information to uncover functions of cells and
tissues, such as those of the mammalian brain. However, the HTS PPI data contain 
much false-negatives and false-positives, which should be primarily addressed in 
experiments. Integrating PPI data sets with other genome-wide data, such as
expression profiles and phenotype data sets, provides novel biological insights. 
Such integration analysis is valuable for addressing the complexity of the
mammalian brain. Discovery of novel interactions followed by a detailed analysis 
is a successful approach to uncover the function of proteins. For example,
extensive PPI screens for parkin, a hereditary Parkinson's disease gene,
elucidated the function of parkin as an E3 ubiquitin ligase, with localization
and activity regulated by contact with its interaction partners, uncovering at
least a part of the molecular pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease.

PMCID: PMC1819454
PMID: 16840513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Plant J. 2006 Aug;47(4):640-51. Epub 2006 Jun 30.

A trial of phenome analysis using 4000 Ds-insertional mutants in gene-coding
regions of Arabidopsis.

Kuromori T(1), Wada T, Kamiya A, Yuguchi M, Yokouchi T, Imura Y, Takabe H,
Sakurai T, Akiyama K, Hirayama T, Okada K, Shinozaki K.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan.

Mutant lines covering all Arabidopsis genes allow us to pursue systematic
functional genomics. A comprehensive phenotype description, called a phenome, is 
highly sought after in the profiling of -omics data. We selected 4000
transposon-insertional lines with transposon insertions in their gene-coding
regions, and systematically observed the visible phenotype of each line. For the 
first 3 weeks after germination, plants were grown on agar plates and the
juvenile phenotypes were recorded. Then the plants were transferred to soil and
their phenotypes were recorded at each growth stage. About 140 lines showed clear
and reproducible visible phenotypes, including novel phenotypic mutants as well
as previously reported ones. All descriptions of the mutants showing visible
phenotypes were classified into eight primary categories (seedling, leaves,
flowering and growth, stems, branching, flowers, siliques and seed yield) and 43 
secondary categories of morphological phenotypes. Phenotypic images have been
entered into a searchable database (http://rarge.gsc.riken.jp/phenome/). One
example investigated through the use of plural alleles was a mutant of a novel
gene related to glycerolipid biosynthesis, with a unique visible phenotype of
sepal opening. Our results suggest that we can find more novel visible phenotypes
and their corresponding genes, and that phenotypic mutants of gene knockouts are 
not exhausted yet. This study provides basic data on large-scale phenotyping of
gene knockout lines in plants, and will contribute to the completion of an
international effort to develop a phenome database of all the functional genes in
Arabidopsis.

PMID: 16813574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Development. 2006 Jul;133(14):2757-70. Epub 2006 Jun 14.

Maternal control of vertebrate dorsoventral axis formation and epiboly by the POU
domain protein Spg/Pou2/Oct4.

Reim G(1), Brand M.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Center and Center for Regenerative Therapies, University of
Technology (TU) Dresden, Pfotenhauerstrasse 108, D-01307 Dresden, Germany.

Dorsoventral (DV) axis formation of the vertebrate embryo is controlled by the
maternal genome and is subsequently refined zygotically. In the zygote,
repression of ventralizing Bmp activity on the dorsal side through chordin and
noggin is crucial for establishment of a dorsally located organizer. This
interplay generates a zygotic Bmp activity gradient that defines distinct
positional values along the DV axis. The maternal processes that control
expression of the zygotic genes implicated in DV patterning are largely unknown. 
spiel-ohne-grenzen (spg/pou2) is a maternally and zygotically expressed zebrafish
gene that encodes the POU domain transcription factor Pou2, an ortholog of
mammalian Oct4/Pou5f1. We show that embryos that are genetically depleted of both
maternal and zygotic pou2 function (MZspg) exhibit extreme DV patterning defects 
and, independently, a blastoderm-specific arrest of epiboly. Dorsal tissues
expand to the ventral side at the expense of ventrolateral tissue in MZspg
embryos. Dorsally expressed Bmp-antagonists, such as Chd and Nog1, and Gsc are
ectopically activated at ventral levels in MZspg. Lack of ventral specification
is apparent very early, suggesting that maternal processes are affected in MZspg.
Indeed, maternal pou2 function is necessary to initiate zygotic expression of
ventrally expressed genes such as bmp2b and bmp4, and for proper activation of
bmp7, vox, vent and eve1. A constitutively active Alk8-TGFbeta-receptor can
ectopically induce bmp2b and bmp4 and rescues the dorsalization of MZspg. This
indicates that pou2 acts upstream of Alk8, a maternally provided receptor
implicated in the activation of zygotic bmp2b and bmp4 transcription. Consistent 
with this possibility, Bmp gene misexpression can rescue MZspg embryos,
indicating that TGFbeta-mediated signal transduction itself is intact in absence 
of Pou2. Inhibition of Fgf signaling, another pathway with early dorsalizing
activity, can also restore and even ventralize MZspg embryos. The requirement for
pou2 to initiate bmp2b expression can therefore be bypassed by releasing the
repressive function of Fgf signaling upon bmp2b transcription. In transplantation
experiments, we find that dorsalized cells from prospective ventrolateral regions
of MZspg embryos are non cell-autonomously respecified to a ventral fate within
wild-type host embryos. Analysis of pou2 mRNA injected MZspg embryos shows that
pou2 is required on the ventral side of cleavage stage embryos. Based on the
maternal requirement for pou2 in ventral specification, we propose that ventral
specification employs an active, pou2-dependent maternal induction step, rather
than a default ventralizing program.

PMID: 16775002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. DNA Res. 2005;12(4):247-56.

RARTF: database and tools for complete sets of Arabidopsis transcription factors.

Iida K(1), Seki M, Sakurai T, Satou M, Akiyama K, Toyoda T, Konagaya A, Shinozaki
K.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Mutation Exploration Team, Plant Functional Genomics Research Group,
RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku,
Yokohama, Japan. k_iida@nagahama-i-bio-ac.jp

More than 5% of all genes in the Arabidopsis thaliana genome have been assumed to
code for transcription factors. However, it has been difficult to accurately
identify them. To construct proper sets of transcription factors, we used
PSI-BLAST and InterProScan, and also checked several families manually.
Especially to determine major Arabidopsis transcription factors (MYB, AP2/EREBP, 
bHLH, NAC, MADS, bZIP, WRKY), we compared the PSI-BLAST search results with those
in recent reports. Finally, we identified 1968 proteins as transcription factors 
(7.4% of all Arabidopsis genes). We established a database named RARTF (RIKEN
Arabidopsis Transcription Factor database, http://rarge.gsc.riken.jp/rartf/)
based on the identified transcription factors. In RARTF, we provide information
on the functional motif of transcription factors, full-length cDNAs, alternative 
pre-mRNA splicing events and Ac/Ds transposon-tagged mutants. We also provide
expression profiles of 400 transcription factor genes in six experiments. We will
report expression profiles of all transcription factor genes in various plant
tissues under various stress and hormone conditions in the near future.

PMID: 16769687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Eur J Cell Biol. 2006 Aug;85(8):813-24. Epub 2006 Jun 6.

Structural and functional characterization of the zebrafish lamin B receptor.

Schild-Prüfert K(1), Giegerich M, Schäfer M, Winkler C, Krohne G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Electron Microscopy, Biocenter of the University of Würzburg, Am
Hubland, D-97074 Würzburg, Germany.

The lamin B receptor (LBR) is an integral membrane protein of the inner nuclear
membrane that is interacting with B-type lamins, chromatin and DNA. The complete 
loss of the protein in mouse mutants causes a reduced viability of embryos, and
viable animals develop abnormalities of the skeleton. Here, we present the
molecular characterization of the zebrafish LBR (zLBR) gene and the functional
analysis of LBR during zebrafish embryogenesis. We found that the coding region
of the LBR mRNA of zebrafish as well as of mammals is contained in 13 exons. At
the protein level, human and zebrafish LBR exhibit a high sequence identity (57% 
and higher) in 8 of the 13 exons. Knockdown of zLBR by microinjection of 0.5-1.0 
mM morpholino antisense oligonucleotides (MO) into 1- to 2-cell stage embryos
reduced the amount of endogenous zLBR protein to approximately 10-20%. The
viability of MO-injected embryos within 24 h was reduced to 70-77%. Surviving
1-day-old embryos exhibited morphological alterations including reduced growth of
head structures, retardation of tail growth and a bent backbone and tail.
Expression analysis of the transcription factors no tail (ntl) and goosecoid
(gsc) by in situ hybridization suggests that these malformations are caused by
altered cell migration during gastrulation. Our data indicate that the LBR of
zebrafish and mammals are both required for correct development.

PMID: 16759737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. J Bioenerg Biomembr. 2005 Dec;37(6):411-3.

Structure and mechanism of vacuolar Na+-translocating ATPase from Enterococcus
hirae.

Murata T(1), Yamato I, Kakinuma Y.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center, Yokohama, Japan. take46rata@gsc.riken.jp

V-type Na(+)-ATPase from Entercoccus hirae consists of nine kinds of subunits
(NtpA(3), B(3), C(1), D(1), E(1-3), F(1-3), G(1), I(1), and K(10)) which are
encoded by the ntp operon. The amino acid sequences of the major subunits, A, B, 
and K (proteolipid), were highly similar to those of A, B, and c subunits of
eukaryotic V-ATPases, and those of beta, alpha, and c subunits of F-ATPases. We
modeled the A and B subunits by homology modeling using the structure of beta and
alpha subunits of F-ATPase, and obtained an atomic structure of NtpK ring by
X-ray crystallography. Here we briefly summarize our current models of the whole 
structure and mechanism of the E. hirae V-ATPase.

PMID: 16691474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Genome Res. 2006 Jun;16(6):713-22. Epub 2006 May 10.

Evolutionary turnover of mammalian transcription start sites.

Frith MC(1), Ponjavic J, Fredman D, Kai C, Kawai J, Carninci P, Hayashizaki Y,
Sandelin A.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences Centre (GSC), RIKEN 
Yokohama Institute, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa, 230-0045, Japan.

Erratum in
    Genome Res. 2006 Jul;16(7):947. Hayshizaki, Yoshihide [corrected to Hayashizaki, 
Yoshihide].

Alignments of homologous genomic sequences are widely used to identify functional
genetic elements and study their evolution. Most studies tacitly equate homology 
of functional elements with sequence homology. This assumption is violated by the
phenomenon of turnover, in which functionally equivalent elements reside at
locations that are nonorthologous at the sequence level. Turnover has been
demonstrated previously for transcription-factor-binding sites. Here, we show
that transcription start sites of equivalent genes do not always reside at
equivalent locations in the human and mouse genomes. We also identify two types
of partial turnover, illustrating evolutionary pathways that could lead to
complete turnover. These findings suggest that the signals encoding transcription
start sites are highly flexible and evolvable, and have cautionary implications
for the use of sequence-level conservation to detect gene regulatory elements.

PMCID: PMC1473182
PMID: 16687732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Development. 2006 Jun;133(12):2337-46. Epub 2006 May 10.

Specification of ectoderm restricts the size of the animal plate and patterns
neurogenesis in sea urchin embryos.

Yaguchi S(1), Yaguchi J, Burke RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Victoria, POB 3020, STN CSC, Victoria,
BC, V8W 3N5, Canada.

The animal plate of the sea urchin embryo becomes the apical organ, a sensory
structure of the larva. In the absence of vegetal signaling, an expanded and
unpatterned apical organ forms. To investigate the signaling that restricts the
size of the animal plate and patterns neurogenesis, we have expressed molecules
that regulate specification of ectoderm in embryos and chimeras. Enhancing oral
ectoderm suppresses serotonergic neuron differentiation, whereas enhancing aboral
or ciliary band ectoderm increases differentiation of serotonergic neurons. In
embryos in which vegetal signaling is blocked, Nodal expression does not reduce
the size of the thickened animal plate; however, almost no neurons form.
Expression of BMP in the absence of vegetal signaling also does not restrict the 
size of the animal plate, but abundant serotonergic neurons form. In chimeras in 
which vegetal signaling is blocked in the entire embryo, and one half of the
embryo expresses Nodal, serotonergic neuron formation is suppressed in both
halves. In similar chimeras in which vegetal signaling is blocked and one half of
the embryo expresses Goosecoid (Gsc), serotonergic neurons form only in the half 
of the embryo not expressing Gsc. We propose that neurogenesis is specified by a 
maternal program that is restricted to the animal pole by signaling that is
dependent on nuclearization of beta-catenin and specifies ciliary band ectoderm. 
Subsequently, neurogenesis in the animal plate is patterned by suppression of
serotonergic neuron formation by Nodal. Like other metazoans, echinoderms appear 
to have a phase of neural development during which the specification of ectoderm 
restricts and patterns neurogenesis.

PMID: 16687447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 2006 May;53(5):840-4.

Performance analysis of reduced-rank beamformers for estimating dipole source
signals using EEG/MEG.

Gutiérrez D(1), Nehorai A, Dogandzic A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Systems Engineering and Automation, Institute of
Research in Applied Mathematics and Systems, National Autonomous University of
Mexico, Mexico City 01000, Mexico. david.gutierrez@ieee.org

We study the performance of various beamformers for estimating a current dipole
source at a known location using electroencephalography (EEG) and
magnetoencephalography (MEG). We present our beamformers in the form of the
generalized sidelobe canceler (GSC). Under this structure, the beamformer can be 
solved by finding a filter that achieves the minimum mean-squared error (MMSE)
between the mainbeam response and filtered observed signal. We express the MMSE
as a function of the filter's rank and use it as a criterion to evaluate the
performance of the beamformers. We do not make any assumptions on the rank of the
interference-plus-noise covariance matrix. Instead, we treat it as low-rank and
derive a general expression for the MMSE. We present numerical examples to
compare the MSE performance of beamformers commonly studied in the literature:
principal components (PCs), cross-spectral metrics (CSMs), and eigencanceler
(EIG) beamformers. Our results show that good estimates of the dipole source
signals can be achieved using reduced-rank beamformers even for low
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) values.

PMID: 16686406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. PLoS Genet. 2006 Apr;2(4):e62.

Transcript annotation in FANTOM3: mouse gene catalog based on physical cDNAs.

Maeda N(1), Kasukawa T, Oyama R, Gough J, Frith M, Engström PG, Lenhard B,
Aturaliya RN, Batalov S, Beisel KW, Bult CJ, Fletcher CF, Forrest AR, Furuno M,
Hill D, Itoh M, Kanamori-Katayama M, Katayama S, Katoh M, Kawashima T,
Quackenbush J, Ravasi T, Ring BZ, Shibata K, Sugiura K, Takenaka Y, Teasdale RD, 
Wells CA, Zhu Y, Kai C, Kawai J, Hume DA, Carninci P, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Science Laboratory, Discovery Research Institute, RIKEN Wako Institute,
Wako, Japan. rgscerg@gsc.riken.jp

The international FANTOM consortium aims to produce a comprehensive picture of
the mammalian transcriptome, based upon an extensive cDNA collection and
functional annotation of full-length enriched cDNAs. The previous dataset,
FANTOM2, comprised 60,770 full-length enriched cDNAs. Functional annotation
revealed that this cDNA dataset contained only about half of the estimated number
of mouse protein-coding genes, indicating that a number of cDNAs still remained
to be collected and identified. To pursue the complete gene catalog that covers
all predicted mouse genes, cloning and sequencing of full-length enriched cDNAs
has been continued since FANTOM2. In FANTOM3, 42,031 newly isolated cDNAs were
subjected to functional annotation, and the annotation of 4,347 FANTOM2 cDNAs was
updated. To accomplish accurate functional annotation, we improved our automated 
annotation pipeline by introducing new coding sequence prediction programs and
developed a Web-based annotation interface for simplifying the annotation
procedures to reduce manual annotation errors. Automated coding sequence and
function prediction was followed with manual curation and review by expert
curators. A total of 102,801 full-length enriched mouse cDNAs were annotated. Out
of 102,801 transcripts, 56,722 were functionally annotated as protein coding
(including partial or truncated transcripts), providing to our knowledge the
greatest current coverage of the mouse proteome by full-length cDNAs. The total
number of distinct non-protein-coding transcripts increased to 34,030. The
FANTOM3 annotation system, consisting of automated computational prediction,
manual curation, and final expert curation, facilitated the comprehensive
characterization of the mouse transcriptome, and could be applied to the
transcriptomes of other species.

PMCID: PMC1449903
PMID: 16683036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Dev Biol. 2006 Jul 15;295(2):743-55. Epub 2006 Apr 7.

Absence of Nodal signaling promotes precocious neural differentiation in the
mouse embryo.

Camus A(1), Perea-Gomez A, Moreau A, Collignon J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Développement des Vertébrés, Institut Jacques Monod UMR 7592
CNRS, Universités Paris 6 et 7, 2 place Jussieu, 75251 Paris, France.
acamus@ijm.jussieu.fr

After implantation, mouse embryos deficient for the activity of the transforming 
growth factor-beta member Nodal fail to form both the mesoderm and the definitive
endoderm. They also fail to specify the anterior visceral endoderm, a specialized
signaling center which has been shown to be required for the establishment of
anterior identity in the epiblast. Our study reveals that Nodal-/- epiblast cells
nevertheless express prematurely and ectopically molecular markers specific of
anterior fate. Our analysis shows that neural specification occurs and regional
identities characteristic of the forebrain are established precociously in the
Nodal-/- mutant with a sequential progression equivalent to that of wild-type
embryo. When explanted and cultured in vitro, Nodal-/- epiblast cells readily
differentiate into neurons. Genes normally transcribed in organizer-derived
tissues, such as Gsc and Foxa2, are also expressed in Nodal-/- epiblast. The
analysis of Nodal-/-;Gsc-/- compound mutant embryos shows that Gsc activity plays
no critical role in the acquisition of forebrain characters by Nodal-deficient
cells. This study suggests that the initial steps of neural specification and
forebrain development may take place well before gastrulation in the mouse and
highlights a possible role for Nodal, at pregastrula stages, in the inhibition of
anterior and neural fate determination.

PMID: 16678814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. J Biotechnol. 2006 Oct 1;125(4):557-64. Epub 2006 May 2.

Coupled transcription-and-translation in Xenopus oocyte and egg extracts.

Tokmakov AA(1), Terazawa Y, Ikeda M, Shirouzu M, Yokoyama S.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Sciences Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Yokohama, Japan.
tokmak@gsc.riken.go.jp

Coinjection of T7 promoter-driven plasmids and T7 RNA polymerase (T7 RNAP) into
Xenopus oocytes results in robust protein synthesis, due to simultaneous gene
transcription-and-translation (TnT) in the oocyte cytoplasm [Geib, S., Sandoz,
G., Carlier, E., V. Cornet, Cheynet-Sauvion, V., De Waard, M., 2001. A novel
Xenopus oocyte expression system based on cytoplasmic coinjection of T7-driven
plasmids and purified T7-RNA polymerase. Receptors Channels 7, 331-343; Tokmakov,
A.A., Matsumoto, E., Shirouzu, M., Yokoyama, S., 2006. Coupled cytoplasmic
transcription-and-translation--a method of choice for heterologous gene
experession in Xenopus oocytes. J. Biotechnol. 122, 5-15]. In the present study, 
we demonstrate that the TnT reaction of protein synthesis can be reconstituted in
cell-free extracts of Xenopus oocytes and eggs. Similar to the reaction in
oocytes, the effective coupling of bacteriophage T7 RNAP-mediated transcription
with the eukaryotic translation machinery takes place in the Xenopus oocyte and
egg extracts. However, the kinetics of protein and RNA production in the extracts
are quite different from those observed in oocytes. Potent RNA synthesis in the
extracts starts immediately after the addition of T7 promoter-driven DNA and T7
RNAP and continues for about 30 min, followed by RNA degradation. The protein
product is detectable in the extracts in 15 min after the initiation of the TnT
reaction. Efficient protein synthesis in the extracts continues for about 1h. The
productivity of this expression system can be boosted by the additions of an
RNase inhibitor and an ATP-regeneration system, and by extract dilution. Kinetic 
analyses suggested that extending the lifetime of the extracts would further
increase their productivity.

PMID: 16647777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Oncogene. 2006 Sep 28;25(44):5933-41. Epub 2006 Apr 24.

The Drosophila homolog of the human tumor suppressor gene BHD interacts with the 
JAK-STAT and Dpp signaling pathways in regulating male germline stem cell
maintenance.

Singh SR(1), Zhen W, Zheng Z, Wang H, Oh SW, Liu W, Zbar B, Schmidt LS, Hou SX.

Author information: 
(1)Mouse Cancer Genetics Program, National Institutes of Health, National Cancer 
Institute at Frederick, Frederick, MD 21702, USA. sshreeram@ncifcrf.gov

Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome (BHD) is a rare, inherited genodermatosis characterized
by hair follicle hamartomas, kidney tumors and spontaneous pneumothorax. The BHD 
locus was mapped to chromosome 17p11.2 by linkage analysis, and germline
mutations in a novel gene (BHD) were identified in a panel of BHD families. Using
RNA interference to decrease expression of the Drosophila BHD homolog (DBHD), we 
have demonstrated that DBHD is required for male germline stem cell (GSC)
maintenance in the fly testis. Reduction of DBHD gene activity suppresses the GSC
overproliferation phenotype associated with overexpression of either unpaired
(upd) or decapentaplegic (dpp). Further genetic interaction experiments suggest
that DBHD regulates GSC maintenance downstream or in parallel of the JAK/STAT and
Dpp signal-transduction pathways. These findings suggest that the BHD protein may
regulate tumorigenesis through modulating stem cells in human.

PMID: 16636660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2006 Sep;77(9):1043-6. Epub 2006 Apr 13.

Anti-ganglioside complex antibodies in Miller Fisher syndrome.

Kaida K(1), Kanzaki M, Morita D, Kamakura K, Motoyoshi K, Hirakawa M, Kusunoki S.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, National Defense Medical College,
Tokorozawa, Saitama-Ken, Japan.

Comment in
    J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2006 Sep;77(9):1002-3.

BACKGROUND: Some ganglioside complexes (GSCs) are target antigens for serum
antibodies in patients with Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS). Anti-GSC antibodies
may be associated with particular clinical features of GBS.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate antibodies to GSCs in the sera of patients with Miller 
Fisher syndrome (MFS) characterised by elevation of the IgG anti-GQ1b antibody.
RESULTS: In all, 7 of 12 (58%) consecutive patients with MFS were found to have
IgG antibodies to GSCs containing GQ1b, of whom 5 had IgG antibodies to GQ1b-GM1 
complex (GQ1b/GM1) and 2 had antibodies to GQ1b/GD1a; 4 of 5 patients without
sensory symptoms had anti-GQ1b/GM1 antibodies.
CONCLUSIONS: At least three different specificities in MFS-associated antibodies,
GQ1b-specific, anti-GQ1b/GM1-positive and anti-GQ1b/GD1a-positive, were observed.
In patients with MFS not only GQ1b itself but also clustered epitopes of GSCs,
including GQ1b, may be considered to be prime target antigens for serum
antibodies. A tendency to escape sensory disturbances is shown by
anti-GQ1b/GM1-positive MFS.

PMCID: PMC2077752
PMID: 16614007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Comput Biol Chem. 2006 Jun;30(3):169-78. Epub 2006 Apr 5.

Selecting effective siRNA sequences based on the self-organizing map and
statistical techniques.

Takasaki S(1), Kawamura Y, Konagaya A.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center, Suehiro-cho 1-7-22-E216, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, 
Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. takasaki@gsc.riken.jp

Short interfering RNA (siRNA) has been widely used for studying gene functions in
mammalian cells but varies markedly in its gene-silencing efficacy. Although many
design rules/guidelines for effective siRNAs based on various criteria have been 
reported recently, there are only a few consistencies among them. This makes it
difficult to select effective siRNA sequences in mammalian genes. Here, we
propose a new method for selecting effective siRNA target sequences on the basis 
of the self-organizing map (SOM) technique and statistical significance analyses 
for a large number of effective siRNAs. In the proposed method, the score is
defined as a gene degradation measure. The effectiveness for the proposed method 
was confirmed by evaluating effective and ineffective siRNAs for recently
reported genes (12 genes, 172 siRNA sequences) and comparing with other reported 
scoring methods. The size (value) of this score is closely correlated with the
degree of gene degradation, and the score can easily be used for selecting
high-potential siRNA candidates. The evaluation results indicate that the
proposed method would be useful for many other genes. It will therefore be useful
for selecting siRNA sequences in mammalian genes.

PMID: 16600687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. BMC Genomics. 2006 Mar 29;7:64.

"Per cell" normalization method for mRNA measurement by quantitative PCR and
microarrays.

Kanno J(1), Aisaki K, Igarashi K, Nakatsu N, Ono A, Kodama Y, Nagao T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular and Molecular Toxicology, National Institute of Health
Sciences, 1-18-1, Kamiyoga, Tokyo 158-8501, Japan. kanno@nihs.go.jp

BACKGROUND: Transcriptome data from quantitative PCR (Q-PCR) and DNA microarrays 
are typically obtained from a fixed amount of RNA collected per sample.
Therefore, variations in tissue cellularity and RNA yield across samples in an
experimental series compromise accurate determination of the absolute level of
each mRNA species per cell in any sample. Since mRNAs are copied from genomic
DNA, the simplest way to express mRNA level would be as copy number per template 
DNA, or more practically, as copy number per cell.
RESULTS: Here we report a method (designated the "Percellome" method) for
normalizing the expression of mRNA values in biological samples. It provides a
"per cell" readout in mRNA copy number and is applicable to both quantitative PCR
(Q-PCR) and DNA microarray studies. The genomic DNA content of each sample
homogenate was measured from a small aliquot to derive the number of cells in the
sample. A cocktail of five external spike RNAs admixed in a dose-graded manner
(dose-graded spike cocktail; GSC) was prepared and added to each homogenate in
proportion to its DNA content. In this way, the spike mRNAs represented absolute 
copy numbers per cell in the sample. The signals from the five spike mRNAs were
used as a dose-response standard curve for each sample, enabling us to convert
all the signals measured to copy numbers per cell in an expression
profile-independent manner. A series of samples was measured by Q-PCR and
Affymetrix GeneChip microarrays using this Percellome method, and the results
showed up to 90 % concordance.
CONCLUSION: Percellome data can be compared directly among samples and among
different studies, and between different platforms, without further
normalization. Therefore, "percellome" normalization can serve as a standard
method for exchanging and comparing data across different platforms and among
different laboratories.

PMCID: PMC1448209
PMID: 16571132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Dev Biol. 2006 Jun 1;294(1):92-103. Epub 2006 Mar 29.

Development of the male germline stem cell niche in Drosophila.

Le Bras S(1), Van Doren M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Mudd Hall 305, Johns Hopkins University, 3400 N.
Charles St., Baltimore, MD 21218, USA.

Stem cells are found in specialized microenvironments, or "niches", which
regulate stem cell identity and behavior. The adult testis and ovary in
Drosophila contain germline stem cells (GSCs) with well-defined niches, and are
excellent models for studying niche development. Here, we investigate the
formation of the testis GSC niche, or "hub", during the late stages of
embryogenesis. By morphological and molecular criteria, we identify and follow
the development of an embryonic hub that forms from a subset of anterior somatic 
gonadal precursors (SGPs) in the male gonad. Embryonic hub cells form a discrete 
cluster apart from other SGPs, express several molecular markers in common with
the adult hub and organize anterior-most germ cells in a rosette pattern
characteristic of GSCs in the adult. The sex determination genes transformer and 
doublesex ensure that hub formation occurs only in males. Interestingly, hub
formation occurs in both XX and XY gonads mutant for doublesex, indicating that
doublesex is required to repress hub formation in females. This work establishes 
the Drosophila male GSC niche as a model for understanding the mechanisms
controlling niche formation and initial stem cell recruitment, as well as the
development of sexual dimorphism in the gonad.

PMID: 16566915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Jan 1;33(Database issue):D647-50.

RARGE: a large-scale database of RIKEN Arabidopsis resources ranging from
transcriptome to phenome.

Sakurai T(1), Satou M, Akiyama K, Iida K, Seki M, Kuromori T, Ito T, Konagaya A, 
Toyoda T, Shinozaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute,
1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan.

The RIKEN Arabidopsis Genome Encyclopedia (RARGE) database houses information on 
biological resources ranging from transcriptome to phenome, including RIKEN
Arabidopsis full-length (RAFL) complementary DNAs (cDNAs), their promoter
regions, Dissociation (Ds) transposon-tagged lines and expression data from
microarray experiments. RARGE provides tools for searching by resource code,
sequence homology or keyword, and rapid access to detailed information on the
resources. We have isolated 245 946 RAFL cDNA clones and collected 11 933
transposon-tagged lines, which are available from the RIKEN Bioresource Center
and are stored in RARGE. The RARGE web interface can be accessed at
http://rarge.gsc.riken.jp/. Additionally, we report 90 000 new RAFL cDNA clones
here.

PMCID: PMC539968
PMID: 15608280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Int J Dev Biol. 2004 Dec;48(10):1131-40.

Insulin-like growth factor (IGF) signalling is required for early dorso-anterior 
development of the zebrafish embryo.

Eivers E(1), McCarthy K, Glynn C, Nolan CM, Byrnes L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland.

The insulin-like growth factor (IGF) signalling pathway has been highly conserved
in animal evolution and, in mammals and Xenopus, plays a key role in embryonic
growth and development, with the IGF-1 receptor (IGF-1R) being a crucial
regulator of the signalling cascade. Here we report the first functional role for
the IGF pathway in zebrafish. Expression of mRNA coding for a dominant negative
IGF-1R resulted in embryos that were small in size compared to controls and had
disrupted head and CNS development. At its most extreme, this phenotype was
characterized by a complete loss of head and eye structures, an absence of
notochord and the presence of abnormal somites. In contrast, up-regulation of IGF
signalling following injection of IGF-1 mRNA, resulted in a greatly expanded
development of anterior structures at the expense of trunk and tail. IGF-1R
knockdown caused a significant decrease in the expression of Otx2, Rx3, FGF8,
Pax6.2 and Ntl, while excess IGF signalling expanded Otx2 expression in
presumptive forebrain tissue and widened the Ntl expression domain in the
developing notochord. The observation that IGF-1R knockdown reduced expression of
two key organizer genes (chordin and goosecoid) suggests that IGF signalling
plays a role in regulating zebrafish organizer activity. This is supported by the
expression of IGF-1, IGF-2 and IGF-1R in shield-stage zebrafish embryos and the
demonstration that IGF signalling influences expression of BMP2b, a gene that
plays an important role in zebrafish pattern formation. Our data is consistent
with a common pathway for integration of IGF, FGF8 and anti-BMPs in early
vertebrate development.

PMID: 15602699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Biotechniques. 2004 Dec;37(6):918, 920.

In vitro pull-down assay without expression constructs.

Suzuki H(1), Ogawa C, Usui K, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences
Center, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan. rgscerg@gsc.riken.jp

PMID: 15597540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. J Zhejiang Univ Sci B. 2005 Jan;6(1):38-42.

Surgical management of gastric stump cancer: a report of 37 cases.

Chen L(1), Tian H, Chen J, He ZG, Tao SF, Lokesh G, Peng SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Second Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310009, China. chenli@mail.hz.zj.cn

OBJECTIVE: To observe the clinicopathological characteristics of gastric stump
cancer (GSC) and evaluate the benefits of radical surgery of GSC.
METHODS: The clinicopathological characteristics and postoperative survival time 
of 37 GSC patients who underwent surgery were investigated retrospectively. The
survival time was compared according to the type of surgical operation (radical
resection vs palliative operation). Twenty-one cases that received radical
resection were analyzed based on the pTMN stage. Survival curves were traced by
using Kaplan-Meier methods.
RESULTS: Most GSC (32/37) was detected in patients who had received Billroth II
reconstruction after partial gastrectomy for benign gastric disease. The lesser
curvature side and the suture line of anastomosis were the most frequent sites
where GSC occurred (27/37). Differentiated adenocarcinoma was the dominant
histopathological type (24/37). The postoperative 5-year survival rate of early
stage GSC patients (n=9) was significantly higher than advanced stage GSC (n=12) 
(55.6% vs 16.5%, xL2=11.48, P<0.01). Five-year survival rate of 21 GSC patients
with radical resection were 75% (3/4) for stage I, 60% (3/5) for stage II, 14.2% 
(1/7) for stage III, and 0% (0/5) for stage IV respectively. The median survival 
time of 21 GSC patients who underwent radical resection was longer than those
undergoing palliative operation (43.0 m vs 13.0 m, x L2=36.31, P<0.01), the
median survival time of stage IV patients with radical resection was 23.8 months.
CONCLUSIONS: Without remote metastasis, radical resection for GSC is possible,
and is an effective way to improve the prognosis of GSC. Even in stage IV GSC,
radical resection can still prolong the survival time. It is necessary for the
patients with benign gastric diseases who received partial gastrectomy to carry
out the endoscopy follow-up, especially in patients with Billroth II
reconstruction procedure at 15-20 years.

PMCID: PMC1390757
PMID: 15593390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Pediatr Res. 2005 Mar;57(3):347-52. Epub 2004 Dec 7.

Total and ionized plasma magnesium concentrations in children after traumatic
brain injury.

Mendez DR(1), Corbett R, Macias C, Laptook A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. 
drmendez@texaschildrenshospital.org

This study examined 1) whether plasma total Mg (TMg) and ionized Mg (IMg)
concentrations in children are reduced by traumatic brain injury (TBI) and 2)
whether the extent of reduction correlates with severity of trauma assessed by
the Glasgow Coma Scale (GSC) score. This was a prospective cohort study of 98
pediatric patients who had TBI and were admitted through the emergency
department. A GCS score was assigned and blood was obtained upon presentation and
24 h later. Plasma was analyzed for TMg and IMg. Patients were grouped into three
categories-GCS scores 13-15, 8-12, and <8-to designate mild (n=21), moderate
(n=37), and severe (n=40) TBI, respectively. Blood was obtained from 50 healthy
children before elective surgery as controls. Control subjects had a TMg and an
IMg of 0.94 +/- 0.08 and 0.550 +/- 0.06 mM. TBI patients had an initial TMg and
IMg of 0.83 +/- 0.09 and 0.520 +/- 0.05 mM, respectively. Initial TMg for mild,
moderate, and severe TBI subgroups (0.87 +/- 0.16, 0.81 +/- 0.15, and 0.83 +/-
0.14 mM, respectively) was reduced from control subjects (p <0.01). IMg was
reduced only in the severe TBI subgroup (0.516 +/- 0.07 mM; p=0.016). Twenty-four
hours later, TMg remained lower than in control subjects for all subgroups of
TBI; however, IMg normalized. TBI in children is associated with a reduction in
TMg, whereas IMg decreased only with severe TBI. IMg returned to control values
by 24 h despite a continued lower TMg, suggesting mechanisms to maintain IMg.
Changes in plasma IMg may serve as a marker for TBI but only over a limited time 
interval.

PMID: 15585675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Exp Gerontol. 2004 Nov-Dec;39(11-12):1595-8.

Association analysis between longevity in the Japanese population and polymorphic
variants of genes involved in insulin and insulin-like growth factor 1 signaling 
pathways.

Kojima T(1), Kamei H, Aizu T, Arai Y, Takayama M, Nakazawa S, Ebihara Y, Inagaki 
H, Masui Y, Gondo Y, Sakaki Y, Hirose N.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genome Research Group, Genomic Sciences Center, RIKEN, 1-7-22
Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. tkojima@gsc.riken.jp

Recent studies have demonstrated a significant association between mutations in
genes involved in the insulin/IGF1 signaling pathway and extension of the life
span of model organisms. In this study which compared 122 Japanese
semisupercentenarians (older than 105) with 122 healthy younger controls, we
examined polymorphic variations of six genes which are involved in insulin/IGF1
signaling. These genes were FOXO1A, INSR, IRS1, PIK3CB, PIK3CG, and PPARGC1A. We 
investigated the possible association of each gene locus and longevity by
haplotype-based association analyses using 18 SNPs from public databases and the 
published literature. One INSR haplotype, which was comprised of 2 SNPs in
linkage disequilibrium, was more frequent in semisupercentenarians than in
younger controls.

PMID: 15582274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Methods. 2004 Dec;34(4):488-95.

Textmining in support of knowledge discovery for vaccine development.

Schönbach C(1), Nagashima T, Konagaya A.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Knowledge Discovery Team, RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center (GSC),
Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. schoen@postman.riken.jp

Complete genome data of infectious microorganisms permit systematic computational
sequence-based predictions and experimental testing of candidate vaccine
epitopes. Both, predictions and the interpretation of experiments rely on
existing information in the literature which is mostly manually extracted and
curated. The growing amount of data and literature information has created a
major bottleneck for the interpretation of results and maintenance of curated
databases. The lack of suitable free-text information extraction, processing, and
reporting tools prompted us to develop a knowledge discovery support system that 
enhances the understanding of immune response and vaccine development. The
current prototype system, Gene expression/epitpopes/protein interaction (GEpi),
focuses on molecular functions of HIV-infected T-cells and HIV epitope
information, using textmining, and interrelation of biomolecular data from
domain-specific databases with MEDLINE abstract-inferred information. Results
showed that extraction and processing of molecular interaction, disease
associations, and gene ontology-derived functional information generate intuitive
knowledge reports that aid the interpretation of host-pathogen interaction. In
contrast, epitope (word and sequence) information in MEDLINE abstracts is
surprisingly sparse and often lacks necessary context information, such as
HLA-restriction. Since the majority of epitope information is found in tables,
figures, and legends of full-text articles, its extraction may not require
sophisticated natural language processing techniques. Support of vaccine
development through textmining requires therefore the timely development of
domain-specific extraction rules for full-text articles, and a knowledge model
for epitope-related information.

PMID: 15542375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Genomics. 2004 Dec;84(6):913-21.

Construction of representative transcript and protein sets of human, mouse, and
rat as a platform for their transcriptome and proteome analysis.

Kasukawa T(1), Katayama S, Kawaji H, Suzuki H, Hume DA, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences
Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.
rgscerg@gsc.riken.jp

The number of mammalian transcripts identified by full-length cDNA projects and
genome sequencing projects is increasing remarkably. Clustering them into a
strictly nonredundant and comprehensive set provides a platform for functional
analysis of the transcriptome and proteome, but the quality of the clustering and
predictive usefulness have previously required manual curation to identify
truncated transcripts and inappropriate clustering of closely related sequences. 
A Representative Transcript and Protein Sets (RTPS) pipeline was previously
designed to identify the nonredundant and comprehensive set of mouse transcripts 
based on clustering of a large mouse full-length cDNA set (FANTOM2). Here we
propose an alternative method that is more robust, requires less manual curation,
and is applicable to other organisms in addition to mouse. RTPSs of human, mouse,
and rat have been produced by this method and used for validation. Their
comprehensiveness and quality are discussed by comparison with other clustering
approaches. The RTPSs are available at .

PMID: 15533708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Bioinformatics. 2005 Apr 1;21(7):1154-63. Epub 2004 Oct 28.

Inference of S-system models of genetic networks using a cooperative
coevolutionary algorithm.

Kimura S(1), Ide K, Kashihara A, Kano M, Hatakeyama M, Masui R, Nakagawa N,
Yokoyama S, Kuramitsu S, Konagaya A.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho,
Tsurumi, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. skimura@gsc.riken.jp

MOTIVATION: To resolve the high-dimensionality of the genetic network inference
problem in the S-system model, a problem decomposition strategy has been
proposed. While this strategy certainly shows promise, it cannot provide a model 
readily applicable to the computational simulation of the genetic network when
the given time-series data contain measurement noise. This is a significant
limitation of the problem decomposition, given that our analysis and
understanding of the genetic network depend on the computational simulation.
RESULTS: We propose a new method for inferring S-system models of large-scale
genetic networks. The proposed method is based on the problem decomposition
strategy and a cooperative coevolutionary algorithm. As the subproblems divided
by the problem decomposition strategy are solved simultaneously using the
cooperative coevolutionary algorithm, the proposed method can be used to infer
any S-system model ready for computational simulation. To verify the
effectiveness of the proposed method, we apply it to two artificial genetic
network inference problems. Finally, the proposed method is used to analyze the
actual DNA microarray data.

PMID: 15514004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Mol Cell Probes. 2004 Dec;18(6):369-72.

Selection for 3' end triplets for polymerase chain reaction primers.

Onodera K(1), Melcher U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oklahoma State University,
246 NRC, Stillwater, OK 74078, USA. onodera@gsc.riken.jp

The 3' end of a primer is a key component of PCR primer design. Many
recommendations for the composition and sequence of the 3' end have been
suggested based on theoretical considerations, but have not been verified
experimentally. We analyzed 3' end triplets of PCR primer sequences obtained from
refereed journal articles, to test those recommendations and to make empirical
recommendations for primer design. The frequencies of the 64 possible 3'end
triplets among 2137 PCR primers from the VirOligo database were not uniformly
distributed. From the analysis, we found that unfavored and preferred 3' end
triplets existed, and that the apparent preferences were not due to base
compositions in viral genome sequences. Comparison of the sequences preferred by 
practitioners to those recommended, suggested that no single recommendation is
entirely satisfactory. We suggest that recommendations be replaced with a scoring
system incorporating empirical frequencies such as those reported here.

PMID: 15488375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Addiction. 2004 Nov;99 Suppl 2:140-50.

Culturally sensitive substance abuse intervention for Hispanic and African
American adolescents: empirical examples from the Alcohol Treatment Targeting
Adolescents in Need (ATTAIN) Project.

Gil AG(1), Wagner EF, Tubman JG.

Author information: 
(1)The Community-Based Intervention Research Group, Florida International
University, College of Health and Urban Affairs, School of Social Work, Miami, FL
33199, USA. gila@fiu.edu

AIMS: This study presents preliminary analyses examining the effects of an
alcohol and other drug use (AOD) intervention with minority juvenile offenders.
Furthermore, the study investigates the impact of cultural factors on baseline
AOD use among Hispanic and African American youth, as well as on treatment
outcome.
DESIGN, SETTING AND PARTICIPANTS: Participants were 213 juvenile offenders
referred for treatment (mean age = 15.7 years), 97 of whom have completed
treatment to date. The intervention was carried out in clinics placed within the 
neighborhoods in which the participants resided. Intervention Alcohol Treatment
Targeting Adolescents in Need (ATTAIN) is a controlled clinical trial evaluating 
the effectiveness of a brief motivational, cognitive behavioral intervention,
guided self-change (GSC). Participants are assigned randomly to the individual
format of guided self-change (I-GSC), the family involved format of guided
self-Change (F-GSC), choice of one of these two, or a waiting list control
condition. Only participants involved in active intervention are included in the 
present report.
MEASUREMENTS: Data were collected via structured face-to-face interviews. Alcohol
and marijuana use measures were collected using the Time-line Follow-back
interview (TLFB).
FINDINGS: There were significant reductions in alcohol and marijuana use for all 
ethnic groups from baseline to post-intervention. Cultural factors
(discrimination, acculturation, ethnic pride and cultural mistrust) were
associated with pre-intervention levels of alcohol and marijuana use. Among
Hispanics, pre-intervention level of substance use were higher among foreign-born
than US-born youth. Analyses conducted with the US-born Hispanic group showed
that ethnic orientation and ethnic pride were associated positively with greater 
reductions in alcohol use.
CONCLUSIONS: The intervention provided through ATTAIN appears to be effective
with a multi-ethnic population of juvenile delinquents. Cultural factors, such as
ethnic orientation and ethnic mistrust, appear to constitute amenability to
treatment factors, with US-born Hispanic youth lower in acculturation responding 
better to the intervention.

PMID: 15488112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. J Am Chem Soc. 2004 Oct 13;126(40):13132-9.

Cooperative motions of protein and hydration water molecules: molecular dynamics 
study of scytalone dehydratase.

Okimoto N(1), Nakamura T, Suenaga A, Futatsugi N, Hirano Y, Yamaguchi I,
Ebisuzaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Contribution from the Computational Astrophysics Laboratory, Institute of
Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN), 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0198,
Japan. okimoto@gsc.riken.go.jp

Two molecular dynamics (MD) simulations totaling 25 ns of simulation time of
monomeric scytalone dehydratase (SD) were performed. The enzyme has a
ligand-binding pocket containing a cone-shaped alpha+beta barrel, and the
C-terminal region covers the binding pocket. Our simulations clarified the
difference in protein dynamics and conformation between the liganded protein and 
the unliganded protein. The liganded protein held the ligand molecule tightly and
the initial structure was maintained during the simulation. The unliganded
protein, on the other hand, fluctuated dynamically and its structure changed
largely from the initial structure. In the equilibrium state, the binding pocket 
was fully solvated by opening of the C-terminal region, and the protein dynamics 
was connected with hydration water molecules entry into and release from the
binding pocket. In addition, the cooperative motions of the unliganded protein
and the hydration water molecules produced the path through the protein interior 
for ligand binding.

PMID: 15469312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Cell Tissue Res. 2004 Nov;318(2):383-94. Epub 2004 Oct 1.

Structural polarity and dynamics of male germline stem cells in the milkweed bug 
(Oncopeltus fasciatus).

Schmidt ED(1), Dorn A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zoologie, Johannes Gutenberg-Universität, 55099 Mainz, Germany.

The male germline stem cells (GSCs) of the milkweed bug present an extraordinary 
structural polarity that is, to our knowledge, unequalled by any other type of
stem cells. They consist of a perikaryon and numerous projections arising from
the cell pole directed toward the apical cells, the proposed niche of the GSCs.
The projections can traverse a considerable distance until their terminals touch 
the apical cells. From hatching until death, the GSC projections undergo
conspicuous changes, the sequence of which has been deduced from observations of 
all developmental stages. Projection formation starts from lobular cell
protrusions showing trabecular ingrowths of the cell membrane. Finger-like
projections result from a process of growth and "carving out". The newly formed
projections contain mostly only free ribosomes other than a few mitochondria. A
stereotyped degradation process commences in the projection terminals: profiles
of circular, often concentric, cisternae of rough endoplasmic reticulum appear
and turn into myelin bodies, whereas mitochondria become more numerous. The
cytoplasm vesiculates, lysosomal bodies appear, and mitochondria become swollen. 
At the same time, the projection terminals are segregated by transverse ingrowths
of the cell membrane. Finally, autophagic vacuoles and myelin bodies fill the
segregated terminals, which then rupture. Simultaneously, new projections seem to
sprout from the perikaryon of the GSCs. These dynamics, which are not
synchronized among the GSCs, indicate that a novel type of signal exchange and
transduction between the stem cells and their niche is involved in the regulation
of asymmetric versus symmetric division of GSCs.

PMID: 15459767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Development. 2004 Oct;131(20):5079-89.

Germline stem cells in the Drosophila ovary descend from pole cells in the
anterior region of the embryonic gonad.

Asaoka M(1), Lin H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, BOX 3709, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, 
NC 27710, USA.

A fundamental yet unexplored question in stem cell biology is how the fate of
tissue stem cells is initially determined during development. In Drosophila,
germline stem cells (GSCs) descend from a subset of primordial germ cells (PGCs) 
at the onset of oogenesis. GSC determination may occur at the onset of oogenesis 
when a subset of PGCs is induced to become GSCs by contacting niche cells.
Alternatively, the GSC fate could be predetermined for a subset of PGCs before
oogenesis, due to either their interaction with specific somatic cells in the
embryonic/larval gonads, or their inherently heterogeneous potential in becoming 
GSCs, or both. Here, we show that anterior somatic cells in the embryonic gonad
already differ from posterior somatic cells and are likely to be the precursors
of niche cells in the adult ovary. Furthermore, only pole cells in the anterior
half of the embryonic gonad give rise to the PGCs that frequently acquire contact
with nascent niche cells in the late larval ovary. Eventually, only these
contacting PGCs become GSCs, whereas non-contacting PGCs directly differentiate
into cystoblasts. The strong preference of these 'anterior PGCs' towards
contacting niche cells does not require DE-cadherin-mediated adhesion and is not 
correlated with either orientation or rate of their divisions. These data suggest
that the GSC fate is predetermined before oogenesis. The predetermination
probably involves soma/pole-cell interaction in the anterior half of the
embryonic gonad, followed by an active homing mechanism during PGC proliferation 
to maintain the contact between the 'anterior PGCs' and anterior somatic cells.

PMID: 15459101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Development. 2004 Oct;131(20):4895-905.

How different is Venus from Mars? The genetics of germ-line stem cells in
Drosophila females and males.

Gilboa L(1), Lehmann R.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball Institute and Department of Cell
Biology at NYU School of Medicine and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 540 First 
Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

In the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster, both spermatogenesis and oogenesis rely
on germ-line stem cells (GSCs). Intensive research has revealed many of the
molecules and pathways that underlie GSC maintenance and differentiation in males
and females. In this review, we discuss new studies that, some differences
notwithstanding, highlight the similarities in the structural and molecular
strategies used by the two sexes in GSC maintenance and differentiation. These
include the tight control that somatic support cells exert on every aspect of GSC
function and the similar molecular mechanisms for physical attachment, cell-cell 
signaling and gap-junction communication. Some common principles underlying GSC
biology in the fly may be applied to stem cells in other organisms.

PMID: 15459096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Sep 27;32(17):5096-103. Print 2004.

Genome-wide analysis of alternative pre-mRNA splicing in Arabidopsis thaliana
based on full-length cDNA sequences.

Iida K(1), Seki M, Sakurai T, Satou M, Akiyama K, Toyoda T, Konagaya A, Shinozaki
K.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Mutation Exploration Team, Plant Functional Genomics Research Group,
RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center (GSC), RIKEN Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22
Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan.

We mapped RIKEN Arabidopsis full-length (RAFL) cDNAs to the Arabidopsis thaliana 
genome to search for alternative splicing events. We used 278,734 full-length and
3'/5' terminal reads of the sequences of 220,214 RAFL cDNA clones for the
analysis. Eighty-nine percent of the cDNA sequences could be mapped to the genome
and were clustered in 17,130 transcription units (TUs). Alternative splicing
events were found in 1764 out of 15,214 TUs (11.6%) with multiple sequences. We
collected full-length cDNA clones from plants grown under various environmental
conditions or from various organs. We then analyzed the correlation between
alternative splicing events and environmental stress conditions. Alternative
splicing profiles changed according to environmental stress conditions and the
various developmental stages of plant organs. In particular, cold-stress
conditions affected alternative splicing profiles. The change in alternative
splicing profiles under cold stress may be mediated by alternative splicing and
transcriptional regulation of splicing factors.

PMCID: PMC521658
PMID: 15452276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Brief Bioinform. 2004 Sep;5(3):249-58.

Integrated analysis of the genome and the transcriptome by FANTOM.

Katayama S(1), Kanamori M, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences
Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa,
230--0045, Japan. katayama@gsc.riken.jp

The key to reliable annotation of a mammalian genome is broad characterisation of
the transcriptional output, the transcriptome. FANTOM, the functional annotation 
of mouse cDNA, is a large-scale analysis of both the genome and the transcriptome
of the mouse. In the early days of this work, the transcripts were characterised 
using our sophisticated methods. After the timely release of the first draft of
mouse genome sequences, interesting information was obtained by its integration
with these one-by-one annotations. Moreover, each transcript included its
expression profile. Here, the two integrated annotation methods used by FANTOM
are reviewed: one-by-one and categorised. One-by-one annotation refers to naming 
carried out based on well-known transcripts or its fragments using the
top-down-style pipeline developed mostly by the FANTOM project. Categorised
annotation, which refers to transcript grouping, not only helps naming of unknown
transcripts, but will be the most utilised method for integration of the genome
and the transcriptome from now on.

PMID: 15383211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. J Neurosurg. 2004 Sep;101(3):408-16.

Relationship between intracranial pressure and other clinical variables in
patients with aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage.

Heuer GG(1), Smith MJ, Elliott JP, Winn HR, LeRoux PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

OBJECT: Increased intracranial pressure (ICP) is well known to affect adversely
patients with head injury. In contrast, the variables associated with ICP
following aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) and their impact on outcome
have been less intensely studied.
METHODS: In this retrospective study the authors reviewed a prospective
observational database cataloging the treatment details in 433 patients with SAH 
who had undergone surgical occlusion of an aneurysm as well as ICP monitoring.
All 433 patients underwent postoperative ICP monitoring, whereas only 146 (33.7%)
underwent both pre- and postoperative ICP monitoring. The mean maximal ICP was
24.9 +/- 17.3 mm Hg (mean +/- standard deviation). During their hospital stay,
234 patients (54%) had elevated ICP (> 20 mm Hg), including 136 of those (48.7%) 
with a good clinical grade (Hunt and Hess Grades I-III) and 98 (63.6%) of the 154
patients with a poor grade (Hunt and Hess Grades IV and V) on admission. An
increased mean maximal ICP was associated with several admission variables: worse
Hunt and Hess clinical grade (p < 0.0001), a lower Glasgow Coma Scale (GSC) motor
score (p < 0.0001); worse SAH grade based on results of computerized tomography
studies (p < 0.0001); intracerebral hemorrhage (p = 0.024); severity of
intraventricular hemorrhage (p < 0.0001); and rebleeding (p = 0.0048). Both
intraoperative cerebral swelling (p = 0.0017) and postoperative GCS score (p <
0.0001) were significantly associated with a raised ICP. Variables such as
patient age, aneurysm size, symptomatic vasospasm, intraoperative aneurysm
rupture, and secondary cerebral insults such as hypoxia were not associated with 
raised ICP. Increased ICP adversely affected outcome: 71.9% of patients with
normal ICP demonstrated favorable 6-month outcomes postoperatively, whereas 63.5%
of patients with ICP between 20 and 50 mm Hg and 33.3% with ICP greater than 50
mm Hg demonstrated favorable outcomes. Among 21 patients whose raised ICP did not
respond to mannitol therapy, all experienced a poor outcome and 95.2% died. Among
145 patients whose elevated ICP responded to mannitol, 66.9% had a favorable
outcome and only 20.7% were dead 6 months after surgery (p < 0.0001). According
to results of multivariate analysis, however, ICP was not an independent outcome 
predictor (odds ratio 1.26, 95% confidence interval 0.28-5.68).
CONCLUSIONS: Increased ICP is common after SAH, even in patients with a good
clinical grade. Elevated ICP post-SAH is associated with a worse patient outcome,
particularly if ICP does not respond to treatment. This association, however, may
depend more on the overall severity of the SAH than on ICP alone.

PMID: 15352597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Sep 24;322(3):787-93.

A genome-wide and nonredundant mouse transcription factor database.

Kanamori M(1), Konno H, Osato N, Kawai J, Hayashizaki Y, Suzuki H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences
Center (GSC), 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan.

Here we describe the development of a genome-wide and nonredundant mouse
transcription factor database and its viewer (http://genome.gsc.riken.gp/TFdb/). 
We systematically selected transcription factors with DNA-binding properties and 
their regulators on the basis of their LocusLink and Gene Ontology annotations.
We also incorporated into our database information regarding the corresponding
available cDNA clones and their structural properties. Because of these features,
our database is unique and may provide useful information for systematic
genome-wide studies of transcriptional regulation.

PMID: 15336533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. FEBS Lett. 2004 Aug 27;573(1-3):214-8.

Identification of region-specific transcription factor genes in the adult mouse
brain by medium-scale real-time RT-PCR.

Suzuki H(1), Okunishi R, Hashizume W, Katayama S, Ninomiya N, Osato N, Sato K,
Nakamura M, Iida J, Kanamori M, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences
Center (GSC), 1-7-22, Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan.
rgscerg@gsc.riken.jp

We established a medium-scale real-time RT-PCR system focusing on transcription
factors and applied it to their expression profiles in the adult mouse 11 brain
regions (http://genome.gsc.riken.jp/qRT-PCR/). Almost 90% of the examined genes
showed significant expression in at least one region. We successfully extracted
179 region-specific genes by clustering analysis. Interestingly, the
transcription factors involved in the development of the pituitary were still
expressed in the adult pituitary, suggesting that they also play important roles 
in maintenance of the pituitary. These results provide unique molecular markers
that may account for the molecular basis of the unique functions of specific
brain regions.

PMID: 15328000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Structure. 2004 Jun;12(6):917-25.

The linked conservation of structure and function in a family of high diversity: 
the monomeric cupredoxins.

Gough J(1), Chothia C.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Genomic Sciences Centre, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama
230-0045, Japan. gough@gsc.riken.jp

The monomeric cupredoxins are a highly divergent family of copper binding
electron transport proteins that function in photosynthesis and respiration. To
determine how function and structure are conserved in the context of large
sequence differences, we have carried out a detailed analysis of the cupredoxins 
of known structure and their sequence homologs. The common structure of the
cupredoxins is formed by a sandwich of two beta sheets which support a copper
binding site. The structure of the deeply buried core is intimately coupled to
the binding site on the surface of the protein; in each protein the conserved
regions form one continuous substructure that extends from the surface active
site and through the center of the molecule. Residues around the active site are 
conserved for functional reasons, while those deeper in the structure will be
conserved for structural reasons. Together the two sets support each other.

PMID: 15274913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Brief Bioinform. 2004 Jun;5(2):107-17.

From masking repeats to identifying functional repeats in the mouse
transcriptome.

Schönbach C(1).

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center (GSC), RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Suehiro-cho,
Tsurumi, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. schoen@postman.riken.jp

The back-to-back release of the mouse genome and the functionally annotated RIKEN
mouse full-length cDNA collection was an important milestone in mammalian
genomics. Yet much of the data remain to be explored in terms of biological
effects and mechanisms. For example, interspersed repeats account for 39 per cent
of the mouse genome sequence and 11 per cent of representative transcripts. A
considerable number of transposable repeat elements are still active and
propagating in mouse compared with human. While existing repeat databases and
tools assist the classification of repeats or identification of new repeats,
there is little bioinformatic support towards exploring the extent and role of
repeats in transcriptional variation, modulation of protein function, or gene
regulatory events. Since the mouse is used as a model organism to study human
genes and their disease associations, this review focuses on information
extraction and collation that captures the functional context of repeats in mouse
transcripts to facilitate the biological interpretation and extrapolation of
findings to the human.

PMID: 15260892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Genome Biol. 2004;5(7):111. Epub 2004 Jun 30.

After 'completion': the changing face of human chromosomes 21 and 22.

Taylor TD(1).

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center, Human Genome Research Group, 1-7-22
Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. taylor@gsc.riken.jp

In the four years since the publication of the first two 'complete' human
chromosome sequences the type of research being done on each has shifted subtly, 
reflecting the impact of genomic data on biological science in general. There is 
now considerably more gene-expression evidence to support predicted genes, and
the annotation of functions for previously unknown genes, including those
implicated in disease, is gradually improving.

PMCID: PMC463270
PMID: 15239819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Genetics. 2004 Jun;167(2):707-23.

A misexpression screen reveals effects of bag-of-marbles and TGF beta class
signaling on the Drosophila male germ-line stem cell lineage.

Schulz C(1), Kiger AA, Tazuke SI, Yamashita YM, Pantalena-Filho LC, Jones DL,
Wood CG, Fuller MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
California 94305-5329, USA.

Male gametes are produced throughout reproductive life by a classic stem cell
mechanism. However, little is known about the molecular mechanisms for lineage
production that maintain male germ-line stem cell (GSC) populations, regulate
mitotic amplification divisions, and ensure germ cell differentiation. Here we
utilize the Drosophila system to identify genes that cause defects in the male
GSC lineage when forcibly expressed. We conducted a gain-of-function screen using
a collection of 2050 EP lines and found 55 EP lines that caused defects at early 
stages of spermatogenesis upon forced expression either in germ cells or in
surrounding somatic support cells. Most strikingly, our analysis of forced
expression indicated that repression of bag-of-marbles (bam) expression in male
GSC is important for male GSC survival, while activity of the TGF beta signal
transduction pathway may play a permissive role in maintenance of GSCs in
Drosophila testes. In addition, forced activation of the TGF beta signal
transduction pathway in germ cells inhibits the transition from the
spermatogonial mitotic amplification program to spermatocyte differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1470893
PMID: 15238523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Plant Cell Physiol. 2004 Jun;45(6):703-11.

A novel ethanol-hypersensitive mutant of Arabidopsis.

Hirayama T(1), Fujishige N, Kunii T, Nishimura N, Iuchi S, Shinozaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Integrated Science, Yokohama City University, Yokohama,
Kanagawa, 230-0045 Japan. hirayama@gsc.riken.jp

A novel ethanol-hypersensitive mutant, geko1 (gek1), was isolated from
Arabidopsis thaliana. The gek1 mutant displays an enhanced sensitivity (10-100
times greater than the wild type) to ethanol in growth medium, while it grows
normally in the absence of ethanol, and responds normally to other alcohols and
to environmental stresses such as heat shock and high salinity. The
ethanol-hypersensitive phenotype of gek1 requires alcohol dehydrogenase activity,
indicating that gek1 is sensitive not to ethanol itself but to the metabolites of
ethanol. Consistent with this, gek1 shows enhanced sensitivity to acetaldehyde in
the medium. The endogenous acetaldehyde levels were not different between gek1-2 
and wild-type seedlings treated with ethanol. These results indicate that the
ethanol hypersensitivity of gek1 is due to an enhanced sensitivity to
acetaldehyde toxicity, instead of abnormally elevated accumulation of toxic
acetaldehyde, which has been thought to be the major cause of ethanol toxicity in
mammal cells.

PMID: 15215505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Dev Dyn. 2004 Jul;230(3):494-508.

Functional and hierarchical interactions among zebrafish vox/vent homeobox genes.

Gilardelli CN(1), Pozzoli O, Sordino P, Matassi G, Cotelli F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Milan, Milan, Italy.

The vertebrate Vox/Vent family of transcription factors plays a crucial role in
the establishment of the dorsoventral (DV) axis, by repressing organizer genes
such as bozozok/dharma, goosecoid, and chordino. In Danio rerio (zebrafish),
members of the vox/vent gene family (vox/vega1, vent/vega2, and ved) are thought 
to share expression patterns and functional properties. Bringing novel insights
in the differential activity of the zebrafish vox/vent genes, we propose a
critical role for the ved gene in DV patterning of vertebrate embryos. ved is not
only expressed as a maternal gene, but it also appears to function as a repressor
of dorsal factors involved in organizer formation. At early- and mid-gastrula
stage, ved appears to be finely controlled by antagonist crosstalks in a complex 
regulatory network, involving gradients of bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)
activity, dorsal factors, and vox/vent family members. We show that ved
transcripts are ventrally restricted by BMP factors such as bmp2b, bmp7, smad5,
and alk8, and by dorsal factors (chd and gsc). Alteration of ved expression in
both vox and vent deletion mutants and vox and vent mRNAs-injected embryos,
suggests that vox and vent function downstream of BMP signaling to negatively
regulate ved expression. This inhibitory role is emphasized by a vox and vent
redundant activity, compared with single gene effects.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15188434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Curr Biol. 2004 Jun 8;14(11):981-6.

Repression of primordial germ cell differentiation parallels germ line stem cell 
maintenance.

Gilboa L(1), Lehmann R.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Program, The Skirball Institute and Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016
USA.

In Drosophila, primordial germ cells (PGCs) are set aside from somatic cells and 
subsequently migrate through the embryo and associate with somatic gonadal cells 
to form the embryonic gonad. During larval stages, PGCs proliferate in the female
gonad, and a subset of PGCs are selected at late larval stages to become germ
line stem cells (GSCs), the source of continuous egg production throughout
adulthood. However, the degree of similarity between PGCs and the self-renewing
GSCs is unclear. Here we show that many of the genes that are required for GSC
maintenance in adults are also required to prevent precocious differentiation of 
PGCs within the larval ovary. We show that following overexpression of the
GSC-differentiation gene bag of marbles (bam), PGCs differentiate to form cysts
without becoming GSCs. Furthermore, PGCs that are mutant for nanos (nos), pumilio
(pum) or for signaling components of the decapentaplegic (dpp) pathway also
differentiate. The similarity in the genes necessary for GSC maintenance and the 
repression of PGC differentiation suggest that PGCs and GSCs may be functionally 
equivalent and that the larval gonad functions as a "PGC niche".

Copyright 2004 Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 15182671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Mamm Genome. 2004 May;15(5):404-11.

Development and implementation of a database system to manage a large-scale mouse
ENU-mutagenesis program.

Masuya H(1), Nakai Y, Motegi H, Niinaya N, Kida Y, Kaneko Y, Aritake H, Suzuki N,
Ishii J, Koorikawa K, Suzuki T, Inoue M, Kobayashi K, Toki H, Wada Y, Kaneda H,
Ishijima J, Takahashi KR, Minowa O, Noda T, Wakana S, Gondo Y, Shiroishi T.

Author information: 
(1)Mouse Functional Genomics Research Group, RIKEN GSC, 214 Maeda-cho,
Totsuka-ku, 244-0804, Yokohama City, Kanagawa, Japan.

A mouse ENU-mutagenesis program at RIKEN GSC has been initiated to conduct a
large-scale, genome-wide, early- and late-onset phenotypic screen of mutant mice.
We screened about a hundred mice every week with a comprehensive set of phenotype
assays including behavioral tests based on a modified SHIRPA protocol, blood
tests (both clinical biochemical testing and hemogram), and measurement of
locomotor activity in their home cages. To manage the entire program, we
developed a client/server architecture database system and named it MUSDB
(Mutagenesis Universal Support DataBase). It manages mouse husbandry, mating
protocols, procedures for ENU injection and phenotypic screens, phenotype
inheritance tests, preservation of sperm and organs, and other materials
generated during the program. We have implemented MUSDB in quite a large-scale
system that includes 150 client computers. It has, helped reduce typographical
errors and provided simple and efficient operation via its front-end user
interface. It significantly contributed to the communication within and between
workgroups in the program and in the accumulation of various phenotypic and
inheritance data.

PMID: 15170230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Development. 2004 May;131(10):2443-61.

moz regulates Hox expression and pharyngeal segmental identity in zebrafish.

Miller CT(1), Maves L, Kimmel CB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, 1254 University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA.
ctm@stanford.edu

In vertebrate embryos, streams of cranial neural crest (CNC) cells migrate to
form segmental pharyngeal arches and differentiate into segment-specific parts of
the facial skeleton. To identify genes involved in specifying segmental identity 
in the vertebrate head, we screened for mutations affecting cartilage patterning 
in the zebrafish larval pharynx. We present the positional cloning and initial
phenotypic characterization of a homeotic locus discovered in this screen. We
show that a zebrafish ortholog of the human oncogenic histone acetyltransferase
MOZ (monocytic leukemia zinc finger) is required for specifying segmental
identity in the second through fourth pharyngeal arches. In moz mutant zebrafish,
the second pharyngeal arch is dramatically transformed into a mirror-image
duplicated jaw. This phenotype resembles a similar but stronger transformation
than that seen in hox2 morpholino oligo (hox2-MO) injected animals. In addition, 
mild anterior homeotic transformations are seen in the third and fourth
pharyngeal arches of moz mutants. moz is required for maintenance of most hox1-4 
expression domains and this requirement probably at least partially accounts for 
the moz mutant homeotic phenotypes. Homeosis and defective Hox gene expression in
moz mutants is rescued by inhibiting histone deacetylase activity with
Trichostatin A. Although we find early patterning of the moz mutant hindbrain to 
be normal, we find a late defect in facial motoneuron migration in moz mutants.
Pharyngeal musculature is transformed late, but not early, in moz mutants. We
detect relatively minor defects in arch epithelia of moz mutants. Vital labeling 
of arch development reveals no detectable changes in CNC generation in moz
mutants, but later prechondrogenic condensations are mispositioned and misshapen.
Mirror-image hox2-dependent gene expression changes in postmigratory CNC
prefigure the homeotic phenotype in moz mutants. Early second arch ventral
expression of goosecoid (gsc) in moz mutants and in animals injected with
hox2-MOs shifts from lateral to medial, mirroring the first arch pattern. bapx1, 
which is normally expressed in first arch postmigratory CNC prefiguring the jaw
joint, is ectopically expressed in second arch CNC of moz mutants and hox2-MO
injected animals. Reduction of bapx1 function in wild types causes loss of the
jaw joint. Reduction of bapx1 function in moz mutants causes loss of both first
and second arch joints, providing functional genetic evidence that bapx1
contributes to the moz-deficient homeotic pattern. Together, our results reveal
an essential embryonic role and a crucial histone acetyltransferase activity for 
Moz in regulating Hox expression and segmental identity, and provide two early
targets, bapx1 and gsc, of moz and hox2 signaling in the second pharyngeal arch.

PMID: 15128673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Cell Cycle. 2004 Jun;3(6):790-5. Epub 2004 Jun 1.

An effective method for selecting siRNA target sequences in mammalian cells.

Takasaki S(1), Kotani S, Konagaya A.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center (GSC), Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan.
takasaki@gsc.riken.jp

RNA interference is a gene-silencing phenomenon triggered by dsRNA
(double-stranded RNA) and has been widely used for studying gene functions. The
short interfering RNA (siRNA) responsible for RNA interference, however, varies
markedly in its gene-silencing efficacy. Because this efficacy depends on the
selected target sequences, we developed an effective selection method based on
the gene degradation measure (priority score) defined by positional features of
individual nucleotides. We tested this method experimentally by using it to
select new siRNA target sequences in the homo sapiens cyclin B1 gene (CCNB1) and 
confirmed that it selected highly effective gene-silencing sequences. The
proposed method will therefore be useful for selecting new siRNA target sequences
in mammalian cells.

PMID: 15118413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Clin Pathol. 2004 May;57(5):487-91.

Epstein-Barr virus in gastric carcinomas and gastric stump carcinomas: a late
event in gastric carcinogenesis.

Zur Hausen A(1), van Rees BP, van Beek J, Craanen ME, Bloemena E, Offerhaus GJ,
Meijer CJ, van den Brule AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Vrije Universiteit Medical Centre, PO Box 7057, 1007 
MB Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: To determine at what stage during gastric carcinogenesis Epstein-Barr
virus (EBV) enters the gastric epithelial cells, the presence of EBV was
investigated in two pathogenetically related but distinct forms of adenocarcinoma
of the stomach-gastric carcinoma of the intact stomach (GCIS) and gastric stump
carcinoma (GSC)-and their presumed precursor lesions.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Eleven patients with EBV positive GCIS and eight patients
with EBV positive GSC, demonstrated by the highly sensitive EBV encoded RNA 1/2
(EBER1/2) RNA in situ hybridisation (RISH) technique, were studied. Paraffin wax 
embedded tissue available from preoperative gastric biopsies and tumour adjacent 
tissue from the resection specimens containing normal gastric mucosa, inflamed
gastric mucosa, and preneoplastic lesions (intestinal metaplasia and dysplasia)
was investigated by EBER1/2 RISH, in addition to EBV nuclear antigen 1 (EBNA-1)
and latent membrane protein 1 (LMP-1) immunohistochemistry (IHC).
RESULTS: In both GCIS and GSC and their precursor lesions EBER1/2 transcripts
were restricted to the carcinoma cells. In addition, positivity of EBNA-1 IHC was
also restricted to the tumour cells. IHC for LMP-1 was negative in all cases
tested.
CONCLUSIONS: The absence of EBER1/2 transcripts in preneoplastic gastric lesions 
(intestinal metaplasia and dysplasia) and their presence in two distinct types of
gastric carcinoma strongly suggest that EBV can only infect neoplastic gastric
cells and thus is a late event in gastric carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1770299
PMID: 15113855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Development. 2004 May;131(9):1881-90.

Germline stem cell number in the Drosophila ovary is regulated by redundant
mechanisms that control Dpp signaling.

Casanueva MO(1), Ferguson EL.

Author information: 
(1)Committee on Developmental Biology, University of Chicago, Chicago IL 60637,
USA.

The available experimental data support the hypothesis that the cap cells (CpCs) 
at the anterior tip of the germarium form an environmental niche for germline
stem cells (GSCs) of the Drosophila ovary. Each GSC undergoes an asymmetric
self-renewal division that gives rise to both a GSC, which remains associated
with the CpCs, and a more posterior located cystoblast (CB). The CB upregulates
expression of the novel gene, bag of marbles (bam), which is necessary for
germline differentiation. Decapentaplegic (Dpp), a BMP2/4 homologue, has been
postulated to act as a highly localized niche signal that maintains a GSC fate
solely by repressing bam transcription. Here, we further examine the role of Dpp 
in GSC maintenance. In contrast to the above model, we find that an enhancer trap
inserted near the Dpp target gene, Daughters against Dpp (Dad), is expressed in
additional somatic cells within the germarium, suggesting that Dpp protein may be
distributed throughout the anterior germarium. However, Dad-lacZ expression
within the germline is present only in GSCs and to a lower level in CBs,
suggesting there are mechanisms that actively restrict Dpp signaling in germ
cells. We demonstrate that one function of Bam is to block Dpp signaling
downstream of Dpp receptor activation, thus establishing the existence of a
negative feedback loop between the action of the two genes. Moreover, in females 
doubly mutant for bam and the ubiquitin protein ligase Smurf, the number of germ 
cells responsive to Dpp is greatly increased relative to the number observed in
either single mutant. These data indicate that there are multiple, genetically
redundant mechanisms that act within the germline to downregulate Dpp signaling
in the Cb and its descendants, and raise the possibility that a Cb and its
descendants must become refractory to Dpp signaling in order for germline
differentiation to occur.

PMID: 15105369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Bioinformatics. 2004 Nov 1;20(16):2836-8. Epub 2004 Apr 22.

ProteoMix: an integrated and flexible system for interactively analyzing large
numbers of protein sequences.

Chikayama E(1), Kurotani A, Kuroda Y, Yokoyama S.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho,
Tsurumi, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan.

ProteoMix is a suite of JAVA programs for identifying, annotating and predicting 
regions of interest in large sets of amino acid sequences, according to
systematic and consistent criteria. It is based on two concepts (1) the
integration of results from different sequence analysis tools increases the
prediction reliability; and (2) the integration protocol is critical and needs to
be easily adaptable in a case-by-case manner. ProteoMix was designed to analyze
simultaneously multiple protein sequences using several bioinformatics tools,
merge the results of the analyses using logical functions and display them on an 
integrated viewer. In addition, new sequences can be added seamlessly to an
analysis performed on an initial set of sequences. ProteoMix has a modular
design, and bioinformatics tools are run on remote servers accessed using the
Internet Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP), ensuring the swift implementation 
of additional tools. ProteoMix has a user-friendly interactive graphical user
interface environment and runs on PCs with Microsoft OS.AVAILABILITY: ProteoMix
is freely available for academic users at http://bio.gsc.riken.jp/ProteoMix/

PMID: 15105278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Plant J. 2004 Apr;38(2):358-65.

Automatic quantification of morphological traits via three-dimensional
measurement of Arabidopsis.

Kaminuma E(1), Heida N, Tsumoto Y, Yamamoto N, Goto N, Okamoto N, Konagaya A,
Matsui M, Toyoda T.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Knowledge Base Research Team, Bioinformatics Group, RIKEN Yokohama
Institute, Genomic Sciences Center, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama,
Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. eli@gsc.riken.go.jp

Many mutants have been isolated from the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana, and
recent important genetic resources, such as T-DNA knockout lines, facilitate the 
speed of identifying new mutants. However, present phenotypic analysis of mutant 
screens depends mainly on qualitative descriptions after visual observation of
morphological traits. We propose a novel method of phenotypic analysis based on
precise three-dimensional (3D) measurement by a laser range finder (LRF) and
automatic data processing. We measured the 3D surfaces of young plants of two
Arabidopsis ecotypes and successfully defined two new traits, the direction of
the blade surface and epinasty of the blade, quantitatively. The proposed method 
enables us to obtain quantitative and precise descriptions of plant morphologies 
compared to conventional 2D measurement. The method will open a way to find new
traits from mutant pools or natural ecotypes based on 3D data.

PMID: 15078337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Oncogene. 2004 Jun 24;23(29):5023-31.

Transformation potency of ErbB heterodimer signaling is determined by B-Raf
kinase.

Hatakeyama M(1), Yumoto N, Yu X, Shirouzu M, Yokoyama S, Konagaya A.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho,
Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. marikoh@gsc.riken.jp

Cellular transformation occurs only in cells that express both ErbB1 and ErbB4
receptors, but not in cells expressing only one or the other of these receptors. 
However, when both receptors are coexpressed and ligand-stimulated, they interact
with virtually the same adaptor/effector proteins as when expressed singly. To
reveal the underlying regulatory mechanism of the kinase/phosphatase network in
ErbB homo- and heterodimer receptor signaling, extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (ERK) and Akt activities were evaluated in the presence of several enzyme 
inhibitors in ligand-induced cells expressing ErbB1 (E1), ErbB4 (E4), and
ErbB1/ErbB4 (E1/4) receptor. The PP2A inhibitor okadaic acid showed
receptor-specific inhibitory profiles for ERK and Akt activities. Moreover, B-Raf
isolated only from E1/4 cells could induce in vitro phosphorylation for MEK; this
B-Raf kinase activity was abolished by pretreatment of the cells with okadaic
acid. Our study further showed that the E1/4 cell-specific B-Raf activity was
stimulated by PLC gamma and subsequent Rap1 activation. The present study
suggests that B-Raf kinase, which was specifically activated in the cells
coexpressing ErbB1 and ErbB4 receptors, elevates total ERK activity within the
cell and, therefore, can induce cellular transformation.

PMID: 15064721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. BMC Genomics. 2004 Feb 23;5(1):16.

Assessment of clusters of transcription factor binding sites in relationship to
human promoter, CpG islands and gene expression.

Murakami K(1), Kojima T, Sakaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center, 1-7-22, Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi, Yokohama,
Kanagawa, JAPAN. katsu@gsc.riken.go.jp

BACKGROUND: Gene expression is regulated mainly by transcription factors (TFs)
that interact with regulatory cis-elements on DNA sequences. To identify
functional regulatory elements, computer searching can predict TF binding sites
(TFBS) using position weight matrices (PWMs) that represent positional base
frequencies of collected experimentally determined TFBS. A disadvantage of this
approach is the large output of results for genomic DNA. One strategy to identify
genuine TFBS is to utilize local concentrations of predicted TFBS. It is unclear 
whether there is a general tendency for TFBS to cluster at promoter regions,
although this is the case for certain TFBS. Also unclear is the identification of
TFs that have TFBS concentrated in promoters and to what level this occurs. This 
study hopes to answer some of these questions.
RESULTS: We developed the cluster score measure to evaluate the correlation
between predicted TFBS clusters and promoter sequences for each PWM. Non-promoter
sequences were used as a control. Using the cluster score, we identified a PWM
group called PWM-PCP, in which TFBS clusters positively correlate with promoters,
and another PWM group called PWM-NCP, in which TFBS clusters negatively correlate
with promoters. The PWM-PCP group comprises 47% of the 199 vertebrate PWMs, while
the PWM-NCP group occupied 11 percent. After reducing the effect of CpG islands
(CGI) against the clusters using partial correlation coefficients among three
properties (promoter, CGI and predicted TFBS cluster), we identified two PWM
groups including those strongly correlated with CGI and those not correlated with
CGI.
CONCLUSION: Not all PWMs predict TFBS correlated with human promoter sequences.
Two main PWM groups were identified: (1) those that show TFBS clustered in
promoters associated with CGI, and (2) those that show TFBS clustered in
promoters independent of CGI. Assessment of PWM matches will allow more positive 
interpretation of TFBS in regulatory regions.

PMCID: PMC375527
PMID: 15053842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Trends Biotechnol. 2004 Apr;22(4):161-7.

Dynamic transcriptome of mice.

Hayashizaki Y(1), Kanamori M.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Exploration Research Group, Genomic Science Center (GSC), RIKEN, 1-7-22
Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, 230-0045 Japan. yosihide@gsc.riken.go.jp

Life science in the 21st century is developing rapidly through the structural
analysis of biomolecules, the completion of the human genome sequence and the
analysis of transcriptomes. The mouse transcriptome has been comprehensively
analyzed using a gene discovery approach to collect full-length cDNA (FL-cDNA)
clones. The framework of the transcriptome was then mapped out by an
international Functional ANnoTation Of Mouse cDNA (FANTOM) effort, and a
significant new population of noncoding transcripts was discovered. The
geographical analogy of a second "RNA continent," separate from the "continent"
of expressed proteins, aids the visualization of this concept. An unexpected
number of variations was discovered in the mouse transcriptome. The animal
transcriptome has evolved to produce several transcripts and proteins from a
single "transcriptional unit". Transcriptome analysis has given rise to the
FL-cDNA database and to the 60 770 FANTOM FL-cDNA clone set, and the DNABook was 
developed as an easier way to distribute these clones. In conjunction with genome
sequence databases, transcriptome databases and clone banks will be platforms for
developing advanced databases of gene function (e.g. the Genome Function
Database). This will enable life science to make rapid progress towards
understanding life as a system of molecules.

PMID: 15038920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Bioinformatics. 2004 Jul 22;20(11):1759-65. Epub 2004 Mar 22.

Omic space: coordinate-based integration and analysis of genomic phenomic
interactions.

Toyoda T(1), Wada A.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Knowledge Base Research Team, Bioinformatics Group, RIKEN Yokohama
Institute, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. toyop@gsc.riken.go.jp

MOTIVATION: With the recent progress in genomics, various data sets of omic
interactions describing networks of omic elements have become available. In order
to obtain reliable hypotheses from the data, it is effective to integrate
interactions from different sorts of data sets. In order to facilitate a
coordinate-based integration and analysis of omic interactions, we introduce the 
concept of an omic space comprising a comprehensive set of omic planes. Genomic, 
transcriptomic, proteomic, metabolomic, phenomic and other omic planes are
defined by two orthogonal genomic-coordinate axes.
RESULTS: We show that the omic space concept helps us to assimilate biological
findings comprehensively into hypotheses or models combining higher-order
phenomena and lower-order mechanisms by demonstrating that a comprehensive
ranking of correspondences among interactions in the space can be used
effectively for estimating candidates of responsible gene pairs for epistatic
interacting loci of tumors in mice. We also show that the omic space offers a
convenient framework for database integration, by presenting a system named the
'Genome <==> Phenome Superhighway' (GPS) that serves as a framework for
integration and visualization of omic interactions based on omic spaces of some
model species including Homo sapiens, Mus musculus, Caenorhabditis elegans and
Arabidopsis thaliana.
AVAILABILITY: For the GPS web site, see http://omicspace.riken.jp/gps/.

PMID: 15037505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Plant J. 2004 Mar;37(6):897-905.

A collection of 11 800 single-copy Ds transposon insertion lines in Arabidopsis.

Kuromori T(1), Hirayama T, Kiyosue Y, Takabe H, Mizukado S, Sakurai T, Akiyama K,
Kamiya A, Ito T, Shinozaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Mutation Exploration Team, Plant Functional Genomics Research Group,
RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho,
Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan.

More than 10 000 transposon-tagged lines were constructed by using the Activator 
(Ac)/Dissociation (Ds) system in order to collect insertional mutants as a useful
resource for functional genomics of Arabidopsis. The flanking sequences of the Ds
element in the 11 800 independent lines were determined by high-throughput
analysis using a semi-automated method. The sequence data allowed us to map the
unique insertion site on the Arabidopsis genome in each line. The Ds element of
7566 lines is inserted in or close to coding regions, potentially affecting the
function of 5031 of 25 000 Arabidopsis genes. Half of the lines have Ds
insertions on chromosome 1 (Chr. 1), in which donor lines have a donor site. In
the other half, the Ds insertions are distributed throughout the other four
chromosomes. The intrachromosomal distribution of Ds insertions varies with the
donor lines. We found that there are hot spots for Ds transposition near the ends
of every chromosome, and we found some statistical preference for Ds insertion
targets at the nucleotide level. On the basis of systematic analysis of the Ds
insertion sites in the 11 800 lines, we propose the use of Ds-tagged lines with a
single insertion in annotated genes for systematic analysis of phenotypes
(phenome analysis) in functional genomics. We have opened a searchable database
of the insertion-site sequences and mutated genes (http://rarge.gsc.riken.go.jp/)
and are depositing these lines in the RIKEN BioResource Center as available
resources (http://www.brc.riken.go.jp/Eng/).

PMID: 14996221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Pharmacol Toxicol Methods. 2004 Mar-Apr;49(2):131-6.

Determination of volatile anesthetics isoflurane and enflurane in mouse brain
tissues using gas chromatography-mass spectrometry.

Deng XS(1), Simpson VJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center,
Mail Stop C-236, 4200 E. 9th Avenue, Denver, CO 80262, USA.
xin-sheng.Deng@uchsc.edu

INTRODUCTION: A method for determination of the volatile anesthetics, isoflurane,
and enflurane in mouse brain tissues using headspace gas chromatography-mass
spectrometry (GC-MS) is described.
METHODS: Halothane was used as internal standard (I.S.). Brain samples were
completely homogenized in ice-cold water and isoflurane, enflurane, and I.S. were
extracted with headspace. One milliliter of headspace gas was injected onto the
GC-MS and separation was achieved by using porous layer open tubular (PLOT)
capillary column with a solid stationary phase (GSC). As a result, isoflurane,
enflurane, and halothane were cleanly separated.
RESULTS: The method demonstrated satisfactory recovery (72% and 76% for
isoflurane and enflurane, respectively) and linear calibration ranges of
0.015-2.20 and 0.0152-3.94 microg/sample for isoflurane and enflurane,
respectively. Reproducibility calculated as CV% was 3.3-3.9% for all intraday and
interday determinations. The procedure was applied for quantitation of isoflurane
and enflurane in about 300 mouse brain samples for genetic behavioral study.
DISCUSSION: The method was achieved and shown to be effective.

PMID: 14990338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Development. 2004 Mar;131(6):1235-45. Epub 2004 Feb 18.

Bapx1 regulates patterning in the middle ear: altered regulatory role in the
transition from the proximal jaw during vertebrate evolution.

Tucker AS(1), Watson RP, Lettice LA, Yamada G, Hill RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development and Orthodontics, Kings College London,
Floor 28, Guy's Tower, Guy's Hospital, London SE1 9RT, UK.

The middle ear apparatus is composed of three endochondrial ossicles (the stapes,
incus and malleus) and two membranous bones, the tympanic ring and the gonium,
which act as structural components to anchor the ossicles to the skull. Except
for the stapes, these skeletal elements are unique to mammals and are derived
from the first and second branchial arches. We show that, in combination with
goosecoid (Gsc), the Bapx1 gene defines the structural components of the murine
middle ear. During embryogenesis, Bapx1 is expressed in a discrete domain within 
the mandibular component of the first branchial arch and later in the primordia
of middle ear-associated bones, the gonium and tympanic ring. Consistent with the
expression pattern of Bapx1, mouse embryos deficient for Bapx1 lack a gonium and 
display hypoplasia of the anterior end of the tympanic ring. At E10.5, expression
of Bapx1 partially overlaps that of Gsc and although Gsc is required for
development of the entire tympanic ring, the role of Bapx1 is restricted to the
specification of the gonium and the anterior tympanic ring. Thus, simple
overlapping expression of these two genes appears to account for the patterning
of the elements that compose the structural components of the middle ear and
suggests that they act in concert. In addition, Bapx1 is expressed both within
and surrounding the incus and the malleus. Examination of the malleus shows that 
the width, but not the length, of this ossicle is decreased in the mutant mice.
In non-mammalian jawed vertebrates, the bones homologous to the mammalian middle 
ear ossicles compose the proximal jaw bones that form the jaw articulation
(primary jaw joint). In fish, Bapx1 is responsible for the formation of the joint
between the quadrate and articular (homologues of the malleus and incus,
respectively) enabling an evolutionary comparison of the role of a regulatory
gene in the transition of the proximal jawbones to middle ear ossicles. Contrary 
to expectations, murine Bapx1 does not affect the articulation of the malleus and
incus. We show that this change in role of Bapx1 following the transition to the 
mammalian ossicle configuration is not due to a change in expression pattern but 
results from an inability to regulate Gdf5 and Gdf6, two genes predicted to be
essential in joint formation.

PMID: 14973294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Development. 2004 Mar;131(6):1365-75. Epub 2004 Feb 18.

Gbb/Bmp signaling is essential for maintaining germline stem cells and for
repressing bam transcription in the Drosophila testis.

Kawase E(1), Wong MD, Ding BC, Xie T.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, 1000 East 50th Street, Kansas City, MO
64110, USA.

Stem cells are responsible for replacing damaged or dying cells in various adult 
tissues throughout a lifetime. They possess great potential for future
regenerative medicine and gene therapy. However, the mechanisms governing stem
cell regulation are poorly understood. Germline stem cells (GSCs) in the
Drosophila testis have been shown to reside in niches, and thus these represent
an excellent system for studying relationships between niches and stem cells.
Here we show that Bmp signals from somatic cells are essential for maintaining
GSCs in the Drosophila testis. Somatic cyst cells and hub cells express two Bmp
molecules, Gbb and Dpp. Our genetic analysis indicates that gbb functions
cooperatively with dpp to maintain male GSCs, although gbb alone is essential for
GSC maintenance. Furthermore, mutant clonal analysis shows that Bmp signals
directly act on GSCs and control their maintenance. In GSCs defective in Bmp
signaling, expression of bam is upregulated, whereas forced bam expression in
GSCs causes the GSCs to be lost. This study demonstrates that Bmp signals from
the somatic cells maintain GSCs, at least in part, by repressing bam expression
in the Drosophila testis. dpp signaling is known to be essential for maintaining 
GSCs in the Drosophila ovary. This study further suggests that both Drosophila
male and female GSCs use Bmp signals to maintain GSCs.

PMID: 14973292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Development. 2004 Mar;131(6):1353-64. Epub 2004 Feb 18.

Bmp signals from niche cells directly repress transcription of a
differentiation-promoting gene, bag of marbles, in germline stem cells in the
Drosophila ovary.

Song X(1), Wong MD, Kawase E, Xi R, Ding BC, McCarthy JJ, Xie T.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, 1000 East 50th Street, Kansas City, MO
64110, USA.

The Drosophila ovary is an attractive system to study how niches control stem
cell self-renewal and differentiation. The niche for germline stem cells (GSCs)
provides a Dpp/Bmp signal, which is essential for GSC maintenance. bam is both
necessary and sufficient for the differentiation of immediate GSC daughters,
cystoblasts. Here we show that Bmp signals directly repress bam transcription in 
GSCs in the Drosophila ovary. Similar to dpp, gbb encodes another Bmp niche
signal that is essential for maintaining GSCs. The expression of phosphorylated
Mad (pMad), a Bmp signaling indicator, is restricted to GSCs and some
cystoblasts, which have repressed bam expression. Both Dpp and Gbb signals
contribute to pMad production. bam transcription is upregulated in GSCs mutant
for dpp and gbb. In marked GSCs mutant for Med and punt, two essential Bmp signal
transducers, bam transcription is also elevated. Finally, we show that Med and
Mad directly bind to the bam silencer in vitro. This study demonstrates that Bmp 
signals maintain the undifferentiated or self-renewal state of GSCs, and directly
repress bam expression in GSCs by functioning as short-range signals. Thus, niche
signals directly repress differentiation-promoting genes in stem cells in order
to maintain stem cell self-renewal.

PMID: 14973291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Nat Rev Genet. 2004 Mar;5(3):223-8.

A new approach to the distribution and storage of genetic resources.

Hayashizaki Y(1), Kawai J.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Exploration Research Group, Riken Genomic Sciences Center, Riken
Yokohama Institute, and Japan and Preventure JST, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku,
Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. yosihide@gsc.riken.go.jp

PMID: 14970824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Mar Biotechnol (NY). 2001 Jan;3(1):27-35.

Fibroblast growth factor inhibits expression of neural markers in cultures of
zebrafish early embryo cells.

Singh NN(1), Fischer K, Hedstrom O, Barnes DW.

Author information: 
(1)National Stem Cell Resource, American Type Culture Collection, 10801
University Blvd., Manassas, VA 20110, USA.

Basic fibroblast growth factor (FGF) regulation of developmental markers in cell 
cultures derived from early zebrafish embryos was examined with the goal of in
vitro culture of zebrafish embryonic stem cells and gaining an understanding of
extracellular influences on early embryonic development. Markers were
stem/primordial germ cell markers pou-2 and vas, neural markers zp-50, pax[zf-a],
en-3, and wnt-1, and mesodermal markers gsc and myoD. Previously we had shown
that FGF prevents the development of zebrafish pigment cells in vitro. In our
culture system, FGF reduced expression of neural-specific markers, possibly
implicating the FGF family in suppression of early neural cell development.
Exposure to FGF for 24 hours at the time of seeding the cells was sufficient to
suppress neural marker expression for a subsequent 4 days of culture, while
absence of FGF for the first 24 hours of culture nullified the effect of FGF
added subsequently. FGF predictably increased expression of gsc and myoD. Vas
expression was unaffected, while pou-2 expression decreased with time in culture 
in the presence or absence of FGF. However, in situ hybridization identified a
subpopulation of cells expressing pou-2, suggesting the possible continued
existence of undifferentiated stem cells in the cultures.

PMID: 14961387  [PubMed]


26. C R Biol. 2003 Oct-Nov;326(10-11):923-9.

The Riken mouse genome encyclopedia project.

Hayashizaki Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Gene Exploration Research Group, Riken Genomic Sciences Center, 1-7-22
Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.
yosihide@gsc.riken.go.jp

The Riken mouse genome encyclopedia a comprehensive full-length cDNA collection
and sequence database. High-level functional annotation is based on sequence
homology search, expression profiling, mapping and protein-protein interactions. 
More than 1000000 clones prepared from 163 tissues were end-sequenced and
classified into 128000 clusters, and 60000 representative clones were fully
sequenced representing 24000 clear protein-encoding genes. The application of the
mouse genome database for positional cloning and gene network regulation analysis
is reported.

PMID: 14744098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Novartis Found Symp. 2003;254:177-88; discussion 189-92, 216-22, 250-2.

From immunogenetics to immunomics: functional prospecting of genes and
transcripts.

Schönbach C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Knowledge Discovery Team, Bioinformatics Group, RIKEN Genomic
Sciences Center (GSC), 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan.

Human and mouse genome and transcriptome projects have expanded the field of
'immunogenetics' beyond the traditional study of the genetics and evolution of
MHC, TCR and Ig loci into the new interdisciplinary area of 'immunomics'.
Immunomics is the study of the molecular functions associated with all
immune-related coding and non-coding mRNA transcripts. To unravel the function,
regulation and diversity of the immunome requires that we identify and correctly 
categorize all immune-related transcripts. The importance of intercalated genes, 
antisense transcripts and non-coding RNAs and their potential role in regulation 
of immune development and function are only just starting to be appreciated. To
better understand immune function and regulation, transcriptome projects (e.g.
Functional Annotation of the Mouse, FANTOM), that focus on sequencing full-length
transcripts from multiple tissue sources, ideally should include specific immune 
cells (e.g. T cell, B cells, macrophages, dendritic cells) at various states of
development, in activated and unactivated states and in different disease
contexts. Progress in deciphering immune regulatory networks will require the
cooperative efforts of immunologists, immunogeneticists, molecular biologists and
bioinformaticians. Although primary sequence analysis remains useful for
annotation of new transcripts it is less useful for identifying novel functions
of known transcripts in a new context (protein interaction network or pathway).
The most efficient approach to mine useful information from the vast a priori
knowledge contained in biological databases and the scientific literature, is to 
use a combination of computational and expert-driven knowledge discovery
strategies. This paper will illustrate the challenges posed in attempts to
functionally infer transcriptional regulation and interaction of immune-related
genes from text and sequence-based data sources.

PMID: 14712938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Genome Biol. 2003;5(1):R5. Epub 2003 Dec 11.

Antisense transcripts with rice full-length cDNAs.

Osato N(1), Yamada H, Satoh K, Ooka H, Yamamoto M, Suzuki K, Kawai J, Carninci P,
Ohtomo Y, Murakami K, Matsubara K, Kikuchi S, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Science Center
(GSC), RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan 230-0045.

BACKGROUND: Natural antisense transcripts control gene expression through
post-transcriptional gene silencing by annealing to the complementary sequence of
the sense transcript. Because many genome and mRNA sequences have become
available recently, genome-wide searches for sense-antisense transcripts have
been reported, but few plant sense-antisense transcript pairs have been studied. 
The Rice Full-Length cDNA Sequencing Project has enabled computational searching 
of a large number of plant sense-antisense transcript pairs.
RESULTS: We identified sense-antisense transcript pairs from 32,127 full-length
rice cDNA sequences produced by this project and public rice mRNA sequences by
aligning the cDNA sequences with rice genome sequences. We discovered 687
bidirectional transcript pairs in rice, including sense-antisense transcript
pairs. Both sense and antisense strands of 342 pairs (50%) showed homology to at 
least one expressed sequence tag other than that of the pair. Microarray analysis
showed 82 pairs (32%) out of 258 pairs on the microarray were more highly
expressed than the median expression intensity of 21,938 rice transcriptional
units. Both sense and antisense strands of 594 pairs (86%) had coding potential.
CONCLUSIONS: The large number of plant sense-antisense transcript pairs suggests 
that gene regulation by antisense transcripts occurs in plants and not only in
animals. On the basis of our results, experiments should be carried out to
analyze the function of plant antisense transcripts.

PMCID: PMC395737
PMID: 14709177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Dent Traumatol. 2003 Oct;19(5):248-54.

Prevalence and handedness correlates of traumatic injuries to the permanent
incisors in 13-17-year-old adolescents in Erzurum, Turkey.

Canakci V(1), Akgül HM, Akgül N, Canakci CF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, School of Dentistry, Atatürk University,
Erzurum, Turkey. varol@atauni.edu.tr

The objectives of the present study were to explore the relationship between
dental trauma and handedness, and to assess the prevalence of traumatic injuries 
to the permanent incisors of 13-17-year-old patients, seeking treatment for
various dental conditions in Erzurum, Turkey. A questionnaire focusing on
handedness was administered to these patients. Handedness was assessed by the
Edinburgh Handedness Inventory (Oldfield, 1971). Hand preference was divided into
two classes for convenience in data analysis: (i) right-handers (GSc from 80 to
100); and (ii) left-handers (GSc from -80 to -100). This study included the
13-17-year-old group patients who had GSc as described above. Thus, the present
study was carried out on 2180 (1252 male and 928 female, with a mean age of 14.9 
years) out of 2392 patients. The clinical examinations and radiographic
assessments were performed in full-designed dental chairs. Preliminary analysis
showed no differences in rates of handedness with respect to sex and age.
Overall, 10.4% of the patients were left-handers. A total of 292 (13.4%) of 2180 
patients examined had one or more traumatized permanent incisors. The proportion 
of dental trauma was significantly higher in males than in females, 17.41% in
males as compared to 7.97% in females; and ratio of the affected males to females
was about 2.18. Sex difference in the prevalence of traumatized permanent
incisors was statistically significant (P < 0.001). That is, males had a
significantly higher risk of dental trauma than females (P < 0.001; odds ratio:
2.49; 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.88, 3.23). There was a higher level of
traumatized permanent incisors among left-handers than among right-handers. 28.3%
of left-handers and 11.7% of right-handers had dental trauma. This difference in 
the prevalence of traumatized permanent incisors for handedness was statistically
significant (P < 0.001). Indeed, left-handers had a significantly higher risk on 
dental trauma than right-handers (P < 0.001; odds ratio: 3.09; 95% CI 2.23,
4.29). The primary causative factor in the occurrence of trauma was the fall
(27.7%). Then came violence and fight as the second most frequent cause of trauma
(24%), followed by sports injury (18.8%). Trauma resulting from collisions and
traffic accidents were accounted as 13.7 and 11.3% of all cases, respectively.
The other causes were 4.5%. In conclusion, the present study suggests that
left-handed adolescents have more frequent permanent incisor tooth trauma than
right-handed adolescents. Left-handedness, therefore, appears to be a risk factor
for trauma in 13-17-year-old adolescents.

PMID: 14708648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Jan 1;32(Database issue):D548-51.

EICO (Expression-based Imprint Candidate Organizer): finding disease-related
imprinted genes.

Nikaido I(1), Saito C, Wakamoto A, Tomaru Y, Arakawa T, Hayashizaki Y, Okazaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genomic Information Resource Exploration, Science of Biological
Supramolecular Systems, Yokohama City University, Graduate School of Integrated
Science, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.

We have developed an integrated database that is specialized for the study of
imprinted disease genes. The database contains novel candidate imprinted genes
identified by the RIKEN full-length mouse cDNA microarray study, information on
validated single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) to confirm imprinting using
reciprocal mouse crosses and the predicted physical position of
imprinting-related disease loci in the mouse and human genomes. It has two
user-friendly search interfaces: the SNP-central view (MuSCAT: MoUse SNP CATalog)
and the candidate gene-central view (CITE: Candidate Imprinted Transcripts by
Expression). The database, EICO (Expression-based Imprint Candidate Organizer),
can be accessed via the World Wide Web (http://fantom2.gsc.riken.jp/EICODB/) and 
the DAS client software. These data and interfaces facilitate understanding of
the mechanism of imprinting in mammalian inherited traits.

PMCID: PMC308827
PMID: 14681478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Jan 1;32(Database issue):D471-5.

FREP: a database of functional repeats in mouse cDNAs.

Nagashima T(1), Matsuda H, Silva DG, Petrovsky N, Konagaya A, Schönbach C,
Kasukawa T, Arakawa T, Carninci P, Kawai J, Hayashizaki Y; RIKEN GER Group;
Genome Science Laoratory Members.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Knowledge Discovery Team, Bioinformatics Group, RIKEN Genomic
Sciences Center (GSC), RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku,
Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.

The FREP database (http://facts.gsc.riken.go.jp/FREP/) contains 31 396
RepeatMasker-identified non-redundant variant repeat sequences derived from
16,527 mouse cDNAs with protein-coding potential. The repeats were
computationally associated with potential effects on transcriptional variation,
translation, protein function or involvement in disease to identify Functional
REPeats (FREPs). FREPs are defined by the (i) occurrence of exon-exon boundaries 
in repeats, (ii) presence of polyadenylation sites in 3'UTR-located repeats,
(iii) effect on translation, (iv) position in the protein- coding region or
protein domains or (v) conditional association with disease MeSH terms. Currently
the database contains 9261 (29.5%) inferred FREPs derived from 6861 (41.5%) mouse
cDNAs. Integrated evidence of the functional assignments and dynamically
generated sequence similarity search results support the exploration and
annotation of functional, ancestral or taxon-specific repeats. Keyword and
pre-selected feature searches (e.g. coding sequence-repeat or splice site-repeat 
relations) support intuitive database querying as well as the retrieval of repeat
sequences. Integrated sequence search and alignment tools allow the analysis of
known or identification of new functional repeat candidates. FREP is a unique
resource for illuminating the role of transposons and repetitive sequences in
shaping the coding part of the mouse transcriptome and for selecting the
appropriate experimental model to study diseases with suspected repeat etiology
contributions.

PMCID: PMC308857
PMID: 14681460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Jan 1;32(Database issue):D423-6.

Nematode.net: a tool for navigating sequences from parasitic and free-living
nematodes.

Wylie T(1), Martin JC, Dante M, Mitreva MD, Clifton SW, Chinwalla A, Waterston
RH, Wilson RK, McCarter JP.

Author information: 
(1)The Genome Sequencing Center, Washington University School of Medicine, St
Louis, MO 63108, USA. twylie@watson.wustl.edu

Nematode.net (www.nematode.net) is a web- accessible resource for investigating
gene sequences from nematode genomes. The database is an outgrowth of the
parasitic nematode EST project at Washington University's Genome Sequencing
Center (GSC), St Louis. A sister project at the University of Edinburgh and the
Sanger Institute is also underway. More than 295,000 ESTs have been generated
from >30 nematodes other than Caenorhabditis elegans including key parasites of
humans, animals and plants. Nematode.net currently provides NemaGene EST cluster 
consensus sequence, enhanced online BLAST search tools, functional
classifications of cluster sequences and comprehensive information concerning the
ongoing generation of nematode genome data. The long-term goal of nematode.net is
to provide the scientific community with the highest quality sequence information
and tools for studying these diverse species.

PMCID: PMC308745
PMID: 14681448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Exp Bot. 2004 Jan;55(395):213-23. Epub 2003 Dec 12.

RIKEN Arabidopsis full-length (RAFL) cDNA and its applications for expression
profiling under abiotic stress conditions.

Seki M(1), Satou M, Sakurai T, Akiyama K, Iida K, Ishida J, Nakajima M, Enju A,
Narusaka M, Fujita M, Oono Y, Kamei A, Yamaguchi-Shinozaki K, Shinozaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Mutation Exploration Team, Plant Functional Genomics Research Group,
RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center (GSC), RIKEN Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22
Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan.

Full-length cDNAs are essential for the correct annotation of genomic sequences
and for the functional analysis of genes and their products. 155,144 RIKEN
Arabidopsis full-length (RAFL) cDNA clones were isolated. The 3'-end expressed
sequence tags (ESTs) of all 155,144 RAFL cDNAs were clustered into 14,668
non-redundant cDNA groups, about 60% of predicted genes. The sequence database of
the RAFL cDNAs is useful for promoter analysis and the correct annotation of
predicted transcription units and gene products. Recently, cDNA microarray
analysis has been developed for quantitative analysis of global and simultaneous 
analysis of expression profiles. RAFL cDNA microarrays were prepared, containing 
independent full-length cDNA groups for analysing the expression profiles of
genes under various stress- and hormone-treatment conditions and in various
mutants and transgenic plants. In this review, recent progress on transcriptome
analysis using the RAFL cDNA microarray is highlighted.

PMID: 14673034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Dev Biol. 2003 Dec 15;264(2):564-81.

Xenopus Xlmo4 is a GATA cofactor during ventral mesoderm formation and regulates 
Ldb1 availability at the dorsal mesoderm and the neural plate.

de la Calle-Mustienes E(1), Lu Z, Cortés M, Andersen B, Modolell J,
Gómez-Skarmeta JL.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas and Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Cantoblanco, 28049, Madrid,
Spain.

We have identified and functionally characterized the Xenopus Xlmo4 gene, which
encodes a member of the LIM-domain-only protein family. Xlmo4 is activated at
gastrula stages in the mesodermal marginal zone probably in response to BMP4
signaling. Soon after, Xlmo4 is downregulated in the dorsal region of the
mesoderm. This repression seems to be mediated by organizer-expressed repressors,
such as Gsc. Xlmo4 downregulation is necessary for the proper formation of this
territory. Increasing Xlmo4 function in this region downregulates Spemman
Organizer genes and suppresses dorsal-anterior structures. By binding to Ldb1,
Xlmo4 may restrict the availability of this cofactor for transcription factors
expressed at the Spemman Organizer. In the ventral mesoderm, Xlmo4 is required to
establish the identity of this territory by acting as a positive cofactor of GATA
factors. In the neural ectoderm, Xlmo4 expression depends on Xiro homeoprotein
activity. In this region, Xlmo4 suppresses differentiation of primary neurons and
interferes with gene expression at the Isthmic Organizer, most likely by
displacing Ldb1 from active transcription factor complexes required for these
processes. Together, our data suggest that Xlmo4 uses distinct mechanisms to
participate in different processes during development.

PMID: 14651938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. JAMA. 2003 Nov 19;290(19):2556-63.

Acute effects and recovery time following concussion in collegiate football
players: the NCAA Concussion Study.

McCrea M(1), Guskiewicz KM, Marshall SW, Barr W, Randolph C, Cantu RC, Onate JA, 
Yang J, Kelly JP.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Center, Waukesha Memorial Hospital, Waukesha, Wis 53188, USA.
michael.mccrea@phci.org

Comment in
    JAMA. 2003 Nov 19;290(19):2604-5.

CONTEXT: Lack of empirical data on recovery time following sport-related
concussion hampers clinical decision making about return to play after injury.
OBJECTIVE: To prospectively measure immediate effects and natural recovery course
relating to symptoms, cognitive functioning, and postural stability following
sport-related concussion.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Prospective cohort study of 1631 football
players from 15 US colleges. All players underwent preseason baseline testing on 
concussion assessment measures in 1999, 2000, and 2001. Ninety-four players with 
concussion (based on American Academy of Neurology criteria) and 56 noninjured
controls underwent assessment of symptoms, cognitive functioning, and postural
stability immediately, 3 hours, and 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, and 90 days after injury.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Scores on the Graded Symptom Checklist (GSC), Standardized
Assessment of Concussion (SAC), Balance Error Scoring System (BESS), and a
neuropsychological test battery.
RESULTS: No player with concussion was excluded from participation; 79 players
with concussion (84%) completed the protocol through day 90. Players with
concussion exhibited more severe symptoms (mean GSC score 20.93 [95% confidence
interval [CI], 15.65-26.21] points higher than that of controls), cognitive
impairment (mean SAC score 2.94 [95% CI, 1.50-4.38] points lower than that of
controls), and balance problems (mean BESS score 5.81 [95% CI, -0.67 to 12.30]
points higher than that of controls) immediately after concussion. On average,
symptoms gradually resolved by day 7 (GSC mean difference, 0.33; 95% CI, -1.41 to
2.06), cognitive functioning improved to baseline levels within 5 to 7 days (day 
7 SAC mean difference, -0.03; 95% CI, -1.33 to 1.26), and balance deficits
dissipated within 3 to 5 days after injury (day 5 BESS mean difference, -0.31;
95% CI, -3.02 to 2.40). Mild impairments in cognitive processing and verbal
memory evident on neuropsychological testing 2 days after concussion resolved by 
day 7. There were no significant differences in symptoms or functional
impairments in the concussion and control groups 90 days after concussion.
CONCLUSIONS: Collegiate football players may require several days for recovery of
symptoms, cognitive dysfunction, and postural instability after concussion.
Further research is required to determine factors that predict variability in
recovery time after concussion. Standardized measurement of postconcussive
symptoms, cognitive functioning, and postural stability may enhance clinical
management of athletes recovering from concussion.

PMID: 14625332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Plant J. 2003 Nov;36(3):421-9.

Sequence database of 1172 T-DNA insertion sites in Arabidopsis activation-tagging
lines that showed phenotypes in T1 generation.

Ichikawa T(1), Nakazawa M, Kawashima M, Muto S, Gohda K, Suzuki K, Ishikawa A,
Kobayashi H, Yoshizumi T, Tsumoto Y, Tsuhara Y, Iizumi H, Goto Y, Matsui M.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Function Exploration Team, Plant Functional Genomics Research Group,
Genomic Sciences Center, RIKEN, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumiku, Yokohama, Kanagawa
230-0045, Japan.

Plant genomic resources harbouring gain-of-function mutations remain rare, even
though this type of mutation is believed to be one of the most useful for
elucidating the function of unknown genes that have redundant partners in the
genome. An activation-tagging T-DNA was introduced into the genome of Arabidopsis
creating 55,431 independent transformed lines. Of these T1 lines, 1,262 showed
phenotypes different from those of wild-type plants. We called these lines
'AT1Ps' (activation T1 putants). The phenotypes observed include abnormalities in
morphology, growth rate, plant colour, flowering time and fertility. Similar
phenotypes re-appeared either in dominant or semi-dominant fashion in 17% of 177 
AT2P plants tested. Plasmid rescue or an adaptor-PCR method was used to identify 
1172 independent genomic loci of T-DNA integration sites in the AT1P plants.
Mapping of the integration sites revealed that the chromosomal distribution of
these sites is similar to that observed in conventional T-DNA knock-out lines,
except that the intragenic type of integration is slightly lower (27%) in the
AT1P plants compared to that observed in other random knock-out populations
(30-35%). Ten AT2P lines that showed dominant phenotypes were chosen to monitor
expression levels of genes adjacent to the T-DNA integration sites by RT-PCR.
Activation was observed in 7 out of 17 of the adjacent genes detected. Genes
located up to 8.2 kb away from the enhancer sequence were activated. One of the
seven activated genes was located close to the left-border sequence of the T-DNA,
having an estimated distance of 5.7 kb from the enhancer. Surprisingly, one gene,
the first ATG of which is located 12 kb away from the enhancer, showed reduced
mRNA accumulation in the tagged line. Application of the database generated to
Arabidopsis functional genomics research is discussed. The sequence database of
the 1172 loci from the AT1P plants is available
(http://pfgweb.gsc.riken.go.jp/index.html).

PMID: 14617098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Genome Inform. 2002;13:183-91.

A novel index which precisely derives protein coding regions from cross-species
genome alignments.

Noguchi H(1), Yada T, Sakaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Sciences Center, RIKEN, 1-7-22 Furo-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama
230-0045, Japan. hide@gsc.riken.go.jp

We introduce here a novel index which precisely derives protein coding regions
from cross-species genome alignments. The index is deeply related to frame
recovery observed in coding sequence alignments, that is, if insertions or
deletions of nucleotides causes frame shifts in coding regions, other in-dels
which recover the reading frames will be often observed in the vicinity. In
contrast, such frame recoveries are not observed in other conserved regions. We
prepared two gene models: a model which finds gene by using sequence similarity
and intrinsic gene measures (basic model), and the other model which finds gene
by using frame recovery index in addition to sequence similarity and intrinsic
gene measures (frame recovery model). We evaluated the prediction accuracies of
the two models, and our benchmark test revealed that frame recovery model
significantly improved the prediction accuracy in comparison with basic model.

PMID: 14571387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Curr Biol. 2003 Oct 14;13(20):1786-91.

Dpp signaling silences bam transcription directly to establish asymmetric
divisions of germline stem cells.

Chen D(1), McKearin D.

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, Dallas, TX
75390-9148, USA.

Stem cells execute self-renewing and asymmetric cell divisions in close
association with stromal cells that form a niche. The mechanisms that link
stromal cell signaling to self-renewal and asymmetry are only beginning to be
identified, but Drosophila oogenic germline stem cells (GSCs) have emerged as an 
important model for studying stem cell niches. A member of the Bone Morphogenetic
Protein (BMP) ligand family, Decapentaplegic (Dpp), sustains ovarian GSCs by
suppressing differentiation in the stem cell niche (Figure 1A). Dpp
overexpression expands the niche, blocks germ cell differentiation, and causes
GSC hyperplasty. Here, we show that the bag-of-marbles (bam) differentiation
factor is the principal target of Dpp signaling in GSCs; ectopic bam expression
restores differentiation even when Dpp is overexpressed. We show that the
transcriptional silencer element in the bam gene integrates Dpp control of bam
expression. Finally and most significantly, we demonstrate for the first time
that Dpp signaling regulates bam expression directly since the bam silencer
element is a strong binding site for the Drosophila Smads, Mad and Medea. These
studies provide a simple mechanistic explanation for how stromal cell signals
regulate both the self-renewal and asymmetric fates of the products of stem cell 
division.

PMID: 14561403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Nov;23(21):7648-57.

Miz1 is required for early embryonic development during gastrulation.

Adhikary S(1), Peukert K, Karsunky H, Beuger V, Lutz W, Elsässer HP, Möröy T,
Eilers M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology and Tumor Research. Institute for Cytobiology 
and Cytopathology, University of Marburg, 35033 Marburg, Germany.

Miz1 is a member of the POZ domain/zinc finger transcription factor family. In
vivo, Miz1 forms a complex with the Myc oncoprotein and recruits Myc to core
promoter elements. Myc represses transcription through Miz1 binding sites. We now
show that the Miz1 gene is ubiquitously expressed during mouse embryogenesis. In 
order to elucidate the physiological function of Miz1, we have deleted the mouse 
Miz1 gene by homologous recombination. Miz1(+/-) mice are indistinguishable from 
wild-type animals; in contrast, Miz1(-/-) embryos are not viable. They are
severely retarded in early embryonic development and do not undergo normal
gastrulation. Expression of Goosecoid and Brachyury is detectable in Miz1(-/-)
embryos, suggesting that Miz1 is not required for signal transduction by Nodal.
Expression of p21Cip1, a target gene of Miz1 is unaltered; in contrast,
expression of p57Kip2, another target gene of Miz1 is absent in Miz1(-/-)
embryos. Miz1(-/-) embryos succumb to massive apoptosis of ectodermal cells
around day 7.5 of embryonic development. Our results show that Miz1 is required
for early embryonic development during gastrulation.

PMCID: PMC207589
PMID: 14560010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Development. 2003 Nov;130(22):5503-17.

The maternally expressed zebrafish T-box gene eomesodermin regulates organizer
formation.

Bruce AE(1), Howley C, Zhou Y, Vickers SL, Silver LM, King ML, Ho RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organismal Biology and Anatomy, University of Chicago, Chicago, 
IL 60637, USA. abruce@uchicago.edu

Early embryonic development in many organisms relies upon maternal molecules
deposited into the egg prior to fertilization. We have cloned and characterized a
maternal T-box gene in the zebrafish, eomesodermin (eomes). During oogenesis, the
eomes transcript becomes localized to the cortex of the oocyte. After
fertilization during early cleavage stages, eomes is expressed in a vegetal to
animal gradient in the embryo, whereas Eomesodermin protein (Eom) is distributed 
cytoplasmically throughout the blastoderm. Strikingly, following midblastula
transition, nuclear-localized Eomesodermin is detected on the dorsal side of the 
embryo only. Overexpression of eomes results in Nodal-dependent and
nieuwkoid/dharma (nwk/dhm) independent ectopic expression of the organizer
markers goosecoid (gsc), chordin (chd) and floating head (flh) and in the
formation of secondary axes. The same phenotypes are observed when a
VP16-activator construct is injected into early embryos, indicating that eomes
acts as a transcriptional activator. In addition, a dominant-negative construct
and antisense morpholino oligonucleotides led to a reduction in gsc and flh
expression. Together these data indicate that eomes plays a role in specifying
the organizer.

PMID: 14530296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2003 Oct 20;13(20):3441-5.

Novel sulfated gangliosides, high-affinity ligands for neural siglecs, inhibit
NADase activity of leukocyte cell surface antigen CD38.

Hara-Yokoyama M(1), Ito H, Ueno-Noto K, Takano K, Ishida H, Kiso M.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry, Department of Hard Tissue Engineering, Division of Bio-Matrix,
Graduate School, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yusima, Bunkyo-ku,
Tokyo 113-8549, Japan. m.yokoyama.bch@tmd.ac.jp

Three kinds of novel sulfated gangliosides structurally related to the Chol-1
(alpha-series) ganglioside GQ1balpha were synthesized. These sulfated
gangliosides were potent inhibitors of NADase activity of leukocyte cell surface 
antigen CD38. Among the synthetic gangliosides, GSC-338 (II(3)III(6)-disulfate of
iso-GM1b) was surprisingly found to be the most potent structure in both the
NADase inhibition and MAG-binding activity. The present study indicates that the 
sulfated gangliosides are useful to study the recognition of the internal tandem 
sialic acid residues alpha2-3-linked to Gal(II(3)) as well as the
siglec-dependent recognition including a terminal sialic acid residue.

PMID: 14505645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Struct Funct Genomics. 2003;4(1):35-9.

Practical application of transcriptional sequencing for GC-rich templates.

Shibata K(1), Izawa M, Hayashizaki Y, Watahiki M.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Science Laboratory, RIKEN Discovery and Research Institute, 2-1
Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan. rgscerg@gsc.riken.go.jp

Transcriptional sequencing (TS) is a method that differs considerably from
conventional sequencing methods. These differences include the use RNA
polymerases with rNTPs and 3'-dNTPs as substrates and terminators respectively,
and initiation from double stranded promoters on templates of ds-DNA. We used TS 
in an attempt to sequence 33 clones whose electropherogram peaks suddenly became 
absent or weak with conventional sequencing methods. All of the TS reactions
overcame the difficulty in sequencing the problematic target regions of the 33
clones. Therefore, TS can be applied to sequence not only GC-rich regions, but
also whole genome sequences with a high GC content.

PMID: 12943366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Bioinformatics. 2003 Jul 22;19(11):1423-30.

The connectivity structure, giant strong component and centrality of metabolic
networks.

Ma HW(1), Zeng AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Analysis,GBF - German Research Center for Biotechnology, 
Mascheroder Weg 1, 38124 Braunschweig, Germany.

MOTIVATION: Structural and functional analysis of genome-based large-scale
metabolic networks is important for understanding the design principles and
regulation of the metabolism at a system level. The metabolic network is
conventionally considered to be highly integrated and very complex. A rational
reduction of the metabolic network to its core structure and a deeper
understanding of its functional modules are important.
RESULTS: In this work, we show that the metabolites in a metabolic network are
far from fully connected. A connectivity structure consisting of four major
subsets of metabolites and reactions, i.e. a fully connected sub-network, a
substrate subset, a product subset and an isolated subset is found to exist in
metabolic networks of 65 fully sequenced organisms. The largest fully connected
part of a metabolic network, called 'the giant strong component (GSC)',
represents the most complicated part and the core of the network and has the
feature of scale-free networks. The average path length of the whole network is
primarily determined by that of the GSC. For most of the organisms, GSC normally 
contains less than one-third of the nodes of the network. This connectivity
structure is very similar to the 'bow-tie' structure of World Wide Web. Our
results indicate that the bow-tie structure may be common for large-scale
directed networks. More importantly, the uncovered structure feature makes a
structural and functional analysis of large-scale metabolic network more
amenable. As shown in this work, comparing the closeness centrality of the nodes 
in the GSC can identify the most central metabolites of a metabolic network. To
quantitatively characterize the overall connection structure of the GSC we
introduced the term 'overall closeness centralization index (OCCI)'. OCCI
correlates well with the average path length of the GSC and is a useful parameter
for a system-level comparison of metabolic networks of different organisms.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: http://genome.gbf.de/bioinformatics/

PMID: 12874056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Carbohydr Res. 2003 Jul 29;338(16):1621-39.

Systematic synthesis and MAG-binding activity of novel sulfated GM1b analogues as
mimics of Chol-1 (alpha-series) gangliosides: highly active ligands for neural
siglecs.

Ito H(1), Ishida H, Collins BE, Fromholt SE, Schnaar RL, Kiso M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Bio-organic Chemistry, Gifu University, Gifu 501-1193,
Japan.

Systematic synthesis and myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG)-binding activity of
novel sulfated GM1b analogues structurally related to Chol-1 (alpha-series)
gangliosides, high-affinity ligands for neural siglecs, are described. The
suitably protected gangliotriose derivatives, 2-(trimethylsilyl)ethyl
2-acetamido-2-deoxy-6-O-levulinoyl-beta-D-galactopyranosyl-(1-->4)-2,3,6-tri-O-be
nzyl-beta-D-galactopyranosyl-(1-->4)-2,3,6-tri-O-benzyl-beta-D-glucopyranoside
and 2-(trimethylsilyl)ethyl
2-acetamido-2-deoxy-6-O-levulinoyl-beta-D-galactopyranosyl-(1-->4)-2,6-di-O-benzy
l-3-O-levulinoyl-beta-D-galactopyranosyl-(1-->4)-2,3,6-tri-O-benzyl-beta-D-glucop
yranoside were each glycosylated with alpha-NeuAc-(2-->3)-galactose donor to give
the corresponding pentasaccharides in 94% (beta1,3 glycoside only) and 90%
(beta1,3:beta1,4 = 2:1), respectively. After proper manipulation of the
protecting groups, the pentasaccharides were converted into three novel sulfated 
GM1b gangliosides by the successive introduction of the ceramide and sulfo
groups, followed by complete deprotection. Among the synthetic gangliosides,
GSC-338 (II3III6-disulfate of iso-GM1b) was surprisingly found to be the most
potent MAG binding structure tested to date.

PMID: 12873419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Tongji Med Univ. 2000;20(4):315-7.

The early diagnosis and surgical treatment of the gastric stump carcinoma.

Chai X(1), Wang C, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Xiehe Hospital, Tongji Medical University,
Wuhan 430022.

The clinical data of 30 patients with GSC after partial gastrectomy for benign
gastric diseases were analyzed retrospectively. Eleven cases accepted radical
resection, 11 cases palliative resection and the remaining 8 underwent
exploratory laparotomy. It was emphasized that the detection of stump cancer at a
relatively early stage, mainly due to screening programmes for gastro-rectomised 
patients, was important in improving its prognosis.

PMID: 12840921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Struct Funct Genomics. 2002;2(1):23-8.

Mapping of 19032 mouse cDNAs on mouse chromosomes.

Yamanaka I(1), Kiyosawa H, Kondo S, Saito T, Carninci P, Shinagawa A, Aizawa K,
Fukuda S, Hara A, Itoh M, Kawai J, Shibata K, Arakawa T, Ishii Y, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences
Center (GSC), RIKEN Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 
City, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.

Finding genes by the positional candidate approach requires abundant cDNAs mapped
to chromosomes. To provide such important information, we computationally mapped 
19032 of our mouse cDNAs to mouse chromosomes by using data from public
databases. We used 2 approaches. In the first, we integrated the mapping data of 
cDNAs on the human genome, known gene-related data, and comparative mapping data.
From this, we calculated map positions on the mouse chromosomes. For this first
approach, we developed a simple and powerful criterion to choose the correct map 
position from candidate positions in sequence homology searches. In the second
approach, we related cDNAs to expressed sequence tags (EST) previously mapped in 
radiation hybrid experiments. We discuss improving the mapping by combining the 2
methods.

PMID: 12836671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Genome Res. 2003 Jun;13(6B):1542-51.

Development and evaluation of an automated annotation pipeline and cDNA
annotation system.

Kasukawa T(1), Furuno M, Nikaido I, Bono H, Hume DA, Bult C, Hill DP, Baldarelli 
R, Gough J, Kanapin A, Matsuda H, Schriml LM, Hayashizaki Y, Okazaki Y,
Quackenbush J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences
Center (GSC), RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama,
Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.

Manual curation has long been held to be the "gold standard" for functional
annotation of DNA sequence. Our experience with the annotation of more than
20,000 full-length cDNA sequences revealed problems with this approach, including
inaccurate and inconsistent assignment of gene names, as well as many good
assignments that were difficult to reproduce using only computational methods.
For the FANTOM2 annotation of more than 60,000 cDNA clones, we developed a number
of methods and tools to circumvent some of these problems, including an automated
annotation pipeline that provides high-quality preliminary annotation for each
sequence by introducing an "uninformative filter" that eliminates uninformative
annotations, controlled vocabularies to accurately reflect both the functional
assignments and the evidence supporting them, and a highly refined, Web-based
manual annotation tool that allows users to view a wide array of sequence
analyses and to assign gene names and putative functions using a consistent
nomenclature. The ultimate utility of our approach is reflected in the low rate
of reassignment of automated assignments by manual curation. Based on these
results, we propose a new standard for large-scale annotation, in which the
initial automated annotations are manually investigated and then computational
methods are iteratively modified and improved based on the results of manual
curation.

PMCID: PMC403710
PMID: 12819153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Genome Res. 2003 Jun;13(6B):1534-41.

The mammalian protein-protein interaction database and its viewing system that is
linked to the main FANTOM2 viewer.

Suzuki H(1), Saito R, Kanamori M, Kai C, Schönbach C, Nagashima T, Hosaka J,
Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences
Center (GSC), RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama,
Kanagawa, 230-0045, Japan.

Here, we describe the development of a mammalian protein-protein interaction
(PPI) database and of a PPI Viewer application to display protein interaction
networks (http://fantom21.gsc.riken.go.jp/PPI/). In the database, we stored the
mammalian PPIs identified through our PPI assays (internal PPIs), as well as
those we extracted and processed (external PPIs) from publicly available data
sources, the DIP and BIND databases and MEDLINE abstracts by using FACTS, a new
functional inference and curation system. We integrated the internal and external
PPIs into the PPI database, which is linked to the main FANTOM2 viewer. In
addition, we incorporated into the PPI Viewer information regarding the
luciferase reporter activity of internal PPIs and the data confidence of external
PPIs; these data enable visualization and evaluation of the reliability of each
interaction. Using the described system, we successfully identified several
interactions of biological significance. Therefore, the PPI Viewer is a useful
tool for exploring FANTOM2 clone-related protein interactions and their potential
effects on signaling and cellular communication.

PMCID: PMC403706
PMID: 12819152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Genome Res. 2003 Jun;13(6B):1520-33.

Inferring higher functional information for RIKEN mouse full-length cDNA clones
with FACTS.

Nagashima T(1), Silva DG, Petrovsky N, Socha LA, Suzuki H, Saito R, Kasukawa T,
Kurochkin IV, Konagaya A, Schönbach C.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Knowledge Discovery Team, Bioinformatics Group, RIKEN Genomic
Sciences Center (GSC), Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa, 230-0045,
Japan.

FACTS (Functional Association/Annotation of cDNA Clones from Text/Sequence
Sources) is a semiautomated knowledge discovery and annotation system that
integrates molecular function information derived from sequence analysis results 
(sequence inferred) with functional information extracted from text.
Text-inferred information was extracted from keyword-based retrievals of MEDLINE 
abstracts and by matching of gene or protein names to OMIM, BIND, and DIP
database entries. Using FACTS, we found that 47.5% of the 60,770 RIKEN mouse cDNA
FANTOM2 clone annotations were informative for text searches. MEDLINE queries
yielded molecular interaction-containing sentences for 23.1% of the clones. When 
disease MeSH and GO terms were matched with retrieved abstracts, 22.7% of clones 
were associated with potential diseases, and 32.5% with GO identifiers. A
significant number (23.5%) of disease MeSH-associated clones were also found to
have a hereditary disease association (OMIM Morbidmap). Inferred neoplastic and
nervous system disease represented 49.6% and 36.0% of disease MeSH-associated
clones, respectively. A comparison of sequence-based GO assignments with
informative text-based GO assignments revealed that for 78.2% of clones,
identical GO assignments were provided for that clone by either method, whereas
for 21.8% of clones, the assignments differed. In contrast, for OMIM assignments,
only 28.5% of clones had identical sequence-based and text-based OMIM
assignments. Sequence, sentence, and term-based functional associations are
included in the FACTS database (http://facts.gsc.riken.go.jp/), which permits
results to be annotated and explored through web-accessible keyword and sequence 
search interfaces. The FACTS database will be a critical tool for investigating
the functional complexity of the mouse transcriptome, cDNA-inferred interactome
(molecular interactions), and pathome (pathologies).

PMCID: PMC403704
PMID: 12819151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Genome Res. 2003 Jun;13(6B):1488-95.

DNA book.

Kawai J(1), Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences
Center (GSC), RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama,
Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.

We propose herein a new method of DNA distribution, whereby DNA clones or PCR
products are printed directly onto the pages of books and delivered to users
along with relevant scientific information. DNA sheets, comprising water-soluble 
paper onto which DNA is spotted, can be bound into books. Readers can easily
extract the DNA fragments from DNA sheets and amplify them using PCR. We show
that DNA sheets can withstand various conditions that may be experienced during
bookbinding and delivery, such as high temperatures and humidity. Almost all
genes (95%-100% of randomly selected RIKEN mouse cDNA clones) were recovered
successfully by use of PCR. Readers can start their experiments after a 2-h PCR
amplification without waiting for the delivery of DNA clones. The DNA Book thus
provides a novel method for delivering DNA in a timely and cost-effective manner.
A sample DNA sheet (carrying RIKEN mouse cDNA clones encoding genes of enzymes
for the TCA cycle) is included in this issue for field-testing. We would greatly 
appreciate it if readers could attempt to extract DNA and report the results and 
whether the DNA sheet was shipped to readers in good condition.

PMCID: PMC403695
PMID: 12819147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Genome Res. 2003 Jun;13(6B):1478-87.

CDS annotation in full-length cDNA sequence.

Furuno M(1), Kasukawa T, Saito R, Adachi J, Suzuki H, Baldarelli R, Hayashizaki
Y, Okazaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences
Center (GSC), RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama,
Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.

The identification of coding sequences (CDS) is an important step in the
functional annotation of genes. CDS prediction for mammalian genes from genomic
sequence is complicated by the vast abundance of intergenic sequence in the
genome, and provides little information about how different parts of potential
CDS regions are expressed. In contrast, mammalian gene CDS prediction from cDNA
sequence offers obvious advantages, yet encounters a different set of
complexities when performed on high-throughput cDNA (HTC) sequences, such as the 
set of 60,770 cDNAs isolated from full-length enriched libraries of the FANTOM2
project. We developed a CDS annotation strategy that uses a variety of different 
CDS prediction programs to annotate the CDS regions of FANTOM2 cDNAs. These
include rsCDS, which uses sequence similarity to known proteins; ProCrest;
Longest-ORF and Truncated-ORF, which are ab initio based predictors; and finally,
DECODER and NCBI CDS predictor, which use a combination of both principles. Aided
by graphical displays of these CDS prediction results in the context of other
sequence similarity results for each cDNA, FANTOM2 CDS inspection by curators and
follow-up quality control procedures resulted in high quality CDS predictions for
a total of 14,345 FANTOM2 clones.

PMCID: PMC403693
PMID: 12819146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Genome Res. 2003 Jun;13(6B):1402-9.

Discovery of imprinted transcripts in the mouse transcriptome using large-scale
expression profiling.

Nikaido I(1), Saito C, Mizuno Y, Meguro M, Bono H, Kadomura M, Kono T, Morris GA,
Lyons PA, Oshimura M, Hayashizaki Y, Okazaki Y; RIKEN GER Group; GSL Members.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences
Center (GSC), RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku Yokohama,
Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.

Candidate imprinted transcriptional units in the mouse genome were identified
systematically from 27,663 FANTOM2 full-length mouse cDNA clones by expression
profiling. Large-scale cDNA microarrays were used to detect differential
expression dependent upon chromosomal parent of origin by comparing the mRNA
levels in the total tissue of 9.5 dpc parthenogenote and androgenote mouse
embryos. Of the FANTOM2 transcripts, 2114 were identified as candidates on the
basis of the array data. Of these, 39 mapped to known imprinted regions of the
mouse genome, 56 were considered as nonprotein-coding RNAs, and 159 were natural 
antisense transcripts. The imprinted expression of two transcripts located in the
mouse chromosomal region syntenic to the human Prader-Willi syndrome region was
confirmed experimentally. We further mapped all candidate imprinted transcripts
to the mouse and human genome and were shown in correlation with the imprinting
disease loci. These data provide a major resource for understanding the role of
imprinting in mammalian inherited traits.

PMCID: PMC403673
PMID: 12819139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Genome Res. 2003 Jun;13(6B):1345-9.

Comprehensive analysis of the mouse metabolome based on the transcriptome.

Bono H(1), Nikaido I, Kasukawa T, Hayashizaki Y, Okazaki Y; RIKEN GER Group; GSL 
Members.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences
Center (GSC), RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama,
Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.

The complete set of cDNAs encoding the enzymes of known metabolic pathways has
not previously been available for any mammal. Here, transcripts encoding the
metabolic pathways of the mouse (mouse metabolome) were reconstructed by making
use of the KEGG metabolic pathway database and gene ontology (GO) assignment to
the mouse representative transcript and protein set (RTPS), which contains all
available mouse transcript sequences including the FANTOM set of RIKEN mouse cDNA
clones. By assigning EC numbers extracted from the molecular function ontology in
GO, the known mouse transcriptome was predicted to encode enzymes with 726 unique
EC numbers. Of these, 648 EC numbers were newly assigned based on the FANTOM set.
The mouse metabolome confirmed by cDNA analysis includes almost all of the
enzymes of well known pathways such as the tricarboxylic acid cycle and urea
cycle. On the other hand, analysis of enzymes required for the tryptophan
metabolism pathway revealed a lack of connectivity, indicating that cDNAs/genes
encoding several key enzymes remain to be identified. The information derived
from coexpression from the cDNA microarray analysis of enzymes of known function 
may lead to identification of the missing components of the metabolome, and will 
add new insights into the connectivity of the mammalian metabolic pathways.

PMCID: PMC403659
PMID: 12819132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Genome Res. 2003 Jun;13(6B):1324-34.

Antisense transcripts with FANTOM2 clone set and their implications for gene
regulation.

Kiyosawa H(1), Yamanaka I, Osato N, Kondo S, Hayashizaki Y; RIKEN GER Group; GSL 
Members.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences
Center (GSC), RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama,
Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.

We have used the FANTOM2 mouse cDNA set (60,770 clones), public mRNA data, and
mouse genome sequence data to identify 2481 pairs of sense-antisense transcripts 
and 899 further pairs of nonantisense bidirectional transcription based upon
genomic mapping. The analysis greatly expands the number of known examples of
sense-antisense transcript and nonantisense bidirectional transcription pairs in 
mammals. The FANTOM2 cDNA set appears to contain substantially large numbers of
noncoding transcripts suitable for antisense transcript analysis. The average
proportion of loci encoding sense-antisense transcript and nonantisense
bidirectional transcription pairs on autosomes was 15.1 and 5.4%, respectively.
Those on the X chromosome were 6.3 and 4.2%, respectively. Sense-antisense
transcript pairs, rather than nonantisense bidirectional transcription pairs, may
be less prevalent on the X chromosome, possibly due to X chromosome inactivation.
Sense and antisense transcripts tended to be isolated from the same libraries,
where nonantisense bidirectional transcription pairs were not apparently
coregulated. The existence of large numbers of natural antisense transcripts
implies that the regulation of gene expression by antisense transcripts is more
common that previously recognized. The viewer showing mapping patterns of
sense-antisense transcript pairs and nonantisense bidirectional transcription
pairs on the genome and other related statistical data is available on our Web
site.

PMCID: PMC403655
PMID: 12819130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Genome Res. 2003 Jun;13(6B):1318-23.

Systematic expression profiling of the mouse transcriptome using RIKEN cDNA
microarrays.

Bono H(1), Yagi K, Kasukawa T, Nikaido I, Tominaga N, Miki R, Mizuno Y, Tomaru Y,
Goto H, Nitanda H, Shimizu D, Makino H, Morita T, Fujiyama J, Sakai T, Shimoji T,
Hume DA, Hayashizaki Y, Okazaki Y; RIKEN GER Group; GSL Members.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences
Center (GSC), RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama,
Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.

The number of known mRNA transcripts in the mouse has been greatly expanded by
the RIKEN Mouse Gene Encyclopedia project. Validation of their reproducible
expression in a tissue is an important contribution to the study of functional
genomics. In this report, we determine the expression profile of 57,931 clones on
20 mouse tissues using cDNA microarrays. Of these 57,931 clones, 22,928 clones
correspond to the FANTOM2 clone set. The set represents 20,234 transcriptional
units (TUs) out of 33,409 TUs in the FANTOM2 set. We identified 7206 separate
clones that satisfied stringent criteria for tissue-specific expression. Gene
Ontology terms were assigned for these 7206 clones, and the proportion of
'molecular function' ontology for each tissue-specific clone was examined. These 
data will provide insights into the function of each tissue. Tissue-specific gene
expression profiles obtained using our cDNA microarrays were also compared with
the data extracted from the GNF Expression Atlas based on Affymetrix microarrays.
One major outcome of the RIKEN transcriptome analysis is the identification of
numerous nonprotein-coding mRNAs. The expression profile was also used to obtain 
evidence of expression for putative noncoding RNAs. In addition, 1926 clones
(70%) of 2768 clones that were categorized as "unknown EST," and 1969 (58%)
clones of 3388 clones that were categorized as "unclassifiable" were also shown
to be reproducibly expressed.

PMCID: PMC403653
PMID: 12819129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Genome Res. 2003 Jun;13(6B):1273-89.

Targeting a complex transcriptome: the construction of the mouse full-length cDNA
encyclopedia.

Carninci P(1), Waki K, Shiraki T, Konno H, Shibata K, Itoh M, Aizawa K, Arakawa
T, Ishii Y, Sasaki D, Bono H, Kondo S, Sugahara Y, Saito R, Osato N, Fukuda S,
Sato K, Watahiki A, Hirozane-Kishikawa T, Nakamura M, Shibata Y, Yasunishi A,
Kikuchi N, Yoshiki A, Kusakabe M, Gustincich S, Beisel K, Pavan W, Aidinis V,
Nakagawara A, Held WA, Iwata H, Kono T, Nakauchi H, Lyons P, Wells C, Hume DA,
Fagiolini M, Hensch TK, Brinkmeier M, Camper S, Hirota J, Mombaerts P, Muramatsu 
M, Okazaki Y, Kawai J, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences
Center (GSC), RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama,
Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.

We report the construction of the mouse full-length cDNA encyclopedia,the most
extensive view of a complex transcriptome,on the basis of preparing and
sequencing 246 libraries. Before cloning,cDNAs were enriched in full-length by
Cap-Trapper,and in most cases,aggressively subtracted/normalized. We have
produced 1,442,236 successful 3'-end sequences clustered into 171,144 groups,
from which 60,770 clones were fully sequenced cDNAs annotated in the FANTOM-2
annotation. We have also produced 547,149 5' end reads,which clustered into
124,258 groups. Altogether, these cDNAs were further grouped in 70,000
transcriptional units (TU),which represent the best coverage of a transcriptome
so far. By monitoring the extent of normalization/subtraction, we define the
tentative equivalent coverage (TEC),which was estimated to be equivalent to
>12,000,000 ESTs derived from standard libraries. High coverage explains
discrepancies between the very large numbers of clusters (and TUs) of this
project,which also include non-protein-coding RNAs,and the lower gene number
estimation of genome annotations. Altogether,5'-end clusters identify regions
that are potential promoters for 8637 known genes and 5'-end clusters suggest the
presence of almost 63,000 transcriptional starting points. An estimate of the
frequency of polyadenylation signals suggests that at least half of the
singletons in the EST set represent real mRNAs. Clones accounting for about half 
of the predicted TUs await further sequencing. The continued high-discovery rate 
suggests that the task of transcriptome discovery is not yet complete.

PMCID: PMC403712
PMID: 12819125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Biol Reprod. 2003 Oct;69(4):1303-7. Epub 2003 Jun 11.

Dramatic expansion of germinal stem cells by ectopically expressed human glial
cell line-derived neurotrophic factor in mouse Sertoli cells.

Yomogida K(1), Yagura Y, Tadokoro Y, Nishimune Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Science for Laboratory Animal Experimentation, Research
Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Although the mammalian germinal stem cell (GSC) provides a good model to
investigate the regulation of stem cells, the small number of these cells
currently available hampers elucidation of the regulatory mechanism. Here, we
show the dramatic amplification of GSCs in mouse testis following transfection of
human glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor cDNA into Sertoli cells using
an efficient, in vivo electroporation technique. Transplantation analysis
demonstrated not only GSC enrichment but also differentiation from stem cells
into sperm. The GSC population, as estimated using a colony-formation assay, was 
approximately 20-fold greater than in cryptorchid testis, or approximately 500-
to 1000-fold greater than in normal adult testis. This system should provide
sufficient quantities of GSCs to accelerate our understanding of GSC properties, 
regulation mechanisms, and behavior control.

PMID: 12801989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Plant J. 2003 Jun;34(5):741-50.

Activation tagging, a novel tool to dissect the functions of a gene family.

Nakazawa M(1), Ichikawa T, Ishikawa A, Kobayashi H, Tsuhara Y, Kawashima M,
Suzuki K, Muto S, Matsui M.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Function Exploration Team, Plant Functional Genomics Research Group,
RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Genomic Sciences Center (GSC), 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho,
Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.

In a screen for morphological mutants from the T1 generation of approximately 50 
000 activation-tagging lines, we isolated four dominant mutants that showed
hyponastic leaves, downward-pointing flowers and decreased apical dominance. We
designated them isoginchaku (iso). The iso-1D and iso-2D are allelic mutants
caused by activation of the AS2 gene. The T-DNAs were inserted in the 3'
downstream region of AS2. Iso-3D and iso-4D are the other allelic mutants caused 
by activation of the ASL1/LBD36 gene. These two genes belong to the AS2 family
that is composed of 42 genes in Arabidopsis. The only recessive mutation isolated
from this gene family was of AS2, which resulted in a leaf morphology mutant.
Applying reverse genetics using a database of activation-tagged T-DNA flanking
sequences, we found a dominant mutant that we designated peacock1-D (pck1-D) in
which the ASL5/LBD12 gene was activated by a T-DNA. The pck1-D mutants have lost 
apical dominance, have epinastic leaves and are sterile. These results strongly
suggest that activation tagging is a powerful mutant-mining tool especially for
genes that make up a gene family.

PMID: 12787254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Dent. 2003 May;31(4):247-52.

Effect of circumferential undercut placement in the root canal wall on the
retention of a tapered post in large and small root canals.

Chen DC(1), Lai YL, Chen HL, Lee SY.

Author information: 
(1)School of Dentistry, National Yang-Ming University, 112, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.

OBJECTIVES: This study examined the influence of root canal space and
circumferential undercut placement in the dentine wall on the retention of a
prefabricated Root Keeper post.
METHODS: Twenty-four extracted single-rooted teeth, having narrow root canal
spaces, were decoronated, treated endodontically, and then centrally embedded in 
resin blocks. All canal spaces were prepared with a no. 2 Peeso reamer to an 8mm 
depth, and half the specimens were successively treated with a no. 3 Peeso to
depths of 5 and 8mm for the small canal group (SC) and large canal group (LC),
respectively. An L-type keeper post (Aichi Steel Co.) was luted to each canal
with resin cement. The assembly was thermocycled 2000 times (4-60 degrees C), and
post retention was measured. Afterwards the dislodged post with the intact
structure was sandblasted, and the canal was cleaned and slightly undercut using 
an inverted cone bur. Six treated posts were recemented for both grooved large
canal (GLC) and grooved small canal (GSC) groups, and the repaired retentive
strengths were measured.
RESULTS: Keeper posts cemented in SC (84.26+/-31.85N) showed better (p<0.05)
retention than those cemented in LC (41.92+/-22.36N). Interestingly, the repaired
strengths of the recemented post increased in both GSC (104.29+/-11.89N) and GLC 
(96.65+/-6.91N). All posts, except for one in the GLC, failed at the keeper-post 
joint.
CONCLUSIONS: Prefabricated Root Keeper posts had lower retentive strength in
roots with a large canal space. Placement of a circumferential undercut in the
root canal wall significantly enhanced the retention of the short tapered posts.

PMID: 12735918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Biochemistry. 2003 May 13;42(18):5195-200.

Molecular dynamics, free energy, and SPR analyses of the interactions between the
SH2 domain of Grb2 and ErbB phosphotyrosyl peptides.

Suenaga A(1), Hatakeyama M, Ichikawa M, Yu X, Futatsugi N, Narumi T, Fukui K,
Terada T, Taiji M, Shirouzu M, Yokoyama S, Konagaya A.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center, Yokohama, Kanagawa,
Japan. suenaga@gsc.riken.go.jp

We studied the interactions between the SH2 domain of growth factor receptor
binding protein 2 (Grb2) and ErbB receptor-derived phosphotyrosyl peptides using 
molecular dynamics, free energy calculations, and surface plasmon resonance (SPR)
analysis. Binding free energies for nine phosphotyrosyl peptides were calculated 
using the MM-PBSA continuum solvent method, and excellent qualitative agreement
with the SPR experimental data, with a correlation coefficient of 0.92, was
obtained. Consistent with previous experimental findings, phosphotyrosyl peptides
with the consensus sequence pYXNX showed favorable binding affinity for the Grb2.
Unexpectedly, phosphotyrosyl peptides with the consensus sequence pYQQD, which
had not shown any specific binding affinity for the Grb2 in earlier studies, also
showed favorable binding affinity for the Grb2 in our experimental and
computational analyses. Component analysis of the calculated binding free
energies revealed that van der Waals interaction between the Grb2 and the
phosphotyrosyl peptide was the dominant factor for specificity and binding
affinity. These results indicate that current methods of estimating binding free 
energies are efficient for obtaining important information about protein-protein 
interactions, which are essential for the transmission of signals in cellular
signaling pathways.

PMID: 12731860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Genome Res. 2003 May;13(5):940-53.

Software for automated analysis of DNA fingerprinting gels.

Fuhrmann DR(1), Krzywinski MI, Chiu R, Saeedi P, Schein JE, Bosdet IE, Chinwalla 
A, Hillier LW, Waterston RH, McPherson JD, Jones SJ, Marra MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electrical Engineering, Washington University, St. Louis,
Missouri 63130, USA.

Here we describe software tools for the automated detection of DNA restriction
fragments resolved on agarose fingerprinting gels. We present a mathematical
model for the location and shape of the restriction fragments as a function of
fragment size, with model parameters determined empirically from "marker" lanes
containing molecular size standards. Automated identification of restriction
fragments involves several steps, including: image preprocessing, to put the data
in a form consistent with a linear model; marker lane analysis, for determination
of the model parameters; and data lane analysis, a procedure for detecting
restriction fragment multiplets while simultaneously determining the amplitude
curve that describes restriction fragment amplitude as a function of mobility. In
validation experiments conducted on fingerprinted and sequenced Bacterial
Artificial Chromosome (BAC) clones, sensitivity and specificity of restriction
fragment identification exceeded 96% on restriction fragments ranging in size
from 600 base pairs (bp) to 30,000 bp. The integrated suite of software tools,
written in MATLAB and collectively called BandLeader, is in use at the BC Cancer 
Agency Genome Sciences Centre (GSC) and the Washington University Genome
Sequencing Center, and has been provided to the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute
and the Whitehead Institute. Employed in a production mode at the GSC, BandLeader
has been used to perform automated restriction fragment identification for more
than 850,000 BAC clones for mouse, rat, bovine, and poplar fingerprint mapping
projects.

PMCID: PMC430903
PMID: 12727910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Arch Histol Cytol. 2003 Mar;66(1):95-108.

Expression and role of Lhx8 in murine tooth development.

Shibaguchi T(1), Kato J, Abe M, Tamamura Y, Tabata MJ, Liu JG, Iwamoto M,
Wakisaka S, Wanaka A, Kurisu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Osaka University
Graduate School of Dentistry, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

We examined the expression and possible functions of Lhx8, a member of the
LIM-homeobox gene family, during tooth morphogenesis of the mouse. Lhx8 was
expressed in the dental mesenchyme between the bud and early bell stage of the
molar tooth germ. Tooth germ explants from embryonic day 12.5 mice treated for 5 
to 7 days with antisense-oligodeoxynucleotides (AS-ODN) against Lhx8 showed a
marked decrease in the number of mesenchymal cells. The explants treated with
AS-ODN for 11 to 14 days were filled with a large number of undifferentiated
epithelial cells and a limited number of undifferentiated mesenchymal cells, but 
did not contain a tooth germ. Treatment of explants with AS-ODN for 7 days
suppressed the proliferation of dental mesenchymal cells and induced apoptosis;
the latter was confirmed by histochemical and ultrastructural examinations.
Moreover, the expression of Lhx6, Msx1, Msx2, Bmp4 and Gsc, which are also known 
to be involved in tooth morphogenesis, were suppressed after the application of
AS-ODN against Lhx8 for 7 days. The present results suggest that Lhx8 plays an
important role in the survival of mesenchymal cells of the tooth germ during
development.

PMID: 12703558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Seikagaku. 2003 Feb;75(2):149-52.

[FANTOM-DB: database of functional annotation of RIKEN mouse cDNA clones].

[Article in Japanese]

Bono H(1), Kasukawa T, Furuno M, Hayashizaki Y, Okazaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences
Center (GSC), RIKEN Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama,
Kanagawa 230-0045.

PMID: 12692975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Bioinformatics. 2003 Apr 12;19(6):756-63.

Construction of reliable protein-protein interaction networks with a new
interaction generality measure.

Saito R(1), Suzuki H, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences
Center (GSC), Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. rgscerg@gsc.riken.go.jp

MOTIVATION: Recent screening techniques have made large amounts of
protein-protein interaction data available, from which biologically important
information such as the function of uncharacterized proteins, the existence of
novel protein complexes, and novel signal-transduction pathways can be
discovered. However, experimental data on protein interactions contain many false
positives, making these discoveries difficult. Therefore computational methods of
assessing the reliability of each candidate protein-protein interaction are
urgently needed.
RESULTS: We developed a new 'interaction generality' measure (IG2) to assess the 
reliability of protein-protein interactions using only the topological properties
of their interaction-network structure. Using yeast protein-protein interaction
data, we showed that reliable protein-protein interactions had significantly
lower IG2 values than less-reliable interactions, suggesting that IG2 values can 
be used to evaluate and filter interaction data to enable the construction of
reliable protein-protein interaction networks.

PMID: 12691988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Biochem J. 2003 Jul 15;373(Pt 2):451-63.

A computational model on the modulation of mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) and Akt pathways in heregulin-induced ErbB signalling.

Hatakeyama M(1), Kimura S, Naka T, Kawasaki T, Yumoto N, Ichikawa M, Kim JH,
Saito K, Saeki M, Shirouzu M, Yokoyama S, Konagaya A.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center, 1-7-22 Suehirocho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama,
Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. marikoh@gsc.riken.go.jp

ErbB tyrosine kinase receptors mediate mitogenic signal cascade by binding a
variety of ligands and recruiting the different cassettes of adaptor proteins. In
the present study, we examined heregulin (HRG)-induced signal transduction of
ErbB4 receptor and found that the phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase (PI3K)-Akt
pathway negatively regulated the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)
cascade by phosphorylating Raf-1 on Ser(259). As the time-course kinetics of Akt 
and ERK activities seemed to be transient and complex, we constructed a
mathematical simulation model for HRG-induced ErbB4 receptor signalling to
explain the dynamics of the regulation mechanism in this signal transduction
cascade. The model reflected well the experimental results observed in
HRG-induced ErbB4 cells and in other modes of growth hormone-induced cell
signalling that involve Raf-Akt cross-talk. The model suggested that HRG
signalling is regulated by protein phosphatase 2A as well as Raf-Akt cross-talk, 
and protein phosphatase 2A modulates the kinase activity in both the PI3K-Akt and
MAPK (mitogen-activated protein kinase) pathways.

PMCID: PMC1223496
PMID: 12691603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Surg Oncol. 2003 Apr;82(4):241-6.

Metastatic pattern of lymph node and surgery for gastric stump cancer.

Han SL(1), Hua YW, Wang CH, Ji SQ, Zhuang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Henan Tumor Hospital, Zhengzhou City, Henan
Province, People's Republic of China. slhan@btamail.net.cn

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Metastatic pattern of lymph node (LN) and surgery
options for gastric stump cancer (GSC) remain controversial. The aim of this
study was to investigate LN metastasis and lymphadenectomy for GSC for curative
purposes.
METHODS: Sixty-seven patients with GSC were analyzed retrospectively.
RESULTS: The metastatic rates of LN were as follows: 63.3% in right cardia (No.
1), 33.3% in left cardia (No. 2), 75.0% in lesser curvature (No. 3), 53.3% in
greater curvature (No. 4), 40.0% in celiac artery (No. 9), 60.0% in splenic hilus
(No. 10), 72.7% in splenic artery (No. 11), 36.1% in hepatoduodenal ligament (No.
12), 8.3% in retropancreatic (No. 13), 21.4% in para-aortic (No. 16), 50% in
supra-diaphragm (No. 111), 16.7% in LN within jejunal mesentery, respectively.
All nine patients who only received simple laparotomy died within 1 year. The
overall 5-year survival rate of GSC was 17.9% (12/67), including 100% for stage
I, 80.0% for stage II, 12.1% for stage III, and 0% for stage IV. Moreover, the
5-year survival rate (36.7%, 11/30) for curative patients was significantly
better than that (3.6%, 1/28) of non-curative patients (chi(2) = 7.76, P < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results imply that GSC has a wide range of LN metastases,
including LN within jejunal mesentery in B-II reconstruction cases, and curable
resection may obtain better results. Therefore, we suggest that radical operation
for B-I patients needs removal of gastroduodenectomy anastomosis and the above
LNs, and that B-II patients need removal of 10 cm of jejunum besides
gastrojejunostomy anastomosis, and clearance of LN within its mesentery, in
addition to B-I GSC.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12672008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Development. 2003 May;130(9):1867-76.

Joint regulation of the MAP1B promoter by HNF3beta/Foxa2 and Engrailed is the
result of a highly conserved mechanism for direct interaction of homeoproteins
and Fox transcription factors.

Foucher I(1), Montesinos ML, Volovitch M, Prochiantz A, Trembleau A.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8542, Ecole Normale Supérieure, 46 rue d'Ulm, 75230 Paris Cedex 05,
France.

The MAP1B (Mtap1b) promoter presents two evolutionary conserved overlapping
homeoproteins and Hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta (HNF3beta/Foxa2) cognate
binding sites (defining putative homeoprotein/Fox sites, HF1 and HF2).
Accordingly, the promoter domain containing HF1 and HF2 is recognized by
cerebellum nuclear extracts containing Engrailed and Foxa2 and has regulatory
functions in primary cultures of embryonic mesmetencephalic nerve cells.
Transfection experiments further demonstrate that Engrailed and Foxa2 interact
physiologically in a dose-dependent manner: Foxa2 antagonizes the
Engrailed-driven regulation of the MAP1B promoter, and vice versa. This led us to
investigate if Engrailed and Foxa2 interact directly. Direct interaction was
confirmed by pull-down experiments, and the regions participating in this
interaction were identified. In Foxa2 the interacting domain is the Forkhead box 
DNA-binding domain. In Engrailed, two independent interacting domains exist: the 
homeodomain and a region that includes the Pbx-binding domain. Finally, Foxa2 not
only binds Engrailed but also Lim1, Gsc and Hoxa5 homeoproteins and in the four
cases Foxa2 binds at least the homeodomain. Based on the involvement of conserved
domains in both classes of proteins, it is proposed that the interaction between 
Forkhead box transcription factors and homeoproteins is a general phenomenon.

PMID: 12642491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Mech Ageing Dev. 2003 Jan;124(1):93-102.

RIKEN mouse genome encyclopedia.

Hayashizaki Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Gene Exploration Research Group, Riken Genomic Sciences Center, 1-7-22
Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, 230-0045, Kanagawa, Japan.
yosihide@gsc.riken.go.jp <yosihide@gsc.riken.go.jp>

We have been working to establish the comprehensive mouse full-length cDNA
collection and sequence database to cover as many genes as we can, named Riken
mouse genome encyclopedia. Recently we are constructing higher-level annotation
(Functional ANnoTation Of Mouse cDNA; FANTOM) not only with homology search based
annotation but also with expression data profile, mapping information and
protein-protein database. More than 1,000,000 clones prepared from 163 tissues
were end-sequenced to classify into 159,789 clusters and 60,770 representative
clones were fully sequenced. As a conclusion, the 60,770 sequences contained
33,409 unique. The next generation of life science is clearly based on all of the
genome information and resources. Based on our cDNA clones we developed the
additional system to explore gene function. We developed cDNA microarray system
to print all of these cDNA clones, protein-protein interaction screening system, 
protein-DNA interaction screening system and so on. The integrated database of
all the information is very useful not only for analysis of gene transcriptional 
network and for the connection of gene to phenotype to facilitate positional
candidate approach. In this talk, the prospect of the application of these genome
resourced should be discussed. More information is available at the web page:
http://genome.gsc.riken.go.jp/.

PMID: 12618011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Arch Oral Biol. 2003 Jan;48(1):1-14.

Tooth and jaw: molecular mechanisms of patterning in the first branchial arch.

Cobourne MT(1), Sharpe PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, GKT Dental Institute, King's College
London, Floor 28, Guys Hospital Tower, SE1 9RT, London, UK.
martyn.cobourne@kcl.ac.uk <martyn.cobourne@kcl.ac.uk>

The mammalian jaw apparatus is ultimately derived from the first branchial arch
derivatives, the maxillary and mandibular processes, and composed of a highly
specialised group of structures. Principle amongst these are the skeletal
components of the mandible and maxilla and the teeth of the mature dentition.
Integral to the development of these structures are signalling interactions
between the stomodeal ectoderm and underlying neural crest-derived
ectomesenchymal cells that populate this region. Recent evidence suggests that in
the early mouse embryo, regionally restricted expression of homeobox-containing
genes, such as members of the Dlx, Lhx and Gsc classes, are responsible for
generating early polarity in the first branchial arch and establishing the
molecular foundations for patterning of the skeletal elements. Teeth also develop
on the first branchial arch and are derived from both ectoderm and the underlying
ectomesenchyme. Reciprocal signalling interactions between these cell populations
also control the odontogenic developmental programme, from early patterning of
the future dental axis to the initiation of tooth development at specific sites
within the ectoderm. In particular, members of the Fibroblast growth factor
(Fgf), Bmp, Hedgehog and Wnt families of signalling molecules induce regionally
restricted expression of downstream target genes in the odontogenic
ectomesenchyme. Finally, the processes of morphogenesis and cellular
differentiation ultimately generate a tooth of specific class. Many of the same
genetic interactions that are involved in early tooth development mediate these
effects through the activity of localised signalling centres within the
developing tooth germ.

PMID: 12615136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Br J Ophthalmol. 2003 Mar;87(3):291-6.

Differences in the management of amblyopia between European countries.

Tan JH(1), Thompson JR, Gottlob I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University Hospitals of Leicester, Leicester, UK.
jtan_ophth@yahoo.co.uk

BACKGROUND: Amblyopia treatment is not standardised and differences between
centres and countries have not been systematically investigated. This survey
compares the different patterns of orthoptic treatment of amblyopia in the United
Kingdom (UK) and three German speaking countries (GSC).
METHODS: Questionnaires were sent to orthoptists in the UK and the GSC asking for
their preferred choices of treatment of amblyopia between the ages of 6 months to
10 years.
RESULTS: The following significant differences in management of amblyopia were
found: (1) the number of hours of occlusion per week was higher in the GSC,
p<0.0001, (2) orthoptists in the GSC treat amblyopia up to an older age.
Orthoptists in the GSC and in the UK predicted similar treatment outcomes.
CONCLUSION: Orthoptists in the GSC usually treat patients more intensively and
for longer, while the prediction of visual outcome does not differ significantly 
between countries. These results highlight the lack of standardisation in the
treatment of the various types of amblyopia.

PMCID: PMC1771562
PMID: 12598440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Development. 2003 Apr;130(7):1353-65.

Two endothelin 1 effectors, hand2 and bapx1, pattern ventral pharyngeal cartilage
and the jaw joint.

Miller CT(1), Yelon D, Stainier DY, Kimmel CB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, 1254 University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA.
ctm@stanford.edu

A conserved endothelin 1 signaling pathway patterns the jaw and other pharyngeal 
skeletal elements in mice, chicks and zebrafish. In zebrafish, endothelin 1 (edn1
or sucker) is required for formation of ventral cartilages and joints in the
anterior pharyngeal arches of young larvae. Here we present genetic analyses in
the zebrafish of two edn1 downstream targets, the bHLH transcription factor Hand2
and the homeobox transcription factor Bapx1, that mediate dorsoventral (DV)
patterning in the anterior pharyngeal arches. First we show that edn1-expressing 
cells in the first (mandibular) and second (hyoid) pharyngeal arch primordia are 
located most ventrally and surrounded by hand2-expressing cells. Next we show
that along the DV axis of the early first arch primordia, bapx1 is expressed in
an intermediate domain, which later marks the jaw joint, and this expression
requires edn1 function. bapx1 function is required for formation of the jaw
joint, the joint-associated retroarticular process of Meckel's cartilage, and the
retroarticular bone. Jaw joint expression of chd and gdf5 also requires bapx1
function. Similar to edn1, hand2 is required for ventral pharyngeal cartilage
formation. However, the early ventral arch edn1-dependent expression of five
genes (dlx3, EphA3, gsc, msxe and msxb) are all present in hand2 mutants.
Further, msxe and msxb are upregulated in hand2 mutant ventral arches. Slightly
later, an edn1-dependent ventral first arch expression domain of gsc is absent in
hand2 mutants, providing a common downstream target of edn1 and hand2. In hand2
mutants, bapx1 expression is present at the joint region, and expanded ventrally.
In addition, expression of eng2, normally restricted to first arch dorsal
mesoderm, expands ventrally in hand2 and edn1 mutants. Thus, ventral pharyngeal
specification involves repression of dorsal and intermediate (joint region)
fates. Together our results reveal two critical edn1 effectors that pattern the
vertebrate jaw: hand2 specifies ventral pharyngeal cartilage of the lower jaw and
bapx1 specifies the jaw joint.

PMID: 12588851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Bioinformatics. 2003 Feb 12;19(3):437-8.

GSCope: a clipped fisheye viewer effective for highly complicated biomolecular
network graphs.

Toyoda T(1), Mochizuki Y, Konagaya A.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics Group, Genomic Sciences Center, RIKEN, 1-7-22, Suehiro,
Tsurumi, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. gscope@gsc.riken.go.jp

A graphical tool to visualize highly complicated biomolecular network graphs is
described. It helps us to understand the graphs from macroscopic and microscopic 
viewpoints by incorporating continuous transition from global to clipped
hyperbolic projection. GSCope also helps us to find a molecule in the graphs by
offering several searching functions. It is useful to publish biomolecular
network graphs on the internet.AVAILABILITY: GSCope is available at
http://gscope.gsc.riken.go.jp.

PMID: 12584139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Bioinformatics. 2003 Feb 12;19(3):433-4.

KnowledgeEditor: a new tool for interactive modeling and analyzing biological
pathways based on microarray data.

Toyoda T(1), Konagaya A.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics Group, Genomic Sciences Center, RIKEN, 1-7-22 Suehiro, Tsurumi,
Yokohama, Kanagawa, 230-0045, Japan. bioinfo@gsc.riken.go.jp

KnowledgeEditor is a graphical workbench for biological experts to model
biomolecular network graphs. The modeled network data are represented by SRML,
and can be published via the internet with the help of plug-in module 'GSCope'.
KnowledgeEditor helps us to model and analyze biological pathways based on
microarray data. It is possible to analyze the drawn networks by simulating
up-down regulatory cascade in molecular interactions.AVAILABILITY:
KnowledgeEditor is available at http://gscope.gsc.riken.go.jp/.

PMID: 12584137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Development. 2003 Mar;130(6):1159-70.

A discrete transcriptional silencer in the bam gene determines asymmetric
division of the Drosophila germline stem cell.

Chen D(1), McKearin DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas-Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA.

The Drosophila germline lineage depends on a complex microenvironment of
extrinsic and intrinsic factors that regulate the self-renewing and asymmetric
divisions of dedicated stem cells. Germline stem cells (GSCs) must express
components of the Dpp cassette and the translational repressors Nanos and
Pumilio, whereas cystoblasts require the bam and bgcn genes. Bam is especially
attractive as a target of GSC differentiation factors because current evidence
indicates that bam is both necessary and sufficient for cystoblast
differentiation. In this paper, we have sought to distinguish between mutually
exclusive transcriptional or post-transcriptional mechanisms as the primary
regulators of bam expression in GSCs and cystoblasts. We find that bam
transcription is active in young germ cells but is repressed specifically in
GSCs. Activation depends on a 50 bp fragment that carries at least one germ
cell-specific enhancer element. A non-overlapping 18 bp sequence carries a
transcriptional silencer that prevents bam expression in the GSC. Promoters
lacking this silencer cause bam expression in the GSC and concomitant GSC loss.
Thus, asymmetry of the GSC division can be reduced to identifying the mechanism
that selectively activates the silencer element in GSCs.

PMID: 12571107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Feb 14;301(3):633-40.

Global insights into protein complexes through integrated analysis of the
reliable interactome and knockout lethality.

Saito R(1), Suzuki H, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences
Center (GSC), Yokohama, Japan.

We performed an integrated computational analysis of data derived from a
comprehensive set of protein-protein interactions (interactome) and a phenotype
dataset on lethality in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. For the analysis, we selected
reliable interactome data using our previous 'interaction generality,' a
computational approach to assess reliability of interactions. Those efforts gave 
clear evidence that proteins with lethal phenotypes in knockout studies (lethal
proteins) may interact with each other to form functional protein complexes to
perform their cellular roles. However, our analysis indicates that interactions
between lethal proteins are rather restricted to the same cellular pathway or
function, and it is quite unlikely that they interact with other lethal proteins 
functioning in different cellular roles. Furthermore, our results allowed us
predictions on the functions of thus far uncharacterized lethal proteins with an 
estimated 93% accuracy. Thus, the analysis described in here can provide global
insights into the biological features of the protein complexes.

PMID: 12565826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Yakugaku Zasshi. 2002 Dec;122(12):1123-31.

[Structures of peptides related to the inactivation gate on sodium channels].

[Article in Japanese]

Miyamoto K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyoto University, 46-29
Yoshidashimoadachi-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan. miyamoto@gsc.riken.go.jp

The peptides related to inactivation of sodium channels were synthesized by the
solid-phase method for the purpose of proposing a more precise concept than so
far obtained for the inactivation and to determine the main factors that control 
inactivation. The three-dimensional structures of the peptides were determined
using 1H-NMR spectroscopy. It was newly discovered that hydrogen bonding was
formed between the amide proton of Ile in the IFM (IFM1488-1490) motif of the
III-IV linker and the hydroxyl oxygen atom of the side chain of Thr located
adjacent to the IFM motif. This hydrogen bonding characterizes the structure
around the IFM motif. By calculating the solvent-accessible surface area of the
peptide corresponding to the III-IV linker, it was found that a hydrophobic
cluster was formed. The hydrophobic cluster stabilizes the structure of the IFM
motif. Moreover, the solvent-accessible surface area of the IFM motif correlated 
with the sustained currents of the incompletely inactivated sodium channels. The 
free energy of stabilization by hydrophobic interactions (delta G, -3.9 kcal
mol-1), which is calculated from the solvent-accessible surface area for the IFM 
motif (195 A2), was in good agreement with that calculated for the equilibrium
between the open and the inactivated states of the sodium channels (-4.1 kcal
mol-1). The structure of the III-IV linker peptide in a phosphate buffer also
formed a hydrophobic cluster, as well as in SDS micelles, although no hydrogen
bonding was formed. This distinction results in the following conformational
change in the IFM motif: in SDS micelles, the side chains of Ile and Phe in the
IFM motif were directed to the hydrophobic cluster, whereas those in a phosphate 
buffer were directed opposite to the cluster and solvent exposed. The secondary
structures of IIIS4-S5 and IVS4-S5, which are considered to form a receptor site,
assumed alpha-helical conformations around the N-terminal half of the sequences. 
The residue A1329 in MPD3, which is considered to interact with F1489 of the IFM 
motif, was found to locate within the alpha-helix. A hydrophobic cluster was
formed on one side of the helix of MP-D4, which also plays an important role in
the inactivation. A new concept for the process of fast inactivation is
presented. In response to the voltage-dependent activation and the movement of
the S4 segments, the two hydrophobic clusters due to the IVS4-S5 and the III-IV
linker interact with each other. This interaction increases the hydrophobicity
around the IFM motif. The increased hydrophobicity causes the conformational
switching of the IF1488-1489 residues to allow F1489 to interact with A1329 of
IIIS4-S5 and/or with N1662 in IVS4-S5. As a consequence of this process, the
inactivation gate closes.

PMID: 12510389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Physiol Genomics. 2003 Feb 6;12(3):251-9.

Detection of genes with tissue-specific expression patterns using Akaike's
information criterion procedure.

Kadota K(1), Nishimura S, Bono H, Nakamura S, Hayashizaki Y, Okazaki Y, Takahashi
K.

Author information: 
(1)Computational Biology Research Center, National Institute of Advanced
Industrial Science and Technology, Tokyo 135-0064 Japan.

We applied a method based on Akaike's information criterion (AIC) to detect genes
whose expression profile is considerably different in some tissue(s) than in
others. Such observations are detected as outliers, and the method we used was
originally developed to detect outliers. The main advantage of the method is that
objective decisions are possible because the procedure is independent of a
significance level. We applied the method to 48 expression ratios corresponding
to various tissues in each of 14,610 clones obtained from the RIKEN Expression
Array Database (READ; http://read.gsc.riken.go.jp). As a result, for several
tissues (e.g., muscle, heart, and tongue tissues that contain similar cell types)
we objectively obtained specific clones without any "thresholding." Our study
demonstrates the feasibility of the method for detecting tissue-specific gene
expression patterns.

PMID: 12499447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Curr Biol. 2002 Dec 23;12(24):2136-41.

Lefty-dependent inhibition of Nodal- and Wnt-responsive organizer gene expression
is essential for normal gastrulation.

Branford WW(1), Yost HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, 2000 E Circle of Hope, Salt
Lake City, Utah 84112, USA.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2003 Jan 8;13(1):R7-9.

During gastrulation, diffusible "organizer" signals, including members of the
TGFbeta Nodal subfamily, pattern dorsal mesoderm and the embryonic axes.
Simultaneously, negative regulators of these signals, including the Nodal
inhibitor Lefty, an atypical TGFbeta factor, are induced by Nodal. This suggests 
that Lefty-dependent modulation of organizer signaling might regulate dorsal
mesoderm patterning and axial morphogenesis. Here, Xenopus Lefty (Xlefty)
function was blocked by injection of anti-Xlefty morpholino oligonucleotides
(MO). Xlefty-deficient embryos underwent exogastrulation, an aberrant
morphogenetic process not predicted from deregulation of the Nodal pathway alone.
In the absence of Xlefty, both Nodal- (Xnr2, gsc, cer, Xbra) and Wnt-responsive
(gsc, Xnr3) organizer gene expression expanded away from the dorsal blastopore
lip. Conversely, coexpression of Xlefty with Nodal or Wnt reduced the ectopic
expression of Nodal- (Xbra) and Wnt-responsive (Xnr3) genes in a dose-dependent
manner. Furthermore, Xlefty expression in the ectodermal animal pole inhibited
endogenous Nodal- and Wnt-responsive gene expression in distant mesoderm cells,
indicating that Xlefty inhibition can spread from its source. We hypothesize that
Xlefty negatively regulates the spatial extent of Nodal- and Wnt-responsive gene 
expression in the organizer and that this Xlefty-dependent inhibition is
essential for normal organizer patterning and gastrulation.

PMID: 12498689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2002 Dec;57(12):M785-92.

Is the prioritization of postural control altered in conditions of postural
threat in younger and older adults?

Brown LA(1), Sleik RJ, Polych MA, Gage WH.

Author information: 
(1)Balance Research Laboratory, Department of Kinesiology, University of
Lethbridge, Alberta, Canada. l.brown@uleth.ca

Background. The purpose of this study was to determine if the prioritization of
postural control over secondary task performance is altered in younger and older 
adults under different conditions of postural threat. Methods. Fifteen healthy
older adults (mean age = 69.53 +/- 5.78) and 15 younger adults (mean age = 22.00 
+/- 2.17) performed Brooks' Spatial Letter Task (BST) while standing in four
conditions of postural threat. Galvanic skin conductance (GSC) was collected to
measure changes in physiological arousal. BST task duration was used to measure
changes in cognitive performance, and center of pressure (COP) area was used to
determine changes in postural stability across each of the testing conditions. A 
prioritization index was calculated based on the relative change in BST and COP
across testing conditions. This measure was used to quantify changes in the
relationship between postural control and secondary task performance under
conditions of postural threat. Results. Measures of GSC increased in younger and 
older adults in response to conditions of increased postural threat.
Prioritization index scores revealed that a greater number of older adults than
younger adults prioritized postural control over secondary task performance under
conditions of increased postural threat. Conclusions. Environmental contexts that
alter postural threat may lead to modifications in the prioritization between
postural control and secondary task performance among older adults. This
relationship may have implications for postural control under situations that do 
not afford deterioration in secondary task performance.

PMID: 12456737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Dev Dyn. 2002 Dec;225(4):392-408.

Morphogen gradients, positional information, and Xenopus: interplay of theory and
experiment.

Green J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School Department of Genetics,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. jeremy_green@dfci.harvard.edu

The idea of morphogen gradients has long been an important one in developmental
biology. Studies with amphibians and with Xenopus in particular have made
significant contributions to demonstrating the existence, identity, and
mechanisms of action of morphogens. Mesoderm induction and patterning by activin,
nodals, bone morphogenetic proteins, and fibroblast growth factors have been
analyzed thoroughly and reveal recurrent and combinatorial roles for these
protein growth factor morphogens and their antagonists. The dynamics of
nodal-type signaling and the intersection of VegT and beta-catenin intracellular 
gradients reveal detailed steps in early long-range patterning. Interpretation of
gradients requires sophisticated mechanisms for sharpening thresholds, and the
activin-Xbra-Gsc system provides an example of this. The understanding of growth 
factor signal transduction has elucidated growth factor morphogen action and
provided tools for dissecting their direct long-range action and distribution.
The physical mechanisms of morphogen gradient establishment are the focus of new 
interest at both the experimental and theoretical level. General themes and
emerging trends in morphogen gradient studies are discussed.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12454918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Z Kardiol. 2002;91 Suppl 4:34-42.

Some historical aspects of the development of cardiovascular drugs.

Scholz H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Experimentelle und Klinische Pharmakologie und Toxikologie
Universitätsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf Martinistrasse 52 D-20246 Hamburg.

This is a short historical overview on the development of important
cardiovascular drugs. Agents developed during the last 75 years and with
relations to German-speaking countries and the German Society of Cardiology (GSC)
are primarily discussed. Other compounds, e.g., nitrates, statins or
thrombolytics, which have been discovered elsewhere, are not covered in this
paper.

PMID: 12436750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Nov 26;99(24):15474-9. Epub 2002 Nov 7.

Activin A induces craniofacial cartilage from undifferentiated Xenopus ectoderm
in vitro.

Furue M(1), Myoishi Y, Fukui Y, Ariizumi T, Okamoto T, Asashima M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Kanagawa Dental College,
Yokosuka 238-8580, Japan.

Activin A has potent mesoderm-inducing activity in amphibian embryos and induces 
various mesodermal tissues in vitro from the isolated presumptive ectoderm. By
using a sandwich culture method established to examine activin A activity, we
previously demonstrated that activin-treated ectoderm can function as both a head
and trunk-tail organizer, depending on the concentration of activin A. By using
activin A and undifferentiated presumptive ectoderm, it is theoretically possible
to reproduce embryonic induction. Here, we test this hypothesis by studying the
induction of cartilage tissue by using the sandwich-culture method. In the
sandwiched explants, the mesenchymal cell condensation expressed type II collagen
and cartilage homeoprotein-1 mRNA, and subsequently, cartilage were induced as
they are in vivo. goosecoid (gsc) mRNA was prominently expressed in the cartilage
in the explants. Xenopus distal-less 4 (X-dll4) mRNA was expressed throughout the
explants. In Xenopus embryos, gsc expression is restricted to the cartilage of
the lower jaw, and X-dll4 is widely expressed in the ventral head region,
including craniofacial cartilage. These finding suggest that the craniofacial
cartilage, especially lower jaw cartilage, was induced in the activin-treated
sandwiched explants. In addition, a normal developmental pattern was
recapitulated at the histological and genetic level. This work also suggests that
the craniofacial cartilage-induction pathway is downstream of activin A. This
study presents a model system suitable for the in vitro analysis of craniofacial 
cartilage induction in vertebrates.

PMCID: PMC137741
PMID: 12424341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Int J Dev Biol. 2002 Sep;46(6):793-800.

Establishment of the organizing activity of the lower endodermal half of the
dorsal marginal zone is a primary and necessary event for dorsal axis formation
in Cynops pyrrhogaster.

Sakaguchi K(1), Kaneda T, Matsumoto M, Imoh H, Suzuki AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Science, Graduate School of Science and
Technology, Kumamoto University, Japan.

The formation of the head and trunk-tail organizers in the dorsal marginal zone
(DMZ) of an amphibian embryo is thought to require spatial and temporal
interactions between the Nieuwkoop center and the DMZ. Recent studies of the
Xenopus embryo suggested that intra-DMZ interaction is also needed to establish
the regional specificity of the DMZ. However, it is not yet clarified when and
how the final pattern of the head and trunk-tail organizers is established. To
analyze the intra-DMZ interactions, we injected suramin into the blastocoel of
the mid-blastula of the urodele, Cynops pyrrhogaster, at 6 h prior to the onset
of gastrulation. The pigmented blastopore formed normally, but the convergent
extension and involution of the DMZ and dorsal axis formation of the embryo were 
completely inhibited. Expression of gsc, chd and Lim-1 were not maintained, but
noggin was unaffected in the suramin-treated embryos. Dorsal axis formation and
the expression of these genes of the suramin-treated embryos were rescued by
replacing the lower endodermal half of the DMZ (LDMZ) with normal LDMZ. The
present results of embryological and molecular examinations indicate that
organizing activity of the early Cynops gastrula DMZ is restricted to the LDMZ,
and that the organizing activity of the LDMZ is established during the late
blastula stages. The results also indicate that LDMZ triggers the sequential
interaction within the DMZ that establishes the final pattern of the regional
specificity of the DMZ, and that the formation of the LDMZ is a primary and
necessary event for dorsal axis formation.

PMID: 12382945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Neuroscience. 2002;114(4):883-9.

Survey for paired-like homeodomain gene expression in the hypothalamus:
restricted expression patterns of Rx, Alx4 and goosecoid.

Asbreuk CH(1), van Schaick HS, Cox JJ, Smidt MP, Burbach JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Pharmacology, Rudolf Magnus Institute for Neurosciences,
University Medical Center Utrecht, Universiteitsweg 100, The Netherlands.

Homeobox genes are important regulators of cellular identity. Several homeobox
genes are known to be specifically expressed in subsets of neurons in the
forebrain, exclusively, or in distinct combinations. In this study, we explored
the expression of homeobox genes in the forebrain of the adult rat by a
degenerate polymerase chain reaction cloning strategy. We identified the
expression of 12 homeobox genes, several of which display a remarkable restricted
expression pattern in the adult brain. We demonstrated the expression of
goosecoid in a very small set of neurons in the hypothalamus. By using Otp as a
marker, these goosecoid-positive cells were found to constitute a small area just
beside the paraventricular nucleus. Furthermore, we found expression of Rx in the
pineal gland, along with Alx4. Rx was additionally found in the posterior
pituitary and in cells aligning the bottom of the third ventricle. These findings
form a starting point to reveal functions of the described homeobox genes in the 
forebrain.

PMID: 12379244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Biotechniques. 2002 Aug;33(2):306-9.

Cytoplasmic RNA extraction from fresh and frozen mammalian tissues.

Carninci P(1), Nakamura M, Sato K, Hayashizaki Y, Brownstein MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Science Laboratory, RIKEN, Saitama, Japan. rgscerg@gsc.riken.go.jp

The quality of collections of expressed sequence tags andfull-length cDNAs is
adversely affected by the presence of "junk" clones derivedfrom unspliced or
partially spliced RNAs present in conventional total RNA preparations. One can
overcome this problem by using intact cytoplasmic RNA to create cDNA libraries,
but the methods in the literature that describe the preparation of RNA only work 
well for extracting cultured cells. Cell lines are not as diverse as one would
like, and to clone comprehensive sets of human and model organism full-length
cDNAs, libraries have to be prepared from tissue samples. Thus, we have developed
a robust and inexpensive method that allows intact cytoplasmic RNA to be
extracted from both fresh and frozen mammalian tissues. A mouse full-length,
cap-trapped cDNA library prepared with RNA using this new procedure had excellent
characteristics.

PMID: 12188181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 2002 Jun;12(3):355-61.

Functional transcriptomes: comparative analysis of biological pathways and
processes in eukaryotes to infer genetic networks among transcripts.

Bono H(1), Okazaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences
Center (GSC), RIKEN Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Kanagawa 
Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. bono@gsc.riken.go.jp

Microarray technology enables us to monitor large changes in transcripts at any
given time. The compilation of these data makes possible the comparison of such
gene expression data on a genome-wide scale. As comparisons of genome sequence
data yield new biological insights, comparative analyses of transcriptome data
also promise new discoveries regarding metabolic pathways and cellular processes.
The coordinated expression of genes shows that these genes physically interact
with each other or are part of the same cascade. We have produced one of the
largest expression profiles of adult mice and developmental tissues. These data, 
as well as the data on yeast from previous reports, were used to see whether
coordinated expression (with high correlation coefficient) is closely coupled to 
the actual cascade on the pathway map.

PMID: 12127455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Cell Calcium. 2002 Jul;32(1):11-20.

Src kinase induces calcium release in Xenopus egg extracts via PLCgamma and
IP3-dependent mechanism.

Tokmakov AA(1), Sato KI, Iwasaki T, Fukami Y.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Sciences Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Yokohama, Japan.
tokmak@gsc.riken.go.jp

Mobilization of intracellular calcium is an indispensable step of
fertilization-induced egg activation. Recently, this process has been shown to
require the sequential activation of Src family tyrosine kinases, phospholipase
Cgamma (PLCgamma), and inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3)-dependent receptor of
endoplasmic reticulum. In the present study, we made an attempt to recapitulate
the early events of egg activation by stimulating Src kinase activity in the
cell-free extracts of Xenopus eggs. We found that enhanced Src kinase activity
can initiate calcium response of low magnitude in cytostatic factor
(CSF)-arrested mitotic extracts without releasing them into interphase. The
addition of catalytically active recombinant Src kinase, as well as the
activation of endogenous Xenopus Src family kinase by hydrogen peroxide (H2O2),
increased total tyrosine phosphorylation, tyrosine phosphorylation of PLCgamma,
and IP3 production in the extracts. The treatment with the Src family
kinase-specific inhibitor, PP1, or PLC inhibitor, U73122, or IP3 receptor
antagonist, heparin, prevented calcium release in the extracts. We conclude,
therefore, that possible mechanism of Src/H2O2 action in the extracts might
involve tyrosine phosphorylation and activation of PLCgamma, accompanied by the
increase in IP3 content and subsequent calcium release from IP3-regulated calcium
stores. These results also suggest that monitoring calcium signals induced in the
Xenopus egg extracts by various components of signaling pathways may provide a
particularly useful approach to investigating their role in the signal
transduction.

PMID: 12127058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Mamm Genome. 2002 Jun;13(6):293-8.

Identification of seven loci for static glucokinesis and dynamic glucokinesis in 
mice.

Komatsu S(1), Kiyosawa H, Yoshiki A, Okazaki Y, Yoshino M, Tomaru Y, Watanabe S, 
Muramatsu M, Kusakabe M, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences
Center (GSC), RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Suehirocho, Tsurumi-ku, Kanagawa, Japan.

Non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) is characterized by a breakdown
of glucose homeostasis and is responsible for serious complications in various
organs and vessels. Most of the genetic factors of NIDDM are yet unknown. Here,
we identified two types of genetic factors that regulate homeostasis of blood
glucose by measuring various pharmacokinetic parameters, some of which are used
in the non-compartment analysis of drug metabolism in 340 F(2) progeny from the
NIDDM model KK-A(y)/Ta Jcl mouse strain, and in non-diabetic PWK strain. We
define "static glucokinesis" as the regulation of homeostasis that occurs during 
glucose deprivation, and "dynamic glucokinesis" as that during glucose stress;
for instance, glucose tolerance test. Quantitative trait locus analysis revealed 
eight loci involved in the regulation of glucose homeostasis on chromosomes 7 (
Nidd1k), 2 ( Nidd2k), 1 ( Nidd3k, Nidd4k, and Nidd5k), 11 ( Nidd6k), 5 ( Nidd7k) 
(named Nidd1k through Nidd7k), and 4 ( Bwt1k). Nidd1k, Nidd4k, and Nidd7k were
novel loci associated with NIDDM in mice. Nidd1k, Nidd2k, Nidd3k, and Nidd4k had 
linkage to factors characteristic of both static and dynamic glucokinesis. Nidd5k
and Nidd6k showed linkage specific to markers of dynamic glucokinesis, and Nidd7k
had linkage specific to static glucokinesis. Bwt1k was linked to obesity. Thus,
the genetic factors for static glucokinesis and those for dynamic glucokinesis
partially overlapped.

PMID: 12115031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Dev Genes Evol. 2002 Jul;212(6):293-7. Epub 2002 May 24.

An orphan PRD class homeobox gene expressed in mouse brain and limb development.

Takahashi T(1), Holland PW, Cohn MJ, Shimizu K, Kurokawa M, Hirai H.

Author information: 
(1)School of Animal and Microbial Science, The University of Reading,
Whiteknights, Reading, RG6 6AJ, UK.

We report the cDNA sequence and expression of a mouse homeobox gene, Dmbx1, from 
the PRD class and comparison to its human orthologue. The gene defines a new
homeobox gene family, Dmbx, phylogenetically distinct from the Ptx, Alx, Prx Otx,
Gsc, Otp and Pax gene families. The Dmbx1 gene is expressed in the developing
mouse diencephalon, midbrain and hindbrain, and has dynamic expression during
forelimb and hindlimb development. Unusually for homeobox genes, there is no
orthologue in the Drosophila or Caenorhabditis genomes; we argue this reflects
secondary loss.

PMID: 12111214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Tsitologiia. 2002;44(3):227-34.

[The signalling cascade of fertilization].

[Article in Russian]

Tokmakov AA(1), Sato KI, Fukami Y.

Author information: 
(1)A. A. Uktomsky Physiological Research Institute, St. Petersburg State
University. tokmak@gsc.riken.go.ip

The early event of fertilization-induced egg activation is a mobilization of
intracellular Ca2+ that originates from the sperm entry point and spreads through
the entire egg cytoplasm. Recently, this process has been established to require 
the sequential activation of Src family kinases, phospholipase C gamma, and
inositoltrisphosphate receptor of endoplasmic reticulum. This review summarizes
recent findings concerning the signalling pathway of fertilization from sperm-egg
interaction to the Ca2+ release with emphasis on the role of tyrosine kinases in 
the egg activation.

PMID: 12094760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Bioorg Med Chem. 2002 Aug;10(8):2751-7.

Effect of protonation of the N-acetyl neuraminic acid residue of sialyl Lewis(X):
a molecular orbital study with insights into its binding properties toward the
carbohydrate recognition domain of E-selectin.

Pichierri F(1), Matsuo Y.

Author information: 
(1)Computational Proteomics Team, Bioinformatics Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences
Center, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan.
fabio@gsc.riken.go.jp

Semiempirical molecular orbital (MO) calculations with an implicit treatment of
the water environment were employed in order to assess whether the sialyl
Lewis(X) (sLe(X)) tetrasaccharide binds to E-selectin in the anionic or neutral
(i.e., protonated) state. The analysis of the frontier molecular orbitals,
electrostatic potential surfaces, and conformational behavior of the sugar
indicates that its neutral form possesses the necessary characteristics for
binding. In particular, the LUMO level of the neutral sLe(X) molecule is
localized both on the carboxylic group of the N-acetyl neuraminic acid (NeuNAc)
residue and on the nearby glycosidic linkage. These two moieties interact with
the Arg97 residue of E-selectin, as revealed by a recent crystal structure
analysis of the E-selectin/sLe(X) complex. The energetics of this specific
interaction was investigated with the aid of ab initio Hartree-Fock MO
calculations, which resulted in a BSSE-corrected binding energy of 16.63
kcal/mol. Our observations could open up new perspectives in the design of sLe(X)
mimics.

PMID: 12057664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Biotechniques. 2002 May;32(5):984-5.

Extra-long first-strand cDNA synthesis.

Carninci P(1), Shiraki T, Mizuno Y, Muramatsu M, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center, Saitama, Japan. rgscerg@gsc.riken.go.jp

PMID: 12019793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Trends Microbiol. 2002 May;10(5):205-8.

Anchorless adhesins and invasins of Gram-positive bacteria: a new class of
virulence factors.

Chhatwal GS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbial Pathogenesis and Vaccine Research, GBF German Research
Centre for Biotechnology, Mascheroder Weg 1, 38124 Braunschweig, Germany.
gsc@gbf.de

Bacterial adherence to and invasion of eukaryotic cells are important mechanisms 
of pathogenicity. Most Gram-positive bacteria interact with the components of the
host extracellular matrix (ECM) to adhere to, colonize and invade cells and
tissues. The bacterial proteins that bind to components of the ECM harbour signal
sequences for their secretion and mechanisms of anchoring to the host cell
surface. However, in recent years, some cell-surface adhesins and invasins of
Gram-positive bacteria have been described that do not possess a signal sequence 
or a membrane anchor. These proteins are secreted by an as-yet-unknown mechanism 
and are probably localized on the bacterial surface by reassociation. These
anchorless but surface-located adhesins and invasins represent a new class of
virulence factors.

PMID: 11973142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Genes Dev. 2002 Apr 1;16(7):820-35.

The role of a Williams-Beuren syndrome-associated helix-loop-helix
domain-containing transcription factor in activin/nodal signaling.

Ring C(1), Ogata S, Meek L, Song J, Ohta T, Miyazono K, Cho KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, and Developmental Biology
Center, University of California, Irvine, California 92697-2300, USA.

We investigated the regulation of the activin/nodal-inducible distal element (DE)
of the Xenopus goosecoid (gsc) promoter. On the basis of its interaction with the
DE, we isolated a Xenopus homolog of the human Williams-Beuren syndrome critical 
region 11 (XWBSCR11), and further, show that it interacts with pathway-specific
Smad2 and Smad3 in a ligand-dependent manner. Interestingly, we also find that
XWBSCR11 functions cooperatively with FoxH1 (Fast-1) to stimulate DE-dependent
transcription. We propose a mechanism in which FoxH1 functions together with
Smads as a cofactor for the recruitment of transcription factors like XWBSCR11 in
the process of activin/nodal-mediated gsc-specific induction. This mechanism
provides considerable opportunities for modulation of transcription across a
variety of activin/nodal-inducible genes, increasing diversity in promoter
selection, thus leading to the differential induction of activin/nodal target
genes.

PMCID: PMC186325
PMID: 11937490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Int J Dev Biol. 2002 Mar;46(2):259-62.

Goosecoid and cerberus-like do not interact during mouse embryogenesis.

Borges AC(1), Marques S, Belo JA.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal.

Mouse Cerberus-like (Cer-l) is a neural inducer molecule, capable of inhibiting
Nodal and BMP-4 signals in the extracelular space. The cer-l expression domain in
the Anterior Visceral Endoderm (AVE) and prechordal plate, tissues involved in
head induction and patterning, respectively, suggested a role for this gene in
head formation. However, animals homozygous for the cer-l null allele failed to
show any abnormality, leading us to propose the existence of other factor(s) that
might compensate for cer-l loss-of-function. Since goosecoid (gsc) shares some
domains of expression with cer-l and was shown to be essential for head
morphogenesis, we tested its ability to interact genetically with cer-l. With
this aim we generated cer-l;gsc double mutants. These animals were analyzed at
birth for skeletal defects and revealed the same phenotype as gsc-/- single
mutants. We also investigated the proper patterning of structures adjacent to the
prechordal plate by performing in situ hybridization of HNF-3beta, Six-3 and
BF-1, genes whose expression domains remained unchanged. In conclusion, the
analysis carried out indicated that gsc does not compensate for cer-l
loss-of-function and that these genes do not interact genetically.

PMID: 11934155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Int J Neurosci. 2001;110(3-4):147-57.

Neurobiological relationships between ambient lighting and the startle response
to acoustic stress in humans.

Basso MR Jr.

A study was conducted to determine differences between psychophysiological
responses to acoustic stress under different ambient lighting conditions. Typical
cool-white indoor lighting was compared to full-spectrum lighting under dim and
bright illumination levels. Full-spectrum lighting exhibits spectral
characteristics that approximate those found in natural sunlight. The startle
response was measured during three preliminary experiments using normal subjects.
In the first experiment, one subject was evaluated. Electromyography (EMG) was
used to measure eyeblink startle at the obicularis oculi muscle; heart rate (HR) 
was measured at the wrist; and galvanic skin conductance (GSC) was measured at
the left index finger. There was a significant increase in galvanic skin
conductance (GSC) and a decrease in heart rate. In the second experiment, GSC was
used to measure the startle response under cool-white fluorescent lighting versus
full-spectrum fluorescent lighting (n = 5 subjects) under both bright and dim
lighting conditions. Higher arousal was detected measuring GSC under the
cool-white lighting condition, and under the dim lighting condition using both
types of lighting. In the third experiment, ten subjects were assessed for GSC
startle response using both lighting types set at the dim brightness level. There
was a strong trend indicating a higher GSC arousal under the dim cool-white
lighting condition. Other studies support that a GABAergic inhibitory circuit is 
inhibited by darkness and that the spectral characteristics of cool-white
lighting are more stressful to humans than full-spectrum lighting. These
preliminary findings regarding stress and ambient lighting may be especially
important in the neural development of children, and in those clinical
populations that are particularly sensitive to environmental stress.

PMID: 11912865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Science. 2002 Apr 5;296(5565):141-5. Epub 2002 Mar 21.

Functional annotation of a full-length Arabidopsis cDNA collection.

Seki M(1), Narusaka M, Kamiya A, Ishida J, Satou M, Sakurai T, Nakajima M, Enju
A, Akiyama K, Oono Y, Muramatsu M, Hayashizaki Y, Kawai J, Carninci P, Itoh M,
Ishii Y, Arakawa T, Shibata K, Shinagawa A, Shinozaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Mutation Exploration Team, Plant Functional Genomics Research Group,
RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center (GSC), 3-1-1 Koyadai, Tsukuba 305-0074, Japan.

Full-length complementary DNAs (cDNAs) are essential for the correct annotation
of genomic sequences and for the functional analysis of genes and their products.
We isolated 155,144 RIKEN Arabidopsis full-length (RAFL) cDNA clones. The 3'-end 
expressed sequence tags (ESTs) of 155,144 RAFL cDNAs were clustered into 14,668
nonredundant cDNA groups, about 60% of predicted genes. We also obtained 5' ESTs 
from 14,034 nonredundant cDNA groups and constructed a promoter database. The
sequence database of the RAFL cDNAs is useful for promoter analysis and correct
annotation of predicted transcription units and gene products. Furthermore, the
full-length cDNAs are useful resources for analyses of the expression profiles,
functions, and structures of plant proteins.

PMID: 11910074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Mech Dev. 2002 Apr;113(1):29-39.

Homeostatic regulation of germinal stem cell proliferation by the GDNF/FSH
pathway.

Tadokoro Y(1), Yomogida K, Ohta H, Tohda A, Nishimune Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Science for Laboratory Animal Experimentation, Research
Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Yamadaoka 3-1, Suita
565-0871, Japan.

Stem cell regulatory mechanisms are difficult to study because self-renewal and
production of differentiated progeny, which are both strictly controlled, occur
simultaneously in these cells. To focus on the self-renewal mechanism alone, we
investigated the behavior of germinal stem cells (GSCs) in progeny-deficient
testes with defective GSC differentiation. In these testes, we found that the
proliferation of undifferentiated spermatogonia, some of which are GSCs, was
accelerated by high concentrations of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor
(GDNF). Furthermore, we found that follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) stimulation
via homeostatic control was one of the major regulators of GDNF concentration.
These results suggest that in mammalian testes, GSC proliferation and population 
size are regulated homeostatically by the GDNF/FSH pathway.

PMID: 11900972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Dev Biol. 2002 Apr 1;244(1):66-74.

Regional specification of the head and trunk-tail organizers of a urodele (Cynops
pyrrhogaster) embryo is patterned during gastrulation.

Kaneda T(1), Miyazaki K, Kudo R, Goto K, Sakaguchi K, Matsumoto M, Todaka S,
Yoshinaga K, Suzuki AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, Advanced Course for Bioengineering, Yatsushiro
National College of Technology, 2627 Hirayama Shin-Machi, Yatsushiro, 866-8501,
Japan. kaneda@as.yatsushiro-nct.ac.jp

The dorsal marginal zone (DMZ) of an amphibian early gastrula is thought to
consist of at least two distinct domains: the future head and trunk-tail
organizers. We studied the mechanism by which the organizing activities of the
lower half of the DMZ (LDMZ) of the urodelean (Cynops pyrrhogaster) embryo are
changed. The uninvoluted LDMZ induces the notochord and then organizes the
trunk-tail structures, whereas after cultivation in vitro or suramin treatment,
the same LDMZ loses the notochord-inducing ability and organizes the head
structures. A cell-lineage experiment indicated that the change in the organizing
activity of the LDMZ was reflected in the transformation of the inductive
ability: from notochord-inducing to neural-inducing activity. Using RT-PCR, we
showed that the LDMZ expressed gsc, lim-1, chordin, and noggin, but not the
mesoderm marker bra. In the sandwich assay, the LDMZ induced bra expression in
the animal cap ectoderm, but the inductive activity was inhibited by cultivation 
or suramin treatment. The present study indicates that the change in the
organizing activity of the LDMZ from trunk-tail to head is coupled with the loss 
of notochord-inducing activity. Based on these results, we suggest that this
change is essential for the specification of the head and trunk-tail organizers
during gastrulation.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 11900459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 Mar 1;30(5):1163-8.

Interaction generality, a measurement to assess the reliability of a
protein-protein interaction.

Saito R(1), Suzuki H, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences
Center (GSC), 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan.

Here we introduce the 'interaction generality' measure, a new method for
computationally assessing the reliability of protein-protein interactions
obtained in biological experiments. This measure is basically the number of
proteins involved in a given interaction and also adopts the idea that
interactions observed in a complicated interaction network are likely to be true 
positives. Using a group of yeast protein-protein interactions identified in
various biological experiments, we show that interactions with low generalities
are more likely to be reproducible in other independent assays. We constructed
more reliable networks by eliminating interactions whose generalities were above 
a particular threshold. The rate of interactions with common cellular roles
increased from 63% in the unadjusted estimates to 79% in the refined networks. As
a result, the rate of cross-talk between proteins with different cellular roles
decreased, enabling very clear predictions of the functions of some unknown
proteins. The results suggest that the interaction generality measure will make
interaction data more useful in all organisms and may yield insights into the
biological roles of the proteins studied.

PMCID: PMC101243
PMID: 11861907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Toxicol Sci. 2002 Feb;65(2):192-9.

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin toxicity in the zebrafish embryo: altered
regional blood flow and impaired lower jaw development.

Teraoka H(1), Dong W, Ogawa S, Tsukiyama S, Okuhara Y, Niiyama M, Ueno N,
Peterson RE, Hiraga T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, School of Veterinary Medicine, Rakuno Gakuen
University, Ebetsu 069-8501, Japan. hteraoka@rakuno.ac.jp

The effects of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) exposure on regional
red blood cell (RBC) perfusion rate, as an index of blood flow, and lower jaw
development were investigated quantitatively in zebrafish embryos (Danio rerio)
during early development. As revealed by observation of live embryos and
alcian-blue staining, TCDD retarded lower jaw development in a
concentration-dependent manner with only a minor inhibitory effect on total body 
length. Both inhibitory effects were significant as early as 60 h
postfertilization (hpf), at which time the area of goosecoid (gsc) mRNA
expression was clearly reduced in the lower jaw. To examine effects of TCDD on
RBC perfusion rate, time-lapse recording was performed using a digital video
camera attached to a light microscope. TCDD did not show marked effects on RBC
perfusion rate until 72 hpf, when vessel-specific effects emerged. TCDD severely 
inhibited RBC perfusion rate in intersegmental arteries of the trunk, but only
modestly and slightly inhibited RBC perfusion rate in certain vessels of the head
such as the central arteries and optic vein. Conversely, at both 72 and 84 hpf,
TCDD significantly increased RBC perfusion rate in the hypobranchial artery
branching to the lower jaw primordia, and then reduced it at 96 hpf. RBC
perfusion rate in all vessels examined in TCDD-exposed embryos was inhibited at
96 hpf. The zebrafish aryl hydrocarbon receptor 2 (zfAhR2) mRNA was strongly
expressed in the lower jaw primordia at 48 hpf, and expression of this transcript
was augmented by TCDD treatment. Thus, TCDD exposure of the zebrafish embryo has 
a disruptive effect on local circulation and lower jaw cartilage growth.
Initially, TCDD may act directly on the lower jaw primordia to impair lower jaw
development. Reductions in hypobranchial RBC perfusion rate occurred well after
the initial retardation in lower jaw development had become apparent, and may
contribute further to the effect.

PMID: 11812923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2001 Dec;46(16 Suppl):2271-7.

[Draft human genome sequencing at RIKEN-GSC].

[Article in Japanese]

Fujiyama A(1).

Author information: 
(1)afujiyam@gsc.riken.go.jp

PMID: 11802378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Jan 25;290(3):1108-13.

T2BP, a novel TRAF2 binding protein, can activate NF-kappaB and AP-1 without TNF 
stimulation.

Kanamori M(1), Suzuki H, Saito R, Muramatsu M, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences
Center (GSC), 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Yokohama, Tsurumi-ku, 230-0045, Japan.

TRAF2 is a key molecule involved in TNF signaling, which is crucial for the
regulation of inflammatory processes. We have identified a novel TRAF2 binding
protein, designated as T2BP (TRAF2 binding protein), by a mammalian two-hybrid
screening approach. T2BP is a relatively small protein of 184 amino acids, which 
includes a forkhead-associated domain, the phosphopeptide binding motif. The
interaction domain search showed that the TRAF domain in TRAF2 is required for
the binding to T2BP whereas almost the entire protein in T2BP binds to TRAF2. The
interaction was further confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation. Expression profiling
for T2BP and TRAF2 revealed an ubiquitous expression in adult mouse tissues.
Overexpression of T2BP in HEK293 cells activated NF-kappaB and AP-1 in a dose
dependent manner as well as seen in the TNF-treated control cells. Our results
suggest that T2BP is involved in the TNF-mediated signaling by its interaction
with TRAF2.

PMID: 11798190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Science. 2002 Jan 4;295(5552):131-4.

Construction and analysis of a human-chimpanzee comparative clone map.

Fujiyama A(1), Watanabe H, Toyoda A, Taylor TD, Itoh T, Tsai SF, Park HS, Yaspo
ML, Lehrach H, Chen Z, Fu G, Saitou N, Osoegawa K, de Jong PJ, Suto Y, Hattori M,
Sakaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama,
Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. afujiyam@gsc.riken.go.jp

The recently released human genome sequences provide us with reference data to
conduct comparative genomic research on primates, which will be important to
understand what genetic information makes us human. Here we present a
first-generation human-chimpanzee comparative genome map and its initial
analysis. The map was constructed through paired alignment of 77,461 chimpanzee
bacterial artificial chromosome end sequences with publicly available human
genome sequences. We detected candidate positions, including two clusters on
human chromosome 21 that suggest large, nonrandom regions of difference between
the two genomes.

PMID: 11778049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Cancer. 2001 Dec 1;92(11):2911-9.

Expression of gamma-glutamyl cysteine synthetase in nonsmall cell lung carcinoma.

Soini Y(1), Näpänkangas U, Järvinen K, Kaarteenaho-Wiik R, Pääkkö P, Kinnula VL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland. msoini@cc.oulu.fi

BACKGROUND: The purpose of this study was to investigate expression of gamma
glutamyl cysteine synthetase (gamma GCS), the rate-limiting enzyme in glutathione
synthesis in nonsmall cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC).
METHODS: Eighty-five samples of NSCLC were studied using immunohistochemistry
with polyclonal antibodies to the heavy and light subunits of gamma GCS (gamma
GCS-h, gamma GCS-l), and the expressions were correlated with apoptosis and
patients survival. Further studies were conducted in cultured cells also to
investigate the effects of gamma GSC inhibition with buthionine sulfoximine on
the cell survival.
RESULTS: In the biopsies, gamma GCS-h positivity was found in 71% and gamma GCS-l
positivity in 67% of NSCLCs, and they were expressed in all cell lines studied.
There was a strong association between the expression of the heavy and light
subunits of gamma GCS in NSCLC (P = 0.003). Strong or moderate gamma GCS-h
expression was found significantly more often in squamous cell carcinomas (P =
0.00013) and in Grade 1-2 tumors (P = 0.008). There was a significantly higher
extent of apoptosis in tumors with a low gamma GCS-h expression (P = 0.016). A
similar tendency was observed with gamma GCS-l (P = 0.073). No association was
found between patient survival and high or low expression of gamma GCS-l or gamma
GCS-h in NSCLCs (P = 0.34 and P = 0.47, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: The results show that gamma GCS is strongly expressed in NSCLCs and 
probably takes part in the defense of the tumor cells against oxidative damage.
This is reflected by the lower extent of apoptosis in tumors with a high gamma
GCS expression. Because expression of gamma GCS has been connected with
chemoresistance, downregulation of its activity by inhibitors in NSCLC might have
putative therapeutic potential in the treatment of lung carcinoma.

Copyright 2001 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 11753966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 Jan 1;30(1):211-3.

READ: RIKEN Expression Array Database.

Bono H(1), Kasukawa T, Hayashizaki Y, Okazaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences
Center (GSC), RIKEN Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama,
Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.

READ, the RIKEN Expression Array Database, is a database of expression profile
data from the RIKEN mouse cDNA microarray. It stores the microarray experimental 
data and information, and provides Web interfaces for researchers to use to
retrieve, analyze and display their data. The goals for READ are to serve as a
storage site for microarray data from ongoing research in the RIKEN mouse
encyclopedia project and to provide useful links and tools to decipher
biologically important information. The gene information is based mainly on the
fully annotated FANTOM database. READ can be accessed at
http://read.gsc.riken.go.jp/. READ also provides a search tool [READ integrates
gene expression neighbor (RINGENE)] for genes with similarities in expression
profiling.

PMCID: PMC99103
PMID: 11752296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 Jan 1;30(1):116-8.

FANTOM DB: database of Functional Annotation of RIKEN Mouse cDNA Clones.

Bono H(1), Kasukawa T, Furuno M, Hayashizaki Y, Okazaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences
Center (GSC), RIKEN Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama,
Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.

FANTOM DB, the database of Functional Annotation of RIKEN Mouse cDNA Clones, is
designed to store sequence information of RIKEN full-length enriched mouse cDNA
clones, graphical views of sequence analysis results, curated functional
annotation information and additional descriptions, including Gene Ontology
terms. RIKEN's Mouse Gene Encyclopedia Project aims to collect full-length
enriched cDNA clones from various mouse tissues, determine the full-length
nucleotide sequences, infer their chromosomal locations by computer and
characterize gene expression patterns. FANTOM DB has been developed to facilitate
this work and to facilitate functional genomic studies such as positional
candidate cloning, cDNA microarrays and protein interaction analyses. FANTOM DB
contains 21 076 full-length cDNA sequences with rich functional annotations and
is publicly available. FANTOM DB thus provides curated functional annotation to
RIKEN full-length enriched mouse clones, and has links to other public resources.
FANTOM DB can be accessed at http://fantom.gsc.riken.go.jp/db/.

PMCID: PMC99137
PMID: 11752270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Biophys J. 2001 Dec;81(6):3483-8.

Molecular dynamics simulations of Gly-12-->Val mutant of p21(ras): dynamic
inhibition mechanism.

Futatsugi N(1), Tsuda M.

Author information: 
(1)Computational Science Division, Institute of Physical and Chemical Research,
Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan. foota@gsc.riken.go.jp

The mutant p21(ras) protein is a G protein produced by the point-mutated H-ras
gene, and this mutant protein has been shown to cause carcinogenesis due to a
reduction in its GTPase activity. However, the mechanism underlying this strange 
phenomenon has still not been elucidated. In our previous study, we have
clarified the mechanism of the GTP-->GDP hydrolysis reaction in the wild-type
p21(ras) at the atomic level and concluded that GTPase-activating protein plays a
significant role in the supply of H2O molecules for the hydrolysis. The structure
of the active site in the mutant is the same as that in the wild type. However,
by performing molecular dynamic calculations, we found that the structure of the 
active site of the enzyme substrate complex in the oncogenic mutant p21(ras)
continuously changes, and these continuous changes in the active site would make 
it difficult for the GTP-->GDP hydrolysis reaction to occur in the mutant. These 
findings can explain the fact that the GTPase activity in the mutant was only 15%
of that in the wild type and the fact that GTPase-activating protein has no
reaction-activating effect in the mutant. This is a dynamic inhibition mechanism 
of a vital reaction that can be explained by considering the molecular dynamics.

PMCID: PMC1301803
PMID: 11721009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2001;13(2-3):177-85.

Comparison of anterior-posterior development in the porcine versus chicken
embryo, using goosecoid expression as a marker.

van de Pavert SA(1), Schipper H, de Wit AA, Soede NM, van den Hurk R, Taverne MA,
Boerjan ML, Stroband HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Farm Animal Health, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht
University, The Netherlands.

During early embryonic development, pig and chicken embryos share striking
morphological similarities. In the present study, the timing and location of
expression of mRNA for goosecoid (gsc), a gene classically expressed in the nodal
region of developing embryos, was examined and compared in preprimitive streak
and gastrulating pig and chicken embryos. The expression of gsc appeared first in
the hypoblast and second in the hypoblast of pig and chicken embryos. Because gsc
expression in these tissues was not symmetrical, gsc appears to be a useful
marker for the onset of embryonic polarity. During gastrulation in both species, 
gsc expression became confined to cells in and around the node, in the epiblast
and mesoderm layers. The only significant species-related difference in the
distribution of gsc expression at these stages of development was the presence of
gsc expression in the gut endoderm of chicken but not pig embryos. Certainly, our
results suggest that the molecular mechanisms that control anterior-posterior
development in different classes of vertebrates are remarkably similar. In
addition, we were able to demonstrate that the pattern of gsc expression appears 
to provide a more sensitive and accurate means of determining the developmental
stage of early porcine embryos than the more commonly used trophoblast or
embryoblast size. Using gsc expression and accompanying embryo morphometric
changes, we were able to develop a four-point scale that may offer a more
accurate means of quantifying early embryo development in pigs.

PMID: 11720135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Bacteriol. 2001 Dec;183(23):6740-5.

Characterization of Pneumocystis carinii PHR1, a pH-regulated gene important for 
cell wall Integrity.

Kottom TJ(1), Thomas CF Jr, Limper AH.

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Diseases Research Unit, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and
Internal Medicine, Mayo Clinic and Foundation, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Pneumocystis carinii remains an important opportunistic fungal pathogen causing
life-threatening pneumonia in patients with AIDS and malignancy. Currently,
little is known about how the organism adapts to environmental stresses and
maintains its cellular integrity. We recently discovered an open reading frame
approximately 600 bp downstream of the region coding GSC-1, a gene mediating
beta-glucan cell wall synthesis in P. carinii. The predicted amino acid sequence 
of this new gene, termed P. carinii PHR1, exhibited 38% homology to Saccharomyces
cerevisiae GAS1, a glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored protein essential to
maintaining cell wall integrity, and 37% homology to Candida albicans PHR1/PHR2, 
pH-responsive genes encoding proteins recently implicated in cross-linking
beta-1,3- and beta-1,6-glucans. In view of its homology to these related fungal
genes, the pH-dependent expression of P. carinii PHR1 was examined. As in C.
albicans, P. carinii PHR1 expression was repressed under acidic conditions but
induced at neutral and more alkaline pH. PHR1-related proteins have been
implicated in glucan cell wall stability under various environmental conditions. 
Although difficulties with P. carinii culture and transformation have
traditionally limited assessment of gene function in the organism itself, we have
successfully used heterologous expression of P. carinii genes in related fungi to
address functional correlates of P. carinii-encoded proteins. Therefore, the
potential role of P. carinii PHR1 in cell wall integrity was examined by
assessing its ability to rescue an S. cerevisiae gas1 mutant with absent
endogenous Phr1p-like activity. Interestingly, P. carinii PHR1 DNA successfully
restored proliferation of S. cerevisiae gas1 mutants under lethal conditions of
cell wall stress. These results indicate that P. carinii PHR1 encodes a protein
responsive to environmental pH and capable of mediating fungal cell wall
integrity.

PMCID: PMC95512
PMID: 11698360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Neurosci Behav Physiol. 2001 Sep-Oct;31(5):467-72.

Coordination of the activity of monoaminergic pedal neurons in freshwater snails.

Tsyganov VV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Developmental Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow.

In the freshwater pulmonate pond snail and flateye snail, contact of the
pneumostoma (the respiratory organ) with the water surface and tactile
stimulation of the mantle induced phase-coordinated excitation and inhibition of 
activation of symmetrical pedal neurons RPeD1 (the GDC--giant dopamine cell) and 
LPeD1 (the GSC--giant serotonin cell). GDC and GSC are not primary sensory
neurons and the mechanism by which their actions are coordinated is polysynaptic.
Injections of depolarizing current into the GDC or GSC induced spike discharges
in one of the columellar nerves. It is suggested that coordination the activities
of the GDC and GSC is functionally important for controlling the right and left
halves of the columellar complex of muscles during respiration.

PMID: 11693469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Angiology. 2001 Oct;52 Suppl 2:S19-25.

Increase in echogenicity of echolucent carotid plaques after treatment with total
triterpenic fraction of Centella asiatica: a prospective, placebo-controlled,
randomized trial.

Cesarone MR(1), Belcaro G, Nicolaides AN, Geroulakos G, Bucci M, Dugall M, De
Sanctis MT, Incandela L, Griffin M, Sabetai M.

Author information: 
(1)Irvine Vascular Laboratory, St Mary's Hospital and Imperial College, London,
UK.

The aim of this study was to evaluate whether total triterpenic fraction of
Centella asiatica (TTFCA), was effective in modulating collagen production over
12 months, by producing an increase in echogenicity in echolucent carotid
plaques. Part I was a pilot study aimed at evaluating the effects of TTFCA on
different types of plaques. Part II was a prospective, randomized,
placebo-controlled trial aimed at evaluating the effects of TTFCA on
hypoechoic-echolucent plaques. The sonographic examination of carotid plaques was
made with high-resolution ultrasound. Capturing, digital image processing, and
normalization were standardized, interobserver, intrascanner, gain-level
variability were standardized using as reference blood (black) for the most
echolucent parts of the plaque and the adventitia (white) as the most echogenic
part. Normalization of echo texture was obtained and plaque characterization
differentiated echo-texture of plaque associated with events and those that did
not cause embolization, thrombosis, or cardiovascular events. After identifying
plaques at higher risk, patients were treated with TTFCA (oral tablets, 60 mg,
thrice daily for 12 months) to evaluate whether this compound, by modulating
collagen synthesis, could increase the echogenicity and therefore the stability
of echolucent plaques. Part II was aimed at evaluating the effects of TTFCA on
hypoechoic-echolucent plaques. Asymptomatic patients with echolucent plaques
(GSM<18) were treated with TTFCA (60 mg, oral tablets three times daily for 12
months) or with comparable placebo after informed consent. All patients were also
treated with antiplatelet agents. In part 1, at inclusion the GSC in the
hypoechoic group was 15 (range, 12-18) while in the hyperechoic group it was 26
(range, 24-31); at 6 months it was increased in the hypoechoic group and at 12
months the increase was significant (19.5; p<0.05). There was a minor increase in
GSM in the hyperechoic group (30; ns). In part II in the treatment group there
was a significant difference in GSM (increase) at 12 months (p<0.05), improvement
in texture (p<0.05) and a nonsignificant decrease in stenosis. No changes were
observed in the placebo group. Events were observed in 6.5% of patients in the
TTFCA group and in 11% in the control group (p<0.05). In conclusion these
observations suggest a positive action of TTFCA on the stabilization of
hypoechoic, low-density carotid plaques.

PMID: 11666118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Mamm Genome. 2001 Sep;12(9):673-7.

Computational analysis of full-length mouse cDNAs compared with human genome
sequences.

Kondo S(1), Shinagawa A, Saito T, Kiyosawa H, Yamanaka I, Aizawa K, Fukuda S,
Hara A, Itoh M, Kawai J, Shibata K, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences
Center (GSC), RIKEN Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 
City, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. rgscerg@gsc.riken.go.jp

Although the sequencing of the human genome is complete, identification of
encoded genes and determination of their structures remain a major challenge. In 
this report, we introduce a method that effectively uses full-length mouse cDNAs 
to complement efforts in carrying out these difficult tasks. A total of 61,227
RIKEN mouse cDNAs (21,076 full-length and 40,151 EST sequences containing certain
redundancies) were aligned with the draft human sequences. We found 35,141
non-redundant genomic regions that showed a significant alignment with the mouse 
cDNAs. We analyzed the structures and compositional properties of the regions
detected by the full-length cDNAs, including cross-species comparisons, and noted
a systematic bias of GENSCAN against exons of small size and/or low GC-content.
Of the cDNAs locating the 35,141 genomic regions, 3,217 did not match any
sequences of the known human genes or ESTs. Among those 3,217 cDNAs, 1,141 did
not show any significant similarity to any protein sequence in the GenBank
non-redundant protein database and thus are candidates for novel genes.

PMID: 11641714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Cancer Lett. 2001 Nov 28;173(2):175-82.

Matrilysin stimulates DNA synthesis of cultured vascular endothelial cells and
induces angiogenesis in vivo.

Nishizuka I(1), Ichikawa Y, Ishikawa T, Kamiyama M, Hasegawa S, Momiyama N,
Miyazaki K, Shimada H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery-2, Yokohama City University, School of Medicine, 3-9
Fukuura Kanazawa-ku, 236-0004, Yokohama, Japan. itaru@gsc.riken.go.jp

Matrilysin produced by human colon cancer cells may be involved in the
progression and metastasis of cancer. In the present study, we investigated the
association of matrilysin with angiogenesis. One microgram of recombinant
matrilysin is confirmed to have increased [3H]-thymidine uptake in human
umbilical vein endothelial cells. Then we used micro encapsulation and a mouse
hemoglobin enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay system for in vivo quantitation of
angiogenesis with BALB/c nu/nu athymic mice. Hundred micrograms of recombinant
matrilysin induced angiogenesis to the same degree as 10 microg of basic
fibroblast growth factor (bFGF). Angiogenesis was observed at the site implanted 
with human colon cancer WiDr cells in agarose micro beads. This was inhibited by 
subcutaneous injection of matrilysin-specific antisense oligonucleotide
significantly by 53%. In conclusion, matrilysin may be associated with
angiogenesis of human colon cancer through the direct proliferative action on
endothelial cells.

PMID: 11597792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Development. 2001 Oct;128(19):3783-93.

Role of Goosecoid, Xnot and Wnt antagonists in the maintenance of the notochord
genetic programme in Xenopus gastrulae.

Yasuo H(1), Lemaire P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique et Physiologie du Développement, Institut de Biologie
du Développement de Marseille, CNRS-INSERM-Université de la Méditerrannée-AP de
Marseille, Campus de Luminy Case 907, F-13288 Marseille Cedex 9, France.
yasuo@obs-vlfr.fr

The Xenopus trunk organiser recruits neighbouring tissues into secondary trunk
axial and paraxial structures and itself differentiates into notochord. The
inductive properties of the trunk organiser are thought to be mediated by the
secretion of bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) antagonists. Ectopic repression of 
BMP signals on the ventral side is sufficient to mimic the inductive properties
of the trunk organiser. Resultant secondary trunks contain somite and neural
tube, but no notochord. We show that inhibition of BMP signalling is sufficient
for the initiation of the trunk organiser genetic programme at the onset of
gastrulation. During late gastrulation, however, this programme is lost, due to
an invasion of secreted Wnts from neighbouring tissues. Maintenance of this
programme requires co-repression of BMP and Wnt signalling within the presumptive
notochord region. To shed light on the molecular cascade that leads to the
repression of the Wnt pathway, we looked for individual organiser genes whose
overexpression could complement the inhibition of BMP signalling to promote
notochord formation in the secondary trunks. Two genes, gsc and Xnot, were thus
identified and shown to act in different ways. Xnot acts as a transcriptional
repressor within the mesodermal region. Gsc acts in deeper vegetal cells, where
it regulates Frzb expression to maintain Xnot expression in the neighbouring
notochord territory. These results suggest that, during gastrulation, the
necessary repression of Wnt/beta-catenin signalling in notochord precursors is
achieved by the action of secreted inhibitors, such as Frzb, emitted by
gsc-expressing dorsal vegetal cells.

PMID: 11585804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Development. 2001 Sep;128(18):3623-34.

The organizer of the mouse gastrula is composed of a dynamic population of
progenitor cells for the axial mesoderm.

Kinder SJ(1), Tsang TE, Wakamiya M, Sasaki H, Behringer RR, Nagy A, Tam PP.

Author information: 
(1)Embryology Unit, Children's Medical Research Institute, Locked Bag 23,
Wentworthville, NSW 2145, Australia.

An organizer population has been identified in the anterior end of the primitive 
streak of the mid-streak stage embryo, by the expression of Hnf3beta, Gsc(lacZ)
and Chrd, and the ability of these cells to induce a second neural axis in the
host embryo. This cell population can therefore be regarded as the mid-gastrula
organizer and, together with the early-gastrula organizer and the node,
constitute the organizer of the mouse embryo at successive stages of development.
The profile of genetic activity and the tissue contribution by cells in the
organizer change during gastrulation, suggesting that the organizer may be
populated by a succession of cell populations with different fates. Fine mapping 
of the epiblast in the posterior region of the early-streak stage embryo reveals 
that although the early-gastrula organizer contains cells that give rise to the
axial mesoderm, the bulk of the progenitors of the head process and the notochord
are localized outside the early gastrula organizer. In the mid-gastrula
organizer, early gastrula organizer derived cells that are fated for the
prechordal mesoderm are joined by the progenitors of the head process that are
recruited from the epiblast previously anterior to the early gastrula organizer. 
Cells that are fated for the head process move anteriorly from the mid-gastrula
organizer in a tight column along the midline of the embryo. Other mid-gastrula
organizer cells join the expanding mesodermal layer and colonize the cranial and 
heart mesoderm. Progenitors of the trunk notochord that are localized in the
anterior primitive streak of the mid-streak stage embryo are later incorporated
into the node. The gastrula organizer is therefore composed of a constantly
changing population of cells that are allocated to different parts of the axial
mesoderm.

PMID: 11566865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Indian J Pediatr. 2001 Aug;68(8):737-47.

Bacterial meningitis in children: critical care needs.

Singhi S(1), Singhi P, Baranwal AK.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Advance Pediatric
Centre, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh,
India. drsinghi@glide.net.in

Acute bacterial meningitis (ABM) in children is associated with a high rate of
acute complications and mortality, particularly in the developing countries. Most
of the deaths occur during first 48 hours of hospitalization. Coma, raised
intracranial pressure (ICP), seizures, shock have been identified as significant 
predictors of death and morbidity. This article reviews issues in critical care
with reference to our experience of managing 88 children with ABM in PICU.
Attention should first be directed toward basic ABCs of life-support. Children
with Glasgow Coma Scale (GSC) score < 8 need intubation and supplemental oxygen. 
Antibiotics should be started, even without LP (contraindicated if focal
neuro-deficit, papilledema, or signs of raised ICP). Raised ICP is present in
most of patients; GCS < 8 and high blood pressure are good guides. Mannitol (0.25
gm/Kg) should be used in such patients. If there are signs of (impending)
herniation short-term hyperventilation is recommended; prolonged hyperventilation
(> 1 hour) must be avoided. Any evidence of poor perfusion, hypovolemia and/or
hypotension needs aggressive treatment with normal saline boluses and inotropes, 
if necessary, to maintain normal blood pressure. Empiric fluid restriction is not
justified. Seizures may be controlled with intravenous diazepam or lorazepam.
Refractory status epilepticus may be treated with continuous diazepam (0.01-0.06)
mg/kg/min) or midazolam infusion. Ventilatory support may be needed early for
associated pneumonia, poor respiratory effort and/or coma, and occasionally to
reduce work of breathing in shock. Provision of critical care to children with
ABM may reduce the mortality significantly as experienced by us.

PMID: 11563252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Genomics. 2001 Sep;77(1-2):79-90.

Balanced-size and long-size cloning of full-length, cap-trapped cDNAs into
vectors of the novel lambda-FLC family allows enhanced gene discovery rate and
functional analysis.

Carninci P(1), Shibata Y, Hayatsu N, Itoh M, Shiraki T, Hirozane T, Watahiki A,
Shibata K, Konno H, Muramatsu M, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center, 1-7-22,
Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa, 230-0045, Japan.
rgscerg@gsc.riken.go.jp

We have developed a new class of cloning vectors: lambda-full-length cDNA
(lambda-FLC) cloning vectors. These vectors can be bulk-excised for preparing
full-length cDNA libraries in which a high proportion of the plasmids carry large
inserts that can be transferred into other (for example, functional) vectors.
Unlike other cloning vectors, lambda-FLC vectors accommodate a broad range of
sizes of eukaryotic cDNA inserts because they contain "size balancers." Further, 
the main protocol we use for direct bulk excision of plasmids is mediated by a
Cre-lox system and is apparently free of size bias. The average size of the
inserts from excised plasmid cDNA libraries was 2.9 kb for standard and 6.9 kb
for size-selected cDNA. The average insert size of the full-length cDNA libraries
was correlated to the rate of new gene discovery, suggesting that effectively
cloning rarely expressed mRNAs requires vectors that can accommodate large
inserts from a variety of sources. Part of the vectors are also suitable for bulk
transfer of inserts into various functional vectors.

PMID: 11543636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Development. 2001 Aug;128(15):2975-87.

Goosecoid promotes head organizer activity by direct repression of Xwnt8 in
Spemann's organizer.

Yao J(1), Kessler DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6058, USA.

Formation of the vertebrate body plan is controlled by discrete head and trunk
organizers that establish the anteroposterior pattern of the body axis. The
Goosecoid (Gsc) homeodomain protein is expressed in all vertebrate organizers and
has been implicated in the activity of Spemann's organizer in Xenopus. The role
of Gsc in organizer function was examined by fusing defined transcriptional
regulatory domains to the Gsc homeodomain. Like native Gsc, ventral injection of 
an Engrailed repressor fusion (Eng-Gsc) induced a partial axis, while a VP16
activator fusion (VP16-Gsc) did not, indicating that Gsc functions as a
transcriptional repressor in axis induction. Dorsal injection of VP16-Gsc
resulted in loss of head structures anterior to the hindbrain, while axial
structures were unaffected, suggesting a requirement for Gsc function in head
formation. The anterior truncation caused by VP16-Gsc was fully rescued by Frzb, 
a secreted Wnt inhibitor, indicating that activation of ectopic Wnt signaling was
responsible, at least in part, for the anterior defects. Supporting this idea,
Xwnt8 expression was activated by VP16-Gsc in animal explants and the dorsal
marginal zone, and repressed by Gsc in Activin-treated animal explants and the
ventral marginal zone. Furthermore, expression of Gsc throughout the marginal
zone inhibited trunk formation, identical to the effects of Frzb and other Xwnt8 
inhibitors. A region of the Xwnt8 promoter containing four consensus
homeodomain-binding sites was identified and this region mediated repression by
Gsc and activation by VP16-Gsc, consistent with direct transcriptional regulation
of Xwnt8 by Gsc. Therefore, Gsc promotes head organizer activity by direct
repression of Xwnt8 in Spemann's organizer and this activity is essential for
anterior development.

PMID: 11532920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Dev Biol. 2001 Sep 1;237(1):183-201.

The role of maternal axin in patterning the Xenopus embryo.

Kofron M(1), Klein P, Zhang F, Houston DW, Schaible K, Wylie C, Heasman J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Children's Hospital Medical Center, 3333
Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039, USA.

Regulation of the stability of beta catenin protein is a critical role of Wnt
signaling cascades. In early Xenopus development, dorsal axis specification
depends on regulation of beta catenin by both cytoplasmic and nuclear mechanisms.
While the cytoplasmic protein axin is known as a key component of the cytoplasmic
beta catenin degradation complex, loss-of-function studies are needed to
establish whether it is required for dorso-ventral patterning in the embryo, and 
to test where in the embryo it carries out its function. Here, we show that
embryos lacking maternal axin protein have increased levels of soluble beta
catenin protein and increased nuclear localization of beta catenin in ventral
nuclei at the blastula stage. These embryos gastrulate abnormally and develop
with excessive notochord and head structures, and reduced tail and ventral
components. They show increased expression of dorsal markers, including siamois, 
Xnr3, chordin, gsc, Xhex, and Otx2, decreased expression of Xwnt 8 and Xbra, and 
little alteration of BMP4 and Xvent1 and -2 mRNA levels. The ventral halves of
axin-depleted embryos at the gastrula stage have dramatically increased levels of
chordin expression, and severely decreased levels of Xwnt 8 mRNA expression,
while BMP4 transcript levels are only slightly reduced. This dorso-anterior
phenotype is rescued by axin mRNA injected into the vegetal pole of axin-depleted
oocytes before fertilization. Interestingly, the phenotype was rescued by ventral
but not dorsal injection of axin mRNA, at the 4-cell stage, although dorsal
injection into wild-type embryos does cause ventralization. These results show
directly that the localized ventral activity of maternal axin is critical for the
correct patterning of the early Xenopus embryo.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11518515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Dev Growth Differ. 2001 Aug;43(4):351-9.

Comparative study of sequential expression of the organizer-related genes in
normal Cynops pyrrhogaster embryos and mesodermalized ectoderm.

Tabata T(1), Sakaguchi K, Tajima T, Suzuki AS.

Author information: 
(1)Natural Enviromental Science, Department of Enviromental Science, Graduate
School of Science and Technology, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 860-8555, Japan.

An artificially mesodermalized ectoderm (mE) of early Cynops pyrrhogaster
gastrula acquires the organizer property; the mE is able to induce the secondary 
axis. The expression of organizer-related genes was investigated during the
mesodermalizing process of the mE. The expression of C. pyrrhogaster
organizer-related genes, such as bra, gsc, lim-1, chd and noggin, were analyzed. 
Cynops pyrrhogaster shh expression was also investigated. The organizer-related
genes were activated by 12 h after the mesoderm-inducing stimulus. It was noted
that there was a temporal gap in the expression of each gene. The expression of
bra and gsc seemed to be more quickly activated during the mesodermalizing
process. While expression of lim-1 and noggin was activated later than that of
bra and gsc, lim-1 expression was earlier than chd and noggin expression. Shh
expression was activated later than lim-1/noggin. The present study suggests the 
possibility that the bra/gsc, lim-1, chd, noggin and shh genes are expressed one 
by one in that order during the mesodermalizing of the presumptive ectoderm. It
also indicates that the sequence is not always consistent with that of the whole 
embryo during normal embryogenesis. The meaning of the discrepancy will be
discussed in connection with the cascade of certain genes expressed during the
mesodermalizing process.

PMID: 11473542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Mol Cell. 2001 Mar;7(3):497-508.

Yb modulates the divisions of both germline and somatic stem cells through piwi- 
and hh-mediated mechanisms in the Drosophila ovary.

King FJ(1), Szakmary A, Cox DN, Lin H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina 27710, USA.

The coordinated division of distinctive types of stem cells within an organ is
crucial for organogenesis and homeostasis. Here we show genetic interactions
among fs(1)Yb (Yb), piwi, and hedgehog (hh) that regulate the division of both
germline stem cells (GSCs) and somatic stem cells (SSCs), the two constituent
stem cell populations of the Drosophila ovary. Yb is required for both GSC and
SSC divisions; loss of Yb function eliminates GSCs and reduces SSC division,
while Yb overexpression increases GSC number and causes SSC overproliferation. We
also show that Yb acts via the piwi- and hh-mediated signaling pathways that
emanate from the same signaling cells to control GSC and SSC division,
respectively. hh signaling also has a minor effect in GSC division.

PMID: 11463375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Am Coll Surg. 2001 Jul;193(1):52-9.

Predictors of general surgical complications after heart transplantation.

Fazel S(1), Everson EA, Stitt LW, Smith C, Quantz M, McKenzie FN, Novick RJ.

Author information: 
(1)London Health Sciences Centre, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Several studies have reported the incidence, morbidity, and mortality
of general surgical conditions (GSCs) in orthotopic heart transplant (OHT)
patients. The following is the largest reported series of such patients and the
first study with sufficient patient numbers to formally evaluate peritransplant
variables as risk factors for GSC development.
STUDY DESIGN: A GSC was defined as a condition for which a general surgeon had
been consulted or as a general surgical condition recognized at the time of
autopsy. The records of 453 consecutive patients who underwent OHT between 1981
and 1999 were reviewed to identify patients who developed a GSC. Kaplan-Meier
actuarial analysis on this cohort, and univariate and multivariate logistic
regression models applied to a subpopulation of 324 consecutive OHT patients
between 1987 and 1997 were used to determine factors associated with and
predictive of GSC after OHT.
RESULTS: Of 453 OHT patients, 371 (81.9%) were men, and the average age was 44.5 
+/- 15 (standard deviation) years. Median followup was 2,086 days (range 1 to
6,642 days). Ninety-three patients (20.5%) developed 111 GSCs. Of these, 78 were 
men, and the average age was 49.9+/-10.2 years. There were 83 general surgical
interventions. Actuarial analyses revealed that age greater than 50 years,
pretransplant diagnosis of ischemic (PTDxI) versus nonischemic heart disease, and
previous general surgical history were factors associated (p < 0.05) with a
higher GSC incidence. Gender, more urgent transplant priority status,
cardiopulmonary bypass time, total graft ischemic time, and intensive care unit
length of stay were not associated with GSC. Factors associated with GSC on
univariate analysis, with odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs)
included: age analyzed as a continuous variable (OR 1.04 per year; CI 1.01, 1.06 
per year; p = 0.0021), PTDxI (OR 2.40; CI 1.39, 4.15; p = 0.0016), and
pretransplant general surgical history (OR 3.35; CI 1.65, 6.82; p = 0.0008).
Multivariate analysis revealed that only pretransplant general surgical history
(OR 3.27; CI 1.58, 6.76; p = 0.0004) and PTDxI (OR 2.37; CI 1.35, 4.16; p =
0.0023) were associated with subsequent development of GSC.
CONCLUSIONS: A pretransplant diagnosis of ischemic heart disease and previous
history of a general surgical procedure are two independent risk factors that
predispose OHT patients to development of GSC. Because GSC may arise insidiously 
in immunosuppressed patients, identification of OHT patients at higher risk for
GSC will permit timely intervention decisions, decreasing morbidity and mortality
in this challenging group of patients.

PMID: 11442254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Nature. 2001 Apr 12;410(6830):830-4.

Arkadia enhances nodal-related signalling to induce mesendoderm.

Niederländer C(1), Walsh JJ, Episkopou V, Jones CM.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Gene Function and Regulation, Chester Beatty Laboratories,
Institute of Cancer Research, 237 Fulham Road, London SW3 6JB, UK.

Nodal-related members of the transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta family
regulate the induction of mesoderm, endoderm, and mesendoderm, a tissue specific 
to the Spemann organizer. How these different tissues form in response to the
same signalling molecules is not completely understood. It has been suggested
that concentration-dependent effects, mediated by extracellular cofactors and
antagonists, are responsible for the differences. Here we show that the nuclear
protein Arkadia specifically potentiates the mesendoderm-inducing activity of a
subset of TGF-beta family members. The combined activities of Arkadia and Xenopus
nodal-related-1 are sufficient to induce mesendoderm and suppress mesoderm.
Arkadia dorsalizes ventral tissues, resulting in the induction of
organizer-specific gene expression. Blocking nodal signalling extracellularly
inhibits these effects. Arkadia influences nodal activity when co-expressed and
can function in cells adjacent to those producing the nodal signal. Our findings,
together with the observation that Arkadia mutant mice lack a node and
node-derived mesendoderm, identify Arkadia as an essential modulator of the nodal
signalling cascade that leads to induction of Spemann's organizer.

PMID: 11298453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Int J Dev Biol. 2001;45(1):347-55.

Defects of the body plan of mutant embryos lacking Lim1, Otx2 or Hnf3beta
activity.

Kinder SJ(1), Tsang TE, Ang SL, Behringer RR, Tam PP.

Author information: 
(1)Embryology Unit, Children's Medical Research Institute, Wentworthville, NSW,
Australia.

The orientation of the anterior-posterior (A-P) axis was examined in
gastrula-stage Hnf3beta, Otx2 and Lim1 null mutant embryos that display defective
axis development. In situ hybridization analysis of the expression pattern of
genes associated with the posterior germ layer tissues and the primitive streak
(T, Wnt3 and Fgf8) and anterior endoderm (Cer1 and Sox17) revealed that the A-P
axis of mutant embryos remains aligned with the proximo-distal plane of the
gastrula. Further analysis revealed that cells which express Chrd activity are
either absent in Hnf3beta mutant embryos or localised in heterotopic sites in
Lim1 and Otx2 null mutants. Lim1-expressing cells are present in the Hnf3beta
mutant embryo albeit in heterotopic sites. In all three mutants, Gsc-expressing
cells are missing from the anterior mesendoderm. These findings suggest that
although some cells with organizer activity may be present in the mutant embryo, 
they are not properly localised and fail to contribute to the axial mesoderm of
the head. By contrast, in T/T mutant embryos that display normal head fold
development, the expression domains of organizer, primitive streak and anterior
endoderm genes are regionalised correctly in the gastrula.

PMID: 11291865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Biol Pharm Bull. 2001 Mar;24(3):316-9.

Anti-metastatic effect of the sialyl Lewis-X analog GSC-150 on the human colon
carcinoma derived cell line KM12-HX in the mouse.

Shirota K(1), Kato Y, Irimura T, Kondo H, Sugiyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Tokyo, Japan.

We investigated the inhibitory effect of the sialyl Lewis-X (sLeX) analog,
GSC-150, on hepatic metastasis of the human colon carcinoma derived cell line,
KM12-HX, which highly expresses sLeX antigen on the cell surface. The number of
cancer nodules found in BALB/c nude mouse liver 6 weeks after intrasplenic
injection of KM12-HX cells was significantly reduced by co-administration of
GSC-150. The amount of [3H]thymidine-labeled KM12-HX cells distributed in liver
was also significantly reduced by GSC-150 co-administration in lipopolysaccharide
(LPS)-treated mice at 48 h after administration of the tumor cells, while GSC-150
did not reduce the amount of HX cells distributed at 30 min. Considering our
previous report that the initial phase of the distribution of KM12-HX cells in
liver is governed by their being trapped in the hepatic microvessels because of
their large size (Mizuno et al., J. Hepatol., 28, 865-877, 1998), these results
suggest that GSC-150 does not inhibit this first-pass trapping by microvessels,
but inhibits the subsequent process which is more directly related to final
metastasis. GSC-150 inhibited the adhesion of KM12-HX cells to tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (TNF-alpha)-activated human umbilical vein endothelial cells
(HUVECs). These findings imply that the anti-metastatic effect of GSC-150 in vivo
could be explained by its inhibition of cell-cell interactions between cancer and
host cells.

PMID: 11256494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Evol Dev. 2000 Nov-Dec;2(6):303-10.

Amphioxus goosecoid and the evolution of the head organizer and prechordal plate.

Neidert AH(1), Panopoulou G, Langeland JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Kalamazoo College, MI 49006-3291, USA.

The organizer is a central feature of vertebrate embryogenesis and is
functionally subdivided into the head organizer that gives rise primarily to the 
prechordal plate and induces forebrain structures, and the trunk/tail organizer
that gives rise primarily to the notochord and induces more posterior structures.
Goosecoid(gsc) encodes a homeodomain-containing transcription factor that is
expressed in the vertebrate head organizer and prechordal plate, and can induce a
secondary axis when expressed ectopically. To investigate the evolution of the
vertebrate head organizer and prechordal plate, we have cloned and characterized 
a gsc homolog from the cephalochordate amphioxus. Amphioxus, it is important to
note, lacks a prechordal plate in that the notochord extends to the extreme
anterior end of the animal, and lacks elaborate differentiation of its forebrain.
Gsc expression in amphioxus is initially localized during gastrulation to the
mesendodermal layer of the dorsal lip of the blastopore. However, gsc expression 
in amphioxus is not maintained in anterior axial mesoderm, as is the case with
the vertebrate prechordal plate. Rather, gsc is expressed in the dorsal axial
mesoderm of the blastopore lip throughout gastrulation, appearing transiently in 
the presumptive notochord that underlies all regions of the amphioxus brain. The 
similarities in gsc expression in amphioxus and vertebrates suggest that a
primitive version of the head organizer evolved prior to the origin of the
vertebrates. The differences in gsc expression can be interpreted either as the
loss of the prechordal plate domain in the cephalochordate lineage, or the gain
of a distinct gsc-expressing prechordal plate that plays a role in forebrain
induction in the vertebrate lineage.

PMID: 11256375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Dev Biol. 2001 Mar 15;231(2):410-9.

Formation of the middle ear: recent progress on the developmental and molecular
mechanisms.

Mallo M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Max-Planck Institute of Immunobiology,
Stübeweg 51, Freiburg, D-79108, Germany. mallo@immunobio.mpg.de

The middle ear allows animals to hear while moving in an aerial medium. It is
composed of a cavity harbouring a chain of three ossicles that transmit
vibrations produced by airborne sound in the tympanic membrane into the inner
ear, where they are converted into neural impulses. The middle ear develops in
the branchial arches, and this requires sequential interactions between the
epithelia and the underlying mesenchyme. Gene-inactivation experiments have
identified genes required for the formation of different middle ear components.
Some encode for signalling molecules, including Endothelin1 and Fgf8, probable
mediators of epithelial-mesenchymal interactions. Other genes, including Eya1,
Prx1, Hoxa1, Hoxa2, Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx5, and Gsc, are most likely involved in
patterning and morphogenetic processes in the neural crest-derived mesenchyme.
Mechanisms controlling formation of a functional tympanic membrane are also
discussed. Basically, the tympanic ring, which serves as support for the tympanic
membrane, directs invagination of the first pharyngeal cleft ectoderm to form the
external acoustic meatus (EAM), which provides the outer layer of the membrane.
Gsc and Prx1 are essential for tympanic ring development. While invaginating, the
EAM controls skeletogenesis in the underlying mesenchyme to form the manubrium of
the malleus, the link between the membrane and the middle ear ossicles.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11237469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Feb 27;98(5):2199-204.

Delineating developmental and metabolic pathways in vivo by expression profiling 
using the RIKEN set of 18,816 full-length enriched mouse cDNA arrays.

Miki R(1), Kadota K, Bono H, Mizuno Y, Tomaru Y, Carninci P, Itoh M, Shibata K,
Kawai J, Konno H, Watanabe S, Sato K, Tokusumi Y, Kikuchi N, Ishii Y, Hamaguchi
Y, Nishizuka I, Goto H, Nitanda H, Satomi S, Yoshiki A, Kusakabe M, DeRisi JL,
Eisen MB, Iyer VR, Brown PO, Muramatsu M, Shimada H, Okazaki Y, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences
Center (GSC), Yokohama 230-0045, Japan.

We have systematically characterized gene expression patterns in 49 adult and
embryonic mouse tissues by using cDNA microarrays with 18,816 mouse cDNAs.
Cluster analysis defined sets of genes that were expressed ubiquitously or in
similar groups of tissues such as digestive organs and muscle. Clustering of
expression profiles was observed in embryonic brain, postnatal cerebellum, and
adult olfactory bulb, reflecting similarities in neurogenesis and remodeling.
Finally, clustering genes coding for known enzymes into 78 metabolic pathways
revealed a surprising coordination of expression within each pathway among
different tissues. On the other hand, a more detailed examination of glycolysis
revealed tissue-specific differences in profiles of key regulatory enzymes. Thus,
by surveying global gene expression by using microarrays with a large number of
elements, we provide insights into the commonality and diversity of pathways
responsible for the development and maintenance of the mammalian body plan.

PMCID: PMC30115
PMID: 11226216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Protein Sci. 2000 Dec;9(12):2313-21.

Automated search of natively folded protein fragments for high-throughput
structure determination in structural genomics.

Kuroda Y(1), Tani K, Matsuo Y, Yokoyama S.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Research Group, Genomic Sciences Center, The Institute of Physical and
Chemical Research (RIKEN), Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan. kuroda@gsc.riken.go.jp

Structural genomic projects envision almost routine protein structure
determinations, which are currently imaginable only for small proteins with
molecular weights below 25,000 Da. For larger proteins, structural insight can be
obtained by breaking them into small segments of amino acid sequences that can
fold into native structures, even when isolated from the rest of the protein.
Such segments are autonomously folding units (AFU) and have sizes suitable for
fast structural analyses. Here, we propose to expand an intuitive procedure often
employed for identifying biologically important domains to an automatic method
for detecting putative folded protein fragments. The procedure is based on the
recognition that large proteins can be regarded as a combination of independent
domains conserved among diverse organisms. We thus have developed a program that 
reorganizes the output of BLAST searches and detects regions with a large number 
of similar sequences. To automate the detection process, it is reduced to a
simple geometrical problem of recognizing rectangular shaped elevations in a
graph that plots the number of similar sequences at each residue of a query
sequence. We used our program to quantitatively corroborate the premise that
segments with conserved sequences correspond to domains that fold into native
structures. We applied our program to a test data set composed of 99 amino acid
sequences containing 150 segments with structures listed in the Protein Data
Bank, and thus known to fold into native structures. Overall, the fragments
identified by our program have an almost 50% probability of forming a native
structure, and comparable results are observed with sequences containing domain
linkers classified in SCOP. Furthermore, we verified that our program identifies 
AFU in libraries from various organisms, and we found a significant number of AFU
candidates for structural analysis, covering an estimated 5 to 20% of the genomic
databases. Altogether, these results argue that methods based on sequence
similarity can be useful for dissecting large proteins into small autonomously
folding domains, and such methods may provide an efficient support to structural 
genomics projects.

PMCID: PMC2144534
PMID: 11206052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Anat Rec. 2001 Feb 1;262(2):221-6.

Classification scheme for genes expressed during formation and progression of the
avian primitive streak.

Lawson A(1), Colas JF, Schoenwolf GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of Utah School of Medicine,
Salt Lake City, Utah 84132, USA.

We have systematically examined the expression patterns of thirteen genes by in
situ hybridization during the formation and progression of the avian primitive
streak. Based on common patterns of expression, we classify these genes into
three distinct groups. Group 1 genes, subdivided into group 1A (Wnt8c, Slug, Vg1,
and Nodal) and group 1B (Fgf8, Brachyury, and Cripto), were expressed first in
the epiblast and then, throughout most of the length of the primitive streak.
Group 2 genes, namely, cNot1, Sonic hedgehog (Shh), Hnf3 beta and Chordin, were
confined to the rostral end of the primitive streak, and then, to Hensen's node. 
In contrast, Group 3 genes, comprising Goosecoid (GSC) and Crescent, were
expressed in the hypoblast. This classification scheme provides a rational basis 
for categorizing genes expressed during avian gastrulation, and such
systematization is likely to provide insight into the relationships among
different genes and their potential roles in key events of gastrulation.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11169917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Blood. 2001 Jan 15;97(2):426-34.

Human CD34(+) stem cells express the hiwi gene, a human homologue of the
Drosophila gene piwi.

Sharma AK(1), Nelson MC, Brandt JE, Wessman M, Mahmud N, Weller KP, Hoffman R.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology/Oncology Section, Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at
Chicago, 60607, USA.

Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) are characterized by their dual abilities to
undergo differentiation into multiple hematopoietic cell lineages or to undergo
self-renewal. The molecular basis of these properties remains poorly understood. 
Recently the piwi gene was found in the embryonic germline stem cells (GSCs) of
Drosophila melanogaster and has been shown to be important in GSC self-renewal.
This study demonstrated that hiwi, a novel human homologue of piwi, is also
present in human CD34(+) hematopoietic progenitor cells but not in more
differentiated cell populations. Placing CD34(+) cells into culture conditions
that supported differentiation and rapid exit from the stem cell compartment
resulted in a loss of hiwi expression by day 5 of a 14-day culture period.
Expression of the hiwi gene was detected in many developing fetal and adult
tissues. By means of 5' RACE cloning methodology, a novel putative full-length
hiwi complementary DNA was cloned from human CD34(+) marrow cells. At the amino
acid level, the human HIWI protein was 52% homologous to the Drosophila protein. 
The transient expression of hiwi in the human leukemia cell line KG1 resulted in 
a dramatic reduction in cellular proliferation. Overexpression of hiwi led to
programmed cell death of KG1 cells as demonstrated by the Annexin V assay system.
These studies suggest that hiwi maybe an important negative developmental
regulator, which, in part, underlies the unique biologic properties associated
with hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells.

PMID: 11154219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Genome Res. 2000 Nov;10(11):1772-87.

Contigs built with fingerprints, markers, and FPC V4.7.

Soderlund C(1), Humphray S, Dunham A, French L.

Author information: 
(1)Clemson University Genomic Institute, Clemson, South Carolina 29634-5808, USA.
cari@cs.clemson.edu

Contigs have been assembled, and over 2800 clones selected for sequencing for
human chromosomes 9, 10 and 13. Using the FPC (FingerPrinted Contig) software,
the contigs are assembled with markers and complete digest fingerprints, and the 
contigs are ordered and localised by a global framework. Publicly available
resources have been used, such as, the 1998 International Gene Map for the
framework and the GSC Human BAC fingerprint database for the majority of the
fingerprints. Additional markers and fingerprints are generated in-house to
supplement this data. To support the scale up of building maps, FPC V4.7 has been
extended to use markers with the fingerprints for assembly of contigs, new clones
and markers can be automatically added to existing contigs, and poorly assembled 
contigs are marked accordingly. To test the automatic assembly, a simulated
complete digest of 110 Mb of concatenated human sequence was used to create
datasets with varying coverage, length of clones, and types of error. When no
error was introduced and a tolerance of 7 was used in assembly, the largest
contig with no false positive overlaps has 9534 clones with 37 out-of-order
clones, that is, the starting coordinates of adjacent clones are in the wrong
order. This paper describes the new features in FPC, the scenario for building
the maps of chromosomes 9, 10 and 13, and the results from the simulation.

PMCID: PMC310962
PMID: 11076862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Genome Res. 2000 Nov;10(11):1757-71.

RIKEN integrated sequence analysis (RISA) system--384-format sequencing pipeline 
with 384 multicapillary sequencer.

Shibata K(1), Itoh M, Aizawa K, Nagaoka S, Sasaki N, Carninci P, Konno H, Akiyama
J, Nishi K, Kitsunai T, Tashiro H, Itoh M, Sumi N, Ishii Y, Nakamura S, Hazama M,
Nishine T, Harada A, Yamamoto R, Matsumoto H, Sakaguchi S, Ikegami T, Kashiwagi
K, Fujiwake S, Inoue K, Togawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN, Genomic Sciences Center (GSC) and
Genome Science Laboratory, RIKEN, Tsukuba Institute, Core Research of Evolutional
Science and Technology (CREST), Japan Science and Technology Corporation (JST),
Ibaraki, Japan.

The RIKEN high-throughput 384-format sequencing pipeline (RISA system) including 
a 384-multicapillary sequencer (the so-called RISA sequencer) was developed for
the RIKEN mouse encyclopedia project. The RISA system consists of colony picking,
template preparation, sequencing reaction, and the sequencing process. A novel
high-throughput 384-format capillary sequencer system (RISA sequencer system) was
developed for the sequencing process. This system consists of a
384-multicapillary auto sequencer (RISA sequencer), a 384-multicapillary array
assembler (CAS), and a 384-multicapillary casting device. The RISA sequencer can 
simultaneously analyze 384 independent sequencing products. The optical system is
a scanning system chosen after careful comparison with an image detection system 
for the simultaneous detection of the 384-capillary array. This scanning system
can be used with any fluorescent-labeled sequencing reaction (chain termination
reaction), including transcriptional sequencing based on RNA polymerase, which
was originally developed by us, and cycle sequencing based on thermostable DNA
polymerase. For long-read sequencing, 380 out of 384 sequences (99.2%) were
successfully analyzed and the average read length, with more than 99% accuracy,
was 654.4 bp. A single RISA sequencer can analyze 216 kb with >99% accuracy in
2.7 h (90 kb/h). For short-read sequencing to cluster the 3' end and 5' end
sequencing by reading 350 bp, 384 samples can be analyzed in 1.5 h. We have also 
developed a RISA inoculator, RISA filtrator and densitometer, RISA plasmid
preparator which can handle throughput of 40,000 samples in 17.5 h, and a
high-throughput RISA thermal cycler which has four 384-well sites. The
combination of these technologies allowed us to construct the RISA system
consisting of 16 RISA sequencers, which can process 50,000 DNA samples per day.
One haploid genome shotgun sequence of a higher organism, such as human, mouse,
rat, domestic animals, and plants, can be revealed by seven RISA systems within
one month.

PMCID: PMC310992
PMID: 11076861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Genesis. 2000 Oct;28(2):58-67.

Functional interaction of vega2 and goosecoid homeobox genes in zebrafish.

Kawahara A(1), Wilm T, Solnica-Krezel L, Dawid IB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The gastrula organizer forms in the dorsal region of the zebrafish embryo, where 
the bozozok/dharma homeobox gene downregulates expression of the vega1
transcriptional repressor. Here, we describe a novel Vega family homeobox gene,
vega2. Expression of vega2 is initiated at the ventral blastoderm margin during
blastula stages, and by gastrulation becomes complementary to but partially
overlapping with the dorsal expression domain of the homeobox gene goosecoid
(gsc). This dorsal exclusion of vega2 expression is not observed in bozozok
mutants in which organizer formation is impaired. Both vega2 and vega1 can
physically interact with Gsc. Zebrafish embryos injected with vega2 mRNA failed
to express gsc and developed a headless phenotype. Conversely, a putative
dominant negative form of vega2, VP16-vega2, elicited the expansion of gsc
expression and a dorsalized phenotype. We suggest that vega2, in cooperation with
vega1, functions as a negative regulator of organizer genes including gsc, and
participates in the refinement of the gastrula organizer domain.

PMID: 11064422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. J Biol Chem. 2000 Dec 22;275(51):40628-34.

Cell wall assembly by Pneumocystis carinii. Evidence for a unique gsc-1 subunit
mediating beta -1,3-glucan deposition.

Kottom TJ(1), Limper AH.

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Diseases Research Unit, Departments of Medicine and Biochemistry,
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

Pneumocystis carinii remains a persistent cause of severe pneumonia in immune
compromised patients. Recent studies indicate that P. carinii is a fungal species
possessing a glucan-rich cyst wall. Pneumocandin antagonists of beta-1,3-glucan
synthesis rapidly suppress infection in animal models of P. carinii pneumonia.
We, therefore, sought to define the molecular mechanisms of beta-glucan cell wall
assembly by P. carinii. Membrane extracts derived from freshly purified P.
carinii incorporate uridine 5'-diphosphoglucose into insoluble carbohydrate, in a
manner that was completely inhibited by the pneumocandin L733-560, an antagonist 
of Gsc-1-type beta-glucan synthetases. Using degenerative polymerase chain
reaction and library screening, the P. carinii Gsc-1 catalytic subunit of
beta-1,3-glucan synthetase was cloned and characterized. P. carinii gsc1
exhibited homology to phylogenetically related fungal beta-1,3-glucan
synthetases, encoding a predicted 214-kDa integral membrane protein with 12
transmembrane domain structure. Immunoprecipitation of P. carinii extracts, with 
a synthetic peptide anti-Gsc-1 antibody, specifically yielded a protein of 219.4 
kDa, which was also capable of incorporating 5'-diphosphoglucose into insoluble
glucan carbohydrate. As opposed to other fungi, the expression of gsc-1 mRNA is
uniquely regulated over P. carinii's life cycle, having minimal expression in
trophic forms, but substantial expression in the thick-walled cystic form of the 
organism. These results indicate that P. carinii contains a unique catalytic
subunit of beta-1,3-glucan synthetase utilized in cyst wall formation. Because
synthesis of beta-1,3-glucan is absent in mammalian cells, inhibition of the P.
carinii Gsc-1 represents an attractive molecular target for therapeutic
exploitation.

PMID: 11013231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2000 Sep;45(12):1978-85.

[Human genome sequencing].

[Article in Japanese]

Hattori M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Human Genome Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center (GSC), Kanagawa,
Japan. hattori@gsc.riken.go.jp

PMID: 10998965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Biol Chem. 2000 Nov 3;275(44):34365-74.

The homeodomain transcription factor Xvent-2 mediates autocatalytic regulation of
BMP-4 expression in Xenopus embryos.

Schuler-Metz A(1), Knöchel S, Kaufmann E, Knöchel W.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Biochemie, Universität Ulm, Albert-Einstein-Allee 11, D-89081 Ulm,
Germany.

Like other genes of the transforming growth factor-beta family, the BMP-4 gene is
regulated by an autocatalytic loop. In Xenopus embryos this loop can be
ectopically induced by injection of BMP-2 RNA. However, cycloheximide treatment
subsequent to BMP-2 overexpression revealed that BMP signaling is not direct but 
requires additional factor(s). As putative mediator we have identified Xvent-2
which is activated by BMP-2/4 signaling and, in turn, activates BMP-4
transcription. Using promoter/reporter assays we have delineated Xvent-2
responsive elements within the BMP-4 gene. We further demonstrate that Xvent-2
which has recently been characterized as a transcriptional repressor can also
act, context dependent, as an activator binding two copies of a 5'-CTAATT-3'
motif in the second intron of the BMP-4 gene. Replacement of Xvent-2 target sites
within the goosecoid (gsc) promoter by the BMP-4 enhancer converts Xvent-2 caused
repression of gsc to strong activation. This switch is obviously due to adjacent 
nucleotides probably binding a transcriptional co-activator interacting with
Xvent-2. A model is presented describing the mechanism of BMP-4 gene activation
in Xenopus embryos at the early gastrula stage.

PMID: 10938274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Development. 2000 Sep;127(17):3815-28.

sucker encodes a zebrafish Endothelin-1 required for ventral pharyngeal arch
development.

Miller CT(1), Schilling TF, Lee K, Parker J, Kimmel CB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, Eugene, OR 97403-1254, USA.
miller@uoneuro.uoregon.edu

Mutation of sucker (suc) disrupts development of the lower jaw and other ventral 
cartilages in pharyngeal segments of the zebrafish head. Our sequencing,
cosegregation and rescue results indicate that suc encodes an Endothelin-1
(Et-1). Like mouse and chick Et-1, suc/et-1 is expressed in a central core of
arch paraxial mesoderm and in arch epithelia, both surface ectoderm and
pharyngeal endoderm, but not in skeletogenic neural crest. Long before
chondrogenesis, suc/et-1 mutant embryos have severe defects in ventral arch
neural crest expression of dHAND, dlx2, msxE, gsc, dlx3 and EphA3 in the anterior
arches. Dorsal expression patterns are unaffected. Later in development, suc/et-1
mutant embryos display defects in mesodermal and endodermal tissues of the
pharynx. Ventral premyogenic condensations fail to express myoD, which correlates
with a ventral muscle defect. Further, expression of shh in endoderm of the first
pharyngeal pouch fails to extend as far laterally as in wild types. We use mosaic
analyses to show that suc/et-1 functions nonautonomously in neural crest cells,
and is thus required in the environment of postmigratory neural crest cells to
specify ventral arch fates. Our mosaic analyses further show that suc/et-1
nonautonomously functions in mesendoderm for ventral arch muscle formation.
Collectively our results support a model for dorsoventral patterning of the
gnathostome pharyngeal arches in which Et-1 in the environment of the
postmigratory cranial neural crest specifies the lower jaw and other ventral arch
fates.

PMID: 10934026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Dev Biol. 2000 Aug 15;224(2):470-85.

Xlim-1 and LIM domain binding protein 1 cooperate with various transcription
factors in the regulation of the goosecoid promoter.

Mochizuki T(1), Karavanov AA, Curtiss PE, Ault KT, Sugimoto N, Watabe T, Shiokawa
K, Jamrich M, Cho KW, Dawid IB, Taira M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Embryology, Department of Biological Sciences,
Graduate School of Science, University of Tokyo, Japan.

The homeobox genes Xlim-1 and goosecoid (gsc) are coexpressed in the Spemann
organizer and later in the prechordal plate that acts as head organizer. Based on
our previous finding that gsc is a possible target gene for Xlim-1, we studied
the regulation of gsc transcription by Xlim-1 and other regulatory genes
expressed at gastrula stages, by using gsc-luciferase reporter constructs
injected into animal explants. A 492-bp upstream region of the gsc promoter
responds to Xlim-1/3m, an activated form of Xlim-1, and to a combination of
wild-type Xlim-1 and Ldb1, a LIM domain binding protein, supporting the view that
gsc is a direct target of Xlim-1. Footprint and electrophoretic mobility shift
assays with GST-homeodomain fusion proteins and embryo extracts overexpressing
FLAG-tagged full-length proteins showed that the Xlim-1 homeodomain or
Xlim-1/Ldb1 complex recognize several TAATXY core elements in the 492-bp upstream
region, where XY is TA, TG, CA, or GG. Some of these elements are also bound by
the ventral factor PV.1, whereas a TAATCT element did not bind Xlim-1 or PV.1 but
did bind the anterior factors Otx2 and Gsc. These proteins modulate the activity 
of the gsc reporter in animal caps: Otx2 activates the reporter synergistically
with Xlim-1 plus Ldb1, whereas Gsc and PV.1 strongly repress reporter activity.
We show further, using animal cap assays, that the endogenous gsc gene was
synergistically activated by Xlim-1, Ldb1, and Otx2 and that the endogenous otx2 
gene was activated by Xlim-1/3m, and this activation was suppressed by the
posterior factor Xbra. Based on these data, we propose a model for gene
interactions in the specification of dorsoventral and anteroposterior differences
in the mesoderm during gastrulation.

PMID: 10926781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Dev Biol. 2000 Aug 15;224(2):428-39.

Development and control of tissue separation at gastrulation in Xenopus.

Wacker S(1), Grimm K, Joos T, Winklbauer R.

Author information: 
(1)Universität zu Köln, Zoologisches Institut, Köln, Germany.

During Xenopus gastrulation, the internalizing mesendodermal cell mass is brought
into contact with the multilayered blastocoel roof. The two tissues do not fuse, 
but remain separated by the cleft of Brachet. This maintenance of a stable
interface is a precondition for the movement of the two tissues past each other. 
We show that separation behavior, i.e., the property of internalized cells to
remain on the surface of the blastocoel roof substratum, spreads before and
during gastrulation from the vegetal endoderm into the anterior and eventually
the posterior mesoderm, roughly in parallel to internalization movement.
Correspondingly, the blastocoel roof develops differential repulsion behavior,
i.e., the ability to specifically repell cells showing separation behavior. From 
the effects of overexpressing wild-type or dominant negative XB/U or EP/C
cadherins we conclude that separation behavior may require modulation of cadherin
function. Further, we show that the paired-class homeodomain transcription
factors Mix.1 and gsc are involved in the control of separation behavior in the
anterior mesoderm. We present evidence that in this function, Mix.1 and gsc may
cooperate to repress transcription.

PMID: 10926778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Development. 2000 Aug;127(16):3407-17.

Axis-inducing activities and cell fates of the zebrafish organizer.

Saúde L(1), Woolley K, Martin P, Driever W, Stemple DL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, National Institute for Medical Research,
Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

We have investigated axis-inducing activities and cellular fates of the zebrafish
organizer using a new method of transplantation that allows the transfer of both 
deep and superficial organizer tissues. Previous studies have demonstrated that
the zebrafish embryonic shield possesses classically defined dorsal organizer
activity. When we remove the morphologically defined embryonic shield, embryos
recover and are completely normal by 24 hours post-fertilization. We find that
removal of the morphological shield does not remove all goosecoid- and floating
head-expressing cells, suggesting that the morphological shield does not comprise
the entire organizer region. Complete removal of the embryonic shield and
adjacent marginal tissue, however, leads to a loss of both prechordal plate and
notochord. In addition, these embryos are cyclopean, show a significant loss of
floor plate and primary motorneurons and display disrupted somite patterning.
Motivated by apparent discrepancies in the literature we sought to test the
axis-inducing activity of the embryonic shield. A previous study suggested that
the shield is capable of only partial axis induction, specifically being unable
to induce the most anterior neural tissues. Contrary to this study, we find
shields can induce complete secondary axes when transplanted into host ventral
germ-ring. In induced secondary axes donor tissue contributes to notochord,
prechordal plate and floor plate. When explanted shields are divided into deep
and superficial fragments and separately transplanted we find that deep tissue is
able to induce the formation of ectopic axes with heads but lacking posterior
tissues. We conclude that the deep tissue included in our transplants is
important for proper head formation.

PMID: 10903167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Genes Dev. 2000 Jul 15;14(14):1741-9.

Inhibition of Wnt signaling by ICAT, a novel beta-catenin-interacting protein.

Tago K(1), Nakamura T, Nishita M, Hyodo J, Nagai S, Murata Y, Adachi S, Ohwada S,
Morishita Y, Shibuya H, Akiyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Genetic Information, Institute for Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113, Japan.

Wnt signaling has an important role in both embryonic development and
tumorigenesis. beta-Catenin, a key component of the Wnt signaling pathway,
interacts with the TCF/LEF family of transcription factors and activates
transcription of Wnt target genes. Here, we identify a novel
beta-catenin-interacting protein, ICAT, that was found to inhibit the interaction
of beta-catenin with TCF-4 and represses beta-catenin-TCF-4-mediated
transactivation. Furthermore, ICAT inhibited Xenopus axis formation by
interfering with Wnt signaling. These results suggest that ICAT negatively
regulates Wnt signaling via inhibition of the interaction between beta-catenin
and TCF and is integral in development and cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC316784
PMID: 10898789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Cell Sci. 2000 Aug;113 ( Pt 15):2705-13.

Goosecoid suppresses cell growth and enhances neuronal differentiation of PC12
cells.

Sawada K(1), Konishi Y, Tominaga M, Watanabe Y, Hirano J, Inoue S, Kageyama R,
Blum M, Tominaga A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Kochi Medical School, Kohasu, Okoh-cho, Nankoku
City, Kochi 783-8505, Japan.

In all vertebrate species, the homeobox gene goosecoid serves as a marker of the 
Spemann organizer tissue. One function of the organizer is the induction of
neural tissue. To investigate the role of goosecoid in neuronal differentiation
of mammalian cells, we have introduced goosecoid into PC12 cells. Expression of
goosecoid resulted in reduced cell proliferation and enhanced neurite outgrowth
in response to NGF. Expression of goosecoid led to a decrease in the percentage
of S-phase cells and to upregulation of the expression of the neuron-specific
markers MAP-1b and neurofilament-L. Analysis of goosecoid mutants revealed that
these effects were independent of either DNA binding or homodimerization of
Goosecoid. Coexpression of the N-terminal portion of the ets transcription factor
PU.1, a protein that can bind to Goosecoid, repressed neurite outgrowth and
rescued the proliferation of PC12 cultures. In contrast, expression of the bHLH
transcription factor HES-1 repressed goosecoid-mediated neurite outgrowth without
changing the proportion of S-phase cells. These results suggest that goosecoid is
involved in neuronal differentiation in two ways, by slowing the cell cycle and
stimulating neurite outgrowth, and that these two events are separately
regulated.

PMID: 10893186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Ross Fiziol Zh Im I M Sechenova. 2000 Apr;86(4):369-78.

[Coordination of the activity of monoaminergic pedal neurons in fresh water
snails].

[Article in Russian]

Tsyganov VV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Developmental Biology of the Russian Acad. Sci., Moscow, Russia.

In fresh water pulmonate snails, contact with the water surface as well as a
tactile stimulation of the mantle wall induces a co-ordinated activity in
symmetrical pedal neurones RPeD1 and LPeD1. The GDC and GSC being not primary
sensory neurones, their activity is co-ordinated by polysynaptic mechanisms. In
both species, a depolarising current applied to the GDC and GSC caused a
discharge in one of the columellar nerves. The data obtained suggest that the
co-ordination of activity in the GDC and GSC may have a functional significance
for controlling the left and right halves of the columellar muscle in
respiration.

PMID: 10870212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Int J Dev Biol. 2000 Apr;44(3):279-88.

goosecoid expression represses Brachyury in embryonic stem cells and affects
craniofacial development in chimeric mice.

Boucher DM(1), Schäffer M, Deissler K, Moore CA, Gold JD, Burdsal CA, Meneses JJ,
Pedersen RA, Blum M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, University of 
California, San Francisco, USA.

The homeobox gene goosecoid, originally identified in Xenopus, is expressed in
the organizer or its equivalent during gastrulation in the frog, chick, zebrafish
and mouse. To investigate the role of goosecoid in mouse development, we have
generated embryonic stem cells that stably overexpress the murine homolog of
goosecoid. These cells show a repression of the gastrulation-associated gene
Brachyury. Interestingly, repression of Brachyury is conserved between Xenopus
and mouse despite the lack of conservation of the Brachyury promoter. Further
characterization of the goosecoid-overexpressing ES cells revealed that they
maintain the expression of stage-specific embryonic antigen-1, and teratomas
derived from goosecoid-overexpressing cells show the presence of cell types
derived from all three germ layers. Some highly chimeric mice derived from
goosecoid-overexpressing cells displayed skull defects. These observations
suggest that goosecoid may play a role in specification of anterior mesendodermal
fates and specifically in mouse craniofacial development.

PMID: 10853824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Development. 2000 Jul;127(13):2795-809.

Development of chick axial mesoderm: specification of prechordal mesoderm by
anterior endoderm-derived TGFbeta family signalling.

Vesque C(1), Ellis S, Lee A, Szabo M, Thomas P, Beddington R, Placzek M.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Programme, Krebs Institute, Firth Court, Sheffield S10 
2TN, UK. m.placzek@sheffield.ac.uk

Two populations of axial mesoderm cells can be recognised in the chick embryo,
posterior notochord and anterior prechordal mesoderm. We have examined the
cellular and molecular events that govern the specification of prechordal
mesoderm. We report that notochord and prechordal mesoderm cells are intermingled
and share expression of many markers as they initially extend out of Hensen's
node. In vitro culture studies, together with in vivo grafting experiments,
reveal that early extending axial mesoderm cells are labile and that their
character may be defined subsequently through signals that derive from anterior
endodermal tissues. Anterior endoderm elicits aspects of prechordal mesoderm
identity in extending axial mesoderm by repressing notochord characteristics,
briefly maintaining gsc expression and inducing BMP7 expression. Together these
experiments suggest that, in vivo, signalling by anterior endoderm may determine 
the extent of prechordal mesoderm. The transforming growth factor (beta)
(TGFbeta) superfamily members BMP2, BMP4, BMP7 and activin, all of which are
transiently expressed in anterior endoderm mimic distinct aspects of its
patterning actions. Together our results suggest that anterior endoderm-derived
TGFbetas may specify prechordal mesoderm character in chick axial mesoderm.

PMID: 10851126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Dev Dyn. 2000 May;218(1):102-11.

Rnf4, a RING protein expressed in the developing nervous and reproductive
systems, interacts with Gscl, a gene within the DiGeorge critical region.

Galili N(1), Nayak S, Epstein JA, Buck CA.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

A yeast 2-hybrid screen was performed to identify possible transcriptional
modulators interactive with goosecoid-like (gscl), a transcription factor with
suppressive activity, expressed during early brain and gonad development. The
screen resulted in the identification of a RING protein known as rnf4 or snrf.
Gscl/rnf4 interactions were confirmed by affinity chromatography and by
immunoprecipitation. Northern analysis confirmed earlier reports of ubiquitous
rnf4 expression in adult tissues. Immunohistochemical analysis of mouse embryos
revealed expression primarily in the developing nervous system, with strong
expression in the dorsal root ganglia and developing gonads. In contrast to
previous reports, both cytoplasmic and nuclear expression of rnf4 was documented.
The results reported here confirm and extend earlier reports of rnf4 expression. 
They suggest for the first time, that in addition to acting as a modulator of
transcriptional activity, rnf4 may function, as do other RING proteins, to
promote the formation of intracytoplasmic complexes involved in shuttling
information between the cytoplasm and the nucleus.

PMID: 10822263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Rev Neurol. 2000 Mar 1-15;30(5):433-5.

[Giant subarachnoid cysts due to neurocysticercosis: two cases reported fro a
rural area in Extremadura].

[Article in Spanish]

Castellanos F(1), Montes I, Porras LF, Peragallo E, Ampuero J, Rueda R.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Neurología, Hospital Virgen del Puerto, Plasencia, Cáceres.
med002001@nacom.es

INTRODUCTION: Neurocysticercosis is the commonest cerebral parasitosis. The most 
recent cases reported in Spain have occurred in patients from endemic countries. 
The formation of giant subarachnoid cysts (GSC) is an uncommon complication of
neurocysticercosis and its treatment is the subject of debate. We report two
cases seen recently in the Valle del Jerte, a rural district in Extremadura.
CLINICAL CASES: Case 1. A 64 year old man had had complex partial crises (CPC)
since 1985. In 1987 he was diagnosed as having neurocysticercosis with
parenchymatous cysts and treated with praziquantel. In 1996, on CAT and MR a left
frontal GSC was diagnosed and also two parenchymatous active cysts. The cyst was 
removed surgically and he was subsequently treated with albendazol. Case 2. A 72 
year old man had generalized crises and CPC since 1970. In 1987 and 1991 on CAT
and MR several parenchymatous lesions compatible with neurocysticercosis were
seen. In 1997 he presented with headache and subacute cognitive impairment. On
CAT and MR a left temporal GSC was seen with several active parenchymatous
lesions. The patient was treated with albendazol and dexamethasone. Both patients
improved, although radiological resolution of the GSC in case 2 took a year.
CONCLUSIONS: Neurocysticercosis is a condition still present in Spain. GSC
respond to treatment with albendazol, whilst surgical treatment is the best
option when severe intracranial hypertension occurs.

PMID: 10775969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Cell Sci. 2000 May;113 ( Pt 10):1705-15.

Intracellular targeting and retention of the glucose transporter GLUT4 by the
perinuclear storage compartment involves distinct carboxyl-tail motifs.

Martinez-Arca S(1), Lalioti VS, Sandoval IV.

Author information: 
(1)Group of Morphogenesis and Cell Signalling, CNRS UMR 144, Institut Curie,
Paris, France.

The mechanisms by which the insulin-sensitive glucose transporter, GLUT4, is
targeted and retained in a storage compartment near to the Golgi complex are
poorly understood. Here we report that removal of the carboxyl-terminal acidic
Pro(505)AspGluAsnAsp(509) sequence prevents the storage of GLUT4 in the VAMP-2
positive compartment adjacent to the Golgi complex (GSC), and results in its
targeting to GLUT4-positive vesicles and Rab7-positive late endosomes. Storage of
the truncated GLUT4 in the GSC is restored by substitution of Phe for the
Tyr(502) residue adjacent to Pro(505) or by treatment of cells with the tyrosine 
kinase inhibitor genistein. Ablation of the Leu(489)Leu(490)-based motif prevents
the targeting of GLUT4delta5 to GLUT4-positive-vesicles and late endosomes as
well as the retention of GLUT4delta5Phe(502 )by the GSC. These results are
consisting with a model of GLUT4 transport in which the targeting of the protein 
from the TGN to the GSC is mediated by the Leu(489)Leu(490)-based motif and its
release from the GSC involves Tyr(502 )and the adjacent carboxyl-terminal
Pro(505)AspGluAsnAsp(509) sequence.

PMID: 10769202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. FEBS Lett. 2000 Apr 14;471(2-3):261.

Corrigendum to: prediction of human cDNA from its homologous mouse full-length
cDNA and human shotgun database.

Fukunishi Y(1), Suzuki H, Yoshino M, Konno H, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genome Exploration Research Group, Genomic Sciences Center
(GSC) and Genome Science Laboratory, Tsukuba Life Science Center, The Institute
of Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN), 3-1-1 Koyadai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki,
Japan.

PMID: 10767435  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


152. Development. 2000 May;127(9):1799-813.

The morphogenetic role of midline mesendoderm and ectoderm in the development of 
the forebrain and the midbrain of the mouse embryo.

Camus A(1), Davidson BP, Billiards S, Khoo P, Rivera-Pérez JA, Wakamiya M,
Behringer RR, Tam PP.

Author information: 
(1)Embryology Unit, Children's Medical Research Institute, Locked Bag 23,
Wentworthville, NSW 2145, Australia. ptam@cmri.usyd.edu.au

The anterior midline tissue (AML) of the late gastrula mouse embryo comprises the
axial mesendoderm and the ventral neuroectoderm of the prospective forebrain,
midbrain and rostral hindbrain. In this study, we have investigated the
morphogenetic role of defined segments of the AML by testing their inductive and 
patterning activity and by assessing the impact of their ablation on the
patterning of the neural tube at the early-somite-stage. Both rostral and caudal 
segments of the AML were found to induce neural gene activity in the host tissue;
however, the de novo gene activity did not show any regional characteristic that 
might be correlated with the segmental origin of the AML. Removal of the rostral 
AML that contains the prechordal plate resulted in a truncation of the head
accompanied by the loss of several forebrain markers. However, the remaining
tissues reconstituted Gsc and Shh activity and expressed the ventral forebrain
marker Nkx2.1. Furthermore, analysis of Gsc-deficient embryos reveals that the
morphogenetic function of the rostral AML requires Gsc activity. Removal of the
caudal AML led to a complete loss of midline molecular markers anterior to the
4th somite. In addition, Nkx2.1 expression was not detected in the ventral neural
tube. The maintenance and function of the rostral AML therefore require inductive
signals emanating from the caudal AML. Our results point to a role for AML in the
refinement of the anteroposterior patterning and morphogenesis of the brain.

PMID: 10751169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Mech Dev. 2000 Mar 1;91(1-2):293-303.

Cooperative roles of Bozozok/Dharma and Nodal-related proteins in the formation
of the dorsal organizer in zebrafish.

Shimizu T(1), Yamanaka Y, Ryu SL, Hashimoto H, Yabe T, Hirata T, Bae YK, Hibi M, 
Hirano T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Oncology (C7), Biomedical Research Center, Osaka
University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-2 Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

In vertebrates, specification of the dorso-ventral axis requires Wnt signaling,
which leads to formation of the Nieuwkoop center and the Spemann organizer
(dorsal organizer), through the nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin. Zebrafish
bozozok/dharma (boz) and squint (sqt), which encode a homeodomain protein and a
Nodal-related protein, respectively, are required for the formation of the dorsal
organizer. The zygotic expression of boz and sqt in the dorsal blastoderm and
dorsal yolk syncytial layer (YSL) was dependent on the maternally derived Wnt
signal, and their expression at the late blastula and early gastrula stages was
dependent on the zygotic expression of their own genes. The dorsal organizer
genes, goosecoid (gsc) and chordin (din), were ectopically expressed in wild-type
embryos injected with boz or sqt RNA. The expression of gsc strictly depended on 
both boz and sqt while the expression of din strongly depended on boz but only
partially depended on sqt and cyclops (cyc, another nodal-related gene).
Overexpression of boz in embryos defective in Nodal signaling elicited the
ectopic expression of din but not gsc and resulted in dorsalization, implying
that boz could induce part of the organizer, independent of the Nodal proteins.
Furthermore, boz; sqt and boz;cyc double mutants displayed a severely ventralized
phenotype with anterior truncation, compared with the single mutants, and
boz;sqt;cyc triple mutant embryos exhibited an even more severe phenotype,
lacking the anterior neuroectoderm and notochord, suggesting that Boz/Dharma and 
the Nodal-related proteins cooperatively regulate the formation of the dorsal
organizer.

PMID: 10704853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Ann Surg. 2000 Feb;231(2):188-94.

Prognostic factors in gastric stump carcinoma.

Thorban S(1), Böttcher K, Etter M, Roder JD, Busch R, Siewert JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: To compare prognostic results in patients with gastric stump cancer
(GSC) versus those with primary gastric cancer (PGC).
SUMMARY BACKGROUND DATA: Gastric stump carcinomas have often been described as
having low resectability rates and a poor prognosis.
METHODS: Results of surgical treatment of 50 patients with GSC were compared with
that of 516 patients with PGC.
RESULTS: The resectability rate was 94% for GSC patients and 96.5% for PGC
patients, without significant differences in terms of postoperative
complications, death rate, and median survival time (31.6 vs. 32.9 months). The
multivariate analysis showed an independent prognostic effect for R0 resection,
pT1 and pT2 category, and age older than 65 years.
CONCLUSION: The prognosis after resection and adequate lymphadenectomy does not
differ between patients with GSC and PGC.

PMCID: PMC1420985
PMID: 10674609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Hum Mol Genet. 2000 Feb 12;9(3):453-60.

The cell cycle control gene ZAC/PLAGL1 is imprinted--a strong candidate gene for 
transient neonatal diabetes.

Kamiya M(1), Judson H, Okazaki Y, Kusakabe M, Muramatsu M, Takada S, Takagi N,
Arima T, Wake N, Kamimura K, Satomura K, Hermann R, Bonthron DT, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)CREST, Japan Science and Technology Corporation (JST), Genome Exploration
Research Group, Genomic Sciences Center (GSC), Genome Science Laboratory and
Biogenetic Research Center, Riken Tsukuba Life Science Center, Ibaraki, Japan.

We describe a screen for new imprinted human genes, and the identification in
this way of ZAC (zinc finger protein which regulates apoptosis and cell cycle
arrest)/ PLAGL1 (pleomorphicadenoma of the salivary gland gene like 1) as a
strong candidate gene for transient neonatal diabetes mellitus (TNDM). To screen 
for imprinted genes, we compared parthenogenetic DNA from the chimeric patient FD
and androgenetic DNA from hydatidiform mole, using restriction landmark genome
scanning for methylation. This resulted in identification of two novel imprinted 
loci, one of which (NV149) we mapped to the TNDM region of 6q24. From analysis of
the corresponding genomic region, it was determined that NV149 lies approximately
60 kb upstream of the ZAC / PLAGL1 gene. RT-PCR analysis was used to confirm that
this ZAC / PLAGL1 is expressed only from the paternal allele in a variety of
tissues. TNDM is known to result from upregulation of a paternally expressed gene
on chromosome 6q24. The paternal expression, map position and known biological
properties of ZAC / PLAGL1 make it highly likely that it is the TNDM gene. In
particular, ZAC / PLAGL1 is a transcriptional regulator of the type 1 receptor
for pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide, which is the most potent 
known insulin secretagog and an important mediator of autocrine control of
insulin secretion in the pancreatic islet.

PMID: 10655556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Head Trauma Rehabil. 1999 Oct;14(5):435-47.

Factors affecting oral feeding with severe traumatic brain injury.

Mackay LE(1), Morgan AS, Bernstein BA.

Author information: 
(1)Rehabilitation Medicine, Medical/Surgical Program, Saint Francis Hospital and 
Medical Center, Hartford, Connecticut 06105, USA.

Safe and adequate nutrition, vital to the recovery from a traumatic brain injury,
can be severely compromised by the presence of dysphagia. This study identified
injury severity and swallowing factors that were associated with impaired oral
intake in patients with severe brain injury. An admitting Glasgow Coma Scale
(GSC) 3-5; a Rancho Los Amigos Scale of Cognitive Functioning (RLA) Level II; a
computed tomography (CT) scan exhibiting midline shift, brainstem involvement, or
brain pathology requiring emergent operative procedures; or ventilation time
>/=15 days identified patients at highest risk for abnormal swallowing,
aspiration, and delay in initiation of oral feeding and achievement of total oral
feeding. When combined in multivariate models, RLA Level, CT scan, ventilation
time and aspiration emerged as significant independent predictors of impaired
oral intake.

PMID: 10653939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Mol Ecol. 1999 Dec;8(12):1991-2001.

Genetic structure of brown trout, salmo trutta l., at the southern limit of the
distribution range of the anadromous form

Bouza C, Arias J, Castro J, Sanchez L, Martinez P.

Genetic variation at 33 protein loci was investigated in 41 wild brown trout
populations from four river basins in Galicia (northwest Spain) to analyse the
amount and distribution of genetic diversity in a marginal area, located in the
distribution limit of the anadromous form of this species. The genetic diversity 
detected within populations (H between 0 and 6%) lies within the range quoted for
this species in previous reports. The Mino, the most southern river basin
analysed, showed a significantly lower genetic diversity and the highest genetic 
differentiation among the river basins studied. The hierarchical gene diversity
analysis showed high population differentiation in a restricted area (GST = 27%),
mostly due to differences among populations within basins (GSC = 22%). The
reduction of GST observed when the isolated samples were excluded from the
analysis (GST = 17%) showed the importance of habitat fragmentation on the
heterogeneity detected. Gene flow among populations was comparatively evaluated
by three indirect methods, which in general revealed low figures of absolute
number of migrants per generation, slightly higher than 1. The gene flow among
basins reflected a positive relationship with geographical distance. This trend
was confirmed by the significant correlation observed between geographical and
genetic distances, including all population pairs, which suggests a component of 
isolation by distance in brown trout genetic structure. Nevertheless, the
nonsignificant intrabasin correlation demonstrates the complexity of genetic
relationships among populations in this species. The model of genetic structure
in brown trout is discussed in the light of the results obtained.

PMID: 10632851  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


158. Mol Reprod Dev. 2000 Jan;55(1):1-7.

Expression of the organizer specific homeobox gene goosecoid (gsc) in porcine
embryos.

Meijer HA(1), Van De Pavert SA, Stroband HW, Boerjan ML.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Animal Science and Health, Department of Reproduction, Lelystad,
The Netherlands.

The homeobox gene goosecoid is one of the first genes expressed in the organizer 
region of vertebrates and specifies future dorsal regions along the
anterior/posterior axis of the embryo. Goosecoid (gsc) expression marks the
posterior end of the anterior/posterior axis and might be a good marker to
visualise early events in embryonic axis formation and differentiation processes 
in the epiblast at the onset of gastrulation. The aim of the present study was to
evaluate gsc expression in porcine embryos. For this the homeobox containing
region of the porcine gsc was isolated using RT-PCR. The sequence of the PCR
product appeared to be highly homologous to the sequence in the mouse, human, and
chicken. We concluded that the isolated region represents part of the porcine gsc
messenger. Relative levels of gsc expression were estimated in porcine embryos
from day 9 to day 12 of pregnancy. Gsc was expressed in embryos of all ages and
localisation on one side of the embryoblast was demonstrated with in situ
hybridisation on whole- mount embryos at day 10 of pregnancy. In embryos
collected at day 13 of pregnancy gsc expression was localised anterior to the
primitive streak. The correlation between embryo size and level of gsc expression
was low. Levels and pattern of expression varied within and between litters
collected at similar days of pregnancy. It is concluded that gsc expression can
be used as an early marker of differentiation and to describe embryo diversity in
the pig.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10602267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Oncogene. 1999 Nov 18;18(48):6795-805.

GOOSECOID inhibits erythrocyte differentiation by competing with Rb for PU.1
binding in murine cells.

Konishi Y(1), Tominaga M, Watanabe Y, Imamura F, Goldfarb A, Maki R, Blum M, De
Robertis EM, Tominaga A.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Center, Kochi Medical School, Japan.

Misexpression of the dorsal mesodermal patterning factor goosecoid on the ventral
side of amphibian embryos results in inhibition of blood formation in early
embryogenesis. To investigate the mechanism of this inhibition, we ectopically
expressed goosecoid in erythroleukemia cells. While erythroid differentiation of 
these cells can be induced by activin, goosecoid expressing cells were
unresponsive to activin. We demonstrate an in vitro interaction between the
oncogene PU.1, an ets family transcription factor thought to play a role in
erythropoiesis, and the goosecoid protein (GSC). Interaction with PU.1 was
specific as GSC did not bind to the ets family members, Fli-1 or Ets-2. The
ability of goosecoid expressing erythroleukemia cells to differentiate in
response to activin was rescued by coexpression of the GSC-binding N-terminal
portion of PU.1. The N-terminal portion of PU.1 was co-immunoprecipitated with
anti-GSC antibodies as well. The N-terminal domain of PU.1 is the region
recognized by the retinoblastoma protein (Rb), a tumor suppressor gene presumably
involved in erythroid differentiation. We show that GSC competitively inhibits
binding of Rb to PU.1. Our data suggest that the suppression of blood formation
by GSC could, at least in part, be mediated by binding to PU.1.

PMID: 10597288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Mech Dev. 2000 Jan;90(1):77-87.

The Xvex-1 antimorph reveals the temporal competence for organizer formation and 
an early role for ventral homeobox genes.

Shapira E(1), Marom1 K, Levy V, Yelin R, Fainsod A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry and Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine,
Hebrew University, P.O. Box 12272, Jerusalem, Israel.

The organizer in vertebrate embryos has been shown to play a central role in
their development by antagonizing ventralizing signals and promoting dorsal
development. The ventral homeobox gene, Xvex-1, is capable of fulfilling some of 
the functions of BMP-4. By fusion to activation and repression domains, Xvex-1
was shown to function as a repressor of transcription. The activator version of
Xvex-1, the antimorph, was made inducible by fusion to the ligand binding domain 
of the glucocorticoid receptor. The organizer genes, gsc and Otx-2, were
identified as direct targets of Xvex-1. The XVEX-1 antimorph can induce the
formation of secondary axes. Temporal analysis of secondary axis induction
revealed that the competence to induce a secondary organizer ends with the onset 
of gastrulation. The same temporal competence window was exhibited by an
inducible gsc construct. Partial loss of Xvex-1 activity was able to improve the 
efficiency of secondary axis induction by the dominant negative BMP receptor or
Smad6. These observations together with the early widespread expression of Xvex-1
throughout the embryo prior to gastrulation encoding a homeodomain repressor
protein, suggest that elements of the ventral signaling pathway play an important
role during late blastula in restricting the formation of Spemann's organizer.

PMID: 10585564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Dev Biol. 1999 Dec 1;216(1):276-81.

Goosecoid regulates the neural inducing strength of the mouse node.

Zhu L(1), Belo JA, De Robertis EM, Stern CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University, 701 West 168th
Street, New York, New York, 10032, USA.

The homeobox gene goosecoid was the first specific genetic marker of Spemann's
organizer in vertebrate embryos to be discovered. In the frog, misexpression of
this gene by RNA injection produces duplication of the posterior axis. For these 
reasons, the recent finding that mice lacking goosecoid function have no early
axial defects was rather surprising. Here we assay the neural inducing strength
of wild-type and goosecoid-mutant mouse nodes by transplantation into primitive
streak stage chick embryos. Wild-type mouse nodes strongly induce the
neural-specific transcription factors Sox2 and Sox3 in the chick host. Homozygous
goosecoid(-/- )nodes are severely impaired in their ability to induce both genes.
Heterozygous goosecoid(+/-) nodes induce Sox3 as well as wild-type nodes, but
resemble -/- nodes in their limited ability to induce Sox2. We propose that
goosecoid does play a role in regulating the neural inducing strength of the node
and that regulative mechanisms exist which mask the early phenotypic consequences
of goosecoid mutations in the intact mouse embryo.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10588878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Biol Chem. 1999 Nov 5;274(45):32325-32.

Site-specific heterodimerization by paired class homeodomain proteins mediates
selective transcriptional responses.

Tucker SC(1), Wisdom R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee 37232,
USA.

Alx4 is a paired class homeodomain protein involved in defining
anterior/posterior polarity in the developing limb bud. The paired class of
homeodomain proteins cooperatively bind palindromic DNA elements as homodimers or
as heterodimers with other paired homeodomain proteins. Previous characterization
demonstrates that the strength of the cooperativity as well as the preference for
targets is dictated largely by the identity of amino acid 50 of the homeodomain. 
Here we compare and contrast the DNA binding properties of a glutamine 50 paired 
homeodomain protein, Alx4, and a lysine 50 paired homeodomain protein, Goosecoid.
We demonstrate that Alx4 homodimers, Gsc homodimers, and Alx4/Gsc heterodimers
each have distinct DNA binding properties, and each can discriminate between
highly related palindromic elements. Using reporter gene assays, we show that
Alx4 activates transcription in a site-specific manner, and that Gsc is capable
of antagonizing Alx4-mediated activation only from promoter elements that support
heterodimer formation. These data demonstrate that paired homeodomain proteins
with different DNA binding properties are able to form heterodimeric complexes
with unique DNA binding and transcriptional activities. Thus, heterodimerization 
regulates the DNA binding specificity of these transcription factors and may
partially explain how paired homeodomain proteins direct specific developmental
functions.

PMID: 10542273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Mech Dev. 1999 Oct;88(1):107-10.

Munster, a novel paired-class homeobox gene specifically expressed in the
Drosophila larval eye.

Goriely A(1), Mollereau B, Coffinier C, Desplan C.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Rockefeller University, New York, USA.

Munster (Mu) is a homeobox-containing gene of the Paired-class which is
specifically expressed in the developing Bolwig organs, the Drosophila larval
eyes. This expression is first detected during early germ band retraction stage
(stage 12 from 7 h 20 at 25 degrees C) and persists until the end of
embryogenesis. Mu homeodomain is most similar to that of Aristaless and
D-Goosecoid. Strikingly, the Munster gene maps within 6 kb of D-goosecoid, in the
same genomic region as aristaless, suggesting that these genes are part of a
homeobox gene cluster.

PMID: 10525194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Eukaryot Microbiol. 1999 Sep-Oct;46(5):131S.

Assembly of cell wall glucans by Pneumocystis carinii: characterization of the
Gsc-1 subunit mediating beta-glucan synthesis.

Kottom TJ(1), Limper AH.

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Diseases Research Unit, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

PMID: 10519285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand). 1999 Jul;45(5):617-29.

Retinoic acid teratogenicity: the role of goosecoid and BMP-4.

Zhu CC(1), Yamada G, Blum M.

Author information: 
(1)St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105-2907, USA.

Retinoic acid (RA) plays a pivotal role during vertebrate development, both as
morphogen and as potent teratogen. While RA function in axial development has
been extensively studied, little is known about the genetic control of RA
teratogenicity. The knockout of the homeobox gene goosecoid in the mouse revealed
similarities to RA induced embryopathy. We show that RA treatment of mouse
gastrula embryos in vitro and of E10.5 embryos in utero led to a rapid but
transient down-regulation of goosecoid expression. Repression was dependent on
retinoid X receptors (RXR). BMP-4 was repressed by RA-treatment as well, both in 
embryos and in F9 teratocarcinoma cells. Our data suggest that both goosecoid and
BMP-4 function as mediators of RA teratogenicity in mouse embryos.

PMID: 10512193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand). 1999 Jul;45(5):589-99.

Middle ear defects associated with the double knock out mutation of murine
goosecoid and Msx1 genes.

Kuratani S(1), Satokata I, Blum M, Komatsu Y, Haraguchi R, Nakamura S, Suzuki K, 
Kosai K, Maas R, Yamada G.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Biology, Fac. of Sciences, Okayama University, Japan.

A number of developmental regulatory genes, including homeobox genes, are
dynamically expressed in the mammalian cephalic ectomesenchyme during
craniofacial morphogenesis. Owing to the vast amount of gene knock out
experiments, functions of such genes are now being revealed in the mammalian
skeletal patterning process. The murine goosecoid (Gsc) and Msx1 genes are
expressed during craniofacial development and each mutant mouse displays
intriguing facial abnormalities including those of middle ear ossicles,
suggesting that both genes play roles in spatial programming of craniofacial
regions. In order to examine whether these genes could function in concert to
direct particular craniofacial morphogenesis, double knock out mice were
analyzed. The phenotype of the double mutant mice was restricted to the first
arch derivatives and was apparently additive of the single gene mutant mice,
implying region specific genetic interactions of these homeobox genes expressed
in overlapping regions of middle ear forming ectomesenchyme. Our results also
suggested that the patterning of distal portions of the malleus depends on the
tympanic membrane, for which normal expressions of both the genes are
prerequisite.

PMID: 10512191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand). 1999 Jul;45(5):493-503.

Experimental analysis of the emergence of left-right asymmetry of the body axis
in early postimplantation mouse embryos.

Tsang TE(1), Kinder SJ, Tam PP.

Author information: 
(1)Embryology Unit, Children's Medical Research Institute, Wentworthville, NSW,
Australia.

The lateral asymmetry of the body axis of mouse embryo is revealed first by the
asymmetric expression of genes such as nodal, lefty2 and Pitx2 in the lateral
plate mesoderm of the neurulating embryo and subsequently by the looping of the
heart tube, the rotation of the body axis and situ solitus of specific visceral
organs. Analysis of gene expression in the early gastrula shows that there is a
transient asymmetric localization of the transcripts of Cerrl, Fgf8, Hesx1 and
Hnf3beta gene in the anterior visceral endoderm, Otx2 and Sox2 in the epiblast
and Lim1 in the nascent mesoderm. However, the asymmetric expression is not
consistent and varies among the embryos, which may be reflecting the lability of 
the mechanism for specifying the laterality of the body axis during gastrulation.
The plasticity of the process that determines laterality is further manifested by
the ability to randomise the expression of the Pitx2 gene in the lateral plate
mesoderm in embryos that are grown in vitro. The expression of laterality
requires the presence of the node and its axial mesodermal derivatives. In mutant
embryos that lack the node and in node-ablated embryos, the loss of the axial
notochord is associated with isomerism of the body axis, which is revealed either
by the expression of the Pitx2 gene in the lateral plate mesoderm of both sides
of the body or the complete absence of expression. Our results are therefore
consistent with the concept that the specification of the laterality of the body 
axis goes through a dynamic phase during gastrulation and the activity of the
node and its derivatives is instrumental in the conferment of left-right identity
of the embryonic tissues.

PMID: 10512182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Br J Neurosurg. 1999 Feb;13(1):60-4.

Subdural haematomas in the elderly: experience with treatment by trephine
craniotomy and not closing the dura or replacing the bone plate.

Beatty RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Illinois, College of Medicine,
Chicago, USA.

A surgical technique was devised to treat chronic subdural haematomas (SDH) in
elderly patients. Initial good results encouraged the author to use this
technique in elderly patients with acute SDH. This small group is also reported. 
The goal was to do definitive, not expectant or incremental surgery on these
fragile patients who have a high incidence of co-morbid conditions and cerebral
atrophy, and to obliterate the subdural space by allowing the skin to sink into
the cranial defect. The surgical technique consists of trephine craniotomy and
not closing the dura or replacing the bone plate. Experience with six elderly
patients with acute SDH and 23 patients with chronic SDH is reported. Of six
patients with acute SDH, mean age 80 years, 2 months, three died, all with a
Glasgow Coma Score (GCS) less than 9. Three recovered to preoperative status, one
with initial GCS of 7 and the other of 8. Of 23 patients with chronic SDH, mean
age 77 years, 21 recovered to preoperative status. The two deaths were in
patients with GSC of 5 and 7. There were no recurrent SDH or postoperative
surgical or cosmetic complications. All patients were followed for at least 6
months. These excellent results suggest that the procedure could be considered as
a first procedure in the elderly patient. At first glance, the operation appears 
to be overly aggressive, but it is an example of 'aggressive-conservative'
treatment which produces good long-term results with few complications and no
need for second operations.

PMID: 10492687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Hum Genet. 1999 Jul-Aug;105(1-2):104-11.

Genomic organisation of the human chordin gene and mutation screening of
candidate Cornelia de Lange syndrome genes.

Smith M(1), Herrell S, Lusher M, Lako L, Simpson C, Wiestner A, Skoda R, Ireland 
M, Strachan T.

Author information: 
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Unit, School of Biochemistry and Genetics, University
of Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

We have determined the genomic organisation of the human chordin gene, CHRD, and 
have shown that it maps within a gene cluster at 3q27 containing THPO
(thrombopoietin), CLCN2 (a voltage-gated chloride-channel gene) and EIF4G1 (a
eukaryotic translation-initiation-factor-gamma gene). The CHRD and THPO genes are
very close neighbours and are transcribed from opposing DNA strands from
promoters that are spaced less than 2 kb apart. We considered that the CHRD gene 
and the chordin-regulating GSC (goosecoid) gene could be candidate genes for
Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CDLS), a developmental malformation syndrome which is
primarily characterised by mental handicap, growth retardation, distinctive
facial features and limb-reduction defects. CDLS patients typically occur as
sporadic cases, but several reports have suggested dominant inheritance. The
candidacy of the CHRD and GSC genes was supported by several lines of evidence:
prior evidence for a CDLS gene at 3q26.3-q27; a report suggesting a significant
association between CDLS and thrombocytopenia; suspected genetic heterogeneity in
CDLS; location of the GSC gene in close proximity to a 14q32 breakpoint detected 
in a CDLS patient with a balanced de novo translocation; known regulation of
chordin expression by goosecoid; and the pattern of embryonic expression of the
mouse GSC gene. Another candidate gene at 3q27, SOX2, was also considered because
of its suspected role as a transcription factor in early development and because 
of known examples of SOX genes that are loci for dominantly inherited
developmental disorders. However, mutation screening failed to identify CDLS
patient-specific mutations in CHRD, GSC or SOX2.

PMID: 10480362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Mutat Res. 1999 Aug;406(2-4):45-54.

Gene expression in individual cells: analysis using global single cell reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (GSC RT-PCR).

Brail LH(1), Jang A, Billia F, Iscove NN, Klamut HJ, Hill RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.

The determination of the gene expression pattern of single cells has important
implications for many areas of cellular and developmental biology including
lineage determination, identification of primitive stem cells and temporal gene
expression patterns induced by changes in the cellular microenvironment. Global
Single Cell Reverse Transcription-Polymerase Chain Reaction (GSC RT-PCR) enables 
the study of single cell gene expression patterns. Initial observations of
significant heterogeneity among single cells derived from a population of cells
prompted us to determine how much of this observed heterogeneity was due to the
intrinsic variation within the method. In this paper we discuss the sensitivity
of GSC RT-PCR for analysis of differences in gene expression between single cells
and, in particular, detail the amount of variation generated by the method
itself. We found that most of the intrinsic variation in the method occurred in
the PCR step. The total variation induced by the method was in the range of 5
fold. While we have determined that there is a five fold methodological variation
in GSC RT-PCR, any method which use its components (including generation of cDNAs
for microarray analysis) is likely to be affected by such experimental
variability, which could limit the interpretation of the resulting data.

PMID: 10479721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Genetics. 1999 Sep;153(1):235-50.

The Drosophila pumilio gene encodes two functional protein isoforms that play
multiple roles in germline development, gonadogenesis, oogenesis and
embryogenesis.

Parisi M(1), Lin H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina 27710, USA.

The pumilio (pum) gene plays an essential role in embryonic patterning and
germline stem cell (GSC) maintenance during oogenesis in Drosophila. Here we
report on a phenotypic analysis using pum(ovarette) mutations, which reveals
multiple functions of pum in primordial germ cell proliferation, larval ovary
formation, GSC division, and subsequent oogenic processes, as well as in
oviposition. Specifically, by inducing pum(-) GSC clones at the onset of
oogenesis, we show that pum is directly involved in GSC division, a function that
is distinct from its requirement in primordial germ cells. Furthermore, we show
that pum encodes 156- and 130-kD proteins, both of which are functional isoforms.
Among pum(ovarette) mutations, pum(1688) specifically eliminates the 156-kD
isoform but not the 130-kD isoform, while pum(2003) and pum(4277) specifically
affect the 130-kD isoform but not the 156-kD isoform. Normal doses of both
isoforms are required for the zygotic function of pum, yet either isoform alone
at a normal dose is sufficient for the maternal effect function of pum. A pum
cDNA transgene that contains the known open reading frame encodes only the 156-kD
isoform and rescues the phenotype of both pum(1688) and pum(2003) mutants. These 
observations suggest that the 156- and 130-kD isoforms can compensate for each
other's function in a dosage-dependent manner. Finally, we present molecular
evidence suggesting that the two PUM isoforms share some of their primary
structures.

PMCID: PMC1460748
PMID: 10471709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Bone Marrow Transplant. 1999 Aug;24(3):283-7.

Comparison of the classic Glucksberg criteria and the IBMTR Severity Index for
grading acute graft-versus-host disease following HLA-identical sibling stem cell
transplantation. International Bone Marrow Transplant Registry.

Martino R(1), Romero P, Subirá M, Bellido M, Altés A, Sureda A, Brunet S, Badell 
I, Cubells J, Sierra J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Hematology, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau,
Barcelona, Spain.

Acute graft-versus-host disease (AGVHD) severity is usually graded (grades 0-IV) 
by the pattern of organ involvement using the classic Glucksberg-Seattle criteria
(GSC). Recently, the International Bone Marrow Transplant Registry (IBMTR)
developed a new Severity Index by regrouping the patterns of organ involvement
into five Indexes (0-D) that appeared more predictive of transplant-related
mortality (TRM) and transplant failure (TF, relapse or TRM). We studied the
predictive value of both grading systems of TRM, TF and GVHD-related mortality
(GTRM) in a series of 114 consecutive patients > or = 12 years old allografted
from a histocompatible sibling at our institution, 100 of whom were evaluable for
AGVHD. The IBMTR Severity Index showed better incremental prediction of TRM
(relative risks (RR) of 1, 1.5, 1.4, 2 and 2.5 for Indexes 0, A, B, C and D), TF 
(RRs of 1, 1.6, 1.6, 2 and 2.3, respectively) and GTRM (RRs of 1, 2.2 and 4.8 for
Indexes B, C and D) than the GSC. With the GSC different outcomes for TRM and TF 
were found only from grade 0 to I-II and 0 to IV or I-III to IV, but not from
I-II to III. The GSC also appeared less predictive of GTRM (RRs of 1, 0.4 and 2.9
for grades II, III and IV). In our relatively small patient sample, the new IBMTR
Severity Index appeared more predictive of transplant outcome than the GSC,
especially between no AGVHD, early Indexes (A-B) and advanced Indexes (C-D).

PMID: 10455367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Development. 1999 Sep;126(17):3811-21.

Goosecoid acts cell autonomously in mesenchyme-derived tissues during
craniofacial development.

Rivera-Pérez JA(1), Wakamiya M, Behringer RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Mice homozygous for a targeted deletion of the homeobox gene Goosecoid (Gsc) have
multiple craniofacial defects. To understand the mechanisms responsible for these
defects, the behavior of Gsc-null cells was examined in morula aggregation
chimeras. In these chimeras, Gsc-null cells were marked with beta-galactosidase
(beta-gal) activity using the ROSA26 lacZ allele. In addition, mice with a lacZ
gene that had been introduced into the Gsc locus were used as a guide to
visualize the location of Gsc-expressing cells. In Gsc-null<->wild-type chimeras,
tissues that would normally not express Gsc were composed of both Gsc-null and
wild-type cells that were well mixed, reflecting the overall genotypic
composition of the chimeras. However, craniofacial tissues that would normally
express Gsc were essentially devoid of Gsc-null cells. Furthermore, the nasal
capsules and mandibles of the chimeras had defects similar to Gsc-null mice that 
varied in severity depending upon the proportion of Gsc-null cells. These results
combined with the analysis of Gsc-null mice suggest that Gsc functions cell
autonomously in mesenchyme-derived tissues of the head. A developmental analysis 
of the tympanic ring bone, a bone that is always absent in Gsc-null mice because 
of defects at the cell condensation stage, showed that Gsc-null cells had the
capacity to form the tympanic ring condensation in the presence of wild-type
cells. However, analysis of the tympanic ring bones of 18.5 d.p.c. chimeras
suggests that Gsc-null cells were not maintained. The participation of Gsc-null
cells in the tympanic ring condensation of chimeras may be an epigenetic
phenomenon that results in a local environment in which more precursor cells are 
present. Thus, the skeletal defects observed in Gsc-null mice may reflect a
regional reduction of precursor cells during embryonic development.

PMID: 10433910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Development. 1999 Jul;126(13):2955-65.

Nuclear beta-catenin and the development of bilateral symmetry in normal and
LiCl-exposed chick embryos.

Roeser T(1), Stein S, Kessel M.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für biophysikalische Chemie, Abteilung für Molekulare
Zellbiologie, Am Fassberg, D-37077 Göttingen, Germany.

Studies in Xenopus laevis and zebrafish suggest a key role for beta-catenin in
the specification of the axis of bilateral symmetry. In these organisms, nuclear 
beta-catenin demarcates the dorsalizing centers. We have asked whether
beta-catenin plays a comparable role in the chick embryo and how it is adapted to
the particular developmental constraints of chick development. The first nuclear 
localization of beta-catenin is observed in late intrauterine stages of
development in the periphery of the blastoderm, the developing area opaca and
marginal zone. Obviously, this early, radially symmetric domain does not predict 
the future organizing center of the embryo. During further development, cells
containing nuclear beta-catenin spread under the epiblast and form the secondary 
hypoblast. The onset of hypoblast formation thus demarcates the first bilateral
symmetry in nuclear beta-catenin distribution. Lithium chloride exposure also
causes ectopic nuclear localization of beta-catenin in cells of the epiblast in
the area pellucida. Embryos treated before primitive streak formation become
completely radialized, as shown by the expression of molecular markers, CMIX and 
GSC. Lithium treatments performed during early or medium streak stages cause
excessive development of the anterior primitive streak, node and notochord, and
lead to a degeneration of prospective ventral and posterior structures, as shown 
by the expression of the molecular markers GSC, CNOT1, BMP2 and Ch-Tbx6L. In
summary, we found that in spite of remarkable spatiotemporal differences,
beta-catenin acts in the chick in a manner similar to that in fish and amphibia.

PMID: 10357939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Methods Enzymol. 1999;303:19-44.

High-efficiency full-length cDNA cloning.

Carninci P(1), Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genome Exploration Research Project, Genomic Sciences Center
(GSC), Ibaraki, Japan.

PMID: 10349636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Mech Dev. 1998 Dec;79(1-2):5-15.

Protein kinase A is involved in the induction of early mesodermal marker genes by
activin.

Joore J(1), van de Water S, Betist M, van den Eijnden-van Raaij A, Zivkovic D.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, The Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology,
Utrecht, The Netherlands.

In this study we have investigated the role of cAMP-dependent protein kinase A
(PKA) in the induction of the early mesodermal marker genes goosecoid and no tail
by activin in zebrafish embryos. We show that upon treatment with activin,
zebrafish blastula cells exhibit a rapid and transient increase in PKA activity. 
In these cells, activin rapidly induces the expression of the immediate early
response genes goosecoid and no tail. Stimulation and inhibition of PKA by
activin, respectively, enhances and reduces the induction of goosecoid and no
tail mRNA expression. Similar effects of PKA stimulation and inhibition on the
induction by activin of a 1.8 kb zebrafish goosecoid promoter construct were
observed. The induction by activin of a fragment of the zebrafish goosecoid
promoter that mediates an immediate early response to activin is blocked by
inhibition of PKA. Activation of PKA alone has no effect in these experiments.
Finally, inhibition of PKA in whole embryos by overexpression of a dominant
negative regulatory subunit of PKA reduces the expression of no tail and
goosecoid, whereas the expression of even-skippedl remains unaltered.
Overexpression of the catalytic subunit of PKA in embryos does not affect
expression of goosecoid, no tail or even-skippedl. These data show that in
dissociated blastulae, PKA is required, but not sufficient for activin signalling
towards induction of goosecoid and no tail. In intact zebrafish embryos, PKA
contributes to induction of goosecoid and no tail, although it is not required or
sufficient.

PMID: 10349616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Mech Dev. 1999 Mar;81(1-2):187-91.

Novel expression of the goosecoid transcription factor in the embryonic mouse
heart.

Conway SJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Department of Cell Biology and
Anatomy, Medical College of Georgia, 1120 15th Street, CB2803, Augusta, GA
30912-2640, USA. sconway@mail.mcg.edu

Goosecoid (gsc)is expressed in the organizer region of vertebrate embryos
undergoing the movements of gastrulation. Likewise, the early heart tube (8.5-9.5
dpc) undergoes a similar process of looping to bring the atrial region cranial
and dorsal to the ventricular region, eventually giving rise to the four
chambered heart. In order to determine whether gsc is similarly involved in heart
morphogenesis, in situ hybridization and RT-PCR were used to detect gsc
expression in the embryonic mouse heart. We have shown, for the first time, that 
gsc mRNA is expressed in the developing mouse heart, and is localized to the
sites that divide the primitive heart tube into a four chambered heart.

PMID: 10330498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Mech Dev. 1999 Mar;81(1-2):51-63.

Removal of vegetal yolk causes dorsal deficencies and impairs dorsal-inducing
ability of the yolk cell in zebrafish.

Mizuno T(1), Yamaha E, Kuroiwa A, Takeda H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Nagoya University,
Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, 464-8602, Japan.

To examine the nature of cytoplasm determinants for dorsal specification in
zebrafish, we have developed a method in which we remove the vegetal yolk
hemisphere of early fertilized eggs (vegetal removed embryos). When the vegetal
yolk mass was removed at the 1-cell stage, the embryos frequently exhibited
typical ventralized phenotypes: no axial structures developed. The frequency of
dorsal defects decreased when the operation was performed at later stages.
Furthermore, the yolk cell obtained from the vegetal-removed embryos lost the
ability to induce goosecoid in normal blastomeres while the normal yolk cell
frequently did so in normal and vegetal-removed embryos. These results suggested 
that the vegetal yolk cell mass contains the dorsal determinants, and that the
dorsal-inducing ability of the yolk cell is dependent on the determinants.

PMID: 10330484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Genome Res. 1999 May;9(5):463-70.

Automated filtration-based high-throughput plasmid preparation system.

Itoh M(1), Kitsunai T, Akiyama J, Shibata K, Izawa M, Kawai J, Tomaru Y, Carninci
P, Shibata Y, Ozawa Y, Muramatsu M, Okazaki Y, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genome Exploration Research Group, Genomic Sciences Center
(GSC) and Genome Science Laboratory, Tsukuba Life Science Center, The Institute
of Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN), Core Research of Evolutional Science
and Technology, JapanA

Current methods of plasmid preparation do not allow for large capacity automated 
processing. We have developed an automated high-throughput system that prepares
plasmid DNA for large-scale sequencing. This system is based on our previously
reported filtration method. In this method, cell harvesting, alkaline lysis, and 
plasmid purification occur in a single 96-well microtiter plate from which
sequence-ready DNA samples are collected. The plates are designed to allow all
reagents to be injected from above the wells and the spent reagents to be
aspirated from below. This design has enabled us to build a linear process
plasmid preparation system consisting of an automated filter plate stacker and a 
21-stage automated plasmid preparator. The 96-well plates used are outfitted with
glass-filters that trap Escherichia coli before the plates are stacked in the
automated stacker. The plates move from the stacker to each of the 21 stages of
the preparator. At specific stages, various reagents or chemicals are injected
into the wells from above. Finally, the plates are collected in the second
stacker. The optimal throughput of the preparator is 40,000 samples in 17.5 hr.
Here, we describe a pilot experiment preparing 15,360 templates in 160 specially 
designed 96-well glass-filter plates. The prepared plasmids were subjected to
restriction digestion, DNA sequencing, and transcriptional sequencing.

PMCID: PMC310785
PMID: 10330126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Comput Med Imaging Graph. 1999 Mar-Apr;23(2):89-101.

Assessment of left ventricular cardiac shape by the use of volumetric curvature
analysis from 3D echocardiography.

Duann JR(1), Chiang SH, Lin SB, Lin CC, Chen JH, Su JL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Applied Physics, Chung Yuan University, Chungli, Taiwan.
djr@medical.be.cycu.edu.tw

A method for three-dimensional shape analysis of left ventricle (LV) is presented
in this article. The method uses three-dimensional transesophageal
echocardiography (TEE) as the source to derive the 3D wire-frame model and the
related shape descriptors. The shape descriptors developed in this article
include regional surface changing (RSC), global surface curvature (GSC), surface 
distance (SD), normalized surface distance (ND), and effective radius (ER) of the
endocardial surface. Based on these shape descriptors, the shape of LV could be
sketched in both static and dynamic manner. The results show that the new
approach provides a robust but easy method to quantify regional and global LV
shape from 2D and 3D echocardiograms.

PMID: 10227375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Mech Dev. 1999 Jan;80(1):67-76.

Characterization of the Ets-type protein ER81 in Xenopus embryos.

Chen Y(1), Hollemann T, Grunz H, Pieler T.

Author information: 
(1)Universität GH Essen, Abteilung Zoophysiologie, Universitätsstrasse 5,
Germany.

A function for FGF-type peptide growth factors has been implied for early
mesodermal patterning events in Xenopus laevis. FGF signalling operates via the
MAP kinase cascade that can directly activate the transcription of
organizer-expressed genes, such as Xbra and Xegr-1. We have recently provided
evidence for a critical role of Ets-type transcription factors in FGF mediated
Xegr-1 transcription activation. Here, we report on the identification of the
Xenopus Ets-type protein ER81 that is expressed in a pattern overlapping with the
ones of Xegr-1 and Xbra during gastrulation. Microinjection in XER81 encoding
mRNA into ventral blastomeres of Xenopus embryos results in the induction of
ectopic, tail-like protrusions, whereas dorsal overexpression results in
disturbed eye development. In the animal cap assay, ectopic expression of XER81
is found to interfere with activin mediated induction of Xegr-1 and gsc, but not 
with the Xbra response to activin.

PMID: 10096064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Am J Ophthalmol. 1999 Feb;127(2):178-82.

Idiopathic intracranial hypertension in prepubertal pediatric patients:
characteristics, treatment, and outcome.

Cinciripini GS(1), Donahue S, Borchert MS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Ophthalmology, Childrens Hospital Los Angeles, USC School of
Medicine, California, USA. gsc@u.washington.edu

PURPOSE: To report the features of idiopathic intracranial hypertension in
prepubertal children, with emphasis on presentation, treatment, and outcome.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed the charts of all patients 11 years and
younger diagnosed with idiopathic intracranial hypertension at two
university-affiliated medical centers. Inclusion critera included papilledema,
normal brain computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging, cerebrospinal
fluid pressure greater than 200 mm H2O, normal cerebrospinal fluid content, and a
nonfocal neurologic examination except for sixth nerve palsy. Patients with
concomitant systemic illness were excluded.
RESULTS: Of the 10 patients, four were girls and six were boys. Only one patient 
was obese. The most common presenting symptoms were stiff neck (four patients)
and diplopia (four patients), and the most common presenting sign was strabismus 
(eight patients). Six of eight patients with strabismus had abducens nerve palsy 
(four bilateral), one patient had a sensory exotropia, and one had a comitant
esotropia. Visual field abnormalities were present in 11 of 13 eyes (85%), and
severe visual loss resulting in no light perception vision occurred in one eye of
one patient. Nine patients were treated medically, four with a combination of
prednisone or dexamethasone and acetazolamide and five with acetazolamide alone. 
One patient in this group also required a lumboperitoneal shunt. One patient was 
treated with lumbar puncture only. Resolution of papilledema occurred rapidly in 
all patients, with a mean of 4.7 +/- 2.6 months. Resolution of sixth nerve palsy 
also occurred rapidly in four of six patients in a mean of 1.6 +/- 1.2 months.
One patient required strabismus surgery for persistent esotropia and one was lost
to follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: Idiopathic intracranial hypertension in prepubertal children is rare
and is different than the disease in adults. In our series, there appeared to be 
no sex predilection, and obesity was uncommon. Children are likely to present
with strabismus and stiff neck rather than headache or pulsatile tinnitus. Both
papilledema and sixth nerve palsy resolved rapidly with treatment. However,
children can sustain loss of visual field and visual acuity despite treatment.

PMID: 10030560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Mar;19(3):2080-7.

A conserved motif in goosecoid mediates groucho-dependent repression in
Drosophila embryos.

Jiménez G(1), Verrijzer CP, Ish-Horowicz D.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London WC2A 3PX,
England, UK. gjcbmc@cid.csic.es

Surprisingly small peptide motifs can confer critical biological functions. One
example is the WRPW tetrapeptide present in the Hairy family of transcriptional
repressors, which mediates recruitment of the Groucho (Gro) corepressor to target
promoters. We recently showed that Engrailed (En) is another repressor that
requires association with Gro for its function. En lacks a WRPW motif; instead,
it contains another short conserved sequence, the En homology region 1 (eh1)/GEH 
motif, that is likely to play a role in tethering Gro to the promoter. Here, we
characterize a repressor domain from the Goosecoid (Gsc) developmental regulator 
that includes an eh1/GEH-like motif. We demonstrate that this domain (GscR)
mediates efficient repression in Drosophila blastoderm embryos and that
repression by GscR requires Gro function. GscR and Gro interact in vitro, and the
eh1/GEH motif is necessary and sufficient for the interaction and for in vivo
repression. Because WRPW- and eh1/GEH-like motifs are present in different
proteins and in many organisms, the results suggest that interactions between
short peptides and Gro represent a widespread mechanism of repression. Finally,
we investigate whether Gro is part of a stable multiprotein complex in the
nucleus. Our results indicate that Gro does not form stable associations with
other proteins but that it may be able to assemble into homomultimeric complexes.

PMCID: PMC84001
PMID: 10022895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Nucleic Acids Res. 1999 Mar 1;27(5):1345-9.

Increased specificity of reverse transcription priming by trehalose and
oligo-blockers allows high-efficiency window separation of mRNA display.

Mizuno Y(1), Carninci P, Okazaki Y, Tateno M, Kawai J, Amanuma H, Muramatsu M,
Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genome Exploration Research Project, Genomic Sciences Center
(GSC), Institute of Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN), Koyadai 3-1-1,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0074, Japan.

We have developed a method for high-efficiency window separation of cDNA display 
by increasing the specificity of priming in reverse transcription. In the
conventional method, two-base anchored oligo(dT) primers (5'dT16VN3', where N is 
any base and V is G, A or C) are used to make windows for the display of
transcripts. However, reverse transcriptase often extends misprimed
oligonucleotides. To avoid mispriming from dT16VN primers, we have developed two 
new technologies. One is higher temperature priming with reverse transcriptase
thermoactivated by the disaccharide trehalose. The other is the use of
competitive oligonucleotide blockers that hybridize to the non-selectively primed
mRNAs, preventing the mispriming from the VN site. These methods were combined to
improve restriction landmark cDNA scanning (RLCS), resulting in the elimination
of the redundant signals that appear in different windows. This was achieved by
the increased specificity of initiation of reverse trans-cription from the
beginning of poly(A) sites. This method paves the way for the precise
visualization of transcripts to allow expression profiles in individual tissues
and at each developmental stage to be understood.

PMCID: PMC148322
PMID: 9973624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Med Chem. 1999 Jan 28;42(2):221-8.

Mechanism-based competitive inhibitors of glyoxalase I: intracellular delivery,
in vitro antitumor activities, and stabilities in human serum and mouse serum.

Kavarana MJ(1), Kovaleva EG, Creighton DJ, Wollman MB, Eiseman JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Maryland Baltimore
County, Baltimore, Maryland 21250, USA.

S-(N-Aryl-N-hydroxycarbamoyl)glutathione derivatives (GSC(O)N(OH)C6H4X, where GS 
= glutathionyl and X = H (1), Cl (2), Br (3)) have been proposed as possible
anticancer agents, because of their ability to strongly inhibit the
methylglyoxal-detoxifying enzyme glyoxalase I. In order to test this hypothesis, 
the in vitro antitumor activities of these compounds and their [glycyl,glutamyl] 
diethyl ester prodrug forms (1(Et)2-3(Et)2) have been examined. All three diethyl
esters inhibit the growth of L1210 murine leukemia and B16 melanotic melanoma in 
culture, with GI50 values in the micromolar concentration range. Cell
permeability studies with L1210 cells indicate that growth inhibition is
associated with rapid diffusion of the diethyl esters into the cells, followed by
enzymatic hydrolysis of the ethyl ester functions to give the inhibitory diacids.
In contrast, the corresponding diacids neither readily diffuse into nor
significantly inhibit the growth of these cells. Consistent with the hypothesis
that cell growth inhibition is due to competitive inhibition of glyoxalase I,
preincubation of L1210 cells with 2(Et)2 increases the sensitivity of these cells
to the inhibitory effects of exogenous methylglyoxal. Compound 2(Et)2 is much
less toxic to nonproliferating murine splenic lymphocytes, possibly reflecting
reduced sensitivity to methylglyoxal and/or reduced chemical stability of the
diacid inside these cells. Finally, a plasma esterase-deficient murine model has 
been identified that should allow in vivo testing of the diethyl esters.

PMID: 9925727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Dev Biol. 1998 Dec 15;204(2):361-72.

Zebrafish nodal-related 2 encodes an early mesendodermal inducer signaling from
the extraembryonic yolk syncytial layer.

Erter CE(1), Solnica-Krezel L, Wright CV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Vanderbilt University, 1161 21st Avenue
South, Nashville, Tennessee, 37232-2175, USA.

Nodal-related factors have been implicated in mesodermal and neural patterning,
and left-right asymmetry, in mouse, frog, and chicken embryos. We describe the
isolation and characterization of zebrafish nodal-related 2 (znr2). znr2 is
expressed at low levels maternally, and zygotic transcripts localize to dorsal
blastomeres at MBT. Slightly later, znr2 is also expressed dorsally in the
extraembryonic yolk syncytial layer (YSL). During early gastrulation, znr2
expression expands to include deep and superficial cells in the entire marginal
zone and YSL. During shield stages, expression is primarily localized to
superficial noninvoluting cells of the organizer called dorsal forerunners. Znr2 
misexpression in whole fish embryos expands or duplicates dorsoanterior and axial
cell fates. Furthermore, Znr2 overexpression exclusively in the YSL, a region
implicated in endogenous mesodermal induction, causes broadened or duplicated gsc
expression in the overlying blastoderm. Functional comparison of Znr2 and another
recently identified zebrafish nodal-related factor, Znr1/Cyclops, reveals
distinct inductive properties of each ligand. Znr2 efficiently induces
organizer-type dorsoanterior mesodermal and endodermal markers, but only weakly, 
if at all, neural markers. In contrast, while Znr1/Cyclops reproducibly induces
mesodermal and neural markers, it is an inefficient inducer of organizer-type
mesoderm. Our results suggest that znr2 encodes a robust mesendodermal inducer
that signals nonautonomously during the earliest stages of embryonic patterning, 
and that part of this activity arises from within the YSL.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9882476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Dev Growth Differ. 1998 Dec;40(6):577-82.

Hormone-inducible expression of secreted factors in zebrafish embryos.

de Graaf M(1), Zivkovic D, Joore J.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, the Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology,
Utrecht.

The study of gene function at later stages of embryonic development by
overexpression experiments is often complicated by genes exerting different
functions at multiple stages of development, which renders analysis of
stage-specific effects difficult. To address this problem an inducible expression
system that supports timed expression of essentially any protein, including
secreted proteins was designed. The system is based on a two step mechanism. A
glucocorticoid inducible, Gal4-site binding chimeric transcription factor is
expressed ubiquitously, whereas a gene of interest is placed under the control of
a Gal4-site driven promoter. Treatment of zebrafish embryos injected with such
constructs with the synthetic glucocorticoid dexamethasone results in readily
detectable reporter activity within 3 h. The system was tested with induced
expression of Xactivin(beta)B and X(wnt), which both were shown to induce
morphological abnormalities, as well as alterations in the expression patterns of
goosecoid and otx2, respectively. Coinjection of an inducible lacZ reporter
vector served as an indicator for expressing cells in embryos. The present
results demonstrate that this is a versatile inducible expression system for use 
in vertebrate embryos, that also supports expression of secreted proteins.

PMID: 9865967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Gut. 1998 Sep;43(3):342-4.

Early gastric stump cancer following distal gastrectomy.

Kaneko K(1), Kondo H, Saito D, Shirao K, Yamaguchi H, Yokota T, Yamao G, Sano T, 
Sasako M, Yoshida S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Gastric stump cancer (GSC) is usually diagnosed at an advanced stage,
and consequently the prognosis is poor.
AIMS: To investigate the clinicopathological characteristics of GSC at an early
stage to assist in its identification, and thereby improve its prognosis.
METHODS: Forty three patients with resected early GSC were compared with 156
patients with resected primary early cancer in the upper third of the stomach.
RESULTS: Sixty five per cent (28/43) of the early GSC patients showed the
elevated type endoscopically, although the frequency of the depressed type in GSC
has tended to increase in the past five years. This occurred in less than 26%
(40/156) of the primary early cancers. Half of the early GSCs were located on the
lesser curvature (47%), and revealed differentiated adenocarcinoma (81%)
histologically. The male:female ratio of early GSC cases was about 6:1, which was
much higher than that in patients with primary early cancer. The five year
survival rates of patients with early GSCs and early primary cancers were 84% and
95%, respectively. GSC had a favourable prognosis, if it was detected at an early
stage.
CONCLUSION: To detect early GSC, our results suggest that special attention
should be given to elevated as well as depressed lesions on the lesser curvature 
of the stomach, particularly in men, during endoscopic examinations.

PMCID: PMC1727245
PMID: 9863478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Genes Dev. 1998 Dec 1;12(23):3715-27.

A novel class of evolutionarily conserved genes defined by piwi are essential for
stem cell self-renewal.

Cox DN(1), Chao A, Baker J, Chang L, Qiao D, Lin H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina 27710 USA.

Germ-line stem cells (GSCs) serve as the source for gametogenesis in diverse
organisms. We cloned and characterized the Drosophila piwi gene and showed that
it is required for the asymmetric division of GSCs to produce and maintain a
daughter GSC but is not essential for the further differentiation of the
committed daughter cell. Genetic mosaic and RNA in situ analyses suggest that
piwi expression in adjacent somatic cells regulates GSC division. piwi encodes a 
highly basic novel protein, well conserved during evolution. We isolated piwi
homologs in Caenorhabditis elegans and humans and also identified Arabidopsis
piwi-like genes known to be required for meristem cell maintenance. Decreasing C.
elegans piwi expression reduces the proliferation of GSC-equivalent cells. Thus, 
piwi represents a novel class of genes required for GSC division in diverse
organisms.

PMCID: PMC317255
PMID: 9851978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Dev Biol. 1998 Dec 1;204(1):172-86.

Activin-induced factors maintain goosecoid transcription through a paired
homeodomain binding site.

McKendry R(1), Harland RM, Stachel SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California at
Berkeley, 401 Barker Hall, Berkeley, California, 94720, USA.

Previous studies in both Xenopus and zebrafish have shown that goosecoid is one
of the first genes to be transcribed at the onset of gastrulation. Goosecoid
transcription still initiates when embryos are treated with protein synthesis
inhibitors, indicating that it is mediated by preexisting factors and suggesting 
that goosecoid transcription is immediately downstream of the maternal
mesoderm-inducing signal. However, goosecoid transcription continues long after
this maternal signal has ceased to be active, indicating that there are
mechanisms to maintain activin-induced transcription. Our study has focused on
understanding the factors required to maintain this transcription. We have
defined an element within the zebrafish goosecoid promoter that is sufficient for
activin inducibility in both Xenopus and zebrafish embryos. This element, the
goosecoid activin element, interacts with two developmentally regulated proteins 
from Xenopus embryos. A maternal protein interacts through cleavage stages until 
the midblastula transition, and a second protein binds from the onset of
gastrulation. The second protein is zygotically expressed, and its binding is
required for activin inducibility in our assay system. We suggest that the
zygotic protein we have identified is a good candidate to be involved in the
maintenance of goosecoid transcription. Furthermore, this zygotic protein is
likely to contain a paired class homeodomain since a consensus binding site for
such proteins is present within the goosecoid activin element and is essential
for its function.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9851851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Genome Res. 1998 Nov;8(11):1097-108.

Toward a complete human genome sequence.

Sanger Center(1); Genome Sequencing Center(2).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK; (2)Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63108 USA

We have begun a joint program as part of a coordinated international effort to
determine a complete human genome sequence. Our strategy is to map large-insert
bacterial clones and to sequence each clone by a random shotgun approach followed
by directed finishing. As of September 1998, we have identified the map positions
of bacterial clones covering approximately 860 Mb for sequencing and completed
>98 Mb ( approximately 3.3%) of the human genome sequence. Our progress and
sequencing data can be accessed via the World Wide Web
(http://webace.sanger.ac.uk/HGP/ or http://genome.wustl.edu/gsc/).

PMID: 9847074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Development. 1999 Jan;126(1):51-61.

Fgf-8 determines rostral-caudal polarity in the first branchial arch.

Tucker AS(1), Yamada G, Grigoriou M, Pachnis V, Sharpe PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, UMDS Guy's Hospital, London SE1 9RT,
UK.

In mammals, rostral ectomesenchyme cells of the mandibular arch give rise to
odontogenic cells, while more caudal cells form the distal skeletal elements of
the lower jaw. Signals from the epithelium are required for the development of
odontogenic and skeletogenic mesenchyme cells. We show that rostral-caudal
polarity is first established in mandibular branchial arch ectomesenchymal cells 
by a signal, Fgf-8, from the rostral epithelium. All neural crest-derived
ectomesenchymal cells are equicompetent to respond to Fgf-8. The restriction into
rostral (Lhx-7-expressing) and caudal (Gsc-expressing) domains is achieved by
cells responding differently according to their proximity to the source of the
signal. Once established, spatial expression domains and cell fates are fixed and
maintained by Fgf-8 in conjunction with another epithelial signal, endothelin-1, 
and by positional changes in ectomesenchymal cell competence to respond to the
signal.

PMID: 9834185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Gene. 1998 Nov 5;222(1):17-23.

Identification of stable RNA hairpins causing band compression in transcriptional
sequencing and their elimination by use of inosine triphosphate.

Sasaki N(1), Izawa M, Sugahara Y, Tanaka T, Watahiki M, Ozawa K, Ohara E, Funaki 
H, Yoneda Y, Matsuura S, Muramatsu M, Okazaki Y, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genome Exploration Research Project, Genomic Sciences Center
(GSC) and Genome Science Laboratory, Tsukuba Life Science Center, The Institute
of Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN), 3-1-1 Koyadai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki
305-0074, Japa.

To identify stable RNA secondary structure causing band compression, 30 lambda
DNA clones and four cDNA clones (about 10 kb in total length) were sequenced
using Transcriptional Sequencing, which is based on the phage RNA polymerase
chain termination reaction with fluorescent 3' deoxynucleoside triphosphate,
using the canonical set of rNTPs for the substrate. Electrophoresis was performed
on acrylamide gel containing 7 M urea at 50 degrees C using ABI 377 DNA
sequencer. A total of 159 band compressions were identified, and most compression
sites seem to be due to hairpin structures. We also found that the presence of
rITP in place of rGTP in the sequencing reaction can entirely eliminate all band 
compressions. The use of rITP gave a better peak uniformity and resolution in the
sequencing gel in the case of lambda DNA than with c7rGTP, leading to improved
accuracy in the sequence determination. Substitution of the base analog rITP for 
rGTP should be useful for accurate sequencing determination.

PMID: 9813225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Hum Mol Genet. 1998 Nov;7(12):1841-9.

Goosecoid-like (Gscl), a candidate gene for velocardiofacial syndrome, is not
essential for normal mouse development.

Saint-Jore B(1), Puech A, Heyer J, Lin Q, Raine C, Kucherlapati R, Skoultchi AI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Department of Molecular Genetics and Department of
Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx,
NY 10461, USA.

Velocardiofacial syndrome (VCFS) and DiGeorge syndrome (DGS) are characterized by
a wide spectrum of abnormalities, including conotruncal heart defects,
velopharyngeal insufficiency, craniofacial anomalies and learning disabilities.
In addition, numerous other clinical features have been described, including
frequent psychiatric illness. Hemizygosity for a 1.5-3 Mb region of chromosome
22q11 has been detected in >80% of VCFS/DGS patients. It is thought that a
developmental field defect is responsible for many of the abnormalities seen in
these patients and that the defect occurs due to reduced levels of a gene product
active in early embryonic development. Goosecoid-like ( GSCL ) is a homeobox gene
which is present in the VCFS/DGS commonly deleted region. The mouse homolog,
Gscl, is expressed in mouse embryos as early as E8.5. Gscl is related to
Goosecoid ( Gsc ), a gene required for proper craniofacial development in mice.
GSCL has been considered an excellent candidate for contributing to the
developmental defects in VCFS/DGS patients. To investigate the role of
Goosecoid-like in VCFS/DGS etiology, we disrupted the Gscl gene in mouse
embryonic stem cells and produced mice that transmit the disrupted allele. Mice
that are homozygous for the disrupted allele appear to be normal and they do not 
exhibit any of the anatomical abnormalities seen in VCFS/DGS patients. RNA in
situ hybridization to mouse embryo sections revealed that Gscl is expressed at
E8.5 in the rostral region of the foregut and at E11.5 and E12.5 in the
developing brain, in the pons region and in the choroid plexus of the fourth
ventricle. Although the gene inactivation experiments indicate that
haploinsufficiency for GSCL is unlikely to be the sole cause of the developmental
field defect thought to be responsible for many of the abnormalities in VCFS/DGS 
patients, its localized expression during development could suggest that
hemizygosity for GSCL, in combination with hemizygosity for other genes in 22q11,
contributes to some of the developmental defects as well as the behavioral
anomalies seen in these patients. The mice generated in this study should help in
evaluating these possibilities.

PMID: 9811927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Hum Mol Genet. 1998 Nov;7(12):1835-40.

Functional analysis of Gscl in the pathogenesis of the DiGeorge and
velocardiofacial syndromes.

Wakamiya M(1), Lindsay EA, Rivera-Pérez JA, Baldini A, Behringer RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas M.D.Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Gscl encodes a Goosecoid-related homeodomain protein that is expressed during
mouse embryogenesis. In situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry studies show 
that Gscl is expressed in the pons region of the developing central nervous
system and primordial germ cells. Gscl expression is also detected in a subset of
adult tissues, including brain, eye, thymus, thyroid region, stomach, bladder and
testis. Gscl is located within a region of the mouse genome that is syntenic with
the region commonly deleted in DiGeorge and velocardiofacial syndrome (DGS/VCFS) 
patients. DGS/VCFS patients have craniofacial abnormalities, cardiac outflow
defects and hypoplasia of the parathyroid gland and thymus due to
haploinsufficiency of a gene or genes located within the deleted region. Thus,
the genomic location of Gscl and its expression in a subset of the tissues
affected in DGS/VCFS patients suggest that Gscl may contribute to the
pathogenesis of DGS/VCFS. To determine the role of Gscl during mouse
embryogenesis and in DGS/VCFS, we have deleted Gscl by gene targeting in mouse
embryonic stem cells. Both Gscl heterozygous and Gscl null mice were normal and
fertile, suggesting that Gscl is not a major factor in DGS/VCFS. Interestingly,
expression of the adjacent Es2 gene in the pons region of Gscl null fetuses was
absent, suggesting that mutations within the DGS/VCFS region can influence
expression of adjacent genes. In addition, embryos that lacked both Gscl and the 
related Gsc gene appeared normal. These studies represent the first functional
analysis of a DGS/VCFS candidate gene in vivo. These Gscl null mice will be an
important genetic resource for crosses with other mouse models of the DGS/VCFS.

PMID: 9811926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Development. 1998 Nov;125(22):4403-16.

Determination of the zebrafish forebrain: induction and patterning.

Grinblat Y(1), Gamse J, Patel M, Sive H.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Nine Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

We report an analysis of forebrain determination and patterning in the zebrafish 
Danio rerio. In order to study these events, we isolated zebrafish homologs of
two neural markers, odd-paired-like (opl), which encodes a zinc finger protein,
and fkh5, which encodes a forkhead domain protein. At mid-gastrula, expression of
these genes defines a very early pattern in the presumptive neurectoderm, with
opl later expressed in the telencephalon, and fkh5 in the diencephalon and more
posterior neurectoderm. Using in vitro explant assays, we show that forebrain
induction has occurred even earlier, by the onset of gastrulation (shield stage).
Signaling from the early gastrula shield, previously shown to be an organizing
center, is sufficient for activation of opl expression in vitro. In order to
determine whether the organizer is required for opl regulation, we removed from
late blastula stage embryos either the presumptive prechordal plate, marked by
goosecoid (gsc) expression, or the entire organizer, marked by chordin (chd)
expression. opl was correctly expressed after removal of the presumptive
prechordal plate and consistently, opl was correctly expressed in one-eyed
pinhead (oep) mutant embryos, where the prechordal plate fails to form. However, 
after removal of the entire organizer, no opl expression was observed, indicating
that this region is crucial for forebrain induction. We further show that
continued organizer function is required for forebrain induction, since beads of 
BMP4, which promotes ventral fates, also prevented opl expression when implanted 
during gastrulation. Our data show that forebrain specification begins early
during gastrulation, and that a wide area of dorsal mesendoderm is required for
its patterning.

PMID: 9778500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Nature. 1998 Sep 10;395(6698):181-5.

Zebrafish organizer development and germ-layer formation require nodal-related
signals.

Feldman B(1), Gates MA, Egan ES, Dougan ST, Rennebeck G, Sirotkin HI, Schier AF, 
Talbot WS.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine
and Department of Cell Biology, New York University Medical Center, New York
10016, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 1998 Sep 10;395(6698):112-3.

The vertebrate body plan is established during gastrulation, when cells move
inwards to form the mesodermal and endodermal germ layers. Signals from a region 
of dorsal mesoderm, which is termed the organizer, pattern the body axis by
specifying the fates of neighbouring cells. The organizer is itself induced by
earlier signals. Although members of the transforming growth factor-beta
(TGF-beta) and Wnt families have been implicated in the formation of the
organizer, no endogenous signalling molecule is known to be required for this
process. Here we report that the zebrafish squint (sqt) and cyclops (cyc) genes
have essential, although partly redundant, functions in organizer development and
also in the formation of mesoderm and endoderm. We show that the sqt gene encodes
a member of the TGF-beta superfamily that is related to mouse nodal. cyc encodes 
another nodal-related proteins, which is consistent with our genetic evidence
that sqt and cyc have overlapping functions. The sqt gene is expressed in a
dorsal region of the blastula that includes the extraembryonic yolk syncytial
layer (YSL). The YSL has been implicated as a source of signals that induce
organizer development and mesendoderm formation. Misexpression of sqt RNA within 
the embryo or specifically in the YSL induces expanded or ectopic dorsal
mesoderm. These results establish an essential role for nodal-related signals in 
organizer development and mesendoderm formation.

PMID: 9744277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Dev Biol. 1998 Sep 15;201(2):185-201.

Ethanol impairs migration of the prechordal plate in the zebrafish embryo.

Blader P(1), Strähle U.

Author information: 
(1)IGBMC, CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Illkirch, 67404, France.

Exposure of vertebrate embryos to ethanol causes cyclopia, but little is known
about the underlying mechanisms of this effect. Here we show that cyclopia can be
induced in the zebrafish by a short ethanol treatment during early gastrula
stages and is accompanied by loss of gene expression characteristic of the
ventral aspects of the fore- and midbrain. Interestingly, defects in the
expression of ventral brain markers are linked to impaired migration of the
prechordal plate mesoderm indicating that the correct position of the prechordal 
plate mesoderm under the anterior neural plate in the zebrafish embryo is
required for specification of the anterior neural midline. Ethanol-induced
cyclopia does not, however, impair the induction of anterior neuroectodermal
structures in general. Finally, as genes like goosecoid and islet-1 are expressed
in prechordal plate cells in a temporal pattern similar to control embryos
despite the ectopic position of expressing cells, it appears that regulation of
prechordal plate-specific gene expression is largely independent of the final
position of the prechordal plate.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9740658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Investig Dermatol Symp Proc. 1998 Aug;3(2):101-4.

What's water got to do with it? A nuclear magnetic resonance study of molecular
motion in pig stratum corneum.

Vavasour I(1), Kitson N, MacKay A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, Canada.

The 1H and 2H magnetic resonance signals from pig stratum corneum were measured
as a function of hydration. The 1H free induction decay contained two components,
one motionally restricted and the other isotropically mobile on the timescale of 
10(-5) s. From its T2 decay, the mobile signal was further subdivided into two
components; one, which was 11% of the signal and 5.5% of the mass of the
dehydrated stratum corneum, was assigned to nonaqueous tissue (likely
hydrocarbons) and the other to water. As water content increased from 0 to 0.25
gH2O/gSC, the second moment of the motionally restricted signal decreased from
5.4 x 10(9) to 3.6 x 10(9) s(-2), whereas the water T2 time increased from less
than 0.3 ms to 3.3 ms. The 2H quadrupolar echo from stratum corneum hydrated in
2H2O had a signal from motionally restricted deuterons, attributed to deuterons
exchanged onto O-H and N-H groups, and a mobile signal from 2H2O. The amount of
exchange, 9.5% of the hydrogen sites in the motionally restricted fraction, was
close to the number of exchangeable sites on keratin, the most abundant protein
in stratum corneum. Our results are consistent with a model in which the bulk of 
the water interacts closely with the corneocytes in stratum corneum.

PMID: 9734821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Mol Cell. 1998 Jul;2(1):109-20.

Smad2 and Smad3 positively and negatively regulate TGF beta-dependent
transcription through the forkhead DNA-binding protein FAST2.

Labbé E(1), Silvestri C, Hoodless PA, Wrana JL, Attisano L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

We identify a mammalian forkhead domain protein, FAST2, that is required for
induction of the goosecoid (gsc) promoter by TGF beta or activin signaling. FAST2
binds to a sequence in the gsc promoter, but efficient transcriptional activation
and assembly of a DNA-binding complex of FAST2, Smad2, and Smad4 requires an
adjacent Smad4 site. Smad3 is closely related to Smad2 but suppresses activation 
of the gsc promoter. Inhibitory activity is conferred by the MH1 domain, which
unlike that of Smad2, binds to the Smad4 site. Through competition for this
shared site, Smad3 may prevent transcription by altering the conformation of the 
DNA-binding complex. Thus, we describe a mechanism whereby Smad2 and Smad3
positively and negatively regulate a TGF beta/activin target gene.

PMID: 9702197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Biomed Sci. 1998;5(3):211-20.

Analysis of HIV-1 Tat effects in Xenopus laevis embryos.

Venanzi S(1), Destrée OH, Gigliani F, Battaglia PA.

Author information: 
(1)Reparto di Genetica Molecolare, Laboratorio di Biologia Cellulare, Istituto
Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy. s.venanz@iss.it

Tat is one of the regulatory proteins of the HIV-1 virus. To date, besides the
transactivation activity, a myriad of effects exerted by HIV-1 Tat on cellular
and viral genes have been observed. The present study investigated the in vivo
effects of HIV-1 Tat protein in the Xenopus embryo. We adopted the Xenopus system
since expression of putative regulatory factors in the embryo has been widely
used as a quick and effective first screen for protein function. Xenopus' early
development is well characterized by stage-specific phenotypes, therefore, an in 
vivo HIV-1 Tat-mediated aberrant phenotype can easily be detected and analyzed.
HIV-1 Tat protein expression through injection of synthetic mRNA into zygotes
produced a marked delay in gastrulation leading to altered specification of the
anterior-posterior axis and to partial or total loss of anterior structures.
HIV-1 Tat effects resulted in a general suppression of gene expression, including
that of Xbra and gsc, two early genes whose expression is required for proper
gastrulation. The specificity of Tat effects was demonstrated by injecting a
'loss of function' mutant (Tat-C37S), lacking a single cysteine residue, which
did not yield any effect. Both Tat and Tat-C37S were found to be localized mainly
in the nucleus. The importance of subcellular targeting for the effects caused by
HIV-1 Tat was demonstrated by injecting a second mutant (Tat-BDM), carrying an
altered nuclear localization signal sequence. The Tat-BDM protein localized in
the cytoplasm and accumulated at the cell membrane. Embryos injected with Tat-BDM
mRNA did not develop beyond gastrulation. The importance of proper protein
conformation and subcellular localization in determining Tat effects is
discussed.

PMID: 9678492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Dev Biol. 1998 Jul 1;199(1):93-110.

Ventral and lateral regions of the zebrafish gastrula, including the neural crest
progenitors, are established by a bmp2b/swirl pathway of genes.

Nguyen VH(1), Schmid B, Trout J, Connors SA, Ekker M, Mullins MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, USA.

A bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling pathway is implicated in
dorsoventral patterning in Xenopus. Here we show that three genes in the
zebrafish, swirl, snailhouse, and somitabun, function as critical components
within a BMP pathway to pattern ventral regions of the embryo. The dorsalized
mutant phenotypes of these genes can be rescued by overexpression of bmp4, bmp2b,
an activated BMP type I receptor, and the downstream functioning Smad1 gene.
Consistent with a function as a BMP ligand, swirl functions cell nonautonomously 
to specify ventral cell fates. Chromosomal mapping of swirl and cDNA sequence
analysis demonstrate that swirl is a mutation in the zebrafish bmp2b gene.
Interestingly, our analysis suggests that the previously described
nonneural/neural ectodermal interaction specifying the neural crest occurs
through a patterning function of swirl/bmp2b during gastrulation. We observe a
loss in neural crest progenitors in swirl/bmp2b mutant embryos, while somitabun
mutants display an opposite, dramatic expansion of the prospective neural crest. 
Examination of dorsally and ventrally restricted markers during gastrulation
reveals a successive reduction and reciprocal expansion in nonneural and neural
ectoderm, respectively, in snailhouse, somitabun, and swirl mutant embryos, with 
swirl/bmp2b mutants exhibiting almost no nonneural ectoderm. Based on the
alterations in tissue-specific gene expression, we propose a model whereby
swirl/bmp2b acts as a morphogen to specify different cell types along the
dorsoventral axis.

PMID: 9676195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Chem Biol. 1998 Jul;5(7):373-84.

Kinetics and regioselectivity of peptide-to-heterocycle conversions by microcin
B17 synthetase.

Belshaw PJ(1), Roy RS, Kelleher NL, Walsh CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology Harvard Medical 
School Boston, MA 02115, USA.

BACKGROUND: The Escherichia coli peptide antibiotic microcin B17 (MccB17)
contains four oxazole and four thiazole rings introduced post-translationally in 
the 69 amino acid McbA gene product, an MccB17 precursor, by the microcin B,C,D
enzyme complex. Both monocyclic and 4,2-bis-heterocyclic moieties are generated. 
The enzymatic cyclization involves 14 of the last 43 amino acids of McbA and
requires the presence of the first 26 amino acids that function as a
specificity-conferring propeptide.
RESULTS: We have constructed maltose-binding protein (MBP)-McbA1-46 fusion
proteins and have mutagenized the Gly39-Ser40-Cys41 (GSC) wild-type sequence to
assess the regioselectivity and chemoselectivity of MccB17-synthetase-mediated
heterocycle formation at the first two loci, residues 40 and 41 of McbA. Four
single-site and four double-site substrates showed substantial differences in
turnover as assessed by western assays, UV-visible spectroscopy and mass
spectrometry. Cysteine-derived thiazoles form at a greater rate than
serine-derived oxazoles. Formation of bis-heterocycles is sensitive both to
composition and sequence context.
CONCLUSIONS: The E. coli McbB,C,D MccB17 synthetase is the first peptide
heterocyclization enzyme to be characterized. This study reveals substantial
regioselectivity and chemoselectivity (thiazole > oxazole) at the most
amino-terminal bis-heterocyclization site of McbA. The heterocyclization of GSS
and GCC mutants of McbA1-46 by MccB17 synthetase demonstrates that the complex
can efficiently generate tandem bis-oxazoles and bis-thiazoles, moieties not
found in MccB17 but present in natural products such as hennoxazole and
bleomycin. The observations suggest a common enzymatic mechanism for the
formation of peptide-derived heterocyclic natural products.

PMID: 9662507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Mech Dev. 1998 Jun;74(1-2):133-43.

The Xcad-2 gene can provide a ventral signal independent of BMP-4.

Pillemer G(1), Yelin R, Epstein M, Gont L, Frumkin Y, Yisraeli JK, Steinbeisser
H, Fainsod A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry, Hebrew University Hadassah Medical
School, P.O. Box 12272, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

Patterning of the marginal zone in the Xenopus embryo has been attributed to
interactions between dorsal genes expressed in the organizer and ventral-specific
genes. In this antagonistic interplay of activities, BMP-4, a gene that is not
expressed in the organizer, provides a strong ventralizing signal. The Xenopus
caudal type homeobox gene, Xcad-2, which is expressed around the blastopore with 
a gap over the dorsal lip, was analyzed as part of the ventral signal. Xcad-2 was
shown to efficiently repress during early gastrula stages the dorsal genes gsc,
Xnot-2, Otx-2, XFKH1 and Xlim-1, while it positively regulates the ventral genes,
Xvent-1 and Xvent-2, with Xpo exhibiting a strong positive response to Xcad-2
overexpression. Xcad-2 was also capable of inducing BMP-4 expression in the
organizer region. Support for a ventralizing role for Xcad-2 was obtained from
co-injection experiments with the dominant negative BMP receptor which was used
to block BMP-4 signaling. Under lack-of-BMP-signaling conditions Xcad-2 could
still regulate dorsal and ventral gene expression and restore normal development,
suggesting that it can act downstream of BMP-4 signaling or independently of it. 
Xcad-2 could also inhibit secondary axis formation and dorsalization induced by
the dominant negative BMP receptor. Xcad-2 was also shown to efficiently reverse 
the dorsalizing effects of LiCl. These results place Xcad-2 as part of the
ventralizing gene program which acts during early gastrula stages and can execute
its ventralizing function in the absence of BMP signaling.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved

PMID: 9651504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Development. 1998 Apr;125(8):1347-59.

Antimorphic goosecoids.

Ferreiro B(1), Artinger M, Cho K, Niehrs C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Embryology, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum,
Heidelberg, Germany.

goosecoid (gsc) is a homeobox gene expressed in the Spemann organizer that has
been implicated in vertebrate axis formation. Here antimorphic gscs are
described. One antimorphic gsc (MTgsc) was fortuitously created by adding 5 myc
epitopes to the N terminus of gsc. The other antimorph (VP16gsc) contains the
transcriptional activation domain of VP16. mRNA injection of either antimorph
inhibits dorsal gastrulation movements and leads to embryos with severe axial
defects. They upregulate ventral gene expression in the dorsal marginal zone and 
inhibit dorsal mesoderm differentiation. Like the VP16 domain, the N-terminal myc
tags act by converting wild-type gsc from a transcriptional repressor into an
activator. However, unlike MTgsc, VP16gsc is able at low dose to uncouple head
from trunk formation, indicating that different antimorphs may elicit distinct
phenotypes. The experiments reveal that gsc and/or gsc-related genes function in 
axis formation and gastrulation. Moreover, this work warns against using myc tags
indiscriminately for labeling DNA-binding proteins.

PMID: 9502717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Nervenarzt. 1998 May;69(5):427-36.

[How effective and acceptable is a self-treatment manual with concomitant brief
therapy in bulimia nervosa].

[Article in German]

Thiels C(1), Schmidt U, Treasure J, Garthe R, Troop N.

Author information: 
(1)Fachbereich Sozialwesen, Fachhochschule Bielefeld.

We compared 8 fortnightly sessions plus a self-care manual (guided self change,
GSC) with 16 weekly individual sessions of cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT).
There were 31 sufferers of DSM-III-R-bulimia nervosa (BN) in each group. Both
treatments resulted in significant improvements regarding self and interviewer
based measures of bulimia nervosa as well as depression, self-esteem, quality of 
life and knowledge about nutrition, weight and shape. There were no significant
differences between therapies regarding drop-out rate, compliance with follow-up,
and the number of patients receiving additional treatment. At none of the
assessments was there a significant difference between GSC and CBT regarding
severity of BN, Beck Depression Inventory-score, self-esteem, and quality of
life. A significantly higher percentage of CBT-patients were abstinent from
bingeing for at least one week at the end of treatment. Three months later, the
GSC-group had caught up in this respect and knew more about nutition, weight and 
shape. Only the sum-scores on a BN self-rating scale were worse for GSC than CBT 
at the end of therapy and at follow-up. There were no significant differences
between the two groups in general treatment satisfaction and judgement about the 
usefulness of the therapies. Thus, guided self change with a selfcare manual can 
save therapist time without impinging significantly on treatment satisfaction and
effectiveness.

PMID: 9629559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Med Pregl. 1998 Mar-Apr;51(3-4):165-8.

[Brain concussion--a minor craniocerebral injury].

[Article in Croatian]

Kojadinovic Z(1), Momcilovic A, Popovic L, Jajic D, Cigic T, Vulekovic P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut za hirurgiju, Neurohirurska klinika, Medicinski fakultet, Novi Sad.

INTRODUCTION: Brain concussion is a brain dysfunction without any macroscopic
structural damage, caused by mechanical force. This research paper presents the
occurrence and basic characteristics of patients with brain concussion without
skull fracture. The second aim of this paper is to answer questions, related to
this problem, neurosurgeons are most often asked by doctors of other specialties.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Posttraumatic amnesia (patient unable to remember events
before and/or after injury) was a condition to diagnose the brain concussion. In 
1995 there were 240 patients with brain concussions without skull fracture at the
Department of Urgent Surgery of our Institute. Eighty of them (33%) have been
admitted to the Neurosurgical Clinic for observation and/or treatment. In all
patients with brain concussion the following diagnostic procedure was applied:
personal history, physical and neurological examination, basic blood tests and
skull x-rays. CT imaging of the brain is not a routine because of our economic
and technical circumstances.
RESULTS: 240 patients were examined; 67% were males. Glasgow coma score (GSC) was
13-15 in all patients, while in nonhospitalized patients it was 15 (GSC = 15).
54% of patients were 15-40 years old; 35% were 41-60 years old and 11% were older
than 60 years of age. Average hospitalization lasted for 3.48 days. According to 
the Glasgow outcome scale all patients had a good recovery.
DISCUSSION: Patients with brain concussion have always amnesia with normal
neurologic status. Legal and clinical definition of the minor head injury are not
completely equal. Brain concussion is legally always a minor head injury.
Patients with organic damage of brain (legally severe injury) can clinically look
like having minor injury initially or till the end of the illness. Risk for brain
damage in patients with amnesia is about 3%. Posttraumatic amnesia is always
established by asking patients to remember events and not asking them if they
were unconscious. Brain concussion is often associated with headache, vegetative 
or/and psychotic difficulties. Diagnostic protocol should comprise at least
personal history, physical and neurological examination and skull x-ray.
Consultation of a neurosurgeon and hospitalization are not indicated in all
cases. In our series it was done in 33% according to indications which are
established. In these cases patients should be transported with documents
describing the type of injury, diagnostic results and treatment performed. The
therapy is symptomatic. After brain concussion gradual return to everyday
activities is indicated. Sick leave of 7-10 days is usually sufficient.
Postconcussion syndrome (headache, vegetative or psychotic disturbances) occurs
often and may last for a long period of time.
CONCLUSION: We tried to describe a doctrine for diagnostic and treatment of
patients suffering from brain concussion most appropriate according to our
technical and economical circumstances.

PMID: 9611962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Dev Dyn. 1998 May;212(1):86-93.

Gscl, a gene within the minimal DiGeorge critical region, is expressed in
primordial germ cells and the developing pons.

Galili N(1), Epstein JA, Leconte I, Nayak S, Buck CA.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.
galili@wista.wistar.upenn.edu

Gscl, a paired-type homeobox gene, has been implicated in the pathology of
DGS/VCFS by virtue of its genomic location and its structural similarity to the
Gsc gene family. Immunohistochemical and in situ studies were performed to
examine the expression pattern of this gene during embryonic development. A
polyclonal antibody, generated to the full-length protein and shown to be
specific for GSCL by both Western blotting and immunofluorescence, was used for
immunohistochemical localization. Both in situ and antibody staining localized
GSCL expression to a cluster of cells in the pons region of the developing brain.
This GSCL expression pattern showed partial overlap with that of Pax6. More
detailed immunohistochemistry revealed the GSCL in primordial germ cells during
migration from the epithelium of the hindgut and later as they colonize the
developing gonads. GSCL was not detected in tissues affected in DGS/VCSF.

PMID: 9603426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Apr 14;95(8):4398-403.

Cooperation between the activin and Wnt pathways in the spatial control of
organizer gene expression.

Crease DJ(1), Dyson S, Gurdon JB.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Cancer Research Campaign Institute, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge, CB2
1QR England and Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2
3EJ England.

The normal expression pattern of the Wnt responsive homeobox gene Siamois is
restricted to the dorso-vegetal region of the Xenopus embryo. Because the Wnt
signaling pathway (via beta-catenin) is active on the entire dorsal side of the
early embryo, we have asked why Siamois expression is not seen in the dorsal
ectoderm. Only Wnt signaling, via activation of beta-catenin, can induce directly
Siamois, and signaling via the SMAD1 (BMP2/4) or SMAD2 (activin/Vg-1) pathways
cannot. We now directly show that the SMAD2 pathway can cooperate with the Wnt
pathway to induce expression of Siamois much more strongly than the Wnt pathway
alone, in normal embryos. We demonstrate the significance of this cooperation in 
normal embryos by blocking the SMAD2 signaling pathway with a dominant negative
activin receptor. The activin dominant negative receptor blocks this cooperative 
effect and reduces the expression of Siamois by threefold in early embryos.
Furthermore, we find that this cooperative relationship between the SMAD2 and Wnt
pathways is reciprocal. Thus, in normal embryos, the Wnt pathway can enhance
induction, by the SMAD 2 pathway, of the organizer genes Gsc and Chd but not the 
pan-mesodermal marker genes Xbra and Eomes. We conclude that the Wnt and SMAD2
signaling pathways cooperate to induce the expression of Spemann-organizer
specific genes and so help to localize their spatial expression.

PMCID: PMC22500
PMID: 9539748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Hum Mol Genet. 1998 Apr;7(4):629-35.

ES2, a gene deleted in DiGeorge syndrome, encodes a nuclear protein and is
expressed during early mouse development, where it shares an expression domain
with a Goosecoid-like gene.

Lindsay EA(1), Harvey EL, Scambler PJ, Baldini A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, One
Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

ES2 is a gene deleted in DiGeorge syndrome (DGS) and velocardiofacial syndrome
(VCFS) which has homologs in species as distant as Caenorhabditis elegans and
Drosophila . The function of ES2 is unknown, and the predicted protein sequence
does not contain motifs which suggest a particular role in the developmental
defects present in DGS and VCFS. Here we show that the mouse homolog, Es2 , is
transcribed in two forms resulting from the use of alternative polyadenylation
signals. Structural analysis programs predict that the Es2 -encoded peptide has a
coiled-coil domain, and transfection experiments with an Es2 -green fluorescent
protein (GFP) fusion construct show that the peptide is recruited into the
nucleus. Es2 is highly expressed during mouse embryogenesis from E7 onwards. In
situ hybridization with an RNA probe revealed that the gene is widely expressed; 
however, relatively higher expression was detected in the nervous system, with a 
particularly high area of expression in a sub-region of the pons. The Es2
expression domain in the pons is shared with a Goosecoid-like gene ( Gscl) which 
is located upstream of Es2 , and raises the possibility that the two genes share 
regulatory elements and/or interact in this region of the developing brain. This 
finding suggests that different genes in the deleted region may be functionally
related and might explain the occurrence of the characteristic phenotype in
patients with non-overlapping genetic lesions.

PMID: 9499415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Mech Dev. 1998 Mar;72(1-2):15-25.

The prechordal midline of the chondrocranium is defective in Goosecoid-1 mouse
mutants.

Belo JA(1), Leyns L, Yamada G, De Robertis EM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biological Chemistry,
University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1662, USA.

Gsc-1 expression marks cells with Spemann organizer, or axis-inducing, activity
in the vertebrate gastrula. Gsc-1 knockouts, however, did not display phenotypes 
related to the early phase of expression. In this paper, additional phenotypes
for the Gsc-1 mouse mutant are presented. Examination of the base of the cranium 
in the dorsal view revealed fusions and deletions in the midline of the
prechordal chondrocranium. These defects were correlated with the sites of
expression of Gsc-1 in the prechordal plate/foregut endoderm in the day 7.5/8.5
embryo. Gsc-1 expression in proximal limb buds was correlated with malformations 
of the shoulder and hip articulations. In addition, ribs in the seventh cervical 
vertebra were observed with low penetrance. The role of Gsc-1 during gastrulation
and axial development is discussed in relation to possible compensatory
interactions with other genes such as HNF-3beta and the recently identified Gsc-2
and Gsc-3 genes.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 9533949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Development. 1998 Mar;125(5):937-47.

Drosophila Goosecoid requires a conserved heptapeptide for repression of
paired-class homeoprotein activators.

Mailhos C(1), André S, Mollereau B, Goriely A, Hemmati-Brivanlou A, Desplan C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Rockefeller
University, New York, USA.

Goosecoid (Gsc) is a homeodomain protein expressed in the organizer region of
vertebrate embryos. Its Drosophila homologue, D-Gsc, has been implicated in the
formation of the Stomatogastric Nervous System. Although there are no apparent
similarities between the phenotypes of mutations in the gsc gene in flies and
mice, all known Gsc proteins can rescue dorsoanterior structures in ventralized
Xenopus embryos. We describe how D-Gsc behaves as a transcriptional repressor in 
Drosophila cells, acting through specific palindromic HD binding sites (P3K).
D-Gsc is a 'passive repressor' of activator homeoproteins binding to the same
sites and an 'active repressor' of activators binding to distinct sites. In
addition, D-Gsc is able to strongly repress transcription activated by
Paired-class homeoproteins through P3K, via specific protein-protein interactions
in what we define as 'interactive repression'. This form of repression requires
the short conserved GEH/eh-1 domain, also present in the Engrailed repressor.
Although the GEH/eh-1 domain is necessary for rescue of UV-ventralized Xenopus
embryos, it is dispensable for ectopic induction of Xlim-1 expression,
demonstrating that this domain is not required for all Gsc functions in vivo.
Interactive repression may represent specific interactions among Prd-class
homeoproteins, several of which act early during development of invertebrate and 
vertebrate embryos.

PMID: 9449676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Development. 1998 Mar;125(5):813-24.

Cranial and cardiac neural crest defects in endothelin-A receptor-deficient mice.

Clouthier DE(1), Hosoda K, Richardson JA, Williams SC, Yanagisawa H, Kuwaki T,
Kumada M, Hammer RE, Yanagisawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular Genetics, University 
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, Dallas, Texas 75235, USA.

Neural crest cells arise in the dorsal aspect of the neural tube and migrate
extensively to differentiate into a variety of neural and non-neural tissues.
While interactions between neural crest cells and their local environments are
required for the proper development of these tissues, little information is
available about the molecular nature of the cell-cell interactions in cephalic
neural crest development. Here we demonstrate that mice deficient for one type of
endothelin receptor, ETA, mimic the human conditions collectively termed CATCH 22
or velocardiofacial syndrome, which include severe craniofacial deformities and
defects in the cardiovascular outflow tract. We show that ETA receptor mRNA is
expressed by the neural crest-derived ectomesenchymal cells of pharyngeal arches 
and cardiac outflow tissues, whereas ET-1 ligand mRNA is expressed by arch
epithelium, paraxial mesoderm-derived arch core and the arch vessel endothelium. 
This suggests that paracrine interaction between neural crest-derived cells and
both ectoderm and mesoderm is essential in forming the skeleton and connective
tissue of the head. Further, we find that pharyngeal arch expression of goosecoid
is absent in ETA receptor-deficient mice, placing the transcription factor as one
of the possible downstream signals triggered by activation of the ETA receptor.
These observations define a novel genetic pathway for inductive communication
between cephalic neural crest cells and their environmental counterparts.

PMID: 9449664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Dev Dyn. 1998 Apr;211(4):374-81.

Malformation of trachea and pelvic region in goosecoid mutant mice.

Zhu CC(1), Yamada G, Nakamura S, Terashi T, Schweickert A, Blum M.

Author information: 
(1)Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe, Institute of Genetics, Germany.

The homeobox gene goosecoid is expressed in the Spemann organizer tissue of
gastrulating vertebrate embryos, and in the craniofacial region and appendicular 
skeleton during organogenesis. The goosecoid knockout mutant mouse revealed
defects related to the second phase of expression. Here we describe new
expression sites in the developing trachea and external genitalia, and in the
developing shoulder and hip joint with their associated ligaments and muscles. We
show that mutant mice display abnormalities in the forming trachea and
appendicular skeleton related to these sites of gene expression. In addition, we 
discuss evidence for the existence of at least three goosecoid genes in
vertebrates, which may account for the lack of a defect of axial patterning in
goosecoid mutant mice.

PMID: 9566956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Mech Dev. 1998 Jan;70(1-2):15-24.

Pre-MBT patterning of early gene regulation in Xenopus: the role of the cortical 
rotation and mesoderm induction.

Ding X(1), Hausen P, Steinbeisser H.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Cell Biology, PR China.

Patterning events that occur before the mid-blastula transition (MBT) and that
organize the spatial pattern of gene expression in the animal hemisphere have
been analyzed in Xenopus embryos. We present evidence that genes that play a role
in dorsoventral specification display different modes of activation. Using early 
blastomere explants (16-128-cell stage) cultured until gastrula stages, we
demonstrate by RT-PCR analysis that the expression of goosecoid (gsc), wnt-8 and 
brachyury (bra) is dependent on mesoderm induction. In contrast, nodal-related 3 
(nr3) and siamois (sia) are expressed in a manner that is independent of mesoderm
induction, however their spatially correct activation does require cortical
rotation. The pattern of sia and nr3 expression reveals that the animal half of
the 16-cell embryo is already distinctly polarized along the dorsoventral axis as
a result of rearrangement of the egg structure during cortical rotation. Similar 
to the antagonistic activity between the ventral and the dorsal mesoderm, the
ventral animal blastomeres can attenuate the expression of nr3 and sia in dorsal 
animal blastomeres. Our data suggest that no Nieuwkoop center activity at the
blastula stage is required for the activation of nr3 and sia in vivo.

PMID: 9510021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Mech Dev. 1997 Dec;69(1-2):31-7.

Goosecoid misexpression alters the morphology and Hox gene expression of the
developing chick limb bud.

Heanue TA(1), Johnson RL, Izpisua-Belmonte JC, Stern CD, De Robertis EM, Tabin
CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The homeobox-containing gene goosecoid (gsc) has been implicated in a variety of 
embryonic processes from gastrulation to rib patterning. We have analyzed the
role it plays during chick limb development. Expression is initially observed at 
stage 20 in a proximal-anterior-ventral domain of the early limb bud which
expands during subsequent stages. Later in limb development a second domain of
expression appears distally which resolves to regions which surround the
condensing cartilage. In order to understand the function of gsc in limb
development, we have examined the effect of misexpressing gsc throughout the
limb. Two striking phenotypes are observed. The first, evident at stage 24, is an
alteration in the angle of femur outgrowth from the main body axis. The second,
which can be detected at day 10 of development, is an overall decrease in the
size of the limb with bones that are small, misshapen and bent. These phenotypes 
correlate with a decrease in levels of Hox gene expression in gsc-infected limb
buds. From these results we suggest that gsc may normally function to regulate
growth and patterning of the limb, perhaps through regulation of Hox gene
expression.

PMID: 9486529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Int J Dev Biol. 1997 Oct;41(5):741-5.

Cortical rotation is required for the correct spatial expression of nr3, sia and 
gsc in Xenopus embryos.

Medina A(1), Wendler SR, Steinbeisser H.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institute for Developmental Biology, Dept. of Cell Biology,
Tübingen, Germany.

Beta-catenin, a component of the wnt-signal-transduction pathway, is essential
for the formation of the dorsal axis in Xenopus laevis embryos. On the dorsal
side of the embryo, beta-catenin is translocated into the nuclei via a process
linked to cortical rotation. When cortical rotation is blocked by UV-irradiation,
nuclear beta-catenin is found in the vegetal pole of the embryo. Here we show
that overexpression of beta-catenin in animal cap explants, in the absence of
mesoderm induction, is sufficient to activate the expression of genes with
dorsalizing activity such as siamois (sia) and nodal-related 3 (nr3) but not
goosecoid (gsc). In embryos ventralized by UV-treatment, the expression of the
dorsal-specific genes sia, nr3 and gsc is induced at the vegetal pole after the
Mid-Blastula-Transition (MBT). While nr3 and sia expression continues in these
embryos until gastrula stages, gsc transcription cannot be maintained. We propose
that the spatial separation of the expression domains of genes with dorsalizing
activities and the prospective mesodermal region results in the loss of dorsal
structures in the embryo. The role of cortical rotation is to generate an overlap
of the region with dorsal axis-forming activity, indicated by nuclear
translocation of beta-catenin, and the prospective mesoderm in the marginal zone 
to assure the correct positioning of the Spemann organizer.

PMID: 9415495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jan 2;273(1):627-35.

Negative autoregulation of the organizer-specific homeobox gene goosecoid.

Danilov V(1), Blum M, Schweickert A, Campione M, Steinbeisser H.

Author information: 
(1)Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe, Institute of Genetics, P.O. Box 3640, D-76021
Karlsruhe,Federal Republic of Germany.

The homeobox gene goosecoid has been implicated to play a central role in the
Spemann organizer tissue of the vertebrate embryo. Misexpression of goosecoid on 
the ventral side of a Xenopus laevis gastrula embryo was shown to result in a
partial duplication of the primary body axis, reminiscent of the Spemann
organizer graft. Normal embryonic development thus requires tight temporal and
spatial control of genes instrumental for organizer function. In the present
study we investigated the transcriptional control of goosecoid gene expression.
Sequence analysis of the mouse and human promoter region revealed the presence of
two palindromic binding elements for homeobox genes of the prd type to which
goosecoid belongs. We show that Goosecoid protein can bind to these sites in
vitro. By using reporter gene constructs of the human and mouse promoter, we
demonstrate that Goosecoid can act as a repressor of its own promoter activity in
transient co-transfection experiments in mouse P19 cells and in Xenopus embryos. 
Autorepression depends on the presence of the homeodomain and is mediated through
the prd element more proximal to the transcriptional start site. Our results
suggest a role for goosecoid in restricting organizer activity in the vertebrate 
gastrula embryo.

PMID: 9417125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Genomics. 1997 Dec 15;46(3):364-72.

Characterization and mutation analysis of goosecoid-like (GSCL), a
homeodomain-containing gene that maps to the critical region for VCFS/DGS on
22q11.

Funke B(1), Saint-Jore B, Puech A, Sirotkin H, Edelmann L, Carlson C, Raft S,
Pandita RK, Kucherlapati R, Skoultchi A, Morrow BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, 
New York 10461, USA.

Velocardiofacial syndrome (VCFS) is a developmental disorder characterized by
conotruncal heart defects, craniofacial anomalies, and learning disabilities.
VCFS is phenotypically related to DiGeorge syndrome (DGS) and both syndromes are 
associated with hemizygous 22q11 deletions. Because many of the tissues and
structures affected in VCFS/DGS derive from the pharyngeal arches of the
developing embryo, it is believed that haploinsufficiency of a gene(s) involved
in embryonic development may be responsible for its etiology. A
homeodomain-containing gene, Goosecoidlike (GSCL), has been recently described,
and it resides in the critical region for VCFS/DGS on 22q11. GSCL is related to
the Goosecoid gene (GSC) in both sequence of the homeodomain and genomic
organization. Gsc in the mouse is expressed during early and midembryogenesis and
is required for craniofacial rib, and limb development. The chick homolog of
GSCL, termed GSX, is expressed during early chick embryogenesis. We detected GSCL
expression in human embryos and biphasic expression in mouse embryos. It is
possible that the vertebrate GSCL gene is also required for embryonic
development. Due to its location in the critical region on 22q11, GSCL is an
excellent candidate gene for VCFS/DGS. The vertebrate GSC protein has the same
DNA binding specificity as the Drosophila morphogen, bicoid. Upon examination of 
the putative GSCL promoter, we found three sequence elements with an exact match 
to the reverse complement of the bicoid DNA recognition motif, suggesting that
GSC, or possibly GSCL itself, regulates the transcription of GSCL. Sequence
analysis of the putative promoter and the coding region of GSCL was performed on 
the DNA template from 17 VCFS patients who did not have a detectable 22q11
deletion to identify mutations. We did not detect a mutation in this set of VCFS 
patients. A polymorphism was detected in codon 47 of exon 1.

PMID: 9441739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Dev Biol. 1997 Dec 15;192(2):482-91.

The Spemann organizer of Xenopus is patterned along its anteroposterior axis at
the earliest gastrula stage.

Zoltewicz JS(1), Gerhart JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina
27710, USA. susiez@acpub.duke.edu

The Spemann organizer is largely responsible for organizing and patterning the
anteroposterior axis during the development of amphibians. In this report, we
examine the degree of anteroposterior pattern in the earliest gastrula organizer 
of Xenopus using a combination of embryological and molecular techniques. When we
divide the earliest gastrula organizer, a region measuring 20 cells high by 25
cells wide, into stereotyped anterior (vegetal) and posterior (animal) halves,
each half not only has a distinct fate and state of specification, but also
induces a unique set of region-specific neural genes. When wrapped in animal cap 
ectoderm, the anterior half induces only anterior-specific genes (XAG-1 and
otxA), while the posterior half induces anterior (otxA and reduced levels of
XAG-1) and posterior (Hox B9) neural genes, revealing early localization of
neural posteriorizing activity to posterior mesendoderm. This is the earliest
demonstration of regionalized neural induction by the Xenopus organizer.
Additionally, based on the expression of gsc, Xbra, and Xnot, we show that the
organizer is patterned both at the early gastrula stage and prior to the
appearance of bottle cells.

PMID: 9441683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Development. 1997 Dec;124(23):4905-16.

The Xenopus homeobox gene twin mediates Wnt induction of goosecoid in
establishment of Spemann's organizer.

Laurent MN(1), Blitz IL, Hashimoto C, Rothbächer U, Cho KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, and the Developmental Biology
Center, University of California, Irvine 92697-2300, USA.

We describe the isolation of the Xenopus homeobox gene twin (Xtwn), which was
identified in an expression cloning screen for molecules with dorsalizing
activities. Injection of synthetic Xtwn mRNA restores a complete dorsal axis in
embryos lacking dorsal structures and induces a complete secondary dorsal axis
when ectopically expressed in normal embryos. The sequence homology, expression
pattern and gain-of-function phenotype of Xtwn is most similar to the previously 
isolated Xenopus homeobox gene siamois (Xsia) suggesting that Xtwn and Xsia
comprise a new subclass of homeobox genes important in dorsal axis specification.
We find that Xtwn is able to activate the Spemann organizer-specific gene
goosecoid (gsc) via direct binding to a region of the gsc promoter previously
shown to mediate Wnt induction. Since Xtwn expression is strongly induced in
ectodermal (animal cap) cells in response to overexpression of a dorsalizing Wnt 
molecule, we examined the possibility that Xtwn might be a direct target of a Wnt
signal transduction cascade. First, we demonstrate that purified LEF1 protein can
interact, in vitro, with consensus LEF1/TCF3-binding sites found within the Xtwn 
promoter. Second, these binding sites were shown to be required for Wnt-mediated 
induction of a Xtwn reporter gene containing these sites. As LEF1/TCF3 family
transcription factors have previously been shown to directly mediate Wnt
signaling, these results suggest that Xtwn induction by Wnt may be direct.
Finally, in UV-hyperventralized embryos, expression of endogenous Xtwn is
confined to the vegetal pole and a Xtwn reporter gene is hyperinduced vegetally
in a LEF1/TCF3-binding-site-dependent manner. These results suggest that cortical
rotation distributes Wnt-like dorsal determinants to the dorsal side of the
embryo, including the dorsal marginal zone, and that these determinants may
directly establish Spemann's organizer in this region.

PMID: 9428427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Am J Hum Genet. 1997 Dec;61(6):1456-9.

Goosecoid-like sequences and the smallest region of deletion overlap in DiGeorge 
and velocardiofacial syndromes.

Pragliola A, Jurecic V, Chau CK, Philip N, Baldini A.

Comment on
    Am J Hum Genet. 1997 May;60(5):1194-201.

PMCID: PMC1716100
PMID: 9399910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Comput Appl Biosci. 1997 Oct;13(5):557-8.

GSC: a graphical program for NMR chemical shift comparison.

Gronwald W(1), Boyko RF, Sykes BD.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Engineering Network of Centres of Excellence, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Canada.

PMID: 9367130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Oncogene. 1997 Sep 25;15(13):1583-6.

Gene structure of the human MET proto-oncogene.

Duh FM(1), Scherer SW, Tsui LC, Lerman MI, Zbar B, Schmidt L.

Author information: 
(1)Intramural Research Support Program, SAIC Frederick, National Cancer
Institute-Frederick Cancer Research and Development Center, Maryland 21702, USA.

By direct sequencing of cosmids using primers designed from the known cDNA
sequence, we identified 19 exons in the human MET proto-oncogene, and sequenced
the corresponding 5' and 3' exon-intron junctions. By homology search in the
database of the Washington University Genome Sequence Center (GSC), we identified
one additional exon. These 20 exons, together with a previously reported exon,
bring the total exon number of MET to 21. Oligonucleotide primers were designed
to amplify each exon and adjacent intronic sequences to permit examination of
each exon for mutations. By restriction mapping, we assembled a 110 kb genomic
contig that covered almost the entire MET proto-oncogene. This information is
relevant for the screening of recently reported mutations of the MET gene which
cause hereditary papillary renal carcinomas and for the search for additional
mutations of the same gene which may play a role in the pathogenesis of common
human carcinomas including carcinomas of the breast, ovary and pancreas.

PMID: 9380410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Can J Anaesth. 1997 Sep;44(9):929-33.

Opioid sedation does not alter intracranial pressure in head injured patients.

Lauer KK(1), Connolly LA, Schmeling WT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, USA.
klauer@post.its.mcw.edu

PURPOSE: This study aimed to examine the effects of sedative doses of morphine,
fentanyl and sufentanil on intracranial pressure (ICP) in head-injured patients
in whom changes in mean arterial pressure (MAP) were minimized.
METHODS: Fifteen severely head-injured patients (GSC of < or = 8) were randomly
assigned to receive either fentanyl, sufentanil or morphine, titrating the drug
to a maximal 10% decrease in MAP. The patients were subsequently given an
infusion of the same opioid. For four hours, ICP, MAP and heart rate were
recorded.
RESULTS: In all groups, there were no increases in ICP. There was a decrease in
MAP in the sufentanil group at 10 min (P < 0.05) and 45 min after the initial
opioid bolus. These decreases in MAP were not associated with increases in ICP.
CONCLUSION: The study suggests that when opioids are titrated in head-injured
patients, worsening intracranial pressure can be avoided.

PMID: 9305555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Genes Dev. 1997 Sep 1;11(17):2176-90.

The KH domain protein encoded by quaking functions as a dimer and is essential
for notochord development in Xenopus embryos.

Zorn AM(1), Krieg PA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Developmental Biology, Department of Zoology, University of Texas
at Austin, 78712, USA. amz@mole.bio.cam.ac.uk

Mutations in the mouse indicate that quaking gene function is essential for both 
embryogenesis and for development of the nervous system. Recent isolation of the 
mouse quaking gene identified a putative RNA-binding protein containing a single 
KH domain. We have previously isolated the Xenopus homolog of quaking, Xqua, and 
shown that the sequence is highly conserved through evolution. Here, we report
experimental data on the biochemical function of the quaking protein and its role
during development. We demonstrate that the quaking protein expressed during
early embryogenesis, pXqua357, can bind RNA in vitro, and we have mapped the
regions of the protein that are essential for RNA binding. We present evidence
that pXqua can form homodimers and that dimerization may be required for RNA
binding. Oocyte injection experiments show that pXqua357 is located in both the
nucleus and cytoplasm. In the Xenopus embryo, Xqua is first expressed during
gastrulation in the organizer region and its derivative, the notochord. In later 
stage embryos, Xqua is expressed in a number of mesodermal and neural tissues. We
demonstrate that disruption of normal Xqua function, by overexpression of a
dominant inhibitory form of the protein, blocks notochord differentiation. Xqua
function appears to be required for the accumulation of important mRNAs such as
Xnot, Xbra, and gsc. These results indicate an essential role for the quaking
RNA-binding protein during early vertebrate embryogenesis.

PMCID: PMC275400
PMID: 9303534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Dev Biol. 1997 Sep 1;189(1):79-94.

Spectrosomes and fusomes anchor mitotic spindles during asymmetric germ cell
divisions and facilitate the formation of a polarized microtubule array for
oocyte specification in Drosophila.

Deng W(1), Lin H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, 412 Nanaline Duke 
Building, Durham, North Carolina, 27710, USA.

In the Drosophila ovary, membrane skeletal proteins such as the adducin-like Hts 
protein(s), spectrin, and ankyrin are found in the spectrosome, an organelle in
germline stem cells (GSC) and their differentiated daughter cells (cystoblasts). 
These proteins are also components of the fusome, a cytoplasmic structure that
spans the cystoblast's progeny that develop to form a germline cyst consisting of
15 nurse cells and an oocyte. Spectrosomes and fusomes are associated with one
pole of spindles during mitosis and are implicated in cyst formation and oocyte
differentiation. Here we show that the asymmetric behavior of the spectrosome
persists throughout the cell cycle of GSC. Eliminating the spectrosome by the
htsl mutation leads to randomized spindle orientation, suggesting that the
spectrosome anchors the spindle to ensure the asymmetry of GSC division;
eliminating the fusome in developing cysts results in defective spindles and
randomized spindle orientation as well as asynchronous and reduced cystocyte
divisions. These observations suggest that fusomes are required for the proper
formation and asymmetric orientation of mitotic spindles. Moreover, they
reinforce the notion that fusomes are required for the four synchronous divisions
of the cystoblast leading to cyst formation. In htsl cysts which lack fusomes and
fail to incorporate a hts gene product(s) into ring canals following cyst
formation, polarized microtubule networks do not form, the dynamics of
cytoplasmic dynein is disrupted, and oskar and orb RNAs fail to be transported to
the future oocyte. These observations support the proposed role of fusomes and
ring canals in organizing a polarized microtubule-based transport system for RNA 
localization that leads to oocyte differentiation.

PMID: 9281339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Mech Dev. 1997 Jul;65(1-2):187-96.

Interaction of goosecoid and brachyury in Xenopus mesoderm patterning.

Artinger M(1), Blitz I, Inoue K, Tran U, Cho KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental & Cell Biology and the Developmental Biology
Center, University of California, Irvine 92697-2300, USA. artinger@genomecorp.com

Detailed in situ analyses reveal overlapping expression of gsc and Xbra in the
early Spemann's organizer. Coexpression is lost during gastrulation suggesting an
interaction between these genes. Ectopic expression of gsc ventrally suppresses
endogenous Xbra expression and transcription from Xbra promoter reporter gene
constructs. Suppression is mediated, at least partially, by a gsc-binding site
within the first 349 bp of the promoter. Xbra reporter gene transcription is also
suppressed in the region of endogenous gsc expression, whereas high-level ectopic
Xbra expression has no effect on endogenous gsc expression. We suggest that early
patterning of the vertebrate mesoderm, like early patterning of the Drosophila
embryo, occurs by first establishing broad domains of gene expression which are
subsequently refined by intergenic interactions to further delimit tissue
boundaries.

PMID: 9256355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Development. 1997 Jul;124(14):2843-54.

Goosecoid and HNF-3beta genetically interact to regulate neural tube patterning
during mouse embryogenesis.

Filosa S(1), Rivera-Pérez JA, Gómez AP, Gansmuller A, Sasaki H, Behringer RR, Ang
SL.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moleculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/Université Louis Pasteur/Collège de France, Illkirch, CU de
Strasbourg.

The homeobox gene goosecoid (gsc) and the winged-helix gene Hepatic Nuclear
Factor-3beta (HNF-3beta) are co-expressed in all three germ layers in the
anterior primitive streak and at the rostral end of mouse embryos during
gastrulation. In this paper, we have tested the possibility of functional
synergism or redundancy between these two genes during embryogenesis by
generating double-mutant mice for gsc and HNF-3beta. Double-mutant embryos of
genotype gsc(-/-);HNF-3beta(+/-) show a new phenotype as early as embryonic days 
8.75. Loss of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and HNF-3beta expression was observed in the
notochord and ventral neural tube of these embryos. These results indicate that
gsc and HNF-3beta interact to regulate Shh expression and consequently
dorsal-ventral patterning in the neural tube. In the forebrain of the mutant
embryos, severe growth defects and absence of optic vesicles could involve loss
of expression of fibroblast growth factor-8, in addition to Shh. Our results also
suggest that interaction between gsc and HNF-3beta regulates other signalling
molecules required for proper development of the foregut, branchial arches and
heart.

PMID: 9226455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Development. 1997 Jul;124(14):2807-17.

The bicoid-related homeoprotein Ptx1 defines the most anterior domain of the
embryo and differentiates posterior from anterior lateral mesoderm.

Lanctôt C(1), Lamolet B, Drouin J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de genetique moleculaire, Institut de recherches cliniques de
Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Ptx1 is a member of the small bicoid family of homeobox-containing genes; it was 
isolated as a tissue-restricted transcription factor of the pro-opiomelanocortin 
gene. Its expression during mouse and chick embryogenesis was determined by in
situ hybridization in order to delineate its putative role in development. In the
head, Ptx1 expression is first detected in the ectoderm-derived stomodeal
epithelium at E8.0. Initially, expression is only present in the stomodeum and in
a few cells of the rostroventral foregut endoderm. A day later, Ptx1 mRNA is
detected in the epithelium and in a streak of mesenchyme of the first branchial
arch, but not in other arches. Ptx1 expression is maintained in all derivatives
of these structures, including the epithelia of the tongue, palate, teeth and
olfactory system, and in Rathke's pouch. Expression of Ptx1 in craniofacial
structures is strikingly complementary to the pattern of goosecoid expression. In
addition, Ptx1 is expressed early (E6.8) in posterior and extraembryonic
mesoderm, and in structures that derive from these. The restriction of expression
to the posterior lateral plate is later evidenced by exclusive labelling of the
hindlimb but not forelimb mesenchyme. In the anterior domain of expression, the
stomodeum was shown by fate mapping to derive from the anterior neural ridge
(ANR) which represents the most anterior domain of the embryo. The concordance
between these fate maps and the stomodeal pattern of Ptx1 expression supports the
hypothesis that Ptx1 defines a stomodeal ectomere, which lies anteriorly to the
neuromeres that have been suggested to constitute units of a segmented plan
directing head formation.

PMID: 9226452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Bacteriol. 1997 Jul;179(13):4096-105.

Cloning of the Candida albicans homolog of Saccharomyces cerevisiae GSC1/FKS1 and
its involvement in beta-1,3-glucan synthesis.

Mio T(1), Adachi-Shimizu M, Tachibana Y, Tabuchi H, Inoue SB, Yabe T,
Yamada-Okabe T, Arisawa M, Watanabe T, Yamada-Okabe H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mycology, Nippon Roche Research Center, Kamakura, Kanagawa,
Japan. toshiyuki.mio@roche.com

Saccharomyces cerevisiae GSC1 (also called FKS1) and GSC2 (also called FKS2) have
been identified as the genes for putative catalytic subunits of beta-1,3-glucan
synthase. We have cloned three Candida albicans genes, GSC1, GSL1, and GSL2, that
have significant sequence homologies with S. cerevisiae GSC1/FKS1, GSC2/FKS2, and
the recently identified FKSA of Aspergillus nidulans at both nucleotide and amino
acid levels. Like S. cerevisiae Gsc/Fks proteins, none of the predicted products 
of C. albicans GSC1, GSL1, or GSL2 displayed obvious signal sequences at their
N-terminal ends, but each product possessed 10 to 16 potential transmembrane
helices with a relatively long cytoplasmic domain in the middle of the protein.
Northern blotting demonstrated that C. albicans GSC1 and GSL1 but not GSL2 mRNAs 
were expressed in the growing yeast-phase cells. Three copies of GSC1 were found 
in the diploid genome of C. albicans CAI4. Although we could not establish the
null mutation of C. albicans GSC1, disruption of two of the three GSC1 alleles
decreased both GSC1 mRNA and cell wall beta-glucan levels by about 50%. The
purified C. albicans beta-1,3-glucan synthase was a 210-kDa protein as judged by 
sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, and all sequences
determined with peptides obtained by lysyl endopeptidase digestion of the 210-kDa
protein were found in the deduced amino acid sequence of C. albicans Gsc1p.
Furthermore, the monoclonal antibody raised against the purified beta-1,3-glucan 
synthase specifically reacted with the 210-kDa protein and could
immunoprecipitate beta-1,3-glucan synthase activity. These results demonstrate
that C. albicans GSC1 is the gene for a subunit of beta-1,3-glucan synthase.

PMCID: PMC179227
PMID: 9209021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Jun 27;235(3):748-53.

Correlation between loss of middle ear bones and altered goosecoid gene
expression in the branchial region following retinoic acid treatment of mouse
embryos in vivo.

Zhu CC(1), Yamada G, Blum M.

Author information: 
(1)Karlsruhe Research Center, Institute of Genetics, Germany.

The homeobox gene goosecoid marks the Spemann organizer in vertebrate gastrula
embryos, and is expressed in the craniofacial region, body wall and limbs during 
organogenesis. Mouse mutants of goosecoid displayed a variety of phenotypes
related to the expression pattern at mid-embryogenesis. These defects included
loss of the tympanic ring and malformation of the malleus, phenotypes which were 
reminiscent of the teratogenic effects of retinoic acid (RA). Here we
investigated the correlation of goosecoid gene expression and RA-teratogenicity
following treatment of mouse embryos in vivo at embryonic day (E) 8 + 5 h. We
found that goosecoid was specifically affected at E10.5 in branchial arches I and
II. Expression was either reduced to background levels or restricted to the
branchial cleft region. This change in goosecoid gene expression correlated with 
a loss of middle ear ossicles and a partial or complete deletion of the tympanic 
ring, suggesting a role for goosecoid in executing the RA teratogenic effects.

PMID: 9207233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Clin Chem. 1997 May;43(5):886-92.

Thoughts on quality-control systems: a laboratorian's perspective.

Cembrowski GS(1).

Author information: 
(1)GSC Consulting, Edina, MN 55424, USA. cembr001@gold.tc.umn.edu

State-of-the-art prospective quality-control systems entail the use of medically 
relevant, analyte-specific quality control limits. With analyte-specific limits
broader than those generally used in the clinical laboratory, there will be fewer
false rejections, fewer unnecessary reanalyses, and shorter delays in run
reporting. If the analyte-specific limits are narrower than those used in the
laboratory, more errors will be detected, but the user is at risk of identifying 
errors over which s/he and the manufacturer have little control. The use of
various patient data quality-control algorithms is described. Conservatism is
stressed in adopting manufacturers' guidelines for surrogate, nondestructive
quality-control testing. A simple, optimized approach is suggested for the
systematic retrospective review of proficiency data. Finally, an approach is
presented for converting from older, previously accepted quality control
procedures to more efficient analyte-specific quality control.

PMID: 9166258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Am J Hum Genet. 1997 May;60(5):1194-201.

The DiGeorge syndrome minimal critical region contains a goosecoid-like (GSCL)
homeobox gene that is expressed early in human development.

Gottlieb S(1), Emanuel BS, Driscoll DA, Sellinger B, Wang Z, Roe B, Budarf ML.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics and Molecular Biology, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Hum Genet. 1997 Dec;61(6):1456-9.

The majority of patients with DiGeorge syndrome (DGS) and velocardiofacial
syndrome (VCFS) have deletions of chromosomal region 22q11.2. The abnormalities
observed in these patients include conotruncal cardiac defects, thymic hypoplasia
or aplasia, hypocalcemia, and characteristic facial features. To understand the
genetic basis of these disorders, we have characterized genes within the region
that is most consistently deleted in patients with DGS/VCFS, the minimal DiGeorge
critical region (MDGCR). In this report, we present the identification and
characterization of a novel gene, GSCL, in the MDGCR, with homology to the
homeodomain family of transcription factors. Further, we provide evidence that
this gene is expressed in a limited number of adult tissues as well as in early
human development. The identification of GSCL required a genomic sequence-based
approach because of its restricted expression and high GC content. The early
expression, together with the known role of homeobox-containing proteins in
development, make GSCL an outstanding candidate for some of the abnormalities
seen in DGS/VCFS.

PMCID: PMC1712429
PMID: 9150167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Apr 7;233(1):161-5.

Nasal and pharyngeal abnormalities caused by the mouse goosecoid gene mutation.

Yamada G(1), Ueno K, Nakamura S, Hanamure Y, Yasui K, Uemura M, Eizuru Y,
Mansouri A, Blum M, Sugimura K.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Developmental Biology Division, Kurume University Research Center
for Innovative Cancer Therapy, Fukuoka, Japan.

The Goosecoid (gsc) gene is a homeobox-containing gene expressed first in the
gastrula, and later during organogenesis in development. The gsc gene transcript 
is found in the first and second branchial arches, frontonasal mass in its late
phase of expression. We have previously shown that targeted mutation of the mouse
gsc gene leads to neonatal death and craniofacial defects. In this study, we
performed histological studies on craniofacial phenotypes in order to elucidate
the processes underlying the neonatal death of gsc mutant mice. We found that gsc
mutant mice have aplastic nasal cavities and lack the Sinus Paranasalis. We also 
showed that secretory olfactory glands in the basal layers are aplastic. This is 
suggested to be essential defects for olfaction. gsc mutant mice also show
several pharyngeal phenotypes, including defects in the pharyngeal muscles and
the pharyngeal mucosa. It is therefore suggested that mutant mice develop lethal 
gastro-intestinal phenotypes caused by defects in breathing and sucking of milk
as a consequence of these craniofacial disorders. These results should help
elucidating the molecular genetic programs essential to the neonatal development 
of mammals.

PMID: 9144415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Development. 1997 Apr;124(8):1443-52.

Segregating expression domains of two goosecoid genes during the transition from 
gastrulation to neurulation in chick embryos.

Lemaire L(1), Roeser T, Izpisúa-Belmonte JC, Kessel M.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für biophysikalische Chemie, Göttingen, Germany.

We report the isolation and characterization of a chicken gene, GSX, containing a
homeobox similar to that of the goosecoid gene. The structure of the GSX gene and
the deduced GSX protein are highly related to the previously described goosecoid 
gene. The two homeodomains are 74% identical. In the first few hours of chick
embryogenesis, the expression pattern of GSX is similar to GSC, in the posterior 
margin of the embryo and the young primitive streak. Later during gastrulation,
expression of the two genes segregate. GSC is expressed in the anterior part of
the primitive streak, then in the node, and finally in the pre-chordal plate. GSX
is expressed in the primitive streak excluding the node, and then demarcating the
early neural plate around the anterior streak and overlying the pre-chordal
plate. We demonstrate that the GSX-positive part of the primitive streak induces 
gastrulation, while the GSC-expressing part induces neurulation. After full
extension of the streak, the fate of cells now characterized by GSX is to undergo
neurulation, while those expressing GSC undergo gastrulation. We discuss the
effect of a duplicated basic goosecoid identity for the generation of a chordate 
nervous system in ontogeny and phylogeny.

PMID: 9108361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Apr 1;94(7):3082-7.

Jak1 kinase is required for cell migrations and anterior specification in
zebrafish embryos.

Conway G(1), Margoliath A, Wong-Madden S, Roberts RJ, Gilbert W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA 02114, USA. conway@nucleus.harvard.edu

Establishment of the vertebrate body plan requires a variety of signaling
molecules. In a search for tyrosine kinases expressed in early zebrafish embryos,
a model system for the study of vertebrate development, we discovered Jak1 kinase
to be maternally encoded and the mRNA evenly distributed among the cells of
blastula-stage embryos. Injection of RNA-encoding dominant-negative Jak1 kinases 
reduces a specific cell migration, epiboly, and results in the reduction of
goosecoid expression and of anterior structures. This work establishes that, in
addition to its role in signal transduction of cytokines in adult tissues, Jak1
kinase has a role in early vertebrate development.

PMCID: PMC20325
PMID: 9096349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Dev Biol. 1997 Mar 1;183(1):61-73.

tbx6, a Brachyury-related gene expressed by ventral mesendodermal precursors in
the zebrafish embryo.

Hug B(1), Walter V, Grunwald DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City 84112, USA.

Classical embryology experiments have indicated the existence of dorsal-type and 
ventral-type mesoderms that arise as a consequence of mesoderm induction during
vertebrate development. Here we report that the zebrafish tbx6 gene, a member of 
the Brachyury-related T-box family of genes, is exclusively expressed by ventral 
mesendoderm. Three observations link the expression of tbx6 to ventral mesoderm
specification. First, the gene is initially expressed at the onset of
gastrulation within a ventrolateral subpopulation of cells that express the
pan-mesodermal gene, no tail (Brachyury). Second, the mesoderm-inducing factors
activin and bFGF activate tbx6 expression in animal caps. Third, dorsalization of
the mesendodermal precursor population following exposure of embryos to lithium
ions causes down-regulation of tbx6 transcription. tbx6 is expressed transiently 
in the involuting derivatives of the ventral mesendoderm, which give rise to
nonaxial mesodermal tissues; its expression is extinguished as tissue
differentiation progresses. Transcription of tbx6 commences about an hour after
initiation of expression of the pan-mesendodermal gene no tail and the organizer 
gene goosecoid. The dependence of tbx6 expression on no tail activity was
examined in no tail mutant embryos. The activation of tbx6 transcription in
ventral mesoderm does not depend on no tail gene activity. However, no tail
appears to contribute to the maintenance of normal levels of tbx6 transcription
and may be required for tbx6 transcription in the developing tail.

PMID: 9119115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Development. 1997 Mar;124(6):1179-89.

XIPOU 2 is a potential regulator of Spemann's Organizer.

Witta SE(1), Sato SM.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Biochemistry Branch, NIDDK, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892-1766, USA.

XIPOU 2, a member of the class III POU-domain family, is expressed initially at
mid-blastula transition (MBT) and during gastrulation in the entire marginal zone
mesoderm, including Spemann's Organizer (the Organizer). To identify potential
targets of XIPOU 2, the interaction of XIPOU 2 with other genes co-expressed in
the Organizer was examined by microinjecting XIPOU 2's mRNA into the lineage of
cells that contributes to the Organizer, head mesenchyme and prechordal plate.
XIPOU 2 suppresses the expression of a number of dorsal mesoderm-specific genes, 
including gsc, Xlim-1, Xotx2, noggin and chordin, but not Xnot. As a consequence 
of the suppression of dorsal mesoderm gene expression, bone morphogenetic
factor-4 (Bmp-4), a potent inducer of ventral mesoderm, is activated in the
Organizer. Gsc is a potential target of XIPOU 2. XIPOU 2 is capable of binding a 
class III POU protein binding site (CATTAAT) that is located within the gsc
promoter, in the activin-inducible (distal) element. Furthermore, XIPOU 2
suppresses the activation of the gsc promoter by activin signaling. At the
neurula and tailbud stages, dorsoanterior structures are affected: embryos
displayed micropthalmia and the loss of the first branchial arch, as detected by 
the expression of pax-6, Xotx2 and en-2. By examining events downstream from the 
Wnt and chordin pathways, we determined that XIPOU 2, when overexpressed, acts
specifically in the Organizer, downstream from GSK-3beta of the Wnt pathway and
upstream from chordin. The interference in dorsalizing events caused by XIPOU 2
was rescued by chordin. Thus, in addition to its direct neuralizing ability, in a
different context, XIPOU 2 has the potential to antagonize dorsalizing events in 
the Organizer.

PMID: 9102305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. J Med Chem. 1997 Jan 31;40(3):362-9.

Selectin-ligand interactions revealed by molecular dynamics simulation in
solution.

Tsujishita H(1), Hiramatsu Y, Kondo N, Ohmoto H, Kondo H, Kiso M, Hasegawa A.

Author information: 
(1)New Drug Discovery Research Laboratory, Kanebo Ltd., Osaka, Japan.

Through a computer modeling and simulation technique, we investigated the binding
mode of a complex of E-selectin-GSC-150, which is a novel selectin blocker.
GSC-150 is the 3'-sulfated Lewis X derivative with a long, branched alkyl chain. 
Initial attempts to construct a model for E-selectin-GSC-150 complex were
performed based on a previously reported model of E-selectin-sialyl Lewis X
(sLex) complex [Kogan, T.P.; Revelle, B.M.; Tapp, S.; Scott, D.; Beck, P.J.J.
Biol. Chem. 1995, 270, 14047-14055]. In our model, the carbohydrate portion of
GSC-150 interacted with the protein in a similar manner as that of sLex reported 
previously. Interestingly, each of the branched alkyl chains extended on the
surface of E-selectin and interacted with two different hydrophobic portions. One
of these hydrophobic portions consists of Tyr44, Pro46, and Tyr48. Another
portion forms a shallow cavity, and it consists of Ala9, Leu114, and the alkyl
moieties of the side chains of Lys111, Lys112, and Lys113. A subsequent 200-ps
molecular dynamics simulation in solution revealed that the interactions involved
in the sugar portion of the ligand were relatively weak, whereas the hydrophobic 
interactions involved in the branched alkyl chains were fairly stable in
solution. These results suggest that the branched alkyl chain serves as an
"anchor" for the tight binding of GSC-150 on the surface of E-Selectin. This is
the first attempt to evaluate the dynamics of E-Selectin-ligand interactions in
solution, and it sheds light on the nature of ligand recognition by selectins.

PMID: 9022803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 1997;62:145-9.

Goosecoid and goosecoid-related genes in mouse embryogenesis.

Wakamiya M(1), Rivera-Pérez JA, Baldini A, Behringer RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston 77030, USA.

PMID: 9598346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 1997;62:135-44.

Lineage and functional analyses of the mouse organizer.

Tam PP(1), Steiner KA, Zhou SX, Quinlan GA.

Author information: 
(1)Embryology Unit, Children's Medical Research Institute, Wentworthville, NSW,
Australia.

PMID: 9598345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Biochem Cell Biol. 1997;75(5):601-12.

Domains of retinoid signalling and neurectodermal expression of zebrafish otx1
and goosecoid are mutually exclusive.

Joore J(1), Timmermans A, van de Water S, Folkers GE, van der Saag PT, Zivkovic
D.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, The Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology,
Utrecht, The Netherlands. jos@niob.knaw.nl

Retinoid signalling plays an important role in embryonic pattern formation.
Excess of retinoic acid during gastrulation results in axial defects in
vertebrate embryos, suggesting that retinoids are involved in early
anteroposterior patterning. To study retinoid signalling in zebrafish embryos, we
developed a novel method to detect endogenous retinoids in situ in embryos, using
a fusion protein of the ligand inducible transactivation domain of a retinoic
acid receptor and a heterologous DNA binding domain. Using this method, we show
that retinoid signalling is localized in zebrafish embryos in the region of the
embryonic shield, and towards the end of gastrulation in a posterior dorsal
domain. To investigate the relationships between the spatial distribution of
retinoid signalling and the regulation of retinoid target genes, we studied the
downregulation by retinoic acid of two genes expressed in anterior regions of the
embryo, goosecoid and otx1. These experiments show that expression of both genes 
is strongly downregulated in the anterior neurectoderm of zebrafish embryos
treated with retinoic acid, whereas mesendodermal expression is only mildly
affected. Interestingly, a significant downregulation of goosecoid expression by 
retinoic acid was observed only during midgastrulation but not in earlier stages.
In agreement with these results, spatial expression of goosecoid and otx1 does
not overlap with the region of retinoid signalling in the late gastrula. Our data
support the hypothesis that a localized retinoid signal is involved in axial
patterning during early development, at least in part through the repression of
anterior genes in posterior regions of the embryo. Furthermore, our data suggest 
that the action of retinoids is spatially as well as temporally regulated in the 
developing embryo.

PMID: 9551182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Annu Rev Genet. 1997;31:455-91.

The tao of stem cells in the germline.

Lin H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina 27710, USA. h.lin@cellbio.duke.edu

Germline stem cells (GSCs) are the self-renewing population of germ cells that
serve as the source for gametogenesis. GSCs exist in diverse forms, from those
that undergo strict self-renewing asymmetric divisions in Drosophila to those
that maintain their population by balancing between mitosis and differentiation
in Caenorhabditis elegans. Most vertebrate spermatogonial GSCs appear to adopt an
intermediate strategy. In most animals, GSCs are established during preadult
gonadogenesis following the proliferation and migration of embryonic primordial
germ cells. GSCs produce numerous gametes throughout the sexually active period
of adult life. The establishment and self-renewing division of GSCs are
controlled by extracellular signals such as hormones from the
hypothalamic-pituitary axis and local interactions between GSCs and their
neighboring cells. These extracellular signals may then influence differential
gene expression, cell cycle machinery, and cytoskeletal organization of GSCs for 
their formation and/or divisional asymmetry. In addition, the GSC mechanism is
related to that for germline and sex determination. Current knowledge has
provided a solid framework for further study of GSCs and stem cells in general.

PMID: 9442904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Development. 1997 Jan;124(2):327-42.

The one-eyed pinhead gene functions in mesoderm and endoderm formation in
zebrafish and interacts with no tail.

Schier AF(1), Neuhauss SC, Helde KA, Talbot WS, Driever W.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Charlestown 02129, USA.

The zebrafish locus one-eyed pinhead (oep) is essential for the formation of
anterior axial mesoderm, endoderm and ventral neuroectoderm. At the beginning of 
gastrulation anterior axial mesoderm cells form the prechordal plate and express 
goosecoid (gsc) in wild-type embryos. In oep mutants the prechordal plate does
not form and gsc expression is not maintained. Exposure to lithium, a dorsalizing
agent, leads to the ectopic induction and maintenance of gsc expression in
wild-type embryos. Lithium treatment of oep mutants still leads to ectopic gsc
induction but not maintenance, suggesting that oep acts downstream of inducers of
dorsal mesoderm. In genetic mosaics, wild-type cells are capable of forming
anterior axial mesoderm in oep embryos, suggesting that oep is required in
prospective anterior axial mesoderm cells before gastrulation. The oep gene is
also essential for endoderm formation and the early development of ventral
neuroectoderm, including the floor plate. The loss of endoderm is already
manifest during gastrulation by the absence of axial-expressing cells in the
hypoblast of oep mutants. These findings suggest that oep is also required in
lateral and ventral regions of the gastrula margin. The sonic hedgehog (shh).gene
is expressed in the notochord of oep animals. Therefore, the impaired floor plate
development in oep mutants is not caused by the absence of the floor plate
inducer shh. This suggests that oep is required downstream or in parallel to shh 
signaling. The ventral region of the forebrain is also absent in oep mutants,
leading to severe cyclopia. In contrast, anterior-posterior brain patterning
appears largely unaffected, suggesting that underlying prechordal plate is not
required for anterior-posterior pattern formation but might be involved in
dorsoventral brain patterning. To test if oep has a wider, partially redundant
role, we constructed double mutants with two other zebrafish loci essential for
patterning during gastrulation. Double mutants with floating head, the zebrafish 
Xnot homologue, display enhanced floor plate and adaxial muscle phenotypes.
Double mutants with no tail (ntl), the zebrafish homologue of the mouse Brachyury
locus, display severe defects in midline and mesoderm formation including absence
of most of the somitic mesoderm. These results reveal a redundant function of oep
and ntl in mesoderm formation. Our data suggest that both oep and ntl act in the 
blastoderm margin to specify mesendodermal cell fates.

PMID: 9053309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Cell. 1996 Dec 13;87(6):989-1000.

Eomesodermin, a key early gene in Xenopus mesoderm differentiation.

Ryan K(1), Garrett N, Mitchell A, Gurdon JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, England.

Eomesodermin (Eomes) is a novel Xenopus T-domain gene. In normal development, it 
is expressed in mesodermal cells in a ventral-to-dorsal gradient of increasing
concentration. It reaches its peak expression 1-2 hr before any other known
panmesodermal gene. It is strongly inducible by normal vegetal cells and by
mesoderm-inducing factors. Ectopic expression of Eomes in animal caps induces the
transcription of nearly all mesodermal genes in a concentration-dependent way.
Overexpression of Eomes dorsalizes ventral mesoderm, inducing gsc and changing
cell fate to muscle and notochord. Blocking the function of Eomes causes
gastrulation arrest and defective mesoderm-dependent gene activation. We propose 
that Eomes fulfills an essential function in initiating mesoderm differentiation 
and in determining mesodermal cell fate.

PMID: 8978604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Nature. 1996 Nov 21;384(6606):270-2.

Interactions of the LIM-domain-binding factor Ldb1 with LIM homeodomain proteins.

Agulnick AD(1), Taira M, Breen JJ, Tanaka T, Dawid IB, Westphal H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Mammalian Genes and Development, National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
20892, USA. agulnica@dir6.nichd.nih.gov

The LIM homeodomain (LIM-HD) proteins, which contain two tandem LIM domains
followed by a homeodomain, are critical transcriptional regulators of embryonic
development. The LIM domain is a conserved cysteine-rich zinc-binding motif found
in LIM-HD and LMO (rhombotin or Ttg) proteins, cytoskeletal components, LIM
kinases and other proteins. LIM domains are protein-protein interaction motifs,
can inhibit binding of LIM-HD proteins to DNA and can negatively regulate LIM-HD 
protein function. How LIM domains exert these regulatory effects is not known. We
have now isolated a new LIM-domain-binding factor, Ldb1, on the basis of its
ability to interact with the LIM-HD protein Lhx1 (Lim1). High-affinity binding by
Ldb1 requires paired LIM domains and is restricted to the related subgroup of LIM
domains found in LIM-HD and LMO proteins. The highly conserved Xenopus Ldb
protein XLdb1, interacts with Xlim-1, the Xenopus orthologue of Lhx1. When
injected into Xenopus embryos, XLdb1 (or Ldb1) can synergize with Xlim-1 in the
formation of partial secondary axes and in activation of the genes encoding
goosecoid (gsc), chordin, NCAM and XCG7, demonstrating a functional as well as a 
physical interaction between the two proteins.

PMID: 8918878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Curr Biol. 1996 Nov 1;6(11):1468-75.

Signalling by TGF-beta family members: short-range effects of Xnr-2 and BMP-4
contrast with the long-range effects of activin.

Jones CM(1), Armes N, Smith JC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, National Institute for Medical Research,
Mill Hill, London, UK. m-jones@nimr.mrc.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: One way of establishing a morphogen gradient in a developing embryo
involves the localized synthesis of an inducing molecule followed by its
diffusion into surrounding tissues. The morphogen-like effects of the
mesoderm-inducing factor activin provide support for this idea in amphibian
development. The questions remain, however, of how activin exerts its long-range 
effects, and whether long-range signalling is a property of all transforming
growth factor beta (TGF-beta) family members.
RESULTS: We compare the signalling ranges of activin and two other TGF-beta
family members, Xnr-2 and BMP-4. Unlike activin, Xnr-2 and BMP-4 act over short
distances. Furthermore, the effects of constitutively active activin receptors
are strictly cell-autonomous. These observations suggest that the long-range
effects of activin occur through protein diffusion and that "relay' mechanisms
are not initiated by any of these TGF-beta family members. Mechanisms limiting
the signalling range of Xnr-2 were addressed by studying Xnr-2 processing and
secretion. An activin-Xnr-2 fusion protein signals over many cell diameters,
suggesting that regulated processing or secretion is one limiting factor.
Disaggregation and reaggregation of Xnr-2-producing tissues also extends the
range of Xnr-2, suggesting that components of intact tissue restrict spread of
the protein.
CONCLUSIONS: The long-range effects of activin are likely to occur through the
diffusion of activin protein. The short-range effects of Xnr-2 and BMP-4
emphasize that long-range diffusion is not a general property of TGF-beta-related
molecules. Finally, signalling ranges may be regulated by constraints on
processing or secretion and by interactions with extracellular components of
embryonic tissues.

PMID: 8939607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Addict Behav. 1996 Nov-Dec;21(6):817-33.

Fostering self-change among problem drinkers: a proactive community intervention.

Sobell LC(1), Cunningham JA, Sobell MB, Agrawal S, Gavin DR, Leo GI, Singh KN.

Author information: 
(1)Nova Southeastern University, Center for Psychological Studies, Fort
Lauderdale, FL 33314, USA.

This paper describes the rationale and design for a recently implemented study
involving a community-based intervention designed to foster self-change for
individuals who otherwise would be unlikely to seek formal help or treatment for 
their alcohol problem. The study is based on research examining natural recovery 
processes with alcohol abusers and on clinical trials using a Guided Self-Change 
model of treatment with problem drinkers. Advertisements and mailed pamphlets are
used to solicit individuals who wanted to change their drinking on their own
using self-help materials. Respondents are screened and, if eligible, are
randomly assigned to two conditions: Guided Self-Change (GSC) or Educational
Materials Control (EMC) (projected N = 788): All subjects complete and mail in
several brief assessment forms. Subjects in the GSC group receive advice and
personalized feedback based on their assessment answers. Subjects in the EMC
group receive educational pamphlets prepared for general medical and mental
health settings. Subject characteristics and drinking-related history variables
for the first 10% of the sample are presented. Subjects will be followed up at 12
months following the intervention.

PMID: 8904946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Med Clin (Barc). 1996 Oct 5;107(11):405-9.

[Cranioencephalic trauma in adults: clinical and radiologic features].

[Article in Spanish]

Marruecos-Sant L(1), Pérez-Márquez M, Betbesé AJ, Rialp G, Molet J, Net A.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Medicina Intensiva, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau,
Universitat Autònoma, Barcelona.

BACKGROUND: To analyse extracranial complications and basic variables in
head-injury patients, such as Glasgow coma score (GCS), intracranial pressure
(ICP) and cranial computerized tomography (CT), in relation to the outcome of
these patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: 64 consecutive patients (47 males and 17 females) with head
injury, admitted from January 1992 to May 1994, were studied in this prospective 
study. Mean age was 37 +/- 18 years. Overall mortality was 23% (15/64). Student-t
and Chi-square tests were used for statistical analysis, and p < 0.05 was
considered statistical significant.
RESULTS: Overall GCS was 7 +/- 3, survivors presenting GCS of 7.7 +/- 2.9 and
non-survivors 4.7 +/- 1.5 (p = 0.04). CT were classified as follows: diffuse
injury, 4 patients (7%); focal injury, 32 (53%), and mixed injury 24 (40%).
Depending on the presence or absence of mesencephalic cisterns in the CT, GSC was
7.6 +/- 2.8 and 4.3 +/- 1.4, respectively (p = 0.04). Subarachnoid hemorrhage
(SAH) was associated to a GCS of 6.3 +/- 2.5 and its absence to 8 +/- 3.3 (p =
0.03). The absence of mesencephalic cisterns and SAH were more frequent in the
non-survivors, 72% and 32% (p = 0.01 and 0.04), respectively. ICP was recorded in
42 patients. Regarding to ICP, mortality was: 6.7% with ICP < or = 20 mmHg, 37%
with ICP 21-30, 44% with ICP 31-40 and 67% with ICP > 50 mmHg (p = 0.03).
Diabetes insipidus, cardiorespiratory arrest, shock, prolonged mechanical
ventilation, SDRA and sepsis were the most frequent extracranial complications in
non-survivors.
CONCLUSIONS: There is an association between the outcome of head-injury patients 
with the GCS and ICP values. Absence of mesencephalic cisterns and SAH were
radiologic signs of poor prognosis. Patients who died had more extracranial
complications.

PMID: 9045001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Development. 1996 Oct;122(10):3141-50.

A conserved region of engrailed, shared among all en-, gsc-, Nk1-, Nk2- and
msh-class homeoproteins, mediates active transcriptional repression in vivo.

Smith ST(1), Jaynes JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Kimmel Cancer Institute, Thomas
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

The engrailed homeoprotein is a dominantly acting or 'active' transcriptional
repressor both in cultured cells and in vivo. When retargeted via a homeodomain
swap to the endogenous fushi tarazu gene (ftz), it actively represses it,
resulting in a ftz mutant phenocopy. We have mapped functional regions of
engrailed using this in vivo repression assay. In addition to a region containing
an active repression domain identified in cell culture assays (K. Han and J. L.
Manley (1993) EMBO J. 12, 2723-2733), we find that two evolutionarily conserved
regions contribute to activity. The one of these that does not flank the HD is
particularly crucial to repression activity in vivo. We find that this domain is 
present not only in all engrailed-class homeoproteins but also in all known
members of several other classes, including goosecoid, Nk1, Nk2 and msh. Thus
engrailed's active repression function in vivo is dependent on a highly conserved
interaction that was established early in the evolution of the homeobox gene
superfamily. We further show using rescue transgenes that the widely conserved in
vivo repression domain is required for the normal function of engrailed in the
embryo.

PMCID: PMC2729110
PMID: 8898227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Development. 1996 Oct;122(10):3045-53.

The Xvent-2 homeobox gene is part of the BMP-4 signalling pathway controlling
[correction of controling] dorsoventral patterning of Xenopus mesoderm.

Onichtchouk D(1), Gawantka V, Dosch R, Delius H, Hirschfeld K, Blumenstock C,
Niehrs C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Embryology, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum,
Heidelberg, Germany.

Erratum in
    Development 1997 Jan;124(1):precedi.

We describe a novel Xenopus homeobox gene, Xvent-2, which together with the
previously identified homeobox gene Xvent-1, defines a novel class of homeobox
genes. vent genes are related by sequence homology, expression pattern and
gain-of-function phenotype. Evidence is presented for a role of Xvent-2 in the
BMP-4 pathway involved in dorsoventral patterning of mesoderm. (1) Xvent-2 is
expressed in regions that also express BMP-4. (2) Xvent-2 and BMP-4 interact in a
positive feedback loop. (3) Xvent-2 ventralizes dorsal mesoderm in a
dose-dependent manner resulting in phenoytpes ranging from microcephaly to
Bauchstück pieces, as does BMP-4. (4) Like BMP-4 and gsc, Xvent-2 and gsc are
able to interact in a crossregulatory loop to suppress each other. (5)
Microinjection of Xvent-2 mRNA can rescue dorsalization by a dominant-negative
BMP-4 receptor. The results suggest that Xvent-2 functions in the BMP-4
signalling pathway that antagonizes the Spemann organizer.

PMID: 8898218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Mol Biol. 1996 Sep 20;262(2):105-28.

Effects of Na+ and Mg2+ on the structures of supercoiled DNAs: comparison of
simulations with experiments.

Gebe JA(1), Delrow JJ, Heath PJ, Fujimoto BS, Stewart DW, Schurr JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Washington Seattle 98195-1700, USA.

Recent cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) results suggest that sufficient NaCl
concentration (> or approximately 0.1 M) and superhelix density (> or
approximately-0.05) cause circular DNAs to adopt highly extended, tightly
interwound configurations, in which the strands are laterally contiguous along
almost their entire length. Millimolar levels of MgCl2 reportedly act
synergistically with NaCl to produce similar conformations. However, Monte Carlo 
simulations with purely repulsive interduplex forces failed to reproduce such
structures. In the present work, solution measurements of particular physical
properties were performed both to characterize the effects of Na+ and Mg2+ on DNA
structure and to provide quantitative tests of Monte Carlo simulations of
circular DNAs. Supercoiled p30 delta DNAs in 10 mM Tris plus 0, 0.122, and 0.1 M 
NaCl, and 0.1 M NaCl plus 4 mM Mg2+ were examined by static and dynamic light
scattering (LS and DLS), time-resolved fluorescence polarization anisotropy (FPA)
of intercalated ethidium, and circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy. Upon addition
of 0.122 M NaCl, the radius of gyration (Rg) decreased substantially, which
indicates that p30 delta adopts a more compact structure. This contradicts the
cryo-EM studies, where molecular extension and Rg both increase upon adding 0.1 M
NaCl. In 0.1 M NaCl, the torsion constant measured by FPA is practically
invariant to superhelix density, and the plateau diffusion coefficient at large
scattering vector (Dplat) is likewise nearly the same at both relaxed and native 
superhelix densities. Such invariance is difficult to reconcile with any
transition from relaxed circles to tightly interwound structures with laterally
contiguous strands. Metropolis Monte Carlo simulations were performed to generate
canonically distributed sets of structures, from which average Do values and
scattered intensity ratios, [symbol: see text]I (zero) [symbol: see
text]/[symbol: see text] l(k) [symbol: see text], were calculated. Agreement
between simulations and experiments in regard to [symbol: see text] I(O) [symbol:
see text] /[symbol: see text] I(k) [symbol: see text], D(zero) and the
supercoiling free energy, delta Gsc (delta l), is remarkably good for the most
extensively studied p30 delta samples. The simulated structures exhibit no sign
of very tight interwinding with extensive lateral contacts, but instead exhibit
most probable superhelix diameters of 85 to 90 A. When 4 mM Mg2+ was added to
native supercoiled p30 delta in 0.1 M NaCl, Rg decreased, D(zero) increased, and 
the longest internal relaxation rate (1/tau 2(zero)) increased, all of which
indicate a further overall contraction of the molecular envelope. The torsion
constant exhibited a slight increase that is hardly statistically significant. In
this case, agreement between the simulations and experiments was only
semi-quantitative for most samples investigated, although the predicted
contraction was exhibited by all five samples of p30 delta and one of pBR322 DNA.
The simulated structures in 0.1 M NaCl plus 4 mM Mg2+ again showed no sign of
extensive lateral contacts. A plausible explanation is proposed for the highly
extended, tightly interwound structures seen in cryo-EM, and explicitly tested by
Monte Carlo simulations of a 1000 bp circular DNA at +25 and -50 degrees C.
Structures identical to those seen in cryo-EM are in fact the equilibrium
structures in the simulations at -50 degrees C, and the estimated time for
equilibration (2.3 x 10(-6) second) is much smaller than the estimated time for
vitrification (1 x 10(-4) second).

PMID: 8831783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Anim Sci. 1996 Jul;74(7):1728-35.

Digestibility and utilization of pearl millet diets fed to finishing beef cattle.

Hill GM(1), Newton GL, Streeter MN, Hanna WW, Utley PR, Mathis MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Dairy Science, University of Georgia, Tifton
31793-0748, USA.

Pearl millet grain was blended with corn in 1:1 or 2:1 ratios in beef finishing
diets fed in two metabolism and two feedlot trials. In Exp. 1, diets contained 1)
79.5% corn and 4.5% soybean meal (C-SBM), 2) 28% corn, 54.5% sorghum, and 1.5%
soybean meal [GSC(2:1)], and 3) 28% corn and 56% pearl millet [PMC(2:1)]. In Exp.
2, diets contained 1) 81.5% corn and 3.5% soybean meal (C-SBM) or 2) 42.5% corn
and 42.5% pearl millet [PMC(1:1)]. Diets fed to steers in metabolism trials in
Exp. 1 and 2 had similar (P > .10) apparent digestion coefficients for OM, crude 
fiber, NDF, and ADF. However, ether extract digestibility was higher (P < .05)
for C-SBM than for GSC(2:1) and PMC(2:1) in Exp. 1, and it was higher (P < .10)
for C-SBM than for PMC(1:1) in Exp. 2. In both experiments CP digestibility was
higher (P < .10) for C-SBM diets, and N retention was similar (P > .10) for diets
within each experiment. In each experiment, TDN calculated from apparent
digestion coefficients was converted to NEm and NEg. The TDN, NEm, and NEg were
lower (P < .10) for GSC(2:1) and PMC(2:1) than for C-SBM in Exp. 1. Experimental 
diets were fed to steers (n = 45; 396 +/- 19 kg initial BW; 70-d ad libitum
feeding) in Exp. 1 and to heifers (n = 30; 318 +/- 15 kg initial BW; 92-d ad
libitum feeding) in Exp. 2. The ADG, empty body weight gain (EBG), and predicted 
EBG were not different (P > .10) for diets composed of the different grain
sources. Feed DMI and DM per gain were higher (P < .05) for PMC(1:1) than for
C-SBM in Exp. 2. Pearl millet supplied approximately 88% as much NEm and 85% as
much NEg as the corn-SBM portion of diets having similar CP concentrations.

PMID: 8818822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. EMBO J. 1996 Jun 17;15(12):3077-84.

Drosophila goosecoid participates in neural development but not in body axis
formation.

Hahn M(1), Jäckle H.

Author information: 
(1)Max Plank Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany.

In vertebrate embryos, the homeobox gene goosecoid (gsc) is expressed in the
gastrula organizer region and in later arising embryonic tissues including the
foregut anlage. Ectopic expression and loss-of-function studies have demonstrated
that Xenopus gsc elicits a dorsalizing activity that contributes to body axis
formation. Here we report that the gsc gene is conserved in invertebrates. In
Drosophila, D-gsc is expressed most strongly in the foregut anlage, which gives
rise to the foregut proper and the stomatogastric nervous system (SNS). D-gsc
expression overlaps with one of the three SNS precursor groups invaginating from 
the foregut anlage. Embryos mutant for D-gsc gastrulate normally but show
disrupted invagination in the SNS primordium and lack one specific SNS ganglion. 
In addition, D-gsc mutant embryos show a less well defined defect in foregut
arrangement. Our results indicate that this invertebrate homolog of gsc is not
required for gastrulation but plays a role in neurogenesis in post-gastrula
Drosophila embryos.

PMCID: PMC450248
PMID: 8670808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Development. 1996 Jun;122(6):1873-83.

Anteroposterior patterning in the zebrafish, Danio rerio: an explant assay
reveals inductive and suppressive cell interactions.

Sagerström CG(1), Grinbalt Y, Sive H.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

We report the first extended culture system for analysing zebrafish (Danio rerio)
embryogenesis with which we demonstrate neural induction and anteroposterior
patterning. Explants from the animal pole region of blastula embryos ('animal
caps') survived for at least two days and increased in cell number. Mesodermal
and neural-specific genes were not expressed in cultured animal caps, although
low levels of the dorsoanterior marker otx2 were seen. In contrast, we observed
strong expression of gta3, a ventral marker and cyt1, a novel type I cytokeratin 
expressed in the outer enveloping layer. Isolated 'embryonic shield', that
corresponds to the amphibian organizer and amniote node, went on to express the
mesodermal genes gsc and ntl, otx2, the anterior neural marker pax6, and
posterior neural markers eng3 and krx20. The expression of these genes defined a 
precise anteroposterior axis in shield explants. When conjugated to animal caps, 
the shield frequently induced expression of anterior neural markers. More
posterior markers were rarely induced, suggesting that anterior and posterior
neural induction are separable events. Mesodermal genes were also seldom
activated in animal caps by the shield, demonstrating that neural induction did
not require co-induction of mesoderm in the caps. Strikingly, ventral marginal
zone explants suppressed the low levels of otx2 in animal caps, indicating that
ventral tissues may play an active role in axial patterning. These data suggest
that anteroposterior patterning in the zebrafish is a multi-step process.

PMID: 8674426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Development. 1996 May;122(5):1641-50.

A functional homologue of goosecoid in Drosophila.

Goriely A(1), Stella M, Coffinier C, Kessler D, Mailhos C, Dessain S, Desplan C.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY
10021, USA.

We have cloned a Drosophila homologue (D-gsc) of the vertebrate homeobox gene
goosecoid (gsc). In the Gsc proteins, the pressure for conservation has been
imposed on the homeodomain, the functional domain of the protein: sequence
homology is limited to the homeodomain (78% identity) and to a short stretch of 7
aminoacids also found in other homeoproteins such as Engrailed. Despite this weak
homology, D-gsc is able to mimic gsc function in a Xenopus assay, as shown by its
ability to rescue the axis development of a UV-irradiated embryo. Moreover, our
data suggest that the position of insect and vertebrate gsc homologues within a
regulatory network has also been conserved: D-gsc expression is controlled by
decapentaplegic, orthodenticle, sloppy-paired and tailless whose homologues
control gsc expression (for BMP4 and Otx-2), or are expressed at the right time
and the right place (for XFKH1/Pintallavis and Tlx) to be interacting with gsc
during vertebrate development. However, the pattern of D-gsc expression in
ectodermal cells of the nervous system and foregut cannot easily be reconciled
with that of vertebrate gsc mesodermal expression, suggesting that its precise
developmental function might have diverged. Still, this comparison of domains of 
expression and functions among Gsc proteins could shed light on a common origin
of gut formation and/or on basic cellular processes. The identification of gsc
target genes and/or other genes involved in similar developmental processes will 
allow the definition of the precise phylogenetic relationship among Gsc proteins.

PMID: 8625850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Dev Biol. 1996 Apr 10;175(1):108-17.

Induction of axial mesoderm by zDVR-1, the zebrafish orthologue of Xenopus Vg1.

Dohrmann CE(1), Kessler DS, Melton DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 02138, USA.

The zebrafish DVR-1 (zDVR-1) gene, like Xenopus Vg1, is present maternally as an 
unprocessed precursor protein which is distributed ubiquitously along the future 
dorsoventral axis. Also, like Vg1, overexpression of zDVR-1 in zebrafish directs 
synthesis of more precursor, but no processed protein. However, the native zDVR-1
precursor is processed to mature protein when expressed in Xenopus. Like
processed Vg1, mature zDVR-1 is a potent inducer of axial mesoderm. The parallels
in expression pattern, apparent regulation of protein processing, and
mesoderm-inducing activity support the hypothesis that localized protein
processing controls production of a dorsal mesoderm inducer in these two species.
Furthermore, using mutant mRNAs, we show that cleavage site sequences of the
precursor protein are important in regulating protein processing.

PMID: 8608857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Mar 5;93(5):1803-7.

Retinoid X receptor-selective ligands produce malformations in Xenopus embryos.

Minucci S(1), Saint-Jeannet JP, Toyama R, Scita G, DeLuca LM, Tiara M, Levin AA, 
Ozato K, Dawid IB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Growth Regulation, National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Retinoids exert pleiotropic effects on the development of vertebrates through the
action of retinoic acid receptors (RAR) and retinoid X receptors (RXR). We have
investigated the effect of synthetic retinoids selective for RXR and RAR on the
development of Xenopus and zebrafish embryos. In Xenopus, both ligands selective 
for RAR and RXR caused striking malformations along the anterior-posterior axis, 
whereas in zebrafish only ligands specific for RAR caused embryonic
malformations. In Xenopus, RAR- and RXR-selective ligands regulated the
expression of the Xlim-1, gsc, and HoxA1 genes similarly as all-trans-retinoic
acid. Nevertheless, RXR-selective ligands activated only an RXR responsive
reporter but not an RAR responsive reporter introduced by microinjection into the
Xenopus embryo, consistent with our failure to detect conversion of an
RXR-selective ligand to different derivatives in the embryo. These results
suggest that Xenopus embryos possess a unique response pathway in which liganded 
RXR can control gene expression. Our observations further illustrate the
divergence in retinoid responsiveness between different vertebrate species.

PMCID: PMC39862
PMID: 8700839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Mech Dev. 1996 Mar;55(1):3-18.

Regulation of the zebrafish goosecoid promoter by mesoderm inducing factors and
Xwnt1.

Joore J(1), Fasciana C, Speksnijder JE, Kruijer W, Destrée OH, van den
Eijnden-van Raaij AJ, de Laat SW, Zivkovic D.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology, Utrecht,
The Netherlands.

Goosecoid is a homeobox gene that is expressed as an immediate early response to 
mesoderm induction by activin. We have investigated the induction of the
zebrafish goosecoid promoter by the mesoderm inducing factors activin and basic
fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) in dissociated zebrafish blastula cells, as well 
as by different wnts in intact embryos. Activin induces promoter activity, while 
bFGF shows a cooperative effect with activin. We have identified two enhancer
elements that are functional in the induction of the goosecoid promoter. A distal
element confers activin responsiveness to a heterologous promoter in the absence 
of de novo protein synthesis, whereas a proximal element responds only to a
combination of activin and bFGF. Deletion experiments show that both elements are
important for full induction by activin. Nuclear proteins that bind to these
elements are expressed in blastula embryos, and competition experiments show that
an octamer site in the activin responsive distal element is specifically bound,
suggesting a role for an octamer binding factor in the regulation of goosecoid
expression by activin. Experiments in intact embryos reveal that the proximal
element contains sequences that respond to Xwnt1, but not to Xwnt5c. Furthermore,
we show that the distal element is active in a confined dorsal domain in embryos 
and responds to overexpression of activin in vivo, as well as to dorsalization by
lithium. The distal element is to our knowledge the first enhancer element
identified that mediates the induction of a mesodermal gene by activin.

PMID: 8734495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Development. 1996 Jan;122(1):173-9.

Development of the mammalian ear: coordinate regulation of formation of the
tympanic ring and the external acoustic meatus.

Mallo M(1), Gridley T.

Author information: 
(1)Roche Institute of Molecular Biology, Roche Research Center, Nutley, NJ 07110,
USA.

The tympanic membrane in mammals is a trilaminar structure formed by the
apposition of two epithelial cell layers, along with an intervening layer of
cells derived from pharyngeal arch mesenchyme. One epithelial layer is
contributed by the external acoustic meatus, a derivative of the first pharyngeal
cleft. The other epithelial layer is contributed by the tubotympanic recess, a
derivative of the first pharyngeal pouch. We demonstrate here an absolute
correlation between formation of the external acoustic meatus and formation of
the tympanic ring, a first arch-derived membrane bone that anchors the tympanic
membrane. Experimental loss of the tympanic ring by retinoic acid treatment, or
duplication of the ring in Hoxa-2 null mutant embryos, resulted in corresponding 
alterations in formation of the external acoustic meatus. We suggest that the
tympanic ring primordium induces formation and morphogenesis of the external
acoustic meatus, and that expression of the Hoxa-2 and goosecoid genes may be
involved in regulating the formation and morphogenesis of these structures.

PMID: 8565828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. J Am Coll Surg. 1996 Jan;182(1):1-6.

Gastric remnant carcinoma after partial gastrectomy for benign and malignant
gastric lesions.

Kodera Y(1), Yamamura Y, Torii A, Uesaka K, Hirai T, Yasui K, Morimoto T, Kato T,
Kito T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Aichi Cancer Center, Nagoya, Japan.

BACKGROUND: A retrospective study was designed to evaluate the clinicopathologic 
characteristics and prognosis of gastric stump carcinoma (GSC) after gastrectomy 
for gastric adenocarcinoma.
STUDY DESIGN: A comparison of the clinicopathologic features was made between 12 
cases of GSC and 27 cases of remnant carcinoma (RC) following gastrectomy for
adenocarcinoma. The various factors influencing survival of both groups of
patients were evaluated separately and by multivariate analysis.
RESULTS: Gastric stump carcinoma emerges late after initial gastrectomy and has a
significant tendency toward lymph node metastasis. No difference was observed
between the survival curves for patients with GSC or RC after gastrectomy for
malignancy. Serosal invasion was the factor most affecting survival.
CONCLUSIONS: Early diagnosis is most important for management of the disease, and
only patients with T2 staged GSC according to the Union Internationale Contre le 
Cancer classification system might benefit from extensive lymphadenectomies.

PMID: 8542082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Genes Dev. 1995 Dec 15;9(24):3038-50.

Molecular mechanisms of Spemann's organizer formation: conserved growth factor
synergy between Xenopus and mouse.

Watabe T(1), Kim S, Candia A, Rothbächer U, Hashimoto C, Inoue K, Cho KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, University of California, Irvine
92717-2300, USA.

Mesoderm induction assays in Xenopus have implicated growth factors such as
activin, Vg1, Xwnt-8, and noggin as important in directing the formation of
dorsal mesoderm (Spemann's organizer). Because these growth factors are
structurally very different, they presumably act through distinct cell surface
receptors that initiate different intracellular signaling cascades. A consequence
of all of these signaling pathways, however, seems to be the induction of
goosecoid (gsc) gene expression. To understand how integration of these different
signaling pathways results in formation of Spemann's organizer, we sought to
identify growth factor-responsive elements within the gsc promoter. Through
microinjection of reporter genes we have identified two cis-acting elements, a
distal element (DE) and a proximal element (PE), that are required for
activin/BVg1 and Wnt induction, respectively. We have shown that the DE mediates 
activin induction in the absence of protein synthesis and therefore constitutes
the first activin response element identified to interpret transforming growth
factor-beta (TGF-beta) superfamily member signaling directly. Using a reporter
gene construct containing a multimerized DE, we find that an activin/BVg1-type
signaling cascade is active throughout the vegetal hemisphere and marginal zone
but not in the animal hemisphere. We demonstrate further that both the distal and
proximal elements are essential for high-level transcription of the gsc gene,
specifically in dorsal mesoderm, strongly suggesting that establishment of
Spemann's organizer requires synergistic input from activin/BVg1-like and Wnt
signaling pathways. Finally, mechanisms of establishing the organizer are likely 
to be conserved throughout vertebrate evolution.

PMID: 8543150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. J Trauma. 1995 Dec;39(6):1100-2.

Transpyloric passage of feeding tubes in patients with head injuries does not
decrease complications.

Spain DA(1), DeWeese RC, Reynolds MA, Richardson JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Louisville School of Medicine, Kentucky
40292, USA.

Early enteral nutrition is reported to improve outcome of patients with severe
closed head injuries (CHI). The efficacy and safety of nasoenteric tube (NET)
feeds, however, has been questioned; the risk of aspiration is the major concern.
Our purpose was to determine the rate of transpyloric migration, the efficacy of 
adjunctive measures to promote passage, and the effect on pulmonary
complications. Seventy-four consecutive patients with moderate to severe CHI
received enteral nutrition. Glasgow Coma Scale (GSC) score was 5.2 on admission
and 6.9 at 48 hours. NETs were placed an average of 5.6 days after admission; an 
average of three abdominal films per patient were used to assess tube position.
No patients had endoscopic NET placement during this period. Ten patients
required fluoroscopic placement after failure to pass spontaneously by 5 days.
Overall, transpyloric passage was achieved in 32 patients (43%), whereas 42 (57%)
remained intragastric. There were no differences between the postpyloric and
intragastric groups in days to full feeding (5 vs. 7 days), ventilator days (11.9
vs. 12.5), intensive care unit length of stay (15.5 vs. 15.1), or incidence of
pneumonia (81 vs. 69%) or aspiration (6 vs 7%). Sixty-two patients (83%) were
transferred to extended care facilities and 50 (68%) were still receiving NET
feedings. Spontaneous transpyloric passage of NET occurred in less than one-half 
of patients with severe CHI. The routine use of adjunctive measures to promote
transpyloric passage was not particularly successful, had no obvious benefit, and
therefore may not be necessary.

PMID: 7500401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Nat Genet. 1995 Dec;11(4):409-14.

Transforming growth factor-beta 3 is required for secondary palate fusion.

Proetzel G(1), Pawlowski SA, Wiles MV, Yin M, Boivin GP, Howles PN, Ding J,
Ferguson MW, Doetschman T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Biochemistry & Microbiology, University of
Cincinnati College of Medicine, Ohio 45267, USA.

Mice lacking TGF-beta 3 exhibit an incompletely penetrant failure of the palatal 
shelves to fuse leading to cleft palate. The defect appears to result from
impaired adhesion of the apposing medial edge epithelia of the palatal shelves
and subsequent elimination of the mid-line epithelial seam. No craniofacial
abnormalities were observed. This result demonstrates that TGF-beta 3 affects
palatal shelf fusion by an intrinsic, primary mechanism rather than by effects
secondary to craniofacial defects.

PMCID: PMC3855390
PMID: 7493021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Mamm Genome. 1995 Nov;6(11):816-7.

The mouse goosecoïd gene (Gsc) maps to the telomeric part of mouse chromosome 12.

Guénet JL(1), Simon-Chazottes D, de Robertis E, Blum M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique des Mammifères, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

PMID: 8597641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. EMBO J. 1995 Nov 1;14(21):5230-43.

The role of gsc and BMP-4 in dorsal-ventral patterning of the marginal zone in
Xenopus: a loss-of-function study using antisense RNA.

Steinbeisser H(1), Fainsod A, Niehrs C, Sasai Y, De Robertis EM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California, Los Angeles
90095-1737, USA.

The dorsal-specific homeobox gene goosecoid (gsc) and the bone morphogenetic
protein 4 gene (BMP-4) are expressed in complementary regions of the Xenopus
gastrula. Injection of gsc mRNA dorsalizes ventral mesodermal tissue and can
induce axis formation in normal and UV-ventralized embryos. On the other hand,
BMP-4 mRNA injection, which has a strong ventralizing effect on whole embryos,
has been implicated in ventralization by UV, and can rescue tail structures in
embryos dorsalized by LiCl. The above-mentioned putative roles for BMP-4 and gsc 
are based on gain-of-function experiments. In order to determine the in vivo role
of these two genes in the patterning of the Xenopus mesoderm during gastrulation,
partial loss-of-function experiments were performed using antisense RNA
injections. Using marker genes that are expressed early in gastrulation, we show 
that antisense gsc RNA has a ventralizing effect on embryos, whereas antisense
BMP-4 RNA dorsalizes mesodermal tissue. These loss-of-function studies also show 
a requirement for gsc and BMP-4 in the dorsalization induced by LiCl and in the
ventralization generated by UV irradiation, respectively. Thus, both gain- and
loss-of-function results for gsc and BMP-4 support the view that these two genes 
are necessary components of the dorsal and ventral patterning pathways in Xenopus
embryos.

PMCID: PMC394633
PMID: 7489713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Development. 1995 Sep;121(9):3005-12.

Goosecoid is not an essential component of the mouse gastrula organizer but is
required for craniofacial and rib development.

Rivera-Pérez JA(1), Mallo M, Gendron-Maguire M, Gridley T, Behringer RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston 77030, USA.

Goosecoid (gsc) is an evolutionarily conserved homeobox gene expressed in the
gastrula organizer region of a variety of vertebrate embryos, including
zebrafish, Xenopus, chicken and mouse. To understand the role of gsc during mouse
embryogenesis, we generated gsc-null mice by gene targeting in embryonic stem
cells. Surprisingly, gsc-null embryos gastrulated and formed the primary body
axes; gsc-null mice were born alive but died soon after birth with numerous
craniofacial defects. In addition, rib fusions and sternum abnormalities were
detected that varied depending upon the genetic background. Transplantation
experiments suggest that the ovary does not provide gsc function to rescue
gastrulation defects. These results demonstrate that gsc is not essential for
organizer activity in the mouse but is required later during embryogenesis for
craniofacial and rib cage development.

PMID: 7555726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Development. 1995 Sep;121(9):2917-22.

Targeted mutation of the murine goosecoid gene results in craniofacial defects
and neonatal death.

Yamada G(1), Mansouri A, Torres M, Stuart ET, Blum M, Schultz M, De Robertis EM, 
Gruss P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical
Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany.

The goosecoid gene encodes a homeodomain-containing protein that has been
identified in a number of species and has been implicated in a variety of key
developmental processes. Initially suggested to be involved in organizing the
embryo during early development, goosecoid has since been demonstrated to be
expressed during organogenesis-most notably in the head, the limbs and the
ventrolateral body wall. To investigate the role of goosecoid in embryonic
development, we have inactivated the gene by gene targeting to generate mice
mutant for the goosecoid gene. Mice that are homozygous for the goosecoid
mutation do not display a gastrulation phenotype and are born; however, they do
not survive more than 24 hours. Analysis of the homozygotes revealed numerous
developmental defects affecting those structures in which goosecoid is expressed 
during its second (late) phase of embryonic expression. Predominantly, these
defects involve the lower mandible and its associated musculature including the
tongue, the nasal cavity and the nasal pits, as well as the components of the
inner ear (malleus, tympanic ring) and the external auditory meatus. Although the
observed phenotype is in accordance with the late expression domains of goosecoid
in wild-type embryos, we suggest that the lack of an earlier phenotype is the
result of functional compensation by other genes.

PMID: 7555718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. J Pediatr Surg. 1995 Jul;30(7):983-6; discussion 986-7.

Effect of intraamniotic dexamethasone administration on intestinal absorption in 
a rabbit gastroschisis model.

Guo W(1), Swaniker F, Fonkalsrud EW, Vo K, Karamanoukian R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, UCLA School of Medicine 90024, USA.

Infants with gastroschisis experience delayed intestinal motility and absorption 
for several weeks after birth. This intestinal dysfunction is believed to occur
primarily in the third trimester and to be largely caused by the prolonged
exposure of the intestine to amniotic fluid. Previous studies have shown that
prenatal steroid administration will enhance mucosal disaccharidase activity and 
nutrient uptake. The present study evaluates the effects of dexamethasone on
intestinal function in a rabbit fetal gastroschisis model. Thirty-four fetuses
from 10 New Zealand white rabbits were divided into three groups: (1)
gastroschisis group (GSC, n = 10), gastroschisis was created on gestational day
(GD) 24 (term = 31 to 33 days); (2) dexamethasone group (GSD, n = 10), after the 
creation of gastroschisis, a small osmotic pump was placed into the rabbit doe
for dexamethasone infusion into the fetal amniotic cavity for 7 days (0.2
microgram/g/d); (3) normal group (NF, n = 10), unoperated littermates from the
GSC group. There were no maternal deaths, and fetal survival rate was 85%. The
fetal small intestinal disaccharidase enzyme, lactase (UE/g protein), was
markedly decreased in GSC fetuses. It was increased 70% in the GSD group but
lower than in normal fetuses (GSC = 10.0 +/- 1.6; GSD = 17.3 +/- 1.6 [GSD versus 
GSC, P < .05]; NF = 48.0 +/- 6.7). Maltase activity in the GSD group was
significantly increased (GSC = 7.2 +/- 1.1; GSD = 13.9 +/- 1.8 [GSD versus GSC, P
< .05]; NF = 12.2 +/- 1.3).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7472958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. J Biol Chem. 1995 Jun 2;270(22):12957-60.

Evidence for a (triosephosphate isomerase-like) "catalytic loop" near the active 
site of glyoxalase I.

Lan Y(1), Lu T, Lovett PS, Creighton DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Maryland Baltimore County 21228, USA.

The conformational mobility of glyoxalase I (Glx I) during catalysis has been
probed using stable analogs of the enediol intermediate that forms along the
reaction pathway: GSC(O)N(OH)R, where GS = glutathionyl and R = CH3 (1), C6H5
(2), C6H4Cl (3), or C6H4Br (4). For human erythrocyte Glx I, catalysis is
unlikely to be coupled to major changes in protein secondary structure, as the
circular dichroism spectrum of the enzyme (190-260 nm) is insensitive to
saturating concentrations of either enediol analog or S-D-lactoylglutathione, the
product of the Glx I reaction. However, a small conformational change is
indicated by the fact that binding of enediol analog to the active site decreases
intrinsic protein fluorescence by 11%, and protects the enzyme from proteolytic
cleavage by Pronase E at the C-side of Ala-92 and Leu-93. In contrast, binding of
S-D-lactoylglutathione does not affect protein fluorescence, and increases the
rate of proteolytic cleavage by 1.5-fold. These observations are consistent with 
a model of catalysis in which a flexible peptide loop folds over and stabilizes
the enediol intermediate bound to the active site. Indeed, a highly conserved
sequence of amino acid residues is found near the proteolytic cleavage sites, for
human Glx I (100-111) and Pseudomonas putida Glx I (93-105), that shows
significant sequence homology to the "catalytic loop" of chicken muscle
triosephosphate isomerase (TIM) (165-176). The active site base (Glu-165) of TIM,
which catalyzes the proton transfer reaction during isomerization, corresponds in
position to Glu-93 of P. putida Glx I. Consistent with a functional role for
Glu-93, a mutant enzyme in which Glu-93 is replaced by Asp shows no detectable
catalytic activity.

PMID: 7768882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Development. 1995 Jun;121(6):1787-99.

Zebrafish wnt8 and wnt8b share a common activity but are involved in distinct
developmental pathways.

Kelly GM(1), Greenstein P, Erezyilmaz DF, Moon RT.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Pharmacology, Seattle,
Washington, USA.

The specification of the vertebrate body plan is dependent on numerous signaling 
molecules, including members of the Wnt family. We have identified two zebrafish 
wnt8 paralogs related to Xwnt-8B and Xwnt-8, respectively. A RT-PCR assay
demonstrated that wnt8 is expressed maternally, with transcripts detected
throughout embryogenesis, whereas wnt8b transcripts were first detected during
late gastrulation. The wnt8 transcripts at 50% epiboly are spatially restricted
to those cells at the blastoderm margin, overlying gsc-expressing cells in the
axial hypoblast. During late gastrulation, wnt8 was no longer detected in the
marginal cells at the dorsal midline and by mid-segmentation, transcripts were
found in the presumptive tail bud. In contrast, wnt8b expression is spatially
restricted to prospective neuroepithelium, and later to neural-specific
structures. Overexpression of both wnts results in two major phenotypes:
radialized embryos and embryos with anterior defects. These phenotypes were
preceded by significant changes in the spatial expression patterns of gsc and ntl
transcripts, reminiscent of activities of Xwnt-8 in Xenopus, and consistent with 
a role for wnt8 in the specification or patterning of mesoderm.

PMID: 7600994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Development. 1995 Jun;121(6):1581-9.

Effect of activin and lithium on isolated Xenopus animal blastomeres and response
alteration at the midblastula transition.

Kinoshita K(1), Asashima M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biology, Nippon Medical School, Kawasaki, Japan.

Dorsoventral mesoderm patterning in the amphibian embryo involves a series of
interactions mediated by several peptide growth factors. Animal blastomeres
isolated at the 8-cell stage are useful for studying mesoderm patterning, since
they contain the prospective (uninduced) mesoderm region and allow examination of
the default state of animal cells. When activin is applied to these dorsal and
ventral animal half explants, a competence prepattern for responding to activin
is observed. In order to investigate the characteristics of prepatterning, we
treated animal blastomeres with the embryo dorsalizing agent LiCl. Treatment with
lithium alone did not induce normal trunk mesoderm in either blastomere. Lithium 
did, however, alter the competence of animal blastomeres to activin. Dorsal
mesoderm was formed in the ventral blastomeres, as well as in the dorsal
blastomeres. This result reveals that the early dorsoventral polarity in the
animal hemisphere is not fixed. Using goosecoid(gsc) and Xwnt-8 genes as dorsal
and ventral mesoderm markers, it was verified that lithium modifies the
competence to activin. Unexpectedly, lithium treatment on its own resulted in gsc
expression in the animal half explants. This suggests that embryo goosecoid
expression may be induced by the effect of dorsal determination activity, but not
by mesoderm induction. However, lithium induced also the expression of brachyury 
(Xbra) gene at very low levels. This would indicate the formation of
dorsal-anterior mesoderm, which was not identified by the tissue observations.
Expression of Xwnt-8, a ventral mesoderm marker usually induced in blastula
animal caps by activin, was hardly induced in the blastomere explants. We
isolated whole animal half explants at the 8-cell stage and exposed to activin at
different stages. It was found that the same concentration of activin induces gsc
before the midblastula stage, and induces Xwnt-8 at later stages. This suggests
that the response of animal blastomeres alters depending on the stage of activin 
signaling.

PMID: 7600976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Curr Biol. 1995 Jun 1;5(6):574-6.

Inductive signals. Revolving vertebrates.

Jones CM(1), Smith JC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, National Institute for Medical Research,
Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London, UK.

An old idea about the relationship between arthropod and vertebrate body plans
has been given new life by studies of the signalling genes controlling dorsal and
ventral development in Drosophila and Xenopus.

PMID: 7552158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Vojnosanit Pregl. 1995 May-Jun;52(3):225-32.

[Disorders of olfactory function in penetrating head injuries sustained during
war].

[Article in Serbian]

Jovic NS(1), Ocic G.

Author information: 
(1)Medicinski fakultet, Klinika za neurologiju i psihijatriju za decu i omladinu,
Beograd.

Olfactory function was estimated in the group of 37 patients with the penetrating
war head injury. In 4 (10.8%) patients mutual anosmia was found. In comparison to
healthy volunteers the injured showed worse performance on the level of the
tested olfactory parameters. In 9 (24.3%) patients the offered smells were sensed
as very unpleasant. The subgroup of patients from Glasgow Coma Scale (GSC) < or =
8 showed the highest degree of olfactive disfunction. The patients with
complicated penetrating head injury were less successful at the level of all
olfactive qualities comparing to those without injury complications. The
localization of the focal penetrating wound, regardless of the kind of a weapon
causing the brain injury, was not significantly correlated with the results of
olfactometry in distinction from hemisphere lateralization of the lesion. The
recovery of the retested was minimal.

PMID: 7571538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Development. 1995 Feb;121(2):383-91.

Nodal induces ectopic goosecoid and lim1 expression and axis duplication in
zebrafish.

Toyama R(1), O'Connell ML, Wright CV, Kuehn MR, Dawid IB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

One of the first intercellular signalling events in the vertebrate embryo leads
to mesoderm formation and axis determination. In the mouse, a gene encoding a new
member of the TGF-beta superfamily, nodal, is disrupted in a mutant deficient in 
mesoderm formation (Zhou et al., 1993, Nature 361, 543). nodal mRNA is found in
prestreak mouse embryos, consistent with a role in the development of the dorsal 
axis. To examine the biological activities of nodal, we have studied the action
of this factor in eliciting axis determination in the zebrafish, Danio rerio.
Injection of nodal mRNA into zebrafish embryos caused the formation of ectopic
axes that included notochord and somites. Axis duplication was preceded by the
generation of an apparent ectopic shield (organizer equivalent) in nodal-injected
embryos, as indicated by the appearance of a region over-expressing gsc and lim1;
isolation and expression in the shield of the lim1 gene is reported here. These
results suggest a role for a nodal-like factor in pattern formation in zebrafish.

PMID: 7768180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Development. 1995 Feb;121(2):273-85.

The eed mutation disrupts anterior mesoderm production in mice.

Faust C(1), Schumacher A, Holdener B, Magnuson T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio
44106-4955, USA.

Mouse embryos homozygous for the mutation embryonic ectoderm development (eed)
exhibit a growth defect and fail to gastrulate normally. While extraembryonic
mesoderm is produced extensively, very little embryonic mesoderm is detected in
eed mutant embryos, and there is no subsequent organization of mesoderm into
node, notochord, or somites. The phenotype is consistent with a defect in the
distal primitive streak. Here we report additional phenotypic analyses that
include mRNA in situ hybridization of genes whose expression reflects the
function of different regions of the primitive streak and their derivatives.
These studies have confirmed that mesoderm derived from the proximal primitive
streak is specified appropriately. Despite the absence of a morphologically
distinct node, sparse axial mesoderm cells in eed mutant embryos are specified,
as reflected by expression of Brachyury (T), Sonic hedgehog, and Tcf3b/HNF-3
beta, and definitive endoderm is produced. Specification of these cell types is
also independent of correct expression of nodal, Fgf4, and gsc. Finally, T and
Evx1 display ectopic expression in cells not normally fated to ingress through
the primitive streak. The data presented are discussed in terms of mechanisms for
establishment of the eed phenotype, and are consistent with the eed gene product 
playing an early role in primitive streak formation and/or organization.

PMID: 7768172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Pediatr Neurosurg. 1995;23(2):57-63.

Prognosis of extradural haematomas in children.

Mohanty A(1), Kolluri VR, Subbakrishna DK, Satish S, Mouli BA, Das BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro
Sciences, Bangalore, India.

102 children treated surgically for intracranial extradural haematoma from 1982
to 1991 were evaluated retrospectively and their prognosis was compared with 387 
adults treated during the same period. Children had a better prognosis than
adults even with a low Glasgow Coma Scale (GSC) score at surgery. Children had a 
higher incidence of frontal and posterior fossa haematomas. The GCS score and the
associated parenchymal injuries had a strong correlation with the outcome both in
adult and children, whereas the site of haematoma had no correlation with the
final outcome.

PMID: 8555096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Mech Dev. 1995 Jan;49(1-2):49-63.

c-otx2 is expressed in two different phases of gastrulation and is sensitive to
retinoic acid treatment in chick embryo.

Bally-Cuif L(1), Gulisano M, Broccoli V, Boncinelli E.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS URA 1414, Equipe ATIPE, Ecole Normale Superieure, Paris, France.

We cloned the chick homologue of the mouse Otx2 gene, c-otx2, and analyzed its
expression pattern during gastrulation. During mouse embryogenesis, Otx2
expression is first detected in the entire epiblast and after the formation of
the primitive streak becomes confined to the most anterior region of the embryo
corresponding to presumptive fore- and mid-brain. Similarly, two distinct phases 
of c-otx2 expression were observed in the chick. c-otx2 transcripts were first
detected in the unincubated egg and up to stage XIII, in all epiblast, and
forming hypoblast and mesoblast cells. During primitive streak progression,
c-otx2 expression becomes progressively restricted to anterior regions and is
mainly associated with Hensen's node. When the extension of the streak is
maximal, transcripts are only found in Hensen's node. A second phase of c-otx2
expression starts during streak regression. c-otx2 transcripts are lost from the 
node and present in higher abundance in anterior neuroectoderm and mesendoderm,
with the exception of forming notochord and floor plate. The first phase of
expression bears strong similarity with that of c-gsc, a gene shown to be a
marker for cells that have organizer activity in the chick. Therefore, we
compared the expression of the two genes by double staining on the same embryo.
This analysis demonstrated that c-otx2 is transcribed first and its expression in
the hypoblast precedes that of c-gsc. On the other hand, c-gsc is an earlier
marker of primitive streak cells. The expression domains of the two genes
transiently overlap in Hensen's node and anterior mesendoderm, whereas only
c-otx2 is expressed in neuroectodermal areas. The second phase of c-otx2
expression is sensitive to an early treatment with retinoic acid. This treatment 
abolishes c-otx2 expression in mesendoderm and restricts it to most anterior
regions in the forming neural plate. In conclusion, our results suggest that
c-otx2 expression is first associated with cells with an anterior mesendoderm
fate and subsequently extends to anterior neuroectoderm.

PMID: 7748789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Nature. 1994 Dec 15;372(6507):677-9.

Role of the LIM class homeodomain protein Xlim-1 in neural and muscle induction
by the Spemann organizer in Xenopus.

Taira M(1), Otani H, Saint-Jeannet JP, Dawid IB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

Erratum in
    Nature 1995 Feb 2;373(6513):451.

Like all known LIM class homeobox genes, Xlim-1 encodes a protein with two
tandemly repeated cysteine-rich LIM domains upstream of the homeodomain. In
Xenopus laevis, Xlim-1 is specifically expressed in the Spemann organizer, whose 
major functions include neural induction and dorsalization of ventral mesoderm.
From RNA injection experiments we conclude here that: (1) the LIM domains behave 
as negative regulatory domains; (2) LIM domain mutants of Xlim-1 elicited neural 
differentiation in animal explants; (3) mutant, and to a lesser extent wild-type,
Xlim-1 enhanced muscle formation after coinjection with Xbra; (4) both of these
activities are mediated by extracellular signals as seen in combined explant
experiments; (5) Xlim-1 mutants activated goosecoid (gsc) expression in animal
explants, but not expression of noggin or follistatin; (6) mutant Xlim-1 elicited
formation of partial secondary axes, and cooperated with gsc in notochord
formation. Thus Xlim-1 has latent activities, implicating it in organizer
functions.

PMID: 7990959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Int J Dev Biol. 1994 Dec;38(4):605-11.

Expression of mesoderm markers in Xenopus laevis Keller explants.

Saint-Jeannet JP(1), Karavanov AA, Dawid IB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

In an attempt to document at the molecular level the behavior of mesodermal cells
in Keller explant preparation, we have analyzed the time course of expression of 
four molecular markers of mesoderm gsc, Xbra, Xnot and XLIM-1. Our findings
demonstrate that, (i) all mesodermal markers tested were expressed in the
explants, but patterning of the mesoderm appeared incomplete; (ii) during
convergence and extension of the explants, mesodermal cells did not invade the
ectodermal tissue at any time tested, supporting the view that mesoderm
establishes exclusively planar contacts with the ectoderm in this preparation;
(iii) planar contacts were not sufficient to promote the neural expression of
XLIM-1 protein in these explants.

PMID: 7779682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. EMBO J. 1994 Nov 1;13(21):5015-25.

On the function of BMP-4 in patterning the marginal zone of the Xenopus embryo.

Fainsod A(1), Steinbeisser H, De Robertis EM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, University of California, Los Angeles 90024-1737.

Bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP-4) is expressed in the ventral marginal zone of
the gastrulating embryo. At late gastrula stage this gene is expressed in the
ventral-most part of the slit blastopore and in tissues that derive from it. At
tailbud stages BMP-4 is expressed in the spinal cord roof plate, neural crest,
eye and auditory vesicle. The interactions of BMP-4 with dorsal genes such as
goosecoid (gsc) and Xnot-2 were studied in vivo. In embryos ventralized by UV
irradiation and suramin treatment, BMP-4 zygotic transcripts accumulate
prematurely and the entire marginal zone expresses this gene. The patterning
effect of BMP-4 on ventro-posterior development can be revealed by a sensitive
assay involving the injection of BMP-4 mRNA in the ventral marginal zone of
embryos partially dorsalized with LiCl, which leads to the complete rescue of
trunk and tail structures. The experiments presented here argue that BMP-4 may
act in vivo as a ventral signal for the proper patterning of the marginal zone,
actively interacting with dorsal genes such as gsc and Xnot-2. A model is
proposed in which the timing of expression of various marginal zone-specific
genes plays a central role in patterning the mesoderm.

PMCID: PMC395447
PMID: 7957067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1994 Sep 15;203(2):1102-9.

A chemically synthesized sialic acid-containing glycoconjugate,
2-(tetradecylhexadecyl)-O-(5-acetamido-3,5-dideoxy-D-glycero-alpha-D-ga
lacto-2-nonulopyranosylonic
acid)-(2-->3)-O-beta-D-galactopyrannosyl-(1-->4)-beta-D- glucopyrannoside, is a
potent inhibitor of cellular immune responses.

Ladisch S(1), Hasegawa A, Li R, Kiso M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer and Transplantation Biology, Children's Research Institute, 
Washington, DC 20010.

Structural variations among gangliosides significantly influence their
immunosuppressive activity. By total chemical synthesis, a sialic acid-containing
glycoconjugate,
2-(tetradecylhexadecyl)-O-(5-acetamido-3,5-dideoxy-D-glycero-alpha
-D-galacto-2-nonulopyranosylonic
acid)-(2-->3)-O-beta-D-galactopyrannosyl-(1-->4)-beta-D- glucopyrannoside was
synthesized. This glycoconjugate has the same carbohydrate structure as does GM3 
ganglioside and a branched alkane in place of ceramide. It markedly inhibits the 
tetanus toxoid-induced human lymphoproliferative response in vitro (ID90 < 7
microM) and is five-fold more active than d18:1-C18:0 GM3 ganglioside, to which
it is structurally related. This glycoconjugate is also a potent inhibitor of the
murine alloimmune response in vivo: 10 nmol of the molecule injected
subcutaneously together with an allogeneic cell challenge markedly inhibits the
cellular immune response in the draining popliteal lymph node. In fact, the
effect is quantitatively similar to that of systemically administered cyclosporin
A, a well-studied immunosuppressive agent.

PMID: 8093028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Nature. 1994 Aug 11;370(6489):468-71.

Implications for dorsoventral axis determination from the zebrafish mutation
janus.

Abdelilah S(1), Solnica-Krezel L, Stainier DY, Driever W.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown
02129.

THE mechanisms underlying the formation of dorsoventral polarity in the zebrafish
Danio rerio are unknown. Here we describe the zebrafish recessive maternal-effect
mutation janusm55. The mutant phenotype is a division of the blastoderm along the
first cleavage plane into two detached half-sized blastoderms. Partial-axis
bifurcation occurs in a subset of mutants. Analysis of goosecoid expression in
the mutant embryos indicates that only one organizer region is present in each
embryo. Furthermore, the position of this organizer region is random with respect
to the first cleavage plane bisecting the two blastoderms. Finally, cell tracing 
in wild-type embryos demonstrates that there is no strict correlation of the
dorsoventral axis with early cleavage planes in zebrafish. These findings support
the notion that the establishment of the dorsoventral axis and the first cleavage
planes are determined by separate mechanisms in the zebrafish embryo.

PMID: 8047167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Dev Biol. 1994 Aug;164(2):420-9.

Goosecoid expression in neurectoderm and mesendoderm is disrupted in zebrafish
cyclops gastrulas.

Thisse C(1), Thisse B, Halpern ME, Postlethwait JH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, University of Oregon, Eugene 97403.

RNA from goosecoid, a homeobox-containing gene expressed during gastrulation in
the anterior mesoderm of vertebrate embryos, can generate organizer activity when
injected into ventral mesoderm, resulting in a secondary body axis; it is not yet
understood, however, how goosecoid performs its organizer function. We report
here that in the zebrafish gastrula, a domain of goosecoid expression arises in
presumptive anterior neurectoderm which lies directly above goosecoid-expressing 
mesendodermal cells. From this position, goosecoid expression then spreads
gradually across the ectodermal layer. In cyclops mutant embryos, which lack a
ventral anterior brain, expression of goosecoid is abnormal in the mesendoderm
and completely absent in the overlying neurectoderm. These results indicate that 
cyclops is required for correct specification of the mesendoderm and suggest that
goosecoid expression in the ectoderm may result from vertical induction from the 
mesoderm. We propose that in the gastrula head, goosecoid may be important in
organizing the ventral neurectoderm.

PMID: 8045345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Genomics. 1994 May 15;21(2):388-93.

Molecular cloning of the human homeobox gene goosecoid (GSC) and mapping of the
gene to human chromosome 14q32.1.

Blum M(1), De Robertis EM, Kojis T, Heinzmann C, Klisak I, Geissert D, Sparkes
RS.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, University of California at Los Angeles
90024-1737.

Goosecoid is a homeobox gene first isolated from a Xenopus dorsal lip cDNA
library. Homologous genes have been isolated from mouse, zebrafish, and chick. In
all species examined, the gene is expressed and plays an important role during
the process of gastrulation in early embryonic development. We report here the
cloning of the human goosecoid gene (GSC) from a genomic library and the sequence
of its encoded protein. The genomic organization and protein sequence of the
human gene are highly conserved with respect to those of its Xenopus and mouse
counterparts: all three genes consist of three exons, with conserved exon-intron 
boundaries; the sequence of the homeodomain is 100% conserved in most
vertebrates. Using somatic cell hybrid and chromosomal in situ hybridization, the
gene was mapped to chromosome 14q32.1.

PMID: 7916327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Development. 1994 Apr;120(4):843-52.

Expression of zebrafish goosecoid and no tail gene products in wild-type and
mutant no tail embryos.

Schulte-Merker S(1), Hammerschmidt M, Beuchle D, Cho KW, De Robertis EM,
Nüsslein-Volhard C.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Entwicklungsbiologie, Abteilung Genetik, Tübingen,
Germany.

goosecoid is an immediate early gene expressed at the dorsal blastoporal lip of
the Xenopus gastrula. Microinjection experiments have suggested a direct role for
goosecoid in organizing the dorsoventral axis of the frog embryo. Here we
characterize the zebrafish homologue of goosecoid (gsc) and compare its
expression to that of Brachyury or no tail (ntl), another immediate early gene
required in developing mesoderm. We show that gsc exhibits two independent phases
of expression: an early one in cells anterior to the presumptive notochord, but
not in cells of the notochord itself, and a later one in neural crest derivatives
in the larval head. Zygotic gsc transcripts are detected soon after the
midblastula transition, and at the blastula stage form a gradient with a maximum 
at the dorsal side. Use of gsc as a dorsal marker allowed us to demonstrate that 
ntl expression is initially activated at the dorsal side of the blastula. At this
early stage, gsc and ntl show overlapping domains of expression and are
co-expressed in cells at the dorsal midline of the early gastrula. However, gsc- 
and ntl-expressing cells become separated in the course of gastrulation, with gsc
being expressed in the axial hypoblast (prechordal plate) anterior to the
ntl-expressing presumptive notochord cells. Studies with mutant embryos suggest
that gsc is independent of ntl function in vivo.

PMID: 7600961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1994 Mar 15;199(2):734-41.

GR transcripts are localized during early Xenopus laevis embryogenesis and
overexpression of GR inhibits differentiation after dexamethasone treatment.

Gao X(1), Stegeman BI, Lanser P, Koster JG, Destrée OH.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratorium, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

We have studied the spatial expression of the Xenopus GR in early embryos by
whole-mount in situ hybridization. At the gastrula stage, GR mRNA is localized in
the dorsal ectoderm. By the early neurula stage, GR transcripts were detected
along the notoplate. Between mid and late neurula stages, GR mRNA was not
detectable. At the tailbud stage, GR mRNA was found in the anterior part of the
embryo, including the cement gland, eyes, brain, the foregut,
stomodeal-hypophyseal anlage, the olfactory placodes, head mesenchyme and
somites. Injection of Xenopus GR RNA into zygotes followed by treatment
dexamethasone from the blastula stage onwards inhibits early differentiation.
Expression of Xbra, gsc and histone H3 genes in these embryos is not inhibited,
indicating that the GR effects are not due to a general squelching effect on
transcription.

PMID: 8135817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Science. 1994 Feb 11;263(5148):817-20.

Mesodermal patterning by a gradient of the vertebrate homeobox gene goosecoid.

Niehrs C(1), Steinbeisser H, De Robertis EM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, University of California, Los Angeles 90024-1737.

Amphibian mesoderm arises from the marginal zone of the early gastrula and
generates various tissues such as notochord, muscle, kidney, and blood. Small
changes (twofold) in the amount of microinjected messenger RNA encoding the
goosecoid (gsc) homeodomain protein resulted in marked changes in the
differentiation of mesoderm in Xenopus laevis. At least three thresholds were
observed, which were sufficient to specify four mesodermal cell states.
Endogenous gsc messenger RNA was expressed in the marginal zone in a graded
fashion that is congruent with a role for this gene in dorso-ventral patterning
of mesoderm at the early gastrula stage.

PMID: 7905664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Development. 1994 Feb;120(2):453-62.

Activin-mediated mesoderm induction requires FGF.

Cornell RA(1), Kimelman D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry SJ-70, School of Medicine, University of
Washington, Seattle 98195.

The early patterning of mesoderm in the Xenopus embryo requires signals from
several intercellular factors, including mesoderm-inducing agents that belong to 
the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) and TGF-beta families. In animal hemisphere
explants (animal caps), basic FGF and the TGF-beta family member activin are
capable of converting pre-ectodermal cells to a mesodermal fate, although activin
is much more effective at inducing dorsal and anterior mesoderm than is basic
FGF. Using a dominant-negative form of the Xenopus type 1 FGF receptor, we show
that an FGF signal is required for the full induction of mesoderm by activin.
Animal caps isolated from embryos that have been injected with the truncated FGF 
receptor and cultured with activin do not extend and the induction of some genes,
including cardiac actin and Xbra, is greatly diminished, while the induction of
other genes, including the head organizer-specific genes gsc and Xlim-1, is less 
sensitive. These results are consistent with the phenotype of the truncated FGF
receptor-injected embryo and imply that the activin induction of mesoderm depends
on FGF, with some genes requiring a higher level of FGF signaling than others.

PMID: 8149920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Dig Dis Sci. 1994 Jan;39(1):138-44.

Neutrophil-mediated injury to gastric mucosal surface cells.

Kozol R(1), Kopatsis A, Fligiel SE, Czanko R, Callewaert D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Veterans Administration, Allen Park, Michigan 48101.

Neutrophils (PMNs) have been implicated in the pathogenesis of gastritis. This
study evaluates the magnitude and mode of PMN-mediated damage to gastric mucosal 
surface cells (GSC) in a system independent of vascular and neural factors.
Rabbit GSC were freshly isolated and preloaded with 51Cr. GSC were then incubated
for 1 hr or 4 hr with freshly isolated human PMNs at varying effector-to-target
cell ratios. Injury to GSC was assessed as percent specific 51Cr released and by 
electron microscopy. We found minimal GSC injury using nonactivated PMNs.
Incubation with PMNs activated with formylmethionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine (FMLP), 
however, resulted in significant GSC injury at the 20:1 PMN/GSC ratio, 33.2 +/-
1.8% 51Cr release (P < 0.001 compared to nonactivated PMNs). Electron microscopy 
revealed well-preserved gastric surface cells after exposure to nonstimulated
PMNs. GSC exposed to activated PMNs (20:1 PMN/GSC ratio) were severely injured.
Proteinase inhibitors and dimethylsulfoxide failed to diminish PMN-mediated GSC
injury. Conversely, superoxide dismutase (SOD) inhibited GSC injury by more than 
50% (P < 0.001). In addition, glutathione peroxidase inhibited injury by 84% (P <
0.001). These data suggest that neutrophil-mediated injury to gastric surface
cells in vitro involves superoxide anion and hypochlorous acid and not neutral
trypsinlike proteinases or hydroxyl radicals.

PMID: 8281848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Dev Suppl. 1994:117-24.

The evolution of vertebrate gastrulation.

De Robertis EM(1), Fainsod A, Gont LK, Steinbeisser H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California, Los Angeles
90024-1737, USA.

The availability of molecular markers now permits the analysis of the common
elements of vertebrate gastrulation. While gastrulation appears to be very
diverse in the vertebrates, by analyzing a head-organizer marker, goosecoid, and 
a marker common to all forming mesoderm, Brachyury, we attempt to identify
homologous structures and equivalent stages in Xenopus, zebrafish, chick and
mouse gastrulation. Using a tail-organizer marker, Xnot-2, we also discuss how
the late stages of gastrulation lead to the formation of the postanal tail, a
structure characteristic of the chordates.

PMID: 7579512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Ann Emerg Med. 1993 Dec;22(12):1813-21.

A clinical trial of escalating doses of flumazenil for reversal of suspected
benzodiazepine overdose in the emergency department.

Spivey WH(1), Roberts JR, Derlet RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Medical College of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia.

STUDY OBJECTIVE: To determine if flumazenil, when used in doses higher than those
currently recommended, could reverse the effects of a benzodiazepine (BDZ)
overdose in patients who might not otherwise respond and whether the higher dose 
was associated with increased adverse effects.
DESIGN: Multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, balanced, with
parallel groups. Open-label flumazenil administration was available if a patient 
failed to respond or became resedated.
SETTING: Sixteen emergency departments in the United States.
POPULATION: Patients presenting to the ED with clinically significant signs and
symptoms of a known or suspected BDZ overdose.
INTERVENTIONS: Patients were randomized to receive 10 mL/min of placebo or
flumazenil (1 mg/10 mL) each minute for ten minutes. If there was no response, up
to 3 mg of open-label flumazenil could be administered.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Of 170 patients enrolled, 87 received flumazenil
and 83 received placebo. The demographic characteristics of both groups were
comparable. Ten minutes after the beginning of study drug infusion, patients were
evaluated using the Clinical Global Impression Scale (CGIS), Glasgow Coma Scale
(GSC), and Neurobehavioral Assessment Scale (NAS). The mean +/- SD CGIS score at 
ten minutes for BDZ-positive patients was 1.41 +/- 0.72 for patients who received
flumazenil and 3.41 +/- 0.91 for the placebo group (P < .01). There was no
difference in the mean CGIS score between the flumazenil (3.25 +/- 1.15) and
placebo (3.75 +/- 0.69) groups in BDZ-negative patients. The GCS and NAS were
also significantly better in patients who were BDZ-positive and received
flumazenil. The mean +/- SD dose of flumazenil administered during the
double-blind phase was 71.3 +/- 34.2 mL (7.13 mg) compared with 95.06 +/- 16.03
mL of placebo. Of the 39 patients who had BDZ-positive drug screens and received 
flumazenil, 29 (74%) responded to 3 mg or less. Six additional patients responded
to 4 or 5 mg, and one patient responded to 8 mg. The most common adverse effects 
in patients who received flumazenil were injection site pain (10.3%), agitation
(8%), vomiting (3.4%), dizziness (3.4%), headache (3.4%), tachycardia (3.4%), and
crying (3.4%). Three patients developed seizures. Two were associated with
significant tricyclic antidepressant overdoses and one with propoxyphene
ingestion. Two patients had positive drug screens for BDZ.
CONCLUSION: Flumazenil rapidly and effectively reverses the clinical signs and
symptoms of a BDZ overdose. Most patients will respond to 3 mg or less, but a
small number may require a higher dose for reversal of clinical symptoms.
Patients with concomitant tricyclic antidepressant overdose may be at risk for
developing seizures.

PMID: 8239101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. C R Acad Sci III. 1993 Sep;316(9):945-58.

Regulatory interactions during embryogenesis in Xenopus laevis.

[Article in English, French]

Dawid IB(1), Otani H, Curtiss P, Taira M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, Bethesda, Maryland.

During amphibian embryogenesis, axis definition and the specification of the
mesoderm and neural plate depend on cell interactions. These interactions are
mediated by peptide growth factors and other diffusible molecules including
retinoic acid (RA). Several genes encoding transcription factors are known to be 
immediate early or delayed early responses to the action of growth factors and
retinoids in the embryo. By the criterion of cycloheximide (CHX) resistance,
goosecoid (gsc), Xlim-1, Xbra, Mix.1, XFKH1/pintallavis/XFD1, and Xnot are
immediate early response genes in mesoderm/induction. Among these, gsc, Xnot and 
XFKH1 are superinduced by CHX, suggesting that their regulation depends in part
on rapid turnover of the mRNA. RA is known to induce Xlim-1 in Xenopus embryos
and to lead to anterior malformations. We show that 9-cis RA, the ligand of the
RXR receptor class, is more effective than all-trans RA in generating these
biological effects.

PMID: 7915634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. C R Acad Sci III. 1993 Sep;316(9):959-71.

Xenopus goosecoid: a gene expressed in the prechordal plate that has dorsalizing 
activity.

[Article in English, French]

Steinbeisser H(1), De Robertis EM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, University of California, Los Angeles 90024-1737.

gsc is a homeobox gene expressed in the dorsal lip of the blastopore in Xenopus. 
Its mRNA can mimic many aspects of Spemann's organizer activity when
microinjected into the ventral side of the embryo. In the present study we
analyze gsc expression in late gastrula and neurula embryos of Xenopus. At these 
stages gsc is expressed in the prechordal plate, an anterior mesodermal structure
underlying the forebrain. Furthermore, we studied the dorsalizing activity of gsc
in animal caps and found that UV-sensitive cofactors in the marginal zone are
required to induce dorso-anterior mesoderm in concert with gsc. FGF, an inducer
of ventral mesoderm, cannot substitute for these factors.

PMID: 7521271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Cell. 1993 Aug 27;74(4):645-59.

The homeobox gene goosecoid and the origin of organizer cells in the early chick 
blastoderm.

Izpisúa-Belmonte JC(1), De Robertis EM, Storey KG, Stern CD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, University of California, Los Angeles 90024-1737.

The chick homeobox gene goosecoid (gsc) is first expressed in a barely noticeable
cell population near the posterior margin (Koller's sickle) of the unincubated
egg. Then it is detected in Hensen's node, traditionally considered the chick
organizer. Later, gsc-expressing cells leave the node with the prechordal plate. 
Fate mapping indicates that these three regions are related by cell lineage, and 
transplantation experiments suggest that they all have inducing activity. Quail
posterior margin and anterior primitive streak grafts (gsc expressing) induce gsc
transcription in neighboring chick host cells. We propose that development of the
chick organizer starts earlier than previously thought and that gsc marks this
changing cell population.

PMID: 7916659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Int J Androl. 1993 Jun;16(3):207-13.

The detection of antisperm antibodies in serum: a comparison of the tray
agglutination test, indirect immunobead test and indirect SpermCheck assay.

Morroll DR(1), Lieberman BA, Matson PL.

Author information: 
(1)Manchester Fertility Services, BUPA Hospital, U.K.

Testing for antisperm antibodies (ASAs) is an important part of the work-up of
the sub-fertile couple, yet there is little consensus regarding the most
appropriate methods. The SpermCheck assay (GSC; Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc.,
Diagnostics Division, Hercules, CA, U.S.A.) is supplied with wash buffer,
controls and bead reagent which detects all three major classes of ASAs (IgA, IgG
and IgM) in a single test. This study compared results on a bank of samples using
the tray agglutination test (TAT), immunobead test (IBT), GSC and a modified
SpermCheck assay to detect a single isotype in each test (SISC). The IBT and SISC
showed excellent correlation, with 127/141 (90.1%) tests agreeing. There was an
apparent lack of sensitivity to IgM with GSC as 8/15 (53.3%) samples testing
positive with IBT and 7/15 (46.7%) testing positive with SISC were negative with 
GSC. Of the 24 IBT-negatives, seven (29.2%) were positive for TAT, indicating a
high incidence of non-immunological agglutination, though this decreased as the
TAT titre increased. The proportion of samples testing positive for IBT increased
with TAT titre: 3/20 (15.0%) for TAT-negative samples, 6/10 (60.0%) for low
titres and 21/24 (87.5%) for high titres. This was also observed when comparing
the GSC with TAT. The TAT therefore appears useful as a first-line screen, whilst
the inability of the GSC to adequately detect IgM limits its use as an indirect
test. Both the IBT and SISC can be used to further investigate the type and class
of ASA present.

PMID: 8359936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Cell. 1993 Feb 26;72(4):491-503.

The homeobox gene goosecoid controls cell migration in Xenopus embryos.

Niehrs C(1), Keller R, Cho KW, De Robertis EM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, University of California, Los Angeles 90024-1737.

Goosecoid (gsc), a homeobox gene expressed specifically in the dorsal blastopore 
lip of the Xenopus gastrula, is considered to play an important role in Spemann's
organizer phenomenon. Lineage tracing and time-lapse microscopy were used to
follow the fate of embryonic cells microinjected with gsc mRNA. Microinjected gsc
has non-cell autonomous effects, recruiting neighboring uninjected cells into a
twinned dorsal axis. Ectopic expression of gsc mRNA in ventral blastomeres as
well as overexpression of gsc in dorsal blastomeres leads to cell movement toward
the anterior of the embryo. The results suggest a function for gsc in the control
of gastrulation movements in groups of cells, but not in dissociated cells, and
demonstrate that a vertebrate homeobox gene can regulate region-specific cell
migration.

PMID: 8095000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Development. 1993 Feb;117(2):769-78.

Expression of the mouse goosecoid gene during mid-embryogenesis may mark
mesenchymal cell lineages in the developing head, limbs and body wall.

Gaunt SJ(1), Blum M, De Robertis EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Embryology, AFRC Institute of Animal Physiology and
Genetics Research, Babraham, Cambridge, UK.

After an earlier, transient phase of expression in the developing primitive
streak of 6.4- to 6.8-day mouse embryos, the homeobox gene goosecoid is now shown
to be expressed in a later phase of mouse development, from 10.5 days onwards.
The later, spatially restricted domains of goosecoid expression are detected in
the head, limbs and ventrolateral body wall. At all sites, the domains of
expression are first detected in undifferentiated tissue, and then expression
persists as these tissues undergo subsequent morphogenesis. For example,
goosecoid expression is noted in the first branchial arch at 10.5 days, and then 
expression persists as this tissue undergoes morphogenesis to form the lower jaw 
and the body of the tongue. Expression in tissues around the first branchial
cleft persists as these undergo morphogenesis to form the base of the auditory
meatus and eustachian tube. Expression in tissues around the newly formed nasal
pits persists as these elongate to form the nasal chambers. Expression in the
ventral epithelial lining of the otic vesicle persists as this eventually gives
rise to the non-sensory epithelium of the cochlea. Expression in the proximal
limb buds and ventrolateral body wall persists as these tissues undergo
morphogenesis to form proximal limb structures and ventral ribs respectively. Our
findings lead us to suggest that the goosecoid gene product plays a role in
spatial programming within discrete embryonic fields, and possibly lineage
compartments, during organogenesis stages of mouse development.

PMID: 8101169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Dev Genet. 1993;14(3):204-11.

Differential induction of regulatory genes during mesoderm formation in Xenopus
laevis embryos.

Tadano T(1), Otani H, Taira M, Dawid IB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20814.

Mesoderm development in Xenopus laevis depends on inductive cell interactions
mediated by diffusible molecules. The mesoderm inducer activin is capable of
redirecting the development of animal explants both morphologically and
biochemically. We have studied the induction of four regulatory genes, Mix. 1,
goosecoid (gsc), Xlim-1, and Xbra in such explants by activin, and the influence 
of other factors on this induction. Activin induction of gsc is strongly enhanced
by dorsalization of the embryo by LiCl, while expression of the other genes is
only slightly enhanced. The protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide (CHX)
inhibits the activin-dependent induction of Xbra partially, while induction of
Mix. 1 and Xlim-1 is essentially unaffected. In contrast, gsc shows strong
superinduction in the presence of activin and CHX, and can be induced in animal
explants by CHX alone. Induction and superinduction by CHX have previously been
observed for immediate early genes in a variety of systems, notably for the
activation of c-fos expression by serum stimulation, but have not been reported
in early amphibian embryos.

PMID: 8395366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. APMIS. 1992 Dec;100(12):1097-105.

Remnant kidney pathology after five-sixth nephrectomy in rat. I. A biochemical
and morphological study.

Faraj AH(1), Morley AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Royal Victoria Infirmary, Newcastle Upon Tyne, U.K.

In Wistar male rats, hypertension was induced by 5/6 nephrectomy (5/6N). Body
weight, blood pressure measurements, morphological and biochemical changes were
followed (at four weekly intervals) for 12 weeks after 5/6N. Renal function was
assessed by daily total urinary protein (TUP), plasma creatinine concentration
[(Cr)p] and creatinine clearance rate. Plasma renin concentration (PRC),
aldosterone concentration and erythrocyte content of sodium [Na]E and potassium
[K]E were also investigated. Significant increases in systolic blood pressure
(SBP), TUP, [(Cr)p] and [Na]E occurred after 4, 8, and 12 weeks of 5/6N.
Progressive glomerulosclerosis (GSC), tubular atrophy and interstitial fibrosis
were observed. Positive correlations were found between GSC and SBP and TUP.
Positive correlations were also found between SBP and [Na]E and [(Cr)P]. PRC was 
not increased and showed no correlation with SBP. It is concluded that 5/6N
produced hypertension associated with a series of morphological and biochemical
alterations in kidney structure and function. In this model, mechanisms other
than the renin-angiotensin system may be involved.

PMID: 1492978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Dev Biol. 1992 Dec;154(2):348-55.

Interaction of Wnt and activin in dorsal mesoderm induction in Xenopus.

Sokol SY(1), Melton DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138.

Both the activin and Wnt families of peptide growth factors are capable of
inducing dorsal mesoderm in Xenopus embryos. Presumptive ventral ectoderm cells
isolated from embryos injected with Xwnt8 mRNA were cultured in the presence of
activin A to study the possible interactions between these two classes of
signaling proteins. We find that overexpression of Xwnt8 RNA alters the response 
of ventral ectoderm to activin such that ventral explants differentiate
dorsoanterior structures including notochord and eyes. This response is similar
to the response of dorsal ectoderm to activin alone. When embryos are irradiated 
with uv light to inhibit dorsal axis formation, ectodermal explants differentiate
notochord when they are induced by a combination of both signaling factors, but
not when cells receive only one inducing signal (activin or Xwnt8). This result
is further supported by the observation that goosecoid (gsc) mRNA, an early
marker for dorsal mesoderm, is expressed in these explants only when they are
injected with Xwnt8 mRNA followed by exposure to activin. Early morphogenetic
movements of the induced cells and activation of muscle-specific actin and
Brachyury (Xbra) genes also reveal a cooperation of activin A and Xwnt8 in
mesoderm induction.

PMID: 1426642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Am J Med Genet. 1992 Oct 1;44(3):345-51.

Innovative approach to genetic counseling services for the deaf population.

Arnos KS(1), Cunningham M, Israel J, Marazita ML.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Services Center, Gallaudet University, Washington, D.C. 20002.

Genetic service providers have stressed the importance of genetic counseling that
is nondirective and specific to the personal needs of consultants. Successful
genetic counseling for deaf persons often requires special provisions for complex
family histories, syndromic conditions, and diversity in communication methods
and cultural orientation. The Gallaudet University Genetic Services Center (GSC) 
was established in 1984 to provide genetic education and counseling services to
the deaf community. The GSC staff developed and implemented a standardized system
of data collection (family and medical history), clinical evaluation by
consultant clinical geneticists, and counseling in sign language. In addition to 
clinical services, an in-depth educational program for professionals and
consumers was developed and carried out. During a 6-year period, over 220
educational presentations were made and 659 deaf persons were seen for genetic
evaluation and counseling. Most of these persons were self-referred. Sign
language was the preferred means of communication of more than 90% of these
individuals. A genetic cause of deafness was diagnosed in over 50% of the deaf
consultants and was confirmed by segregation analysis, which had results similar 
to those reported for other studies of students in schools for the deaf. Special 
materials and strategies were developed in order to provide genetic services that
were sensitive to the cultural and linguistic differences of the deaf population.
These included written and visual materials that contained culturally neutral
terminology and training of all staff members in sign language and the culture of
the deaf.

PMID: 1488983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Jpn J Genet. 1992 Aug;67(4):335-48.

Molecular cloning and characterization of gravity specific cDNA in rice (Oryza
sativa L.) suspension callus.

Kwon ST(1), Kikuchi S, Oono K.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Agrobiological Resources Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

Rice (Oryza sativa L. var. Nipponbare) suspension callus was exposed to gravity
stress at 450,000 g for 2 hours, after which poly(A)+RNA was isolated and a cDNA 
library was constructed. Three different gravity specific cDNAs, namely, GSC 128,
GSC 233 and GSC 381 of 0.67, 0.60 and 0.68 kilobase pairs and transcripts of 1.9,
1.6 and 2.0 kb, respectively, were isolated by differential screening and
Northern hybridization. The maximum level of transcript was achieved after 4
hours of exposure to gravity at 450,000 g for GSC 128, 2 hours for GSC 233 and 8 
hours for GSC 381 followed by a gradual decrease to undetectable levels with the 
extension of gravitation time. Callus (GSC 128), shoot and callus (GSC 381) and
root and callus (GSC 233) specific expression of transcripts was identified.
Although the protection of callus by treatment with ABA, kinetin and sucrose
extended the period of expression of mRNA in suspension callus after gravity
exposure, the expression of gravity-inducible mRNA was exclusively regulated by
the degree of callus viability or survival after the stress. In addition, we
demonstrated that the level of GSC 381 transcript was markedly increased by
exposing the cell to periodical gravity stress, suggesting that this mRNA is
expressed and translated into special proteins which are closely related to the
survival of the cell against gravity stress. The sequence of GSC 233 and GSC 381,
consisting of 417 and 531 base pairs of the longest open reading frames, encode
polypeptides with calculated molecular weights of 15.29 and 19.47 kDa,
respectively. A sequence homology search against a data bank revealed that GSC
233 and GSC 381 differed from other stress inducible genes in terms of the coding
sequence and expression characteristics.

PMID: 1363521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Cell. 1992 Jun 26;69(7):1097-106.

Gastrulation in the mouse: the role of the homeobox gene goosecoid.

Blum M(1), Gaunt SJ, Cho KW, Steinbeisser H, Blumberg B, Bittner D, De Robertis
EM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, University of California, Los Angeles 90024-1737.

Mouse goosecoid is a homeobox gene expressed briefly during early gastrulation.
Its mRNA accumulates as a patch on the side of the epiblast at the site where the
primitive streak is first formed. goosecoid-expressing cells are then found at
the anterior end of the developing primitive streak, and finally in the
anteriormost mesoderm at the tip of the early mouse gastrula, a region that gives
rise to the head process. Treatment of early mouse embryos with activin results
in goosecoid mRNA accumulation in the entire epiblast, suggesting that a
localized signal induces goosecoid expression during development. Transplantation
experiments indicate that the tip of the murine early gastrula is the equivalent 
of the organizer of the amphibian gastrula.

PMID: 1352187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Neurosurgery. 1990 Nov;27(5):701-7; discussion 707-8.

Median nerve somatosensory evoked potentials and the Glasgow Coma Scale as
predictors of outcome in comatose patients with head injuries.

Houlden DA(1), Li C, Schwartz ML, Katic M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurosurgery, Sunnybrook Medical Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Median nerve somatosensory evoked potential (SSEP) grades and Glasgow Coma Scale 
(GSC) scores were obtained from 51 patients with head injuries within 1 week
after the injury to determine the relationship of these scores, both individually
and combined, to outcome scores obtained more than 6 months after the injury.
SSEP grading was based on the presence or absence of the cortical evoked
potential, the amplitude of the early cortically generated P22 wave form, and the
conduction time through the brain (P/N13-N20 interpeak latency). SSEP responses
from both sides of the brain were combined and graded from 1 to 6. The GCS was
graded without the verbal component (maximum score, 10), because all patients
were intubated. All patients were unresponsive to commands. Median SSEP grades
correlated better with Glasgow Outcome Scale and Barthel Index scores (R = 0.57
and 0.64, respectively; P less than 0.00001) than GCS scores did (R = 0.35 and
0.37, respectively, P less than 0.00001), and combining SSEP grades and GCS
scores did not improve the predictive power of the model (R = 0.57 and 0.64,
respectively; P less than 0.00001). All SSEP Grade 1 patients (n = 13) either
died or remained in a vegetative state. In contrast, all SSEP Grade 6 patients (n
= 7) had a moderate disability or good recovery. This study demonstrates the
prognostic value of early quantitative median nerve SSEP grading for patients
with head injuries who are unresponsive to commands within 1 week after the
injury.

PMID: 2259399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Minerva Ginecol. 1990 Jan-Feb;42(1-2):7-9.

[The diathermy loop and diathermic coagulation in the ambulatory treatment of
intraepithelial cervical neoplasia].

[Article in Italian]

Zannoni E(1), Di Taranto G, Schettino F, Candiani M, Sideri M.

Author information: 
(1)I Clinica Ostetrica e Ginecologica, Università di Milano.

Ninety-four patients suffering from CIN, of which 28 CIN1, 37 CIN2 and 29 CIN3
were treated with Cartier diathermal loop (57 cases 60.6%) or DTC (37 cases
29.4%). GSC proved visible in all cases except for a group of 16 patients in whom
the combined use of ethinylestradiol and microendocervicoscopy showed GSC
localisation within 5 mm of the OUE. The latter cases were all treated with
Cartier diathermal loop. Results two months after the intervention showed
correction of the colposcopic and cytological examination in 85 cases (94.4%) and
bioptic cure in 91 cases (96.8%). In two cases, histological examination showed
CIN1 and in one case CIN2.

PMID: 2336174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Andrologia. 1990 Jan-Feb;22(1):42-54.

The CellSoft computerized semen analysis system. II. On the optimalization of
running conditions concerning gray scale and cell size range.

Bendvold E(1), Aanesen A.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Obstetrics and Gynaecology National Hospital, Oslo, Norway.

The CellSoft automated semen analysis system was studied concerning the effect of
gray scale (GSc) variation on cell motion parameters and to establish an
appropriate setting for human spermatozoal sizes (PixMin and PixMax) based on the
cell's instant velocities (InsVels). GSc could be set within a range from
"optimum" till +10 units without, except for curvilinear velocity, the CellSoft
generated sperm measures being altered (p greater than 0.05). The aspect of a
sample specific GSc setting according to certain criteria is stressed.
Considering the area of immobilized spermatozoa (at GSc + 20) and of motile cells
with low InsVel, PixMin should be set at 3 pixels. Correspondingly, the InsVel
determined setting for PixMax (at a maximum velocity threshold set at 200
microns/sec.) was 28 pixels. A final recommendation on the setting for cell sizes
can, however, only be determined in considering sizes of nonsperm seminal
elements and in studying the appropriate setting for the maximum velocity
threshold.

PMID: 2281877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Br J Neurosurg. 1990;4(1):9-15.

A double blind placebo controlled trial of the calcium entry blocking drug,
nicardipine, in the treatment of vasospasm following severe head injury.

Compton JS(1), Lee T, Jones NR, Waddell G, Teddy PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford, United
Kingdom.

A double blind, placebo controlled trial of nicardipine in the treatment of high 
Doppler Flow Velocity (DFV) following severe head injury (Glasgow Coma Score
(GSC) less than or equal to 8) was performed. Thirty patients with high DFV
(greater than or equal to 100 cm/s for 6 h duration) on transcranial Doppler
ultrasound, were treated with nicardipine or placebo for 24 h (2.5 mg/h,
increasing in steps of 2.5 mg/h at 2 h intervals (maximum rate 7.5 mg/h)
depending on response of DFV). DFV was measured hourly for 24 h and then every 12
h for 2 days. Nicardipine significantly reduced DFV below the threshold of 100
cm/s (16/19 cf placebo 3/11, chi-square p less than 0.001). In the nicardipine
treated group maximum DFV was significantly reduced (p less than 0.001) and time 
with DFV below 100 was significantly longer. Rises in DFV were significantly
reduced by the drug if the DFV was normal at the time of entry. High DFV returned
on cessation of the infusion. No unexpected or adverse side effects were seen. No
clinical benefit was demonstrable.

PMID: 2185791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Eur J Clin Invest. 1989 Jun;19(3):306-10.

The glomerular sieving of pepsinogen A and C in man.

ten Kate RW(1), Pals G, Res JC, van Kamp GJ, Verheugt FW, Pronk JC, Donker AJ,
Eriksson AW, Meuwissen SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Gastroenterology, Free University
Hospital, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Pepsinogen A (PGA) and pepsinogen C (PGC) are negatively charged, low molecular
weight (LMW) proteins with a striking difference in renal handling: PGA
(molecular weight 43,500 daltons) shows a high fractional excretion while the
fractional excretion of PGC (molecular weight 40,500 daltons) is low, presumably 
due to tubular reabsorption. As these data suggest a high glomerular sieving of
pepsinogens, we assessed the glomerular sieving coefficient (GSC) of PGA, PGC and
several other proteins from their renal extractions. For this purpose blood
samples were obtained simultaneously from the aorta (A) and right renal vein (V) 
in nine patients undergoing an elective heart catheterization. After correction
of A-V differences for diuresis with the A-V difference of transferrin, GSCs (+/-
SEM) for PGA and PGC were 0.90 +/- 0.14 and 0.85 +/- 0.17, respectively, GSC of
beta 2-microglobulin being 0.90 +/- 0.12. For albumin and IgG, known to have a
low GSC, low values were found. It is concluded that the GSC of a LMW protein in 
man can be calculated from both its A-V difference over the kidney and the A-V
difference of an inert marker with a GSC of 1, provided they are corrected by the
A-V difference of an inert marker with a GSC of 0. Our results demonstrate that
PGA and PGC are almost freely filtered through the glomerular basement membrane
despite their size and negative net molecular charge.

PMID: 2478370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. J Immunol. 1988 Sep 15;141(6):2084-9.

Immunogenic duplex nucleic acids are nuclease resistant.

Braun RP(1), Lee JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, University of Saskatchewan,
Saskatoon, Canada.

Several derivatives of the synthetic duplex DNA poly(d(GC] were prepared. These
analogs contained ribo- and phosphorothioate substitutions, namely, poly(r(GC],
poly(rGdC), poly(d(sGC], poly(d(GsC], and poly(d(sGsC]. The nucleic acids were
complexed to methylated BSA and injected into C57BL/6 mice. Poly(d(GC] was not
immunogenic, whereas the analogs gave a strong response. Analysis of the sera
revealed that antibody populations were present, which recognized A, B, and Z
form nucleic acids. In particular, immunization with poly(d(sGC] and poly(d(GsC] 
produced antibodies that bound poly(d(GC] and poly(d(IC]. The nuclease
sensitivity of these polymers also was investigated. Poly(d(GC] was rapidly
degraded by pancreatic DNase I, whereas the phosphorothioate derivatives were
resistant, and the ribo-substituted polymers were resistant to both RNases and
DNase I. Similarly, the nucleases present in mouse serum digested calf thymus DNA
and ribosomal rRNA while both types of analog persisted indefinitely. These
results suggest the hypothesis that duplex DNAs are generally not immunogenic
because they are rapidly degraded by serum nucleases. Therefore, they escape
immune detection.

PMID: 3171172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J Clin Microbiol. 1988 Aug;26(8):1496-500.

Performance and reliability of five commercial enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
kits in screening for anti-human immunodeficiency virus antibody in high-risk
subjects.

Ozanne G(1), Fauvel M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de sante publique du Quebec, Canada.

Anti-human immunodeficiency virus enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay kits marketed
by Electro-Nucleonics Inc. (ENI), Genetic Systems Corp. (GSC), Organon Teknika
Inc. (OTI), Ortho Diagnostic Systems Inc. (ODSI), and Wellcome Diagnostics (WD)
were evaluated by using 289 randomly selected serum samples from a high-risk
population and 53 serum samples likely to produce false-positive results. The
radioimmunoprecipitation assay was used as the reference test. Sensitivities
ranged from 96.51% (ODSI, WD) to 97.67% (ENI, GSC, OTI). Sera showing antibodies 
to viral glycoproteins only produced the false-negative results. Specificities
ranged from 99.6% (ENI, GSC, ODSI, OTI) to 100% (WD). False-positive results were
obtained with sera from patients with autoimmune disease or Epstein-Barr virus
infection. Only results from GSC and OTI kits were distributed in two compact
clusters well segregated on either side of the cutoff point. ODSI and GSC kits
had the best intralot reproducibility. The GSC kit had the best interlot
reproducibility. Cutoff values for ODSI and GSC kits were the least variable.
Intraplate repeatability was good for all kits. Sample localization was not an
important source of variability. Our results do not point out one outstanding kit
among the five evaluated. However, the GSC kit showed the best overall results.

PMCID: PMC266649
PMID: 3170712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Neurosci Res. 1988 Apr;5(4):273-98.

Distribution of glucuronic acid-and-sulfate-containing glycoproteins in the
central nervous system of the adult mouse.

Yamamoto M(1), Marshall P, Hemmendinger LM, Boyer AB, Caviness VS Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, E.K. Shriver Center, Waltham, MA 02254.

The distribution of glucuronic acid-and-sulfate-containing carbohydrate (GSC)
epitope recognized by two monoclonal antibodies, HNK-1 and 4F4, was studied by
immunocytochemistry in adult mouse brain. Both antibodies recognized proteins
ranging in molecular weight from 60 to above 250 kDa in Western blot but no
glycolipid was recognized in the adult brain. With both light and electron
microscopic study, two patterns of staining are observed: diffuse neuropil
staining, and individual neuronal somata staining. The diffuse neuropil staining 
is concentrated in discrete anatomically defined areas. At the EM level, this
immunoreactivity is associated with numerous dendrites or astrocytic processes.
At cell somata, most of neurons are stained only at Golgi apparatus (type 2);
however, a distinct population of cells showed membranous staining (type 1) as
well. Type 1 membranous immunoreactivity is observed only in membrane adjacent to
astrocytic processes. In the cerebral cortex, type 1 neurons are found in layers 
III and V-VIa of somatosensory cortex, but only in layers V-VIa in most other
cortical fields. Other areas containing type 1 neurons include the globus
pallidus, the thalamic reticular nucleus, the hippocampus, the deep cerebellar
nuclei, and a majority of the primary sensory and motor nuclei in the brainstem. 
The subpopulation of type 1 neurons show an overlap in distribution and
morphology with some GABA-containing cells.

PMID: 2453818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis. 1987 Sep;8(1):1-11.

Direct susceptibility testing of blood culture isolates with the AutoMicrobic
System (AMS).

Sahm DF(1), Boonlayangoor S, Morello JA.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Microbiology Laboratories, University of Chicago, IL 60637-1463.

To decrease the time needed to obtain preliminary antimicrobial susceptibility
results with blood culture isolates, we inoculated a suspension of centrifuged
organisms from blood culture broth directly into the AutoMicrobic System
Gram-Positive (GPS) and Gram-Negative (GSC+) susceptibility cards (AMS, Vitek
Systems Inc., Hazelwood, MO). Interpretive category results (susceptible,
moderately susceptible, resistant) obtained by this direct method (DAMS) were
then compared with results obtained by conventional inoculation (i.e., using
18-hr subcultures) of both AMS cards (CAMS method) and broth microdilution panels
(MIC method, Micro-Media Systems Inc., Potomac, MD). Ninety-six Gram-positive
cocci (951 antimicrobial agent--organism combinations) and 112 Gram-negative
bacilli (1006 antimicrobial agent-organism combinations) were tested. When only
very major (false susceptible DAMS results) and major (false resistant DAMS
results) discrepancies were considered, 95% of the DAMS results for Gram-positive
cocci agreed with CAMS results and 93% agreed with MIC results. Most
discrepancies were observed when staphylococci were tested against oxacillin and 
when enterococci were tested against several antimicrobial agents. For
Gram-negative bacilli, 94% of DAMS results agreed with CAMS results and 93%
agreed with MIC results. Most discrepancies occurred when Enterobacter spp. and
Serratia marcescens were tested against ampicillin and cefamandole. The DAMS
method provides accurate and rapid preliminary susceptibility test results,
usually within 6 to 7 hr of the time a positive blood culture is first detected.

PMID: 3440367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Kidney Int. 1987 Jun;31(6):1257-66.

Glomerular sieving of high molecular weight proteins in proteinuric rats.

Bertolatus JA, Abuyousef M, Hunsicker LG.

To characterize the permeability of the glomerular capillary wall to high
molecular weight proteins in normal and proteinuric rats, we determined the
glomerular sieving coefficients (GSC) of radioiodinated marker proteins of known 
size and charge by means of a paired label, tissue accumulation method previously
validated in this laboratory. In one group of rats (Series A) the GSCs of
125I-anionic IgG (aIgG-molecular weight [mol wt] 150,000, pI 4.9) and
131I-neutral IgG (nIgG-pI 7.4 to 7.6) were measured simultaneously. In Series B, 
the GSC of a second anionic marker, 131I-human ceruloplasmin (Crp-mol wt 137,000,
pI 4.9) was compared to that of 125I-nIgG. As in the previous report, the labeled
proteins were not degraded or deiodinated during the 20 minute clearance period
for GSC determination. Within Series A and B, three subgroups of rats were
studied: control saline-infused rats, rats made acutely proteinuric by infusion
of the polycation hexadimethrine (HDM), and rats with chronic doxorubicin
(Adriamycin-Adria) nephrosis. In the control rats, GSCs for the anionic markers
aIgG (Series A) or Crp (Series B) were significantly greater than that of nIgG
(both series). These large proteins crossed the filtration barrier by a different
pathway from that available to smaller neutral molecules the size of albumin,
which in our previous study had a much higher GSC than a native, anionic albumin 
marker. In a third group of control rats only (Series C), the GSCs of native
anionic bovine albumin (BSA) and nIgG were compared directly. The GSC of BSA
(0.0029) was only slightly larger than the GSC of nIgG (0.0025), indicating that 
most of the native albumin crosses the glomerular capillary wall via a
nonselective pathway similar to that available to nIgG. The results in the
control groups are compatible with recently-described heteroporous models of
glomerular size selectivity. In the HDM proteinuric rats of both series, the
filtration of all three markers was significantly increased, although the GSCs of
the anionic markers continued to exceed that of nIgG. The finding of increased
nIgG filtration in HDM rats confirms our previous observation that HDM, although 
it binds to and neutralizes anionic sites in glomerular basement membrane,
induces a structural change which leads to altered pore size distribution. Adria 
rats also had increased GSCs of all markers, although the increase was not as
great as in HDM rats, and the GSCs of the anionic and neutral markers became
equal.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 3613403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Presse Med. 1987 May 30;16(20):991-4.

[Cranial traumatology. Recent statistical data].

[Article in French]

Djindjian M, Nguyen JP, Lepresle E, Melon E, François Y, Royand F.

The authors describe a one-year prospective study carried out in Créteil from
October, 1983 to October, 1984 in 155 selected patients admitted for at least 24 
hours with traumatic head injury. Patients with gunshot wounds of the head were
excluded from the study. 30% of the patients were infants, 60% were adults aged
between 15 and 60, and 5% were over 60; 48% were not comatose (initial Glasgow
symptomatic score [GSC] greater than or equal to 8) and 36% were free of any
neurological symptom. Prognosis was related to the initial neurological status,
to the patient's age and to underlying diseases, such as alcoholism. 10 out of 11
patients with an initial GSC of 4 or less died, against 12 out of 144 with a GSC 
above 5. At the first CT scan, 10% were found to have an extradural haematoma,
but the examination was normal in 20% of patients with neurological symptoms
and/or coma; 22% of the CT scans were abnormal without any clinical symptom, as
was the case, in particular, with 4 extradural haematomas. Surgery was performed 
in 24% of all patients and in 17.4% of infants, whereas the percentage reached
30% in alcoholic patients, due to the frequency of intracerebral haematomas in
this population. In 16% of the 155 cases, barbiturates were used to treat
uncontrolled intracranial pressure higher than 20 mmHg. 15% of the 155 patients
deteriorated; a second operation was necessary in 9 cases. The final outcome on
discharge was: 112/155 patients with good recovery or moderate disability, 22
with severe disability, 5 with persistent vegetative state and 21 deaths.

PMID: 2955319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. J Rural Health. 1986 Jan;2(1):7-22.

Education of health care providers for the rural setting: a family nurse
practitioner demonstration program.

Ryan R, Hanson CM, Hodnicki D, Dorroh MW.

Spurred by mass concern over shortages of health care providers, the country's
educational system has, over the past ten years, produced an ample supply (in
some areas a near glut) of health care professionals. Studies demonstrate,
however, that these professionals tend to cluster in the affluent metropolitan
and suburban areas. Residents of rural areas are still significantly underserved.
In the healthy rural southern half of Georgia, this problem has reached a
critical peak. Georgia Southern College (GSC) is a rural based college located in
the heart of rural south Georgia. In order to address some of the health care
problems of its constituency, GSC, with federal support, established a Nursing
Department and a Family Nurse Practitioner program with a commitment to recruit
nursing students from the rural area, educate them in rural settings, and provide
appropriate preparation for the unique experience of working in the rural
environment. The program has been very successful in producing highly skilled
graduates who do stay and work in the rural areas, providing health care at
reasonable costs. This paper describes the setting (rural south Georgia), the
need, the program implementation, and the impact (number of graduates actually
working in rural settings, and innovative projects initiated by graduates).

PMID: 10279393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Kidney Int. 1985 Sep;28(3):467-76.

Glomerular sieving of anionic and neutral bovine albumins in proteinuric rats.

Bertolatus JA, Hunsicker LG.

To characterize the defect in glomerular permeability leading to albuminuria in
rats made nephrotic acutely by infusion of hexadimethrine (HDM) or chronically by
administration of Adriamycin (doxorubicin) (Adria), we developed and validated a 
tissue accumulation method for simultaneous determination of the glomerular
sieving coefficients (GSC) of anionic 131I-labeled bovine albumin (BSA-pI 4.9)
and 125I-labeled charge-modified neutral BSA (nBSA-pI 7.5 to 8.0). Total filtered
marker was calculated by adding marker excreted in the urine to that filtered but
reabsorbed by the tubules. The latter was determined by subtracting interstitial 
marker present in the left kidney, rendered non-filtering by ureteral ligation
during mannitol diuresis, from the total marker accumulating within the right,
filtering kidney. Experiments showed that markers circulated and were excreted
intact and were neither degraded nor deiodinated during the period of the
clearance studies. In control animals the GSC of nBSA (0.026 +/- 0.004) greatly
exceeded that of BSA (0.0006 +/- 0.0002), demonstrating the normal charge
dependence of permeability. Both proteinuric groups had marked increases in the
GSC of BSA (HDM: 0.021 +/- 0.005; Adria: 0.025 +/- 0.004), which correlated with 
appearance of rat albumin in their urine. HDM rats also had a twofold increase in
the GSC of nBSA (0.049 +/- 0.005), indicating alteration of the size dependence
of permeability. The absolute increase of GSC of BSA and nBSA was similar,
suggesting that albuminuria resulted from appearance of new "pores" in the
glomerular filter that were not charge selective for proteins of the size of
albumin. Thus, infusion of HDM, which binds to and neutralizes GBM anions,
appears to produce albuminuria by inducing a structural change in the glomerular 
filter. Conversely, Adria rats had no significant increase in the GSC of nBSA
(0.031 +/- 0.005), indicating no significant change in the size dependence of
permeability for proteins of the size of albumin. In these animals, the GSC of
the anionic BSA approached that of the neutral nBSA, indicating that Adriamycin
induces albuminuria by markedly reducing the normal charge dependence of
permeability.

PMID: 4068481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. J Clin Microbiol. 1985 Jun;21(6):983-4.

Confirmation of Legionella pneumophila cultures with a fluorescein-labeled
monoclonal antibody.

Tenover FC, Carlson L, Goldstein L, Sturge J, Plorde JJ.

We compared a fluorescein-labeled monoclonal antibody directed against an outer
membrane protein of Legionella pneumophila (Genetic Systems Corp. [GSC], Seattle,
Wash.) with a similarly labeled polyclonal reagent (L. pneumophila serogroups 1
to 6, poly; BioDx, Inc., Denville, N.J.) for the confirmation of L. pneumophila
isolates grown in culture. Duplicate suspensions of 52 organisms, including 21 L.
pneumophila and 8 non-L. pneumophila species of legionella, were placed on
individual glass slides, fixed, and stained with both reagents, and the results
were compared. Both antisera correctly identified all L. pneumophila serogroups 1
to 6, but only the GSC reagent produced definitive staining of the L. pneumophila
isolates of serogroups 7, 8, and 9. Additionally, the GSC reagent produced more
uniform staining patterns around the legionella bacilli and displayed little
background fluorescence when compared with the BioDx reagent.

PMCID: PMC271831
PMID: 3891777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Clin Microbiol. 1985 Mar;21(3):454-6.

Inability to adequately control antimicrobial agents on AutoMicrobic System
Gram-Positive and Gram-Negative Susceptibility Cards.

Kellogg JA.

The Vitek Gram-Positive Susceptibility Card (GPS) and Gram-Negative General
Susceptibility Plus Card (GSC Plus) were tested on the AutoMicrobic System (AMS) 
50 times each with the recommended control organisms. Only 1 drug
(chloramphenicol) of 11 on the GPS and 1 (gentamicin) of 10 on the GSC Plus could
be adequately controlled, leaving unsubstantiated the results obtained with
patient isolates on the remaining 19 antimicrobial agents.

PMCID: PMC271686
PMID: 3980698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. J Clin Microbiol. 1984 Oct;20(4):630-5.

Evaluation of the AutoMicrobic system Gram-Negative General Susceptibility-Plus
Card.

Van Horn KG, Vandernoot AM, Burke EW, McKitrick JC.

The MICs of 10 antimicrobial agents were determined for 1,000 clinical aerobic
and facultatively anaerobic gram-negative bacilli by the 6-h AutoMicrobic system 
Gram-Negative General Susceptibility-Plus Card (GSC+) (Vitek Systems, Inc.,
Hazelwood, Mo.) and by an 18-h reference agar dilution method. Results obtained
by both systems were evaluated for twofold dilution discrepancies and for
interpretive category discrepancies. MICs that differed by more than one twofold 
dilution between the two test systems were considered to be discrepant. The
overall twofold dilution agreement of the GSC+ MICs to agar dilution MICs was
94.0%. The agreement for each drug tested ranged from 91.7% (ampicillin and
chloramphenicol) to 96.5% (carbenicillin). Interpretive categories were
considered in agreement when the susceptibility interpretations obtained by the
two systems were both very susceptible, moderately susceptible, or resistant. The
overall interpretive category agreement was 80.5%. This agreement increased to
95.8% when all minor errors (moderately susceptible, one system; very
susceptible, the other system) that would not affect therapy were omitted. The
AutoMicrobic system GSC+ provides rapid and accurate susceptibility test results 
for clinical aerobic and facultatively anaerobic gram-negative bacilli.

PMCID: PMC271399
PMID: 6490849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Skeletal Radiol. 1984;12(2):90-6.

Giant synovial cysts.

Fedullo LM, Bonakdarpour A, Moyer RA, Tourtellotte CD.

Giant synovial cysts (GSC) are large, well-defined cavities, containing synovial 
fluid and lined by a synovium-like membrane, which extend for a variable distance
outside the joint cavity. We are reporting 15 cases of GSC of various joints.
Rheumatoid arthritis is the most common disease process reported in association
with GSC. We suggest that trauma may be a more important cause of GSC than has
previously been described. Arthrography and ultrasonography are both helpful in
diagnosing these large cysts, especially in the knee to aid in differentiating
GSC from thrombophlebitis.

PMID: 6385276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Clin Microbiol. 1983 Dec;18(6):1301-9.

Comparison of two automated instrument systems for rapid susceptibility testing
of gram-negative bacilli.

Johnson JE, Jorgensen JH, Crawford SA, Redding JS, Pruneda RC.

The Vitek AutoMicrobic System with GSC-plus cards and the Abbott MS-2 system were
tested in parallel and the results were compared directly with those of a
reference microdilution minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) procedure on a
group of 262 clinical isolates of the family Enterobacteriaceae and of
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Results of both systems were compared with the reference 
MIC for category agreement, and in addition, the Vitek MICs were compared with
those obtained by the reference procedure. The Vitek system provided an essential
category correlation of 89.4% for enteric bacteria and 97.0% for P. aeruginosa.
Vitek MICs agreed within 1 twofold dilutional increment for 86.3% of the enteric 
bacteria tested and for 96.2% of the P. aeruginosa isolates. The Abbott MS-2
essential categoric agreement was 92.0% for enteric bacteria and 92.4% for P.
aeruginosa. If only aminoglycosides or carbenicillin were considered for P.
aeruginosa isolates, the essential category agreement was 92.5% for the Vitek and
93.3% for the MS-2. The majority of MS-2 category errors (13 of 19) with P.
aeruginosa involved gentamicin results on isolates whose reference MICs were 8
micrograms/ml and whose MS-2 results were susceptible (MIC less than or equal to 
4 micrograms/ml). Retesting of the P. aeruginosa isolates in calcium-supplemented
MS-2 broth increased the essential agreement for the aminoglycosides to 97.5%.

PMCID: PMC272897
PMID: 6418754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis. 1983 Jun;1(2):139-43.

Clinical evaluation of new AMS GSC plus card.

Dudley M, Nauschuetz WF, Juchau SV.

The AutoMicrobic System GSC Plus Card was compared to a broth microdilution
reference method. Of 1660 minimum inhibitory concentration pairs, 86.1% were
within 1 log2 dilution range. A total of 89.2% of the GSC Plus results agreed
qualitatively (susceptible, moderately susceptible, resistant). If
chloramphenicol data are excluded, agreement is 88.8% and 89.9%, respectively. A 
total of only 0.90% results were very major or major discrepancies. This is
significantly fewer major discrepancies than reported with other systems.

PMID: 6425001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. J Neurosurg. 1981 Mar;54(3):300-3.

Early prediction of outcome in head-injured patients.

Young B, Rapp RP, Norton JA, Haack D, Tibbs PA, Bean JR.

The relationship between Glasgow Coma Scale (GSC) scores obtained during the 1st 
week after head injury and outcome at 1 year was analyzed in 170 patients.
Seventy-two of 76 patients with initial GCS scores of 3 or 4 lived, and only one 
had a favorable outcome. Favorable and unfavorable outcomes were almost equally
divided when the initial GCS scores were in the intermediate range of 5, 6, or 7.
No patients with an initial GCS score in this intermediate range that
subsequently worsened had a favorable outcome, while over 80% of those improving 
to a score higher than 7 had a favorable outcome. Only 12% of those persisting
with a score of 5, 6, or 7 for 1 week had favorable outcome. Outcome predictions 
using the multiple logistic model were made for this intermediate group of
patients based on GCS scores and data on midline shift derived from computerized 
tomography (CT). The patients with initial scores of 5, 6, or 7 with midline
shifts of less than 4.1 mm on initial CT scanning had a significantly higher
favorable outcome rate compared with patients with a larger shift. However,
outcome prediction made by combining shift data and initial GCS scores are not
significantly more accurate than predictions based solely on initial GCS scores. 
Combining 48-hour GCS scores and shift data significantly improves predictive
accuracy based only on coma scores. The data obtained by combining GCS scores at 
72 hours and 1 week and shift data is marginally significant for improving
accuracy of outcome predictions. It is concluded that GCS scores and shift data
are highly accurate indicators of outcome in head-injured patients.

PMID: 7463129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Cell Tissue Res. 1979 May 18;198(2):295-307.

A study of gonadal organogenesis, and the factors influencing regeneration
following surgical castration in Deroceras reticulatum (Pulmonata:Limacidae).

Hogg NA, Wijdenes J.

At hatching, the hermaphrodite duct of Deroceras reticulatum consists of a single
cell type designated the Gonadal Stem Cell (GSC). Proliferation of the GSC leads 
to the formation of numerous ductules each of which forms one of the acini of the
gonad. The germinal and supporting cells are derived entirely from the GSC. The
germ cells differentiate first, followed by the Sertoli and follicle cells. At
the early sperm stage of gonadal development the hermaphrodite duct
differentiates to function as a seminal vesicle. Once the GSC are committed to
this change they lose their regenerative ability. The only remaining GSC are the 
cells of the acinar epithelium, and these retain their germinal potential until
the death of the animal. Regeneration will occur from the hermaphrodite duct
provided it is in the immature state, i.e., composed of GSC, and is exposed to
the hormonal conditions of a young animal. Nervous connections and the presence
of an artery are not necessary for this regeneration. The presence of a
functional gonad does not inhibit regeneration.

PMID: 466672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Assoc Off Anal Chem. 1978 Jul;61(4):813-9.

Headspace sampling and gas-solid chromatographic determination and confirmation
of greater than or equal to 1 ppb vinyl chloride residues in polyvinyl chloride
food packaging.

Dennison JL, Breder CV, McNeal T, Snyder RC, Roach JA, Sphon JA.

The determination and confirmation of residual vinyl chloride (VC) in polyvinyl
chloride (PVC) food packaging materials are described. PVC packaging materials
are dissolved in dimethylacetamide (DMAC). VC is sparged from solution with
helium gas and collected in sealed vials of ethanol. VC is detected and
quantitated by using a headspace sampling technique and standard gas-solid
chromatography (GSC) with flame ionization detection. GSC peak heights of about
5% full scale deflection are obtained for samples of PVC containing 1 ppb VC.
Polymer samples taken from tubing, blood bags, food packaging films, bottles, and
unprocessed resin were analyzed. Residual VC levels ranged from 0.3 to 913 ppb.
VC was confirmed by GSC-mass spectrometry, using selected ion recording of m/z 62
and 64 in conjunction with full mass scans to identify components eluting near
VC.

PMID: 681255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Am J Physiol. 1977 Sep;233(3):F185-96.

Renal extraction, filtration, absorption, and catabolism of growth hormone.

Johnson V, Maack T.

Renal handling of homologous labeled rat growth hormone (125I-rGH) was studied in
the intact rat and in a filtering and nonfiltering isolated perfused rat kidney
preparation. Plasma disappearance rate, renal accumulation, renal clearance (C), 
glomerular sieving coefficient (GSC), absorption rates, and fate of absorbed
hormones were determined. 125I-rGH is extensively filtered (GSC approximately
0.6) and subsequently absorbed by the tubular epithelium (C/GRF less than 1%).
The absorption process of 125I-rGH has a high capacity and is inhibited by
iodoacetate. Absorbed 125I-rGH is catabolized and a detectable product of
catabolism (125I-monoiodotyrosine) is returned to the circulation. A nonfiltering
kidney preparation with adequate renal perfusate flow was developed to study the 
contribution of the peritubular side to the renal handling of small proteins.
Experiments in the nonfiltering kidney show that renal accumulation, extraction, 
and catabolism of 125I-rGH from the peritubular side is minimal when compared to 
that occurring from the luminal side. The ratio of the renal extraction rate of
125I-rGH in the isolated kidney and the mean plasma disappearance rate of
125I-rGH in the intact rat was 0.67, demonstrating that the kidneys account for
the major fraction of the total plasma turnover of GH in the rat.

PMID: 910912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Brain Res. 1975 Jun 13;90(2):261-71.

Dopamine metabolism in characterised neurones of Planorbis corneus.

Osborne NN, Priggemeier E, Neuhoff V.

A sensitive chromatographic procedure was used to study the metabolism of
[14C]tyrosine, [3H]DOPA and [3H]dopamine in 3 defined cell-types situated in the 
nervous system of Planorbis corneus. One of the cell-types contains dopamine
(GDC), the other serotonin (GSC) and the other neither amine (GC). The GDCs
metabolise [14C]tyrosine to form DOPA and dopamine while the other two cells lack
this ability. In contrast, the GDCs and the GSC, but not the GCs, metabolise
[3H]DOPA to form dopamine. In addition the GDCs incorporate radioactivity from
[3H]DOPA into DOPAC, homovanillic acid and methoxytyramine. After incubation of
cells in [3H]dopamine, only the GDCs metabolise it to form DOPAC, homovanillic
acid and methoxytyramine. In no instance did the GDCs form significant amounts of
noradrenaline from the incorporated radioactive substances. These results,
together with data on the amine histochemistry of the individual cell-types
following pretretment of animals with drugs known to affect specific enzymes in
the synthesis of amine transmitter substances, clearly demonstrate that the GDCs 
alone have the enzymes requisite for the biosynthesis and catabolism of dopamine,
but not noradrenaline.

PMID: 1139307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Br J Pharmacol. 1973 Jul;48(3):546-9.

Tryptophan metabolism in characterized neurones of Helix.

Osborne NN.

[(14)C]-Tryptophan perfused through the central nervous system of the snail Helix
pomatia is taken up by both 5-hydroxytryptamine-containing (GSC) and
non-5-hydroxytryptamine-containing cells. Only the GSCs have the capacity to
metabolize [(14)C]-tryptophan to form some 5-hydroxytryptophan and slightly more 
5-hydroxytryptamine. Electrical stimulation of the GSCs, strong enough to elicit 
a firing of spikes, resulted in more 5-hydroxytryptamine being produced, though
there was also a slight increase in the amount of labelled tryptophan and
5-hydroxytryptophan. Doubling the length of stimulation and the amount of
[(14)C]-tryptophan perfused through the central nervous system had no great
influence on the content of radioactive substances found in the GSC. Pretreatment
of snails with p-chlorophenylalanine, though not interfering with the uptake of
tryptophan into the GSCs, almost completely prevented the formation of
5-hydroxytryptophan. As well as showing that the enzyme tryptophanhydroxylase is 
only present in cells containing 5-hydroxytryptamine, these experiments
demonstrate the possibility of studying the metabolism of 5-hydroxytryptamine in 
characterized neurones.

PMCID: PMC1776130
PMID: 4271756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


