
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Aug 18;43(14):6827-46. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv589. Epub 2015
Jul 2.

Identification of in vivo DNA-binding mechanisms of Pax6 and reconstruction of
Pax6-dependent gene regulatory networks during forebrain and lens development.

Sun J(1), Rockowitz S(1), Xie Q(1), Ashery-Padan R(2), Zheng D(3), Cvekl A(4).

Author information: 
(1)The Departments of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY
10461, USA. (2)Sackler School of Medicine and Sagol School of Neuroscience,
Tel-Aviv University, 69978 Ramat Aviv, Tel Aviv, Israel. (3)The Departments of
Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA Neurology,
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA Neuroscience, Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA deyou.zheng@einstein.yu.edu.
(4)The Departments of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY
10461, USA Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA ales.cvekl@einstein.yu.edu.

The transcription factor Pax6 is comprised of the paired domain (PD) and
homeodomain (HD). In the developing forebrain, Pax6 is expressed in ventricular
zone precursor cells and in specific subpopulations of neurons; absence of Pax6
results in disrupted cell proliferation and cell fate specification. Pax6 also
regulates the entire lens developmental program. To reconstruct Pax6-dependent
gene regulatory networks (GRNs), ChIP-seq studies were performed using forebrain 
and lens chromatin from mice. A total of 3514 (forebrain) and 3723 (lens)
Pax6-containing peaks were identified, with ~70% of them found in both tissues
and thereafter called 'common' peaks. Analysis of Pax6-bound peaks identified
motifs that closely resemble Pax6-PD, Pax6-PD/HD and Pax6-HD established binding 
sequences. Mapping of H3K4me1, H3K4me3, H3K27ac, H3K27me3 and RNA polymerase II
revealed distinct types of tissue-specific enhancers bound by Pax6. Pax6 directly
regulates cortical neurogenesis through activation (e.g. Dmrta1 and Ngn2) and
repression (e.g. Ascl1, Fezf2, and Gsx2) of transcription factors. In lens, Pax6 
directly regulates cell cycle exit via components of FGF (Fgfr2, Prox1 and Ccnd1)
and Wnt (Dkk3, Wnt7a, Lrp6, Bcl9l, and Ccnd1) signaling pathways. Collectively,
these studies provide genome-wide analysis of Pax6-dependent GRNs in lens and
forebrain and establish novel roles of Pax6 in organogenesis.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4538810
PMID: 26138486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Br J Haematol. 2015 Oct;171(1):141-5. doi: 10.1111/bjh.13368. Epub 2015 Mar 30.

4q12 translocations with GSX2 expression identify a CD7(+) acute myeloid
leukaemia subset.

Di Giacomo D(1), La Starza R(1), Barba G(1), Pierini V(1), Baldazzi C(2),
Storlazzi CT(3), Daniele G(3), Forghieri F(4), Borlenghi E(5), Testoni N(2),
Mecucci C(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Section of Haematology, University of Perugia,
Perugia, Italy. (2)Institute of Haematology and Medical Oncology 'Seràgnoli',
University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy. (3)Department of Biology, University of
Bari, Bari, Italy. (4)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Section of
Haematology, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy. (5)Department
of Haematology, Spedali Civili, Brescia, Italy. (6)Department of Medicine,
Section of Haematology, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
cristina.mecucci@unipg.it.

PMID: 25816740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Development. 2015 Apr 1;142(7):1375-86. doi: 10.1242/dev.117093.

Activin A directs striatal projection neuron differentiation of human pluripotent
stem cells.

Arber C(1), Precious SV(2), Cambray S(3), Risner-Janiczek JR(1), Kelly C(2),
Noakes Z(4), Fjodorova M(4), Heuer A(2), Ungless MA(1), Rodríguez TA(3), Rosser
AE(2), Dunnett SB(2), Li M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial College London,
Hammersmith Hospital Campus, Du Cane Road, London W12 ONN, UK. (2)Brain Repair
Group, Neuroscience and Mental Health Research Institute, School of Bioscience,
Cardiff University, Cardiff CF10 3AX, UK. (3)National Heart and Lung Institute,
Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, Du Cane Road, London W12
ONN, UK. (4)Stem Cell Neurogenesis Group, Neuroscience and Mental Health Research
Institute, School of Medicine and School of Bioscience, Cardiff University,
Cardiff CF24 4HQ, UK. (5)Medical Research Council Clinical Sciences Centre,
Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, Du Cane Road, London W12
ONN, UK Stem Cell Neurogenesis Group, Neuroscience and Mental Health Research
Institute, School of Medicine and School of Bioscience, Cardiff University,
Cardiff CF24 4HQ, UK lim26@cf.ac.uk.

The efficient generation of striatal neurons from human embryonic stem cells
(hESCs) and induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) is fundamental for realising 
their promise in disease modelling, pharmaceutical drug screening and cell
therapy for Huntington's disease. GABAergic medium-sized spiny neurons (MSNs) are
the principal projection neurons of the striatum and specifically degenerate in
the early phase of Huntington's disease. Here we report that activin A induces
lateral ganglionic eminence (LGE) characteristics in nascent neural progenitors
derived from hESCs and hiPSCs in a sonic hedgehog-independent manner. Correct
specification of striatal phenotype was further demonstrated by the induction of 
the striatal transcription factors CTIP2, GSX2 and FOXP2. Crucially, these human 
LGE progenitors readily differentiate into postmitotic neurons expressing the
striatal projection neuron signature marker DARPP32, both in culture and
following transplantation in the adult striatum in a rat model of Huntington's
disease. Activin-induced neurons also exhibit appropriate striatal-like
electrophysiology in vitro. Together, our findings demonstrate a novel route for 
efficient differentiation of GABAergic striatal MSNs from human pluripotent stem 
cells.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4378247
PMID: 25804741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Front Neuroanat. 2014 Aug 13;8:82. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2014.00082. eCollection
2014.

The complexity of the calretinin-expressing progenitors in the human cerebral
cortex.

Radonjic NV(1), Ortega JA(2), Memi F(2), Dionne K(2), Jakovcevski I(3), Zecevic
N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Connecticut Health Center
Farmington, CT, USA ; Institute of Medical and Clinical Biochemistry, School of
Medicine, University of Belgrade Belgrade, Serbia. (2)Department of Neuroscience,
University of Connecticut Health Center Farmington, CT, USA. (3)Experimental
Neurophysiology, University Hospital Cologne Köln, Germany ; Experimental
Neurophysiology, German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases Bonn, Germany.

The complex structure and function of the cerebral cortex critically depend on
the balance of excitation and inhibition provided by the pyramidal projection
neurons and GABAergic interneurons, respectively. The calretinin-expressing
(CalR(+)) cell is a subtype of GABAergic cortical interneurons that is more
prevalent in humans than in rodents. In rodents, CalR(+) interneurons originate
in the caudal ganglionic eminence (CGE) from Gsx2(+) progenitors, but in humans
it has been suggested that a subpopulation of CalR(+) cells can also be generated
in the cortical ventricular/subventricular zone (VZ/SVZ). The progenitors for
cortically generated CalR(+) subpopulation in primates are not yet characterized.
Hence, the aim of this study was to identify patterns of expression of the
transcription factors (TFs) that commit cortical stem cells to the CalR fate,
with a focus on Gsx2. First, we studied the expression of Gsx2 and its downstream
effectors, Ascl1 and Sp8 in the cortical regions of the fetal human forebrain at 
midgestation. Next, we established that a subpopulation of cells expressing these
TFs are proliferating in the cortical SVZ, and can be co-labeled with CalR. The
presence and proliferation of Gsx2(+) cells, not only in the ventral
telencephalon (GE) as previously reported, but also in the cerebral cortex
suggests cortical origin of a subpopulation of CalR(+) neurons in humans. In
vitro treatment of human cortical progenitors with Sonic hedgehog (Shh), an
important morphogen in the specification of interneurons, decreased levels of
Ascl1 and Sp8 proteins, but did not affect Gsx2 levels. Taken together, our
ex-vivo and in vitro results on human fetal brain suggest complex endogenous and 
exogenous regulation of TFs implied in the specification of different subtypes of
CalR(+) cortical interneurons.

PMCID: PMC4131197
PMID: 25165435  [PubMed]


5. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2014 Dec;25(12):2859-70. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2013050446. Epub 2014
Jun 12.

Lupus nephritis susceptibility loci in women with systemic lupus erythematosus.

Chung SA(1), Brown EE(2), Williams AH(3), Ramos PS(4), Berthier CC(5), Bhangale
T(6), Alarcon-Riquelme ME(7), Behrens TW(8), Criswell LA(1), Graham DC(9),
Demirci FY(10), Edberg JC(11), Gaffney PM(12), Harley JB(13), Jacob CO(14),
Kamboh MI(10), Kelly JA(12), Manzi S(15), Moser-Sivils KL(16), Russell LP(3),
Petri M(17), Tsao BP(18), Vyse TJ(9), Zidovetzki R(19), Kretzler M(5), Kimberly
RP(11), Freedman BI(20), Graham RR(8), Langefeld CD(21); International Consortium
for Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Genetics.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Rosalind Russell-Ephraim P. Engleman Medical
Research Center for Arthritis, University of California, San Francisco,
California; (2)Department of Epidemiology, University of Alabama, Birmingham,
Alabama; Division of Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology, Department of
Medicine, University of Alabama, Birmingham, Alabama; (3)Department of
Biostatistical Sciences, Center for Public Health Genomics, Wake Forest School of
Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina; (4)Division of Rheumatology and
Immunology, Department of Medicine, Medical University of South Carolina,
Charleston, South Carolina; (5)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan; (6)Department of
Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, and. (7)Arthritis and Clinical
Immunology Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City,
Oklahoma; Human DNA Variability Area, Pfizer-University of Granada-Andalusian
Government Centre for Genomics and Oncological Research, Granada, Spain;
(8)Immunology Tissue Growth and Repair Human Genetics Group, Genentech Inc.,
South San Francisco, California; (9)Divisions of Genetics and Molecular Medicine 
and Immunology, Infection, and Inflammatory Disease, Kings College, London,
United Kingdom; (10)Department of Human Genetics, Graduate School of Public
Health, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; (11)Division of
Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, University of
Alabama, Birmingham, Alabama; (12)Arthritis and Clinical Immunology Research
Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma;
(13)Arthritis and Clinical Immunology Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research
Foundation, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Division of Rheumatology, Center for
Autoimmune Genomics and Etiology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
Cincinnati, Ohio; University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City,
Oklahoma; US Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Oklahoma City,
Oklahoma; (14)Department of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, California; (15)Department of Medicine, West Penn Allegheny Health
System, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; Temple University
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; (16)Arthritis and Clinical
Immunology Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City,
Oklahoma; College of Medicine, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; (17)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland; (18)Division of Rheumatology, Department
of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, California; (19)Department of
Cell Biology and Neuroscience, University of California, Riverside, California;
and. (20)Section on Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Wake Forest
School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina. (21)Department of
Biostatistical Sciences, Center for Public Health Genomics, Wake Forest School of
Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina; clangefe@wakehealth.edu.

Lupus nephritis is a manifestation of SLE resulting from glomerular immune
complex deposition and inflammation. Lupus nephritis demonstrates familial
aggregation and accounts for significant morbidity and mortality. We completed a 
meta-analysis of three genome-wide association studies of SLE to identify lupus
nephritis-predisposing loci. Through genotyping and imputation, >1.6 million
markers were assessed in 2000 unrelated women of European descent with SLE (588
patients with lupus nephritis and 1412 patients with lupus without nephritis).
Tests of association were computed using logistic regression adjusting for
population substructure. The strongest evidence for association was observed
outside the MHC and included markers localized to 4q11-q13 (PDGFRA, GSX2;
P=4.5×10(-7)), 16p12 (SLC5A11; P=5.1×10(-7)), 6p22 (ID4; P=7.4×10(-7)), and
8q24.12 (HAS2, SNTB1; P=1.1×10(-6)). Both HLA-DR2 and HLA-DR3, two well
established lupus susceptibility loci, showed evidence of association with lupus 
nephritis (P=0.06 and P=3.7×10(-5), respectively). Within the class I region,
rs9263871 (C6orf15-HCG22) had the strongest evidence of association with lupus
nephritis independent of HLA-DR2 and HLA-DR3 (P=8.5×10(-6)). Consistent with a
functional role in lupus nephritis, intra-renal mRNA levels of PDGFRA and
associated pathway members showed significant enrichment in patients with lupus
nephritis (n=32) compared with controls (n=15). Results from this large-scale
genome-wide investigation of lupus nephritis provide evidence of multiple
biologically relevant lupus nephritis susceptibility loci.

Copyright © 2014 by the American Society of Nephrology.

PMCID: PMC4243339
PMID: 24925725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Anat Rec (Hoboken). 2013 Sep;296(9):1364-82. doi: 10.1002/ar.22733. Epub 2013 Jul
31.

Transcriptional regulation of olfactory bulb neurogenesis.

Díaz-Guerra E(1), Pignatelli J, Nieto-Estévez V, Vicario-Abejón C.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Cajal, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Madrid,
Spain.

The neurons in the olfactory bulb originate from molecularly defined and
spatially distinct proliferative regions. Glutamatergic projection neurons are
generated during the embryonic period in the local ventricular zone of the
olfactory bulb, a territory in the dorsal telencephalon in which the
transcription factor Pax6 is expressed. Some cells in this zone also express
Tbr1, a marker of glutamatergic neurons. By contrast, embryonic olfactory bulb
interneurons are derived from Gsx2 expressing cells in the dorsal lateral
ganglionic eminence of the ventral telencephalon, and from progenitors outside
the dorsal lateral ganglionic eminence, including the olfactory bulb
neuroepithelium. Postnatally, interneurons arise from the subventricular zone of 
the lateral ventricle, although the rostral migratory stream and the olfactory
bulb also appear to serve as a source of neurons. Transcription factors are
crucial to generate all classes of neurons and glia in the olfactory bulb, both
during development and adulthood. In this article, we discuss and propose models 
on how the spatial and temporal regulation of transcription factor expression
controls the self-renewal, proliferation and cell fate of neural stem cells and
progenitors, which finally leads to the generation of distinct functional
subtypes of neurons in the developing and adult olfactory bulb.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23904336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Blood Cancer J. 2013 Jul 12;3:e124. doi: 10.1038/bcj.2013.20.

Identification of GSX2 and AF10 as NUP98 partner genes in myeloid malignancies.

Soler G(1), Kaltenbach S, Dobbelstein S, Broccardo C, Radford I, Mozziconacci MJ,
Bernard OA, Penard-Lacronique V, Delabesse E, Romana SP.

Author information: 
(1)1] Service de Cytogénétique, Hôpital Necker, AP-HP, Paris, France [2]
Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France [3] INSERM U985, Institut Gustave
Roussy, Villejuif, France.

PMCID: PMC3730198
PMID: 23852159  [PubMed]


8. J Cell Sci. 2013 Aug 15;126(Pt 16):3533-40. doi: 10.1242/jcs.125757. Epub 2013
Jun 20.

Non-invasive neural stem cells become invasive in vitro by combined FGF2 and BMP4
signaling.

Sailer MH(1), Gerber A, Tostado C, Hutter G, Cordier D, Mariani L, Ritz MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, Brain Tumor Biology Laboratory, Klingelbergstrasse 
50/70, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland. martin.sailer@usb.ch

Neural stem cells (NSCs) typically show efficient self-renewal and selective
differentiation. Their invasion potential, however, is not well studied. In this 
study, Sox2-positive NSCs from the E14.5 rat cortex were found to be non-invasive
and showed only limited migration in vitro. By contrast, FGF2-expanded NSCs
showed a strong migratory and invasive phenotype in response to the combination
of FGF2 and BMP4. Invasive NSCs expressed Podoplanin (PDPN) and p75NGFR (Ngfr) at
the plasma membrane after exposure to FGF2 and BMP4. FGF2 and BMP4 together
upregulated the expression of Msx1, Snail1, Snail2, Ngfr, which are all found in 
neural crest (NC) cells during or after epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), 
but not in forebrain stem cells. Invasive cells downregulated the expression of
Olig2, Sox10, Egfr, Pdgfra, Gsh1/Gsx1 and Gsh2/Gsx2. Migrating and invasive NSCs 
had elevated expression of mRNA encoding Pax6, Tenascin C (TNC), PDPN, Hey1,
SPARC, p75NGFR and Gli3. On the basis of the strongest upregulation in
invasion-induced NSCs, we defined a group of five key invasion-related genes:
Ngfr, Sparc, Snail1, Pdpn and Tnc. These genes were co-expressed and upregulated 
in seven samples of glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) compared with normal human
brain controls. Induction of invasion and migration led to low expression of
differentiation markers and repressed proliferation in NSCs. Our results indicate
that normal forebrain stem cells have the inherent ability to adopt a glioma-like
invasiveness. The results provide a novel in vitro system to study stem cell
invasion and a novel glioma invasion model: tumoral abuse of the developmental
dorsoventral identity regulation.

PMCID: PMC3744023
PMID: 23788430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Genes Dev. 2013 Jun 1;27(11):1272-87. doi: 10.1101/gad.217539.113. Epub 2013 May 
30.

Gsx2 controls region-specific activation of neural stem cells and injury-induced 
neurogenesis in the adult subventricular zone.

López-Juárez A(1), Howard J, Ullom K, Howard L, Grande A, Pardo A, Waclaw R, Sun 
YY, Yang D, Kuan CY, Campbell K, Nakafuku M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research
Foundation, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

Neural stem cells (NSCs) reside in widespread regions along the lateral ventricle
and generate diverse olfactory bulb (OB) interneuron subtypes in the adult mouse 
brain. Molecular mechanisms underlying their regional diversity, however, are not
well understood. Here we show that the homeodomain transcription factor Gsx2
plays a crucial role in the region-specific control of adult NSCs in both
persistent and injury-induced neurogenesis. In the intact brain, Gsx2 is
expressed in a regionally restricted subset of NSCs and promotes the activation
and lineage progression of stem cells, thereby controlling the production of
selective OB neuron subtypes. Moreover, Gsx2 is ectopically induced in damaged
brains outside its normal expression domains and is required for injury-induced
neurogenesis in the subventricular zone (SVZ). These results demonstrate that
mobilization of adult NSCs is controlled in a region-specific manner and that
distinct mechanisms operate in continuous and injury-induced neurogenesis in the 
adult brain.

PMCID: PMC3690400
PMID: 23723414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Development. 2013 Jun;140(11):2289-98. doi: 10.1242/dev.091090. Epub 2013 May 1.

The homeobox gene Gsx2 controls the timing of oligodendroglial fate specification
in mouse lateral ganglionic eminence progenitors.

Chapman H(1), Waclaw RR, Pei Z, Nakafuku M, Campbell K.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Developmental Biology and Neurosurgery, Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 3333
Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

The homeobox gene Gsx2 has previously been shown to be required for the
specification of distinct neuronal subtypes derived from lateral ganglionic
eminence (LGE) progenitors at specific embryonic time points. However, its role
in the subsequent generation of oligodendrocytes from these progenitors remains
unclear. We have utilized conditional gain-of-function and loss-of-function
approaches in order to elucidate the role of Gsx2 in the switch between
neurogenesis and oligodendrogenesis within the embryonic ventral telencephalon.
In the absence of Gsx2 expression, an increase in oligodendrocyte precursor cells
(OPCs) with a concomitant decrease in neurogenesis is observed in the
subventricular zone of the LGE at mid-stages of embryogenesis (i.e. E12.5-15.5), 
which subsequently leads to an increased number of Gsx2-derived OPCs within the
adjacent mantle regions of the cortex before birth at E18.5. Moreover, using
Olig2(cre) to conditionally inactivate Gsx2 throughout the ventral telencephalon 
with the exception of the dorsal (d)LGE, we found that the increase in cortical
OPCs in Gsx2 germline mutants are derived from dLGE progenitors. We also show
that Ascl1 is required for the expansion of these dLGE-derived OPCs in the cortex
of Gsx2 mutants. Complementing these results, gain-of-function experiments in
which Gsx2 was expressed throughout most of the late-stage embryonic
telencephalon (i.e. E15.5-18.5) result in a significant decrease in the number of
cortical OPCs. These results support the notion that high levels of Gsx2 suppress
OPC specification in dLGE progenitors and that its downregulation is required for
the transition from neurogenesis to oligodendrogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3653554
PMID: 23637331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Stem Cell Rev. 2013 Aug;9(4):461-74. doi: 10.1007/s12015-013-9441-8.

Human pluripotent stem cell differentiation into authentic striatal projection
neurons.

Delli Carri A(1), Onorati M, Castiglioni V, Faedo A, Camnasio S, Toselli M,
Biella G, Cattaneo E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Center for Stem Cell Research, Università degli 
Studi di Milano, 20133 Milan, Italy.

Here we present the principles and steps of a protocol that we have recently
developed for the differentiation of hES/iPS cells into the authentic human
striatal projection medium spiny neurons (MSNs) that die in Huntington's Disease 
(HD). Authenticity is judged by the convergence of multiple features within
individual cells. Our procedure lasts 80 days and couples neural induction via
BMP/TGF-ß inhibition with exposure to the developmental factors sonic hedgehog
(SHH) and dickkopf1 (DKK-1) to drive ventral telencephalic specification,
followed by terminal differentiation [1]. Authenticity of the resulting neuronal 
population is monitored by the appearance of FOXG1(+)/GSX2(+) progenitor cells of
the lateral ganglionic eminence (LGE) at day 15-25 of differentiation, followed
by appearance of CTIP2-, FOXP1- and FOXP2-positive cells at day 45. These
precursor cells then mature into MAP2(+)/GABA(+) neurons with 20 % of them
ultimately co-expressing the DARPP-32 and CTIP2 diagnostic markers and carrying
electrophysiological properties expected for fully functional MSNs.The protocol
is characterized by its replicability in at least three human pluripotent cell
lines. Altogether this protocol defines a useful platform for in vitro
developmental neurobiology studies, drug screening, and regenerative medicine
approaches.

PMID: 23625190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Development. 2013 Jan 15;140(2):301-12. doi: 10.1242/dev.084608.

Developmentally coordinated extrinsic signals drive human pluripotent stem cell
differentiation toward authentic DARPP-32+ medium-sized spiny neurons.

Delli Carri A(1), Onorati M, Lelos MJ, Castiglioni V, Faedo A, Menon R, Camnasio 
S, Vuono R, Spaiardi P, Talpo F, Toselli M, Martino G, Barker RA, Dunnett SB,
Biella G, Cattaneo E.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Stem Cell Research, Università degli Studi di Milano, 20133 Milan, 
Italy.

Medium-sized spiny neurons (MSNs) are the only neostriatum projection neurons,
and their degeneration underlies some of the clinical features of Huntington's
disease. Using knowledge of human developmental biology and exposure to key
neurodevelopmental molecules, human pluripotent stem (hPS) cells were induced to 
differentiate into MSNs. In a feeder-free adherent culture, ventral telencephalic
specification is induced by BMP/TGFß inhibition and subsequent SHH/DKK1
treatment. The emerging FOXG1(+)/GSX2(+) telencephalic progenitors are then
terminally differentiated, resulting in the systematic line-independent
generation of FOXP1(+)/FOXP2(+)/CTIP2(+)/calbindin(+)/DARPP-32(+) MSNs. Similar
to mature MSNs, these neurons carry dopamine and A2a receptors, elicit a typical 
firing pattern and show inhibitory postsynaptic currents, as well as dopamine
neuromodulation and synaptic integration ability in vivo. When transplanted into 
the striatum of quinolinic acid-lesioned rats, hPS-derived neurons survive and
differentiate into DARPP-32(+) neurons, leading to a restoration of
apomorphine-induced rotation behavior. In summary, hPS cells can be efficiently
driven to acquire a functional striatal fate using an ontogeny-recapitulating
stepwise method that represents a platform for in vitro human developmental
neurobiology studies and drug screening approaches.

PMID: 23250204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Comp Neurol. 2013 May 1;521(7):1561-84. doi: 10.1002/cne.23242.

Loss of Gsx1 and Gsx2 function rescues distinct phenotypes in Dlx1/2 mutants.

Wang B(1), Long JE, Flandin P, Pla R, Waclaw RR, Campbell K, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and the Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental
Neurobiology, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California
94158-2324, USA.

Mice lacking the Dlx1 and Dlx2 homeobox genes (Dlx1/2 mutants) have severe
deficits in subpallial differentiation, including overexpression of the Gsx1 and 
Gsx2 homeobox genes. To investigate whether Gsx overexpression contributes to the
Dlx1/2 mutant phenotypes, we made compound loss-of-function mutants. Eliminating 
Gsx2 function from the Dlx1/2 mutants rescued the increased expression of Ascl1
and Hes5 (Notch signaling mediators) and Olig2 (oligodendrogenesis mediator). In 
addition, Dlx1/2;Gsx2 mutants, like Dlx1/2;Ascl1 mutants, exacerbated the Gsx2
and Dlx1/2 patterning and differentiation phenotypes, particularly in the lateral
ganglionic eminence (LGE) caudal ganglionic eminence (CGE), and septum, including
loss of GAD1 expression. On the other hand, eliminating Gsx1 function from the
Dlx1/2 mutants (Dlx1/2;Gsx1 mutants) did not severely exacerbate their phenotype;
on the contrary, it resulted in a partial rescue of medial ganglionic eminence
(MGE) properties, including interneuron migration to the cortex. Thus, despite
their redundant properties, Gsx1 and -2 have distinct interactions with Dlx1 and 
-2. Gsx2 interaction is strongest in the LGE, CGE, and septum, whereas the Gsx1
interaction is strongest in the MGE. From these studies, and earlier studies, we 
present a model of the transcriptional network that regulates early steps of
subcortical development.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3615175
PMID: 23042297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e29799. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029799. Epub 2012 Jan 5.

The homeobox gene Gsx2 regulates the self-renewal and differentiation of neural
stem cells and the cell fate of postnatal progenitors.

Méndez-Gómez HR(1), Vicario-Abejón C.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Cajal, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC),
Madrid, Spain.

The Genetic screened homeobox 2 (Gsx2) transcription factor is required for the
development of olfactory bulb (OB) and striatal neurons, and for the regional
specification of the embryonic telencephalon. Although Gsx2 is expressed
abundantly by progenitor cells in the ventral telencephalon, its precise function
in the generation of neurons from neural stem cells (NSCs) is not clear.
Similarly, the role of Gsx2 in regulating the self-renewal and multipotentiality 
of NSCs has been little explored. Using retroviral vectors to express Gsx2, we
have studied the effect of Gsx2 on the growth of NSCs isolated from the OB and
ganglionic eminences (GE), as well as its influence on the proliferation and cell
fate of progenitors in the postnatal mouse OB. Expression of Gsx2 reduces
proliferation and the self-renewal capacity of NSCs, without significantly
affecting cell death. Furthermore, Gsx2 overexpression decreases the
differentiation of NSCs into neurons and glia, and it maintains the cells that do
not differentiate as cycling progenitors. These effects were stronger in GESCs
than in OBSCs, indicating that the actions of Gsx2 are cell-dependent. In vivo,
Gsx2 produces a decrease in the number of Pax6+ cells and doublecortin+
neuroblasts, and an increase in Olig2+ cells. In summary, our findings show that 
Gsx2 inhibits the ability of NSCs to proliferate and self-renew, as well as the
capacity of NSC-derived progenitors to differentiate, suggesting that this
transcription factor regulates the quiescent and undifferentiated state of NSCs
and progenitors. Furthermore, our data indicate that Gsx2 negatively regulates
neurogenesis from postnatal progenitor cells.

PMCID: PMC3252334
PMID: 22242181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Aug 10;21(12):2239-51. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0607. Epub 2012
Jan 26.

Helios transcription factor expression depends on Gsx2 and Dlx1&2 function in
developing striatal matrix neurons.

Martín-Ibáñez R(1), Crespo E, Esgleas M, Urban N, Wang B, Waclaw R, Georgopoulos 
K, Martínez S, Campbell K, Vicario-Abejón C, Alberch J, Chan S, Kastner P,
Rubenstein JL, Canals JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Immunology and Neuroscience, and Cell Therapy
Program, Faculty of Medicine, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i
Sunyer-IDIBAPS, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

Development of the nervous system is finely regulated by consecutive expression
of cell-specific transcription factors. Here we show that Helios, a member of the
Ikaros transcription factor family, is expressed in ectodermal and
neuroectodermal-derived tissues. During embryonic development, Helios is
expressed by several brain structures including the lateral ganglionic eminence
(LGE, the striatal anlage); the cingulated, insular and retrosplenial cortex; the
hippocampus; and the accessory olfactory bulb. Moreover, Helios is also expressed
by Purkinje neurons during postnatal cerebellar development. Within the LGE,
Helios expression follows a dynamic spatio-temporal pattern starting at embryonic
stages (E14.5), peaking at E18.5, and completely disappearing during postnatal
development. Helios is expressed by a small population of nestin-positive neural 
progenitor cells located in the subventricular zone as well as by a larger
population of immature neurons distributed throughout the mantle zone. In the
later, Helios is preferentially expressed in the matrix compartment, where it
colocalizes with Bcl11b and Foxp1, well-known markers of striatal projection
neurons. In addition, we observed that Helios expression is not detected in
Dlx1/2 and Gsx2 null mutants, while its expression is maintained in Ascl1
mutants. These findings allow us to introduce a new transcription factor in the
cascade of events that take part of striatal development postulating the
existence of at least 4 different neural progenitors in the LGE. An
Ascl1-independent but Gsx2- & Dlx1/2-dependent precursor will express Helios
defining a new lineage for a subset of matrix striatal neurons.

PMCID: PMC3411368
PMID: 22142223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Cereb Cortex. 2012 Feb;22(2):403-16. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhr122. Epub 2011 Jun
10.

Tangentially migrating transient glutamatergic neurons control neurogenesis and
maintenance of cerebral cortical progenitor pools.

Teissier A(1), Waclaw RR, Griveau A, Campbell K, Pierani A.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS-UMR 7592, Institut Jacques Monod, Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne
Paris Cité, 75205 Paris Cedex 13, France.

The relative contribution of intrinsic and extrinsic cues in the regulation of
cortical neurogenesis remains a crucial challenge in developmental neurobiology. 
We previously reported that a transient population of glutamatergic neurons, the 
cortical plate (CP) transient neurons, migrates from the ventral pallium (VP)
over long distances and participate in neocortical development. Here, we show
that the genetic ablation of this population leads to a reduction in the number
of cortical neurons especially fated to superficial layers. These defects result 
from precocious neurogenesis followed by a depletion of the progenitor pools.
Notably, these changes progress from caudolateral to rostrodorsal pallial
territories between E12.5 and E14.5 along the expected trajectory of the ablated 
cells. Conversely, we describe enhanced proliferation resulting in an increase in
the number of cortical neurons in the Gsx2 mutants which present an expansion of 
the VP and a higher number of CP transient neurons migrating into the pallium.
Our findings indicate that these neurons act to maintain the proliferative state 
of neocortical progenitors and delay differentiation during their migration from 
extraneocortical regions and, thus, participate in the extrinsic control of
cortical neuronal numbers.

PMCID: PMC3256409
PMID: 21666133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Neurosci. 2011 Apr 6;31(14):5313-24. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3867-10.2011.

Pax6 is required at the telencephalic pallial-subpallial boundary for the
generation of neuronal diversity in the postnatal limbic system.

Cocas LA(1), Georgala PA, Mangin JM, Clegg JM, Kessaris N, Haydar TF, Gallo V,
Price DJ, Corbin JG.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience Research, Children's Research Institute, Children's
National Medical Center, Washington, DC 20010, USA.

During embryogenesis, the pallial-subpallial boundary (PSB) divides the two main 
progenitor domains in the telencephalon: the pallium, the major source of
excitatory neurons, and the subpallium, the major source of inhibitory neurons.
The PSB is formed at the molecular interface between the pallial (high Pax6+) and
subpallial (high Gsx2+) ventricular zone (VZ) compartments. Initially, the PSB
contains cells that express both Pax6 and Gsx2, but during later stages of
development this boundary is largely refined into two separate compartments. In
this study we examined the developmental mechanisms underlying PSB boundary
formation and the postnatal consequences of conditional loss of Pax6 function at 
the PSB on neuronal fate in the amygdala and olfactory bulb, two targets of
PSB-derived migratory populations. Our cell fate and time-lapse imaging analyses 
reveal that the sorting of Pax6+ and Gsx2+ progenitors during embryogenesis is
the result of a combination of changes in gene expression and cell movements.
Interestingly, we find that in addition to giving rise to inhibitory neurons in
the amygdala and olfactory bulb, Gsx2+ progenitors generate a subpopulation of
amygdala excitatory neurons. Consistent with this finding, targeted conditional
ablation of Pax6 in Gsx2+ progenitors results in discrete local embryonic
patterning defects that are linked to changes in the generation of subsets of
postnatal excitatory and inhibitory neurons in the amygdala and inhibitory
neurons in the olfactory bulb. Thus, in PSB progenitors, Pax6 plays an important 
role in the generation of multiple subtypes of neurons that contribute to the
amygdala and olfactory bulb.

PMCID: PMC3086773
PMID: 21471366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Jan 25;108(4):1675-80. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1008824108. Epub 2011 Jan 4.

Homeobox genes Gsx1 and Gsx2 differentially regulate telencephalic progenitor
maturation.

Pei Z(1), Wang B, Chen G, Nagao M, Nakafuku M, Campbell K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Perinatal Institute, Cincinnati Children's 
Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati
OH 45229, USA.

Homeobox genes Gsx1 and Gsx2 (formerly Gsh1 and Gsh2) are among the earliest
transcription factors expressed in neuronal progenitors of the lateral ganglionic
eminence (LGE) in the ventral telencephalon. Gsx2 is required for the early
specification of LGE progenitor cells and recently has been shown to specify
different LGE neuronal subtypes at distinct time points. In Gsx2 mutants, Gsx1
compensates, at least in part, for the loss of Gsx2 in the specification of LGE
neuronal subtypes. Because no specific phenotype has been described in Gsx1
mutants, it is unclear what role this factor plays in the development of the
ventral telencephalon. Here, we used a gain-of-function approach to express
either Gsx1 or Gsx2 throughout the telencephalon and found that Gsx1 functions
similarly to Gsx2 in the specification of LGE identity. However, our results show
that Gsx1 and Gsx2 differentially regulate the maturation of LGE progenitors.
Specifically, Gsx2 maintains LGE progenitors in an undifferentiated state,
whereas Gsx1 promotes progenitor maturation and the acquisition of neuronal
phenotypes, at least in part, through the down-regulation of Gsx2. These unique
results indicate that the two closely related Gsx genes similarly regulate LGE
patterning but oppositely control the balance between proliferation and
differentiation in the neuronal progenitor pool.

PMCID: PMC3029701
PMID: 21205889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Neural Dev. 2010 Aug 24;5:21. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-5-21.

Nolz1 promotes striatal neurogenesis through the regulation of retinoic acid
signaling.

Urbán N(1), Martín-Ibáñez R, Herranz C, Esgleas M, Crespo E, Pardo M,
Crespo-Enríquez I, Méndez-Gómez HR, Waclaw R, Chatzi C, Alvarez S, Alvarez R,
Duester G, Campbell K, de Lera AR, Vicario-Abejón C, Martinez S, Alberch J,
Canals JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Immunology and Neuroscience, Faculty of Medicine, 
IDIBAPS, Universitat de Barcelona, C/Casanova 143, 08036 Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Nolz1 is a zinc finger transcription factor whose expression is
enriched in the lateral ganglionic eminence (LGE), although its function is still
unknown.
RESULTS: Here we analyze the role of Nolz1 during LGE development. We show that
Nolz1 expression is high in proliferating neural progenitor cells (NPCs) of the
LGE subventricular zone. In addition, low levels of Nolz1 are detected in the
mantle zone, as well as in the adult striatum. Similarly, Nolz1 is highly
expressed in proliferating LGE-derived NPC cultures, but its levels rapidly
decrease upon cell differentiation, pointing to a role of Nolz1 in the control of
NPC proliferation and/or differentiation. In agreement with this hypothesis, we
find that Nolz1 over-expression promotes cell cycle exit of NPCs in neurosphere
cultures and negatively regulates proliferation in telencephalic organotypic
cultures. Within LGE primary cultures, Nolz1 over-expression promotes the
acquisition of a neuronal phenotype, since it increases the number of ß-III
tubulin (Tuj1)- and microtubule-associated protein (MAP)2-positive neurons, and
inhibits astrocyte generation and/or differentiation. Retinoic acid (RA) is one
of the most important morphogens involved in striatal neurogenesis, and regulates
Nolz1 expression in different systems. Here we show that Nolz1 also responds to
this morphogen in E12.5 LGE-derived cell cultures. However, Nolz1 expression is
not regulated by RA in E14.5 LGE-derived cell cultures, nor is it affected during
LGE development in mouse models that present decreased RA levels. Interestingly, 
we find that Gsx2, which is necessary for normal RA signaling during LGE
development, is also required for Nolz1 expression, which is lost in Gsx2
knockout mice. These findings suggest that Nolz1 might act downstream of Gsx2 to 
regulate RA-induced neurogenesis. Keeping with this hypothesis, we show that
Nolz1 induces the selective expression of the RA receptor (RAR)ß without altering
RARa or RAR<U+03B3>. In addition, Nozl1 over-expression increases RA signaling since it 
stimulates the RA response element. This RA signaling is essential for
Nolz1-induced neurogenesis, which is impaired in a RA-free environment or in the 
presence of a RAR inverse agonist. It has been proposed that Drosophila Gsx2 and 
Nolz1 homologues could cooperate with the transcriptional co-repressors
Groucho-TLE to regulate cell proliferation. In agreement with this view, we show 
that Nolz1 could act in collaboration with TLE-4, as they are expressed at the
same time in NPC cultures and during mouse development.
CONCLUSIONS: Nolz1 promotes RA signaling in the LGE, contributing to the striatal
neurogenesis during development.

PMCID: PMC2939507
PMID: 20735826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Neurosci. 2010 May 19;30(20):6944-53. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5772-09.2010.

Developmental origin of the neuronal subtypes that comprise the amygdalar fear
circuit in the mouse.

Waclaw RR(1), Ehrman LA, Pierani A, Campbell K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229,
USA.

We have taken a genetic-based fate-mapping approach to determine the specific
contributions of telencephalic progenitors to the structures that comprise the
amygdalar fear circuit including the central (CA), lateral (LA), and basolateral 
(BLA) amygdala. Our data indicate that progenitors in the ventral pallium (VP)
contribute projection neurons to the LA and BLA but not the CA. Rather, the CA
appears to derive, at least in part, from progenitors located in the ventral
lateral ganglionic eminence (vLGE). Diverse groups of interneurons populate these
amygdalar nuclei, and as predicted our data support the notion that they
originate from subpallial progenitors. A rather specific population of amygdalar 
interneurons, the intercalated cells (ITCs), is known to play a fundamental role 
in fear-related behaviors. However, no information on their specific origin has, 
as yet, been provided. Our findings suggest that the ITCs arise from the dorsal
lateral ganglionic eminence (dLGE) and migrate in the lateral migratory stream to
populate the paracapsular regions as well as the main intercalated mass of the
amygdala (IA). Germ-line Gsx2 mutants are known to exhibit an expansion of the VP
into the LGE and a concomitant reduction in the dLGE and vLGE. Accordingly, Gsx2 
conditional mutants display a significantly enlarged LA and a significant
reduction in ITCs both within the paracapsular regions and the IA. Additional
support for a dLGE origin of the ITCs was obtained in conditional mutants of the 
dLGE gene Sp8. Thus, our findings indicate diverse origins for the neuronal
components that comprise the amygdalar fear circuit.

PMCID: PMC2882074
PMID: 20484636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Cancer Res. 2010 Apr 1;70(7):2718-27. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-3631. Epub
2010 Mar 16.

CpG island hypermethylation in human astrocytomas.

Wu X(1), Rauch TA, Zhong X, Bennett WP, Latif F, Krex D, Pfeifer GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, 
Duarte, CA, USA.

Astrocytomas are common and lethal human brain tumors. We have analyzed the
methylation status of over 28,000 CpG islands and 18,000 promoters in normal
human brain and in astrocytomas of various grades using the methylated CpG island
recovery assay. We identified 6,000 to 7,000 methylated CpG islands in normal
human brain. Approximately 5% of the promoter-associated CpG islands in the
normal brain are methylated. Promoter CpG island methylation is inversely
correlated whereas intragenic methylation is directly correlated with gene
expression levels in brain tissue. In astrocytomas, several hundred CpG islands
undergo specific hypermethylation relative to normal brain with 428 methylation
peaks common to more than 25% of the tumors. Genes involved in brain development 
and neuronal differentiation, such as BMP4, POU4F3, GDNF, OTX2, NEFM, CNTN4, OTP,
SIM1, FYN, EN1, CHAT, GSX2, NKX6-1, PAX6, RAX, and DLX2, were strongly enriched
among genes frequently methylated in tumors. There was an overrepresentation of
homeobox genes and 31% of the most commonly methylated genes represent targets of
the Polycomb complex. We identified several chromosomal loci in which many
(sometimes more than 20) consecutive CpG islands were hypermethylated in tumors. 
Seven such loci were near homeobox genes, including the HOXC and HOXD clusters,
and the BARHL2, DLX1, and PITX2 genes. Two other clusters of hypermethylated
islands were at sequences of recent gene duplication events. Our analysis offers 
mechanistic insights into brain neoplasia suggesting that methylation of the
genes involved in neuronal differentiation, in cooperation with other oncogenic
events, may shift the balance from regulated differentiation towards
gliomagenesis.

PMCID: PMC2848870
PMID: 20233874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Neuron. 2010 Feb 11;65(3):328-40. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.01.004.

Sonic hedgehog signaling confers ventral telencephalic progenitors with distinct 
cortical interneuron fates.

Xu Q(1), Guo L, Moore H, Waclaw RR, Campbell K, Anderson SA.

Author information: 
(1)Weill Cornell Medical College, 1300 York Avenue New York, NY 10065, USA.

Interneurons in the cerebral cortex regulate cortical functions through the
actions of distinct subgroups that express parvalbumin, somatostatin, or
calretinin. The genesis of the first two subgroups requires the expression of
NKX2.1, which is maintained by SHH signaling during neurogenesis. In this paper, 
we report that mosaic elimination in the medial ganglionic eminence (MGE) of Smo,
a key effector of SHH signaling, reveals that MGE progenitors retain a remarkable
degree of plasticity during the neurogenic period. SHH signaling prevents the
upregulation of GSX2 and conversion of some MGE progenitors to a caudal
ganglionic eminence-like, bipolar calretinin-expressing cell fate that is
promoted by GSX2. In addition, a higher level of SHH signaling promotes the
generation of the somatostatin-expressing interneuron at the expense of
parvalbumin-expressing subgroup. These results indicate that cortical interneuron
diversity, a major determinant of cortical function, is critically influenced by 
differential levels of SHH signaling within the ventral telencephalon.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2868511
PMID: 20159447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Neuron. 2009 Aug 27;63(4):451-65. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2009.07.015.

Distinct temporal requirements for the homeobox gene Gsx2 in specifying striatal 
and olfactory bulb neuronal fates.

Waclaw RR(1), Wang B, Pei Z, Ehrman LA, Campbell K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 3333 Burnet Avenue,
Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

The homeobox gene Gsx2 (formerly Gsh2) is known to be required for striatal and
olfactory bulb neurogenesis; however, its specific role in the specification of
these two neuronal subtypes remains unclear. To address this, we have employed a 
temporally regulated gain-of-function approach in transgenic mice and found that 
misexpression of Gsx2 at early stages of telencephalic neurogenesis favors the
specification of striatal projection neuron identity over that of olfactory bulb 
interneurons. In contrast, delayed activation of the Gsx2 transgene until later
stages exclusively promotes olfactory bulb interneuron identity. In a
complementary approach, we have conditionally inactivated Gsx2 in a temporally
progressive manner. Unlike germline Gsx2 mutants, which exhibit severe
alterations in both striatal and olfactory bulb neurogenesis at birth, the
conditional mutants exhibited defects restricted to olfactory bulb interneurons. 
These results demonstrate that Gsx2 specifies striatal projection neuron and
olfactory bulb interneuron identity at distinct time points during telencephalic 
neurogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2772064
PMID: 19709628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Neural Dev. 2009 Feb 10;4:5. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-4-5.

Ascl1 is a required downstream effector of Gsx gene function in the embryonic
mouse telencephalon.

Wang B(1), Waclaw RR, Allen ZJ 2nd, Guillemot F, Campbell K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati OH 45229, USA.
bei.wang@ucsf.edu

BACKGROUND: The homeobox gene Gsx2 (formerly Gsh2) is known to regulate
patterning in the lateral ganglionic eminence (LGE) of the embryonic
telencephalon. In its absence, the closely related gene Gsx1 (previously known as
Gsh1) can partially compensate in the patterning and differentiation of ventral
telencephalic structures, such as the striatum. However, the cellular and
molecular mechanisms underlying this compensation remain unclear.
RESULTS: We show here that in the Gsx2 mutants Gsx1 is expressed in only a subset
of the ventral telencephalic progenitors that normally express Gsx2. Based on the
similarities in the expression of Gsx1 and Ascl1 (Mash1) within the Gsx2 mutant
LGE, we examined whether Ascl1 plays an integral part in the Gsx1-based recovery.
Ascl1 mutants show only modest alterations in striatal development; however, in
Gsx2;Ascl1 double mutants, striatal development is severely affected, similar to 
that seen in the Gsx1;Gsx2 double mutants. This is despite the fact that Gsx1 is 
expressed, and even expands, in the Gsx2;Ascl1 mutant LGE, comparable to that
seen in the Gsx2 mutant. Finally, Notch signaling has recently been suggested to 
be required for normal striatal development. In spite of the fact that Notch
signaling is severely disrupted in Ascl1 mutants, it actually appears to be
improved in the Gsx2;Ascl1 double mutants.
CONCLUSION: These results, therefore, reveal a non-proneural requirement of Ascl1
that together with Gsx1 compensates for the loss of Gsx2 in a subset of LGE
progenitors.

PMCID: PMC2644683
PMID: 19208224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


