
61. Br J Cancer. 2011 Apr 12;104(8):1349-55. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2011.75. Epub 2011 Mar 
15.

Multifunctional transcription factor TFII-I is an activator of BRCA1 function.

Tanikawa M(1), Wada-Hiraike O, Nakagawa S, Shirane A, Hiraike H, Koyama S,
Miyamoto Y, Sone K, Tsuruga T, Nagasaka K, Matsumoto Y, Ikeda Y, Shoji K, Oda K, 
Fukuhara H, Nakagawa K, Kato S, Yano T, Taketani Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The TFII-I is a multifunctional transcriptional factor known to bind 
specifically to several DNA sequence elements and to mediate growth factor
signalling. A microdeletion at the chromosomal location 7q11.23 encoding TFII-I
and the related family of transcription factors may result in the onset of
Williams-Beuren syndrome, an autosomal dominant genetic disorder characterised by
a unique cognitive profile, diabetes, hypertension, anxiety, and craniofacial
defects. Hereditary breast and ovarian cancer susceptibility gene product BRCA1
has been shown to serve as a positive regulator of SIRT1 expression by binding to
the promoter region of SIRT1, but cross talk between BRCA1 and TFII-I has not
been investigated to date.
METHODS: A physical interaction between TFII-I and BRCA1 was explored. To
determine pathophysiological function of TFII-I, its role as a transcriptional
cofactor for BRCA1 was investigated.
RESULTS: We found a physical interaction between the carboxyl terminus of TFII-I 
and the carboxyl terminus of BRCA1, also known as the BRCT domain. Endogenous
TFII-I and BRCA1 form a complex in nuclei of intact cells and formation of
irradiation-induced nuclear foci was observed. We also showed that the expression
of TFII-I stimulates the transcriptional activation function of BRCT by a
transient expression assay. The expression of TFII-I also enhanced the
transcriptional activation of the SIRT1 promoter mediated by full-length BRCA1.
CONCLUSION: These results revealed the intrinsic mechanism that TFII-I may
modulate the cellular functions of BRCA1, and provide important implications to
understand the development of breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3078593
PMID: 21407215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Autism Res. 2011 Feb;4(1):28-39. doi: 10.1002/aur.169. Epub 2010 Dec 3.

Haploinsufficiency of Gtf2i, a gene deleted in Williams Syndrome, leads to
increases in social interactions.

Sakurai T(1), Dorr NP, Takahashi N, McInnes LA, Elder GA, Buxbaum JD.

Author information: 
(1)Seaver Autism Center for Research and Treatment, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, New York, USA.

Comment in
    Autism Res. 2011 Feb;4(1):1-4.

Identifying genes involved in social behavior is important for autism research.
Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS) is a developmental syndrome with unique
neurocognitive features, including low IQ, deficits in visuospatial and
visual-motor abilities, hypersensitivity to sounds, hypersociability, and
increased general anxiety. The syndrome is caused by a recurrent hemizygous
deletion of the 7q11.23 region, containing about 28 genes. One of genes in the
region, GTF2I, has been implicated in the hypersociability and visuospatial
deficits of WBS based on genotype-phenotype correlation studies of patients with 
atypical deletions. In order to clarify the involvement of GTF2I in
neurocognitive function, especially social behavior, we have developed and
characterized Gtf2i-deficient mice. We found that homozygous deletion of Gtf2i
causes lethality during embryonic development with neural tube closure defects
and exencephaly, consistent with other reports. Gtf2i heterozygous animals show
no gross changes in brain structure or development. Furthermore, heterozygous
animals show no alterations in learning and memory, including spatial memory as
assessed by the Morris water maze, but show alterations in the recognition of
novel objects. Interestingly, they show increased social interaction with
unfamiliar mice and do not show typical social habituation processes, reminiscent
of the hypersociability observed in WBS patients. The mice do not appear to show 
increased anxiety, supporting a specific effect of Gtf2i on defined domains of
the WBS phenotype. These data indicate that Gtf2i is involved in several aspects 
of embryonic development and the development of social neurocircuitry and that
GTF2I haploinsufficiency could be a contributor to the hypersociability in WBS
patients.

Copyright © 2010, International Society for Autism Research, Wiley Periodicals,
Inc.

PMID: 21328569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2011 Mar;10(3):M110.001784. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M110.001784.
Epub 2011 Jan 12.

Identification of MST1/STK4 and SULF1 proteins as autoantibody targets for the
diagnosis of colorectal cancer by using phage microarrays.

Babel I(1), Barderas R, Diaz-Uriarte R, Moreno V, Suarez A, Fernandez-Aceñero MJ,
Salazar R, Capellá G, Casal JI.

Author information: 
(1)Functional Proteomics Laboratory, Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas
(CIB-CSIC), 28040 Madrid, Spain.

The characterization of the humoral response in cancer patients is becoming a
practical alternative to improve early detection. We prepared phage microarrays
containing colorectal cancer cDNA libraries to identify phage-expressed peptides 
recognized by tumor-specific autoantibodies from patient sera. From a total of
1536 printed phages, 128 gave statistically significant values to discriminate
cancer patients from control samples. From this, 43 peptide sequences were unique
following DNA sequencing. Six phages containing homologous sequences to
STK4/MST1, SULF1, NHSL1, SREBF2, GRN, and GTF2I were selected to build up a
predictor panel. A previous study with high-density protein microarrays had
identified STK4/MST1 as a candidate biomarker. An independent collection of 153
serum samples (50 colorectal cancer sera and 103 reference samples, including
healthy donors and sera from other related pathologies) was used as a validation 
set to study prediction capability. A combination of four phages and two
recombinant proteins, corresponding to MST1 and SULF1, achieved an area under the
curve of 0.86 to correctly discriminate cancer from healthy sera. Inclusion of
sera from other different neoplasias did not change significantly this value. For
early stages (A+B), the corrected area under the curve was 0.786. Moreover, we
have demonstrated that MST1 and SULF1 proteins, homologous to phage-peptide
sequences, can replace the original phages in the predictor panel, improving
their diagnostic accuracy.

PMCID: PMC3047148
PMID: 21228115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Mol Psychiatry. 2011 Apr;16(4):365-82. doi: 10.1038/mp.2010.105. Epub 2010 Oct
19.

A theoretical molecular network for dyslexia: integrating available genetic
findings.

Poelmans G(1), Buitelaar JK, Pauls DL, Franke B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition
and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands.

Developmental dyslexia is a common specific childhood learning disorder with a
strong heritable component. Previous studies using different genetic approaches
have identified several genetic loci and candidate genes for dyslexia. In this
article, we have integrated the current knowledge on 14 dyslexia candidate genes 
suggested by cytogenetic findings, linkage and association studies. We found that
10 of the 14 dyslexia candidate genes (ROBO1, KIAA0319, KIAA0319L, S100B, DOCK4, 
FMR1, DIP2A, GTF2I, DYX1C1 and DCDC2) fit into a theoretical molecular network
involved in neuronal migration and neurite outgrowth. Based on this, we also
propose three novel dyslexia candidate genes (SLIT2, HMGB1 and VAPA) from known
linkage regions, and we discuss the possible involvement of genes emerging from
the two reported genome-wide association studies for reading impairment-related
phenotypes in the identified network.

PMID: 20956978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Development. 2010 Sep;137(18):3089-97. doi: 10.1242/dev.051052. Epub 2010 Aug 11.

An SNP in an ultraconserved regulatory element affects Dlx5/Dlx6 regulation in
the forebrain.

Poitras L(1), Yu M, Lesage-Pelletier C, Macdonald RB, Gagné JP, Hatch G, Kelly I,
Hamilton SP, Rubenstein JL, Poirier GG, Ekker M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Research in Environmental Genomics (CAREG), Department of 
Biology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON K1N 6N5, Canada.

Dlx homeobox genes play a crucial role in the migration and differentiation of
the subpallial precursor cells that give rise to various subtypes of
gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-expressing neurons of the forebrain, including
local-circuit cortical interneurons. Aberrant development of GABAergic
interneurons has been linked to several neurodevelopmental disorders, including
epilepsy, schizophrenia, Rett syndrome and autism. Here, we report in mice that a
single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) found in an autistic proband falls within a 
functional protein binding site in an ultraconserved cis-regulatory element. This
element, I56i, is involved in regulating Dlx5/Dlx6 homeobox gene expression in
the developing forebrain. We show that the SNP results in reduced I56i activity, 
predominantly in the medial and caudal ganglionic eminences and in streams of
neurons tangentially migrating to the cortex. Reduced activity is also observed
in GABAergic interneurons of the adult somatosensory cortex. The SNP affects the 
affinity of Dlx proteins for their binding site in vitro and reduces the
transcriptional activation of the enhancer by Dlx proteins. Affinity purification
using I56i sequences led to the identification of a novel regulator of Dlx gene
expression, general transcription factor 2 I (Gtf2i), which is among the genes
most often deleted in Williams-Beuren syndrome, a neurodevelopmental disorder.
This study illustrates the clear functional consequences of a single nucleotide
variation in an ultraconserved non-coding sequence in the context of
developmental abnormalities associated with disease.

PMCID: PMC3188590
PMID: 20702565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. BMC Res Notes. 2010 Jul 20;3:203. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-3-203.

Expression of the transcription factor, TFII-I, during post-implantation mouse
embryonic development.

Fijalkowska I(1), Sharma D, Bult CJ, Danoff SK.

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Department of Medicine,
Cardiopulmonary and Critical Care Division, 1830 E, Monument Street, Baltimore,
MD 21205, USA. sdanoff@jhmi.edu.

BACKGROUND: General transcription factor (TFII-I) is a multi-functional
transcription factor encoded by the Gtf2i gene, that has been demonstrated to
regulate transcription of genes critical for development. Because of the broad
range of genes regulated by TFII-I as well as its potential role in a significant
neuro-developmental disorder, developing a comprehensive expression profile is
critical to the study of this transcription factor. We sought to define the
timing and pattern of expression of TFII-I in post-implantation embryos at a time
during which many putative TFII-I target genes are expressed.
FINDINGS: Antibodies to the N-terminus of TFII-I were used to probe embryonic
mouse sections. TFII-I protein is widely expressed in the developing embryo.
TFII-I is expressed throughout the period from E8-E16. However, within this
period there are striking shifts in localization from cytoplasmic predominant to 
nuclear. TFII-I expression varies in both a spatial and temporal fashion. There
is extensive expression in neural precursors at E8. This expression persists at
later stages. TFII-I is expressed in developing lung, heart and gut structures.
There is no evidence of isoform specific expression. Available data regarding
expression patterns at both an RNA and protein level throughout development are
also comprehensively reviewed.
CONCLUSIONS: Our immunohistochemical studies of the temporal and spatial
expression patterns of TFII-I in mouse embryonic sections are consistent with the
hypothesis that hemizygous deletion of GTF2I in individuals with Williams-Beuren 
Syndrome contributes to the distinct cognitive and physiological symptoms
associated with the disorder.

PMCID: PMC2921380
PMID: 20642858  [PubMed]


67. Int J Cancer. 2011 Apr 15;128(8):1836-42. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25524.

Role for transcription factor TFII-I in the suppression of SSeCKS/Gravin/Akap12
transcription by Src.

Bu Y(1), Gao L, Gelman IH.

Author information: 
(1)Kinex Pharmaceuticals, LLC, Buffalo, NY, USA.

The SSeCKS/Gravin/AKAP12 gene, encoding a kinase scaffolding protein with
metastasis-suppressing activity, is transcriptionally downregulated in
Src-transformed cells through the recruitment of HDAC1 to a Src-responsive
proximal promoter site charged with Sp1, Sp3 and USF1. However, the ectopic
expression of these proteins formed a suppressive complex in Src-transformed but 
not in parental NIH3T3 cells, suggesting the involvement of additional repressor 
factors. Transcription factor II-I (TFII-I) [general transcription factor 2i
(Gtf2i)] was identified by mass spectrometry as being associated with the SSeCKS 
promoter complex in NIH3T3/Src cells, and moreover, the Src-induced tyrosine
phosphorylation of TFII-I significantly increased its binding to the SSeCKS
proximal promoter. siRNA-mediated knockdown of TFII-I or the expression of
TFII-I(Y248/249F) caused the derepression of SSeCKS in NIH3T3/Src cells. Taken
with previous data showing that the tyrosine phosphorylation of TFII-I
facilitates its nuclear translocation, these data suggest that Src-family
kinase-mediated phosphorylation converts a portion of TFII-I into a
transcriptional repressor.

Copyright © 2010 UICC.

PMCID: PMC2997892
PMID: 20568114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Biol Chem. 2010 Aug 13;285(33):25686-98. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.109751. Epub
2010 Jun 1.

Protection of pancreatic beta-cells from various stress conditions is mediated by
DJ-1.

Inberg A(1), Linial M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 
91904, Israel.

Pancreatic beta-cells are vulnerable to multiple stresses, leading to dysfunction
and apoptotic death. Deterioration in beta-cells function and mass is associated 
with type 2 diabetes. Comparative two-dimensional gel electrophoresis from
pancreatic MIN6 cells that were maintained at varying glucose concentrations was 
carried out. An induced expression of a protein spot, detected in MIN6 cells
experiencing high glucose concentration, was identified by mass spectrometry as
the oxidized form of DJ-1. DJ-1 (park7) is a multifunctional protein implicated
in familial Parkinsonism and neuroprotection in response to oxidative damage. The
DJ-1 protein and its oxidized form were also induced following exposure to
oxidative and endoplasmic reticulum stress in MIN6 and betaTC-6 cells and also in
mouse pancreatic islets. Suppression of DJ-1 levels by small interfering RNA led 
to an accelerated cell death, whereas an increase in DJ-1 levels by
adenovirus-based infection attenuated cell death induced by H(2)O(2) and
thapsigargin in beta-cell lines and mouse pancreatic islets. Furthermore, DJ-1
improved regulated insulin secretion under basal as well as oxidative and
endoplasmic reticulum stress conditions in a dose-dependent manner. We identified
TFII-I (Gtf2i) as DJ-1 partner in the cytosol, whereas the binding of TFII-I to
DJ-1 prevented TFII-I translocation to the nucleus. The outcome was attenuation
of the stress response. Our results suggest that DJ-1 together with TFII-I
operate in concert to cope with various insults and to sustain pancreatic
beta-cell function.

PMCID: PMC2919132
PMID: 20516060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Cleft Palate Craniofac J. 2011 Jan;48(1):109-16. doi: 10.1597/09-093. Epub 2010
Apr 7.

Molecular basis of Williams-Beuren syndrome: TFII-I regulated targets involved in
craniofacial development.

Makeyev AV, Bayarsaihan D.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study is to identify gene targets of TFII-I
transcription factors involved in craniofacial development.
DESIGN: Recent findings in individuals with Williams-Beuren syndrome who show
facial dysmorphism and cognitive defects have pointed to TFII-I genes (GTF2I and 
GTF2IRD1) as the prime candidates responsible for these clinical features.
However, TFII-I proteins are multifunctional transcriptional factors regulating a
number of genes during development, and how their haploinsufficiency leads to the
Williams-Beuren syndrome phenotype is currently unknown.
RESULTS: Here we report the identification of three genes with a well-established
relevance to craniofacial development as direct TFII-I targets. These genes,
craniofacial development protein 1 (Cfdp1), Sec23 homolog A (Sec23a), and nuclear
receptor binding SET domain protein 1 (Nsd1), contain consensus TFII-I binding
sites in their proximal promoters; the chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis
showed that TFII-I transcription factors are recruited to these sites in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that transcriptional regulation of these genes
by TFII-I proteins could provide a possible genotype-phenotype link in
Williams-Beuren syndrome.

PMID: 20500075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. BMC Med Genet. 2010 Apr 19;11:61. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-11-61.

Essential role of the N-terminal region of TFII-I in viability and behavior.

Lucena J(1), Pezzi S, Aso E, Valero MC, Carreiro C, Dubus P, Sampaio A, Segura M,
Barthelemy I, Zindel MY, Sousa N, Barbero JL, Maldonado R, Pérez-Jurado LA,
Campuzano V.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Unit, de Ciències Experimentals i de la Salut, Universitat Pompeu
Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: GTF2I codes for a general intrinsic transcription factor and calcium 
channel regulator TFII-I, with high and ubiquitous expression, and a strong
candidate for involvement in the morphological and neuro-developmental anomalies 
of the Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS). WBS is a genetic disorder due to a
recurring deletion of about 1,55-1,83 Mb containing 25-28 genes in chromosome
band 7q11.23 including GTF2I. Completed homozygous loss of either the Gtf2i or
Gtf2ird1 function in mice provided additional evidence for the involvement of
both genes in the craniofacial and cognitive phenotype. Unfortunately nothing is 
now about the behavioral characterization of heterozygous mice.
METHODS: By gene targeting we have generated a mutant mice with a deletion of the
first 140 amino-acids of TFII-I. mRNA and protein expression analysis were used
to document the effect of the study deletion. We performed behavioral
characterization of heterozygous mutant mice to document in vivo implications of 
TFII-I in the cognitive profile of WBS patients.
RESULTS: Homozygous and heterozygous mutant mice exhibit craniofacial
alterations, most clearly represented in homozygous condition. Behavioral test
demonstrate that heterozygous mutant mice exhibit some neurobehavioral
alterations and hyperacusis or odynacusis that could be associated with specific 
features of WBS phenotype. Homozygous mutant mice present highly compromised
embryonic viability and fertility. Regarding cellular model, we documented a
retarded growth in heterozygous MEFs respect to homozygous or wild-type MEFs.
CONCLUSION: Our data confirm that, although additive effects of
haploinsufficiency at several genes may contribute to the full craniofacial or
neurocognitive features of WBS, correct expression of GTF2I is one of the main
players. In addition, these findings show that the deletion of the fist 140
amino-acids of TFII-I altered it correct function leading to a clear phenotype,
at both levels, at the cellular model and at the in vivo model.

PMCID: PMC2865459
PMID: 20403157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. EMBO Mol Med. 2009 Apr;1(1):50-65. doi: 10.1002/emmm.200900003.

Induced chromosome deletions cause hypersociability and other features of
Williams-Beuren syndrome in mice.

Li HH(1), Roy M, Kuscuoglu U, Spencer CM, Halm B, Harrison KC, Bayle JH,
Splendore A, Ding F, Meltzer LA, Wright E, Paylor R, Deisseroth K, Francke U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, 
USA.

Comment in
    EMBO Mol Med. 2009 Apr;1(1):6-9.

The neurodevelopmental disorder Williams-Beuren syndrome is caused by spontaneous
approximately 1.5 Mb deletions comprising 25 genes on human chromosome 7q11.23.
To functionally dissect the deletion and identify dosage-sensitive genes, we
created two half-deletions of the conserved syntenic region on mouse chromosome
5G2. Proximal deletion (PD) mice lack Gtf2i to Limk1, distal deletion (DD) mice
lack Limk1 to Fkbp6, and the double heterozygotes (D/P) model the complete human 
deletion. Gene transcript levels in brain are generally consistent with gene
dosage. Increased sociability and acoustic startle response are associated with
PD, and cognitive defects with DD. Both PD and D/P males are growth-retarded,
while skulls are shortened and brains are smaller in DD and D/P. Lateral
ventricle (LV) volumes are reduced, and neuronal cell density in the
somatosensory cortex is increased, in PD and D/P. Motor skills are most impaired 
in D/P. Together, these partial deletion mice replicate crucial aspects of the
human disorder and serve to identify genes and gene networks contributing to the 
neural substrates of complex behaviours and behavioural disorders.

PMCID: PMC3378107
PMID: 20049703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Biol Chem. 2010 Feb 12;285(7):4715-24. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.086660. Epub 2009 
Dec 9.

Negative autoregulation of GTF2IRD1 in Williams-Beuren syndrome via a novel DNA
binding mechanism.

Palmer SJ(1), Santucci N, Widagdo J, Bontempo SJ, Taylor KM, Tay ES, Hook J,
Lemckert F, Gunning PW, Hardeman EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, School of Medical Sciences, The University of New South
Wales, Sydney 2052, Australia. s.palmer@unsw.edu.au

The GTF2IRD1 gene is of principal interest to the study of Williams-Beuren
syndrome (WBS). This neurodevelopmental disorder results from the hemizygous
deletion of a region of chromosome 7q11.23 containing 28 genes including
GTF2IRD1. WBS is thought to be caused by haploinsufficiency of certain
dosage-sensitive genes within the deleted region, and the feature of
supravalvular aortic stenosis (SVAS) has been attributed to reduced elastin
caused by deletion of ELN. Human genetic mapping data have implicated two related
genes GTF2IRD1 and GTF2I in the cause of some the key features of WBS, including 
craniofacial dysmorphology, hypersociability, and visuospatial deficits. Mice
with mutations of the Gtf2ird1 allele show evidence of craniofacial abnormalities
and behavioral changes. Here we show the existence of a negative autoregulatory
mechanism that controls the level of GTF2IRD1 transcription via direct binding of
the GTF2IRD1 protein to a highly conserved region of the GTF2IRD1 promoter
containing an array of three binding sites. The affinity for this protein-DNA
interaction is critically dependent upon multiple interactions between separate
domains of the protein and at least two of the DNA binding sites. This
autoregulatory mechanism leads to dosage compensation of GTF2IRD1 transcription
in WBS patients. The GTF2IRD1 promoter represents the first established in vivo
gene target of the GTF2IRD1 protein, and we use it to model its DNA interaction
capabilities.

PMCID: PMC2836076
PMID: 20007321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Ethnopharmacol. 2010 Feb 3;127(2):242-50. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2009.11.013. Epub 
2009 Nov 14.

Effects of Astragalus polysaccharide on the erythroid lineage and microarray
analysis in K562 cells.

Yang M(1), Qian XH, Zhao DH, Fu SZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neonatology, Nanfang Hospital Affiliated Nanfang Medical
University, 1838 Guang Zhou Da Dao North, Guangzhou 510515, Guangdong, PR China.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Astragalus polysaccharide (APS), obtained from
Astragalus membranaceus, displays a range of activities in many systems,
including the promotion of immune responses, anti-inflammation, and the
protection of vessels. It possesses potent pharmacological activity on
differentiation to the erythroid lineage.
AIM OF THE STUDY: To investigate the effects of APS on the erythroid
differentiation and the mechanism of action by microarray analysis in K562 cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Benzidine staining, semi-quantitative RT-PCR, Western blot
and microarray methods were used to survey the effects of APS on inducing
erythroid differentiation and the changes of gene expression profile in K562
cells.
RESULTS: Of the 13.2% positive cells detected by benzidine staining, the
induction was the highest with 200 microg/ml APS on 72h. Ggamma-mRNA expression
and fetal hemoglobin synthesis were significantly up-regulated. Microarray
analysis showed that 31 genes were up-regulated and 108 genes were
down-regulated. These differential expression genes generally regulate protein
binding, cellular metabolic process, the cell proliferation, and transcriptional 
activator activity. The gamma-globin gene was up-regulated, the genes related
with erythroid differentiation such as LMO2, Runx1 and GTF2I were up-regulated,
while Bklf, Eklf, EPHB4 and Sp1 were down-regulated.
CONCLUSIONS: Our studies indicate that APS indicate potent activities on the
erythroid differentiation by modulating genes of LMO2, Klf1, Klf3, Runx1, EphB4
and Sp1, increasing gamma-globin mRNA expression and fetal hemoglobin synthesis
in K562 cells.

Crown Copyright 2009. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19922785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Med Genet. 2010 May;47(5):312-20. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2009.071712. Epub 2009 Nov
5.

Partial 7q11.23 deletions further implicate GTF2I and GTF2IRD1 as the main genes 
responsible for the Williams-Beuren syndrome neurocognitive profile.

Antonell A(1), Del Campo M, Magano LF, Kaufmann L, de la Iglesia JM, Gallastegui 
F, Flores R, Schweigmann U, Fauth C, Kotzot D, Pérez-Jurado LA.

Author information: 
(1)Unitat de Genètica, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Parc de Recerca Biomèdica de
Barcelona (PRBB), C/Dr Aiguader, 88, Barcelona 08003, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS) is a developmental disorder with
multisystemic manifestations mainly characterised by vascular stenoses,
distinctive craniofacial features, mental retardation with a characteristic
neurocognitive profile, and some endocrine and connective tissue abnormalities,
caused by a recurrent deletion of 1.55 Mb including 26-28 genes at chromosomal
region 7q11.23. The analysis of clinical-molecular correlations in a few reported
atypical patients has been useful to propose several deleted genes as main
contributors to specific aspects of the WBS phenotype.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Two additional families with partial phenotypes and
atypical 7q11.23 deletions were studied. Deletions were precisely defined at the 
nucleotide level, and the expression levels of some affected and flanking genes
were assessed in lymphoblastoid cell lines.
RESULTS: Affected individuals presented variable cardiovascular and connective
tissue manifestations, subtle craniofacial features, normal visuospatial
construction abilities with low average IQ and no endocrine abnormalities. The
deletion in family NW1 encompassed 817 kb with 11 genes (CLDN3-GTF2IRD1), and 610
kb with 14 genes (VPS37D-RFC2) in family NW2. All deleted genes in typical and
atypical deletions revealed low expression levels in lymphoblastoid cell lines,
except for GTF2IRD1. CLIP2 was also underexpressed in all patients despite being 
outside the deletion in NW2, while no other flanking non-deleted gene showed
significantly different expression compared to controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Along with previously reported cases, clinical-molecular
correlations in these two families further confirm that the functional
hemizygosity for the GTF2I and GTF2IRD1 genes is the main cause of the
neurocognitive profile and some aspects of the gestalt phenotype of WBS.

PMID: 19897463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Biol Chem. 2009 Dec 25;284(52):36234-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C109.063115. Epub 2009
Oct 30.

Williams-Beuren syndrome-associated transcription factor TFII-I regulates
osteogenic marker genes.

Lazebnik MB(1), Tussie-Luna MI, Hinds PW, Roy AL.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Genetics, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts 02111, USA.

Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS), an autosomal dominant genetic disorder, is
characterized by a unique cognitive profile and craniofacial defects. WBS results
from a microdeletion at the chromosomal location 7q11.23 that encompasses the
genes encoding the members of TFII-I family of transcription factors. Given that 
the haploinsufficiency for TFII-I is causative to the craniofacial phenotype in
humans, we set out to analyze the effect of post-transcriptional silencing of
TFII-I during BMP-2-driven osteoblast differentiation in the C2C12 cell line. Our
results show that TFII-I plays an inhibitory role in regulating genes that are
essential in osteogenesis and intersects with the bone-specific transcription
factor Runx2 and the retinoblastoma protein, pRb. Identification of pathways
regulated by TFII-I family transcription factors may begin to shed light on the
molecular determinants of WBS.

PMCID: PMC2794739
PMID: 19880526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Oncol Rep. 2009 Oct;22(4):853-61.

Identification of candidate epigenetic biomarkers for ovarian cancer detection.

Huang YW(1), Jansen RA, Fabbri E, Potter D, Liyanarachchi S, Chan MW, Liu JC,
Crijns AP, Brown R, Nephew KP, van der Zee AG, Cohn DE, Yan PS, Huang TH, Lin HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology and Cancer Genetics Program, Comprehensive Cancer Center,
The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Ovarian cancer ranks the most lethal among gynecologic neoplasms in women. To
develop potential biomarkers for diagnosis, we have identified five novel genes
(CYP39A1, GTF2A1, FOXD4L4, EBP, and HAAO) that are hypermethylated in ovarian
tumors, compared with the non-malignant normal ovarian surface epithelia, using
the quantitative methylation-specific polymerase chain reactions. Interestingly
enough, multivariate Cox regression analysis has identified hypermethylation of
CYP39A1 correlated with an increase rate of relapsing (P=0.032, hazard ratio >1).
Concordant hypermethylation in at least three loci was observed in 50 out of 55
(91%) of ovarian tumors examined. The test sensitivity and specificity were
assessed to be 96 and 67% for CYP39A1; 95 and 88% for GTF2A1; 93 and 67% for
FOXD4L4; 81 and 67% for EBP; 89 and 82% for HAAO, respectively. Our data have
identified, for the first time, GTF2A1 alone, or GTF2A1 plus HAAO are excellent
candidate biomarkers for detecting this disease. Moreover, the known functions of
these gene products further implicate dysregulated transcriptional control,
cholesterol metabolism, or synthesis of quinolinic acids, may play important
roles in attributing to ovarian neoplasm. Molecular therapies, by reversing the
aberrant epigenomes using inhibitory agents or by abrogating the upstream
signaling pathways that convey the epigenomic perturbations, may be developed
into promising treatment regimens.

PMCID: PMC2829240
PMID: 19724865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Eur J Immunol. 2009 Sep;39(9):2584-95. doi: 10.1002/eji.200839031.

Characterization of a novel interaction between transcription factor TFII-I and
the inducible tyrosine kinase in T cells.

Sacristán C(1), Schattgen SA, Berg LJ, Bunnell SC, Roy AL, Rosenstein Y.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Medicina Molecular y Bioprocesos, Instituto de Biotecnología, 
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico. catarina.sacristan@med.nyu.edu

Comment in
    Eur J Immunol. 2009 Sep;39(9):2354-7.

TCR signaling leads to the activation of kinases such as inducible tyrosine
kinase (Itk), a key regulatory protein in T-lymphocyte activation and function.
The homolog of Itk in B cells is Bruton's tyrosine kinase, previously shown to
bind and phosphorylate the transcription factor TFII-I. TFII-I plays major roles 
in transcription and signaling. Our purpose herein was twofold: first, to
identify some of the molecular determinants involved in TFII-I activation
downstream of receptor crosslinking in T cells and second, to uncover the
existence of Itk-TFII-I signaling in T lymphocytes. We report for the first time 
that TFII-I is tyrosine phosphorylated upon TCR, TCR/CD43, and TCR/CD28
co-receptor engagement in human and/or murine T cells. We show that Itk
physically interacts with TFII-I and potentiates TFII-I-driven c-fos
transcription. We demonstrate that TFII-I is phosphorylated upon co-expression of
WT, but not kinase-dead, or kinase-dead/R29C mutant Itk, suggesting these
residues are important for TFII-I phosphorylation, presumably via an
Itk-dependent mechanism. Structural analysis of TFII-I-Itk interactions revealed 
that the first 90 residues of TFII-I are dispensable for Itk binding. Mutations
within Itk's kinase, pleckstrin-homology, and proline-rich regions did not
abolish TFII-I-Itk binding. Our results provide an initial step in understanding 
the biological role of Itk-TFII-I signaling in T-cell function.

PMCID: PMC3014647
PMID: 19701889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Eur J Hum Genet. 2010 Jan;18(1):33-8. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2009.108.

An atypical 7q11.23 deletion in a normal IQ Williams-Beuren syndrome patient.

Ferrero GB(1), Howald C, Micale L, Biamino E, Augello B, Fusco C, Turturo MG,
Forzano S, Reymond A, Merla G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Torino, Torino, Italy.

Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS; OMIM no. 194050) is a multisystemic
neurodevelopmental disorder caused by a hemizygous deletion of 1.55 Mb on
chromosome 7q11.23 spanning 28 genes. Haploinsufficiency of the ELN gene was
shown to be responsible for supravalvular aortic stenosis and generalized
arteriopathy, whereas LIMK1, CLIP2, GTF2IRD1 and GTF2I genes were suggested to be
linked to the specific cognitive profile and craniofacial features. These
insights for genotype-phenotype correlations came from the molecular and clinical
analysis of patients with atypical deletions and mice models. Here we report a
patient showing mild WBS physical phenotype and normal IQ, who carries a shorter 
1 Mb atypical deletion. This rearrangement does not include the GTF2IRD1 and
GTF2I genes and only partially the BAZ1B gene. Our results are consistent with
the hypothesis that hemizygosity of the GTF2IRD1 and GTF2I genes might be
involved in the facial dysmorphisms and in the specific motor and cognitive
deficits observed in WBS patients.

PMCID: PMC2987159
PMID: 19568270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Sep 4;386(4):554-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.06.045. Epub 2009 Jun 13.

New TFII-I family target genes involved in embryonic development.

Makeyev AV(1), Bayarsaihan D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reconstructive Sciences, University of Connecticut Health
Center, 262 Farmington Avenue, Farmington, CT 06030, USA.

Two members of the TFII-I family transcription factor genes, GTF2I and GTF2IRD1, 
are the prime candidates responsible for the craniofacial and cognitive
abnormalities of Williams syndrome patients. We have previously generated mouse
lines with targeted disruption of Gtf2i and Gtf2ird1. Microarray analysis
revealed significant changes in the expression profile of mutant embryos. Here we
described three unknown genes that were dramatically down-regulated in mutants.
The 2410018M08Rik/Scand3 gene encodes a protein of unknown function with CHCH and
hATC domains. Scand3 is down-regulated during mouse embryonic stem cell (ES)
differentiation. 4933436H12Rik is a testis-specific gene, which encodes a protein
with no known domains. It is expressed in mouse ES cells. 1110008P08Rik/Kbtbd7
encodes an adapter protein with BTB/POZ, BACK, and Kelch motifs, previously shown
to recruit substrates to the enzymatic complexes of the histone modifying or E3
ubiquitin ligase activities. Based on its expression pattern Kbtbd7 may have a
specific role in brain development and function. All three genes possess
well-conserved TFII-I-binding consensus sites within proximal promoters.
Therefore our analysis suggests that these genes can be direct targets of TFII-I 
proteins and their impaired expression, as a result of the GTF2I and GTF2IRD1
haploinsufficiency, could contribute to the etiology of Williams syndrome.

PMCID: PMC3092703
PMID: 19527686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Hum Genet. 2009 Apr;54(4):193-8. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2009.5. Epub 2009 Mar 13.

William's syndrome: gene expression is related to parental origin and regional
coordinate control.

Collette JC(1), Chen XN, Mills DL, Galaburda AM, Reiss AL, Bellugi U, Korenberg
JR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurogenetics, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center and Departments of
Human Genetics and Pediatrics, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

William's syndrome (WS) features a spectrum of neurocognitive and behavioral
abnormalities due to a rare 1.5 MB deletion that includes about 24-28 genes on
chromosome band 7q11.23. Study of the expression of these genes from the single
normal copy provides an opportunity to elucidate the genetic and epigenetic
controls on these genes as well as their roles in both WS and normal brain
development and function. We used quantitative RT-PCR to determine the
transcriptional level of 14 WS gene markers in a cohort of 77 persons with WS and
48 normal controls. Results reported here: (1) show that the expression of the
genes deleted in WS is decreased in some but not all cases, (2) demonstrate that 
the parental origin of the deletion contributes to the level of expression of
GTF2I independently of age and gender and (3) indicate that the correlation of
expression between GTF2I and some other genes in the WS region differs in WS
subjects and normal controls, which in turn points toward a regulatory role for
this gene. Interspecies comparisons suggest GTF2I may play a key role in normal
brain development.

PMCID: PMC3556903
PMID: 19282872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Nature. 2009 Feb 26;457(7233):1103-8. doi: 10.1038/nature07765.

A mechanosensitive transcriptional mechanism that controls angiogenesis.

Mammoto A(1), Connor KM, Mammoto T, Yung CW, Huh D, Aderman CM, Mostoslavsky G,
Smith LE, Ingber DE.

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Biology Program, Department of Pathology & Surgery, Children's
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Angiogenesis is controlled by physical interactions between cells and
extracellular matrix as well as soluble angiogenic factors, such as VEGF.
However, the mechanism by which mechanical signals integrate with other
microenvironmental cues to regulate neovascularization remains unknown. Here we
show that the Rho inhibitor, p190RhoGAP (also known as GRLF1), controls capillary
network formation in vitro in human microvascular endothelial cells and retinal
angiogenesis in vivo by modulating the balance of activities between two
antagonistic transcription factors, TFII-I (also known as GTF2I) and GATA2, that 
govern gene expression of the VEGF receptor VEGFR2 (also known as KDR). Moreover,
this new angiogenesis signalling pathway is sensitive to extracellular matrix
elasticity as well as soluble VEGF. This is, to our knowledge, the first known
functional cross-antagonism between transcription factors that controls tissue
morphogenesis, and that responds to both mechanical and chemical cues.

PMCID: PMC2708674
PMID: 19242469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Am J Med Genet A. 2009 Mar;149A(3):302-14. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32652.

Is it Williams syndrome? GTF2IRD1 implicated in visual-spatial construction and
GTF2I in sociability revealed by high resolution arrays.

Dai L(1), Bellugi U, Chen XN, Pulst-Korenberg AM, Järvinen-Pasley A,
Tirosh-Wagner T, Eis PS, Graham J, Mills D, Searcy Y, Korenberg JR.

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Integrated Neuroscience and Human Behavior, The Brain
Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah 84108, USA.

Genetic contributions to human cognition and behavior are clear but difficult to 
define. Williams syndrome (WS) provides a unique model for relating single genes 
to visual-spatial cognition and social behavior. We defined a approximately 1.5
Mb region of approximately 25 genes deleted in >98% of typical WS and then rare
small deletions, showing that visual-spatial construction (VSC) in WS was
associated with the genes GTF2IRD1 and GTF2I. To distinguish the roles of
GTF2IRD1 and GTF2I in VSC and social behavior, we utilized multiple genomic
methods (custom high resolution oligonucleotide microarray, multicolor FISH and
somatic cell hybrids analyzed by PCR) to identify individuals deleted for either 
gene but not both. We analyzed genetic, cognitive and social behavior in a unique
individual with WS features (heart defects, small size, facies), but with an
atypical deletion of a set of genes that includes GTF2IRD1, but not GTF2I. The
centromeric breakpoint localized to the region 72.32-72.38 Mb and the telomeric
breakpoint to 72.66 Mb, 10 kb downstream of GTF2IRD1. Cognitive testing (WPPSI-R,
K-BIT, and PLS-3) demonstrated striking deficits in VSC (Block Design, Object
Assembly) but overall performance 1.5-3 SD above WS means. We have now integrated
the genetic, clinical and cognitive data with previous reports of social behavior
in this subject. These results combine with previous data from small deletions to
suggest the gene GTF2IRD1 is associated with WS facies and VSC, and that GTF2I
may contribute to WS social behaviors including increased gaze and attention to
strangers.

2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2650741
PMID: 19205026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Cell Cycle. 2009 Feb 15;8(4):596-605. Epub 2009 Mar 1.

Phase specific functions of the transcription factor TFII-I during cell cycle.

Ashworth T(1), Roy AL.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Immunology, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts 02111, USA.

The post-embryonic cells, in a non-proliferating quiescent state (G(0)), require 
mitogenic signaling to drive them into cell cycle entry (G(1)). However, cell
cycle events become largely independent of external signaling once cells begin
DNA synthesis in S phase. Given these two phases of cell cycle are
mechanistically distinct, it is unclear whether there could be coordinated
transcriptional regulation between these phases. The signal induced
multifunctional transcription factor TFII-I, upon growth factor signaling,
undergoes tyrosine phosphorylation, which is essential for its transcriptional
activation function and corresponding G(0)-G(1) transition. Here we show that
silencing of TFII-I has unexpected defects in S-phase. The TFII-I KD cells
exhibit significant delay entering into and executing S-phase progression and
entry into G(2)/M phase but do not exhibit any significant mitotic defects as
evidenced by post-mitotic G(1) entry and frequency of binucleation. Microarray
analysis, coupled with functional validation, reveals cyclin D1 and PKC-beta as
major downstream targets of TFII-I. Cyclin D1 is induced in G(1) and is necessary
for G(1)/S transition. PKC-beta also activates cyclin D1 via NFkappaB. These
observations suggest a transcriptional network during early phases of cell cycle 
mediated by TFII-I. Finally, we show that Cdk1 phosphorylates TFII-I at the
G(2)/M boundary, which likely leads to its displacement from the condensed
chromatin during prophase to pro-metaphase transition. Taken together, TFII-I
appears to have distinct roles in distinct phases of the mammalian cell cycle.

PMID: 19182516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Toxicol Sci. 2009 Mar;108(1):132-48. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfp002. Epub 2009 Jan 8.

Valproic acid-induced deregulation in vitro of genes associated in vivo with
neural tube defects.

Jergil M(1), Kultima K, Gustafson AL, Dencker L, Stigson M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Biosciences, Division of Toxicology, Uppsala
University, BMC, Box 594, SE-75124 Uppsala, Sweden.

The utility of an in vitro system to search for molecular targets and markers of 
developmental toxicity was explored, using microarrays to detect genes
susceptible to deregulation by the teratogen valproic acid (VPA) in the
pluripotent mouse embryonal carcinoma cell line P19. Total RNA extracted from P19
cells cultured in the absence or presence of 1, 2.5, or 10mM VPA for 1.5, 6, or
24 h was subjected to replicated microarray analysis, using CodeLink UniSet I
Mouse 20K Expression Bioarrays. A moderated F-test revealed a significant VPA
response for 2972 (p < 10(-3)) array probes (19.4% of the filtered gene list),
421 of which were significant across all time points. In a core subset of VPA
target genes whose expression was downregulated (68 genes) or upregulated (125
genes) with high probability (p < 10(-7)) after both 1.5 and 6 h of VPA exposure,
there was a significant enrichment of the biological process Gene Ontology term
transcriptional regulation among downregulated genes, and apoptosis among
upregulated, and two of the downregulated genes (Folr1 and Gtf2i) have a knockout
phenotype comprising exencephaly, the major malformation induced by VPA in mice. 
The VPA-induced gene expression response in P19 cells indicated that
approximately 30% of the approximately 200 genes known from genetic mouse models 
to be associated with neural tube defects may be potential VPA targets,
suggestive of a combined deregulation of multiple genes as a possible mechanism
of VPA teratogenicity. Gene expression responses related to other known effects
of VPA (histone deacetylase inhibition, G(1)-phase cell cycle arrest, induction
of apoptosis) were also identified. This study indicates that toxicogenomic
responses to a teratogenic compound in vitro may correlate with known in vitro
and in vivo effects, and that short-time (< or =6 h) exposures in such an in
vitro system could provide a useful component in mechanistic studies and
screening tests in developmental toxicology.

PMID: 19136453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Gene. 2009 Mar 15;433(1-2):16-25. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2008.11.027. Epub 2008 Dec 
9.

Alternative splicing and promoter use in TFII-I genes.

Makeyev AV(1), Bayarsaihan D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Craniofacial Biology, Birth Defects
Center, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY 40202, USA.
aleksandr.makeyev@gmail.com

TFII-I proteins are ubiquitously expressed transcriptional factors involved in
both basal transcription and signal transduction activation or repression. TFII-I
proteins are detected as early as at two-cell stage and exhibit distinct and
dynamic expression patterns in developing embryos as well as mark regional
variation in the adult mouse brain. Analysis of atypical small and rare
chromosomal deletions at 7q11.23 points to TFII-I genes (GTF2I and GTF2IRD1) as
the prime candidates responsible for craniofacial and cognitive abnormalities in 
the Williams-Beuren syndrome. TFII-I genes are often subjected to alternative
splicing, which generates isoforms that show different activities and play
distinct biological roles. The coding regions of TFII-I genes are composed of
more than 30 exons and are well conserved among vertebrates. However, their 5'
untranslated regions are not as well conserved and all poorly characterized. In
the present work, we analyzed promoter regions of TFII-I genes and described
their additional exons, as well as tested tissue specificity of both previously
reported and novel alternatively spliced isoforms. Our comprehensive analysis
leads to further elucidation of the functional heterogeneity of TFII-I proteins, 
provides hints on search for regulatory pathways governing their expression, and 
opens up possibilities for examining the effect of different haplotypes on their 
promoter functions.

PMCID: PMC2643308
PMID: 19111598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Jan 6;106(1):181-6. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0811531106. 
Epub 2008 Dec 24.

Essential functions of the Williams-Beuren syndrome-associated TFII-I genes in
embryonic development.

Enkhmandakh B(1), Makeyev AV, Erdenechimeg L, Ruddle FH, Chimge NO, Tussie-Luna
MI, Roy AL, Bayarsaihan D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reconstructive Sciences, University of Connecticut Health
Center, Farmington, CT 06032, USA.

GTF2I and GTF2IRD1 encoding the multifunctional transcription factors TFII-I and 
BEN are clustered at the 7q11.23 region hemizygously deleted in Williams-Beuren
syndrome (WBS), a complex multisystemic neurodevelopmental disorder. Although the
biochemical properties of TFII-I family transcription factors have been studied
in depth, little is known about the specialized contributions of these factors in
pathways required for proper embryonic development. Here, we show that homozygous
loss of either Gtf2ird1 or Gtf2i function results in multiple phenotypic
manifestations, including embryonic lethality; brain hemorrhage; and
vasculogenic, craniofacial, and neural tube defects in mice. Further analyses
suggest that embryonic lethality may be attributable to defects in yolk sac
vasculogenesis and angiogenesis. Microarray data indicate that the Gtf2ird1
homozygous phenotype is mainly caused by an impairment of the genes involved in
the TGFbetaRII/Alk1/Smad5 signal transduction pathway. The effect of Gtf2i
inactivation on this pathway is less prominent, but downregulation of the
endothelial growth factor receptor-2 gene, resulting in the deterioration of
vascular signaling, most likely exacerbates the severity of the Gtf2i mutant
phenotype. A subset of Gtf2ird1 and Gtf2i heterozygotes displayed microcephaly,
retarded growth, and skeletal and craniofacial defects, therefore showing that
haploinsufficiency of TFII-I proteins causes various developmental anomalies that
are often associated with WBS.

PMCID: PMC2629217
PMID: 19109438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Cell Biochem. 2009 Feb 15;106(3):381-9. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22016.

Transcription factor TFII-I causes transcriptional upregulation of GRP78
synthesis in prostate cancer cells.

Misra UK(1), Wang F, Pizzo SV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina 27710, USA.

Receptor-recognized forms of alpha(2)-macroglobulin (alpha(2)M*) bind to cell
surface-associated GRP78 and induce proliferative and survival signaling in
prostate cancer cells. As part of the cellular response to alpha(2)M*, GRP78
expression is itself upregulated. In response to other stimuli, the transcription
factor TFII-I upregulates GRP78 by binding to its gene promoter. We have,
therefore, studied the role of TFII-I in transcriptional upregulation of GRP78 in
1-LN human prostate cancer cells stimulated with alpha(2)M*. This treatment
caused a two- to threefold increase in TFII-I and GRP78 synthesis from
[(35)S]-labeled precursor amino acids. Synthesis of both TFII-I and GRP78 were
significantly reduced by silencing TFII-I gene expression or pretreatment of
cells with genistein or actinomycin D. Confocal microscopy was employed to
demonstrate relocation of TFII-I to the nucleus. In alpha(2)M*-stimulated cells, 
moreover, TFII-I bound to the GRP78 promoter as determined by CHIP assay. We also
demonstrate binding of TFII-I to the c-fos promoter, consistent with its role in 
upregulating c-fos gene expression. In non-lymphoid cells, phosphorylated c-Src
is an activator of TFII-I. Ligation of GRP78 on 1-LN cells with alpha(2)M* was
followed by tyrosine phosphorylation of c-Src as well as TFII-I. We conclude that
alpha(2)M*-induced increase in GRP78 synthesis is caused by transcriptional
upregulation of TFII-I which binds to the GRP78 promoter and thus potentiates its
cell survival and antipoptotic functions in 1-LN prostate cancer cells.

PMID: 19097122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. FEBS Lett. 2008 Nov 26;582(28):3903-8. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2008.10.032. Epub
2008 Oct 29.

Specific interaction of TFII-I with an upstream element on the HIV-1 LTR
regulates induction of latent provirus.

Malcolm T(1), Kam J, Pour PS, Sadowski I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Molecular Epigenetics, LSI, 
University of British Columbia, 2350 Health Sciences Mall, Vancouver, BC, Canada 
V6T 1Z3.

RBF-2 is a factor comprised of a USF1/2 heterodimer, whose association with a
highly conserved upstream element (RBEIII) on the HIV-1 LTR requires a co-factor 
TFII-I. We have identified specific nucleotides, immediately 3' of RBEIII that
are required for stable association of TFII-I with this region of the LTR.
Mutations that inhibit interaction of TFII-I with DNA also prevent stimulation of
USF binding to RBEIII, and render the integrated LTR unresponsive to T cell
signaling. These results demonstrate an essential role of TFII-I bound at an
upstream LTR element for viral replication.

PMID: 18976654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Int J Biomed Sci. 2008 Sep;4(3):161-70.

Detection of Hemizygous Chromosomal Copy Number Variants in Williams-Beuren
Syndrome (WBS) by Duplex Quantitative PCR Array: An Unusual Type of WBS Genetic
Defect.

Etokebe GE(1), Axelsson S, Svaerd NH, Storhaug K, Dembic Z.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Laboratory, Department of Oral Biology, University of Oslo, Oslo,
Norway;

We have developed a dual probe quantitative PCR (qPCR) mini array enabling a more
accurate analysis of the relationship between copy number variants (CNVs) and
other genomic features in specific areas. We used it to map hemizygous
microdeletion on human chromosome 7 around the elastin gene (ELN), which is the
molecular basis of the Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS). In two WBS patients, the
haploid content of the elastin gene was ascertained previously by the
fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH). Our dual-color qPCR assay used this
information to normalize for DNA content in all tests. We mapped the extent of
the deleted area using 10 loci spanning over 4 Mb. A border region containing the
GTF2I gene, usually deleted in most cases, was found about 10 times amplified in 
both patients, suggesting an unusual type of the WBS genetic defect. This
10-WBS-loci-specific qPCR assay could be an affirmative diagnostic tool
alternative to FISH. Due to low cost, it could be used as a screening test that
would not only facilitate research on CNVs, but also allow early diagnosis of the
disease, as well-timed diagnosis would benefit WBS children with earlier proper
health-care measures.

PMCID: PMC3614712
PMID: 23675084  [PubMed]


90. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Jul 1;105(26):9006-10. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0803051105. Epub 2008 Jun 25.

Identification of the TFII-I family target genes in the vertebrate genome.

Chimge NO(1), Makeyev AV, Ruddle FH, Bayarsaihan D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Craniofacial Biology, Birth Defects
Center, University of Louisville, 501 South Preston Street, Louisville, KY 40292,
USA.

GTF2I and GTF2IRD1 encode members of the TFII-I transcription factor family and
are prime candidates in the Williams syndrome, a complex neurodevelopmental
disorder. Our previous expression microarray studies implicated TFII-I proteins
in the regulation of a number of genes critical in various aspects of cell
physiology. Here, we combined bioinformatics and microarray results to identify
TFII-I downstream targets in the vertebrate genome. These results were validated 
by chromatin immunoprecipitation and siRNA analysis. The collected evidence
revealed the complexity of TFII-I-mediated processes that involve distinct
regulatory networks. Altogether, these results lead to a better understanding of 
specific molecular events, some of which may be responsible for the Williams
syndrome phenotype.

PMCID: PMC2449355
PMID: 18579769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. FASEB J. 2008 Aug;22(8):3001-9. doi: 10.1096/fj.07-104455. Epub 2008 Apr 29.

The complex of TFII-I, PARP1, and SFPQ proteins regulates the DYX1C1 gene
implicated in neuronal migration and dyslexia.

Tapia-Páez I(1), Tammimies K, Massinen S, Roy AL, Kere J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, 141 57 Huddinge, Karolinska
Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.

DYX1C1 was first identified as a candidate gene for dyslexia susceptibility, and 
its role in controlling neuronal migration during embryogenesis and effect on
learning in rodents have been verified. In contrast, genetic association studies 
have been ambiguous in replicating its effects on dyslexia. To better understand 
the regulation of DYX1C1 and the possible functional role of genetic variation in
the promoter of DYX1C1, we selected three single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
with predicted functional consequences or suggested associations to dyslexia for 
detailed study. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays suggested the
allele-specific binding of the transcription factors TFII-I (to rs3743205) and
Sp1 (to rs16787 and rs12899331) that could be verified by competition assays. In 
addition, we purified a complex of protein factors binding to the previously
suggested dyslexia-related SNP, -3G/A (rs3743205). Three proteins, TFII-I, PARP1,
and SFPQ, were unambiguously identified by mass spectrometry and protein
sequencing. Two SNPs, rs16787 and rs3743205, showed significant allelic
differences in luciferase assays. Our results show that TFII-I, PARP1, and SFPQ
proteins, each previously implicated in gene regulation, form a complex
controlling transcription of DYX1C1. Furthermore, allelic differences in the
promoter or 5' untranslated region of DYX1C1 may affect factor binding and thus
regulation of the gene.

PMCID: PMC2493457
PMID: 18445785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007 Nov-Dec;1769(11-12):613-21. Epub 2007 Oct 11.

Signal-induced functions of the transcription factor TFII-I.

Roy AL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tufts University School of Medicine, 150 Harrison
Avenue, Boston, MA 02111, USA. ananda.roy@tufts.edu

We have learned a great deal over the last several years about the molecular
mechanisms that govern cell growth, cell division and cell death. Normal cells
pass through cell cycle (growth) and divide in response to mitogenic signals that
are transduced through their cognate cell surface receptors to the nucleus.
Despite the fact that cellular growth and division are mechanistically distinct
steps, they are usually coordinately regulated, which is critical for normal
cellular proliferation. The precise mechanistic basis for this coordinated
regulation is unclear. TFII-I is a unique, signal-induced multifunctional
transcription factor that is activated upon a variety of signaling pathways and
appears to participate in distinct phases of cell growth. For instance, TFII-I is
required for growth factor-induced transcriptional activation of the c-fos gene, 
which is essential for cell cycle entry. Two alternatively spliced isoforms of
TFII-I exhibit opposing but necessary functions for mitogen-induced
transcriptional activation of c-fos. Besides transcriptional activation of the
c-fos proto-oncogene and eventual entry into cell cycle, TFII-I also appears to
have a role in later phases of the cell cycle and cell division. Here we discuss 
how a multitude of signaling inputs target TFII-I isoforms, which may exert their
functions in distinct phases of the cell cycle and play a key role in the
coordinated regulation of cellular proliferation.

PMCID: PMC2140948
PMID: 17976384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Dev Dyn. 2007 Oct;236(10):2884-8.

TFII-I gene family during tooth development: candidate genes for tooth anomalies 
in Williams syndrome.

Ohazama A(1), Sharpe PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, Dental Institute, King's College
London, Guy's Hospital, London Bridge, London, United Kingdom.

Williams syndrome is a rare congenital disorder involving the cardiovascular
system, mental retardation, distinctive facial features, and tooth anomalies. It 
is caused by the heterozygous deletion of approximately 1.6 Mb encompassing 28
genes on human chromosome 7q11.23. It has been suggested that the genes
responsible for craniofacial anomalies are located in the telomeric end region,
which harbors three members of the TFII-I gene family (Tassabehji et al. [2005]
Science 310:1184). To recognize potential candidate genes for the tooth anomalies
in Williams syndrome, we carried out comparative in situ hybridization analysis
of members of TFII-I gene family during murine odontogenesis. Gtf2i showed
widespread expression in the developing head but was higher in the developing
teeth than surrounding tissues throughout tooth development. At the bud stage,
Gtf2ird1 and Gtf2ird2 were expressed in the epithelial buds. At the early bell
stage, expression of Gtf2ird1 and Gtf2ird2 was observed in preameloblasts and
preodontoblasts.

2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17823943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Genes Brain Behav. 2008 Mar;7(2):224-34. Epub 2007 Aug 3.

Reduced fear and aggression and altered serotonin metabolism in Gtf2ird1-targeted
mice.

Young EJ(1), Lipina T, Tam E, Mandel A, Clapcote SJ, Bechard AR, Chambers J,
Mount HT, Fletcher PJ, Roder JC, Osborne LR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The GTF2IRD1 general transcription factor is a candidate for involvement in the
varied cognitive and neurobehavioral symptoms of the microdeletion disorder,
Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS). We show that mice with heterozygous or homozygous
disruption of Gtf2ird1 exhibit decreased fear and aggression and increased social
behaviors. These findings are reminiscent of the hypersociability and diminished 
fear of strangers that are hallmarks of WBS. Other core features of WBS, such as 
increased anxiety and problems with spatial learning were not present in the
targeted mice. Investigation of a possible neurochemical basis for the altered
behaviors in these mice using high-performance liquid chromatography analysis
showed increased levels of serotonin metabolites in several brain regions,
including the amygdala, frontal cortex and parietal cortex. Serotonin levels have
previously been implicated in fear and aggression, through modulation of the
neural pathway connecting the prefrontal cortex and amygdala. These results
suggest that hemizygosity for GTF2IRD1 may play a role in the complex behavioral 
phenotype seen in patients with WBS, either individually, or in combination with 
other genes, and that the GTF2I transcription factors may influence fear and
social behavior through the alteration of neurochemical pathways.

PMCID: PMC2883608
PMID: 17680805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Protein Sci. 2007 Aug;16(8):1788-92. Epub 2007 Jun 28.

Solution structure of the general transcription factor 2I domain in mouse TFII-I 
protein.

Doi-Katayama Y(1), Hayashi F, Inoue M, Yabuki T, Aoki M, Seki E, Matsuda T,
Kigawa T, Yoshida M, Shirouzu M, Terada T, Hayashizaki Y, Yokoyama S, Hirota H.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan.

The general transcription factor TFII-I, with the corresponding gene name GTF2I, 
is an unusual transcriptional regulator that associates with both basal and
signal-induced transcription factors. TFII-I consists of six GTF2I repeat
domains, called I-repeats R1-R6. The structure and function of the GTF2I domain
are not clearly understood, even though it contains a helix-loop-helix motif,
which is considered to be the protein-protein interaction area, based on
biochemical analyses. Here, we report the solution structure of the fifth repeat 
of the six GTF2I repeat domains from murine TFII-I, which was determined by
heteronuclear multidimensional NMR spectroscopy (PDB code 1Q60). The
three-dimensional structure of the GTF2I domain is classified as a new fold,
consisting of four helices (residues 8-24, 34-39, 63-71, and 83-91), two
antiparallel beta strands (residues 44-47 and 77-80), and a well-defined loop
containing two beta-turns between sheet 1 and helix 3. All of the repeats
probably have similar folds to that of repeat 5, because the conserved residues
in the GTF2I repeat domains are assembled on the hydrophobic core, turns, and
secondary structure elements, as revealed by a comparison of the sequences of the
first through the sixth GTF2I repeats in TFII-I.

PMCID: PMC2203370
PMID: 17600150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Virus Genes. 2007 Oct;35(2):215-23. Epub 2007 Jun 2.

Induction of chromosomally integrated HIV-1 LTR requires RBF-2 (USF/TFII-I) and
Ras/MAPK signaling.

Malcolm T(1), Chen J, Chang C, Sadowski I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Molecular Epigenetics, LSI, 
University of British Columbia, 2350 Health Sciences Mall, Vancouver, BC, Canada 
V6T 1Z3.

The HIV-1 LTR is regulated by multiple signaling pathways responsive to T cell
activation. In this study, we have examined the contribution of the MAPK,
calcineurin-NFAT and TNFalpha-NF-kappaB pathways on induction of chromosomally
integrated HIV-1 LTR reporter genes. We find that induction by T-cell receptor
(CD3) cross-linking and PMA is completely dependent upon a binding site for RBF-2
(USF1/2-TFII-I), known as RBEIII at -120. The MAPK pathway is essential for
induction of the wild type LTR by these treatments, as the MEK inhibitors PD98059
and U0126 block induction by both PMA treatment and CD3 cross-linking.
Stimulation of cells with ionomycin on its own has no effect on the integrated
LTR, indicating that calcineurin-NFAT is incapable of causing induction in the
absence of additional signals, but stimulation with both PMA and ionomycin
produces a synergistic response. In contrast, stimulation of NF-kappaB by
treatment with TNFalpha causes induction of both the wild type and RBEIII mutant 
LTRs, an effect that is independent of MAPK signaling. USF1, USF2 and TFII-I from
unstimulated cells are capable of binding RBEIII in vitro, and furthermore can be
observed on the LTR in vivo by chromatin imunoprecipitation from untreated cells.
DNA binding activity of USF1/2 is marginally stimulated by PMA/ ionomycin
treatment, and all three factors appear to remain associated with the LTR
throughout the course of induction. These results implicate major roles for the
MAPK pathway and RBF-2 (USF1/2-TFII-I) in coordinating events necessary for
transition of latent integrated HIV-1 to active transcription in response to T
cell signaling.

PMID: 17546494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Neurobiol Dis. 2007 Apr;26(1):112-24. Epub 2006 Dec 20.

Contribution of CYLN2 and GTF2IRD1 to neurological and cognitive symptoms in
Williams Syndrome.

van Hagen JM(1), van der Geest JN, van der Giessen RS, Lagers-van Haselen GC,
Eussen HJ, Gille JJ, Govaerts LC, Wouters CH, de Coo IF, Hoogenraad CC, Koekkoek 
SK, Frens MA, van Camp N, van der Linden A, Jansweijer MC, Thorgeirsson SS, De
Zeeuw CI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics and Human Genetics, VU University Medical
Center, PO Box 7057, 1007 MB Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Williams Syndrome (WS, [MIM 194050]) is a disorder caused by a hemizygous
deletion of 25-30 genes on chromosome 7q11.23. Several of these genes including
those encoding cytoplasmic linker protein-115 (CYLN2) and general transcription
factors (GTF2I and GTF2IRD1) are expressed in the brain and may contribute to the
distinct neurological and cognitive deficits in WS patients. Recent studies of
patients with partial deletions indicate that hemizygosity of GTF2I probably
contributes to mental retardation in WS. Here we investigate whether CYLN2 and
GTF2IRD1 contribute to the motoric and cognitive deficits in WS. Behavioral
assessment of a new patient in which STX1A and LIMK1, but not CYLN2 and GTF2IRD1,
are deleted showed that his cognitive and motor coordination functions were
significantly better than in typical WS patients. Comparative analyses of gene
specific CYLN2 and GTF2IRD1 knockout mice showed that a reduced size of the
corpus callosum as well as deficits in motor coordination and hippocampal memory 
formation may be attributed to a deletion of CYLN2, while increased ventricle
volume can be attributed to both CYLN2 and GTF2IRD1. We conclude that the motor
and cognitive deficits in Williams Syndrome are caused by a variety of genes and 
that heterozygous deletion of CYLN2 is one of the major causes responsible for
such dysfunctions.

PMID: 17270452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Sci STKE. 2007 Jan 30;2007(371):pe5.

Split personality of transcription factors inside and outside the nuclear border.

Naranjo JR(1), Mellström B.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Nacional de Biotecnología, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Cientificas, Madrid, Spain. naranjo@cnb.uam.es

Growing evidence indicates that transcription factors may have functions entirely
distinct from the regulation of gene transcription. Here we describe three
transcription factors that, when outside the nucleus, regulate calcium
homeostasis by three independent but convergent mechanisms.

PMID: 17264316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Gene Expr Patterns. 2007 Feb;7(4):396-404. Epub 2006 Dec 1.

Expression of Gtf2ird1, the Williams syndrome-associated gene, during mouse
development.

Palmer SJ(1), Tay ES, Santucci N, Cuc Bach TT, Hook J, Lemckert FA, Jamieson RV, 
Gunnning PW, Hardeman EC.

Author information: 
(1)Muscle Development Unit, Children's Medical Research Institute, Westmead, NSW,
2145, Australia. spalmer@cmri.usyd.edu.au

The gene GTF2IRD1 is localized within the critical region on chromosome 7 that is
deleted in Williams syndrome patients. Genotype-phenotype comparisons of patients
carrying variable deletions within this region have implicated GTF2IRD1 and a
closely related homolog, GTF2I, as prime candidates for the causation of the
principal symptoms of Williams syndrome. We have generated mice with an nls-LacZ 
knockin mutation of the Gtf2ird1 allele to study its functional role and examine 
its expression profile. In adults, expression is most prominent in neurons of the
central and peripheral nervous system, the retina of the eye, the olfactory
epithelium, the spiral ganglion of the cochlea, brown fat adipocytes and to a
lesser degree myocytes of the heart and smooth muscle. During development, a
dynamic pattern of expression is found predominantly in musculoskeletal tissues, 
the pituitary, craniofacial tissues, the eyes and tooth buds. Expression of
Gtf2ird1 in these tissues correlates with the manifestation of some of the
clinical features of Williams syndrome.

PMID: 17239664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Mol Cell. 2006 Oct 20;24(2):301-8.

Opposing functions of TFII-I spliced isoforms in growth factor-induced gene
expression.

Hakre S(1), Tussie-Luna MI, Ashworth T, Novina CD, Settleman J, Sharp PA, Roy AL.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Immunology, Tufts University School of Medicine, 150 Harrison
Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02111, USA.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2006 Oct 20;24(2):169-71.

Multifunctional transcription factor TFII-I has two spliced isoforms (Delta and
beta) in murine fibroblasts. Here we show that these isoforms have distinct
subcellular localization and mutually exclusive transcription functions in the
context of growth factor signaling. In the absence of signaling, TFII-Ibeta is
nuclear and recruited to the c-fos promoter in vivo. But upon growth factor
stimulation, the promoter recruitment is abolished and it is exported out of the 
nucleus. Moreover, isoform-specific silencing of TFII-Ibeta results in
transcriptional activation of the c-fos gene. In contrast, TFII-IDelta is largely
cytoplasmic in the resting state but translocates to the nucleus upon growth
factor signaling, undergoes signal-induced recruitment to the same site on the
c-fos promoter, and activates the gene. Importantly, activated TFII-IDelta
interacts with Erk1/2 (MAPK) kinase in the cell cytoplasm and imports the Erk1/2 
to the nucleus, thereby transducing growth factor signaling. Our results identify
a unique growth factor signaling pathway controlled by opposing activities of two
TFII-I spliced isoforms.

PMID: 17052463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Mol Cell. 2006 Oct 20;24(2):169-71.

TFII-IDelta and TFII-Ibeta: unequal brothers fostering cellular proliferation.

Santolin L(1), Meisterernst M.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression, GSF-National Research Center for Environment and Health,
Institute for Molecular Immunology, Marchionistrasse 25, D-81377 München,
Germany.

Comment on
    Mol Cell. 2006 Oct 20;24(2):301-8.

Activation of the immediate-early gene c-fos through MAP kinases is a hallmark of
growth factor signaling. In this issue of Molecular Cell, Roy and colleagues
(Hakre et al., 2006) show that TFII-I isoforms play differential roles in this
process.

PMID: 17052451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Science. 2006 Oct 6;314(5796):122-5.

Action of TFII-I outside the nucleus as an inhibitor of agonist-induced calcium
entry.

Caraveo G(1), van Rossum DB, Patterson RL, Snyder SH, Desiderio S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Institute for Cell Engineering, 
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2006 Oct 6;314(5796):64-5.

TFII-I is a transcription factor and a target of phosphorylation by Bruton's
tyrosine kinase. In humans, deletions spanning the TFII-I locus are associated
with a cognitive defect, the Williams-Beuren cognitive profile. We report an
unanticipated role of TFII-I outside the nucleus as a negative regulator of
agonist-induced calcium entry (ACE) that suppresses surface accumulation of TRPC3
(transient receptor potential C3) channels. Inhibition of ACE by TFII-I requires 
phosphotyrosine residues that engage the SH2 (Src-homology 2) domains of
phospholipase C-g (PLC-g) and an interrupted, pleckstrin homology (PH)-like
domain that binds the split PH domain of PLC-g. Our observations suggest a model 
in which TFII-I suppresses ACE by competing with TRPC3 for binding to PLC-g.

PMID: 17023658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Science. 2006 Oct 6;314(5796):64-5.

Cell signaling. The double life of a transcription factor takes it outside the
nucleus.

Park CY(1), Dolmetsch R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
CA 94305, USA.

Comment on
    Science. 2006 Oct 6;314(5796):122-5.

PMID: 17023638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Med Genet. 2007 Feb;44(2):136-43. Epub 2006 Sep 13.

An atypical deletion of the Williams-Beuren syndrome interval implicates genes
associated with defective visuospatial processing and autism.

Edelmann L, Prosnitz A, Pardo S, Bhatt J, Cohen N, Lauriat T, Ouchanov L,
González PJ, Manghi ER, Bondy P, Esquivel M, Monge S, Delgado MF, Splendore A,
Francke U, Burton BK, McInnes LA.

BACKGROUND: During a genetic study of autism, a female child who met diagnostic
criteria for autism spectrum disorder, but also exhibited the
cognitive-behavioural profile (CBP) associated with Williams-Beuren syndrome
(WBS) was examined. The WBS CBP includes impaired visuospatial ability, an overly
friendly personality, excessive non-social anxiety and language delay.
METHODS: Using array-based comparative genomic hybridisation (aCGH), a deletion
corresponding to BAC RP11-89A20 in the distal end of the WBS deletion interval
was detected. Hemizygosity was confirmed using fluorescence in situ hybridisation
and fine mapping was performed by measuring the copy number of genomic DNA using 
quantitative polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: The proximal breakpoint was mapped to intron 1 of GTF2IRD1 and the
distal breakpoint lies 2.4-3.1 Mb towards the telomere. The subject was
completely hemizygous for GTF2I, commonly deleted in carriers of the classic
approximately 1.5 Mb WBS deletion, and GTF2IRD2, deleted in carriers of the rare 
approximately 1.84 Mb WBS deletion.
CONCLUSION: Hemizygosity of the GTF2 family of transcription factors is
sufficient to produce many aspects of the WBS CBP, and particularly implicate the
GTF2 transcription factors in the visuospatial construction deficit. Symptoms of 
autism in this case may be due to deletion of additional genes outside the
typical WBS interval or remote effects on gene expression at other loci.

PMCID: PMC2598069
PMID: 16971481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Sep;26(18):6832-43.

Antagonistic regulation of beta-globin gene expression by helix-loop-helix
proteins USF and TFII-I.

Crusselle-Davis VJ(1), Vieira KF, Zhou Z, Anantharaman A, Bungert J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine,
University of Florida, P.O. Box 100245, 1600 SW Archer Road, Gainesville, FL
32610, USA.

The human beta-globin genes are expressed in a developmental stage-specific
manner in erythroid cells. Gene-proximal cis-regulatory DNA elements and
interacting proteins restrict the expression of the genes to the embryonic,
fetal, or adult stage of erythropoiesis. In addition, the relative order of the
genes with respect to the locus control region contributes to the temporal
regulation of the genes. We have previously shown that transcription factors
TFII-I and USF interact with the beta-globin promoter in erythroid cells. Herein 
we demonstrate that reducing the activity of USF decreased beta-globin gene
expression, while diminishing TFII-I activity increased beta-globin gene
expression in erythroid cell lines. Furthermore, a reduction of USF activity
resulted in a significant decrease in acetylated H3, RNA polymerase II, and
cofactor recruitment to the locus control region and to the adult beta-globin
gene. The data suggest that TFII-I and USF regulate chromatin structure
accessibility and recruitment of transcription complexes in the beta-globin gene 
locus and play important roles in restricting beta-globin gene expression to the 
adult stage of erythropoiesis.

PMCID: PMC1592872
PMID: 16943425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Jun;26(12):4758-68.

Induction of immunoglobulin heavy-chain transcription through the transcription
factor Bright requires TFII-I.

Rajaiya J(1), Nixon JC, Ayers N, Desgranges ZP, Roy AL, Webb CF.

Author information: 
(1)Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Immunobiology and Cancer Research
Program, 825 N. E. 13th Street, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

Bright/ARID3a/Dril1, a member of the ARID family of transcription factors, is
expressed in a highly regulated fashion in B lymphocytes, where it enhances
immunoglobulin transcription three- to sixfold. Recent publications from our lab 
indicated that functional, but not kinase-inactive, Bruton's tyrosine kinase
(Btk) is critical for Bright activity in an in vitro model system, yet Bright
itself is not appreciably tyrosine phosphorylated. These data suggested that a
third protein, and Btk substrate, must contribute to Bright-enhanced
immunoglobulin transcription. The ubiquitously expressed transcription factor
TFII-I was identified as a substrate for Btk several years ago. In this work, we 
show that TFII-I directly interacts with human Bright through amino acids in
Bright's protein interaction domain and that specific tyrosine residues of TFII-I
are essential for Bright-induced activity of an immunoglobulin reporter gene.
Moreover, inhibition of TFII-I function in a B-cell line resulted in decreased
heavy-chain transcript levels. These data suggest that Bright functions as a
three-component protein complex in the immunoglobulin locus and tie together
previous data indicating important roles for Btk and TFII-I in B lymphocytes.

PMCID: PMC1489113
PMID: 16738337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Genes Cells. 2006 Apr;11(4):373-81.

TFII-I down-regulates a subset of estrogen-responsive genes through its
interaction with an initiator element and estrogen receptor alpha.

Ogura Y(1), Azuma M, Tsuboi Y, Kabe Y, Yamaguchi Y, Wada T, Watanabe H, Handa H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of
Technology, 4259 Nagatsuta, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan.

TFII-I was initially identified as the general transcription factor that binds to
initiator (Inr) elements in vitro. Subsequent studies have shown that TFII-I
activates transcription of various genes either through Inr elements or through
other upstream elements in vivo. Since, however, most studies so far on TFII-I
have been limited to over-expression and reporter gene assays, we reevaluated the
role of TFII-I in vivo by using stable knockdown with siRNA and by examining the 
expression of endogenous genes. Contrary to the widely accepted view, here we
show that TFII-I is not important for cell viability in general but rather
inhibits the growth of MCF-7 human breast cancer cells. MCF-7 cells are known to 
proliferate in an estrogen-dependent manner. Through analysis of TFII-I's
cell-type specific growth inhibitory effect, we show evidence that TFII-I
down-regulates a subset of estrogen-responsive genes, only those containing Inr
elements, by recruiting estrogen receptor (ER) alpha and corepressors to these
promoters. Thus, this study has revealed an unexpected new role of TFII-I as a
negative regulator of transcription and cell proliferation.

PMID: 16611241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Dec;25(24):10940-52.

Inhibition of TFII-I-dependent cell cycle regulation by p53.

Desgranges ZP(1), Ahn J, Lazebnik MB, Ashworth T, Lee C, Pestell RC, Rosenberg N,
Prives C, Roy AL.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Immunology, Sackler School of Graduate Biomedical Sciences,
Department of Pathology, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02111,
USA.

The multifunctional transcription factor TFII-I is tyrosine phosphorylated in
response to extracellular growth signals and transcriptionally activates
growth-promoting genes. However, whether activation of TFII-I also directly
affects the cell cycle profile is unknown. Here we show that under normal growth 
conditions, TFII-I is recruited to the cyclin D1 promoter and transcriptionally
activates this gene. Most strikingly, upon cell cycle arrest resulting from
genotoxic stress and p53 activation, TFII-I is ubiquitinated and targeted for
proteasomal degradation in a p53- and ATM (ataxia telangiectasia
mutated)-dependent manner. Consistent with a direct role of TFII-I in cell cycle 
regulation and cellular proliferation, stable and ectopic expression of wild-type
TFII-I increases cyclin D1 levels, resulting in accelerated entry to and exit
from S phase, and overcomes p53-mediated cell cycle arrest, despite radiation. We
further show that the transcriptional regulation of cyclin D1 and cell cycle
control by TFII-I are dependent on its tyrosine phosphorylation at positions 248 
and 611, sites required for its growth signal-mediated transcriptional activity. 
Taken together, our data define TFII-I as a growth signal-dependent
transcriptional activator that is critical for cell cycle control and
proliferation and further reveal that genotoxic stress-induced degradation of
TFII-I results in cell cycle arrest.

PMCID: PMC1316948
PMID: 16314517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Science. 2005 Nov 18;310(5751):1184-7. Epub 2005 Nov 3.

GTF2IRD1 in craniofacial development of humans and mice.

Tassabehji M(1), Hammond P, Karmiloff-Smith A, Thompson P, Thorgeirsson SS,
Durkin ME, Popescu NC, Hutton T, Metcalfe K, Rucka A, Stewart H, Read AP,
Maconochie M, Donnai D.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Unit of Medical Genetics, University of Manchester, St. Mary's
Hospital, Manchester M13 9PL, UK. m.tassabehji@manchester.ac.uk

Craniofacial abnormalities account for about one-third of all human congenital
defects, but our understanding of the genetic mechanisms governing craniofacial
development is incomplete. We show that GTF2IRD1 is a genetic determinant of
mammalian craniofacial and cognitive development, and we implicate another member
of the TFII-I transcription factor family, GTF2I, in both aspects. Gtf2ird1-null 
mice exhibit phenotypic abnormalities reminiscent of the human microdeletion
disorder Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS); craniofacial imaging reveals
abnormalities in both skull and jaws that may arise through misregulation of
goosecoid, a downstream target of Gtf2ird1. In humans, a rare WBS individual with
an atypical deletion, including GTF2IRD1, shows facial dysmorphism and cognitive 
deficits that differ from those of classic WBS cases. We propose a mechanism of
cumulative dosage effects of duplicated and diverged genes applicable to other
human chromosomal disorders.

PMID: 16293761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Biol Chem. 2005 Nov 18;280(46):38211-8. Epub 2005 Sep 15.

Identification of the interface between cGMP-dependent protein kinase Ibeta and
its interaction partners TFII-I and IRAG reveals a common interaction motif.

Casteel DE(1), Boss GR, Pilz RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Cancer Center, University of California at San
Diego, La Jolla, California 92093-0652, USA.

Protein-protein interactions have emerged as an important mechanism providing for
specificity in cellular signal transduction. Two splice variants of type I
cGMP-dependent protein kinase (PKG Ialpha and Ibeta) differ only in their
N-terminal approximately 100 amino acids, which mediate binding to different
target proteins. PKG Ibeta, but not Ialpha, binds to the general transcriptional 
regulator TFII-I and the inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor-associated PKG
substrate IRAG. Using a combination of site-directed mutagenesis and in vitro
binding assays, we identified a group of acidic amino acids in the N-terminal
leucine zipper dimerization domain of PKG Ibeta required for its binding to both 
TFII-I and IRAG. Small clusters of basic amino acids in possible alpha-helical
regions in TFII-I and IRAG were found to mediate their interaction with PKG
Ibeta. Mutation of two negatively charged residues in the PKG Ibeta leucine
zipper (D26K/E31R) to positively charged residues, found in corresponding
positions in PKG Ialpha, completely abrogated binding to TFII-I and IRAG without 
disrupting PKG dimerization. Mutation of specific basic residues in TFII-I or
IRAG abolished binding of the full-length proteins to PKG Ibeta in intact cells. 
Based on these results, we propose a model for specific PKG Ibeta interaction
with target proteins.

PMID: 16166082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Aug;25(16):7144-57.

Positive and negative regulation of the transforming growth factor beta/activin
target gene goosecoid by the TFII-I family of transcription factors.

Ku M(1), Sokol SY, Wu J, Tussie-Luna MI, Roy AL, Hata A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology Research Institute, Tufts-New England Medical Center,
Boston, MA 02111, USA.

Goosecoid (Gsc) is a homeodomain-containing transcription factor present in a
wide variety of vertebrate species and known to regulate formation and patterning
of embryos. Here we show that in embryonic carcinoma P19 cells, the transcription
factor TFII-I forms a complex with Smad2 upon transforming growth factor beta
(TGFbeta)/activin stimulation, is recruited to the distal element (DE) of the Gsc
promoter, and activates Gsc transcription. Downregulation of endogenous TFII-I by
small inhibitory RNA in P19 cells abolishes the TGFbeta-mediated induction of
Gsc. Similarly, Xenopus embryos with endogenous TFII-I expression downregulated
by injection of TFII-I-specific antisense oligonucleotides exhibit decreased Gsc 
expression. Unlike TFII-I, the related factor BEN (binding factor for early
enhancer) is constitutively recruited to the distal element in the absence of
TGFbeta/activin signaling and is replaced by the TFII-I/Smad2 complex upon
TGFbeta/activin stimulation. Overexpression of BEN in P19 cells represses the
TGFbeta-mediated transcriptional activation of Gsc. These results suggest a model
in which TFII-I family proteins have opposing effects in the regulation of the
Gsc gene in response to a TGFbeta/activin signal.

PMCID: PMC1190264
PMID: 16055724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Mol Biol Cell. 2005 Oct;16(10):4765-80. Epub 2005 Jul 29.

Phosphoproteome profiling of transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta signaling:
abrogation of TGFbeta1-dependent phosphorylation of transcription factor-II-I
(TFII-I) enhances cooperation of TFII-I and Smad3 in transcription.

Stasyk T(1), Dubrovska A, Lomnytska M, Yakymovych I, Wernstedt C, Heldin CH,
Hellman U, Souchelnytskyi S.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Uppsala University, SE-751 24 Uppsala,
Sweden.

Transforming growth factor-beta (TGFbeta) signaling involves activation of a
number of signaling pathways, several of which are controlled by phosphorylation 
events. Here, we describe a phosphoproteome profiling of MCF-7 human breast
epithelial cells treated with TGFbeta1. We identified 32 proteins that change
their phosphorylation upon treatment with TGFbeta1; 26 of these proteins are
novel targets of TGFbeta1. We show that Smad2 and Smad3 have different effects on
the dynamics of TGFbeta1-induced protein phosphorylation. The identified proteins
belong to nine functional groups, e.g., proteins regulating RNA processing,
cytoskeletal rearrangements, and proteasomal degradation. To evaluate the
proteomics findings, we explored the functional importance of TGFbeta1-dependent 
phosphorylation of one of the targets, i.e., transcription factor-II-I (TFII-I). 
We confirmed that TGFbeta1 stimulated TFII-I phosphorylation at serine residues
371 and 743. Abrogation of the phosphorylation by replacement of Ser371 and
Ser743 with alanine residues resulted in enhanced complex formation between
TFII-I and Smad3, and enhanced cooperation between TFII-I and Smad3 in
transcriptional regulation, as evaluated by a microarray-based measurement of
expression of endogenous cyclin D2, cyclin D3, and E2F2 genes, and by a
luciferase reporter assay. Thus, TGFbeta1-dependent phosphorylation of TFII-I may
modulate TGFbeta signaling at the transcriptional level.

PMCID: PMC1237082
PMID: 16055503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Med Genet. 2006 Mar;43(3):266-73. Epub 2005 Jul 1.

Two high throughput technologies to detect segmental aneuploidies identify new
Williams-Beuren syndrome patients with atypical deletions.

Howald C, Merla G, Digilio MC, Amenta S, Lyle R, Deutsch S, Choudhury U, Bottani 
A, Antonarakis SE, Fryssira H, Dallapiccola B, Reymond A.

OBJECTIVE: To develop and compare two new technologies for diagnosing a
contiguous gene syndrome, the Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS).
METHODS: The first proposed method, named paralogous sequence quantification
(PSQ), is based on the use of paralogous sequences located on different
chromosomes and quantification of specific mismatches present at these loci using
pyrosequencing technology. The second exploits quantitative real time polymerase 
chain reaction (QPCR) to assess the relative quantity of an analysed locus.
RESULTS: A correct and unambiguous diagnosis was obtained for 100% of the
analysed samples with either technique (n = 165 and n = 155, respectively). These
methods allowed the identification of two patients with atypical deletions in a
cohort of 182 WBS patients. Both patients presented with mild facial anomalies,
mild mental retardation with impaired visuospatial cognition, supravalvar aortic 
stenosis, and normal growth indices. These observations are consistent with the
involvement of GTF2IRD1 or GTF2I in some of the WBS facial features.
CONCLUSIONS: Both PSQ and QPCR are robust, easy to interpret, and simple to set
up. They represent a competitive alternative for the diagnosis of segmental
aneuploidies in clinical laboratories. They have advantages over fluorescence in 
situ hybridisation or microsatellites/SNP genotyping for detecting short
segmental aneuploidies as the former is costly and labour intensive while the
latter depends on the informativeness of the polymorphisms.

PMCID: PMC2563253
PMID: 15994861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Biol Chem. 2005 Sep 9;280(36):31722-31. Epub 2005 Jun 28.

Multiple GTF2I-like repeats of general transcription factor 3 exhibit DNA binding
properties. Evidence for a common origin as a sequence-specific DNA interaction
module.

Vullhorst D(1), Buonanno A.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Molecular Neurobiology, NICHD, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. vullhord@mail.nih.gov

A hallmark of general transcription factor 3 (GTF3) is the presence of multiple
GTF2I-like repeats that were suggested to mediate protein-protein interactions.
However, we have recently demonstrated that repeat 4 is necessary and sufficient 
for binding of GTF3 to the bicoid-like motif of the Troponin I slow enhancer.
Given the sequence similarity between different GTF2I-like repeats we
hypothesized that DNA binding might be a common property of this domain type. We 
subjected five repeats of GTF3 to random oligonucleotide selection (SELEX) to
assess their DNA binding potentials. We delineated the consensus sequence
G(TC)G(A)GATTA(G)BG(A) for repeat 4 and showed that binding sites for GTF3 in
enhancers for Troponin I and homeobox c8 (HOXc8) are in very good agreement with 
this motif. SELEX selections for repeats 5 and 2 enriched for oligonucleotides
that were also bound by R4, suggesting that they share common sequence
preferences, whereas repeat 3 exhibited relaxed sequence requirements for DNA
binding. No binding was observed for repeat 1. We also show that GTF2I-like
repeats 4 and 6 of transcription factor II-I (TFII-I) exhibit modest DNA binding 
properties. Lastly, we identified several amino acids of GTF3 repeat 4 required
for high affinity protein-DNA interaction. Based on the ability of many repeats
to bind DNA in vitro, we suggest that GTF2I-like domains evolved by duplication
and diversification of a prototypic DNA-binding ancestor.

PMID: 15987678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Biol Chem. 2005 Aug 19;280(33):29856-63. Epub 2005 Jun 7.

Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2: counter-regulation by the
transcription factors, TFII-I and TFII-IRD1.

Jackson TA(1), Taylor HE, Sharma D, Desiderio S, Danoff SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The John Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

The vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 (VEGFR-2/KDR/flk-1) functions
as the primary mediator of vascular endothelial growth factor activation in
endothelial cells. Regulation of VEGFR-2 expression appears critical in
mitogenesis, differentiation, and angiogenesis. Transcriptional regulation of the
VEGFR-2 is complex and may involve multiple putative upstream regulatory elements
including E boxes. Transcript initiation is dependent on an initiator (Inr)
element flanking the transcriptional start site. The transcription factor,
TFII-I, enhances VEGFR-2 transcription in an Inr-dependent fashion. TFII-I is
unusual both structurally and functionally. The TFII-I transcription factor
family members contain multiple putative DNA binding domains. Functionally,
TFII-I acts at both the basal, Inr element as well as at several distinct
upstream regulatory sites. It has been postulated that the structure of TFII-I
might allow simultaneous interaction with both basal and regulatory sites in a
given promoter. As TFII-I is known to act at regulatory sites including E boxes
as well as at the basal Inr element, we evaluated the possibility of
Inr-independent TFII-I activation of the VEGFR-2 promoter. We found that an
Inr-mutated VEGFR-2 reporter construct retains TFII-I-stimulated activity. We
demonstrated that TFII-I binds to both the Inr and to three regulatory E boxes in
the human VEGFR-2 promoter. In addition, reduction in TFII-I expression by siRNA 
results in decreased VEGFR-2 expression. We also describe counter-regulation of
the VEGFR-2 promoter by TFII-IRD1. We found that TFII-I is capable of acting at
both basal and regulatory sites in one promoter and that the human VEGFR-2
promoter is functionally counter-regulated by TFII-I and TFII-IRD1.

PMID: 15941713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Virol. 2005 Apr;79(7):4396-406.

TFII-I regulates induction of chromosomally integrated human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 long terminal repeat in cooperation with USF.

Chen J(1), Malcolm T, Estable MC, Roeder RG, Sadowski I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z3, Canada.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) replication is coupled to T-cell
activation through its dependence on host cell transcription factors. Despite the
enormous sequence variability of these factors, several cis elements for host
factors are highly conserved within the 5' long terminal repeats (LTRs) of
viruses from AIDS patients; among these is the RBEIII upstream element for the
Ras response element binding factor 2 (RBF-2). Here we show that RBF-2 is
comprised of a USF1/USF2 heterodimer and TFII-I, which bind cooperatively to
RBEIII. Recombinant USF1/USF2 binds to the RBEIII core sequence 160-fold less
efficiently than it binds to an E box element, but the interaction with RBEIII is
stimulated by TFII-I. Chromosomally integrated HIV-1 LTRs bearing an RBEIII
mutation have slightly elevated basal transcription in unstimulated Jurkat cells 
but are unresponsive to cross-linking of the T-cell receptor or stimulation with 
phorbol myristate acetate (PMA) and ionomycin. Induction is inhibited by dominant
interfering USF and TFII-I but not by the dominant negative I-kappaB protein.
USF1, USF2, and TFII-I bind to the integrated wild-type LTR in unstimulated cells
and become phosphorylated during the induction of transcription upon stimulation 
with PMA. These results demonstrate that USF1/USF2 and TFII-I interact
cooperatively at the upstream RBEIII element and are necessary for the induction 
of latent HIV-1 in response to T-cell activation signals.

PMCID: PMC1061576
PMID: 15767439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 29;280(17):16821-8. Epub 2005 Jan 21.

Transcriptional regulation of the Grp78 promoter by endoplasmic reticulum stress:
role of TFII-I and its tyrosine phosphorylation.

Hong M(1), Lin MY, Huang JM, Baumeister P, Hakre S, Roy AL, Lee AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and the University of
Southern California/Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine
of the University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California 90089-9176,
USA.

TFII-I is a signal-induced multi-functional transcription factor that has
recently been implicated as a regulatory component of the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress response. TFII-I acts through ER stress-induced binding to the ER
stress element, which is highly conserved in promoters of ER stress-inducible
genes such as Grp78/BiP. Interestingly, its tyrosine phosphorylation sites are
required for its activation of the Grp78 promoter. Toward understanding the link 
between TFII-I, the tyrosine kinase signaling pathway, and Grp78 activation, we
discovered that Tg stress induces a dramatic increase of TFII-I phosphorylation
at Tyr248 and localization of this form of TFII-I to the nucleus. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis further reveals enhanced TFII-I binding to the Grp78
promoter in vivo upon ER stress. Previously, we reported that genistein, a
general inhibitor of tyrosine kinase, could suppress ER stress induction of Grp78
by inhibiting complex formation on the ER stress element; however, the mechanism 
is not known. Consistent with TFII-I being a target of genistein suppression, we 
observed that genistein could suppress Tg stress-induced phosphorylation of
TFII-I. We further demonstrate that c-Src, which is one of kinases identified to 
mediate phosphorylation of TFII-I at Tyr248, is activated by Tg stress and is
able to stimulate the Grp78 promoter activity. Lastly, using stable cell lines
with suppressed TFII-I levels, we show that TFII-I is required for optimal
induction of Grp78 by ER stress. Our studies provide a molecular link that
connects the c-Src tyrosine kinase transduction pathway to ER stress-induced
transcriptional activation of Grp78 mediated by TFII-I.

PMID: 15664986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Mol Cell. 2005 Jan 7;17(1):23-35.

An FF domain-dependent protein interaction mediates a signaling pathway for
growth factor-induced gene expression.

Jiang W(1), Sordella R, Chen GC, Hakre S, Roy AL, Settleman J.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center and Harvard Medical School,
Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

FF domains are poorly understood protein motifs found in all eukaryotes but in a 
very small number of proteins. They typically occur in tandem arrays and appear
predominantly in splicing and transcription factors. Curiously, they are also
present in the p190 family of cytoplasmic Rho GTPase activating proteins (GAPs). 
We identified the serum-responsive transcriptional regulator TFII-I as a specific
interactor with the p190 RhoGAP FF domains. p190 sequesters TFII-I in the
cytoplasm via the FF domains, but upon PDGF receptor-mediated phosphorylation of 
an FF domain, TFII-I is released from p190 and translocates to the nucleus where 
it can activate transcription of serum-inducible genes including c-fos. These
findings reveal a pathway by which mitogens promote gene transcription and
indicate a role for FF domains in phosphorylation-mediated signal transduction.

PMID: 15629714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Protein Sci. 2004 Oct;13(10):2588-99.

Comparison of TFII-I gene family members deleted in Williams-Beuren syndrome.

Hinsley TA(1), Cunliffe P, Tipney HJ, Brass A, Tassabehji M.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Department of Medical Genetics, St. Mary's Hospital, Hathersage Road,
Manchester, M13 0JH, UK.

Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS) is a neurological disorder resulting from a
microdeletion, typically 1.5 megabases in size, at 7q11.23. Atypical patients
implicate genes at the telomeric end of this multigene deletion as the main
candidates for the pathology of WBS in particular the unequal cognitive profile
associated with the condition. We recently identified a gene (GTF2IRD2) that
shares homology with other members of a unique family of transcription factors
(TFII-I family), which reside in the critical telomeric region. Using
bioinformatics tools this study focuses on the detailed assessment of this gene
family, concentrating on their characteristic structural components such as the
leucine zipper (LZ) and I-repeat elements, in an attempt to identify features
that could aid functional predictions. Phylogenetic analysis identified distinct 
I-repeat clades shared between family members. Linking functional data to one
such clade has implicated them in DNA binding. The identification of PEST,
synergy control motifs, and sumoylation sites common to all family members
suggest a shared mechanism regulating the stability and transcriptional activity 
of these factors. In addition, the identification/isolation of short truncated
isoforms for each TFII-I family member implies a mode of self-regulation. The
exceptionally high identity shared between GTF2I and GTF2IRD2, suggests that
heterodimers as well as homodimers are possible, and indicates overlapping
functions between their respective short isoforms. Such cross-reactivity between 
GTF2I and GTF2IRD2 short isoforms might have been the evolutionary driving force 
for the 7q11.23 chromosomal rearrangement not present in the syntenic region in
mice.

PMCID: PMC2286546
PMID: 15388857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Jul 27;101(30):11052-7. Epub 2004 Jul 8.

GTF2IRD2 is located in the Williams-Beuren syndrome critical region 7q11.23 and
encodes a protein with two TFII-I-like helix-loop-helix repeats.

Makeyev AV(1), Erdenechimeg L, Mungunsukh O, Roth JJ, Enkhmandakh B, Ruddle FH,
Bayarsaihan D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Yale University,
266 Whitney Avenue, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Williams-Beuren syndrome (also known as Williams syndrome) is caused by a
deletion of a 1.55- to 1.84-megabase region from chromosome band 7q11.23.
GTF2IRD1 and GTF2I, located within this critical region, encode proteins of the
TFII-I family with multiple helix-loop-helix domains known as I repeats. In the
present work, we characterize a third member, GTF2IRD2, which has sequence and
structural similarity to the GTF2I and GTF2IRD1 paralogs. The ORF encodes a
protein with several features characteristic of regulatory factors, including two
I repeats, two leucine zippers, and a single Cys-2/His-2 zinc finger. The genomic
organization of human, baboon, rat, and mouse genes is well conserved. Our
exon-by-exon comparison has revealed that GTF2IRD2 is more closely related to
GTF2I than to GTF2IRD1 and apparently is derived from the GTF2I sequence. The
comparison of GTF2I and GTF2IRD2 genes revealed two distinct regions of homology,
indicating that the helix-loop-helix domain structure of the GTF2IRD2 gene has
been generated by two independent genomic duplications. We speculate that GTF2I
is derived from GTF2IRD1 as a result of local duplication and the further
evolution of its structure was associated with its functional specialization.
Comparison of genomic sequences surrounding GTF2IRD2 genes in mice and humans
allows refinement of the centromeric breakpoint position of the primate-specific 
inversion within the Williams-Beuren syndrome critical region.

PMCID: PMC503739
PMID: 15243160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Int Immunol. 2004 May;16(5):747-57. Epub 2004 Apr 5.

Bruton's tyrosine kinase (Btk) enhances transcriptional co-activation activity of
BAM11, a Btk-associated molecule of a subunit of SWI/SNF complexes.

Hirano M(1), Kikuchi Y, Nisitani S, Yamaguchi A, Satoh A, Ito T, Iba H, Takatsu
K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Institute
of Medical Science, University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo
108-8639, Japan.

Bruton's tyrosine kinase (Btk) is required for B cell development and signal
transduction through cell-surface molecules such as BCR and IL-5 receptor. We
have identified a Btk-associated molecule, BAM11 (hereafter referred to as BAM)
that binds to the pleckstrin homology (PH) domain of Btk, and inhibits Btk
activity both in vivo and in vitro. In this study, we demonstrate BAM's
transcriptional co-activation activity and its functional interaction with Btk.
By using transient transcription assays, we demonstrate that the enforced
expression of BAM enhances transcriptional activity of the synthetic reporter
gene. The C-terminus of BAM is essential for the transcriptional co-activation
activity. The ectopic expression of Btk together with BAM enhances BAM's
transcriptional co-activation activity. BAM's transcriptional co-activation
activity is enhanced through interaction with Btk, and requires both its intact
PH domain and functional kinase activity. We also show that enforced expression
of TFII-I, another Btk-binding protein with transcriptional activity, together
with BAM and Btk, further augments BAM- and Btk-dependent transcriptional
co-activation. Furthermore, BAM can be co-immunoprecipitated with the INI1/SNF5
protein, a member of the SWI/SNF complex that remodels chromatin and activates
transcription. We propose a model in which Btk regulates gene transcription in B 
cells by activating BAM and the SWI/SNF transcriptional complex via TFII-I
activation.

PMID: 15096481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Gene Expr Patterns. 2004 Jan;4(1):25-8.

The early embryonic expression of TFII-I during mouse preimplantation
development.

Enkhmandakh B(1), Bitchevaia N, Ruddle F, Bayarsaihan D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, Yale University, 
266 Whitney Avenue, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

We studied the developmentally regulated expression of mouse TFII-I, a founding
member of a family of transcription factors characterized by the presence of
multiple helix-loop-helix repeat domains. TFII-I and BEN, a second member of this
family, are involved in histone modification and SUMOylation. The genes, GTF2I
and GTF2IRD1, encoding these proteins in human are located at chromosomal band
7q11.23, within the Williams syndrome critical region. Our immunohistochemical
analysis revealed extensive expression of TFII-I at early stages of
embryogenesis. Like BEN, TFII-I is detected in the cytoplasm and nuclei of
postfertilization through first cleavage stage embryos. However, in E4.5
blastocysts, at the time of implantation, TFII-I is localized in the nucleus and 
cytoplasm of the inner cell mass (ICM) and trophectoderm. BEN, at this stage, is 
expressed only in the cytoplasm of trophoblast cells, but not in the ICM [Gene
Expr. Patterns, 2003; 3, 577-587]. Using RT-PCR, we detected Gtf2i and Gtf2ird1
mRNA transcripts in unfertilized oocytes, which indicates the maternal expression
of these genes. Thus, the early embryonic expression of TFII-I implicates this
family of transcription factors in preimplantation development.

PMID: 14678824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Biol Chem. 2004 Feb 13;279(7):5460-9. Epub 2003 Nov 26.

Regulation of immunoglobulin promoter activity by TFII-I class transcription
factors.

Tantin D(1), Tussie-Luna MI, Roy AL, Sharp PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139-4307, USA.

The restriction of immunoglobulin variable region promoter activity to B
lymphocytes is a well known paradigm of promoter specificity. Recently, a
cis-element, located downstream of the transcription initiation site of murine
heavy chain variable promoters, was shown to be critical for B cell activity and 
specificity. Here we show that mutation of this element, termed DICE (Downstream 
Immunoglobulin Control Element), reduces in vivo activity in B cells. Gel
mobility shift assays show that DICE forms B cell-specific complexes that were
also sensitive to DICE mutation. DICE mutation strongly reduces the ability of a 
distal immunoglobulin heavy chain intronic enhancer to stimulate transcription.
We also identify a DICE-interacting factor: a TFII-I-related protein known as BEN
(also termed Mus-TRD1 and WBSCR11). Dominant-negative and RNAi-mediated knockdown
experiments indicate that BEN can both positively and negatively regulate IgH
promoter activity, depending on the cell line.

PMID: 14645227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Biol Chem. 2004 Feb 20;279(8):7147-58. Epub 2003 Nov 17.

Mechanism of Bruton's tyrosine kinase-mediated recruitment and regulation of
TFII-I.

Sacristán C(1), Tussié-Luna MI, Logan SM, Roy AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Program in Immunology, Tufts University School of
Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02111, USA.

TFII-I is a ubiquitously expressed multifunctional transcription factor with
broad biological roles in transcription and signal transduction in a variety of
cell types. We and others have shown that TFII-I can interact physically and
functionally with Bruton's tyrosine kinase (Btk), a hematopoietic non-receptor
protein tyrosine kinase that is critical for B lymphocyte development. Although
TFII-I-Btk interactions are impaired in B cells from X-linked immunodeficient
mice, the precise molecular determinants governing TFII-I-Btk complex formation
remain unknown. To this end, we have conducted a structural analysis of
TFII-I-Btk interactions by using a panel of TFII-I mutants. These studies have
revealed that a region within the N-terminal 90 amino acids of TFII-I, which
includes a putative leucine zipper motif, is primarily responsible for its
interaction with Btk. Mutations in the leucine zipper region itself were not
sufficient to abrogate binding of TFII-I to Btk, suggesting that regions/residues
outside the leucine zipper are responsible for such interactions. Because the
first 90 amino acids of TFII-I are required for its dimerization, we propose that
Btk tethers TFII-I to the cytoplasm by preventing its dimerization and its
subsequent nuclear localization. We further examined the requirement of tyrosine 
phosphorylation for TFII-I-Btk complex formation. Our data showed that
Src-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation sites in TFII-I are not targeted by Btk,
suggesting that multiple kinases can independently target TFII-I via distinct
signaling pathways. Our results provide a beginning step toward understanding the
functional importance of the TFII-I-Btk pathway in B cell signaling and gene
expression.

PMID: 14623887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Am J Med Genet A. 2003 Nov 15;123A(1):45-59.

GTF2I hemizygosity implicated in mental retardation in Williams syndrome:
genotype-phenotype analysis of five families with deletions in the Williams
syndrome region.

Morris CA(1), Mervis CB, Hobart HH, Gregg RG, Bertrand J, Ensing GJ, Sommer A,
Moore CA, Hopkin RJ, Spallone PA, Keating MT, Osborne L, Kimberley KW, Stock AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Genetics, University of Nevada School of
Medicine, Las Vegas, Nevada 89102, USA. cam@unr.edu

Most individuals with Williams syndrome (WS) have a 1.6 Mb deletion in chromosome
7q11.23 that encompasses the elastin (ELN) gene, while most families with
autosomal dominant supravalvar aortic stenosis (SVAS) have point mutations in
ELN. The overlap of the clinical phenotypes of the two conditions (cardiovascular
disease and connective tissue abnormalities such as hernias) is due to the effect
of haploinsufficiency of ELN. SVAS families often have affected individuals with 
some WS facial features, most commonly in infancy, suggesting that ELN plays a
role in WS facial gestalt as well. To find other genes contributing to the WS
phenotype, we studied five families with SVAS who have small deletions in the WS 
region. None of the families had mental retardation, but affected family members 
had the Williams Syndrome Cognitive Profile (WSCP). All families shared a
deletion of LIMK1, which encodes a protein strongly expressed in the brain,
supporting the hypothesis that LIMK1 hemizygosity contributes to impairment in
visuospatial constructive cognition. While the deletions from the families nearly
spanned the WS region, none had a deletion of FKBP6 or GTF2I, suggesting that the
mental retardation seen in WS is associated with deletion of either the
centromeric and/or telomeric portions of the region. Comparison of these five
families with reports of other individuals with partial deletions of the WS
region most strongly implicates GTF2I in the mental retardation of WS.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14556246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Genet Med. 2003 Jul-Aug;5(4):311-21.

Williams syndrome deficits in visual spatial processing linked to GTF2IRD1 and
GTF2I on chromosome 7q11.23.

Hirota H(1), Matsuoka R, Chen XN, Salandanan LS, Lincoln A, Rose FE, Sunahara M, 
Osawa M, Bellugi U, Korenberg JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Tokyo Women's Medical University, Tokyo,
Japan.

PURPOSE: To identify the relationship between specific genes and phenotypic
features of Williams syndrome.
METHODS: Subjects were selected based on their deletion status determined by
fluorescence in situ hybridization using a panel of 24 BACs and cosmids spanning 
the region commonly deleted and single gene analysis using Southern blotting.
From the cohort of subjects, three had atypical deletions. Physical examinations 
and cognitive tests were administered to the three subjects and the results were 
compared to those from a cohort of typical WS subjects.
RESULTS: The molecular results indicate smaller deletions for each subject. In
all three cases, typical Williams facies were absent and visual spatial abilities
were above that of full deletion WS subjects, particularly in the qualitative
aspects of visual spatial processing.
CONCLUSIONS: Combining the molecular analysis with the cognitive results suggest 
that the genes GTF2IRD1 and GTF2I contribute to deficits on visual spatial
functioning.

PMID: 12865760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Am J Hum Genet. 2003 Jul;73(1):131-51. Epub 2003 Jun 9.

Mutational mechanisms of Williams-Beuren syndrome deletions.

Bayés M(1), Magano LF, Rivera N, Flores R, Pérez Jurado LA.

Author information: 
(1)Unitat de Genètica, Departament Ciències Experimentals i de la Salut,
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Doctor Aiguader 80, 08003 Barcelona, Spain.
luis.perez@cexs.upf.es

Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS) is a segmental aneusomy syndrome that results from
a heterozygous deletion of contiguous genes at 7q11.23. Three large
region-specific low-copy repeat elements (LCRs), composed of different blocks (A,
B, and C), flank the WBS deletion interval and are thought to predispose to
misalignment and unequal crossing-over, causing the deletions. In this study, we 
have determined the exact deletion size and LCR copy number in 74 patients with
WBS, as well as precisely defined deletion breakpoints in 30 of them, using
LCR-specific nucleotide differences. Most patients (95%) exhibit a 1.55-Mb
deletion caused by recombination between centromeric and medial block B copies,
which share approximately 99.6% sequence identity along 105-143 kb. In these
cases, deletion breakpoints were mapped at several sites within the recombinant
block B, with a cluster (>27%) occurring at a 12 kb region within the
GTF2I/GTF2IP1 gene. Almost one-third (28%) of the transmitting progenitors were
found to be heterozygous for an inversion between centromeric and telomeric LCRs.
All deletion breakpoints in the patients with the inversion occurred in the
distal 38-kb block B region only present in the telomeric and medial copies.
Finally, only four patients (5%) displayed a larger deletion ( approximately 1.84
Mb) caused by recombination between centromeric and medial block A copies. We
propose models for the specific pairing and precise aberrant recombination
leading to each of the different germline rearrangements that occur in this
region, including inversions and deletions associated with WBS. Chromosomal
instability at 7q11.23 is directly related to the genomic structure of the
region.

PMCID: PMC1180575
PMID: 12796854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Horm Res. 2003;59 Suppl 1:106-13.

Williams-Beuren syndrome: a model of recurrent genomic mutation.

Pérez Jurado AL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Facultat de Ciéncies de la Salut i Vida, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, 
Spain. luis.perez@cexs.upf.es

Williams-Beuren syndrome is a segmental aneusomy syndrome with manifestations
affecting the vascular, connective tissue, endocrine and central nervous systems.
Most patients show a similar heterozygous approximately 1.5 Mb deletion at
7q11.23 that contains a number of reported genes. Deletion mapping in the few
atypical patients with smaller deletions suggested that additive effects of
haploinsufficiency for two or more genes might be necessary for the phenotype.
Vascular stenoses are caused by haploinsufficiency at the elastin gene, while the
genes responsible for the cognitive deficits are likely located at the telomeric 
edge of the deletion, including CYLN2 and GTF2I. Large region-specific segmental 
duplications predispose to misalignment and inter- or intrachromosomal unequal
crossing-over causing the deletions. Atypical alleles at 7q11.23 such as
inversions and deletions/insertions of large repeats, also generated through
aberrant recombination between the local segmental duplications, are found in
approximately 35% of transmitting parents. Genomic instability at 7q11.23 is
directly related to the genomic structure of the region.

PMID: 12638521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Feb 15;31(4):1292-301.

Characterization of the human beta-globin downstream promoter region.

Leach KM(1), Vieira KF, Kang SH, Aslanian A, Teichmann M, Roeder RG, Bungert J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Mammalian Genetics, Powell Gene Therapy Center, Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Florida College of Medicine,
1600 SW Archer Road, PO 100245, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

The human beta-globin gene is abundantly expressed specifically in adult
erythroid cells. Stage-specific transcription is regulated principally by
promoter proximal cis-regulatory elements. The basal promoter contains a
non-canonical TATA-like motif as well as an initiator element. These two elements
have been shown to interact with the TFII-D complex. Here we show that in
addition to the TATA and initiator elements, conserved E-box motifs are located
in the beta-globin downstream promoter. One of the E-box motifs overlaps the
initiator and this composite element interacts with USF1 and TFII-I in vitro.
Another E-box, located 60 bp 3' to the transcription initiation site, interacts
with USF1 and USF2. Mutations of either the initiator or the downstream E-box
impair transcription of the beta-globin gene in vitro. Mutations of a putative
NF-E2-binding site in the downstream promoter region do not affect transcription 
in vitro. USF1, USF2, TFII-I and p45 can be crosslinked to a beta-globin promoter
fragment in MEL cells in vivo, whereas only TFII-I and USF2 crosslink to the
beta-globin gene in K562 cells. The summary data demonstrate that in addition to 
the well-characterized interactions of the TFII-D complex with the basal
promoter, E-box motifs contribute to the efficient formation of transcription
complexes on the adult beta-globin gene.

PMCID: PMC150227
PMID: 12582249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jan 17;278(3):1841-7. Epub 2002 Oct 18.

Histone deacetylase 3 binds to and regulates the multifunctional transcription
factor TFII-I.

Wen YD(1), Cress WD, Roy AL, Seto E.

Author information: 
(1)H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, University of South
Florida, Tampa, Florida 33612, USA.

Histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3) is one of four members of the human class I histone
deacetylases that are implicated in transcriptional repression through
deacetylation of acetyllysines in amino-terminal tails of core histones. In an
immunoaffinity purification using anti-HDAC3, transcription factor TFII-I
copurified with HDAC3. Specificity of the HDAC3-TFII-I interaction was confirmed 
by coimmunoprecipitation of epitope-tagged proteins, GST pull-down assays, and
protein colocalization with indirect immunofluorescence. An anti-TFII-I
immunoprecipitate contained histone deacetylase enzymatic activity. Mutational
analyses revealed that the carboxyl-terminal of HDAC3 (residues 373-401) and
residues 363-606 of TFII-I were required for the HDAC3-TFII-I interaction.
Transcriptional activation by TFII-I was severely reduced by overexpression of
HDAC3. These results suggest that HDAC3 modulates some of the functions of TFII-I
and provides a link between histone deacetylase and a multifunctional
transcriptional activator.

PMID: 12393887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Biol Chem. 2002 Dec 6;277(49):47898-906. Epub 2002 Sep 24.

T cell-specific expression of the murine CD3delta promoter.

Ji HB(1), Gupta A, Okamoto S, Blum MD, Tan L, Goldring MB, Lacy E, Roy AL,
Terhorst C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA. hji@caregroup.harvard.edu

T cell-specific expression of human and mouse CD3delta is known to be governed by
an enhancer element immediately downstream from the gene. Here we demonstrate by 
transgenic and in vitro studies that the murine CD3delta (mCD3delta) promoter
prefers to be expressed in cells of the T lineage. Deletion analyses of a
promoter segment (-401/+48 bp) followed by transient transfections indicate that 
upstream elements between -149 and -112 bp contribute to full expression of the
gene. Furthermore, a core promoter region -37/+29 appears to contribute to a T
cell specificity. Using substitution mutant scanning, four positive and one
negative regulatory elements were found within the mCD3delta core promoter. The
first two positive elements comprise two classical initiator-like sites, which
recruit TFII-I, whereas a third contains a functional Ets binding site.
Immediately adjacent to the observed transcription start site is a negative
element that utilizes the transcription regulator YY1. The last positive
regulatory element contains a potentially functional CREB binding site and the
minor transcriptional start site. Because NERF-2, Elf-1, and Ets-1 are expressed 
preferentially in lymphocytes and because, in addition, YY1 represses the
promoter activity strongly in non-T cells, we conclude that the combination of
these transcription factors contributes to the T cell-specific expression pattern
of mouse CD3delta.

PMID: 12324448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Genomics. 2002 Jan;79(1):137-43.

Genomic organization of the genes Gtf2ird1, Gtf2i, and Ncf1 at the mouse
chromosome 5 region syntenic to the human chromosome 7q11.23 Williams syndrome
critical region.

Bayarsaihan D(1), Dunai J, Greally JM, Kawasaki K, Sumiyama K, Enkhmandakh B,
Shimizu N, Ruddle FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, Yale University, 
New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

We have recently isolated a mouse ortholog of human GTF2IRD1 that is related to
GTF2I. GTF2IRD1 and GTF2I proteins are characterized by the presence of multiple 
helix-loop-helix domains and a leucine zipper motif. Both paralogs are closely
linked and deleted hemizygously in individuals with Williams syndrome, a dominant
genetic condition characterized by unique neurocognitive and behavioral features.
We have isolated and analyzed the sequence of bacterial artificial chromosome
clones from the syntenic mouse chromosome 5 region that contains Gtf2ird1 and
Gtf2i as well as a neighboring gene, Ncf1. Gtf2ird1 is composed of 31 exons
spanning >100 kb on mouse chromosome 5 and is located between Cyln2 and Gtf2i.
Gtf2i is composed of 34 exons spanning about 77 kb. Ncf1, located downstream of
Gtf2i, consists of 11 exons that extend over 8 kb. The gene organization of
Gtf2ird1, Gtf2i, and Ncf1 is conserved in mice and humans, although the intronic 
regions are more compact in the mouse genome. The helix-loop-helix repeats of
Gtf2ird1 and Gtf2i are encoded separately on adjacent exons and were generated by
independent genomic rearrangements. These studies contribute to our knowledge of 
transcription factor defects and their pathogenesis in haploinsufficiency
conditions.

PMID: 11827466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 May;21(10):3387-97.

JAK2 activates TFII-I and regulates its interaction with extracellular
signal-regulated kinase.

Kim DW(1), Cochran BH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Tufts University School of
Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02111, USA.

TFII-I is a transcription factor that shuttles between the cytoplasm and nucleus 
and is regulated by serine and tyrosine phosphorylation. Tyrosine phosphorylation
of TFII-I can be regulated in a signal-dependent manner in various cell types. In
B lymphocytes, Bruton's tyrosine kinase has been identified as a TFII-I tyrosine 
kinase. Here we report that JAK2 can phosphorylate and regulate TFII-I in
nonlymphoid cells. The activity of TFII-I on the c-fos promoter in response to
serum can be abolished by dominant negative JAK2 or the specific JAK2 kinase
inhibitor AG490. Consistent with this, we have also found that JAK2 is activated 
by serum stimulation of fibroblasts. Tyrosine 248 of TFII-I is phosphorylated in 
vivo upon serum stimulation or JAK2 overexpression, and mutation of tyrosine 248 
to phenylalanine inhibits the ability of JAK2 to phosphorylate TFII-I in vitro.
Tyrosine 248 of TFII-I is required for its interaction with and phosphorylation
by ERK and its in vivo activity on the c-fos promoter. These results indicate
that the interaction between TFII-I and ERK, which is essential for its activity,
can be regulated by JAK2 through phosphorylation of TFII-I at tyrosine 248. Thus,
like the STAT factors, TFII-I is a direct substrate of JAK2 and a
signal-dependent transcription factor that integrates signals from both tyrosine 
kinase and mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways to regulate transcription.

PMCID: PMC100260
PMID: 11313464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Am J Hum Genet. 2000 Jan;66(1):47-68.

A physical map, including a BAC/PAC clone contig, of the Williams-Beuren
syndrome--deletion region at 7q11.23.

Peoples R(1), Franke Y, Wang YK, Pérez-Jurado L, Paperna T, Cisco M, Francke U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, 
USA.

Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS) is a developmental disorder caused by
haploinsufficiency for genes in a 2-cM region of chromosome band 7q11.23. With
the exception of vascular stenoses due to deletion of the elastin gene, the
various features of WBS have not yet been attributed to specific genes. Although 
>/=16 genes have been identified within the WBS deletion, completion of a
physical map of the region has been difficult because of the large duplicated
regions flanking the deletion. We present a physical map of the WBS deletion and 
flanking regions, based on assembly of a bacterial artificial
chromosome/P1-derived artificial chromosome contig, analysis of high-throughput
genome-sequence data, and long-range restriction mapping of genomic and cloned
DNA by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis. Our map encompasses 3 Mb, including 1.6 
Mb within the deletion. Two large duplicons, flanking the deletion, of >/=320 kb 
contain unique sequence elements from the internal border regions of the
deletion, such as sequences from GTF2I (telomeric) and FKBP6 (centromeric). A
third copy of this duplicon exists in inverted orientation distal to the
telomeric flanking one. These duplicons show stronger sequence conservation with 
regard to each other than to the presumptive ancestral loci within the common
deletion region. Sequence elements originating from beyond 7q11.23 are also
present in these duplicons. Although the duplicons are not present in mice, the
order of the single-copy genes in the conserved syntenic region of mouse
chromosome 5 is inverted relative to the human map. A model is presented for a
mechanism of WBS-deletion formation, based on the orientation of duplicons'
components relative to each other and to the ancestral elements within the
deletion region.

PMCID: PMC1288354
PMID: 10631136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1999;86(3-4):296-304.

Identification of GTF2IRD1, a putative transcription factor within the
Williams-Beuren syndrome deletion at 7q11.23.

Franke Y(1), Peoples RJ, Francke U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford CA,
USA. francke@cmgm.stanford.edu

Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS) is a microdeletion syndrome caused by
haploinsufficiency of genes at 7q11.23. Here we describe the identification and
characterization of a novel gene named GTF2IRD1, for GTF2I-repeat domain 1,
within the WBS deletion region. Northern blot analysis revealed ubiquitous
expression during development with two transcripts of 3.6 kb and 5.0 kb generated
by alternative splicing. GTF2IRD1 encodes a protein of 944 amino acids that
contains a region of high similarity to a unique motif with helix-loop-helix
forming potential occurring within the transcription factor GTF2I. Analogous to
TFII-I, the product of GTF2IRD1 may have the ability to interact with other
HLH-proteins and function as a transcription factor or as a negative
transcriptional regulator. A recent report of the identification of a
muscle-specific transcription factor, MusTRD1, supports this hypothesis
(O'Mahoney et al., 1998). The open reading frame described for MusTRD1 is
identical to that of GTF2IRD1; however, the putative MusTRD1-protein is 486 amino
acids shorter than the predicted protein encoded by GTF2IRD1. A heterozygous
deletion of GTF2IRD1 may contribute to the complex WBS phenotype.

PMID: 10575229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Eur J Hum Genet. 1999 Oct-Nov;7(7):737-47.

A transcription factor involved in skeletal muscle gene expression is deleted in 
patients with Williams syndrome.

Tassabehji M(1), Carette M, Wilmot C, Donnai D, Read AP, Metcalfe K.

Author information: 
(1)University Department of Medical Genetics, St Mary's Hospital, Manchester, UK.
M.Tassabehji@man.ac.uk

Williams-Beuren syndrome (WS) is a developmental disorder caused by a hemizygous 
microdeletion of approximately 1.4MB at chromosomal location 7q11.23. The
transcription map of the WS critical region is not yet complete. We have isolated
and characterised a 3.4 kb gene, GTF3, which occupies about 140 kb of the deleted
region. Northern blot analysis showed that the gene is expressed in skeletal
muscle and heart, and RT-PCR analysis showed expression in a range of adult
tissues with stronger expression in foetal tissues. Part of the conceptual GTF3
protein sequence is almost identical to a recently reported slow muscle-fibre
enhancer binding protein MusTRD1, and shows significant homology to the 90
amino-acid putative helix-loop-helix repeat (HLH) domains of the transcription
factor TFII-I (encoded for by the gene GTF2I). These genes may be members of a
new family of transcription factors containing this HLH-like repeated motif. Both
GTF3 and GTF2I map within the WS deleted region, with GTF2I being positioned
distal to GTF3. GTF3 is deleted in patients with classic WS, but not in patients 
we have studied with partial deletions of the WS critical region who have only
supravalvular aortic stenosis. A feature of WS is abnormal muscle fatiguability, 
and we suggest that haploinsufficiency of the GTF3 gene may be the cause of this.

PMID: 10573005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Genomics. 1999 Apr 15;57(2):279-84.

Identification of a putative transcription factor gene (WBSCR11) that is commonly
deleted in Williams-Beuren syndrome.

Osborne LR(1), Campbell T, Daradich A, Scherer SW, Tsui LC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Genomic Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children,
555 University Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, M5G 1X8, Canada.
lucy@genet.sickkids.on.ca

Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS) is a complex developmental disorder involving the 
hemizygous deletion of genes on chromosome 7q11.23. The cardiovascular aspects of
the disorder are known to be caused by haploinsufficiency for ELN, but the genes 
contributing to the other features of WBS are still undetermined. Fifteen genes
have been shown to reside within the WBS deletion, and here we report the
identification and cloning of an additional gene that is commonly deleted.
WBSCR11, which was identified through genomic DNA sequence analysis and cDNA
library screening, was positioned toward the telomeric end of the WBS deletion.
The gene is expressed in all adult tissues analyzed, including many regions of
the brain. The predicted protein displays homology to another gene from the WBS
deletion, GTF2I, which is known to be a transcription factor. We postulate that
WBSCR11 is also a transcription factor and may contribute to the spectrum of
developmental symptoms found in WBS.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10198167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Hum Mol Genet. 1998 Mar;7(3):325-34.

A duplicated gene in the breakpoint regions of the 7q11.23 Williams-Beuren
syndrome deletion encodes the initiator binding protein TFII-I and BAP-135, a
phosphorylation target of BTK.

Pérez Jurado LA(1), Wang YK, Peoples R, Coloma A, Cruces J, Francke U.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Gen-etica, Hospital Ni-no Jes-us, Madred, Spain. Stanford University
Medical Center,

Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder with
multisystemic manifestations caused by heterozygosity for a partial deletion of
chromosome band 7q11.23. The breakpoints cluster within regions located
approximately 1 cM either side of the elastin (ELN) locus. We have characterized 
a duplicated region near the common deletion breakpoints, which includes a
transcribed gene. The centromeric (C) and telomeric (T) copies are almost
identical in the duplicated 3[prime] portions but diverge at their 5[prime]-ends.
C-specific 4.3 kb mRNA and T-specific 5.4 kb mRNA are widely expressed in
embryonic and adult tissues. The telomeric gene gives rise to several
alternatively spliced forms and is deleted in all WBS individuals who have
documented ELN deletions. Database searches revealed that this gene encodes
BAP-135, a protein phosphorylated by Bruton's tyrosine kinase in B cells, as well
as the multifunctional transcription factor TFII-I, hence the gene name GTF2I.
The centromeric gene is not deleted in WBS and appears to be a partially
truncated expressed pseudogene with no protein product (gene name GTF2IP1). Both 
loci map to different genomic clone contigs that also contain other deleted and
non-deleted loci. A probe from the shared region recognizes a >3 Mb Not I
junction fragment that is unique to individuals with the WBS deletion. Therefore,
the duplicated region containing GTF2I and GTF2IP1 respectively is located close 
to the deletion breakpoints and may predispose to unequal meiotic recombination
between chromosome 7 homologs and/or to intrachromosomal rearrangements.
Hemizygosity for GTF2I may also contribute to the WBS phenotype.

PMID: 9466987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Genomics. 1998 Mar 1;48(2):163-70.

A mouse single-copy gene, Gtf2i, the homolog of human GTF2I, that is duplicated
in the Williams-Beuren syndrome deletion region.

Wang YK(1), Pérez-Jurado LA, Francke U.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University Medical Center,
California 94305, USA.

We have cloned and characterized Gtf2i, the mouse homolog of human GTF2I (general
transcription factor II-I), which encodes BAP-135, a target for Bruton's tyrosine
kinase. GTF2I represents the telomeric and functional copy of a duplicated gene
flanking the 2-Mb Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS) common deletion at 7q11.23.
GTF2I is deleted in WBS, while a truncated centromeric pseudogene (GTF2IP1) is
not deleted. In mouse, there appears to be only a single locus, Gtf2i, which we
mapped to mouse chromosome 5 in a region of conserved mouse-human synteny. Gtf2i 
is 87.7% identical to GTF2I at the nucleotide and 97% at the amino acid level and
generates several alternatively spliced transcripts. The gene is widely expressed
in adult tissues and equally in all areas of the brain. Gtf2i transcript is
detectable in ES cells by RT-PCR and on Northern blots of tissues from 7-dpc
embryos. A ubiquitous expression pattern is seen by Northern and tissue in situ
hybridization studies of 14-dpc embryos.

PMID: 9521869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Jan 21;94(2):604-9.

BAP-135, a target for Bruton's tyrosine kinase in response to B cell receptor
engagement.

Yang W(1), Desiderio S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Johns Hopkins University School 
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Bruton's tyrosine kinase (Btk) is essential for B cell activation, but downstream
targets of Btk have not been defined. We now describe a protein, BAP-135, that is
associated with Btk in B cells and is a substrate for phosphorylation by Btk.
BAP-135, which exhibits no detectable homology to known proteins, contains six
occurrences of a hitherto undescribed amino acid repeat and two motifs, similar
to the Src autophosphorylation site, that represent potential targets for
tyrosine phosphorylation. The pleckstrin homology domain of Btk comprises the
principal site of BAP-135 binding. Btk-dependent phosphorylation of BAP-135 is
abolished by mutations that impair activation of Btk by Src-related kinases. Btk 
and BAP-135 exist in a complex before B cell antigen receptor (BCR) engagement;
in response to BCR crosslinking, BAP-135 is transiently phosphorylated on
tyrosine. Taken together, these observations suggest that BAP-135 may reside
downstream of Btk in a signaling pathway originating at the BCR.

PMCID: PMC19560
PMID: 9012831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


