
1. Endocrinology. 2016 Mar 29:en20152031. [Epub ahead of print]

Chronic exposure to Bisphenol A affects uterine function during early pregnancy
in mice.

Li Q(1), Davila J(1), Kannan A(1), Flaws JA(1), Bagchi MK(2), Bagchi IC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Biosciences; (2)Molecular & Integrative Physiology
(M.K.B.), University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61802.

Environmental and occupational exposure to Bisphenol A (BPA), a chemical widely
used in polycarbonate plastics and epoxy resins, has received much attention in
female reproductive health due to its widespread toxic effects. While BPA has
been linked to infertility and recurrent miscarriage in women, the impact of its 
exposure on uterine function during early pregnancy remains unclear. In this
study, we addressed the effect of prolonged exposure to an environmental relevant
dose of BPA on embryo implantation and establishment of pregnancy. Our studies
revealed that treatment of mice with BPA led to improper endometrial epithelial
and stromal functions thus affecting embryo implantation and establishment of
pregnancy. Upon further analyses, we found that the expression of progesterone
receptor (PGR) and its downstream target gene, Hand2, was markedly suppressed in 
BPA-exposed uterine tissues. Previous studies have shown that HAND2 controls
embryo implantation by repressing fibroblast growth factor (FGF) and the MAP
kinase signaling pathways and inhibiting epithelial proliferation. Interestingly 
we observed that downregulation of PGR and HAND2 expression in uterine stroma
upon BPA exposure was associated with enhanced activation of FGF and MAPK
signaling in the epithelium, thus contributing to aberrant proliferation and lack
of uterine receptivity. Further, the differentiation of endometrial stromal cells
to decidual cells, an event critical for the establishment and maintenance of
pregnancy, was severely compromised in response to BPA. In summary, our studies
revealed that chronic exposure to BPA impairs PGR-HAND2 pathway and adversely
affects implantation and the establishment of pregnancy.

PMID: 27022677  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 23;6:21538. doi: 10.1038/srep21538.

Cardiac sodium channel regulator MOG1 regulates cardiac morphogenesis and rhythm.

Zhou J(1), Wang L(1), Zuo M(1), Wang X(1), Ahmed AS(1), Chen Q(2), Wang
QK(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of the Ministry of Education, Cardio-X 
Center, College of Life Science and Technology and Center for Human Genome
Research, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. (2)Center 
for Cardiovascular Genetics, Department of Molecular Cardiology, Lerner Research 
Institute, Cleveland Clinic; Department of Molecular Medicine, Department of
Genetics and Genome Sciences, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio,
USA.

MOG1 was initially identified as a protein that interacts with the small GTPase
Ran involved in transport of macromolecules into and out of the nucleus. In
addition, we have established that MOG1 interacts with the cardiac sodium channel
Nav1.5 and regulates cell surface trafficking of Nav1.5. Here we used zebrafish
as a model system to study the in vivo physiological role of MOG1. Knockdown of
mog1 expression in zebrafish embryos significantly decreased the heart rate (HR).
Consistently, the HR increases in embryos with over-expression of human MOG1.
Compared with wild type MOG1 or control EGFP, mutant MOG1 with mutation E83D
associated with Brugada syndrome significantly decreases the HR. Interestingly,
knockdown of mog1 resulted in abnormal cardiac looping during embryogenesis.
Mechanistically, knockdown of mog1 decreases expression of hcn4 involved in the
regulation of the HR, and reduces expression of nkx2.5, gata4 and hand2 involved 
in cardiac morphogenesis. These data for the first time revealed a novel role
that MOG1, a nucleocytoplasmic transport protein, plays in cardiac physiology and
development.

PMCID: PMC4763225
PMID: 26903377  [PubMed - in process]


3. G3 (Bethesda). 2016 Feb 10. pii: g3.115.026518. doi: 10.1534/g3.115.026518. [Epub
ahead of print]

A HAND2 Loss-of-Function Mutation Causes Familial Ventricular Septal Defect and
Pulmonary Stenosis.

Sun YM(1), Wang J(2), Qiu XB(3), Yuan F(3), Li RG(3), Xu YJ(3), Qu XK(3), Shi
HY(3), Hou XM(3), Huang RT(4), Xue S(4), Yang YQ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Jing'an District Central Hospital; (2)Jing'an District Central Hospital;
wang_jun98@sina.cn. (3)Shanghai Chest Hospital; (4)Shanghai Jiao Tong University.
(5)Shanghai Chest Hospital; dryyq@tongji.edu.cn.

Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the most common developmental abnormality and
is the leading non-infectious cause of mortality in neonates. Increasing evidence
demonstrates that genetic defects play an important role in the pathogenesis of
CHD. However, CHD is of substantial heterogeneity and the genetic determinants
for CHD in an overwhelming majority of cases remain unknown. In the current
study, the coding exons and flanking introns of the HAND2 gene, which encodes a
basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor essential for normal cardiovascular
development, were sequenced in 192 unrelated patients with CHD, and a novel
heterozygous mutation, p.S65I, was identified in a patient with congenital
ventricular septal defect (VSD). Genetic analysis of the index patient's pedigree
revealed that the mutation was present in all the seven affected family members
available but absent in the thirteen unaffected family members examined. Besides,
in addition to VSD, five of the proband's close relatives also had pulmonary
stenosis (PS), and the proband's son also had double outlet right ventricle
(DORV). The missense mutation, which altered the evolutionarily conserved amino
acid, was absent in 300 unrelated, ethnically-matched healthy individuals.
Biological analyses by using a dual-luciferase reporter assay system showed that 
the mutant HAND2 was associated with significantly diminished transcriptional
activity. Furthermore, the mutation abolished the synergistic activation between 
HAND2 and GATA4 as well as NKX2.5, two other cardiac core transcriptional factors
that have been causally linked to CHD. These findings indicate that HAND2
loss-of-function mutation contributes to human CHD, perhaps via its interaction
with GATA4 as well as NKX2.5.

Copyright © 2016 Author et al.

PMID: 26865696  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Dev Neurobiol. 2016 Jan 28. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22378. [Epub ahead of print]

Distinct roles of Hand2 in developing and adult autonomic neurons.

Stanzel S(1), Stubbusch J(1), Pataskar A(2), Howard MJ(3), Deller T(4),
Ernsberger U(1,)(4,)(5), Tiwari VK(2), Rohrer H(1,)(4,)(5), Tsarovina K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institute for Brain Research, Developmental Neurobiology,
Max-von-Lauestr. 4, 60438, Frankfurt/M, Germany. (2)Institute of Molecular
Biology (IMB) Boehringer Ingelheim Foundation, Ackermannweg 4, 55128, Mainz,
Germany. (3)Department of Neurosciences and Program in Neurosciences and
Neurological Disorders, University of Toledo Health Sciences Campus, Toledo, OH, 
43614, USA. (4)Institute of Clinical Neuroanatomy, Goethe University Frankfurt/M,
Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590, Frankfurt/M, Germany. (5)Ernst-Strüngmann-Institute, 
Deutschordenstr. 46, 60528, Frankfurt/M, Germany.

The bHLH transcription factor Hand2 is essential for the acquisition and
maintenance of noradrenergic properties of embryonic sympathetic neurons and
controls neuroblast proliferation. Hand2 is also expressed in embryonic and
postnatal parasympathetic ganglia and remains expressed in sympathetic neurons up
to the adult stage. Here, we address its function in developing parasympathetic
and adult sympathetic neurons. We conditionally deleted Hand2 in the
parasympathetic sphenopalatine ganglion by crossing a line of floxed Hand2 mice
with DbhiCre transgenic mice, taking advantage of the transient Dbh expression in
parasympathetic ganglia. Hand2 elimination does not affect Dbh expression and
sphenopalatine ganglion size at E12.5 and E16.5, in contrast to sympathetic
ganglia. These findings demonstrate different functions for Hand2 in the
parasympathetic and sympathetic lineage. Our previous Hand2 knockdown in
postmitotic, differentiated chick sympathetic neurons resulted in decreased
expression of noradrenergic marker genes but it was unclear whether Hand2 is
required for maintaining noradrenergic neuron identity in adult animals. We now
show that Hand2 elimination in adult Dbh-expressing sympathetic neurons does not 
decrease the expression of Th and Dbh, in contrast to the situation during
development. However, gene expression profiling of adult sympathetic neurons
identified 75 Hand2-dependent target genes. Interestingly, a high proportion of
down-regulated genes (15%) encode for proteins with synaptic and
neurotransmission functions. These results demonstrate a change in Hand2 target
genes during maturation of sympathetic neurons. Whereas Hand2 controls genes
regulating noradrenergic differentiation during development, Hand2 seems to be
involved in the regulation of genes controlling neurotransmission in adult
sympathetic neurons. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26818017  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 27;11(1):e0148062. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148062.
eCollection 2016.

MycN Is Critical for the Maintenance of Human Embryonic Stem Cell-Derived Neural 
Crest Stem Cells.

Zhang JT(1), Weng ZH(1), Tsang KS(2), Tsang LL(1), Chan HC(1,)(3), Jiang
XH(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine, Ministry of Education, Epithelial
Cell Biology Research Center, School of Biomedical Sciences, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, PR China. (2)Department of Anatomical and
Cellular Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong SAR, PR China. (3)The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
Research Institute, Shenzhen, PR China.

The biologic studies of human neural crest stem cells (hNCSCs) are extremely
challenging due to the limited source of hNCSCs as well as ethical and technical 
issues surrounding isolation of early human embryonic tissues. On the other hand,
vast majority of studies on MycN have been conducted in human tumor cells, thus, 
the role of MycN in normal human neural crest development is completely unknown. 
In the present study, we determined the role of MycN in hNCSCs isolated from in
vitro-differentiating human embryonic stem cells (hESCs). For the first time, we 
show that suppression of MycN in hNCSCs inhibits cell growth and cell cycle
progression. Knockdown of MycN in hNCSCs increases the expression of Cdkn1a,
Cdkn2a and Cdkn2b, which encodes the cyclin-dependent kinases p21CIP1, p16 INK4a 
and p15INK4b. In addition, MycN is involved in the regulation of human
sympathetic neurogenesis, as knockdown of MycN enhances the expression of key
transcription factors involved in sympathetic neuron differentiation, including
Phox2a, Phox2b, Mash1, Hand2 and Gata3. We propose that unlimited source of
hNCSCs provides an invaluable platform for the studies of human neural crest
development and diseases.

PMCID: PMC4729679
PMID: 26815535  [PubMed - in process]


6. Am J Reprod Immunol. 2016 Mar;75(3):237-45. doi: 10.1111/aji.12473. Epub 2016 Jan
24.

Progesterone-Regulated Endometrial Factors Controlling Implantation.

Bhurke AS(1), Bagchi IC(1), Bagchi MK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Biosciences, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA. (2)Department of Molecular and Integrative
Physiology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA.

The steroid hormone progesterone (P), acting via the progesterone receptor (PR)
isoforms, PR-A and PR-B, exerts a profound influence on uterine functions during 
early gestation. In recent years, chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing in
combination with microarray-based gene expression profiling analyses have
revealed that the PR isoforms control a substantially large cistrome and
transcriptome during endometrial differentiation in the human and the mouse.
Genetically engineered mouse models have established that several PR-regulated
genes, such as Ihh, Bmp2, Hoxa10, and Hand2, are essential for implantation and
decidualization. PR-A and PR-B also collaborate with other transcription factors,
such as FOS, JUN, C/EBPß and STAT3, to regulate the expression of many target
genes that functions in concert to properly control uterine epithelial
proliferation, stromal differentiation, angiogenesis, and local immune response
to render the uterus 'receptive' and allow embryo implantation. This review
article highlights recent work describing the key PR-regulated pathways that
govern critical uterine functions during establishment of pregnancy.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4754106 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26804062  [PubMed - in process]


7. Stem Cells Int. 2016;2016:4969430. doi: 10.1155/2016/4969430. Epub 2015 Nov 23.

Cardiac Niche Influences the Direct Reprogramming of Canine Fibroblasts into
Cardiomyocyte-Like Cells.

Palazzolo G(1), Quattrocelli M(2), Toelen J(3), Dominici R(4), Anastasia L(5),
Tettamenti G(6), Barthelemy I(7), Blot S(7), Gijsbers R(8), Cassano M(9),
Sampaolesi M(10).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Cardiomyology Laboratory, Stem Cell Biology and Embryology Unit,
Department of Development and Regeneration, KU Leuven, Herestraat 49 O&N4 Bus
814, 3000 Leuven, Belgium ; Laboratory of Stem Cells for Tissue Engineering,
IRCCS, San Donato Hospital, San Donato, Milan, Italy. (2)Translational
Cardiomyology Laboratory, Stem Cell Biology and Embryology Unit, Department of
Development and Regeneration, KU Leuven, Herestraat 49 O&N4 Bus 814, 3000 Leuven,
Belgium. (3)Organ Systems Development and Regeneration Unit, Department of
Development and Regeneration, KU Leuven, Herestraat 49 O&N4 Bus 814, 3000 Leuven,
Belgium. (4)Laboratory of Clinical Chemistry, Public Health Corporation of
Legnano, Magenta Hospital, 20013 Magenta, Italy. (5)Laboratory of Stem Cells for 
Tissue Engineering, IRCCS, San Donato Hospital, San Donato, Milan, Italy ;
Department of Biomedical Sciences for Health, University of Milan, Segrate,
Milan, Italy. (6)Laboratory of Stem Cells for Tissue Engineering, IRCCS, San
Donato Hospital, San Donato, Milan, Italy. (7)Laboratoire de Neurobiologie, Ecole
Nationale Vétérinaire d'Alfort, 94704 Maisons-Alfort, France. (8)Laboratory of
Molecular Virology and Gene Therapy, Department of Pharmaceutical and
Pharmacological Sciences and Leuven Viral Vector Core, KU Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium. (9)School of Life Sciences, EPFL, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.
(10)Translational Cardiomyology Laboratory, Stem Cell Biology and Embryology
Unit, Department of Development and Regeneration, KU Leuven, Herestraat 49 O&N4
Bus 814, 3000 Leuven, Belgium ; Human Anatomy Unit, Department of Public Health, 
Experimental and Forensic Medicine, University of Pavia, Via Forlanini 8, 27100
Pavia, Italy.

The Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophies are caused by mutation of dystrophin
gene and primarily affect skeletal and cardiac muscles. Cardiac involvement in
dystrophic GRMD dogs has been demonstrated by electrocardiographic studies with
the onset of a progressive cardiomyopathy similar to the cardiac disease in DMD
patients. In this respect, GRMD is a useful model to explore cardiac and skeletal
muscle pathogenesis and for developing new therapeutic protocols. Here we
describe a protocol to convert GRMD canine fibroblasts isolated from heart and
skin into induced cardiac-like myocytes (ciCLMs). We used a mix of transcription 
factors (GATA4, HAND2, TBX5, and MEF2C), known to be able to differentiate mouse 
and human somatic cells into ciCLMs. Exogenous gene expression was obtained using
four lentiviral vectors carrying transcription factor genes and different
resistance genes. Our data demonstrate a direct switch from fibroblast into
ciCLMs with no activation of early cardiac genes. ciCLMs were unable to contract 
spontaneously, suggesting, differently from mouse and human cells, an incomplete 
differentiation process. However, when transplanted in neonatal hearts of
SCID/Beige mice, ciCLMs participate in cardiac myogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4670879
PMID: 26681949  [PubMed]


8. Int J Mol Med. 2016 Feb;37(2):445-51. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2436. Epub 2015 Dec 
15.

A novel HAND2 loss-of-function mutation responsible for tetralogy of Fallot.

Lu CX(1), Gong HR(1), Liu XY(2), Wang J(3), Zhao CM(3), Huang RT(4), Xue S(4),
Yang YQ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Huashan Hospital North, Fudan University, Shanghai
201907, P.R. China. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Tongji Hospital, Tongji
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200065, P.R. China. (3)Department of
Cardiology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai
200065, P.R. China. (4)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Renji Hospital,
School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200127, P.R. China.
(5)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai 200030, P.R. China.

Congenital heart disease (CHD), the most common type of developmental
abnormality, is associated with substantial morbidity and mortality in humans
worldwide. The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, heart and neural
crest derivatives expressed 2 (HAND2), has been demonstrated to be crucial for
normal cardiovascular development in animal models. However, whether a
genetically defective HAND2 contributes to congenital heart disease (CHD) in
humans remains to be explored. In this study, the entire coding region and
splicing boundaries of the HAND2 gene were sequenced in a cohort of 145 unrelated
patients with CHD. A total of 200 unrelated, ethnically-matched healthy
individuals used as controls were also genotyped for HAND2. The functional effect
of the mutant HAND2 was characterized in contrast to its wild-type counterpart by
using a dual-luciferase reporter assay system. As a result, a novel heterozygous 
HAND2 mutation, p.L47P, was identified in a patient with tetralogy of
Fallot (TOF). The misense mutation, which altered the amino acid conserved
evolutionarily among species, was absent in 400 control chromosomes. Functional
analyses unveiled that the mutant HAND2 had a significantly decreased
transcriptional activity. Furthermore, the mutation markedly reduced the
synergistic activation between HAND2 and GATA4 or NKX2.5, other two cardiac key
transcription factors involved in the pathogenesis of CHD. To the best of our
knowledge, this study is the first to report the association of a HAND2
loss-of-function mutation with an increased vulnerability to TOF in humans, which
provides novel insight into the molecular mechanism underpinning CHD, suggesting 
potential implications for the genetic counseling of families with CHD.

PMID: 26676105  [PubMed - in process]


9. Stem Cells Transl Med. 2015 Dec;4(12):1415-24. doi: 10.5966/sctm.2015-0136. Epub 
2015 Nov 12.

Generation of Functional Human Cardiac Progenitor Cells by High-Efficiency
Protein Transduction.

Li XH(1), Li Q(2), Jiang L(3), Deng C(3), Liu Z(3), Fu Y(3), Zhang M(3), Tan
H(3), Feng Y(3), Shan Z(3), Wang J(4), Yu XY(5).

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Cardiovascular Institute of Guangdong General Hospital, Guangdong
Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology Department, Wayne State University School of Medicine,
Detroit, Michigan, USA. (2)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Department, Wayne
State University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan, USA. (3)Guangdong
Cardiovascular Institute of Guangdong General Hospital, Guangdong Academy of
Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China. (4)Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology Department, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit,
Michigan, USA yuxycn@aliyun.com jjwang@med.wayne.edu. (5)Guangdong Cardiovascular
Institute of Guangdong General Hospital, Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences,
Guangzhou, People's Republic of China School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China
yuxycn@aliyun.com jjwang@med.wayne.edu.

The reprogramming of fibroblasts to induced pluripotent stem cells raises the
possibility that somatic cells could be directly reprogrammed to cardiac
progenitor cells (CPCs). The present study aimed to assess highly efficient
protein-based approaches to reduce or eliminate the genetic manipulations to
generate CPCs for cardiac regeneration therapy. A combination of
QQ-reagent-modified Gata4, Hand2, Mef2c, and Tbx5 and three cytokines rapidly and
efficiently reprogrammed human dermal fibroblasts (HDFs) into CPCs. This
reprogramming process enriched trimethylated histone H3 lysine 4, monoacetylated 
histone H3 lysine 9, and Baf60c at the Nkx2.5 cardiac enhancer region by the
chromatin immunoprecipitation quantitative polymerase chain reaction assay.
Protein-induced CPCs transplanted into rat hearts after myocardial infarction
improved cardiac function, and this was related to differentiation into
cardiomyocyte-like cells. These findings demonstrate that the highly efficient
protein-transduction method can directly reprogram HDFs into CPCs. This protein
reprogramming strategy lays the foundation for future refinements both in vitro
and in vivo and might provide a source of CPCs for regenerative
approaches.SIGNIFICANCE: The findings from the present study have demonstrated an
efficient protein-transduction method of directly reprogramming fibroblasts into 
cardiac progenitor cells. These results have great potential in cell-based
therapy for cardiovascular diseases.

©AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4675512 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26564862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 6;10(11):e0142528. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142528.
eCollection 2015.

Still Heart Encodes a Structural HMT, SMYD1b, with Chaperone-Like Function during
Fast Muscle Sarcomere Assembly.

Prill K(1), Windsor Reid P(1), Wohlgemuth SL(1), Pilgrim DB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2016;11(1):e0148027.

The vertebrate sarcomere is a complex and highly organized contractile structure 
whose assembly and function requires the coordination of hundreds of proteins.
Proteins require proper folding and incorporation into the sarcomere by assembly 
factors, and they must also be maintained and replaced due to the constant
physical stress of muscle contraction. Zebrafish mutants affecting muscle
assembly and maintenance have proven to be an ideal tool for identification and
analysis of factors necessary for these processes. The still heart mutant was
identified due to motility defects and a nonfunctional heart. The cognate gene
for the mutant was shown to be smyd1b and the still heart mutation results in an 
early nonsense codon. SMYD1 mutants show a lack of heart looping and chamber
definition due to a lack of expression of heart morphogenesis factors gata4,
gata5 and hand2. On a cellular level, fast muscle fibers in homozygous mutants do
not form mature sarcomeres due to the lack of fast muscle myosin incorporation by
SMYD1b when sarcomeres are first being assembled (19hpf), supporting SMYD1b as an
assembly protein during sarcomere formation.

PMCID: PMC4636364
PMID: 26544721  [PubMed - in process]


11. Nat Commun. 2015 Sep 10;6:8243. doi: 10.1038/ncomms9243.

High-efficiency reprogramming of fibroblasts into cardiomyocytes requires
suppression of pro-fibrotic signalling.

Zhao Y(1), Londono P(1), Cao Y(1), Sharpe EJ(2), Proenza C(1,)(2), O'Rourke R(3),
Jones KL(3), Jeong MY(1), Walker LA(1), Buttrick PM(1), McKinsey TA(1), Song
K(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, University of Colorado School 
of Medicine, 12700 E. 19th Avenue, B139, Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA.
(2)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Colorado School of
Medicine, 12800 E. 19th Avenue, Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA. (3)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado School of Medicine,
12801 E. 17th Avenue, Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA. (4)Charles C. Gates Center for
Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Biology, University of Colorado School of
Medicine, 12700 E. 19th Avenue, B139, Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA.

Direct reprogramming of fibroblasts into cardiomyocytes by forced expression of
cardiomyogenic factors, GMT (GATA4, Mef2C, Tbx5) or GHMT (GATA4, Hand2, Mef2C,
Tbx5), has recently been demonstrated, suggesting a novel therapeutic strategy
for cardiac repair. However, current approaches are inefficient. Here we
demonstrate that pro-fibrotic signalling potently antagonizes cardiac
reprogramming. Remarkably, inhibition of pro-fibrotic signalling using small
molecules that target the transforming growth factor-ß or Rho-associated kinase
pathways converts embryonic fibroblasts into functional cardiomyocyte-like cells,
with the efficiency up to 60%. Conversely, overactivation of these pro-fibrotic
signalling networks attenuates cardiac reprogramming. Furthermore, inhibition of 
pro-fibrotic signalling dramatically enhances the kinetics of cardiac
reprogramming, with spontaneously contracting cardiomyocytes emerging in less
than 2 weeks, as opposed to 4 weeks with GHMT alone. These findings provide new
insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying cardiac conversion of
fibroblasts and would enhance efforts to generate cardiomyocytes for clinical
applications.

PMCID: PMC4579788
PMID: 26354680  [PubMed - in process]


12. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Sep 22;112(38):11864-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1516237112. Epub 2015 Sep 9.

Akt1/protein kinase B enhances transcriptional reprogramming of fibroblasts to
functional cardiomyocytes.

Zhou H(1), Dickson ME(1), Kim MS(2), Bassel-Duby R(1), Olson EN(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148; Hamon Center for Regenerative Science and
Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148;
(2)Department of Clinical Sciences, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9066. (3)Department of Molecular Biology, University of 
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148; Hamon Center for
Regenerative Science and Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148; Eric.Olson@utsouthwestern.edu.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Oct 27;112(43):13131-2.

Conversion of fibroblasts to functional cardiomyocytes represents a potential
approach for restoring cardiac function after myocardial injury, but the
technique thus far has been slow and inefficient. To improve the efficiency of
reprogramming fibroblasts to cardiac-like myocytes (iCMs) by cardiac
transcription factors [Gata4, Hand2, Mef2c, and Tbx5 (GHMT)], we screened 192
protein kinases and discovered that Akt/protein kinase B dramatically accelerates
and amplifies this process in three different types of fibroblasts (mouse embryo,
adult cardiac, and tail tip). Approximately 50% of reprogrammed mouse embryo
fibroblasts displayed spontaneous beating after 3 wk of induction by Akt plus
GHMT. Furthermore, addition of Akt1 to GHMT evoked a more mature cardiac
phenotype for iCMs, as seen by enhanced polynucleation, cellular hypertrophy,
gene expression, and metabolic reprogramming. Insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1)
and phosphoinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) acted upstream of Akt whereas the
mitochondrial target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) and forkhead box o3 (Foxo3a)
acted downstream of Akt to influence fibroblast-to-cardiomyocyte reprogramming.
These findings provide insights into the molecular basis of cardiac reprogramming
and represent an important step toward further application of this technique.

PMCID: PMC4586885
PMID: 26354121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Cell Stem Cell. 2015 Sep 3;17(3):287-99. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2015.08.007. Epub
2015 Aug 27.

The Isl1/Ldb1 Complex Orchestrates Genome-wide Chromatin Organization to Instruct
Differentiation of Multipotent Cardiac Progenitors.

Caputo L(1), Witzel HR(1), Kolovos P(2), Cheedipudi S(1), Looso M(1), Mylona
A(3), van IJcken WF(4), Laugwitz KL(5), Evans SM(6), Braun T(1), Soler E(7),
Grosveld F(2), Dobreva G(8).

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research, 61231 Bad Nauheim, Germany. 
(2)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus Medical Center, 3015 CN Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. (3)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus Medical Center, 3015 CN
Rotterdam, The Netherlands; School of Human and Life Sciences, Canterbury Christ 
Church University, Canterbury, Kent CT1 1QU, UK. (4)Center for Biomics, Erasmus
Medical Center, 3015 CN Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (5)I. Medical Department,
Cardiology, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technical University, 81675 Munich,
Germany. (6)Department of Medicine, Skaggs School of Pharmacy, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. (7)Department of Cell Biology,
Erasmus Medical Center, 3015 CN Rotterdam, The Netherlands; Laboratory of
Molecular Hematopoiesis, CEA/DSV/iRCM/LHM, INSERM UMR967, 92265
Fontenay-aux-Roses, France; Laboratory of Excellence GR-Ex, 75015, Paris, France.
(8)Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research, 61231 Bad Nauheim, Germany; 
Medical Faculty, University of Frankfurt, 60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
Electronic address: gergana.dobreva@mpi-bn.mpg.de.

Cardiac stem/progenitor cells hold great potential for regenerative therapies;
however, the mechanisms regulating their expansion and differentiation remain
insufficiently defined. Here we show that Ldb1 is a central regulator of genome
organization in cardiac progenitor cells, which is crucial for cardiac lineage
differentiation and heart development. We demonstrate that Ldb1 binds to the key 
regulator of cardiac progenitors, Isl1, and protects it from degradation.
Furthermore, the Isl1/Ldb1 complex promotes long-range enhancer-promoter
interactions at the loci of the core cardiac transcription factors Mef2c and
Hand2. Chromosome conformation capture followed by sequencing identified specific
Ldb1-mediated interactions of the Isl1/Ldb1 responsive Mef2c anterior heart field
enhancer with genes that play key roles in cardiac progenitor cell function and
cardiovascular development. Importantly, the expression of these genes was
downregulated upon Ldb1 depletion and Isl1/Ldb1 haplodeficiency. In conclusion,
the Isl1/Ldb1 complex orchestrates a network for heart-specific transcriptional
regulation and coordination in three-dimensional space during cardiogenesis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26321200  [PubMed - in process]


14. BMC Dev Biol. 2015 Jul 19;15:28. doi: 10.1186/s12861-015-0078-5.

Key pathways regulated by HoxA9,10,11/HoxD9,10,11 during limb development.

Raines AM(1), Magella B(2), Adam M(3), Potter SS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Medical Center, 3333 
Burnet Ave., Cincinnati, OH, 45229, USA. annaraines516@gmail.com. (2)Division of 
Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Ave.,
Cincinnati, OH, 45229, USA. bliss.magella@cchmc.org. (3)Division of Developmental
Biology, Cincinnati Children's Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Ave., Cincinnati, OH, 
45229, USA. mike.adam@cchmc.org. (4)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati
Children's Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Ave., Cincinnati, OH, 45229, USA.
steve.potter@cchmc.org.

BACKGROUND: The 39 mammalian Hox genes show problematic patterns of functional
overlap. In order to more fully define the developmental roles of Hox genes it is
necessary to remove multiple combinations of paralogous and flanking genes. In
addition, the downstream molecular pathways regulated by Hox genes during limb
development remain incompletely delineated.
RESULTS: In this report we examine limb development in mice with frameshift
mutations in six Hox genes, Hoxa9,10,11 and Hoxd9,10,11. The mice were made with 
a novel recombineering method that allows the simultaneous targeting of
frameshift mutations into multiple flanking genes. The Hoxa9,10,11 (-/-)
/Hoxd9,10,11 (-/-) mutant mice show a reduced ulna and radius that is more severe
than seen in Hoxa11 (-/-)/Hoxd11 (-/-) mice, indicating a minor role for the
flanking Hox9,10 genes in zeugopod development, as well as their primary function
in stylopod development. The mutant mice also show severe reduction of Shh
expression in the zone of polarizing activity, and decreased Fgf8 expression in
the apical ectodermal ridge, thereby better defining the roles of these specific 
Hox genes in the regulation of critical signaling centers during limb
development. Importantly, we also used laser capture microdissection coupled with
RNA-Seq to characterize the gene expression programs in wild type and mutant
limbs. Resting, proliferative and hypertrophic compartments of E15.5 forelimb
zeugopods were examined. The results provide an RNA-Seq characterization of the
progression of gene expression patterns during normal endochondral bone
formation. In addition of the Hox mutants showed strongly altered expression of
Pknox2, Zfp467, Gdf5, Bmpr1b, Dkk3, Igf1, Hand2, Shox2, Runx3, Bmp7 and Lef1, all
of which have been previously shown to play important roles in bone formation.
CONCLUSIONS: The recombineering based frameshift mutation of the six flanking and
paralogous Hoxa9,10,11 and Hoxd9,10,11 genes provides a resource for the analysis
of their overlapping functions. Analysis of the Hoxa9,10,11 (-/-) /Hoxd9,10,11
(-/-) mutant limbs confirms and extends the results of previous studies using
mice with Hox mutations in single paralogous groups or with entire Hox cluster
deletions. The RNA-Seq analysis of specific compartments of the normal and mutant
limbs defines the multiple key perturbed pathways downstream of these Hox genes.

PMCID: PMC4506574
PMID: 26186931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Stem Cells. 2015 Oct;33(10):3100-13. doi: 10.1002/stem.2101. Epub 2015 Jul 29.

Cardiac Repair With a Novel Population of Mesenchymal Stem Cells Resident in the 
Human Heart.

Zhang Y(1), Sivakumaran P(2), Newcomb AE(3,)(4,)(5), Hernandez D(1,)(2), Harris
N(2), Khanabdali R(3,)(2), Liu GS(6,)(7), Kelly DJ(1), Pébay A(6,)(7), Hewitt
AW(6,)(7), Boyle A(8), Harvey R(9), Morrison WA(3,)(2,)(10), Elliott DA(11),
Dusting GJ(3,)(6,)(2,)(7), Lim SY(3,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, St. Vincent's Hospital, University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (2)O'Brien Institute Department, St. Vincent's
Institute of Medical Research, Fitzroy, Victoria, Australia. (3)Department of
Surgery, St. Vincent's Hospital, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia. (4)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, St. Vincent's Hospital,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (5)Vascular and Cardiac Surgery, The
Cardiovascular Research Centre (CvRC), Australian Catholic University, Fitzroy,
Victoria, Australia. (6)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (7)Centre for Eye Research Australia & Royal
Victorian Eye and Ear Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (8)School of
Medicine and Public Health, University of Newcastle, Newcastle, New South Wales, 
Australia. (9)Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Victor Chang Cardiac Research 
Institute, Darlinghurst, New South Wales, Australia. (10)AORTEC, Faculty of
Health Sciences, Australian Catholic University, Fitzroy, Victoria, Australia.
(11)Cardiac Development, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, The Royal
Children's Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

Cardiac resident stem cells (CRSCs) hold much promise to treat heart disease but 
this remains a controversial field. Here, we describe a novel population of
CRSCs, which are positive for W8B2 antigen and were obtained from adult human
atrial appendages. W8B2(+) CRSCs exhibit a spindle-shaped morphology, are
clonogenic and capable of self-renewal. W8B2(+) CRSCs show high expression of
mesenchymal but not hematopoietic nor endothelial markers. W8B2(+) CRSCs
expressed GATA4, HAND2, and TBX5, but not C-KIT, SCA-1, NKX2.5, PDGFRa, ISL1, or 
WT1. W8B2(+) CRSCs can differentiate into cardiovascular lineages and secrete a
range of cytokines implicated in angiogenesis, chemotaxis, inflammation,
extracellular matrix remodeling, cell growth, and survival. In vitro, conditioned
medium collected from W8B2(+) CRSCs displayed prosurvival, proangiogenic, and
promigratory effects on endothelial cells, superior to that of other adult stem
cells tested, and additionally promoted survival and proliferation of neonatal
rat cardiomyocytes. Intramyocardial transplantation of human W8B2(+) CRSCs into
immunocompromised rats 1 week after myocardial infarction markedly improved
cardiac function (~40% improvement in ejection fraction) and reduced fibrotic
scar tissue 4 weeks after infarction. Hearts treated with W8B2(+) CRSCs showed
less adverse remodeling of the left ventricle, a greater number of proliferating 
cardiomyocytes (Ki67(+) cTnT(+) cells) in the remote region, higher myocardial
vascular density, and greater infiltration of CD163(+) cells (a marker for M2
macrophages) into the border zone and scar regions. In summary, W8B2(+) CRSCs are
distinct from currently known CRSCs found in human hearts, and as such may be an 
ideal cell source to repair myocardial damage after infarction.

© 2015 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 26184084  [PubMed - in process]


16. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Oct;12(4):5538-44. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4070. Epub 2015 Jul 9.

HAND2-mediated proteolysis negatively regulates the function of estrogen receptor
a.

Fukuda T(1), Shirane A(1), Wada-Hiraike O(1), Oda K(1), Tanikawa M(1), Sakuabashi
A(1), Hirano M(1), Fu H(1), Morita Y(1), Miyamoto Y(1), Inaba K(1), Kawana K(1), 
Osuga Y(1), Fujii T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

A previous study demonstrated that the progesterone-inducible HAND2 gene product 
is a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor and prevents mitogenic effects
of estrogen receptor a (ERa) by inhibiting fibroblast growth factor signalling in
mouse uteri. However, whether HAND2 directly affects the transcriptional
activation function of ERa remains to be elucidated. In the present study, the
physical interaction between HAND2 and ERa was investigating by performing an
immunoprecipitation assay and an in vitro pull-down assay. The results
demonstrated that HAND2 and ERa interacted in a ligand-independent manner. The in
vitro pull-down assays revealed a direct interaction between HAND2 and the
amino-terminus of ERa, termed the activation function-1 domain. To determine the 
physiological significance of this interaction, the role of HAND2 as a cofactor
of ERa was investigated, which revealed that HAND2 inhibited the ligand-dependent
transcriptional activation function of ERa. This result was further confirmed and
the mRNA expression of vascular endothelial growth factor, an ERa-downstream
factor, was decreased by the overexpression of HAND2. This inhibition of
ligand-dependent transcriptional activation function of ERa was possibly
attributed to the proteasomic degradation of ERa by HAND2. These results indicate
a novel anti-tumorigenic function of HAND2 in regulating ERa-dependent gene
expression. Considering that HAND2 is commonly hypermethylated and silenced in
endometrial cancer, it is hypothesized that HAND2 may serve as a possible tumor
suppressor, particularly in uterine tissue.

PMID: 26166202  [PubMed - in process]


17. Physiol Rep. 2015 Jul;3(7). pii: e12450. doi: 10.14814/phy2.12450.

Unique gene program of rat small resistance mesenteric arteries as revealed by
deep RNA sequencing.

Reho JJ(1), Shetty A(2), Dippold RP(1), Mahurkar A(2), Fisher SA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of
Maryland-Baltimore, Baltimore, Maryland, 21201. (2)Institute for Genome Sciences,
University of Maryland-Baltimore, Baltimore, Maryland, 21201. (3)Department of
Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Maryland-Baltimore, 
Baltimore, Maryland, 21201 sfisher1@medicine.umaryland.edu.

Deep sequencing of RNA samples from rat small mesenteric arteries (MA) and aorta 
(AO) identified common and unique features of their gene programs. ~5% of mRNAs
were quantitatively differentially expressed in MA versus AO. Unique
transcriptional control in MA smooth muscle is suggested by the selective or
enriched expression of transcription factors Nkx2-3, HAND2, and Tcf21 (Capsulin).
Enrichment in AO of PPAR transcription factors and their target genes of
mitochondrial function, lipid metabolism, and oxidative phosphorylation is
consistent with slow (oxidative) tonic smooth muscle. In contrast MA was enriched
in contractile and calcium channel mRNAs suggestive of components of fast
(glycolytic) phasic smooth muscle. Myosin phosphatase regulatory subunit paralogs
Mypt1 and p85 were expressed at similar levels, while smooth muscle MLCK was the 
only such kinase expressed, suggesting functional redundancy of the former but
not the latter in accordance with mouse knockout studies. With regard to
vaso-regulatory signals, purinergic receptors P2rx1 and P2rx5 were reciprocally
expressed in MA versus AO, while the olfactory receptor Olr59 was enriched in MA.
Alox15, which generates the EDHF HPETE, was enriched in MA while eNOS was equally
expressed, consistent with the greater role of EDHF in the smaller arteries.
mRNAs that were not expressed at a level consistent with impugned function
include skeletal myogenic factors, IKK2, nonmuscle myosin, and Gnb3. This
screening analysis of gene expression in the small mesenteric resistance arteries
suggests testable hypotheses regarding unique aspects of small artery function in
the regional control of blood flow.

© 2015 The Authors. Physiological Reports published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on
behalf of the American Physiological Society and The Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4552530
PMID: 26156969  [PubMed]


18. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 Sep 15;413:13-25. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2015.05.038. Epub 
2015 Jun 23.

Expression, regulation and function of Hmgn3 during decidualization in mice.

Li DD(1), Guo CH(1), Yue L(2), Duan CC(3), Yang ZQ(1), Cao H(1), Guo B(4), Yue
ZP(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Jilin University, Changchun, PR China.
(2)College of Clinical Medicine, Jilin University, Changchun, PR China.
(3)Institute of Agro-food Technology, Jilin Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Changchun, PR China. (4)College of Veterinary Medicine, Jilin University,
Changchun, PR China. Electronic address: guobin79@jlu.edu.cn.

Although Hmgn3 is involved in the regulation of development and cellular
differentiation, its physiological roles on decidualization are still unknown.
Here we showed that Hmgn3 was highly expressed in the decidua and decidualizing
stromal cells. Overexpression of Hmgn3 variants, Hmgn3a or Hmgn3b, enhanced the
expression of decidualization markers Prl8a2 and Prl3c1, whereas inhibition of
Hmgn3 reduced their expression. Hmgn3 could mediate the effects of Hoxa10 and
cAMP on the expression of Prl8a2 and Prl3c1. Further study found that Hmgn3
directed the process of decidualization through influencing the expression of
Hand2. Progesterone could induce the expression of Hmgn3 in the ovariectomized
mouse uterus, uterine epithelial cells and stromal cells. Knockdown of Hoxa10
with siRNA alleviated the induction of progesterone and cAMP on Hmgn3 expression.
Simultaneously, siRNA-mediated down-regulation of Hmgn3 in the uterine stromal
cells could attenuate the effects of progesterone, cAMP and Hoxa10 on the
expression of Hand2. Collectively, Hmgn3 may play an important role during mouse 
decidualization.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26112184  [PubMed - in process]


19. Development. 2015 Jul 1;142(13):2304-15. doi: 10.1242/dev.118687. Epub 2015 Jun
19.

Myocardium and BMP signaling are required for endocardial differentiation.

Palencia-Desai S(1), Rost MS(1), Schumacher JA(1), Ton QV(1), Craig MP(1),
Baltrunaite K(1), Koenig AL(1), Wang J(2), Poss KD(2), Chi NC(3), Stainier DY(3),
Sumanas S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA. (2)Department of Cell Biology and Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA. 
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, UCSF, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.
(4)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA saulius.sumanas@cchmc.org.

Endocardial and myocardial progenitors originate in distinct regions of the
anterior lateral plate mesoderm and migrate to the midline where they coalesce to
form the cardiac tube. Endocardial progenitors acquire a molecular identity
distinct from other vascular endothelial cells and initiate expression of
specific genes such as nfatc1. Yet the molecular pathways and tissue interactions
involved in establishing endocardial identity are poorly understood. The
endocardium develops in tight association with cardiomyocytes. To test for a
potential role of the myocardium in endocardial morphogenesis, we used two
different zebrafish models deficient in cardiomyocytes: the hand2 mutant and a
myocardial-specific genetic ablation method. We show that in hand2 mutants
endocardial progenitors migrate to the midline but fail to assemble into a
cardiac cone and do not express markers of differentiated endocardium.
Endocardial differentiation defects were rescued by myocardial but not
endocardial-specific expression of hand2. In metronidazole-treated
myl7:nitroreductase embryos, myocardial cells were targeted for apoptosis, which 
resulted in the loss of endocardial nfatc1 expression. However, endocardial cells
were present and retained expression of general vascular endothelial markers. We 
further identified bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) as a candidate
myocardium-derived signal required for endocardial differentiation. Chemical and 
genetic inhibition of BMP signaling at the tailbud stage resulted in severe
inhibition of endocardial differentiation while there was little effect on
myocardial development. Heat-shock-induced bmp2b expression rescued endocardial
nfatc1 expression in hand2 mutants and in myocardium-depleted embryos. Our
results indicate that the myocardium is crucial for endocardial morphogenesis and
differentiation, and identify BMP as a signal involved in endocardial
differentiation.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4510589 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 26092845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. PLoS One. 2015 May 22;10(5):e0128006. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128006.
eCollection 2015.

Suppressor of Fused Is Required for Determining Digit Number and Identity via
Gli3/Fgfs/Gremlin.

Li J(1), Wang Q(1), Cui Y(1), Yang X(1), Li Y(1), Zhang X(1), Qiu M(2), Zhang
Z(3), Zhang Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Zhejiang Key Laboratory for Organogenesis and Regenerative technology,
Institute of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, College of Life and
Environmental Sciences, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou 310036, China.
(2)Zhejiang Key Laboratory for Organogenesis and Regenerative technology,
Institute of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, College of Life and
Environmental Sciences, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou 310036, China;
Department of Anatomical Sciences and Neurobiology, University of Louisville,
Louisville, Kentucky 40292, United States of America. (3)Department of
Ophthalmology, Tulane University Medical Center, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112,
United States of America.

The anterior-posterior patterning of the vertebrate limb bud requires closely
coordinated signaling interactions, including Sonic Hedgehog (Shh)-mediated
counteraction of the Gli3 transcription factor in the distal and posterior
mesenchyme of the limb bud. Suppressor of Fused (Sufu), an intracellular negative
regulator of Shh signaling via Gli2 and Gli3, is implicated in early development 
of the mouse limb bud. However, how Sufu is involved in the genetic regulation of
limb bud patterning still remains elusive. In this study, we show that the
conditional deletion of Sufu in the mesenchyme of the early limb bud results in
polydactyly with loss of digit identity and supernumerary bones in the wrist and 
the ankle. These pattern alterations are associated with anterior expansion of
HoxD genes located at the 5' end of the cluster. By focusing on gene expression
analysis of Shh/Gremlin1/Fgf signaling critical for the establishment and
maintenance of anterior-posterior patterning, we show that early response to loss
of Sufu involves anterior prolongation of Fgf4 and Fgf8 expression in the apical 
ectodermal ridge at E10.5. We also reveal the anterior activation of
Shh-dependent posterior markers Ptc1, Gli1 and Gremlin in limb buds lacking Sufu.
Furthermore, we find that loss of Sufu leads to attenuated levels of repressor
Gli2 and repressor Gli3 in the early limb bud. Moreover, expression of Hand2 is
activated in the entire limb bud at the early outgrowth stage in the mutant
lacking Sufu. Thus, we provide evidence that Sufu is involved in the genetic
network that restricts the posterior expression of Gli2/3/Hand2 and Gremlin/Fgf
in limb bud patterning.

PMCID: PMC4441507
PMID: 26001200  [PubMed - in process]


21. Nat Commun. 2015 May 18;6:6930. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7930.

PDGFRa demarcates the cardiogenic clonogenic Sca1+ stem/progenitor cell in adult 
murine myocardium.

Noseda M(1), Harada M(1), McSweeney S(1), Leja T(1), Belian E(1), Stuckey DJ(2), 
Abreu Paiva MS(1), Habib J(3), Macaulay I(4), de Smith AJ(5), al-Beidh F(1),
Sampson R(1), Lumbers RT(1), Rao P(6), Harding SE(1), Blakemore AI(7), Jacobsen
SE(4), Barahona M(8), Schneider MD(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] British Heart Foundation Centre of Research Excellence, Imperial College
London, London SW7 2AZ, UK [2] National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial
College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK. (2)1] British Heart Foundation Centre of
Research Excellence, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK [2] National
Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK [3] Centre 
for Advanced Biomedical Imaging (CABI), University College London, London WC1E
6DD, UK. (3)1] British Heart Foundation Centre of Research Excellence, Imperial
College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK [2] National Heart and Lung Institute,
Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK [3] Department of Biomedical
Engineering, King's College London, London SE1 7EH, UK. (4)Haematopoietic Stem
Cell Biology, MRC Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of
Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK. (5)1] Department of Medicine, Imperial College
London, London SW7 2AZ, UK [2] Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.
(6)1] Texas Children's Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 
77030, USA [2] Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas 77030, USA. (7)Department of Medicine, Imperial College London, London SW7 
2AZ, UK. (8)1] British Heart Foundation Centre of Research Excellence, Imperial
College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK [2] Department of Mathematics, Imperial
College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK.

Cardiac progenitor/stem cells in adult hearts represent an attractive therapeutic
target for heart regeneration, though (inter)-relationships among reported cells 
remain obscure. Using single-cell qRT-PCR and clonal analyses, here we define
four subpopulations of cardiac progenitor/stem cells in adult mouse myocardium
all sharing stem cell antigen-1 (Sca1), based on side population (SP) phenotype, 
PECAM-1 (CD31) and platelet-derived growth factor receptor-a (PDGFRa) expression.
SP status predicts clonogenicity and cardiogenic gene expression (Gata4/6, Hand2 
and Tbx5/20), properties segregating more specifically to PDGFRa(+) cells. Clonal
progeny of single Sca1(+) SP cells show cardiomyocyte, endothelial and smooth
muscle lineage potential after cardiac grafting, augmenting cardiac function
although durable engraftment is rare. PDGFRa(-) cells are characterized by
Kdr/Flk1, Cdh5, CD31 and lack of clonogenicity. PDGFRa(+)/CD31(-) cells derive
from cells formerly expressing Mesp1, Nkx2-5, Isl1, Gata5 and Wt1, distinct from 
PDGFRa(-)/CD31(+) cells (Gata5 low; Flk1 and Tie2 high). Thus, PDGFRa demarcates 
the clonogenic cardiogenic Sca1(+) stem/progenitor cell.

PMCID: PMC4479024
PMID: 25980517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 21;10(4):e0124756. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124756.
eCollection 2015.

A Suppressive Antagonism Evidences Progesterone and Estrogen Receptor Pathway
Interaction with Concomitant Regulation of Hand2, Bmp2 and ERK during Early
Decidualization.

Mestre-Citrinovitz AC(1), Kleff V(2), Vallejo G(1), Winterhager E(3), Saragüeta
P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología y Medicina Experimental, IByME-Conicet, Buenos Aires,
Argentina. (2)Institut für Anatomie, Universaetsklinikum Duisburg-Essen, Essen,
Germany. (3)Institut für Molekulare Biologie, Universaetsklinikum Duisburg-Essen,
Essen, Germany.

Progesterone receptor and estrogen receptor participate in growth and
differentiation of the different rat decidual regions. Steroid hormone receptor
antagonists were used to study steroid regulation of decidualization. Here we
describe a suppressive interaction between progesterone receptor (onapristone)
and estrogen receptor (ICI182780) antagonists and their relation to a rescue
phenomenon with concomitant regulation of Hand2, Bmp2 and p-ERK1/2 during the
early decidualization steps. Phenotypes of decidua development produced by
antagonist treatments were characterized by morphology, proliferation,
differentiation, angiogenesis and expression of signaling molecules. We found
that suppression of progesterone receptor activity by onapristone treatment
resulted in resorption of the implantation sites with concomitant decrease in
progesterone and estrogen receptors, PCNA, KI67 antigen, DESMIN, CCND3, CX43,
Prl8a2, and signaling players such as transcription factor Hand2, Bmp2 mRNAs and 
p-ERK1/2. Moreover, FGF-2 and Vegfa increased as a consequence of onapristone
treatment. Implantation sites from antagonist of estrogen receptor treated rats
developed all decidual regions, but showed an anomalous blood vessel formation at
the mesometrial part of the decidua. The deleterious effect of onapristone was
partially counteracted by the impairment of estrogen receptor activity with
rescue of expression levels of hormone steroid receptors, proliferation and
differentiation markers, and the induction of a probably compensatory increase in
signaling molecules Hand2, Bmp2 and ERK1/2 activation compared to oil treated
controls. This novel drug interaction during decidualization could be applied to 
pathological endometrial cell proliferation processes to improve therapies using 
steroid hormone receptor targets.

PMCID: PMC4405574
PMID: 25897495  [PubMed - in process]


23. BMC Public Health. 2015 Feb 7;15:109. doi: 10.1186/s12889-015-1484-0.

Comparative Effectiveness of Post-Discharge Strategies for Hospitalized Smokers: 
study protocol for the Helping HAND 2 randomized controlled trial.

Reid ZZ(1,)(2), Regan S(3,)(4,)(5), Kelley JH(6,)(7), Streck JM(8), Ylioja T(9), 
Tindle HA(10), Chang Y(11,)(12), Levy DE(13,)(14,)(15), Park ER(16,)(17,)(18),
Singer DE(19,)(20), Carpenter KM(21), Reyen M(22,)(23), Rigotti
NA(24,)(25,)(26,)(27).

Author information: 
(1)Tobacco Research and Treatment Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
MA, USA. zreid@partners.org. (2)Mongan Institute for Health Policy, Massachusetts
General Hospital and Partners HealthCare, Boston, MA, USA. zreid@partners.org.
(3)Tobacco Research and Treatment Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
MA, USA. sregan@partners.org. (4)Division of General Internal Medicine, Medical
Service, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. sregan@partners.org.
(5)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
sregan@partners.org. (6)Tobacco Research and Treatment Center, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. jkelley4@partners.org. (7)Mongan Institute for
Health Policy, Massachusetts General Hospital and Partners HealthCare, Boston,
MA, USA. jkelley4@partners.org. (8)Department of Psychology, University of
Vermont, Burlington, VT, USA. jstreck@uvm.edu. (9)School of Social Work,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. yliojat@upmc.edu. (10)Department
of Medicine, Vanderbilt Initiatives in Tobacco, Addiction and Lifestyle (VITAL)
Center, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.
hilary.tindle@vanderbilt.edu. (11)Division of General Internal Medicine, Medical 
Service, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. ychang@partners.org.
(12)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
ychang@partners.org. (13)Tobacco Research and Treatment Center, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. dlevy3@partners.org. (14)Mongan Institute for 
Health Policy, Massachusetts General Hospital and Partners HealthCare, Boston,
MA, USA. dlevy3@partners.org. (15)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA. dlevy3@partners.org. (16)Tobacco Research and Treatment Center, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. epark@partners.org. (17)Mongan
Institute for Health Policy, Massachusetts General Hospital and Partners
HealthCare, Boston, MA, USA. epark@partners.org. (18)Department of Psychiatry,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. epark@partners.org. (19)Division of
General Internal Medicine, Medical Service, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, MA, USA. desinger@partners.org. (20)Department of Medicine, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. desinger@partners.org. (21)Alere Wellbeing,
Inc., Research Center, Seattle, WA, USA. Kelly.Carpenter@alere.com. (22)Tobacco
Research and Treatment Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
mreyen@partners.org. (23)Division of General Internal Medicine, Medical Service, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. mreyen@partners.org. (24)Tobacco
Research and Treatment Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
nrigotti@partners.org. (25)Mongan Institute for Health Policy, Massachusetts
General Hospital and Partners HealthCare, Boston, MA, USA. nrigotti@partners.org.
(26)Division of General Internal Medicine, Medical Service, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. nrigotti@partners.org. (27)Department of Medicine,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. nrigotti@partners.org.

BACKGROUND: Smoking cessation interventions for hospitalized smokers are
effective in promoting smoking cessation, but only if the tobacco dependence
treatment continues after the patient leaves the hospital. Sustaining tobacco
dependence treatment after hospital discharge is a challenge for health care
systems. Our previous single-site randomized controlled trial demonstrated the
effectiveness of an intervention that facilitated the delivery of comprehensive
tobacco cessation treatment, including both medication and counseling, after
hospital discharge. We subsequently streamlined the intervention model to
increase its potential for dissemination. This new model is being tested in a
larger multi-site trial with broader eligibility criteria in order to enroll a
more representative sample of hospitalized smokers. This paper describes the
trial design and contrasts it with the earlier study.
METHODS/DESIGN: A 2-arm, 3-site randomized controlled trial is testing the
hypothesis that a multi-component Sustained Care intervention is more effective
than Standard Care in helping hospitalized cigarette smokers stop smoking after
hospital discharge. The trial enrolls adult daily cigarette smokers who are
admitted to 1 of 3 participating hospitals in Massachusetts or Pennsylvania.
Participants receive the same smoking cessation intervention in the hospital.
They are randomly assigned to receive either Standard Care or Sustained Care
after hospital discharge. Participants in the Sustained Care arm receive a free
3-month supply of FDA-approved smoking cessation medication and 5 interactive
voice response calls that provide tailored motivational messages, medication
refills, and access to a live tobacco treatment counselor. Participants in the
Standard Care arm receive a smoking cessation medication recommendation and
information about community resources. Outcomes are assessed at 1, 3, and 6
months after discharge. The primary outcome is biochemically-validated tobacco
abstinence for the past 7 days at 6-month follow-up. Other outcome measures
include self-reported tobacco abstinence measures, use of medication and
counseling after discharge, hospital readmissions, and program
cost-effectiveness.
DISCUSSION: We adapted a proven intervention for hospitalized smokers to enhance 
its potential for dissemination and are testing it in a multi-site trial. Study
enrollment data suggests that the trial achieved the goal of recruiting a broader
sample of hospitalized smokers.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Comparative Effectiveness of Post-Discharge Strategies for
Hospitalized Smokers (Helping HAND2) NCT01714323. Registered October 22, 2012.

PMCID: PMC4328622
PMID: 25879193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Nat Commun. 2015 Apr 14;6:6698. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7698.

Molecular development of chondrichthyan claspers and the evolution of copulatory 
organs.

O'Shaughnessy KL(1), Dahn RD, Cohn MJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, UF Genetics Institute,
University of Florida, PO Box 103610, Gainesville, Florida 32610, USA. (2)1]
Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, UF Genetics Institute,
University of Florida, PO Box 103610, Gainesville, Florida 32610, USA [2] Howard 
Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Biology, University of Florida, PO Box
103610, Gainesville, Florida 32610, USA.

The earliest known vertebrate copulatory organs are claspers, paired penis-like
structures that are associated with evolution of internal fertilization and
viviparity in Devonian placoderms. Today, only male chondrichthyans possess
claspers, which extend from posterior pelvic fins and function as intromittent
organs. Here we report that clasper development from pelvic fins of male skates
is controlled by hormonal regulation of the Sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway. We show
that Shh signalling is necessary for male clasper development and is sufficient
to induce clasper cartilages in females. Androgen receptor (AR) controls the
male-specific pattern of Shh in pelvic fins by regulation of Hand2. We identify
an androgen response element (ARE) in the Hand2 locus and present biochemical
evidence that AR can directly bind the Hand2 ARE. Together, our results suggest
that the genetic circuit for appendage development evolved an androgen regulatory
input, which prolonged signalling activity and drove clasper skeletogenesis in
male fins.

PMCID: PMC4403318
PMID: 25868783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Int J Nanomedicine. 2015 Mar 6;10:1841-54. doi: 10.2147/IJN.S75124. eCollection
2015.

Peptide-enhanced mRNA transfection in cultured mouse cardiac fibroblasts and
direct reprogramming towards cardiomyocyte-like cells.

Lee K(1), Yu P(2), Lingampalli N(3), Kim HJ(3), Tang R(3), Murthy N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA ; UC
Berkeley and UCSF Joint Graduate Program in Bioengineering, Berkeley/San
Francisco, CA, USA. (2)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, San
Francisco, CA, USA. (3)Department of Bioengineering, University of California,
Berkeley, CA, USA.

The treatment of myocardial infarction is a major challenge in medicine due to
the inability of heart tissue to regenerate. Direct reprogramming of endogenous
cardiac fibroblasts into functional cardiomyocytes via the delivery of
transcription factor mRNAs has the potential to regenerate cardiac tissue and to 
treat heart failure. Even though mRNA delivery to cardiac fibroblasts has the
therapeutic potential, mRNA transfection in cardiac fibroblasts has been
challenging. Herein, we develop an efficient mRNA transfection in cultured mouse 
cardiac fibroblasts via a polyarginine-fused heart-targeting peptide and
lipofectamine complex, termed C-Lipo and demonstrate the partial direct
reprogramming of cardiac fibroblasts towards cardiomyocyte cells. C-Lipo enabled 
the mRNA-induced direct cardiac reprogramming due to its efficient transfection
with low toxicity, which allowed for multiple transfections of Gata4, Mef2c, and 
Tbx5 (GMT) mRNAs for a period of 2 weeks. The induced cardiomyocyte-like cells
had a-MHC promoter-driven GFP expression and striated cardiac muscle structure
from a-actinin immunohistochemistry. GMT mRNA transfection of cultured mouse
cardiac fibroblasts via C-Lipo significantly increased expression of the
cardiomyocyte marker genes, Actc1, Actn2, Gja1, Hand2, and Tnnt2, after 2 weeks
of transfection. Moreover, this study provides the first direct evidence that the
stoichiometry of the GMT reprogramming factors influence the expression of
cardiomyocyte marker genes. Our results demonstrate that mRNA delivery is a
potential approach for cardiomyocyte generation.

PMCID: PMC4358644
PMID: 25834424  [PubMed - in process]


26. Hum Reprod. 2015 Apr;30(4):800-11. doi: 10.1093/humrep/dev030. Epub 2015 Mar 3.

Effects of ulipristal acetate on human embryo attachment and endometrial cell
gene expression in an in vitro co-culture system.

Berger C(1), Boggavarapu NR(1), Menezes J(2), Lalitkumar PG(3),
Gemzell-Danielsson K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Division of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, Karolinska Institutet/Karolinska University Hospital, S-171 76
Stockholm, Sweden. (2)Fertilitetscentrum, Stockholm, Sweden. (3)Department of
Women's and Children's Health, Division of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Karolinska
Institutet/Karolinska University Hospital, S-171 76 Stockholm, Sweden
kristina.gemzell@ki.se lalit.kumar@ki.se.

STUDY QUESTION: Does ulipristal acetate (UPA) used for emergency contraception
(EC) interfere with the human embryo implantation process?
SUMMARY ANSWER: UPA, at the dosage used for EC, does not affect human embryo
implantation process, in vitro.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: A single pre-ovulatory dose of UPA (30 mg) acts by
delaying or inhibiting ovulation and is recommended as first choice among
emergency contraceptive pills due to its efficacy. The compound has also been
demonstrated to have a dose-dependent effect on the endometrium, which
theoretically could impair endometrial receptivity but its direct action on human
embryo implantation has not yet been studied.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: Effect of UPA on embryo implantation process was
studied in an in vitro endometrial construct. Human embryos were randomly added
to the cultures and cultured for 5 more days with UPA (n = 10) or with vehicle
alone (n = 10) to record the attachment of embryos.
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: Endometrial biopsies were obtained from
healthy, fertile women on cycle day LH+4 and stromal and epithelial cells were
isolated. A three-dimensional in vitro endometrial co-culture system was
constructed by mixing stromal cells with collagen covered with a layer of
epithelial cells and cultured in progesterone containing medium until confluence.
The treatment group received 200 ng/ml of UPA. Healthy, viable human embryos were
placed on both control and treatment cultures. Five days later the cultures were 
tested for the attachment of embryos and the 3D endometrial constructs were
analysed for endometrial receptivity markers by real-time PCR.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: There was no significant difference in the
embryo attachment rate between the UPA treated group and the control group as 5
out of 10 human embryos exposed to UPA and 7 out of 10 embryos in the control
group attached to the endometrial cell surface (P = 0.650). Out of 17 known
receptivity genes studied here, only 2 genes, HBEGF (P = 0.009) and IL6 (P =
0.025) had a significant up-regulation and 4 genes, namely HAND2 (P = 0.003), OPN
(P = 0.003), CALCR (P = 0.016) and FGF2 (P = 0.023) were down-regulated with the 
exposure of UPA, compared with control group.
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: This proof of concept study was conducted with 
a few human embryos, as their availability was limited. Although the 3D model
used for this study is well established and the artificial endometrial luminal
epithelium shown to express progesterone regulated markers of endometrial
receptivity it is still an in vitro model, lacking all cell types that constitute
the receptive endometrium in vivo.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: This study provides new insights on the
mechanism of action of UPA on human embryo implantation, demonstrating that UPA
in a dosage used for EC does not affect embryo viability and the implantation
process of embryo. Progesterone receptor modulators (PRMs) hold the potential to 
be attractive estrogen- and gestagen-free contraceptives and thus may be made
available to a larger proportion of women globally due to these findings.
STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTERESTS: Swedish Research Council
(K2010-54X-14212-09-3) and support provided through the regional agreement on
medical training and clinical research (ALF) between Stockholm County Council and
Karolinska University Hospital.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25740886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Biomaterials. 2015 May;49:37-46. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2015.01.022. Epub
2015 Feb 11.

Novel human-derived extracellular matrix induces in vitro and in vivo
vascularization and inhibits fibrosis.

Moore MC(1), Pandolfi V(1), McFetridge PS(2).

Author information: 
(1)J. Crayton Pruitt Family Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of
Florida, JG-56 Biomedical Sciences Building, P.O. Box 116131, Gainesville, FL
32611-6131, USA. (2)J. Crayton Pruitt Family Department of Biomedical
Engineering, University of Florida, JG-56 Biomedical Sciences Building, P.O. Box 
116131, Gainesville, FL 32611-6131, USA. Electronic address:
pmcfetridge@bme.ufl.edu.

The inability to vascularize engineered organs and revascularize areas of
infarction has been a major roadblock to delivering successful regenerative
medicine therapies to the clinic. These investigations detail an isolated human
extracellular matrix derived from the placenta (hPM) that induces vasculogenesis 
in vitro and angiogenesis in vivo within bioengineered tissues, with significant 
immune reductive properties. Compositional analysis showed ECM components
(fibrinogen, laminin), angiogenic cytokines (angiogenin, FGF), and immune-related
cytokines (annexins, DEFA1) in near physiological ratios. Gene expression
profiles of endothelial cells seeded onto the matrix displayed upregulation of
angiogenic genes (TGFB1, VEGFA), remodeling genes (MMP9, LAMA5) and vascular
development genes (HAND2, LECT1). Angiogenic networks displayed a time dependent 
stability in comparison to current in vitro approaches that degrade rapidly. In
vivo, matrix-dosed bioscaffolds showed enhanced angiogenesis and significantly
reduced fibrosis in comparison to current angiogenic biomaterials. Implementation
of this human placenta derived extracellular matrix provides an alternative to
Matrigel and, due to its human derivation, its development may have significant
clinical applications leading to advances in therapeutic angiogenesis techniques 
and tissue engineering.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4346784 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25725553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Cell Rep. 2014 Dec 24;9(6):2071-83. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.11.021. Epub 2014 
Dec 11.

Hand2 is an essential regulator for two Notch-dependent functions within the
embryonic endocardium.

VanDusen NJ(1), Casanovas J(1), Vincentz JW(1), Firulli BA(1), Osterwalder M(2), 
Lopez-Rios J(2), Zeller R(2), Zhou B(3), Grego-Bessa J(4), De La Pompa JL(5),
Shou W(1), Firulli AB(6).

Author information: 
(1)Riley Heart Research Center, Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Departments 
of Pediatrics and Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University,
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. (2)Developmental Genetics, Department of
Biomedicine, University of Basel, 4058 Basel, Switzerland. (3)Department of
Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New York, NY 10461, USA.
(4)Department of Developmental Biology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center,
New York, NY 10021, USA. (5)Cardiovascular Developmental Biology Program,
Cardiovascular Development and Repair Department, Centro Nacional de
Investigaciones Cardiovasculares (CNIC), Madrid 28029, Spain. (6)Riley Heart
Research Center, Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Departments of Pediatrics
and Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University, Indianapolis, IN 46202,
USA. Electronic address: tfirulli@iu.edu.

The basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor Hand2 plays critical roles
during cardiac morphogenesis via expression and function within myocardial,
neural crest, and epicardial cell populations. Here, we show that Hand2 plays two
essential Notch-dependent roles within the endocardium. Endocardial ablation of
Hand2 results in failure to develop a patent tricuspid valve, intraventricular
septum defects, and hypotrabeculated ventricles, which collectively resemble the 
human congenital defect tricuspid atresia. We show endocardial Hand2 to be an
integral downstream component of a Notch endocardium-to-myocardium signaling
pathway and a direct transcriptional regulator of Neuregulin1. Additionally,
Hand2 participates in endocardium-to-endocardium-based cell signaling, with Hand2
mutant hearts displaying an increased density of coronary lumens. Molecular
analyses further reveal dysregulation of several crucial components of Vegf
signaling, including VegfA, VegfR2, Nrp1, and VegfR3. Thus, Hand2 functions as a 
crucial downstream transcriptional effector of endocardial Notch signaling during
both cardiogenesis and coronary vasculogenesis.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4277501
PMID: 25497097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Feb;35(4):649-61. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00860-14. Epub 2014 Dec 8.

MyoR modulates cardiac conduction by repressing Gata4.

Harris JP(1), Bhakta M(1), Bezprozvannaya S(2), Wang L(1), Lubczyk C(1), Olson
EN(3), Munshi NV(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine (Cardiology Division), UT Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, Texas, USA. (2)Department of Molecular Biology, UT Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA. (3)Department of Molecular Biology, UT
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA Hamon Center for Regenerative
Science and Medicine, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine (Cardiology Division), UT Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, Texas, USA Department of Molecular Biology, UT Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA Hamon Center for Regenerative Science and
Medicine, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA McDermott Center for
Human Growth and Development, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA 
Nikhil.Munshi@UTSouthwestern.edu.

The cardiac conduction system coordinates electrical activation through a series 
of interconnected structures, including the atrioventricular node (AVN), the
central connection point that delays impulse propagation to optimize cardiac
performance. Although recent studies have uncovered important molecular details
of AVN formation, relatively little is known about the transcriptional mechanisms
that regulate AV delay, the primary function of the mature AVN. We identify here 
MyoR as a novel transcription factor expressed in Cx30.2(+) cells of the AVN. We 
show that MyoR specifically inhibits a Cx30.2 enhancer required for AVN-specific 
gene expression. Furthermore, we demonstrate that MyoR interacts directly with
Gata4 to mediate transcriptional repression. Our studies reveal that MyoR
contains two nonequivalent repression domains. While the MyoR C-terminal
repression domain inhibits transcription in a context-dependent manner, the
N-terminal repression domain can function in a heterologous context to convert
the Hand2 activator into a repressor. In addition, we show that genetic deletion 
of MyoR in mice increases Cx30.2 expression by 50% and prolongs AV delay by 13%. 
Taken together, we conclude that MyoR modulates a Gata4-dependent regulatory
circuit that establishes proper AV delay, and these findings may have wider
implications for the variability of cardiac rhythm observed in the general
population.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4301724
PMID: 25487574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2015 Jan;34(1):65-73. doi: 10.1097/PGP.0000000000000106.

Heart and Neural Crest Derivatives Expressed Transcript 2 (HAND2): a novel
biomarker for the identification of atypical hyperplasia and Type I endometrial
carcinoma.

Buell-Gutbrod R(1), Cavallo A, Lee N, Montag A, Gwin K.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology (R.B.-G., A.C., A.M., K.G.) Gynecologic Oncology
(N.L.), University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois Department of Pathology (K.G.), 
UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas.

Progesterone inhibits the proliferative growth effects of estrogen in the
endometrium and prevents the development of endometrial hyperplasia and Type I
adenocarcinoma. The exact mechanism of this action is unknown. The
progesterone-induced helix-loop-helix transcription factor Heart and Neural Crest
Derivatives Expressed 2 (Hand2) was recently shown to suppress production of
growth factors in the endometrium. In Hand2 knockout mice, continuous
proliferation of the endometrium was observed. In this study, archival
paraffin-embedded tissue from 56 hysterectomy specimens was examined by
immunohistochemistry for the expression and localization of Hand2, estrogen
receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and Ki-67. Diagnoses included
disordered proliferative endometrium, simple and complex hyperplasia with or
without atypia, and endometrioid adenocarcinoma. Hand2 expression is localized to
endometrial stromal nuclei. In benign endometrium, Hand2 expression was moderate 
to strong (10/11; 91%), with weak Hand2 expression in only 1 case (1/11; 9%).
Similar Hand2 expression patterns were observed in disordered proliferative
endometrium and simple hyperplasia without atypia, with moderate to strong
expression in 91% of cases (10/11) and weak expression in 9% of cases (1/11). In 
contrast, simple and complex hyperplasia with atypia exhibited moderate to strong
Hand2 expression in 8% of cases (1/12) and a loss of expression or weak
expression in 92% of cases (11/12). In endometrioid adenocarcinomas, Hand2
expression was absent in all cases (22/22). Hand2 is expressed in the stroma of
benign endometrium, but expression is significantly reduced or lost in atypical
hyperplasia and endometrioid carcinoma. Thus, the absence of Hand2 expression may
be a useful biomarker for atypical hyperplasia and endometrioid carcinoma.

PMID: 25473755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Dev Cell. 2014 Nov 10;31(3):345-57. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2014.09.018. Epub 2014 
Nov 10.

HAND2 targets define a network of transcriptional regulators that
compartmentalize the early limb bud mesenchyme.

Osterwalder M(1), Speziale D(1), Shoukry M(2), Mohan R(3), Ivanek R(1), Kohler
M(4), Beisel C(4), Wen X(5), Scales SJ(5), Christoffels VM(3), Visel A(6),
Lopez-Rios J(7), Zeller R(8).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics, Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, 4058
Basel, Switzerland. (2)Genomics Division, MS 84-171, Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. (3)Department of Anatomy, Embryology, and
Physiology, Heart Failure Research Center, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, 1100 DD Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (4)Department for Biosystems
Science and Engineering, Federal Institute of Technology Zurich, 4058 Basel,
Switzerland. (5)Department of Molecular Biology, Genentech, Inc., 1 DNA Way,
South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA. (6)Genomics Division, MS 84-171, Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA; U.S. Department of Energy 
Joint Genome Institute, Walnut Creek, CA 94598, USA; School of Natural Sciences, 
University of California, Merced, Merced, CA 95343, USA. (7)Developmental
Genetics, Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, 4058 Basel,
Switzerland. Electronic address: javier.lopez-rios@unibas.ch. (8)Developmental
Genetics, Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, 4058 Basel,
Switzerland. Electronic address: rolf.zeller@unibas.ch.

The genetic networks that govern vertebrate development are well studied, but how
the interactions of trans-acting factors with cis-regulatory modules (CRMs) are
integrated into spatiotemporal regulation of gene expression is not clear. The
transcriptional regulator HAND2 is required during limb, heart, and branchial
arch development. Here, we identify the genomic regions enriched in HAND2
chromatin complexes from mouse embryos and limb buds. Then we analyze the HAND2
target CRMs in the genomic landscapes encoding transcriptional regulators
required in early limb buds. HAND2 controls the expression of genes functioning
in the proximal limb bud and orchestrates the establishment of anterior and
posterior polarity of the nascent limb bud mesenchyme by impacting Gli3 and Tbx3 
expression. TBX3 is required downstream of HAND2 to refine the posterior Gli3
expression boundary. Our analysis uncovers the transcriptional circuits that
function in establishing distinct mesenchymal compartments downstream of HAND2
and upstream of SHH signaling.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4357275
PMID: 25453830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Clin Oral Investig. 2015 Jul;19(6):1223-33. doi: 10.1007/s00784-014-1353-8. Epub 
2014 Nov 5.

Comparison of gene expression between mandibular and iliac bone-derived cells.

Lee JT(1), Choi SY, Kim HL, Kim JY, Lee HJ, Kwon TG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral & Maxillofacial Surgery, School of Dentistry, Kyungpook
National University, Daegu, Republic of Korea.

OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this study is to investigate the differences in gene
expression between the human mandibular and iliac bone-derived cells (BCs) for
better understanding of the site-specific characteristics of bones.
METHODS: Primary cells were obtained from mandibular and iliac bones from six
healthy, elderly donors. To investigate site-specific differences, gene
expression profile of mandibular and iliac BC from the same donors were compared 
via cDNA microarray analysis.
RESULTS: A comparison of the gene expression profiles revealed that 82 genes were
significantly upregulated and 66 genes were downregulated with 1.5 fold or
greater in mandibular versus iliac BCs. The most significantly differentially
regulated genes were associated with skeletal system development or morphogenesis
(SIX1, MSX1, MSX2, HAND2, PRRX1, OSR2, HOX gene family, PITX2). Especially,
upregulated genes in mandibular BC were related with tooth morphogenesis,
originated from the ectomesenchyme. Microarray analysis revealed that Msx1 was
2.03-fold and Msx2 was 1.99-fold upregulated in mandibular versus iliac BCs (both
p<U+2009>< 0.01). Furthermore, in mandibular BCs, all members of the HOX gene family
that were analyzed were downregulated (p<U+2009>< 0.01) and osteopontin was also
downregulated by 2.84-fold (p<U+2009>< 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Site-specific differences between jaw and long bones can be
explained by the differences in gene expression patterns. Our results suggest
that bone cell-derived cells maintain the genetic characteristics of their
embryological origin.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: This study revealed fundamental differences in gene
expression between the mandibular and iliac bone in humans. These differences
could be important for understanding jaw bone-specific development of
bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaw.

PMID: 25366872  [PubMed - in process]


33. Development. 2014 Nov;141(22):4267-78. doi: 10.1242/dev.114025. Epub 2014 Oct 24.

Induction of diverse cardiac cell types by reprogramming fibroblasts with cardiac
transcription factors.

Nam YJ(1), Lubczyk C(2), Bhakta M(2), Zang T(3), Fernandez-Perez A(2), McAnally
J(3), Bassel-Duby R(3), Olson EN(4), Munshi NV(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX
75390, USA Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine,
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232, USA. (2)Department of Internal
Medicine, Division of Cardiology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX
75390, USA. (3)Department of Molecular Biology, UT Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA. (4)Department of Molecular Biology, UT Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA Hamon Center for Regenerative Science and
Medicine, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA
eric.olson@utsouthwestern.edu nikhil.munshi@utsouthwestern.edu. (5)Department of 
Molecular Biology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA
Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Cardiology, UT Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA McDermott Center for Human Growth and Development, 
UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA
eric.olson@utsouthwestern.edu nikhil.munshi@utsouthwestern.edu.

Various combinations of cardiogenic transcription factors, including Gata4 (G),
Hand2 (H), Mef2c (M) and Tbx5 (T), can reprogram fibroblasts into induced
cardiac-like myocytes (iCLMs) in vitro and in vivo. Given that optimal cardiac
function relies on distinct yet functionally interconnected atrial, ventricular
and pacemaker (PM) cardiomyocytes (CMs), it remains to be seen which subtypes are
generated by direct reprogramming and whether this process can be harnessed to
produce a specific CM of interest. Here, we employ a PM-specific Hcn4-GFP
reporter mouse and a spectrum of CM subtype-specific markers to investigate the
range of cellular phenotypes generated by reprogramming of primary fibroblasts.
Unexpectedly, we find that a combination of four transcription factors (4F)
optimized for Hcn4-GFP expression does not generate beating PM cells due to
inadequate sarcomeric protein expression and organization. However, applying
strict single-cell criteria to GHMT-reprogrammed cells, we observe induction of
diverse cellular phenotypes, including those resembling immature forms of all
three major cardiac subtypes (i.e. atrial, ventricular and pacemaker). In
addition, we demonstrate that cells induced by GHMT are directly reprogrammed and
do not arise from an Nxk2.5(+) progenitor cell intermediate. Taken together, our 
results suggest a remarkable degree of plasticity inherent to GHMT reprogramming 
and provide a starting point for optimization of CM subtype-specific
reprogramming protocols.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4302916
PMID: 25344074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Am Heart Assoc. 2014 Oct 14;3(5):e001271. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.114.001271.

Rac1 signaling is critical to cardiomyocyte polarity and embryonic heart
development.

Leung C(1), Lu X(2), Liu M(3), Feng Q(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Schulich School of Medicine and
Dentistry, The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada (C.L.,
X.L., Q.F.) Collaborative Program in Developmental Biology, The University of
Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada (C.L.). (2)Department of Physiology and 
Pharmacology, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, The University of
Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada (C.L., X.L., Q.F.). (3)Lawson Health
Research Institute, The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada
(M.L., Q.F.). (4)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Schulich School of
Medicine and Dentistry, The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario,
Canada (C.L., X.L., Q.F.) Department of Medicine, Schulich School of Medicine and
Dentistry The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada (Q.F.)
Lawson Health Research Institute, The University of Western Ontario, London,
Ontario, Canada (M.L., Q.F.).

BACKGROUND: Defects in cardiac septation are the most common form of congenital
heart disease, but the mechanisms underlying these defects are still poorly
understood. The small GTPase Rac1 is implicated in planar cell polarity of
epithelial cells in Drosophila; however, its role in mammalian cardiomyocyte
polarity is not clear. We tested the hypothesis that Rac1 signaling in the second
heart field regulates cardiomyocyte polarity, chamber septation, and right
ventricle development during embryonic heart development.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Mice with second heart field-specific deficiency of Rac1
(Rac1(SHF)) exhibited ventricular and atrial septal defects, a thinner right
ventricle myocardium, and a bifid cardiac apex. Fate-mapping analysis showed that
second heart field contribution to the interventricular septum and right
ventricle was deficient in Rac1(SHF) hearts. Notably, cardiomyocytes had a
spherical shape with disrupted F-actin filaments in Rac1(SHF) compared with
elongated and well-aligned cardiomyocytes in littermate controls. Expression of
Scrib, a core protein in planar cell polarity, was lost in Rac1(SHF) hearts with 
decreased expression of WAVE and Arp2/3, leading to decreased migratory ability. 
In addition, Rac1-deficient neonatal cardiomyocytes displayed defects in cell
projections, lamellipodia formation, and cell elongation. Furthermore, apoptosis 
was increased and the expression of Gata4, Tbx5, Nkx2.5, and Hand2 transcription 
factors was decreased in the Rac1(SHF) right ventricle myocardium.
CONCLUSIONS: Deficiency of Rac1 in the second heart field impairs elongation and 
cytoskeleton organization of cardiomyocytes and results in congenital septal
defects, thin right ventricle myocardium, and a bifid cardiac apex. Our study
suggests that Rac1 signaling is critical to cardiomyocyte polarity and embryonic 
heart development.

© 2014 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., 
by Wiley Blackwell.

PMCID: PMC4323834
PMID: 25315346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. PLoS Genet. 2014 Sep 25;10(9):e1004671. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004671.
eCollection 2014.

Nipbl and mediator cooperatively regulate gene expression to control limb
development.

Muto A(1), Ikeda S(2), Lopez-Burks ME(3), Kikuchi Y(2), Calof AL(4), Lander
AD(3), Schilling TF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental & Cell Biology, University of California, Irvine, 
Irvine, California, United States of America; Center for Complex Biological
Systems, University of California, Irvine, Irvine California; Department of
Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Hiroshima University,
Higashi-Hiroshima, Hiroshima, Japan. (2)Department of Biological Science,
Graduate School of Science, Hiroshima University, Higashi-Hiroshima, Hiroshima,
Japan. (3)Department of Developmental & Cell Biology, University of California,
Irvine, Irvine, California, United States of America; Center for Complex
Biological Systems, University of California, Irvine, Irvine California.
(4)Department of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Hiroshima
University, Higashi-Hiroshima, Hiroshima, Japan; Department of Anatomy &
Neurobiology, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, California, United States
of America.

Haploinsufficiency for Nipbl, a cohesin loading protein, causes Cornelia de Lange
Syndrome (CdLS), the most common "cohesinopathy". It has been proposed that the
effects of Nipbl-haploinsufficiency result from disruption of long-range
communication between DNA elements. Here we use zebrafish and mouse models of
CdLS to examine how transcriptional changes caused by Nipbl deficiency give rise 
to limb defects, a common condition in individuals with CdLS. In the zebrafish
pectoral fin (forelimb), knockdown of Nipbl expression led to size reductions and
patterning defects that were preceded by dysregulated expression of key early
limb development genes, including fgfs, shha, hand2 and multiple hox genes. In
limb buds of Nipbl-haploinsufficient mice, transcriptome analysis revealed many
similar gene expression changes, as well as altered expression of additional
classes of genes that play roles in limb development. In both species, the
pattern of dysregulation of hox-gene expression depended on genomic location
within the Hox clusters. In view of studies suggesting that Nipbl colocalizes
with the mediator complex, which facilitates enhancer-promoter communication, we 
also examined zebrafish deficient for the Med12 Mediator subunit, and found they 
resembled Nipbl-deficient fish in both morphology and gene expression. Moreover, 
combined partial reduction of both Nipbl and Med12 had a strongly synergistic
effect, consistent with both molecules acting in a common pathway. In addition,
three-dimensional fluorescent in situ hybridization revealed that Nipbl and Med12
are required to bring regions containing long-range enhancers into close
proximity with the zebrafish hoxda cluster. These data demonstrate a crucial role
for Nipbl in limb development, and support the view that its actions on multiple 
gene pathways result from its influence, together with Mediator, on regulation of
long-range chromosomal interactions.

PMCID: PMC4177752
PMID: 25255084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2014;110:129-52. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-405943-6.00003-8.

The Hand2 gene dosage effect in developmental defects and human congenital
disorders.

Tamura M(1), Amano T(2), Shiroishi T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Technology and Development Team for Mouse Phenotyping Analysis, RIKEN
BioResource Center, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan. Electronic address:
matamura@brc.riken.jp. (2)Mammalian Genetics Laboratory, Genetic Strains Research
Center, National Institute of Genetics, Mishima, Shizuoka, Japan. (3)Mammalian
Genetics Laboratory, Genetic Strains Research Center, National Institute of
Genetics, Mishima, Shizuoka, Japan. Electronic address: tshirois@nig.ac.jp.

Heart- and neural crest derivatives-expressed (Hand) proteins belong to the Twist
family of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors, and play
crucial roles in the development of several organs. They form heterodimers with
Twist1 via their HLH domain. Disruption of the expression balance between Hand2
and Twist1 causes limb malformation, indicating that the expression level of
Hand2 relative to Twist1 is essential for limb development. Mutations of the
TWIST1 and TWIST2 genes are involved in human diseases. Although, the functions
of the Hand proteins are indispensable for limb, heart, and craniofacial
development, mutations of the Hand genes that are causative of human diseases
remain elusive. Recently, comparative analyses of a human chromosomal disorder,
partial trisomy distal 4q, and its mouse model, which is a spontaneously
occurring mutant, clearly demonstrated that over dosage of Hand2 results in
developmental defects of limbs, craniofacial, and lumbar vertebrae, and that
trisomy of the Hand2 gene directly causes a human congenital disorder. In this
review, we focus on gene dosage effect of Hand2 in limb, heart, and craniofacial 
development, and discuss its implication in human diseases.

© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25248475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 5;9(8):e95453. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095453. eCollection 
2014.

Functionally significant, rare transcription factor variants in tetralogy of
Fallot.

Töpf A(1), Griffin HR(1), Glen E(1), Soemedi R(1), Brown DL(1), Hall D(1), Rahman
TJ(1), Eloranta JJ(2), Jüngst C(3), Stuart AG(4), O'Sullivan J(5), Keavney BD(6),
Goodship JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne,
United Kingdom. (2)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, University
Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. (3)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and 
Toxicology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland; Department of
Medicine II, Saarland University Medical Center, Homburg, Germany. (4)Bristol
Royal Hospital for Children, Bristol, United Kingdom. (5)Paediatric Cardiology,
Freeman Hospital Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Newcastle
upon Tyne, United Kingdom. (6)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom; Institute of Cardiovascular
Sciences, The University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.

OBJECTIVE: Rare variants in certain transcription factors involved in cardiac
development cause Mendelian forms of congenital heart disease. The purpose of
this study was to systematically assess the frequency of rare transcription
factor variants in sporadic patients with the cardiac outflow tract malformation 
tetralogy of Fallot (TOF).
METHODS AND RESULTS: We sequenced the coding, 5'UTR, and 3'UTR regions of twelve 
transcription factor genes implicated in cardiac outflow tract development
(NKX2.5, GATA4, ISL1, TBX20, MEF2C, BOP/SMYD1, HAND2, FOXC1, FOXC2, FOXH, FOXA2
and TBX1) in 93 non-syndromic, non-Mendelian TOF cases. We also analysed Illumina
Human 660W-Quad SNP Array data for copy number variants in these genes; none were
detected. Four of the rare variants detected have previously been shown to affect
transactivation in in vitro reporter assays: FOXC1 p.P297S, FOXC2 p.Q444R, FOXH1 
p.S113T and TBX1 p.P43_G61del PPPPRYDPCAAAAPGAPGP. Two further rare variants,
HAND2 p.A25_A26insAA and FOXC1 p.G378_G380delGGG, A488_491delAAAA, affected
transactivation in in vitro reporter assays. Each of these six functionally
significant variants was present in a single patient in the heterozygous state;
each of the four for which parental samples were available were maternally
inherited. Thus in the 93 TOF cases we identified six functionally significant
mutations in the secondary heart field transcriptional network.
SIGNIFICANCE: This study indicates that rare genetic variants in the secondary
heart field transcriptional network with functional effects on protein function
occur in 3-13% of patients with TOF. This is the first report of a functionally
significant HAND2 mutation in a patient with congenital heart disease.

PMCID: PMC4122343
PMID: 25093829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014 Aug 5;64(5):436-48. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2014.04.056.

Effect of human donor cell source on differentiation and function of cardiac
induced pluripotent stem cells.

Sanchez-Freire V(1), Lee AS(2), Hu S(2), Abilez OJ(3), Liang P(4), Lan F(4),
Huber BC(5), Ong SG(4), Hong WX(2), Huang M(4), Wu JC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, California; Stanford Cardiovascular Institute, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, California; Department of Radiology,
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California; Institute of Stem
Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, California. (2)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, California; Stanford Cardiovascular
Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California;
Institute of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, California. (3)Stanford Cardiovascular Institute,
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California. (4)Department of
Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, California; Stanford Cardiovascular Institute, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, California; Department of Radiology, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, California. (5)Department of Medicine,
Division of Cardiology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California; Stanford Cardiovascular Institute, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, California. (6)Department of Medicine, Division of
Cardiology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California;
Stanford Cardiovascular Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, California; Department of Radiology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, California; Institute of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative
Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California.
Electronic address: joewu@stanford.edu.

Comment in
    J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014 Aug 5;64(5):449-50.

BACKGROUND: Human-induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) are a potentially
unlimited source for generation of cardiomyocytes (iPSC-CMs). However, current
protocols for iPSC-CM derivation face several challenges, including variability
in somatic cell sources and inconsistencies in cardiac differentiation
efficiency.
OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to assess the effect of epigenetic memory on
differentiation and function of iPSC-CMs generated from somatic cell sources of
cardiac versus noncardiac origins.
METHODS: Cardiac progenitor cells (CPCs) and skin fibroblasts from the same
donors were reprogrammed into iPSCs and differentiated into iPSC-CMs via embryoid
body and monolayer-based differentiation protocols.
RESULTS: Differentiation efficiency was found to be higher in CPC-derived
iPSC-CMs (CPC-iPSC-CMs) than in fibroblast-derived iPSC-CMs (Fib-iPSC-CMs). Gene 
expression analysis during cardiac differentiation demonstrated up-regulation of 
cardiac transcription factors in CPC-iPSC-CMs, including NKX2-5, MESP1, ISL1,
HAND2, MYOCD, MEF2C, and GATA4. Epigenetic assessment revealed higher methylation
in the promoter region of NKX2-5 in Fib-iPSC-CMs compared with CPC-iPSC-CMs.
Epigenetic differences were found to dissipate with increased cell passaging, and
a battery of in vitro assays revealed no significant differences in their
morphological and electrophysiological properties at early passage. Finally, cell
delivery into a small animal myocardial infarction model indicated that
CPC-iPSC-CMs and Fib-iPSC-CMs possess comparable therapeutic capabilities in
improving functional recovery in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study to compare differentiation of iPSC-CMs from 
human CPCs versus human fibroblasts from the same donors. The authors demonstrate
that although epigenetic memory improves differentiation efficiency of cardiac
versus noncardiac somatic cell sources in vitro, it does not contribute to
improved functional outcome in vivo.

Copyright © 2014 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4134946
PMID: 25082575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. PLoS Genet. 2014 Jul 24;10(7):e1004479. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004479.
eCollection 2014.

Wnt signaling interacts with bmp and edn1 to regulate dorsal-ventral patterning
and growth of the craniofacial skeleton.

Alexander C(1), Piloto S(1), Le Pabic P(1), Schilling TF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, University of California Irvine,
Irvine, California, United States of America.

Craniofacial development requires signals from epithelia to pattern skeletogenic 
neural crest (NC) cells, such as the subdivision of each pharyngeal arch into
distinct dorsal (D) and ventral (V) elements. Wnt signaling has been implicated
in many aspects of NC and craniofacial development, but its roles in D-V arch
patterning remain unclear. To address this we blocked Wnt signaling in zebrafish 
embryos in a temporally-controlled manner, using transgenics to overexpress a
dominant negative Tcf3, (dntcf3), (Tg(hsp70I:tcf3-GFP), or the canonical Wnt
inhibitor dickkopf1 (dkk1), (Tg(hsp70i:dkk1-GFP) after NC migration. In dntcf3
transgenics, NC cells in the ventral arches of heat-shocked embryos show reduced 
proliferation, expression of ventral patterning genes (hand2, dlx3b, dlx5a,
msxe), and ventral cartilage differentiation (e.g. lower jaws). These D-V
patterning defects resemble the phenotypes of zebrafish embryos lacking Bmp or
Edn1 signaling, and overexpression of dntcf3 dramatically reduces expression of a
subset of Bmp receptors in the arches. Addition of ectopic BMP (or EDN1) protein 
partially rescues ventral development and expression of dlx3b, dlx5a, and msxe in
Wnt signaling-deficient embryos, but surprisingly does not rescue hand2
expression. Thus Wnt signaling provides ventralizing patterning cues to arch NC
cells, in part through regulation of Bmp and Edn1 signaling, but independently
regulates hand2. Similarly, heat-shocked dkk1+ embryos exhibit ventral arch
reductions, but also have mandibular clefts at the ventral midline not seen in
dntcf3+ embryos. Dkk1 is expressed in pharyngeal endoderm, and cell
transplantation experiments reveal that dntcf3 must be overexpressed in
pharyngeal endoderm to disrupt D-V arch patterning, suggesting that distinct
endodermal roles for Wnts and Wnt antagonists pattern the developing skeleton.

PMCID: PMC4109847
PMID: 25058015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Development. 2014 Aug;141(16):3112-22. doi: 10.1242/dev.106336. Epub 2014 Jul 18.

Hand2 elevates cardiomyocyte production during zebrafish heart development and
regeneration.

Schindler YL(1), Garske KM(2), Wang J(3), Firulli BA(4), Firulli AB(4), Poss
KD(3), Yelon D(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, CA 92093, USA Developmental Genetics Program and Department of Cell
Biology, Kimmel Center for Biology and Medicine, Skirball Institute of
Biomolecular Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY
10016, USA. (2)Division of Biological Sciences, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. (3)Department of Cell Biology, Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.
(4)Riley Heart Research Center, Herman B. Wells Center for Pediatric Research,
Departments of Pediatrics and Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University 
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. (5)Division of Biological
Sciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA
Developmental Genetics Program and Department of Cell Biology, Kimmel Center for 
Biology and Medicine, Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, New York
University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA dyelon@ucsd.edu.

Embryonic heart formation requires the production of an appropriate number of
cardiomyocytes; likewise, cardiac regeneration following injury relies upon the
recovery of lost cardiomyocytes. The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription 
factor Hand2 has been implicated in promoting cardiomyocyte formation. It is
unclear, however, whether Hand2 plays an instructive or permissive role during
this process. Here, we find that overexpression of hand2 in the early zebrafish
embryo is able to enhance cardiomyocyte production, resulting in an enlarged
heart with a striking increase in the size of the outflow tract. Our evidence
indicates that these increases are dependent on the interactions of Hand2 in
multimeric complexes and are independent of direct DNA binding by Hand2.
Proliferation assays reveal that hand2 can impact cardiomyocyte production by
promoting division of late-differentiating cardiac progenitors within the second 
heart field. Additionally, our data suggest that hand2 can influence
cardiomyocyte production by altering the patterning of the anterior lateral plate
mesoderm, potentially favoring formation of the first heart field at the expense 
of hematopoietic and vascular lineages. The potency of hand2 during embryonic
cardiogenesis suggested that hand2 could also impact cardiac regeneration in
adult zebrafish; indeed, we find that overexpression of hand2 can augment the
regenerative proliferation of cardiomyocytes in response to injury. Together, our
studies demonstrate that hand2 can drive cardiomyocyte production in multiple
contexts and through multiple mechanisms. These results contribute to our
understanding of the potential origins of congenital heart disease and inform
future strategies in regenerative medicine.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4197543
PMID: 25038045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2014 Jun 6;5(3):75. doi: 10.1186/scrt464.

MicroRNA-363 negatively regulates the left ventricular determining transcription 
factor HAND1 in human embryonic stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes.

Wagh V, Pomorski A, Wilschut KJ, Piombo S, Bernstein HS.

Comment in
    Stem Cell Res Ther. 2014;5(4):89.

INTRODUCTION: Posttranscriptional control of mRNA by microRNA (miRNA) has been
implicated in the regulation of diverse biologic processes from directed
differentiation of stem cells through organism development. We describe a unique 
pathway by which miRNA regulates the specialized differentiation of cardiomyocyte
(CM) subtypes.
METHODS: We differentiated human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) to cardiac
progenitor cells and functional CMs, and characterized the regulated expression
of specific miRNAs that target transcriptional regulators of left/right
ventricular-subtype specification.
RESULTS: From >900 known human miRNAs in hESC-derived cardiac progenitor cells
and functional CMs, a subset of differentially expressed cardiac miRNAs was
identified, and in silico analysis predicted highly conserved binding sites in
the 3'-untranslated regions (3'UTRs) of
Hand-and-neural-crest-derivative-expressed (HAND) genes 1 and 2 that are involved
in left and right ventricular development. We studied the temporal and spatial
expression patterns of four miRNAs in differentiating hESCs, and found that
expression of miRNA (miR)-363, miR-367, miR-181a, and miR-181c was specific for
stage and site. Further analysis showed that miR-363 overexpression resulted in
downregulation of HAND1 mRNA and protein levels. A dual luciferase reporter assay
demonstrated functional interaction of miR-363 with the full-length 3'UTR of
HAND1. Expression of anti-miR-363 in-vitro resulted in enrichment for
HAND1-expressing CM subtype populations. We also showed that BMP4 treatment
induced the expression of HAND2 with less effect on HAND1, whereas miR-363
overexpression selectively inhibited HAND1.
CONCLUSIONS: These data show that miR-363 negatively regulates the expression of 
HAND1 and suggest that suppression of miR-363 could provide a novel strategy for 
generating functional left-ventricular CMs.

PMCID: PMC4097848
PMID: 24906886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 3;9(6):e98945. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098945. eCollection 
2014.

Timed deletion of Twist1 in the limb bud reveals age-specific impacts on autopod 
and zeugopod patterning.

Loebel DA(1), Hor AC(2), Bildsoe HK(1), Tam PP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Embryology Unit, Children's Medical Research Institute, Westmead, New South
Wales, Australia; Sydney Medical School, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New
South Wales, Australia. (2)Embryology Unit, Children's Medical Research
Institute, Westmead, New South Wales, Australia.

Twist1 encodes a transcription factor that plays a vital role in limb
development. We have used a tamoxifen-inducible Cre transgene, Ubc-CreERT2, to
generate time-specific deletions of Twist1 by inducing Cre activity in mouse
embryos at different ages from embryonic (E) day 9.5 onwards. A novel forelimb
phenotype of supernumerary pre-axial digits and enlargement or partial
duplication of the distal radius was observed when Cre activity was induced at
E9.5. Gene expression analysis revealed significant upregulation of Hoxd10,
Hoxd11 and Grem1 in the anterior half of the forelimb bud at E11.5. There is also
localized upregulation of Ptch1, Hand2 and Hoxd13 at the site of ectopic digit
formation, indicating a posterior molecular identity for the supernumerary
digits. The specific skeletal phenotypes, which include duplication of digits and
distal zeugopods but no overt posteriorization, differ from those of other Twist1
conditional knockout mutants. This outcome may be attributed to the deferment of 
Twist1 ablation to a later time frame of limb morphogenesis, which leads to the
ectopic activation of posterior genes in the anterior tissues after the
establishment of anterior-posterior anatomical identities in the forelimb bud.

PMCID: PMC4044014
PMID: 24893291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Toxicol Lett. 2014 Aug 4;228(3):140-6. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2014.05.011. Epub
2014 May 21.

Prenatal alcohol exposure causes the over-expression of DHAND and EHAND by
increasing histone H3K14 acetylation in C57 BL/6 mice.

Zhang W(1), Peng C(1), Zheng M(1), Gao W(1), Zhu J(2), Lv T(1), Liu L(2), Liu
Z(3), Li H(1), Xv Y(1), Tian J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Heart Centre, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, 
PR China; Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child Development and
Disorders, Chongqing, PR China. (2)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child 
Development and Disorders, Chongqing, PR China; Chongqing International Science
and Technology Cooperation Center for Child Development and Disorders, Chongqing,
PR China; Chongqing Key Laboratory of Translational Medical Research in Cognitive
Development and Learning and Memory Disorders, Chongqing, PR China. (3)Ohio State
University Medical Center, Richard Ross Heart Hospital Cardiology, Columbus, OH, 
USA. (4)Heart Centre, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University,
Chongqing, PR China. Electronic address: jietian@cqmu.edu.cn.

Prenatal alcohol exposure leads to congenital heart abnormal development, its
mechanisms are still unknown. Recent reports have associated alcohol exposure
with histone H3 acetylation. In the present study, we have performed the
experiments to test the hypothesis that histone H3K14 acetylation is the key role
in the fetal heart leads to over-expression of cardiac specific genes DHAND and
EHAND caused by prenatal alcohol exposure. Seventy pregnant C57BL/6 mice were
divided randomly into seven groups (n=10). They were the untreated group,
dimethyl sulfoxide group, alcohol exposure group, curcumin treatment group, both 
alcohol and curcumin treatment group, SAHA treatment group, both alcohol and SAHA
treatment group. Fetal mouse hearts were collected on embryonic day 14.5. The
changes of HATs activities, the acetylation levels of histone H3K14 (H3K14ac),
the expression levels of cardiac specific genes DHAND and EHAND, and structure of
chromatin were determined. Our data indicates that curcumin and SAHA
significantly reduces and increases the activities of HATs and the levels of
histone H3K14ac in fetal hearts, respectively. The expression of DHAND and EHAND 
is significantly down-regulated and up-regulated in the groups treated with
curcumin and SAHA. Furthermore, our results from ChIP assays have shown that the 
histone H3K14ac connects with the DHAND and EHAND genes are significantly
inhibited by curcumin and simulated by SAHA. Our study suggests that prenatal
alcohol exposure causes the over-expression of DHAND and EHAND by increasing
H3K14ac in mice.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24857828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2014 Sep;50(8):700-6. doi:
10.1007/s11626-014-9755-0. Epub 2014 May 2.

Expression of microRNA-1, microRNA-133a and Hand2 protein in cultured embryonic
rat cardiomyocytes.

Feng Z(1), Takahashi R, Nakamura T, Sato D, Shirasawa N, Nakayama A, Kurashige S,
Kosawada T, Kitajima T, Umezu M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Yamagata University, Yonezawa-shi,
Japan, zhgfeng@yz.yamagata-u.ac.jp.

In this study, we investigated the expression of the pathway,
SRF-microRNA-1/microRNA-133a-Hand2, in the Wistar rat embryonic ventricular
cardiomyocytes under conventional monolayer culture. The morphological
observation of the cultured cardiomyocytes and the mRNA expression levels of
three vital constituent proteins, MLC-2v, N-cadherin, and connexin43,
demonstrated the immaturity of these cultured cells, which was featured by less
myofibril density, immature sarcomeric structure, and significantly lower mRNA
expression of the three constituent proteins than those in neonatal ventricular
samples. More importantly, results in this study suggest that the change of
SRF-microRNA-1/microRNA-133a-Hand2 pathway results into the attenuation of the
Hand2 repression in cultured cardiomyocytes. These outcomes are valuable to
understand the cellular state as embryonic cardiomyocytes to be in vitro model
and might be useful for the assessment of engineered cardiac tissue and cardiac
differentiation of stem cells.

PMID: 24789724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Dev Biol. 2014 Jul 15;391(2):170-81. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.04.013. Epub 2014 
Apr 28.

Directed Bmp4 expression in neural crest cells generates a genetic model for the 
rare human bony syngnathia birth defect.

He F(1), Hu X(2), Xiong W(3), Li L(3), Lin L(4), Shen B(2), Yang L(5), Gu S(3),
Zhang Y(2), Chen Y(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, NY 10029, USA. (2)South China Center for Biomedical Research,
Fujian Key Laboratory of Developmental and Neuro Biology, College of Life
Science, Fujian Normal University, Fuzhou, Fujian Province, PR China.
(3)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Tulane University, New Orleans, 
LA 70118, USA. (4)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, The First
Affiliated Hospital, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou 350005, Fujian Province,
PR China. (5)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Tulane University, New
Orleans, LA 70118, USA; Guanghua School of Stomatology, Sun Yat-Sen University,
Guangzhou 510055, Guangdong Province, PR China. (6)South China Center for
Biomedical Research, Fujian Key Laboratory of Developmental and Neuro Biology,
College of Life Science, Fujian Normal University, Fuzhou, Fujian Province, PR
China; Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Tulane University, New
Orleans, LA 70118, USA. Electronic address: ychen@tulane.edu.

Congenital bony syngnathia, a rare but severe human birth defect, is
characterized by bony fusion of the mandible to the maxilla. However, the genetic
mechanisms underlying this birth defect are poorly understood, largely due to
limitation of available animal models. Here we present evidence that transgenic
expression of Bmp4 in neural crest cells causes a series of craniofacial
malformations in mice, including a bony fusion between the maxilla and
hypoplastic mandible, resembling the bony syngnathia syndrome in humans. In
addition, the anterior portion of the palatal shelves emerged from the mandibular
arch instead of the maxilla in the mutants. Gene expression assays showed an
altered expression of several facial patterning genes, including Hand2, Dlx2,
Msx1, Barx1, Foxc2 and Fgf8, in the maxillary and mandibular processes of the
mutants, indicating mis-patterned cranial neural crest (CNC) derived cells in the
facial region. However, despite of formation of cleft palate and ectopic
cartilage, forced expression of a constitutively active form of BMP receptor-Ia
(caBmprIa) in CNC lineage did not produce the syngnathia phenotype, suggesting a 
non-cell autonomous effect of the augmented BMP4 signaling. Our studies
demonstrate that aberrant BMP4-mediated signaling in CNC cells leads to
mis-patterned facial skeleton and congenital bony syngnathia, and suggest an
implication of mutations in BMP signaling pathway in human bony syngnathia.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4089042
PMID: 24785830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Obstet Gynaecol Res. 2014 May;40(5):1180-7. doi: 10.1111/jog.12392.

Regulation of decidualization and angiogenesis in the human endometrium: mini
review.

Okada H(1), Tsuzuki T, Shindoh H, Nishigaki A, Yasuda K, Kanzaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Kansai Medical University, Hirakata, 
Osaka, Japan.

AIM: The human endometrium is a dynamic tissue that undergoes regular cycles of
menstruation, menstrual repair, proliferation and secretory differentiation in
response to hypoxia and the female sex hormones.
METHODS: We identified new target genes that are regulated by progesterone during
the decidualization of human endometrial stromal cells (ESC), including
interleukin-15 (IL-15), fibulin-1 (FBLN-1), and heart and neural crest
derivatives expressed transcript 2 (HAND2).
RESULTS: IL-15 is deeply involved in the hormonal control of the human
endometrium by progesterone and may be important in embryo implantation. FBLN-1
has been shown to be an important extracellular matrix that mediates progesterone
action in human ESC differentiation toward implantation. Moreover,
progestin-induced HAND2 is a transcription factor that contributes to the
increased levels of FBLN-1 in human ESC. Several mediators, including vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), angiopoietin (ANGPT) and stromal cell-derived
factor 1 (SDF-1), regulate human endometrial angiogenesis. Hypoxia increased the 
expression of VEGF and decreased the expression of SDF-1 in ESCs. Furthermore,
hypoxia reduced ANGPT1 levels in ESC; however, ANGPT2 levels were unaffected.
Estradiol simultaneously induced the expressions of VEGF and SDF-1, suppressing
ANGPT1 production. Therefore, hypoxia and estradiol caused an increase in the
ANGPT2/ANGPT1 ratio.
CONCLUSION: Hypoxia and female sex hormones are involved in the regulation of
angiogenic factors in an independent manner in human ESC. Analysis of the process
of decidualization and angiogenesis in the human endometrium would provide useful
information for the fields of reproductive biology, regenerative medicine and
tissue engineering.

© 2014 The Authors. Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology Research © 2014 Japan
Society of Obstetrics and Gynecology.

PMID: 24754847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Fertil Steril. 2014 Jun;101(6):1781-90.e1-5. doi:
10.1016/j.fertnstert.2014.03.013. Epub 2014 Apr 18.

Requirement of heart and neural crest derivatives-expressed transcript 2 during
decidualization of human endometrial stromal cells in vitro.

Shindoh H(1), Okada H(2), Tsuzuki T(1), Nishigaki A(1), Kanzaki H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Kansai Medical University, Osaka,
Japan. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Kansai Medical University,
Osaka, Japan. Electronic address: hokada@hirakata.kmu.ac.jp.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of heart and neural crest
derivatives-expressed transcript 2 (HAND2) during decidualization of human
endometrial stromal cells (ESCs).
DESIGN: In vitro experiment.
SETTING: Research laboratory.
PATIENT(S): Twenty-six patients undergoing hysterectomy for benign reasons.
INTERVENTION(S): ESCs were cultured for 12 days with HAND2 small interfering RNA 
(siRNA) or nonsilencing RNA during decidualization by medroxyprogesterone acetate
(MPA) and E2.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Decidualization was monitored by changes in cellular
morphology and the expression of several decidual-specific genes.
RESULT(S): HAND2 siRNA effectively suppressed HAND2 levels in ESCs after 12 days 
of E2 + MPA treatment. ESCs cultured with HAND2 siRNA retained a long
fibroblast-like shape, whereas the cells cultured with control siRNA transformed 
into enlarged polygonal cells. Silencing of HAND2 expression significantly
reduced connexin-43 involved in the morphologic changes. HAND2 silencing
significantly reduced the mRNA levels of fibulin-1, prolactin, tissue inhibitor
of metalloproteinase 3, interleukin-15, and forkhead box O1A (FOXO1A), but had no
effect on the mRNA levels of dickkopf-1, serum glucocorticoid kinase 1, and
insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 5. HAND2 siRNA effectively suppressed 
the levels of nuclear FOXO1A protein as a regulator of decidualization.
CONCLUSION(S): These results suggest that HAND2 plays a key role in the
regulation of progestin-induced decidualization of human ESCs.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24745730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Dev Cell. 2014 Apr 28;29(2):241-9. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2014.03.002. Epub 2014
Apr 10.

A switch from low to high Shh activity regulates establishment of limb
progenitors and signaling centers.

Zhulyn O(1), Li D(1), Deimling S(2), Vakili NA(1), Mo R(2), Puviindran V(2), Chen
MH(3), Chuang PT(3), Hopyan S(1), Hui CC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental & Stem Cell Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada; Department of Molecular Genetics, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A8, Canada. (2)Program in Developmental & Stem Cell
Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada.
(3)Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California, San Francisco, CA
94158, USA. (4)Program in Developmental & Stem Cell Biology, The Hospital for
Sick Children, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada; Department of Molecular Genetics,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A8, Canada. Electronic address:
cchui@sickkids.ca.

The patterning and growth of the embryonic vertebrate limb is dependent on Sonic 
hedgehog (Shh), a morphogen that regulates the activity of Gli transcription
factors. However, Shh expression is not observed during the first 12 hr of limb
development. During this phase, the limb bud is prepatterned into anterior and
posterior regions through the antagonistic actions of transcription factors Gli3 
and Hand2. We demonstrate that precocious activation of Shh signaling during this
early phase interferes with the Gli3-dependent specification of anterior
progenitors, disturbing establishment of signaling centers and normal outgrowth
of the limb. Our findings illustrate that limb development requires a sweet spot 
in the level and timing of pathway activation that allows for the Shh-dependent
expansion of posterior progenitors without interfering with early prepatterning
functions of Gli3/Gli3R or specification of anterior progenitors.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24726283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 26;9(2):e89678. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089678. eCollection
2014.

Inhibition of TGFß signaling increases direct conversion of fibroblasts to
induced cardiomyocytes.

Ifkovits JL(1), Addis RC(1), Epstein JA(1), Gearhart JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Institute for Regenerative
Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Recent studies have been successful at utilizing ectopic expression of
transcription factors to generate induced cardiomyocytes (iCMs) from fibroblasts,
albeit at a low frequency in vitro. This work investigates the influence of small
molecules that have been previously reported to improve differentiation to
cardiomyocytes as well as reprogramming to iPSCs in conjunction with ectopic
expression of the transcription factors Hand2, Nkx2.5, Gata4, Mef2C, and Tbx5 on 
the conversion to functional iCMs. We utilized a reporter system in which the
calcium indicator GCaMP is driven by the cardiac Troponin T promoter to quantify 
iCM yield. The TGFß inhibitor, SB431542 (SB), was identified as a small molecule 
capable of increasing the conversion of both mouse embryonic fibroblasts and
adult cardiac fibroblasts to iCMs up to ~5 fold. Further characterization
revealed that inhibition of TGFß by SB early in the reprogramming process led to 
the greatest increase in conversion of fibroblasts to iCMs in a dose-responsive
manner. Global transcriptional analysis at Day 3 post-induction of the
transcription factors revealed an increased expression of genes associated with
the development of cardiac muscle in the presence of SB compared to the vehicle
control. Incorporation of SB in the reprogramming process increases the
efficiency of iCM generation, one of the major goals necessary to enable the use 
of iCMs for discovery-based applications and for the clinic.

PMCID: PMC3935923
PMID: 24586958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Dev Biol. 2014 Apr 15;388(2):149-58. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.02.010. Epub 2014 
Feb 22.

Loss of Hand2 in a population of Periostin lineage cells results in pronounced
bradycardia and neonatal death.

VanDusen NJ(1), Vincentz JW(1), Firulli BA(1), Howard MJ(2), Rubart M(1), Firulli
AB(3).

Author information: 
(1)Riley Heart Research Center, Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research,
Departments of Pediatrics and Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University 
School of Medicine, 1044 West Walnut Street, Indianapolis, IN 46202-5225, USA.
(2)Department of Neurosciences and Program in Neurosciences and Neurological
Disorders, University of Toledo Health Sciences Campus, Toledo, OH 43614, USA.
(3)Riley Heart Research Center, Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research,
Departments of Pediatrics and Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University 
School of Medicine, 1044 West Walnut Street, Indianapolis, IN 46202-5225, USA.
Electronic address: tfirulli@iu.edu.

The Periostin Cre (Postn-Cre) lineage includes endocardial and neural crest
derived mesenchymal cells of the cardiac cushions, neural crest-derived
components of the sympathetic and enteric nervous systems, and cardiac
fibroblasts. In this study, we use the Postn-Cre transgenic allele to
conditionally ablate Hand2 (H2CKO). We find that Postn-Cre H2CKOs die shortly
after birth despite a lack of obvious cardiac structural defects. To ascertain
the cause of death, we performed a detailed comparison of the Postn-Cre lineage
and Hand2 expression at mid and late stages of embryonic development. Gene
expression analyses demonstrate that Postn-Cre ablates Hand2 from the adrenal
medulla as well as the sphenopalatine ganglia of the head. In both cases, Hand2
loss-of-function dramatically reduces expression of Dopamine Beta Hydroxylase
(Dbh), a gene encoding a crucial catecholaminergic biosynthetic enzyme.
Expression of the genes Tyrosine Hydroxylase (Th) and Phenylethanolamine
N-methyltransferase (Pnmt), which also encode essential catecholaminergic
enzymes, were severely reduced in postnatal adrenal glands. Electrocardiograms
demonstrate that 3-day postnatal Postn-Cre H2CKO pups exhibit sinus bradycardia. 
In conjunction with the aforementioned gene expression analyses, these results
strongly suggest that the observed postnatal lethality occurs due to a
catecholamine deficiency and subsequent heart failure.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3990418
PMID: 24565998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Apr;164A(4):1069-74. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36396. Epub 2014 
Jan 23.

Molecular characterization of distal 4q duplication in two patients using
oligonucleotide array-based comparative genomic hybridization (oaCGH) analysis.

Thapa M(1), Asamoah A, Gowans GC, Platky KC, Barch MJ, Mouchrani P, Rajakaruna C,
Hersh JH.

Author information: 
(1)WCEC Cytogenetic Laboratory, Department of Pediatrics, University of
Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky.

Pure/direct duplications on the long arm of chromosome 4 represent an infrequent 
chromosomal finding. Description of clinical findings in 30 patients has resulted
in defining the 4q-associated phenotype. However, such duplications have not been
molecularly or genomically characterized yet, limiting genotype-phenotype
correlation. We report on the first two patients with a duplication involving the
distal third of 4q that are characterized molecularly and genomically. Clinical
features in our patients typical of 4q duplication syndrome included mild
intellectual disability, cranial malformation, minor facial dysmorphism, and
digital anomaly. Duplication of the segment 4q33-4q34, appears to be the critical
region resulting in the phenotype associated with 4q duplication syndrome. The
genes GLRA3, GMP6A that are invovled in neurogenesis and HAND2 in craniofacial
development, within the duplicated region of 4q, may play a key role in the
clinical phenotype. As more reporting on molecular characterization of 4q
duplication becomes available, the role of these underlying genes may become
clearer.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24459084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Dev Biol. 2014 Mar 1;387(1):37-48. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.01.001. Epub 2014
Jan 11.

Distinct populations within Isl1 lineages contribute to appendicular and facial
skeletogenesis through the ß-catenin pathway.

Akiyama R(1), Kawakami H(1), Taketo MM(2), Evans SM(3), Wada N(4), Petryk A(5),
Kawakami Y(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Development, University of Minnesota,
321 Church Street SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA; Stem Cell Institute, University
of Minnesota, 2001 Sixth Street SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. (2)Department of 
Pharmacology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8051,
Japan. (3)Skaggs School of Pharmacy, and Department of Medicine, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. (4)Applied Biological Science,
Faculty of Science and Technology, Tokyo University of Science, 2641 Yamazaki,
Noda, Chiba 278-8510, Japan. (5)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and
Development, University of Minnesota, 321 Church Street SE, Minneapolis, MN
55455, USA; Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota, 2450 Riverside
Avenue, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA; Developmental Biology Center, University of
Minnesota, 321 Church Street SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. (6)Department of
Genetics, Cell Biology and Development, University of Minnesota, 321 Church
Street SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA; Stem Cell Institute, University of
Minnesota, 2001 Sixth Street SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA; Developmental
Biology Center, University of Minnesota, 321 Church Street SE, Minneapolis, MN
55455, USA; Lillehei Heart Institute, University of Minnesota, 312 Church Street 
SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. Electronic address: kawak005@umn.edu.

Isl1 expression marks progenitor populations in developing embryos. In this
study, we investigated the contribution of Isl1-expressing cells that utilize the
ß-catenin pathway to skeletal development. Inactivation of ß-catenin in
Isl1-expressing cells caused agenesis of the hindlimb skeleton and absence of the
lower jaw (agnathia). In the hindlimb, Isl1-lineages broadly contributed to the
mesenchyme; however, deletion of ß-catenin in the Isl1-lineage caused cell death 
only in a discrete posterior domain of nascent hindlimb bud mesenchyme. We found 
that the loss of posterior mesenchyme, which gives rise to Shh-expressing
posterior organizer tissue, caused loss of posterior gene expression and failure 
to expand chondrogenic precursor cells, leading to severe truncation of the
hindlimb. In facial tissues, Isl1-expressing cells broadly contributed to facial 
epithelium. We found reduced nuclear ß-catenin accumulation and loss of Fgf8
expression in mandibular epithelium of Isl1(-/-) embryos. Inactivating ß-catenin 
in Isl1-expressing epithelium caused both loss of epithelial Fgf8 expression and 
death of mesenchymal cells in the mandibular arch without affecting epithelial
proliferation and survival. These results suggest a Isl1<U+2192>ß-catenin<U+2192>Fgf8 pathway
that regulates mesenchymal survival and development of the lower jaw in the
mandibular epithelium. By contrast, activating ß-catenin signaling in
Isl1-lineages caused activation of Fgf8 broadly in facial epithelium. Our results
provide evidence that, despite its broad contribution to hindlimb mesenchyme and 
facial epithelium, the Isl1-ß-catenin pathway regulates skeletal development of
the hindlimb and lower jaw through discrete populations of cells that give rise
to Shh-expressing posterior hindlimb mesenchyme and Fgf8-expressing mandibular
epithelium.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3947553
PMID: 24424161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Steroids Horm Sci. 2014;5(3):136.

Kaempferol Exhibits Progestogenic Effects in Ovariectomized Rats.

Toh MF(1), Mendonca E(1), Eddie SL(1), Endsley MP(1), Lantvit DD(1), Petukhov
PA(1), Burdette JE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacognosy, College of Pharmacy,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60607, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Progesterone (P4) plays a central role in women's health. Synthetic
progestins are used clinically in hormone replacement therapy (HRT), oral
contraceptives, and for the treatment of endometriosis and infertility.
Unfortunately, synthetic progestins are associated with side effects, including
cardiovascular disease and breast cancer. Botanical dietary supplements are
widely consumed for the alleviation of a variety of gynecological issues, but
very few studies have characterized natural compounds in terms of their ability
to bind to and activate progesterone receptors (PR). Kaempferol is a flavonoid
that functions as a non-steroidal selective progesterone receptor modulator
(SPRM) in vitro. This study investigated the molecular and physiological effects 
of kaempferol in the ovariectomized rat uteri.
METHODS: Since genistein is a phytoestrogen that was previously demonstrated to
increase uterine weight and proliferation, the ability of kaempferol to block
genistein action in the uterus was investigated. Analyses of proliferation,
steroid receptor expression, and induction of well-established PR-regulated
targets Areg and Hand2 were completed using histological analysis and qPCR gene
induction experiments. In addition, kaempferol in silico binding analysis was
completed for PR. The activation of estrogen and androgen receptor signalling was
determined in vitro.
RESULTS: Molecular docking analysis confirmed that kaempferol adopts poses that
are consistent with occupying the ligand-binding pocket of PRA. Kaempferol
induced expression of PR regulated transcriptional targets in the ovariectomized 
rat uteri, including Hand2 and Areg. Consistent with progesterone-l ke activity, 
kaempferol attenuated genistein-induced uterine luminal epithelial proliferation 
without increasing uterine weight. Kaempferol signalled without down regulating
PR expression in vitro and in vivo and without activating estrogen and androgen
receptors.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, these data suggest that kaempferol is a unique
natural PR modulator that activates PR signaling in vitro and in vivo without
triggering PR degradation.

PMCID: PMC4382015
PMID: 25844270  [PubMed]


54. BMC Syst Biol. 2013 Dec 26;7:141. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-7-141.

Systems biology approach to stage-wise characterization of epigenetic genes in
lung adenocarcinoma.

Pradhan MP, Desai A, Palakal MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Informatics and Computing, Indiana University Purdue University
Indianapolis, Indianapolis IN, USA. mpalakal@iupui.edu.

BACKGROUND: Epigenetics refers to the reversible functional modifications of the 
genome that do not correlate to changes in the DNA sequence. The aim of this
study is to understand DNA methylation patterns across different stages of lung
adenocarcinoma (LUAD).
RESULTS: Our study identified 72, 93 and 170 significant DNA methylated genes in 
Stages I, II and III respectively. A set of common 34 significant DNA methylated 
genes located in the promoter section of the true CpG islands were found across
stages, and these were: HOX genes, FOXG1, GRIK3, HAND2, PRKCB, etc. Of the total 
significant DNA methylated genes, 65 correlated with transcription function. The 
epigenetic analysis identified the following novel genes across all stages:
PTGDR, TLX3, and POU4F2. The stage-wise analysis observed the appearance of
NEUROG1 gene in Stage I and its re-appearance in Stage III. The analysis showed
similar epigenetic pattern across Stage I and Stage III. Pathway analysis
revealed important signaling and metabolic pathways of LUAD to correlate with
epigenetics. Epigenetic subnetwork analysis identified a set of seven conserved
genes across all stages: UBC, KRAS, PIK3CA, PIK3R3, RAF1, BRAF, and RAP1A. A
detailed literature analysis elucidated epigenetic genes like FOXG1, HLA-G, and
NKX6-2 to be known as prognostic targets.
CONCLUSION: Integrating epigenetic information for genes with expression data can
be useful for comprehending in-depth disease mechanism and for the ultimate goal 
of better target identification.

PMCID: PMC3882327
PMID: 24369052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Gene. 2014 Feb 15;536(1):145-50. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.11.029. Epub 2013 Nov
27.

Array CGH analysis of a cohort of Russian patients with intellectual disability.

Kashevarova AA(1), Nazarenko LP(2), Skryabin NA(2), Salyukova OA(2), Chechetkina 
NN(2), Tolmacheva EN(2), Sazhenova EA(2), Magini P(3), Graziano C(3), Romeo G(3),
Kucinskas V(4), Lebedev IN(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russia. Electronic address:
anna.kashevarova@medgenetics.ru. (2)Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russia.
(3)University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy. (4)Vilnius University, Department of
Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius, Lithuania.

The use of array comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH) as a diagnostic
tool in molecular genetics has facilitated the identification of many new
microdeletion/microduplication syndromes (MMSs). Furthermore, this method has
allowed for the identification of copy number variations (CNVs) whose pathogenic 
role has yet to be uncovered. Here, we report on our application of array CGH for
the identification of pathogenic CNVs in 79 Russian children with intellectual
disability (ID). Twenty-six pathogenic or likely pathogenic changes in copy
number were detected in 22 patients (28%): 8 CNVs corresponded to known MMSs, and
17 were not associated with previously described syndromes. In this report, we
describe our findings and comment on genes potentially associated with ID that
are located within the CNV regions.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24291026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. PLoS Med. 2013 Nov;10(11):e1001551. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1001551. Epub 2013 
Nov 12.

Role of DNA methylation and epigenetic silencing of HAND2 in endometrial cancer
development.

Jones A(1), Teschendorff AE, Li Q, Hayward JD, Kannan A, Mould T, West J, Zikan
M, Cibula D, Fiegl H, Lee SH, Wik E, Hadwin R, Arora R, Lemech C, Turunen H,
Pakarinen P, Jacobs IJ, Salvesen HB, Bagchi MK, Bagchi IC, Widschwendter M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Women's Cancer, UCL Elizabeth Garrett Anderson Institute for
Women's Health, University College London, London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Endometrial cancer incidence is continuing to rise in the wake of the
current ageing and obesity epidemics. Much of the risk for endometrial cancer
development is influenced by the environment and lifestyle. Accumulating evidence
suggests that the epigenome serves as the interface between the genome and the
environment and that hypermethylation of stem cell polycomb group target genes is
an epigenetic hallmark of cancer. The objective of this study was to determine
the functional role of epigenetic factors in endometrial cancer development.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Epigenome-wide methylation analysis of >27,000 CpG sites in
endometrial cancer tissue samples (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>64) and control samples (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>23) revealed 
that HAND2 (a gene encoding a transcription factor expressed in the endometrial
stroma) is one of the most commonly hypermethylated and silenced genes in
endometrial cancer. A novel integrative epigenome-transcriptome-interactome
analysis further revealed that HAND2 is the hub of the most highly ranked
differential methylation hotspot in endometrial cancer. These findings were
validated using candidate gene methylation analysis in multiple clinical sample
sets of tissue samples from a total of 272 additional women. Increased HAND2
methylation was a feature of premalignant endometrial lesions and was seen to
parallel a decrease in RNA and protein levels. Furthermore, women with high
endometrial HAND2 methylation in their premalignant lesions were less likely to
respond to progesterone treatment. HAND2 methylation analysis of endometrial
secretions collected using high vaginal swabs taken from women with
postmenopausal bleeding specifically identified those patients with early stage
endometrial cancer with both high sensitivity and high specificity (receiver
operating characteristics area under the curve<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.91 for stage 1A and 0.97 for
higher than stage 1A). Finally, mice harbouring a Hand2 knock-out specifically in
their endometrium were shown to develop precancerous endometrial lesions with
increasing age, and these lesions also demonstrated a lack of PTEN expression.
CONCLUSIONS: HAND2 methylation is a common and crucial molecular alteration in
endometrial cancer that could potentially be employed as a biomarker for early
detection of endometrial cancer and as a predictor of treatment response. The
true clinical utility of HAND2 DNA methylation, however, requires further
validation in prospective studies. Please see later in the article for the
Editors' Summary.

PMCID: PMC3825654
PMID: 24265601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Nov 26;110(48):19438-43. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1315075110. Epub 2013 Nov 11.

Hox5 interacts with Plzf to restrict Shh expression in the developing forelimb.

Xu B(1), Hrycaj SM, McIntyre DC, Baker NC, Takeuchi JK, Jeannotte L, Gaber ZB,
Novitch BG, Wellik DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109.

To date, only the five most posterior groups of Hox genes, Hox9-Hox13, have
demonstrated loss-of-function roles in limb patterning. Individual paralog groups
control proximodistal patterning of the limb skeletal elements. Hox9 genes also
initiate the onset of Hand2 expression in the posterior forelimb compartment, and
collectively, the posterior HoxA/D genes maintain posterior Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) 
expression. Here we show that an anterior Hox paralog group, Hox5, is required
for forelimb anterior patterning. Deletion of all three Hox5 genes (Hoxa5, Hoxb5,
and Hoxc5) leads to anterior forelimb defects resulting from derepression of Shh 
expression. The phenotype requires the loss of all three Hox5 genes,
demonstrating the high level of redundancy in this Hox paralogous group. Further 
analyses reveal that Hox5 interacts with promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger
biochemically and genetically to restrict Shh expression. These findings, along
with previous reports showing that point mutations in the Shh limb enhancer lead 
to similar anterior limb defects, highlight the importance of Shh repression for 
proper patterning of the vertebrate limb.

PMCID: PMC3845161
PMID: 24218595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Pediatr Surg. 2013 Nov;48(11):2281-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2013.06.024.

The research on screening differentially expressed genes in Hirschsprung's
disease by using Microarray.

Qin KW(1), Shi H, Zhang L, Liu PF, Cai WL, Wu KH, Zhu XC, Lan FF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery of Guangdong Women And Children Hosptial,
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou 511400, P.R. China. Electronic address:
urey0206@gmail.com.

OBJECTIVE: To study the differential expression of genes between Hirschsprung's
disease (HSCR) and normal tissue by using microarray for exploring the mechanism 
of HSCR development and establishing the gene expression profiles of HSCR.
METHODS: Colon tissues (aganglionic and normal segments) of 4 patients with HSCR 
were detected by the Agilent SurePrint G3 Human GE 8x60K Microarrays. RT-PCR was 
used to verify the results of Microarray test. Then, immunohistochemistry was
used to demonstrate the expression of HAND2 in the myenteric plexus of the colon 
from 46 patients with HSCR to further explore the relationship between HAND2 and 
development of HSCR.
RESULTS: A total of 12,125 meaningful expressed genes were screened out. 4 pairs 
of specimens had 622 differentially expressed genes, 584 (93.89%) of which were
up-regulated while 38(6.11%) were down-regulated. 6 of the 622 genes were tested 
by RT-PCR, which were consistent with the results detected by Microarray. The
average optical density of positive expression of HAND2 in myenteric plexus was
compared between the aganglionic, transitional, dilated, normal segments and
control group. The average optical density in the aganglionic segments was
obviously reduced. Statistical analyzed data showed that it has significant
deviation (P<0.01).
CONCLUSION: 1. A set of differentially expressed genes between aganglionic and
normal segments of HSCR was obtained. Our data may provide significant
information to research the pathogenesis of HSCR. 2. Reduced protein expression
of HAND2 in the myenteric plexus of the aganglionic would suggest that HAND2 was 
involved in the pathogenesis of HSCR.

© 2013.

PMID: 24210200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Nat Cell Biol. 2013 Nov;15(11):1282-93. doi: 10.1038/ncb2866. Epub 2013 Oct 27.

Nfat and miR-25 cooperate to reactivate the transcription factor Hand2 in heart
failure.

Dirkx E(1), Gladka MM, Philippen LE, Armand AS, Kinet V, Leptidis S, El Azzouzi
H, Salic K, Bourajjaj M, da Silva GJ, Olieslagers S, van der Nagel R, de Weger R,
Bitsch N, Kisters N, Seyen S, Morikawa Y, Chanoine C, Heymans S, Volders PG, Thum
T, Dimmeler S, Cserjesi P, Eschenhagen T, da Costa Martins PA, De Windt LJ.

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Cardiology, CARIM School for Cardiovascular Diseases,
Maastricht University, 6229 ER Maastricht, The Netherlands [2].

Although aberrant reactivation of embryonic gene programs is intricately linked
to pathological heart disease, the transcription factors driving these gene
programs remain ill-defined. Here we report that increased calcineurin/Nfat
signalling and decreased miR-25 expression integrate to re-express the basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor dHAND (also known as Hand2) in the
diseased human and mouse myocardium. In line, mutant mice overexpressing Hand2 in
otherwise healthy heart muscle cells developed a phenotype of pathological
hypertrophy. Conversely, conditional gene-targeted Hand2 mice demonstrated a
marked resistance to pressure-overload-induced hypertrophy, fibrosis, ventricular
dysfunction and induction of a fetal gene program. Furthermore, in vivo
inhibition of miR-25 by a specific antagomir evoked spontaneous cardiac
dysfunction and sensitized the murine myocardium to heart failure in a
Hand2-dependent manner. Our results reveal that signalling cascades integrate
with microRNAs to induce the expression of the bHLH transcription factor Hand2 in
the postnatal mammalian myocardium with impact on embryonic gene programs in
heart failure.

PMID: 24161931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Postepy Hig Med Dosw (Online). 2013 Sep 10;67:950-7. doi:
10.5604/17322693.1066060.

[Morphological and molecular bases of cardiac development].

[Article in Polish]

Kobylinska J(1), Dworzanski W, Cendrowska-Pinkosz M, Dworzanska A,
Hermanowicz-Dryka T, Kiszka J, Staroslawska E, Burdan F.

Author information: 
(1)Katedra i Zaklad Anatomii Prawidlowej Czlowieka Uniwersytet Medyczny w
Lublinie.

The heart is a mesoderm-derived organ, whose formation is regulated by various
genes. Initially, the most important is expression of Nkx2.5, CR1, pitx2, anf and
mhc2a, which are responsible for differentiation of cardiomyocytes. In a later
phase activation of mhc2b, pitx2c, mesp1, pcmf1, vmhc, xin, mcl2v, mlc2a, mlc2a, 
mef2, hand1 and hand2 was revealed. Their expression is regulated by various
molecules, including transcription (XIN, GATA, MEF, Tbx5, Baf60c, PECAM, tie-2,
MEF2) and growth (VEGF, FGF, PDGF) factors, as well as proteins (i.e.,
dickkopf-1, cerberus, cytotactin, fibrillin, nodal, thrombomodulin, Wnt, bone
morphometric ones - BMP2, BMP 4, BMP5, BMP7) and other substances, such as
retinoid and folic acid. Crucial steps in cardiac organogenesis are development
of the ventricle and atrial formation, as well as septation and valve formation. 
Any disturbances of such processes may lead to various congenital heart diseases 
and defects that could be initiated by various genetic, epigenetic or
environmental factors. The most common heart malformations are: stenosis
(coarctation) of the aorta and pulmonary trunk, bicuspid aortic valve, atrial
and/or ventricular septal defect, persistent truncus arteriosus (Botallo duct),
transposition of the great vessels, tricuspid atresia, hypoplastic left and right
heart, as well as syndrome of Lutembachera, Cantrell, Ebstein, Eisenmenger and
Shone and trilogy, tetralogy, pentalogy of Fallot.

PMID: 24088538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 27;8(9):e73685. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073685. eCollection
2013.

Transcription profiles of endothelial cells in the rat ductus arteriosus during a
perinatal period.

Liu NM(1), Yokota T, Maekawa S, Lü P, Zheng YW, Taniguchi H, Yokoyama U, Kato T, 
Minamisawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science and Medical Bioscience, Waseda University, Tokyo,
Japan.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(1). doi:10.1371/annotation/ebd2da91-3f5a-4b50-8f16-9d7150795c69.
Tei, Inbun [corrected to Zheng, Yun-Wen].

Endothelial cells (ECs) lining the blood vessels serve a variety of functions and
play a central role in the homeostasis of the circulatory system. Since the
ductus arteriosus (DA) has different arterial characteristics from its connecting
vessels, we hypothesized that ECs of the DA exhibited a unique gene profile
involved in the regulation of DA-specific morphology and function. Using a
fluorescence-activated cell sorter, we isolated ECs from pooled tissues from the 
DA or the descending aorta of Wistar rat fetuses at full-term of gestation (F
group) or neonates 30 minutes after birth (N group). Using anti-CD31 and
anti-CD45 antibodies as cell surface markers for ECs and hematopoietic derived
cells, respectively, cDNAs from the CD31-positive and CD45-negative cells were
hybridized to the Affymetrix GeneChip® Rat Gene 1.0 ST Array. Among 26,469
gene-level probe sets, 82 genes in the F group and 81 genes in the N group were
expressed at higher levels in DA ECs than in aortic ECs (p<0.05, fold
change>2.0). In addition to well-known endothelium-enriched genes such as Tgfb2
and Vegfa, novel DA endothelium-dominant genes including Slc38a1, Capn6, and Lrat
were discovered. Enrichment analysis using GeneGo MetaCore software showed that
DA endothelium-related biological processes were involved in morphogenesis and
development. We identified many overlapping genes in each process including
neural crest-related genes (Hoxa1, Hoxa4, and Hand2, etc) and the second heart
field-related genes (Tbx1, Isl1, and Fgf10, etc). Moreover, we found that
regulation of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, cell adhesion, and retinol
metabolism are the active pathways involved in the network via potential
interactions with many of the identified genes to form DA-specific endothelia. In
conclusion, the present study uncovered several significant differences of the
transcriptional profile between the DA and aortic ECs. Newly identified DA
endothelium-dominant genes may play an important role in DA-specific functional
and morphologic characteristics.

PMCID: PMC3785468
PMID: 24086288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Development. 2013 Sep;140(18):3754-64. doi: 10.1242/dev.098798. Epub 2013 Aug 7.

Transcriptional components of anteroposterior positional information during
zebrafish fin regeneration.

Nachtrab G(1), Kikuchi K, Tornini VA, Poss KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

Many fish and salamander species regenerate amputated fins or limbs, restoring
the size and shape of the original appendage. Regeneration requires that spared
cells retain or recall information encoding pattern, a phenomenon termed
positional memory. Few factors have been implicated in positional memory during
vertebrate appendage regeneration. Here, we investigated potential regulators of 
anteroposterior (AP) pattern during fin regeneration in adult zebrafish.
Sequence-based profiling from tissues along the AP axis of uninjured pectoral
fins identified many genes with region-specific expression, several of which
encoded transcription factors with known AP-specific expression or function in
developing embryonic pectoral appendages. Transgenic reporter strains revealed
that regulatory sequences of the transcription factor gene alx4a activated
expression in fibroblasts and osteoblasts within anterior fin rays, whereas hand2
regulatory sequences activated expression in these same cell types within
posterior rays. Transgenic overexpression of hand2 in all pectoral fin rays did
not affect formation of the proliferative regeneration blastema, yet modified the
lengths and widths of regenerating bones. Hand2 influenced the character of
regenerated rays in part by elevation of the vitamin D-inactivating enzyme
encoded by cyp24a1, contributing to region-specific regulation of bone
metabolism. Systemic administration of vitamin D during regeneration partially
rescued bone defects resulting from hand2 overexpression. Thus, bone-forming
cells in a regenerating appendage maintain expression throughout life of
transcription factor genes that can influence AP pattern, and differ across the
AP axis in their expression signatures of these and other genes. These findings
have implications for mechanisms of positional memory in vertebrate tissues.

PMCID: PMC3754474
PMID: 23924636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Aug;14(8):529-41. doi: 10.1038/nrm3619. Epub 2013 Jul
10.

Mending broken hearts: cardiac development as a basis for adult heart
regeneration and repair.

Xin M(1), Olson EN, Bassel-Duby R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, Texas 75390-9148, USA.

As the adult mammalian heart has limited potential for regeneration and repair,
the loss of cardiomyocytes during injury and disease can result in heart failure 
and death. The cellular processes and regulatory mechanisms involved in heart
growth and development can be exploited to repair the injured adult heart through
'reawakening' pathways that are active during embryogenesis. Heart function has
been restored in rodents by reprogramming non-myocytes into cardiomyocytes, by
expressing transcription factors (GATA4, HAND2, myocyte-specific enhancer factor 
2C (MEF2C) and T-box 5 (TBX5)) and microRNAs (miR-1, miR-133, miR-208 and
miR-499) that control cardiomyocyte identity. Stimulating cardiomyocyte
dedifferentiation and proliferation by activating mitotic signalling pathways
involved in embryonic heart growth represents a complementary approach for heart 
regeneration and repair. Recent advances in understanding the mechanistic basis
of heart development offer exciting opportunities for effective therapies for
heart failure.

PMCID: PMC3757945
PMID: 23839576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 24;8(6):e67522. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067522. Print 2013.

edn1 and hand2 Interact in early regulation of pharyngeal arch outgrowth during
zebrafish development.

Sasaki MM(1), Nichols JT, Kimmel CB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon, United States
of America.

Endothelin-1 (Edn1) signaling provides a critical input to development of the
embryonic pharygneal arches and their skeletal derivatives, particularly the
articulating joints and the ventral skeleton including the lower jaw. Previous
work in zebrafish has mostly focused on the role of Edn1 in dorsal-ventral (DV)
patterning, but Edn1 signaling must also regulate tissue size, for with severe
loss of the pathway the ventral skeleton is not only mispatterned, but is also
prominently hypoplastic--reduced in size. Here we use mutational analyses to show
that in the early pharyngeal arches, ventral-specific edn1-mediated proliferation
of neural crest derived cells is required for DV expansion and outgrowth, and
that this positive regulation is counterbalanced by a negative one exerted
through a pivotal, ventrally expressed Edn1-target gene, hand2. We also describe 
a new morphogenetic cell movement in the ventral first arch, sweeping cells
anterior in the arch to the region where the lower jaw forms. This movement is
negatively regulated by hand2 in an apparently edn1-independent fashion. These
findings point to complexity of regulation by edn1 and hand2 at the earliest
stages of pharyngeal arch development, in which control of growth and
morphogenesis can be genetically separated.

PMCID: PMC3691169
PMID: 23826316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Cardiovasc Res. 2013 Oct 1;100(1):105-13. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvt167. Epub 2013 Jun 
20.

Accelerated direct reprogramming of fibroblasts into cardiomyocyte-like cells
with the MyoD transactivation domain.

Hirai H(1), Katoku-Kikyo N, Keirstead SA, Kikyo N.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Institute, MTRF Room 2-216, University of Minnesota, 2001 6th St SE,
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

AIMS: Fibroblasts can be directly reprogrammed to cardiomyocyte-like cells by
introducing defined genes. However, the reprogramming efficiency remains low,
delaying the clinical application of this strategy to regenerative cardiology. We
previously showed that fusion of the MyoD transactivation domain to the
pluripotency transcription factor Oct4 facilitated the transcriptional activity
of Oct4, resulting in highly efficient production of induced pluripotent stem
cells. We examined whether the same approach can be applied to cardiac
transcription factors to facilitate cardiac reprogramming.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We fused the MyoD domain to Mef2c, Gata4, Hand2, and Tbx5
and transduced these genes in various combinations into mouse non-cardiac
fibroblasts. Transduction of the chimeric Mef2c with the wild-types of the other 
three genes produced much larger beating clusters of cardiomyocyte-like cells
faster than the combination of the four wild-type genes, with an efficiency of
3.5%, >15-fold greater than the wild-type genes.
CONCLUSION: Fusion of a powerful transactivation domain to heterologous factors
can increase the efficiency of direct reprogramming of fibroblasts to
cardiomyocytes.

PMCID: PMC3778960
PMID: 23794713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Development. 2013 Jul;140(13):2765-75. doi: 10.1242/dev.090639. Epub 2013 May 22.

barx1 represses joints and promotes cartilage in the craniofacial skeleton.

Nichols JT(1), Pan L, Moens CB, Kimmel CB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403-1254, USA.
jnichols@uoneuro.uoregon.edu

The evolution of joints, which afford skeletal mobility, was instrumental in
vertebrate success. Here, we explore the molecular genetics and cell biology that
govern jaw joint development. Genetic manipulation experiments in zebrafish
demonstrate that functional loss, or gain, of the homeobox-containing gene barx1 
produces gain, or loss, of joints, respectively. Ectopic joints in barx1 mutant
animals are present in every pharyngeal segment, and are associated with
disrupted attachment of bone, muscles and teeth. We find that ectopic joints
develop at the expense of cartilage. Time-lapse experiments suggest that barx1
controls the skeletal precursor cell choice between differentiating into
cartilage versus joint cells. We discovered that barx1 functions in this choice, 
in part, by regulating the transcription factor hand2. We further show that hand2
feeds back to negatively regulate barx1 expression. We consider the possibility
that changes in barx1 function in early vertebrates were among the key
innovations fostering the evolution of skeletal joints.

PMCID: PMC3678344
PMID: 23698351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. DNA Cell Biol. 2013 Jun;32(6):310-9. doi: 10.1089/dna.2013.1993. Epub 2013 May
14.

Regulation of de novo ceramide synthesis: the role of dihydroceramide desaturase 
and transcriptional factors NFATC and Hand2 in the hypoxic mouse heart.

Azzam R(1), Hariri F, El-Hachem N, Kamar A, Dbaibo G, Nemer G, Bitar F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, American University of Beirut-Medical Center,
Beirut, Lebanon.

We have previously shown that ceramide, a proapoptotic molecule decreases in the 
mouse heart as it adapts to hypoxia. We have also shown that its precursor,
dihydroceramide, accumulates with hypoxia. This implicates the enzyme
dihydroceramide desaturase (DHC-DS), which converts dihydroceramide to ceramide, 
in a potential regulatory checkpoint in cardiomyocytes. We hypothesised that the 
regulation of de novo ceramide synthesis plays an important role in the
cardiomyocyte adaptation to hypoxia. We used an established mouse model to induce
acute and chronic hypoxia. Cardiac tissues were extracted and quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) was used to evaluate the expression
levels of DHC-DS. Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assays (EMSAs) and qRT-PCR were 
used to evaluate the activity and expression levels of an array of transcription 
factors that might regulate DEGS1 gene expression. We demonstrated that DEGS1
mRNA levels decrease with time in hypoxic mice concurrent with the decrease in
HAND2 transcripts. Interestingly, the DEGS1 promoter harbors overlapping sites
for Hand2 and Nuclear Factor of Activated T-cells (NFATC) transcription factors. 
We have demonstrated a physical interaction between NFATC1 and the E-Box proteins
with EMSA and coimmunoprecipitation assays. The regulation of de novo ceramide
synthesis in response to hypoxia and this newly described interaction between
E-box and NFATC transcription factors will pave the way to identify new pathways 
in the adaptation of the cardiomyocyte to stress. The elucidation of these
pathways will in the long-term provide insights into potential targets for novel 
therapeutic regimens.

PMCID: PMC3665309
PMID: 23672204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Dev Biol. 2013 Aug 15;380(2):286-98. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.04.027. Epub 2013 
May 3.

The LIM-Homeodomain transcription factor Islet-1 is required for the development 
of sympathetic neurons and adrenal chromaffin cells.

Huber K(1), Narasimhan P, Shtukmaster S, Pfeifer D, Evans SM, Sun Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Anatomy and Cell Biology, Department of Molecular Embryology,
Albert-Ludwigs-University, Freiburg, Germany. katrin.huber@anat.uni-freiburg.de

Islet-1 is a LIM-Homeodomain transcription factor with important functions for
the development of distinct neuronal and non-neuronal cell populations. We show
here that Islet-1 acts genetically downstream of Phox2B in cells of the
sympathoadrenal cell lineage and that the development of sympathetic neurons and 
chromaffin cells is impaired in mouse embryos with a conditional deletion of
Islet-1 controlled by the wnt1 promotor. Islet-1 is not essential for the initial
differentiation of sympathoadrenal cells, as indicated by the correct expression 
of pan-neuronal and catecholaminergic subtype specific genes in primary
sympathetic ganglia of Islet-1 deficient mouse embryos. However, our data
indicate that the subsequent survival of sympathetic neuron precursors and their 
differentiation towards TrkA expressing neurons depends on Islet-1 function. In
contrast to spinal sensory neurons, sympathetic neurons of Islet-1 deficient mice
did not display ectopic expression of genes normally present in the CNS. In
Islet-1 deficient mouse embryos the numbers of chromaffin cells were only mildly 
reduced, in contrast to that of sympathetic neurons, but the initiation of the
adrenaline synthesizing enzyme PNMT was abrogated and the expression level of
chromogranin A was diminished. Microarray analysis revealed that developing
chromaffin cells of Islet-1 deficient mice displayed normal expression levels of 
TH, DBH and the transcription factors Phox2B, Mash-1, Hand2, Gata3 and Insm1, but
the expression levels of the transcription factors Gata2 and Hand1, and AP-2ß
were significantly reduced. Together our data indicate that Islet-1 is not
essentially required for the initial differentiation of sympathoadrenal cells,
but has an important function for the correct subsequent development of
sympathetic neurons and chromaffin cells.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23648511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2013 Jul;60:97-106. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2013.04.004. Epub
2013 Apr 13.

Optimization of direct fibroblast reprogramming to cardiomyocytes using calcium
activity as a functional measure of success.

Addis RC(1), Ifkovits JL, Pinto F, Kellam LD, Esteso P, Rentschler S,
Christoforou N, Epstein JA, Gearhart JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
raddis@mail.med.upenn.edu

Direct conversion of fibroblasts to induced cardiomyocytes (iCMs) has great
potential for regenerative medicine. Recent publications have reported
significant progress, but the evaluation of reprogramming has relied upon
non-functional measures such as flow cytometry for cardiomyocyte markers or GFP
expression driven by a cardiomyocyte-specific promoter. The issue is one of
practicality: the most stringent measures - electrophysiology to detect cell
excitation and the presence of spontaneously contracting myocytes - are not
readily quantifiable in the large numbers of cells screened in reprogramming
experiments. However, excitation and contraction are linked by a third functional
characteristic of cardiomyocytes: the rhythmic oscillation of intracellular
calcium levels. We set out to optimize direct conversion of fibroblasts to iCMs
with a quantifiable calcium reporter to rapidly assess functional
transdifferentiation. We constructed a reporter system in which the calcium
indicator GCaMP is driven by the cardiomyocyte-specific Troponin T promoter.
Using calcium activity as our primary outcome measure, we compared several
published combinations of transcription factors along with novel combinations in 
mouse embryonic fibroblasts. The most effective combination consisted of Hand2,
Nkx2.5, Gata4, Mef2c, and Tbx5 (HNGMT). This combination is >50-fold more
efficient than GMT alone and produces iCMs with cardiomyocyte marker expression, 
robust calcium oscillation, and spontaneous beating that persist for weeks
following inactivation of reprogramming factors. HNGMT is also significantly more
effective than previously published factor combinations for the
transdifferentiation of adult mouse cardiac fibroblasts to iCMs. Quantification
of calcium function is a convenient and effective means for the identification
and evaluation of cardiomyocytes generated by direct reprogramming. Using this
stringent outcome measure, we conclude that HNGMT produces iCMs more efficiently 
than previously published methods.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3679282
PMID: 23591016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59533. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059533. Epub 2013 Mar 21.

Bmp and Shh signaling mediate the expression of satb2 in the pharyngeal arches.

Sheehan-Rooney K(1), Swartz ME, Lovely CB, Dixon MJ, Eberhart JK.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, Institute of Cellular
and Molecular Biology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, United
States of America.

In human, mutation of the transcription factor SATB2 causes severe defects to the
palate and jaw. The expression and sequence of SATB2 is highly conserved across
vertebrate species, including zebrafish. We sought to understand the regulation
of satb2 using the zebrafish model system. Due to the normal expression domains
of satb2, we analyzed satb2 expression in mutants with disrupted Hh signaling or 
defective ventral patterning. While satb2 expression appears independent of Edn1 
signaling, appropriate expression requires Shha, Smo, Smad5 and Hand2 function.
Transplantation experiments show that neural crest cells receive both Bmp and Hh 
signaling to induce satb2 expression. Dorsomorphin- and cyclopamine-mediated
inhibition of Bmp and Hh signaling, respectively, suggests that proper satb2
expression requires a relatively earlier Bmp signal and a later Hh signal. We
propose that Bmp signaling establishes competence for the neural crest to respond
to Hh signaling, thus inducing satb2 expression.

PMCID: PMC3605343
PMID: 23555697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2014;32(2):226-41. doi: 10.1080/07391102.2012.762722. Epub
2013 Mar 25.

Interhelical loops within the bHLH domain are determinant in maintaining
TWIST1-DNA complexes.

Bouard C(1), Terreux R, Hope J, Chemelle JA, Puisieux A, Ansieau S, Payen L.

Author information: 
(1)a Centre de Recherche en Cancerologie de Lyon , Lyon , F-69000 , France .

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor TWIST1 is essential to
embryonic development, and hijacking of its function contributes to the
development of numerous cancer types. It forms either a homodimer or a
heterodimeric complex with an E2A or HAND partner. These functionally distinct
complexes display sometimes antagonistic functions during development, so that
alterations in the balance between them lead to pronounced morphological
alterations, as observed in mice and in Saethre-Chotzen syndrome patients. We,
here, describe the structures of TWIST1 bHLH-DNA complexes produced in silico
through molecular dynamics simulations. We highlight the determinant role of the 
interhelical loops in maintaining the TWIST1-DNA complex structures and provide a
structural explanation for the loss of function associated with several TWIST1
mutations/insertions observed in Saethre-Chotzen syndrome patients. An animated
interactive 3D complement (I3DC) is available in Proteopedia at
http://proteopedia.org/w/Journal:JBSD:27.

PMCID: PMC3869052
PMID: 23527594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Apr 2;110(14):5588-93. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1301019110. Epub 2013 Mar 4.

Reprogramming of human fibroblasts toward a cardiac fate.

Nam YJ(1), Song K, Luo X, Daniel E, Lambeth K, West K, Hill JA, DiMaio JM, Baker 
LA, Bassel-Duby R, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2013 Jun 21;113(1):13-5.

Reprogramming of mouse fibroblasts toward a myocardial cell fate by forced
expression of cardiac transcription factors or microRNAs has recently been
demonstrated. The potential clinical applicability of these findings is based on 
the minimal regenerative potential of the adult human heart and the limited
availability of human heart tissue. An initial but mandatory step toward clinical
application of this approach is to establish conditions for conversion of adult
human fibroblasts to a cardiac phenotype. Toward this goal, we sought to
determine the optimal combination of factors necessary and sufficient for direct 
myocardial reprogramming of human fibroblasts. Here we show that four human
cardiac transcription factors, including GATA binding protein 4, Hand2, T-box5,
and myocardin, and two microRNAs, miR-1 and miR-133, activated cardiac marker
expression in neonatal and adult human fibroblasts. After maintenance in culture 
for 4-11 wk, human fibroblasts reprogrammed with these proteins and microRNAs
displayed sarcomere-like structures and calcium transients, and a small subset of
such cells exhibited spontaneous contractility. These phenotypic changes were
accompanied by expression of a broad range of cardiac genes and suppression of
nonmyocyte genes. These findings indicate that human fibroblasts can be
reprogrammed to cardiac-like myocytes by forced expression of cardiac
transcription factors with muscle-specific microRNAs and represent a step toward 
possible therapeutic application of this reprogramming approach.

PMCID: PMC3619357
PMID: 23487791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Jun 15;22(12):2471-81. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt099. Epub 2013 Feb
27.

Overdosage of Hand2 causes limb and heart defects in the human chromosomal
disorder partial trisomy distal 4q.

Tamura M(1), Hosoya M, Fujita M, Iida T, Amano T, Maeno A, Kataoka T, Otsuka T,
Tanaka S, Tomizawa S, Shiroishi T.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Strains Research Center, Mammalian Genetics Laboratory, National
Institute of Genetics, 1111 Yata, Mishima, Shizuoka 411-8540, Japan.

Partial trisomy distal 4q (denoted 4q+) is a human chromosomal disorder caused by
duplication of the distal end of the long arm of chromosome 4 (Chr4). This
disorder manifests typical phenotypes, including craniofacial, renal, heart and
thumb developmental defects. Although these clinical features are likely caused
by a dosage imbalance in the gene network involving the trisomic region, the
causative gene or genes and the molecular bases are largely unknown. Here, we
report mouse Recombination-induced mutation 4 (Rim4) as a model animal of 4q+.
The Rim4 genome contains an insertion of a 6.5 Mb fragment from mouse chromosome 
8 into chromosome 6. This insertion fragment contains 17 genes, including Hand2, 
that encode the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor and is syntenic to
the distal end of human Chr4, 4q32.3 to 4q34.1, which is responsible for 4q+. A
comparison of phenotypes between patients with Rim4 and 4q+ revealed that Rim4
shows direct parallels with many phenotypes of 4q+ such as craniofacial, heart,
cervical vertebra and limb deformities. Rebalancing the gene dosage by a genetic 
cross with Hand2 knockout mice ameliorated symptoms of the heart and limb
deformities of Rim4. Conversely, an increase in copy number of Hand2 in wild-type
mice recaptures the heart and limb deformities of Rim4. Our results collectively 
demonstrate that overdosage of Hand2 is a major cause for at least the limb and
heart phenotypes of 4q+ and that mouse Rim4 provides a unique animal model for
understanding the molecular bases underlying the complex phenotypes of 4q+.

PMID: 23449628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Ann Plast Surg. 2013 Jul;71(1):118-24. doi: 10.1097/SAP.0b013e318248b67f.

Preaxial polydactyly of the upper limb viewed as a spectrum of severity of
embryonic events.

Al-Qattan MM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Plastic and Hand Surgery, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia. moqattan@hotmail.com

Preaxial polydactyly (PPD) is a common congenital abnormality and its
classification varies among geneticists and hand surgeons. For example, the
triphalangeal thumb, preaxial polysyndactyly, and the mirror hand deformity are
considered as forms of PPD only in the genetics literature. Preaxial polydactyly 
is an error in the anteroposterior axis of the development of the upper limb. In 
this paper, the development of this axis is detailed and all molecular events
that are known to lead to PPD are reviewed. Finally, based on the review, PPD is 
viewed as a spectrum of severity of embryonic events.

PMID: 23364674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54524. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054524. Epub 2013 Jan 16.

Human embryonic stem cell derived mesenchymal progenitors express cardiac markers
but do not form contractile cardiomyocytes.

Raynaud CM(1), Halabi N, Elliott DA, Pasquier J, Elefanty AG, Stanley EG, Rafii
A.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Microenvironment Laboratory, Weill Cornell Medical College in
Qatar Education City, Qatar Foundation, Doha, Qatar.

Mesenchymal progenitors or stromal cells have shown promise as a therapeutic
strategy for a range of diseases including heart failure. In this context, we
explored the growth and differentiation potential of mesenchymal progenitors
(MPs) derived in vitro from human embryonic stem cells (hESCs). Similar to MPs
isolated from bone marrow, hESC derived MPs (hESC-MPs) efficiently differentiated
into archetypical mesenchymal derivatives such as chondrocytes and adipocytes.
Upon treatment with 5-Azacytidine or TGF-ß1, hESC-MPs modified their morphology
and up-regulated expression of key cardiac transcription factors such as NKX2-5, 
MEF2C, HAND2 and MYOCD. Nevertheless, NKX2-5+ hESC-MP derivatives did not form
contractile cardiomyocytes, raising questions concerning the suitability of these
cells as a platform for cardiomyocyte replacement therapy. Gene profiling
experiments revealed that, although hESC-MP derived cells expressed a suite of
cardiac related genes, they lacked the complete repertoire of genes associated
with bona fide cardiomyocytes. Our results suggest that whilst agents such as
TGF-ß1 and 5-Azacytidine can induce expression of cardiac related genes, but
treated cells retain a mesenchymal like phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3546995
PMID: 23342164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e52227. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052227. Epub 2012 Dec 20.

Characterization of shear-sensitive genes in the normal rat aorta identifies
Hand2 as a major flow-responsive transcription factor.

Björck HM(1), Renner J, Maleki S, Nilsson SF, Kihlberg J, Folkersen L, Karlsson
M, Ebbers T, Eriksson P, Länne T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medical and Health
Sciences, Faculty of Health Sciences, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.
hanna.bjorck@ki.se

OBJECTIVE: Shear forces play a key role in the maintenance of vessel wall
integrity. Current understanding regarding shear-dependent gene expression is
mainly based on in vitro or in vivo observations with experimentally deranged
shear, hence reflecting acute molecular events in relation to flow. Our objective
was to combine computational fluid dynamic (CFD) simulations with global
microarray analysis to study flow-dependent vessel wall biology in the aortic
wall under physiological conditions.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Male Wistar rats were used. Animal-specific wall shear
stress (WSS) magnitude and vector direction were estimated using CFD based on
aortic geometry and flow information acquired by magnetic resonance imaging. Two 
distinct flow pattern regions were identified in the normal rat aortic arch; the 
distal part of the lesser curvature being exposed to low WSS and a non-uniform
vector direction, and a region along the greater curvature being subjected to
markedly higher levels of WSS and a uniform vector direction. Microarray analysis
identified numerous novel mechanosensitive genes, including Trpc4 and Fgf12, and 
confirmed well-known ones, e.g. Klf2 and Nrf2. Gene ontology analysis revealed an
over-representation of genes involved in transcriptional regulation. The most
differentially expressed gene, Hand2, is a transcription factor previously shown 
to be involved in extracellular matrix remodeling. HAND2 protein was endothelial 
specific and showed higher expression in the regions exposed to low WSS with
disturbed flow.
CONCLUSIONS: Microarray analysis validated the CFD-defined WSS regions in the rat
aortic arch, and identified numerous novel shear-sensitive genes. Defining the
functional importance of these genes in relation to atherosusceptibility may
provide important insight into the understanding of vascular pathology.

PMCID: PMC3527404
PMID: 23284944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Regen Med. 2013 Mar;8(2):125-44. doi: 10.2217/rme.12.117. Epub 2012 Dec 18.

Seven diverse human embryonic stem cell-derived chondrogenic clonal embryonic
progenitor cell lines display site-specific cell fates.

Sternberg H(1), Kidd J, Murai JT, Jiang J, Rinon A, Erickson IE, Funk WD, Wang Q,
Chapman KB, Vangsness CT Jr, West MD.

Author information: 
(1)BioTime, Inc., 1301 Harbor Bay Parkway, Alameda, CA 94502, USA.

AIM: The transcriptomes of seven diverse clonal human embryonic progenitor cell
lines with chondrogenic potential were compared with that of bone marrow-derived 
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs).
MATERIALS & METHODS: The cell lines 4D20.8, 7PEND24, 7SMOO32, E15, MEL2, SK11 and
SM30 were compared with MSCs using immunohistochemical methods, gene expression
microarrays and quantitative real-time PCR.
RESULTS: In the undifferentiated progenitor state, each line displayed unique
combinations of site-specific markers, including AJAP1, ALDH1A2, BMP5, BARX1,
HAND2, HOXB2, LHX1, LHX8, PITX1, TBX15 and ZIC2, but none of the lines expressed 
the MSC marker CD74. The lines showed diverse responses when differentiated in
the presence of combinations of TGF-ß3, BMP2, 4, 6 and 7 and GDF5, with the lines
4D20.8, SK11, SM30 and MEL2 showing osteogenic markers in some differentiation
conditions. The line 7PEND24 showed evidence of regenerating articular cartilage 
and, in some conditions, markers of tendon differentiation.
CONCLUSION: The scalability of site-specific clonal human embryonic stem
cell-derived embryonic progenitor cell lines may provide novel models for the
study of differentiation and methods for preparing purified and identified cells 
types for use in therapy.

PMID: 23249126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Fertil Steril. 2013 Jan;99(1):248-55. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2012.08.056. Epub
2012 Oct 1.

Progestin-induced heart and neural crest derivatives expressed transcript 2 is
associated with fibulin-1 expression in human endometrial stromal cells.

Cho H(1), Okada H, Tsuzuki T, Nishigaki A, Yasuda K, Kanzaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Kansai Medical University, Osaka,
Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether heart and neural crest derivatives expressed
transcript 2 (HAND2) regulates fibulin-1 (FBLN1) expression during
decidualization of human endometrial stromal cells (ESCs).
DESIGN: In vitro experiment.
SETTING: Research laboratory.
PATIENT(S): Twenty-four patients undergoing hysterectomy for benign reasons.
INTERVENTION(S): ESCs were cultured with various progestins (medroxyprogesterone 
acetate [MPA], norethisterone, levonorgestrel, dienogest, and P), E(2),
dexamethasone, and/or 8-bromoadenosine 3', 5'-cyclic monophosphate (8-Br-cAMP).
HAND2 and FBLN1 were silenced by small interfering RNA technology.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): HAND2 and FBLN1 expression levels were assessed by
real-time polymerase chain reaction and Western blot analysis.
RESULT(S): MPA or E(2) + MPA increased HAND2 mRNA levels in ESCs in a time- and
dose-dependent manner, and this stimulatory effect was blocked by RU-486 (P
receptor antagonist). HAND2 was increased by E(2) + MPA earlier than FBLN1.
Simultaneous MPA and 8-Br-cAMP treatment synergistically enhanced HAND2 mRNA
levels. P and all the progestins significantly increased HAND2 mRNA levels,
whereas E(2), 8-Br-cAMP, or dexamethasone alone had no effect. Silencing of HAND2
expression significantly reduced FBLN1 expression, whereas FBLN1 silencing had no
effect on HAND2 expression.
CONCLUSION(S): These results suggest that progestin-induced HAND2 contributes to 
FBLN1 expression in human ESCs.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23036802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Feb 15;22(4):654-67. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0181. Epub 2012
Nov 7.

The histone methyltransferase inhibitor BIX01294 enhances the cardiac potential
of bone marrow cells.

Mezentseva NV(1), Yang J, Kaur K, Iaffaldano G, Rémond MC, Eisenberg CA,
Eisenberg LM.

Author information: 
(1)New York Medical College/Westchester Medical Center Stem Cell Laboratory,
Department of Physiology, New York Medical College, Valhalla, New York, USA.

Bone marrow (BM) has long been considered a potential stem cell source for
cardiac repair due to its abundance and accessibility. Although previous
investigations have generated cardiomyocytes from BM, yields have been low, and
far less than produced from ES or induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). Since
differentiation of pluripotent cells is difficult to control, we investigated
whether BM cardiac competency could be enhanced without making cells pluripotent.
From screens of various molecules that have been shown to assist iPSC production 
or maintain the ES cell phenotype, we identified the G9a histone
methyltransferase inhibitor BIX01294 as a potential reprogramming agent for
converting BM cells to a cardiac-competent phenotype. BM cells exposed to
BIX01294 displayed significantly elevated expression of brachyury, Mesp1, and
islet1, which are genes associated with embryonic cardiac progenitors. In
contrast, BIX01294 treatment minimally affected ectodermal, endodermal, and
pluripotency gene expression by BM cells. Expression of cardiac-associated genes 
Nkx2.5, GATA4, Hand1, Hand2, Tbx5, myocardin, and titin was enhanced 114, 76,
276, 46, 635, 123, and 5-fold in response to the cardiogenic stimulator Wnt11
when BM cells were pretreated with BIX01294. Immunofluorescent analysis
demonstrated that BIX01294 exposure allowed for the subsequent display of various
muscle proteins within the cells. The effect of BIX01294 on the BM cell phenotype
and differentiation potential corresponded to an overall decrease in methylation 
of histone H3 at lysine9, which is the primary target of G9a histone
methyltransferase. In summary, these data suggest that BIX01294 inhibition of
chromatin methylation reprograms BM cells to a cardiac-competent progenitor
phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3564468
PMID: 22994322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Sep 7;91(3):489-501. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.08.003. Epub
2012 Aug 30.

Contribution of global rare copy-number variants to the risk of sporadic
congenital heart disease.

Soemedi R(1), Wilson IJ, Bentham J, Darlay R, Töpf A, Zelenika D, Cosgrove C,
Setchfield K, Thornborough C, Granados-Riveron J, Blue GM, Breckpot J, Hellens S,
Zwolinkski S, Glen E, Mamasoula C, Rahman TJ, Hall D, Rauch A, Devriendt K,
Gewillig M, O' Sullivan J, Winlaw DS, Bu'Lock F, Brook JD, Bhattacharya S,
Lathrop M, Santibanez-Koref M, Cordell HJ, Goodship JA, Keavney BD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1
3BZ, UK.

Previous studies have shown that copy-number variants (CNVs) contribute to the
risk of complex developmental phenotypes. However, the contribution of global CNV
burden to the risk of sporadic congenital heart disease (CHD) remains
incompletely defined. We generated genome-wide CNV data by using Illumina
660W-Quad SNP arrays in 2,256 individuals with CHD, 283 trio CHD-affected
families, and 1,538 controls. We found association of rare genic deletions with
CHD risk (odds ratio [OR] = 1.8, p = 0.0008). Rare deletions in study
participants with CHD had higher gene content (p = 0.001) with higher
haploinsufficiency scores (p = 0.03) than they did in controls, and they were
enriched with Wnt-signaling genes (p = 1 × 10(-5)). Recurrent 15q11.2 deletions
were associated with CHD risk (OR = 8.2, p = 0.02). Rare de novo CNVs were
observed in ~5% of CHD trios; 10 out of 11 occurred on the paternally transmitted
chromosome (p = 0.01). Some of the rare de novo CNVs spanned genes known to be
involved in heart development (e.g., HAND2 and GJA5). Rare genic deletions
contribute ~4% of the population-attributable risk of sporadic CHD. Second to
previously described CNVs at 1q21.1, deletions at 15q11.2 and those implicating
Wnt signaling are the most significant contributors to the risk of sporadic CHD. 
Rare de novo CNVs identified in CHD trios exhibit paternal origin bias.

Copyright © 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3511986
PMID: 22939634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Sep;158A(9):2139-51. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35502. Epub 2012 
Jul 27.

Genotype-phenotype analysis of 4q deletion syndrome: proposal of a critical
region.

Strehle EM(1), Yu L, Rosenfeld JA, Donkervoort S, Zhou Y, Chen TJ, Martinez JE,
Fan YS, Barbouth D, Zhu H, Vaglio A, Smith R, Stevens CA, Curry CJ, Ladda RL, Fan
ZJ, Fox JE, Martin JA, Abdel-Hamid HZ, McCracken EA, McGillivray BC, Masser-Frye 
D, Huang T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.

Chromosome 4q deletion syndrome (4q- syndrome) is a rare condition, with an
estimated incidence of 1 in 100,000. Although variable, the clinical spectrum
commonly includes craniofacial, developmental, digital, skeletal, and cardiac
involvement. Data on the genotype-phenotype correlation within the 4q arm are
limited. We present detailed clinical and genetic information by array CGH on 20 
patients with 4q deletions. We identified a patient who has a ~465<U+2009>kb deletion
(186,770,069-187,234,800, hg18 coordinates) in 4q35.1 with all clinical features 
for 4q deletion syndrome except for developmental delay, suggesting that this is 
a critical region for this condition and a specific gene responsible for
orofacial clefts and congenital heart defects resides in this region. Since the
patients with terminal deletions all had cleft palate, our results provide
further evidence that a gene associated with clefts is located on the terminal
segment of 4q. By comparing and contrasting our patients' genetic information and
clinical features, we found significant genotype-phenotype correlations at a
single gene level linking specific phenotypes to individual genes. Based on these
data, we constructed a hypothetical partial phenotype-genotype map for chromosome
4q which includes BMP3, SEC31A, MAPK10, SPARCL1, DMP1, IBSP, PKD2, GRID2, PITX2, 
NEUROG2, ANK2, FGF2, HAND2, and DUX4 genes.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22847869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. BMC Bioinformatics. 2012 Jul 28;13:184. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-13-184.

Computational modeling of the bHLH domain of the transcription factor TWIST1 and 
R118C, S144R and K145E mutants.

Maia AM(1), da Silva JH, Mencalha AL, Caffarena ER, Abdelhay E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Célula-tronco-CEMO/INCA, Praça da Cruz Vermelha 236 Andar,
Centro, Rio de Janeiro/RJ, Brasil.

BACKGROUND: Human TWIST1 is a highly conserved member of the regulatory basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors. TWIST1 forms homo- or heterodimers
with E-box proteins, such as E2A (isoforms E12 and E47), MYOD and HAND2.
Haploinsufficiency germ-line mutations of the twist1 gene in humans are the main 
cause of Saethre-Chotzen syndrome (SCS), which is characterized by limb
abnormalities and premature fusion of cranial sutures. Because of the importance 
of TWIST1 in the regulation of embryonic development and its relationship with
SCS, along with the lack of an experimentally solved 3D structure, we performed
comparative modeling for the TWIST1 bHLH region arranged into wild-type
homodimers and heterodimers with E47. In addition, three mutations that promote
DNA binding failure (R118C, S144R and K145E) were studied on the TWIST1 monomer. 
We also explored the behavior of the mutant forms in aqueous solution using
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, focusing on the structural changes of the
wild-type versus mutant dimers.
RESULTS: The solvent-accessible surface area of the homodimers was smaller on
wild-type dimers, which indicates that the cleft between the monomers remained
more open on the mutant homodimers. RMSD and RMSF analyses indicated that mutated
dimers presented values that were higher than those for the wild-type dimers. For
a more careful investigation, the monomer was subdivided into four regions:
basic, helix I, loop and helix II. The basic domain presented a higher
flexibility in all of the parameters that were analyzed, and the mutant dimer
basic domains presented values that were higher than the wild-type dimers. The
essential dynamic analysis also indicated a higher collective motion for the
basic domain.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest the mutations studied turned the dimers into
more unstable structures with a wider cleft, which may be a reason for the loss
of DNA binding capacity observed for in vitro circumstances.

PMCID: PMC3507644
PMID: 22839202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Dev Biol. 2012 Sep 15;369(2):199-210. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.06.019. Epub 2012
Jun 28.

Zebrafish Mef2ca and Mef2cb are essential for both first and second heart field
cardiomyocyte differentiation.

Hinits Y(1), Pan L, Walker C, Dowd J, Moens CB, Hughes SM.

Author information: 
(1)Randall Division of Cell and Molecular Biophysics, New Hunt's House, Guy's
Campus, King's College London, UK. yaniv.hinits@kcl.ac.uk

Mef2 transcription factors have been strongly linked with early heart
development. D-mef2 is required for heart formation in Drosophila, but whether
Mef2 is essential for vertebrate cardiomyocyte (CM) differentiation is unclear.
In mice, although Mef2c is expressed in all CMs, targeted deletion of Mef2c
causes lethal loss of second heart field (SHF) derivatives and failure of cardiac
looping, but first heart field CMs can differentiate. Here we examine Mef2
function in early heart development in zebrafish. Two Mef2c genes exist in
zebrafish, mef2ca and mef2cb. Both are expressed similarly in the bilateral heart
fields but mef2cb is strongly expressed in the heart poles at the primitive heart
tube stage. By using fish mutants for mef2ca and mef2cb and antisense morpholinos
to knock down either or both Mef2cs, we show that Mef2ca and Mef2cb have
essential but redundant roles in myocardial differentiation. Loss of both Mef2ca 
and Mef2cb function does not interfere with early cardiogenic markers such as
nkx2.5, gata4 and hand2 but results in a dramatic loss of expression of
sarcomeric genes and myocardial markers such as bmp4, nppa, smyd1b and late
nkx2.5 mRNA. Rare residual CMs observed in mef2ca;mef2cb double mutants are
ablated by a morpholino capable of knocking down other Mef2s. Mef2cb
over-expression activates bmp4 within the cardiogenic region, but no ectopic CMs 
are formed. Surprisingly, anterior mesoderm and other tissues become skeletal
muscle. Mef2ca single mutants have delayed heart development, but form an
apparently normal heart. Mef2cb single mutants have a functional heart and are
viable adults. Our results show that the key role of Mef2c in myocardial
differentiation is conserved throughout the vertebrate heart.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3927553
PMID: 22750409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Nature. 2012 May 13;485(7400):599-604. doi: 10.1038/nature11139.

Heart repair by reprogramming non-myocytes with cardiac transcription factors.

Song K(1), Nam YJ, Luo X, Qi X, Tan W, Huang GN, Acharya A, Smith CL, Tallquist
MD, Neilson EG, Hill JA, Bassel-Duby R, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd, Dallas, Texas 75390-9148, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2012 May 31;485(7400):585-6.
    Circ Res. 2012 Sep 14;111(7):831-2.
    Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2012 Aug 1;5(4):481-2.

The adult mammalian heart possesses little regenerative potential following
injury. Fibrosis due to activation of cardiac fibroblasts impedes cardiac
regeneration and contributes to loss of contractile function, pathological
remodelling and susceptibility to arrhythmias. Cardiac fibroblasts account for a 
majority of cells in the heart and represent a potential cellular source for
restoration of cardiac function following injury through phenotypic reprogramming
to a myocardial cell fate. Here we show that four transcription factors, GATA4,
HAND2, MEF2C and TBX5, can cooperatively reprogram adult mouse tail-tip and
cardiac fibroblasts into beating cardiac-like myocytes in vitro. Forced
expression of these factors in dividing non-cardiomyocytes in mice reprograms
these cells into functional cardiac-like myocytes, improves cardiac function and 
reduces adverse ventricular remodelling following myocardial infarction. Our
results suggest a strategy for cardiac repair through reprogramming fibroblasts
resident in the heart with cardiogenic transcription factors or other molecules.

PMCID: PMC3367390
PMID: 22660318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Dev Biol. 2012 Aug 1;368(1):118-26. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.05.003. Epub 2012
May 14.

Identification and characterization of the zebrafish pharyngeal arch-specific
enhancer for the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor Hand2.

Iklé JM(1), Artinger KB, Clouthier DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Biology, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical
Campus, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

The development of the vertebrate jaw relies on a network of transcription
factors that patterns the dorsal-ventral axis of the pharyngeal arches. Recent
findings in both mouse and zebrafish illustrate that the basic-helix-loop-helix
transcription factor, Hand2, is crucial in this patterning process. While Hand2
has functionally similar roles in these two species, little is known about the
regulatory sequences controlling hand2 expression in zebrafish. Using
bioinformatics and Tol2-mediated transgenesis, we have generated zebrafish
transgenic reporter lines in which either the mouse or zebrafish arch-specific
hand2 enhancer direct expression of a fluorescent reporter. We find that both the
mouse and zebrafish enhancers drive early reporter expression in a hand2-specific
pattern in the ventral pharyngeal arches of zebrafish embryos. These lines
provide useful tools to follow ventral arch cells during vertebrate jaw
development while also allowing dissection of hand2 transcriptional regulation
during this process.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3676283
PMID: 22595513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Cell Sci. 2012 Aug 15;125(Pt 16):3893-903. doi: 10.1242/jcs.106435. Epub 2012
May 2.

Dual function of the UNC-45b chaperone with myosin and GATA4 in cardiac
development.

Chen D(1), Li S, Singh R, Spinette S, Sedlmeier R, Epstein HF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Texas Medical
Branch, TX 77555-0641, USA.

Cardiac development requires interplay between the regulation of gene expression 
and the assembly of functional sarcomeric proteins. We report that UNC-45b
recessive loss-of-function mutations in C3H and C57BL/6 inbred mouse strains
cause arrest of cardiac morphogenesis at the formation of right heart structures 
and failure of contractile function. Wild-type C3H and C57BL/6 embryos at the
same stage, E9.5, form actively contracting right and left atria and ventricles. 
The known interactions of UNC-45b as a molecular chaperone are consistent with
diminished accumulation of the sarcomeric myosins, but not their mRNAs, and the
resulting decreased contraction of homozygous mutant embryonic hearts. The novel 
finding that GATA4 accumulation is similarly decreased at the protein but not
mRNA levels is also consistent with the function of UNC-45b as a chaperone. The
mRNAs of known downstream targets of GATA4 during secondary cardiac field
development, the cardiogenic factors Hand1, Hand2 and Nkx-2.5, are also
decreased, consistent with the reduced GATA4 protein accumulation. Direct binding
studies show that the UNC-45b chaperone forms physical complexes with both the
alpha and beta cardiac myosins and the cardiogenic transcription factor GATA4.
Co-expression of UNC-45b with GATA4 led to enhanced transcription from GATA
promoters in naïve cells. These novel results suggest that the heart-specific
UNC-45b isoform functions as a molecular chaperone mediating contractile function
of the sarcomere and gene expression in cardiac development.

PMCID: PMC3462083
PMID: 22553207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Hepatology. 2012 Nov;56(5):1958-70. doi: 10.1002/hep.25757. Epub 2012 Oct 14.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, heart and neural crest
derivatives expressed transcript 2, marks hepatic stellate cells in zebrafish:
analysis of stellate cell entry into the developing liver.

Yin C(1), Evason KJ, Maher JJ, Stainier DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2012 Nov;56(5):1596-8.

Hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) are liver-specific mesenchymal cells that play
vital roles in liver development and injury. Our knowledge of HSC biology is
limited by the paucity of in vivo data. HSCs and sinusoidal endothelial cells
(SECs) reside in close proximity, and interactions between these two cell types
are potentially critical for their development and function. Here, we introduce a
transgenic zebrafish line, Tg(hand2:EGFP), that labels HSCs. We find that
zebrafish HSCs share many similarities with their mammalian counterparts,
including morphology, location, lipid storage, gene-expression profile, and
increased proliferation and matrix production, in response to an acute hepatic
insult. Using the Tg(hand2:EGFP) line, we conducted time-course analyses during
development to reveal that HSCs invade the liver after SECs do. However, HSCs
still enter the liver in mutants that lack most endothelial cells, including
SECs, indicating that SECs are not required for HSC differentiation or their
entry into the liver. In the absence of SECs, HSCs become abnormally associated
with hepatic biliary cells, suggesting that SECs influence HSC localization
during liver development. We analyzed factors that regulate HSC development and
show that inhibition of vascular endothelial growth factor signaling
significantly reduces the number of HSCs that enter the liver. We also performed 
a pilot chemical screen and identified two compounds that affect HSC numbers
during development.CONCLUSION: Our work provides the first comprehensive
description of HSC development in zebrafish and reveals the requirement of SECs
in HSC localization. The Tg(hand2:EGFP) line represents a unique tool for in vivo
analysis and molecular dissection of HSC behavior.

Copyright © 2012 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC3407311
PMID: 22488653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Development. 2012 May;139(9):1620-9. doi: 10.1242/dev.073056. Epub 2012 Mar 21.

Islet1 regulates establishment of the posterior hindlimb field upstream of the
Hand2-Shh morphoregulatory gene network in mouse embryos.

Itou J(1), Kawakami H, Quach T, Osterwalder M, Evans SM, Zeller R, Kawakami Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Development, University of Minnesota,
321 Church St. SE. Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

How divergent genetic systems regulate a common pathway during the development of
two serial structures, forelimbs and hindlimbs, is not well understood.
Specifically, HAND2 has been shown to regulate Shh directly to initiate its
expression in the posterior margin of the limb mesenchyme. Although the Hand2-Shh
morphoregulatory system operates in both the forelimb and hindlimb bud, a recent 
analysis suggested that its upstream regulation is different in the forelimb and 
hindlimb bud. A combination of all four Hox9 genes is required for Hand2
expression in the forelimb-forming region; however, it remains elusive what
genetic system regulates the Hand2-Shh pathway in the hindlimb-forming region. By
conditional inactivation of Islet1 in the hindlimb-forming region using the
Hoxb6Cre transgene, we show that Islet1 is required for establishing the
posterior hindlimb field, but not the forelimb field, upstream of the Hand2-Shh
pathway. Inactivation of Islet1 caused the loss of posterior structures in the
distal and proximal regions, specifically in the hindlimb. We found that Hand2
expression was downregulated in the hindlimb field and that Shh expression was
severely impaired in the hindlimb bud. In the Hoxb6Cre; Islet1 mutant pelvis, the
proximal element that is formed in a Shh-independent manner, displayed
complementary defects in comparison with Pitx1(-/-) hindlimbs. This suggests that
Islet1 and Pitx1 function in parallel during girdle development in hindlimbs,
which is in contrast with the known requirement for Tbx5 in girdle development in
forelimbs. Our studies have identified a role for Islet1 in hindlimb-specific
development and have revealed Islet1 functions in two distinct processes:
regulation upstream of the Hand2-Shh pathway and contributions to girdle
development.

PMID: 22438573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Dev Dyn. 2012 May;241(5):924-40. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23776. Epub 2012 Mar 29.

Specific inactivation of Twist1 in the mandibular arch neural crest cells affects
the development of the ramus and reveals interactions with hand2.

Zhang Y(1), Blackwell EL, McKnight MT, Knutsen GR, Vu WT, Ruest LB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, TAMHSC-Baylor College of Dentistry, Dallas,
Texas, USA.

BACKGROUND: The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor Twist1
fulfills an essential function in neural crest cell formation, migration, and
survival and is associated with the craniosynostic Saethre-Chotzen syndrome in
humans. However, its functions during mandibular development, when it may
interact with other bHLH transcription factors like Hand2, are unknown because
mice homozygous for the Twist1 null mutation die in early embryogenesis. To
determine the role of Twist1 during mandibular development, we used the Hand2-Cre
transgene to conditionally inactivate the gene in the neural crest cells
populating the mandibular pharyngeal arch.
RESULTS: The mutant mice exhibited a spectrum of craniofacial anomalies,
including mandibular hypoplasia, altered middle ear development, and cleft
palate. It appears that Twist1 is essential for the survival of the neural crest 
cells involved in the development of the mandibular ramal elements. Twist1 plays 
a role in molar development and cusp formation by participating in the reciprocal
signaling needed for the formation of the enamel knot. This gene is also needed
to control the ossification of the mandible, a redundant role shared with Hand2.
CONCLUSION: Twist1, along with Hand2, is essential for the proximodistal
patterning and development of the mandible and ossification.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3346293
PMID: 22411303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Neurosci. 2012 Feb 8;32(6):2110-20. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3584-11.2012.

A Phox2- and Hand2-dependent Hand1 cis-regulatory element reveals a unique gene
dosage requirement for Hand2 during sympathetic neurogenesis.

Vincentz JW(1), VanDusen NJ, Fleming AB, Rubart M, Firulli BA, Howard MJ, Firulli
AB.

Author information: 
(1)Riley Heart Research Center, Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research,
Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Anatomy, Indiana Medical School, 
Indianapolis, Indiana 46202-5225, USA.

Neural crest cell specification and differentiation to a sympathetic neuronal
fate serves as an important model for neurogenesis and depends upon the function 
of both bHLH transcription factors, notably Hand2, and homeodomain transcription 
factors, including Phox2b. Here, we define a 1007 bp cis-regulatory element 5' of
the Hand1 gene sufficient to drive reporter expression within the sympathetic
chain of transgenic mice. Comparative genomic analyses uncovered evolutionarily
conserved consensus-binding sites within this element, which chromatin
immunoprecipitation and electrophoretic mobility shift assays confirm are bound
by Hand2 and Phox2b. Mutational analyses revealed that the conserved Phox2 and
E-box binding sites are necessary for proper cis-regulatory element activity, and
expression analyses on both Hand2 conditionally null and hypomorphic backgrounds 
demonstrate that Hand2 is required for reporter activation in a gene
dosage-dependent manner. We demonstrate that Hand2 and Hand1 differentially bind 
the E-boxes in this cis-regulatory element, establishing molecular differences
between these two factors. Finally, we demonstrate that Hand1 is dispensable for 
normal tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) and dopamine ß-hydroxylase (DBH) expression in
sympathetic neurons, even when Hand2 gene dosage is concurrently reduced by half.
Together, these data define a tissue-specific Hand1 cis-regulatory element
controlled by two factors essential for the development of the sympathetic
nervous system and provide in vivo regulatory evidence to support previous
findings that Hand2, rather than Hand1, is predominantly responsible for
regulating TH, DBH, and Hand1 expression in developing sympathetic neurons.

PMCID: PMC3324095
PMID: 22323723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Mar;158A(3):635-40. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.34425. Epub 2012
Feb 2.

Chromosome 4q deletion syndrome: narrowing the cardiovascular critical region to 
4q32.2-q34.3.

Xu W(1), Ahmad A, Dagenais S, Iyer RK, Innis JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, Michigan, USA.

The 4q deletion syndrome is a rare chromosome deletion syndrome with a wide range
of clinical phenotypes. There is limited clinical phenotype and molecular
correlation for congenital heart defects (CHDs) reported so far for this region
primarily because many cases are large deletions, often terminal, and because
high-resolution array has not been reported in the evaluation of this group of
patients. CHDs are reported in about 60% of patients with 4q deletion syndrome,
occurring in the presence or absence of dHAND deletion, implying the existence of
additional genes in 4q whose dosage influences cardiac development. We report an 
8-month-old patient with a large mid-muscular to outlet ventricular septal defect
(VSD), moderate-sized secundum-type atrial septal defect (ASD), thickened,
dysplastic pulmonary valve with mild stenosis and moderate pulmonic
regurgitation, and patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). Illumina CytoSNP array
analysis disclosed a de novo, heterozygous, interstitial deletion of 11.6<U+2009>Mb of
genomic material from the long arm of chromosome 4, at 4q32.3-q34.3
(Chr4:167236114-178816031; hg18). The deleted region affects 37 RefSeq genes
(hg18), including two provisional microRNA stemloops. Three genes in this region,
namely TLL1 (Tolloid-like-1), HPGD (15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase), and
HAND2 (Heart and neural crest derivatives-expressed protein 2), are known to be
involved in cardiac morphogenesis. This report narrows the critical region
responsible for CHDs seen in 4q deletion syndrome.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22302627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Dev Biol. 2012 Jun 1;366(1):64-73. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.01.012. Epub 2012
Jan 24.

The enteric nervous system.

Sasselli V(1), Pachnis V, Burns AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

The enteric nervous system (ENS), the intrinsic innervation of the
gastrointestinal tract, consists of numerous types of neurons, and glial cells,
that are distributed in two intramuscular plexuses that extend along the entire
length of the gut and control co-ordinated smooth muscle contractile activity and
other gut functions. All enteric neurons and glia are derived from neural crest
cells (NCC). Vagal (hindbrain) level NCC provide the majority of enteric
precursors along the entire length of the gut, while a lesser contribution, that 
is restricted to the hindgut, arises from the sacral region of the neuraxis.
After leaving the dorsal neural tube NCC undergo extensive migration,
proliferation, survival and differentiation in order to form a functional ENS.
This article reviews the molecular mechanisms underlying these key developmental 
processes and highlights the major groups of molecules that affect enteric NCC
proliferation and survival (Ret/Gdnf and EdnrB/Et-3 pathways, Sox10 and Phox2b
transcription factors), cell migration (Ret and EdnrB signalling, semaphorin 3A, 
cell adhesion molecules, Rho GTPases), and the development of enteric neuronal
subtypes and morphologies (Mash1, Gdnf/neurturin, BMPs, Hand2, retinoic acid).
Finally, looking to the future, we discuss the need to translate the wealth of
data gleaned from animal studies to the clinical area and thus better understand,
and develop treatments for, congenital human diseases affecting the ENS.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22290331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Dev Biol. 2012 Mar 1;363(1):219-33. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.12.026. Epub 2011
Dec 24.

HoxB8 in noradrenergic specification and differentiation of the autonomic nervous
system.

Huber L(1), Ferdin M, Holzmann J, Stubbusch J, Rohrer H.

Author information: 
(1)Research Group Developmental Neurobiology, Max Planck Institute for Brain
Research, Frankfurt/Main, Germany.

Different prespecification of mesencephalic and trunk neural crest cells
determines their response to environmental differentiation signals and
contributes to the generation of different autonomic neuron subtypes,
parasympathetic ciliary neurons in the head and trunk noradrenergic sympathetic
neurons. The differentiation of ciliary and sympathetic neurons shares many
features, including the initial BMP-induced expression of noradrenergic
characteristics that is, however, subsequently lost in ciliary but maintained in 
sympathetic neurons. The molecular basis of specific prespecification and
differentiation patterns has remained unclear. We show here that HoxB gene
expression in trunk neural crest is maintained in sympathetic neurons. Ectopic
expression of a single HoxB gene, HoxB8, in mesencephalic neural crest results in
a strongly increased expression of sympathetic neuron characteristics like the
transcription factor Hand2, tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) and
dopamine-beta-hydroxylase (DBH) in ciliary neurons. Other subtype-specific
properties like RGS4 and RCad are not induced. HoxB8 has only minor effects in
postmitotic ciliary neurons and is unable to induce TH and DBH in the enteric
nervous system. Thus, we conclude that HoxB8 acts by maintaining noradrenergic
properties transiently expressed in ciliary neuron progenitors during normal
development. HoxC8, HoxB9, HoxB1 and HoxD10 elicit either small and transient or 
no effects on noradrenergic differentiation, suggesting a selective effect of
HoxB8. These results implicate that Hox genes contribute to the differential
development of autonomic neuron precursors by maintaining noradrenergic
properties in the trunk sympathetic neuron lineage.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22236961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Biol Reprod. 2012 Mar 8;86(3):63. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.097188. Print 2012 
Mar.

Brief exposure to progesterone during a critical neonatal window prevents uterine
gland formation in mice.

Cooke PS(1), Ekman GC, Kaur J, Davila J, Bagchi IC, Clark SG, Dziuk PJ, Hayashi
K, Bartol FF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville,
Florida 32610, USA. paulscooke@ufl.edu

Uterine gland development (adenogenesis) in mice begins on Postnatal Day (PND) 5 
and is completed in adulthood. Adenogenesis depends on estrogen receptor 1, and
progesterone (P4) inhibits mitogenic effects of estrogen on uterine epithelium.
This progestin-induced effect has been used to inhibit uterine gland development;
progestin treatment of ewes for 8 wk from birth has produced infertile adults
lacking uterine glands. The goals of the present study were to determine if a
window of susceptibility to P4-mediated inhibition of uterine gland development
exists in mice and whether early P4 treatment abolishes adenogenesis and
fertility. Mice were injected daily with P4 (40 µg/g) or vehicle during various
postnatal windows. Adenogenesis, cell proliferation, and expression of key
morphoregulatory transcripts and proteins were examined in uteri at PNDs 10 and
20. Additionally, adenogenesis was assessed in isolated uterine epithelium.
Treatment during PNDs 3-9, 5-9, or 3-7 abolished adenogenesis at PND 10, whereas 
treatments during PNDs 3-5 and 7-9 did not. Critically, mice treated during PNDs 
3-9 lacked glands in adulthood, indicating that adenogenesis did not resume after
this treatment. However, glands were present by PND 20 and later following
treatment during PNDs 5-9 or 3-7, whereas treatment during PNDs 10-16 produced
partial inhibition of adenogenesis at PND 20 and later. Epithelial proliferation 
at PND 10 was low following P4 treatment (PNDs 3-9) but exceeded that in controls
at PND 20, indicating a rebound of epithelial proliferation following treatment. 
Messenger RNA for Wnt, Fzd, and Hox genes was altered by neonatal P4 treatment.
All groups cycled during adulthood. Mice treated with P4 during PNDs 3-9, but not
during other developmental windows, showed minimal fertility in adulthood. In
summary, brief P4 treatment (7 days) during a critical neonatal window (PNDs 3-9)
transiently inhibited epithelial proliferation but totally and permanently
blocked adenogenesis and adult fertility. This resulted in permanent loss of
uterine glands and, essentially, total infertility during adulthood. The narrow
window for inhibition of adenogenesis identified here may have implications for
development of this methodology as a contraceptive strategy for animals.

PMCID: PMC3316263
PMID: 22133692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Eur J Neurosci. 2011 Nov;34(10):1563-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2011.07860.x.

Transcriptional control of differentiation and neurogenesis in autonomic ganglia.

Rohrer H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Group Developmental Neurobiology, Max-Planck-Institute for Brain
Research, 60528 Frankfurt/Main, Germany. hermann.rohrer@brain.mpg.de

Autonomic neuron development is controlled by a network of transcription factors,
which is induced by bone morphogenetic protein signalling in neural crest
progenitor cells. This network intersects with a transcriptional program in
migratory neural crest cells that pre-specifies autonomic neuron precursor cells.
Recent findings demonstrate that the transcription factors acting in the initial 
specification and differentiation of sympathetic neurons are also important for
the proliferation of progenitors and immature neurons during neurogenesis.
Elimination of Phox2b, Hand2 and Gata3 in differentiated neurons affects the
expression of subtype-specific and/or generic neuronal properties or neuron
survival. Taken together, transcription factors previously shown to act in
initial neuron specification and differentiation display a much broader spectrum 
of functions, including control of neurogenesis and the maintenance of subtype
characteristics and survival of mature neurons.

© 2011 The Author. European Journal of Neuroscience © 2011 Federation of European
Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22103414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Dev Dyn. 2011 Dec;240(12):2634-45. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22776.

Tbx5 overexpression favors a first heart field lineage in murine embryonic stem
cells and in Xenopus laevis embryos.

Herrmann F(1), Bundschu K, Kühl SJ, Kühl M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Ulm University,
Albert-Einstein-Allee 11, Ulm, Germany

The T-box transcription factor Tbx5 is involved in several developmental
processes including cardiogenesis. Early steps of cardiac development are
characterised by the formation of two cardiogenic lineages, the first (FHF) and
the second heart field (SHF) lineage, which arise from a common cardiac
progenitor cell population. To further investigate the function of Tbx5 during
cardiogenesis, we generated a murine embryonic stem cell line constitutively
overexpressing Tbx5. Differentiation of these cells is characterised by an
earlier and increased appearance of contracting cardiomyocytes that beat with a
higher frequency than control cells. In semi-quantitative and quantitative RT-PCR
analyses, we observed an up-regulation of cardiac marker genes such as Troponin
T, endogenous Tbx5, and Nkx2.5 and a down-regulation of others like BMP4 and
Hand2. Similar data were gained in Xenopus laevis arguing for a conserved
function of Tbx5. Furthermore, markers of the conduction system and atrial
cardiomyocytes were increased.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22072574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Development. 2011 Dec;138(23):5147-56. doi: 10.1242/dev.067785. Epub 2011 Oct 26.

Gremlin 2 regulates distinct roles of BMP and Endothelin 1 signaling in
dorsoventral patterning of the facial skeleton.

Zuniga E(1), Rippen M, Alexander C, Schilling TF, Crump JG.

Author information: 
(1)Broad CIRM Center, University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine, 
Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

Patterning of the upper versus lower face involves generating distinct
pre-skeletal identities along the dorsoventral (DV) axes of the pharyngeal
arches. Whereas previous studies have shown roles for BMPs, Endothelin 1 (Edn1)
and Jagged1b-Notch2 in DV patterning of the facial skeleton, how these pathways
are integrated to generate different skeletal fates has remained unclear. Here,
we show that BMP and Edn1 signaling have distinct roles in development of the
ventral and intermediate skeletons, respectively, of the zebrafish face. Using
transgenic gain-of-function approaches and cell-autonomy experiments, we find
that BMPs strongly promote hand2 and msxe expression in ventral skeletal
precursors, while Edn1 promotes the expression of nkx3.2 and three Dlx genes
(dlx3b, dlx5a and dlx6a) in intermediate precursors. Furthermore, Edn1 and
Jagged1b pattern the intermediate and dorsal facial skeletons in part by inducing
the BMP antagonist Gremlin 2 (Grem2), which restricts BMP activity to the
ventral-most face. We therefore propose a model in which later cross-inhibitory
interactions between BMP and Edn1 signaling, in part mediated by Grem2, separate 
an initially homogenous ventral region into distinct ventral and intermediate
skeletal precursor domains.

PMCID: PMC3210496
PMID: 22031546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Development. 2011 Dec;138(23):5135-46. doi: 10.1242/dev.067801. Epub 2011 Oct 26.

Combinatorial roles for BMPs and Endothelin 1 in patterning the dorsal-ventral
axis of the craniofacial skeleton.

Alexander C(1), Zuniga E, Blitz IL, Wada N, Le Pabic P, Javidan Y, Zhang T, Cho
KW, Crump JG, Schilling TF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, University of California,
Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) play crucial roles in craniofacial development
but little is known about their interactions with other signals, such as
Endothelin 1 (Edn1) and Jagged/Notch, which pattern the dorsal-ventral (DV) axis 
of the pharyngeal arches. Here, we use transgenic zebrafish to monitor and
perturb BMP signaling during arch formation. With a BMP-responsive transgene,
Tg(Bre:GFP), we show active BMP signaling in neural crest (NC)-derived skeletal
precursors of the ventral arches, and in surrounding epithelia. Loss-of-function 
studies using a heat shock-inducible, dominant-negative BMP receptor 1a
[Tg(hs70I:dnBmpr1a-GFP)] to bypass early roles show that BMP signaling is
required for ventral arch development just after NC migration, the same stages at
which we detect Tg(Bre:GFP). Inhibition of BMP signaling at these stages reduces 
expression of the ventral signal Edn1, as well as ventral-specific genes such as 
hand2 and dlx6a in the arches, and expands expression of the dorsal signal jag1b.
This results in a loss or reduction of ventral and intermediate skeletal elements
and a mis-shapen dorsal arch skeleton. Conversely, ectopic BMP causes dorsal
expansion of ventral-specific gene expression and corresponding
reductions/transformations of dorsal cartilages. Soon after NC migration, BMP is 
required to induce Edn1 and overexpression of either signal partially rescues
ventral skeletal defects in embryos deficient for the other. However, once arch
primordia are established the effects of BMPs become restricted to more ventral
and anterior (palate) domains, which do not depend on Edn1. This suggests that
BMPs act upstream and in parallel to Edn1 to promote ventral fates in the arches 
during early DV patterning, but later acquire distinct roles that further
subdivide the identities of NC cells to pattern the craniofacial skeleton.

PMCID: PMC3210495
PMID: 22031543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Development. 2011 Nov;138(21):4789-800. doi: 10.1242/dev.060053.

Targeted deletion of Hand2 in enteric neural precursor cells affects its
functions in neurogenesis, neurotransmitter specification and gangliogenesis,
causing functional aganglionosis.

Lei J(1), Howard MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences and Program in Neurosciences and Neurodegenerative
Diseases, University of Toledo Health Sciences Campus, Toledo, OH 43614, USA.

Targeted deletion of the bHLH DNA-binding protein Hand2 in the neural crest,
impacts development of the enteric nervous system (ENS), possibly by regulating
the transition from neural precursor cell to neuron. We tested this hypothesis by
targeting Hand2 deletion in nestin-expressing neural precursor (NEP) cells. The
mutant mice showed abnormal ENS development, resulting in lethal neurogenic
pseudo-obstruction. Neurogenesis of neurons derived from NEP cells identified a
second nestin non-expressing neural precursor (NNEP) cell in the ENS. There was
substantial compensation for the loss of neurons derived from the NEP pool by the
NNEP pool but this was insufficient to abrogate the negative impact of Hand2
deletion. Hand2-mediated regulation of proliferation affected both neural
precursor and neuron numbers. Differentiation of glial cells derived from the NEP
cells was significantly decreased with no compensation from the NNEP pool of
cells. Our data indicate differential developmental potential of NEPs and NNEPs; 
NNEPs preferentially differentiate as neurons, whereas NEPs give rise to both
neurons and glial cells. Deletion of Hand2 also resulted in complete loss of NOS 
and VIP and a significant decrease in expression of choline acetyltransferase and
calretinin, demonstrating a role for Hand2 in neurotransmitter specification
and/or expression. Loss of Hand2 resulted in a marked disruption of the
developing neural network, exemplified by lack of a myenteric plexus and
extensive overgrowth of fibers. Thus, Hand2 is essential for neurogenesis,
neurotransmitter specification and neural network patterning in the developing
ENS.

PMCID: PMC3190387
PMID: 21989918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Development. 2011 Nov;138(21):4721-32. doi: 10.1242/dev.064998.

Vascular endothelial and endocardial progenitors differentiate as cardiomyocytes 
in the absence of Etsrp/Etv2 function.

Palencia-Desai S(1), Kohli V, Kang J, Chi NC, Black BL, Sumanas S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Previous studies have suggested that embryonic vascular endothelial, endocardial 
and myocardial lineages originate from multipotential cardiovascular progenitors.
However, their existence in vivo has been debated and molecular mechanisms that
regulate specification of different cardiovascular lineages are poorly
understood. An ETS domain transcription factor Etv2/Etsrp/ER71 has been recently 
established as a crucial regulator of vascular endothelial differentiation in
zebrafish and mouse embryos. In this study, we show that etsrp-expressing
vascular endothelial/endocardial progenitors differentiate as cardiomyocytes in
the absence of Etsrp function during zebrafish embryonic development. Expression 
of multiple endocardial specific markers is absent or greatly reduced in Etsrp
knockdown or mutant embryos. We show that Etsrp regulates endocardial
differentiation by directly inducing endocardial nfatc1 expression. In addition, 
Etsrp function is required to inhibit myocardial differentiation. In the absence 
of Etsrp function, etsrp-expressing endothelial and endocardial progenitors
initiate myocardial marker hand2 and cmlc2 expression. Furthermore, Foxc1a
function and interaction between Foxc1a and Etsrp is required to initiate
endocardial development, but is dispensable for the inhibition of myocardial
differentiation. These results argue that Etsrp initiates endothelial and
endocardial, and inhibits myocardial, differentiation by two distinct mechanisms.
Our findings are important for the understanding of genetic pathways that control
cardiovascular differentiation during normal vertebrate development and will also
greatly contribute to the stem cell research aimed at regenerating heart tissues.

PMCID: PMC3190385
PMID: 21989916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Development. 2011 Nov;138(21):4699-708. doi: 10.1242/dev.072157.

Midkine and Alk signaling in sympathetic neuron proliferation and neuroblastoma
predisposition.

Reiff T(1), Huber L, Kramer M, Delattre O, Janoueix-Lerosey I, Rohrer H.

Author information: 
(1)Research Group Developmental Neurobiology, Max Planck Institute for Brain
Research, Deutschordenstr. 46, 60528, Frankfurt/M, Germany.

Neuroblastoma (NB) is the most common extracranial solid tumor in childhood and
arises from cells of the developing sympathoadrenergic lineage. Activating
mutations in the gene encoding the ALK tyrosine kinase receptor predispose for
NB. Here, we focus on the normal function of Alk signaling in the control of
sympathetic neuron proliferation, as well as on the effects of mutant ALK. Forced
expression of wild-type ALK and NB-related constitutively active ALK mutants in
cultures of proliferating immature sympathetic neurons results in a strong
proliferation increase, whereas Alk knockdown and pharmacological inhibition of
Alk activity decrease proliferation. Alk activation upregulates NMyc and trkB and
maintains Alk expression by an autoregulatory mechanism involving Hand2. The
Alk-ligand Midkine (Mk) is expressed in immature sympathetic neurons and in vivo 
inhibition of Alk signaling by virus-mediated shRNA knockdown of Alk and Mk leads
to strongly reduced sympathetic neuron proliferation. Taken together, these
results demonstrate that the extent and timing of sympathetic neurogenesis is
controlled by Mk/Alk signaling. The predisposition for NB caused by activating
ALK mutations may thus be explained by aberrations of normal neurogenesis, i.e.
elevated and sustained Alk signaling and increased NMyc expression.

PMID: 21989914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Dev Biol. 2011 Oct 15;358(2):368-78. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.07.037. Epub 2011 
Aug 4.

GATA5 interacts with GATA4 and GATA6 in outflow tract development.

Laforest B(1), Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Développement et Différentiation Cardiaque, Programme de
Biologie Moléculaire, Université de Montréal, Montréal QC, Canada H3C 3J7.

Members of the GATA family of transcription factors are critical regulators of
heart development and mutations in 2 of them, GATA4 and GATA6 are associated with
outflow tract and septal defects in human. The heart expresses 3 GATA factors,
GATA4, 5 and 6 in a partially overlapping pattern. Here, we report that compound 
Gata4/Gata5 and Gata5/Gata6 mutants die embryonically or perinatally due to
severe congenital heart defects. Almost all Gata4(+/-)Gata5(+/-) mutant embryos
have double outlet right ventricles (DORV), large ventricular septal defects
(VSD) as well as hypertrophied mitral and tricuspid valves. Only 25% of double
compound Gata4/Gata5 heterozygotes survive to adulthood and these mice have
aortic stenosis. Compound loss of a Gata5 and a Gata6 allele also leads to DORVs 
associated with subaortic VSDs. Expression of several transcription factors
important for endocardial and myocardial cell differentiation, such as Tbx20,
Mef2c, Hey1 and Hand2, was reduced in compound heterozygote embryos. These
findings suggest the existence of important genetic interactions between Gata5
and the 2 other cardiac GATA factors in endocardial cushion formation and outflow
tract morphogenesis. The data identify GATA5 as a potential genetic modifier of
congenital heart disease and provide insight for elucidating the genetic basis of
an important class of human birth defects.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21839733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Development. 2011 Sep;138(17):3759-67. doi: 10.1242/dev.063180. Epub 2011 Jul 27.

Ezh2 regulates anteroposterior axis specification and proximodistal axis
elongation in the developing limb.

Wyngaarden LA(1), Delgado-Olguin P, Su IH, Bruneau BG, Hopyan S.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental and Stem Cell Biology Program, Research Institute, Hospital for 
Sick Children, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada.

Specification and determination (commitment) of positional identities precedes
overt pattern formation during development. In the limb bud, it is clear that the
anteroposterior axis is specified at a very early stage and is prepatterned by
the mutually antagonistic interaction between Gli3 and Hand2. There is also
evidence that the proximodistal axis is specified early and determined
progressively. Little is known about upstream regulators of these processes or
how epigenetic modifiers influence axis formation. Using conditional mutagenesis 
at different time points, we show that the histone methyltransferase Ezh2 is an
upstream regulator of anteroposterior prepattern at an early stage. Mutants
exhibit posteriorised limb bud identity. During later limb bud stages, Ezh2 is
essential for cell survival and proximodistal segment elongation. Ezh2 maintains 
the late phase of Hox gene expression and cell transposition experiments suggest 
that it regulates the plasticity with which cells respond to instructive
positional cues.

PMID: 21795281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Gastroenterology. 2011 Aug;141(2):576-87, 587.e1-6. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2011.04.059. Epub 2011 May 6.

Expression level of Hand2 affects specification of enteric neurons and
gastrointestinal function in mice.

D'Autréaux F(1), Margolis KG, Roberts J, Stevanovic K, Mawe G, Li Z, Karamooz N, 
Ahuja A, Morikawa Y, Cserjesi P, Setlick W, Gershon MD.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biologie, Dévelopement et évolution du système nerveux,
CNRS-Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris, France. fabien.d.autreaux@ens.fr

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Hand2 is a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor
required for terminal differentiation of enteric neurons. We studied Hand2
haploinsufficient mice, to determine whether reduced expression of Hand2 allows
sufficient enteric neurogenesis for survival, but not for development of a normal
enteric nervous system (ENS).
METHODS: Enteric transcripts that encode Hand2 and the neuron-specific embryonic 
lethal abnormal vision proteins HuB, HuC, and HuD were quantified.
Immunocytochemistry was used to identify and quantify neurons. Apoptosis was
analyzed with the terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated deoxyuridine
triphosphate nick-end labeling procedure. Intracellular microelectrodes were used
to record inhibitory junction potentials. Gastrointestinal transit and colonic
motility were measured in vivo.
RESULTS: Levels of of enteric Hand2 transcripts were associated with genotypes of
mice, in the following order: Hand2(+/+) > Hand2(LoxP/+) > Hand2(+/-) >
Hand2(LoxP/-). Parallel reductions were found in expression of HuD and in
regional and phenotypic manners. Numbers of neurons, numbers of neuronal nitric
oxide synthase(+) and calretinin(+), but not substance P(+) or vasoactive
intestinal peptide(+) neurons, decreased. No effects were observed in stomach or 
cecum. Apoptosis was not detected, consistent with the concept that Hand2
inhibits neuronal differentiation, rather than regulates survival. The amplitude 
of inhibitory junction potentials in colonic circular muscle was similar in Hand2
wild-type and haploinsufficient mice, although in haploinsufficient mice, the
purinergic component was reduced and a nitrergic component appeared. The abnormal
ENS of haploinsufficient mice slowed gastrointestinal motility but protected mice
against colitis.
CONCLUSIONS: Reduced expression of factors required for development of the ENS
can cause defects in the ENS that are subtle enough to escape detection yet cause
significant abnormalities in bowel function.

Copyright © 2011 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3152642
PMID: 21669203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Gastroenterology. 2011 Aug;141(2):588-98, 598.e1-2. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2011.04.047. Epub 2011 Apr 28.

Enteric neuronal density contributes to the severity of intestinal inflammation.

Margolis KG(1), Stevanovic K, Karamooz N, Li ZS, Ahuja A, D'Autréaux F, Saurman
V, Chalazonitis A, Gershon MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Morgan Stanley Children's Hospital, New York, New
York 10032, USA. kjg2133@columbia.edu

Comment in
    Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2011 Oct;8(10):534.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Enteric neurons have been reported to be increased in inflamed
regions of the bowel in patients with inflammatory bowel disease or intestinal
neurogangliomatosis. It is impossible to determine whether this hyperinnervation 
predates intestinal inflammation, results from it, or contributes to its severity
in humans, so we studied this process in mice.
METHODS: To determine whether the density of enteric neurons determines the
severity of inflammation, we studied transgenic mice that have greater than
normal (NSE-noggin mice, which overexpress noggin under the control of the
neuron-specific enolase promoter) or fewer than normal (Hand2(+/-) mice) numbers 
of neurons in the enteric nervous system. Colitis was induced with
trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid or dextran sulfate sodium, and the intensity of the
resulting inflammation in Hand2(+/-) and NSE-noggin mice was compared with that
of wild-type littermates.
RESULTS: Severity of each form of colitis (based on survival, symptom, and
histologic scores; intestinal expression of genes that encode proinflammatory
molecules; and levels of neutrophil elastase and p50 nuclear factor <U+03BA>B) were
significantly reduced in Hand2(+/-) mice and significantly increased in
NSE-noggin animals. Neither mouse differed from wild-type in the severity of
delayed-type hypersensitivity (edema, T-cell and neutrophil infiltration, or
expression of interleukin-1ß, interferon-<U+03B3>, or tumor necrosis factor-a) induced
in the ears using 2,4-dinitro-1-fluorobenzene. Transgene effects on inflammation 
were therefore restricted to the gastrointestinal tract.
CONCLUSIONS: The severity of intestinal inflammation is associated with the
density of the enteric innervation in mice. Abnormalities in development of the
enteric nervous system might therefore contribute to the pathogenesis of
inflammatory bowel disease.

Copyright © 2011 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4459707
PMID: 21635893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 29;6(4):e19251. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019251.

Phosphorylation of the Twist1-family basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors
is involved in pathological cardiac remodeling.

Lu S(1), Nie J, Luan Q, Feng Q, Xiao Q, Chang Z, Shan C, Hess D, Hemmings BA,
Yang Z.

Author information: 
(1)The Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Model Animal for Disease Study,
Model Animal Research Center, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China.

BACKGROUND: The Twist1-family basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors
including Twist1, Hand1 and Hand2, play an essential role in heart development
and are implicated in pathological heart remodeling. Previously, it was reported 
that these bHLH transcription factors can be regulated by phosphorylation within 
the basic-helix I domain, which is involved in developmental processes such as
limb formation and trophoblast differentiation. However, how phosphorylation of
Twist1 family functions in post-natal heart is elusive.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here, we generated transgenic mice with over-expression of
Hand1 and Twist1 mutants (to mimic or to abolish phosphorylation) in
cardiomyocytes and found pathological cardiac remodeling leading to heart failure
and sudden death. Gene expression profile analysis revealed up-regulation of
growth-promoting genes and down-regulation of metabolic genes. It is well known
that aberrant activation of Akt signaling causes pathological cardiac remodeling 
and results in heart failure. The basic-helix I domain of Twist1 family members
contain Akt substrate consensus motif and may be downstream targets of Akt
signaling. Using biochemical analysis, we demonstrated that Hand1 and Twist1 were
phosphorylated by Akt in the basic-helix I domain. Phosphorylation of Hand1
regulated its transcriptional activation of luciferase reporter genes and DNA
binding ability.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides novel insights into the regulation of Twist1
family in cardiac remodeling and suggests that the Twist1 family can be regulated
by Akt signaling.

PMCID: PMC3084786
PMID: 21559426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Development. 2011 Jun;138(11):2249-59. doi: 10.1242/dev.056929.

Downregulation of Dlx5 and Dlx6 expression by Hand2 is essential for initiation
of tongue morphogenesis.

Barron F(1), Woods C, Kuhn K, Bishop J, Howard MJ, Clouthier DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Biology, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical
Campus, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

Lower jaw development is a complex process in which multiple signaling cascades
establish a proximal-distal organization. These cascades are regulated both
spatially and temporally and are constantly refined through both induction of
normal signals and inhibition of inappropriate signals. The connective tissue of 
the tongue arises from cranial neural crest cell-derived ectomesenchyme within
the mandibular portion of the first pharyngeal arch and is likely to be impacted 
by this signaling. Although the developmental mechanisms behind later aspects of 
tongue development, including innervation and taste acquisition, have been
elucidated, the early patterning signals driving ectomesenchyme into a tongue
lineage are largely unknown. We show here that the basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor Hand2 plays key roles in establishing the proximal-distal
patterning of the mouse lower jaw, in part through establishing a
negative-feedback loop in which Hand2 represses Dlx5 and Dlx6 expression in the
distal arch ectomesenchyme following Dlx5- and Dlx6-mediated induction of Hand2
expression in the same region. Failure to repress distal Dlx5 and Dlx6 expression
results in upregulation of Runx2 expression in the mandibular arch and the
subsequent formation of aberrant bone in the lower jaw along with proximal-distal
duplications. In addition, there is an absence of lateral lingual swelling
expansion, from which the tongue arises, resulting in aglossia. Hand2 thus
appears to establish a distal mandibular arch domain that is conducive for lower 
jaw development, including the initiation of tongue mesenchyme morphogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3091495
PMID: 21558373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Dev Biol. 2011 Jul 1;355(1):89-100. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.04.011. Epub 2011
Apr 22.

The transcription factors AP-2ß and AP-2a are required for survival of
sympathetic progenitors and differentiated sympathetic neurons.

Schmidt M(1), Huber L, Majdazari A, Schütz G, Williams T, Rohrer H.

Author information: 
(1)Research Group Developmental Neurobiology, Max-Planck-Institute for Brain
Research, Deutschordenstrasse 46, Frankfurt/M, Germany.

Differentiation of sympathetic neurons is controlled by a group of transcription 
factors, including Phox2b, Ascl1, Hand2 and Gata3, induced by bone morphogenetic 
proteins (BMPs) in progenitors located in ganglion primordia at the dorsal aorta.
Here, we address the function of the transcription factors AP-2ß and AP-2a,
expressed in migrating neural crest cells (NCC) and maintained in sympathetic
progenitors and differentiated neurons. The elimination of both AP-2a and AP-2ß
results in the virtually complete absence of sympathetic and sensory ganglia due 
to apoptotic cell death of migrating NCC. In the AP-2ß knockout only sympathetic 
ganglia (SG) are targeted, leading to a reduction in ganglion size by about 40%, 
which is also caused by apoptotic death of neural crest progenitors. The
conditional double knockout of AP-2a and AP-2ß in sympathetic progenitors and
differentiated noradrenergic neurons results in a further decrease in neuron
number, leading eventually to small sympathetic ganglion rudiments postnatally.
The elimination of AP-2ß also leads to the complete absence of noradrenergic
neurons of the Locus coeruleus (LC). Whereas AP-2a/ß transcription factors are in
vivo not required for the onset or maintenance of noradrenergic differentiation, 
their essential survival functions are demonstrated for sympathetic progenitors
and noradrenergic neurons.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21539825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Tumori. 2011 Jan-Feb;97(1):86-94.

Expression analysis of angiogenesis-related genes in Bulgarian patients with
early-stage non-small cell lung cancer.

Metodieva SN(1), Nikolova DN, Cherneva RV, Dimova II, Petrov DB, Toncheva DI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria.
svetlana.metodieva@yahoo.com

AIMS AND BACKGROUND: Angiogenesis is a key process in the early stages of tumor
development. In this study we aimed to evaluate the expression of a panel of
angiogenesis-related genes in a group of Bulgarian patients with early-stage
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS AND STUDY DESIGN: We analyzed the expression of 84 genes associated with 
the angiogenic process in 12 NSCLCs of two histological subtypes: 7
adenocarcinomas and 5 squamous cell carcinomas. Eight peripheral nontumorous
tissues were used as controls. We performed real-time PCR on pathway-specific
gene arrays (SABiosciences).
RESULTS: Our pilot study identified upregulated genes in early-stage NSCLC
including growth factors (TGFA and EFNA3), the adhesion molecule THBS2, cytokines
and chemokines (MDK, CXCL9, CXCL10), and the serine protease PLAU. Several genes 
showed downregulation including one growth factor (FIGF), the receptors for
growth factors TEK and S1PR1 as well as adhesion molecules (COL4A3 and CDH5), the
cytokine IL6, the matrix protein LEP and the transcription factor NOTCH4. The
study demonstrated deregulated genes specific for the two histological subtypes
including the transcription factor HAND2, which was overexpressed in squamous
cell carcinomas but not adenocarcinomas.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the limited number of patients, our results demonstrated the
potential of angiogenesis-related genes as biomarkers in the early stages of
NSCLC development.

PMID: 21528670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Reproduction. 2011 Aug;142(2):353-68. doi: 10.1530/REP-11-0060. Epub 2011 Apr 28.

Evidence for a conserved function of heart and neural crest derivatives expressed
transcript 2 in mouse and human decidualization.

Huyen DV(1), Bany BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Southern Illinois University School of Medicine,
Carbondale, Illinois 62901, USA.

Previously, we showed that heart and neural crest derivatives expressed
transcript 2 (Hand2) mRNA levels dramatically increase in mouse uterine
endometrial stromal cells (ESCs) as they undergo decidualization in vivo.
However, to date, little is known about the expression and function of this
transcription factor in mouse or human uterus decidualization. Therefore, this
study was conducted to provide a more detailed assessment of Hand2 gene
expression and function in the mouse uterus during the peri-implantation period
and also in mouse plus human ESCs during decidualization in vitro. The results
show that Hand2 mRNA and protein levels increase in the mouse uterus during
decidualization and this does not depend on the presence of a conceptus.
Interestingly, Hand2 mRNA and protein are present in ESCs adjacent to the luminal
epithelium in the uterus prior to the onset of implantation. We find that
progesterone is likely a regulator of Hand2 expression during uterine
sensitization of the mouse uterus. Finally, Hand2 expression increases in mouse
and human fibroblast cells as they undergo decidualization in vitro. This
expression is significantly increased in response to prostaglandin E(2). In
particular, reduction of Hand2 expression in these cells using small hairpin RNA 
or small interfering RNA approaches results in the reduced extent of
decidualization as shown by the reduced expression of a subset of decidualization
markers. The results of this study support the hypothesis that Hand2 expression
not only plays an important role in decidualization but may also play a role in
obtaining proper progesterone-dependent uterine sensitization required for
implantation to begin.

PMCID: PMC3141103
PMID: 21527398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Circ Res. 2011 Apr 15;108(8):900-2. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.111.243451.

A hand for the epicardium.

Laforest B, Nemer M.

Comment on
    Circ Res. 2011 Apr 15;108(8):940-9.

PMID: 21493919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2011 Jun;91(6):485-94. doi:
10.1002/bdra.20796. Epub 2011 Apr 1.

Hand factors as regulators of cardiac morphogenesis and implications for
congenital heart defects.

Vincentz JW(1), Barnes RM, Firulli AB.

Author information: 
(1)Riley Heart Research Center, Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Division of 
Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Anatomy, Indiana Medical School,
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Almost 15 years of careful study have established the related basic
Helix-Loop-Helix (bHLH) transcription factors Hand1 and Hand2 as critical for
heart development across evolution. Hand factors make broad contributions,
revealed through animal models, to the development of multiple cellular lineages 
that ultimately contribute to the heart. They perform critical roles in
ventricular cardiomyocyte growth, differentiation, morphogenesis, and conduction.
They are also important for the proper development of the cardiac outflow tract, 
epicardium, and endocardium. Molecularly, they function both through DNA binding 
and through protein-protein interactions, which are regulated transcriptionally, 
posttranscriptionally by microRNAs, and posttranslationally through
phosphoregulation. Although direct Hand factor transcriptional targets are
progressively being identified, confirmed direct targets of Hand factor
transcriptional activity in the heart are limited. Identification of these
targets will be critical to model the mechanisms by which Hand factor bHLH
interactions affect developmental pathways. Improved understanding of Hand
factor-mediated transcriptional cascades will be necessary to determine how Hand 
factor dysregulation translates to human disease phenotypes. This review
summarizes the insight that animal models have provided into the regulation and
function of these factors during heart development, in addition to the recent
findings that suggest roles for HAND1 and HAND2 in human congenital heart
disease.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3119928
PMID: 21462297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Apr 29;408(1):38-44. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.03.113. Epub 2011 Mar 29.

Interaction of Hand2 and E2a is important for transcription of Phox2b in
sympathetic nervous system neuron differentiation.

Hashimoto Y(1), Tsutsumi M, Myojin R, Maruta K, Onoda F, Tashiro F, Ohtsu M,
Murakami Y.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Industrial Science and Technology, Department of Biological Science
and Technology, Tokyo University of Science, 2641 Yamazaki, Noda-shi, Chiba
278-8510, Japan.

Transcription factors play a crucial role in the development of various tissues. 
In particular, the transcription factors of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
family are crucial regulators of neurodifferentiation. Previous studies suggested
that the bHLH transcription factor Hand2 is essential for sympathetic nervous
system neuron differentiation in vivo, but the molecular mechanisms involved have
not been well elucidated. It is important for understanding their mode of action 
in cellular differentiation to clarify how these bHLH factors regulate distinct
transcriptional targets in a temporally and spatially controlled manner. Recent
reports on ES cell differentiation suggested that its molecular mechanism mimics 
that of in vivo neurogenesis. However, the diverse nature of ES cell populations 
has prevented efficient analysis. To address this issue, we previously
established a cell line in P19 embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells. Efficient
sympathetic nervous system (SNS) neuron differentiation is induced in the cell
line. Using this cell line, we succeeded in showing that the interaction of bHLH 
transcription factor Hand2 with E2a is required for transcription of Phox2b,
which is essential for autonomic nervous system neuron development, and this
binding activates this expression in SNS differentiation. Moreover, we also
demonstrated that Hes5 regulated the transcription of Phox2b as a negative
regulator and it inhibited the SNS differentiation. These findings have enabled
us to determine the novel regulatory mechanism of Phox2b in SNS differentiation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21453680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Clin Oral Investig. 2012 Apr;16(2):619-23. doi: 10.1007/s00784-011-0539-6. Epub
2011 Mar 24.

No evidence of HAND2 involvement in nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without cleft 
palate.

Martinelli M(1), Girardi A, Farinella F, Carinci F, Pezzetti F, Caramelli E,
Scapoli L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology, Embryology and Applied Biology, Centre of Molecular
Genetics, University of Bologna, Via Belmeloro 8, 40126 Bologna, Italy.
marcella.martinelli@unibo.it

Craniofacial morphogenesis is determined by multistep processes involving
signalling molecules and transcription factors, which are organised into highly
coordinated pathways. Derailment from this intricate network can lead to
congenital malformations. Cells migrate from neural crests to populate different 
structures, such as branchial arches, involved in embryonal orofacial
development. The EDN1 pathway is involved in branchial arch development. Gene
knockout and knockdown experiments on EDN1 or its downstream effector dHAND
resulted in mice that were characterised by craniofacial defects and cleft
palate. Our aim was to evaluate whether the transcription factor HAND2 could be
implicated in non-syndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate (CL/P)
aetiology. A sample study composed of 39 multiplex Italian pedigrees was enrolled
to test linkage between two microsatellite flanking HAND2 locus and CL/P. No
evidence of linkage between HAND2 and CL/P was obtained. Indeed, formal levels of
exclusion were obtained with different inheritance models. Investigation results 
did not support a role of HAND2 in CL/P aetiology. Nevertheless a minor
contribute of the gene in clefting could not be ruled out.

PMID: 21431856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Mar 22;108(12):4888-91. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1018161108. Epub 2011 Mar 7.

Axial Hox9 activity establishes the posterior field in the developing forelimb.

Xu B(1), Wellik DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200, USA.

Current models hold that the early limb field becomes polarized into anterior and
posterior domains by the opposing activities of Hand2 and Gli3. This polarization
is essential for the initiation of Shh expression in the posterior margin of the 
limb bud, but how this polarity is established is not clear. Here we show that
initial anteroposterior polarization of the early forelimb field requires the
function of all four Hox9 paralogs (Hoxa9, Hoxb9, Hoxc9, and Hoxd9). This is
unexpected, given that only HoxA and HoxD AbdB group genes have been shown to
play a role in forelimb patterning, regulating the activation and maintenance of 
Shh expression and subsequent proximal-distal patterning of the forelimb. Our
analysis of Hox9 quadruple mutants demonstrates that Hox9 function is required
for the expression of Hand2 in the posterior limb field. Subsequently, Gli3
expression is not repressed posteriorly, Shh expression is not initiated, and
collinear expression of HoxA/D10-13 is not established, resulting in severely
malformed forelimbs lacking all posterior, Shh-regulated elements. This Hox9
mutant phenotype is restricted to the forelimbs; mutant hindlimbs are normal,
revealing fundamental differences in the patterning mechanisms governing the
establishment of forelimb and hindlimb fields.

PMCID: PMC3064354
PMID: 21383175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Circ Res. 2011 Apr 15;108(8):940-9. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.110.233171. Epub 2011
Feb 24.

Hand2 loss-of-function in Hand1-expressing cells reveals distinct roles in
epicardial and coronary vessel development.

Barnes RM(1), Firulli BA, VanDusen NJ, Morikawa Y, Conway SJ, Cserjesi P,
Vincentz JW, Firulli AB.

Author information: 
(1)Riley Heart Research Center, Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Division of 
Pediatric Cardiology, Departments of Anatomy and Medical and Molecular Genetics, 
Indiana Medical School, Indianapolis, 46202-5225, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2011 Apr 15;108(8):900-2.

RATIONALE: The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors Hand1 and
Hand2 are essential for embryonic development. Given their requirement for
cardiogenesis, it is imperative to determine their impact on cardiovascular
function.
OBJECTIVE: To deduce the role of Hand2 within the epicardium.
METHOD AND RESULTS: We engineered a Hand1 allele expressing Cre recombinase.
Cardiac Hand1 expression is largely limited to cells of the primary heart field, 
overlapping little with Hand2 expression. Hand1 is expressed within the septum
transversum, and the Hand1 lineage marks the proepicardial organ and epicardium. 
To examine Hand factor functional overlap, we conditionally deleted Hand2 from
Hand1-expressing cells. Hand2 mutants display defective epicardialization and
fail to form coronary arteries, coincident with altered extracellular matrix
deposition and Pdgfr expression.
CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate a hierarchal relationship whereby transient
Hand1 septum transversum expression defines epicardial precursors that are
subsequently dependent on Hand2 function.

PMCID: PMC3086599
PMID: 21350214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Science. 2011 Feb 18;331(6019):912-6. doi: 10.1126/science.1197454.

The antiproliferative action of progesterone in uterine epithelium is mediated by
Hand2.

Li Q(1), Kannan A, DeMayo FJ, Lydon JP, Cooke PS, Yamagishi H, Srivastava D,
Bagchi MK, Bagchi IC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Biosciences, University of Illinois
Urbana/Champaign, Urbana, IL 61820, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2011 Feb 18;331(6019):863-4.

During pregnancy, progesterone inhibits the growth-promoting actions of estrogen 
in the uterus. However, the mechanism for this is not clear. The attenuation of
estrogen-mediated proliferation of the uterine epithelium by progesterone is a
prerequisite for successful implantation. Our study reveals that
progesterone-induced expression of the basic helix-loop-helix transcription
factor Hand2 in the uterine stroma suppresses the production of several
fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) that act as paracrine mediators of mitogenic
effects of estrogen on the epithelium. In mouse uteri lacking Hand2, continued
induction of these FGFs in the stroma maintains epithelial proliferation and
stimulates estrogen-induced pathways, resulting in impaired implantation. Thus,
Hand2 is a critical regulator of the uterine stromal-epithelial communication
that directs proper steroid regulation conducive for the establishment of
pregnancy.

PMCID: PMC3320855
PMID: 21330545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Science. 2011 Feb 18;331(6019):863-4. doi: 10.1126/science.1202372.

Cell biology. A hand to support the implantation window.

Hewitt SC(1), Korach KS.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Environmental Health Science, National Institutes of
Health, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.

Comment on
    Science. 2011 Feb 18;331(6019):912-6.

PMCID: PMC4775075
PMID: 21330520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Dev Biol. 2011 Mar 15;351(2):254-65. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.01.005. Epub 2011 
Jan 20.

The microRNA-processing enzyme Dicer is dispensable for somite segmentation but
essential for limb bud positioning.

Zhang Z(1), O'Rourke JR, McManus MT, Lewandoski M, Harfe BD, Sun X.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706,
USA.

Dicer is an enzyme that processes microRNAs (miRNAs) to their mature forms. As
miRNAs were first discovered for their role in the control of developmental
timing, we investigated their potential requirement in mouse somitogenesis, an
event with precise temporal periodicity. To address the collective role of miRNAs
in mesoderm development including somite formation, we used T (Brachyury)-Cre
mouse line to inactivate Dicer in most cells of the mesoderm lineage. This Dicer 
mutant exhibits a reduced anterior-posterior axis. Somite number remains normal
in mutant embryos up until the death of the embryos more than two days after
Dicer inactivation. Consistent with this, the molecular machineries required for 
establishing segmentation, including clock and wave front, are not perturbed.
However, somite size is reduced and later-formed somites are caudalized,
coincident with increased cell death. Outside of the paraxial mesoderm and prior 
to apparent reduction of the axis in the mutant, the position of the hindlimb
bud, a lateral plate mesoderm-derived structure, is posteriorly shifted and the
timing of hindlimb bud initiation is delayed accordingly. We observed changes in 
the expression of genes critical for limb positioning, which include a shifted
and delayed downregulation of Hand2 and Tbx3, and shifted and delayed
upregulation of Gli3 in the prospective limb bud field. The 3' UTRs of both Hand2
and Tbx3 harbor target sites for a seed sequence-sharing family of miRNAs
mir-25/32/92/363/367. As an example of the family we show that mir-363, a miRNA
with elevated expression in the prospective limb bud field, is capable of
inhibiting Hand2/Tbx3 expression in vitro in a binding site-dependent manner.
Together, our findings provide the first demonstration that in mouse embryonic
mesoderm, while Dicer is dispensable for somite segmentation, it is essential for
proper limb bud positioning.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3541530
PMID: 21256124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2011 Mar;46(3):671-80. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2011.01.008. Epub
2011 Jan 15.

Cytokines inhibit norepinephrine transporter expression by decreasing Hand2.

Pellegrino MJ(1), Parrish DC, Zigmond RE, Habecker BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Oregon Health & Science University,
Portland, OR 97239, USA.

Functional noradrenergic transmission requires the coordinate expression of
enzymes involved in norepinephrine (NE) synthesis, as well as the norepinephrine 
transporter (NET) which removes NE from the synapse. Inflammatory cytokines
acting through gp130 can suppress the noradrenergic phenotype in sympathetic
neurons. This occurs in a subset of sympathetic neurons during development and
also occurs in adult neurons after injury. For example, cytokines suppress
noradrenergic function in sympathetic neurons after axotomy and during heart
failure. The molecular basis for suppression of noradrenergic genes is not well
understood, but previous studies implicated a reduction of Phox2a in cytokine
suppression of dopamine beta hydroxylase. We used sympathetic neurons and
neuroblastoma cells to investigate the role of Phox2a in cytokine suppression of 
NET transcription. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that Phox2a
did not bind the NET promoter, and overexpression of Phox2a did not prevent
cytokine suppression of NET transcription. Hand2 and Gata3 are transcription
factors that induce noradrenergic genes during development and are present in
mature sympathetic neurons. Both Hand2 and Gata3 were decreased by cytokines in
sympathetic neurons and neuroblastoma cells. Overexpression of either Hand2 or
Gata3 was sufficient to rescue NET transcription following suppression by
cytokines. We examined expression of these genes following axotomy to determine
if their expression was altered following nerve injury. NET and Hand2 mRNAs
decreased significantly in sympathetic neurons 48 h after axotomy, but Gata3 mRNA
was unchanged. These data suggest that cytokines can inhibit NET expression
through downregulation of Hand2 or Gata3 in cultured sympathetic neurons, but
axotomy in adult animals selectively suppresses Hand2 expression.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3046314
PMID: 21241805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Dev Biol. 2011 Apr 1;352(1):1-13. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.01.004. Epub 2011 Jan
13.

The canonical Wnt signaling activator, R-spondin2, regulates craniofacial
patterning and morphogenesis within the branchial arch through
ectodermal-mesenchymal interaction.

Jin YR(1), Turcotte TJ, Crocker AL, Han XH, Yoon JK.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine, Maine Medical Center Research Institute, Maine 
Medical Center, 81 Research Drive, Scarborough, ME 04074, USA.

R-spondins are a recently characterized family of secreted proteins that activate
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling. Herein, we determine R-spondin2 (Rspo2) function in
craniofacial development in mice. Mice lacking a functional Rspo2 gene exhibit
craniofacial abnormalities such as mandibular hypoplasia, maxillary and
mandibular skeletal deformation, and cleft palate. We found that loss of the
mouse Rspo2 gene significantly disrupted Wnt/ß-catenin signaling and gene
expression within the first branchial arch (BA1). Rspo2, which is normally
expressed in BA1 mesenchymal cells, regulates gene expression through a unique
ectoderm-mesenchyme interaction loop. The Rspo2 protein, potentially in
combination with ectoderm-derived Wnt ligands, up-regulates Msx1 and Msx2
expression within mesenchymal cells. In contrast, Rspo2 regulates expression of
the Dlx5, Dlx6, and Hand2 genes in mesenchymal cells via inducing expression of
their upstream activator, Endothelin1 (Edn1), within ectodermal cells. Loss of
Rspo2 also causes increased cell apoptosis, especially within the aboral (or
caudal) domain of the BA1, resulting in hypoplasia of the BA1. Severely reduced
expression of Fgf8, a survival factor for mesenchymal cells, in the ectoderm of
Rspo2(-/-) embryos is likely responsible for increased cell apoptosis.
Additionally, we found that the cleft palate in Rspo2(-/-) mice is not associated
with defects intrinsic to the palatal shelves. A possible cause of cleft palate
is a delay of proper palatal shelf elevation that may result from the small
mandible and a failure of lowering the tongue. Thus, our study identifies Rspo2
as a mesenchyme-derived factor that plays critical roles in regulating BA1
patterning and morphogenesis through ectodermal-mesenchymal interaction and a
novel genetic factor for cleft palate.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3089906
PMID: 21237142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Br J Pharmacol. 2011 Apr;162(8):1743-56. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2010.01197.x.

Cytosine arabinoside induces ectoderm and inhibits mesoderm expression in human
embryonic stem cells during multilineage differentiation.

Jagtap S(1), Meganathan K, Gaspar J, Wagh V, Winkler J, Hescheler J, Sachinidis
A.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Institute of Neurophysiology,
Cologne, Germany.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Teratogenic substances induce adverse effects during the 
development of the embryo. Multilineage differentiation of human embryonic stem
cells (hESCs) mimics the development of the embryo in vitro. Here, we propose a
transcriptomic approach in hESCs for monitoring specific toxic effects of
compounds as an alternative to traditional time-consuming and cost-intensive in
vivo tests requiring large numbers of animals. This study was undertaken to
explore the adverse effects of cytosine arabinoside (Ara-C) on randomly
differentiated hESCs.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Human embryonic stem cells were used to investigate the
effects of a developmental toxicant Ara-C. Sublethal concentrations of Ara-C were
given for two time points, day 7 and day 14 during the differentiation. Gene
expression was assessed with microarrays to determine the dysregulated
transcripts in presence of Ara-C.
KEY RESULTS: Randomly differentiated hESCs were able to generate the multilineage
markers. The low concentration of Ara-C (1 nM) induced the ectoderm and inhibited
the mesoderm at day 14. The induction of ectodermal markers such as MAP2, TUBB
III, PAX6, TH and NESTIN was observed with an inhibition of mesodermal markers
such as HAND2, PITX2, GATA5, MYL4, TNNT2, COL1A1 and COL1A2. In addition, no
induction of apoptosis was observed. Gene ontology revealed unique dysregulated
biological process related to neuronal differentiation and mesoderm development. 
Pathway analysis showed the axon guidance pathway to be dysregulated.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: Our results suggest that hESCs in combination with 
toxicogenomics offer a sensitive in vitro developmental toxicity model as an
alternative to traditional animal experiments.

© 2011 The Authors. British Journal of Pharmacology © 2011 The British
Pharmacological Society.

PMCID: PMC3081118
PMID: 21198554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Dev Biol. 2011 Mar 1;351(1):62-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.12.023. Epub 2010 Dec
23.

Hand2 function in second heart field progenitors is essential for cardiogenesis.

Tsuchihashi T(1), Maeda J, Shin CH, Ivey KN, Black BL, Olson EN, Yamagishi H,
Srivastava D.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, University of California San
Francisco, 1650 Owens Street, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.

Cardiogenesis involves the contributions of multiple progenitor pools, including 
mesoderm-derived cardiac progenitors known as the first and second heart fields. 
Disruption of genetic pathways regulating individual subsets of cardiac
progenitors likely underlies many forms of human cardiac malformations. Hand2 is 
a member of the basic helix loop helix (bHLH) family of transcription factors and
is expressed in numerous cell lineages that contribute to the developing heart.
However, the early embryonic lethality of Hand2-null mice has precluded
lineage-specific study of its function in myocardial progenitors. Here, we
generated and used a floxed allele of Hand2 to ablate its expression in specific 
cardiac cell populations at defined developmental points. We found that Hand2
expression within the mesoderm-derived second heart field progenitors was
required for their survival and deletion in this domain recapitulated the
complete Hand2-null phenotype. Loss of Hand2 at later stages of development and
in restricted domains of the second heart field revealed a spectrum of cardiac
anomalies resembling forms of human congenital heart disease. Molecular analyses 
of Hand2 mutant cells revealed several genes by which Hand2 may influence
expansion of the cardiac progenitors. These findings demonstrate that Hand2 is
essential for survival of second heart field progenitors and that the graded loss
of Hand2 function in this cardiac progenitor pool can cause a spectrum of
congenital heart malformation.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3039109
PMID: 21185281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Nat Methods. 2010 Nov;7(11):861.

The author file: Rolf Zeller and Javier Lopez-Rios.

Baker M.

Comment on
    Nat Methods. 2010 Nov;7(11):893-5.

Gene cutting and pasting just got a whole lot faster.

PMID: 21049587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Nov 9;107(45):19231-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1013162107. Epub 2010 Oct 25.

Affinity purification of microRNA-133a with the cardiac transcription factor,
Hand2.

Vo NK(1), Dalton RP, Liu N, Olson EN, Goodman RH.

Author information: 
(1)Vollum Institute, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, OR 97239,
USA. von@ohsu.edu

Predictions of microRNA-mRNA interactions typically rely on bioinformatic
algorithms, but these algorithms only suggest the possibility of microRNA binding
and may miss important interactions as well as falsely predict others. We
developed an affinity purification approach to empirically identify microRNAs
associated with the 3'UTR of the mRNA encoding Hand2, a transcription factor
essential for cardiac development. In addition to miR-1, a known regulator of
Hand2 expression, we determined that the Hand2 3'UTR also associated with
miR-133a, a microRNA cotranscribed with miR-1 in cardiac and muscle cells. Using 
a sequential binding assay, we showed that miR-1 and miR-133a could occupy the
Hand2 3'UTR concurrently. miR-133a inhibited Hand2 expression in tissue culture
models, and miR-133a double knockout mice had elevated levels of Hand2 mRNA and
protein. We conclude that Hand2 is regulated by miR-133a in addition to miR-1.
The affinity purification assay should be generally applicable for identifying
other microRNA-mRNA interactions.

PMCID: PMC2984217
PMID: 20974915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Nat Methods. 2010 Nov;7(11):893-5. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.1521. Epub 2010 Oct 17.

Dual RMCE for efficient re-engineering of mouse mutant alleles.

Osterwalder M(1), Galli A, Rosen B, Skarnes WC, Zeller R, Lopez-Rios J.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics, Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel,
Switzerland.

Comment in
    Nat Methods. 2010 Nov;7(11):861.
    Nat Methods. 2011 Feb;8(2):103-4.

We have developed dual recombinase-mediated cassette exchange (dRMCE) to
efficiently re-engineer the thousands of available conditional alleles in mouse
embryonic stem cells. dRMCE takes advantage of the wild-type loxP and FRT sites
present in these conditional alleles and in many gene-trap lines. dRMCE is a
scalable, flexible tool to introduce tags, reporters and mutant coding regions
into an endogenous locus of interest in an easy and highly efficient manner.

PMCID: PMC3576631
PMID: 20953177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Dev Dyn. 2010 Nov;239(11):3086-97. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22428.

Analysis of the Hand1 cell lineage reveals novel contributions to cardiovascular,
neural crest, extra-embryonic, and lateral mesoderm derivatives.

Barnes RM(1), Firulli BA, Conway SJ, Vincentz JW, Firulli AB.

Author information: 
(1)Riley Heart Research Center, Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Division of 
Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Anatomy, Indiana Medical School,
Indianapolis, Indiana 46202-5225, USA.

The basic Helix-Loop-Helix (bHLH) transcription factors Hand1 and Hand2 play
critical roles in the development of multiple organ systems during embryogenesis.
The dynamic expression patterns of these two factors within developing tissues
obfuscate their respective unique and redundant organogenic functions. To define 
cell lineages potentially dependent upon Hand gene expression, we generated a
mutant allele in which the coding region of Hand1 is replaced by Cre recombinase.
Subsequent Cre-mediated activation of ß-galactosidase or eYFP reporter alleles
enabled lineage trace analyses that clearly define the fate of Hand1-expressing
cells. Hand1-driven Cre marks specific lineages within the extra embryonic
tissues, placenta, sympathetic nervous system, limbs, jaw, and several cell types
within the cardiovascular system. Comparisons between Hand1 expression and
Hand1-lineage greatly refine our understanding of its dynamic spatial-temporal
expression domains and raise the possibility of novel Hand1 functions in
structures not thought to be Hand1-dependent.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2965316
PMID: 20882677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Funct Integr Genomics. 2011 Mar;11(1):139-50. doi: 10.1007/s10142-010-0189-9.
Epub 2010 Sep 16.

Transferase activity function and system development process are critical in
cattle embryo development.

Adams HA(1), Southey BR, Everts RE, Marjani SL, Tian CX, Lewin HA, Rodriguez-Zas 
SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, IL, USA.

Microarray gene expression experiments often consider specific developmental
stages, tissue sources, or reproductive technologies. This focus hinders the
understanding of the cattle embryo transcriptome. To address this, four
microarray experiments encompassing three developmental stages (7, 25, 280 days),
two tissue sources (embryonic or extra-embryonic), and two reproductive
technologies (artificial insemination or AI and somatic cell nuclear transfer or 
NT) were combined using two sets of meta-analyses. The first set of meta-analyses
uncovered 434 genes differentially expressed between AI and NT (regardless of
stage or source) that were not detected by the individual-experiment analyses.
The molecular function of transferase activity was enriched among these genes
that included ECE2, SLC22A1, and a gene similar to CAMK2D. Gene POLG2 was
over-expressed in AI versus NT 7-day embryos and was under-expressed in AI versus
NT 25-day embryos. Gene HAND2 was over-expressed in AI versus NT extra-embryonic 
samples at 280 days yet under-expressed in AI versus NT embryonic samples at 7
days. The second set of meta-analyses uncovered enrichment of system, organ, and 
anatomical structure development among the genes differentially expressed between
7- and 25-day embryos from either reproductive technology. Genes PRDX1and SLC16A1
were over-expressed in 7- versus 25-day AI embryos and under-expressed in 7-
versus 25-day NT embryos. Changes in stage were associated with high number of
differentially expressed genes, followed by technology and source. Genes with
transferase activity may hold a clue to the differences in efficiency between
reproductive technologies.

PMCID: PMC3053413
PMID: 20844914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Development. 2010 Oct;137(20):3417-26. doi: 10.1242/dev.051789. Epub 2010 Sep 8.

Preaxial polydactyly: interactions among ETV, TWIST1 and HAND2 control
anterior-posterior patterning of the limb.

Zhang Z(1), Sui P, Dong A, Hassell J, Cserjesi P, Chen YT, Behringer RR, Sun X.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706,
USA.

Preaxial polydactyly (PPD) is a common limb-associated birth defect characterized
by extra digit(s) in the anterior autopod. It often results from ectopic sonic
hedgehog (Shh) expression in the anterior limb bud. Although several
transcription factors are known to restrict Shh expression to the posterior limb 
bud, how they function together remains unclear. Here we provide evidence from
mouse conditional knockout limb buds that the bHLH family transcription factor
gene Twist1 is required to inhibit Shh expression in the anterior limb bud
mesenchyme. More importantly, we uncovered genetic synergism between Twist1 and
the ETS family transcription factor genes Etv4 and Etv5 (collectively Etv), which
also inhibit Shh expression. Biochemical data suggest that this genetic
interaction is a result of direct association between TWIST1 and ETV proteins.
Previous studies have shown that TWIST1 functions by forming homodimers or
heterodimers with other bHLH factors including HAND2, a key positive regulator of
Shh expression. We found that the PPD phenotype observed in Etv mutants is
suppressed by a mutation in Hand2, indicative of genetic antagonism. Furthermore,
overexpression of ETV proteins influences the dimerization of these bHLH factors.
Together, our data suggest that through biochemical interactions, the Shh
expression regulators ETV, TWIST1 and HAND2 attain a precise balance to establish
anterior-posterior patterning of the limb.

PMCID: PMC2947755
PMID: 20826535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Chin Med J (Engl). 2010 Jul;123(13):1623-7.

Transcription factor HAND2 mutations in sporadic Chinese patients with congenital
heart disease.

Shen L(1), Li XF, Shen AD, Wang Q, Liu CX, Guo YJ, Song ZJ, Li ZZ.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiac Centre, Beijing Children's Hospital affiliated to Capital Medical
University, Beijing 100045, China.

BACKGROUND: The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor HAND2 plays an
essential role in cardiac morphogenesis. However, the prevalence of HAND2
mutations in congenial heart disease (CHD) and the correlation between the HAND2 
genotype and CHD phenotype have not been studied extensively.
METHODS: We amplified the exons and the flanking intron sequences of the HAND2
gene in 131 patients diagnosed with congenital defects of the right ventricle,
outflow tract, aortic artery or cardiac cushion and confirmed the mutations by
sequencing.
RESULTS: Seven mutations including three missense mutations (P11R, S36N and
V83L), one isonymous mutation (H14H) and three mutations in untranslated region
(241A > G, 604C > T and 3237T > A) were identified in 12 out of the 131 patients.
Both nonisonymous mutations are located in the transcriptional activation domain 
on the N-terminus. Only one mutation (S36N) was identified in 250 normal healthy 
controls. The distribution of 3637T > A is the unique one which was different
between the 2 groups.
CONCLUSIONS: HAND2 may be a potential candidate gene of stenosis of the right
ventricle, outflow tract. Further study of those with a family history of HAND2
mutations will help convincingly relate their genotype to the pathogenesis of
CHD.

PMID: 20819618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Cleft Palate Craniofac J. 2011 Jul;48(4):355-62. doi: 10.1597/09-156. Epub 2010
Jul 1.

Prevention of retinoic acid-induced early craniofacial abnormalities by vitamin
B12 in mice.

Zhang Z, Wang J, Dai X, Ding Y, Li Y.

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of the present study was to identify the potential effect 
of prenatal vitamin B12 administration on retinoic acid (RA)-induced early
craniofacial abnormalities in mice and to investigate the possible mechanisms by 
which vitamin B12 reduces malformations.
DESIGN: In our study, whole embryo culture was used to explore the effect of
vitamin B12 on mouse embryos during the critical period of organogenesis. All
embryos were exposed to 0.4 µM RA and different concentrations of vitamin B12 and
scored for their growth in the branchial region at the end of a 48-hour culture
period. The endothelin-1 (ET-1)/dHAND protein expression levels in the first
branchial arch were investigated using an immunohistochemical method.
RESULTS: In the whole embryo culture, 100 and 10 µM vitamin B12 dose-dependently 
prevented branchial region malformations and decreased craniofacial defects by
90.5% and 77.3%, respectively. ET-1 and dHAND protein levels were significantly
increased in vitamin B12-supplemented embryos compared to the RA-exposed group in
embryonic branchial region.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that vitamin B12 may prevent RA-induced
craniofacial abnormalities via prevention of an RA-induced decrease of ET-1 and
dHAND protein levels in the branchial region during the organogenic period. This 
study may shed new light on preventing craniofacial abnormalities.

PMID: 20815727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Dev Dyn. 2010 Oct;239(10):2748-60. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22402.

Analysis of a Hand1 hypomorphic allele reveals a critical threshold for embryonic
viability.

Firulli BA(1), McConville DP, Byers JS 3rd, Vincentz JW, Barnes RM, Firulli AB.

Author information: 
(1)Riley Heart Research Center, Herman B. Wells Center for Pediatric Research
Division of Pediatrics Cardiology, Departments of Anatomy and Medical and
Molecular Genetics, Indiana Medical School, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202-5225,
USA.

Loss-of-function analysis of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription
factor Hand1 indicates critical roles in development. In an effort to generate a 
Hand1 cDNA knock-in reporter mouse, we generated two hypomorphic alleles, which
extend embryonic survival to between embryonic day (E) 10.5 and E12.5. Heart
morphogenesis appears largely normal; however, hypomorphic mice display thin left
ventricular myocardium and reduction in pharyngeal mesoderm. Caudal defects,
large allantois, and thickened yolk sac are observed and consistent with systemic
Hand1 gene deletion. Hand1 mRNA is expressed at 30% of wild-type littermates and 
known Hand1-dependent genes show intermediate expression compared with wild-type 
and Hand1 null mice. Interestingly, putative bHLH partners, Hand2 and Twist1,
show altered expression in both Hand1 null and hypomorphic backgrounds and
intercrossing the Hand1 hypomorphic mice onto the Hand2 systemic null background 
exacerbates the cardiac and lateral mesoderm phenotypes. Together, these data
define a critical threshold of Hand1 expression that is necessary for embryonic
survival.

PMCID: PMC2967597
PMID: 20737509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Dev Biol. 2010 Nov 1;347(1):133-46. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.08.015. Epub 2010
Aug 21.

Twist1 activity thresholds define multiple functions in limb development.

Krawchuk D(1), Weiner SJ, Chen YT, Lu BC, Costantini F, Behringer RR, Laufer E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York, NY 10032, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor Twist1 is essential for normal
limb development. Twist1(-/-) embryos die at midgestation. However, studies on
early limb buds found that Twist1(-/-) mutant limb mesenchyme has an impaired
response to FGF signaling from the apical ectodermal ridge, which disrupts the
feedback loop between the mesenchyme and AER, and reduces and shifts anteriorly
Shh expression in the zone of polarizing activity. We have combined Twist1 null, 
hypomorph and conditional alleles to generate a Twist1 allelic series that
survives to birth. As Twist1 activity is reduced, limb skeletal defects progress 
from preaxial polydactyly to girdle reduction combined with hypoplasia, aplasia
or mirror symmetry of all limb segments. With reduced Twist1 activity there is
striking and progressive upregulation of ectopic Shh expression in the anterior
of the limb, combined with an anterior shift in the posterior Shh domain, which
is expressed at normal intensity, and loss of the posterior AER. Consequently
limb outgrowth is initially impaired, before an ectopic anterior Shh domain
expands the AER, promoting additional growth and repatterning. Reducing the
dosage of FGF targets of the Etv gene family, which are known repressors of Shh
expression in anterior limb mesenchyme, strongly enhances the anterior skeletal
phenotype. Conversely this and other phenotypes are suppressed by reducing the
dosage of the Twist1 antagonist Hand2. Our data support a model whereby multiple 
Twist1 activity thresholds contribute to early limb bud patterning, and suggest
how particular combinations of skeletal defects result from differing amounts of 
Twist1 activity.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2976588
PMID: 20732316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Development. 2010 Oct;137(19):3215-20. doi: 10.1242/dev.052225. Epub 2010 Aug 19.

Hand2 ensures an appropriate environment for cardiac fusion by limiting
Fibronectin function.

Garavito-Aguilar ZV(1), Riley HE, Yelon D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Heart formation requires the fusion of bilateral cardiomyocyte populations as
they move towards the embryonic midline. The bHLH transcription factor Hand2 is
essential for cardiac fusion; however, the effector genes that execute this
function of Hand2 are unknown. Here, we provide in zebrafish the first evidence
for a downstream component of the Hand2 pathway that mediates cardiac
morphogenesis. Although hand2 is expressed in cardiomyocytes, mosaic analysis
demonstrates that it plays a non-autonomous role in regulating cardiomyocyte
movement. Gene expression profiles reveal heightened expression of fibronectin 1 
(fn1) in hand2 mutant embryos. Reciprocally, overexpression of hand2 leads to
decreased Fibronectin levels. Furthermore, reduction of fn1 function enables
rescue of cardiac fusion in hand2 mutants: bilateral cardiomyocyte populations
merge and exhibit improved tissue architecture, albeit without major changes in
apicobasal polarity. Together, our data provide a novel example of a tissue
creating a favorable environment for its morphogenesis: the Hand2 pathway
establishes an appropriate environment for cardiac fusion through negative
modulation of Fn1 levels.

PMCID: PMC2934734
PMID: 20724450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Development. 2010 Sep 1;137(17):2927-37. doi: 10.1242/dev.041079. Epub 2010 Jul
28.

Serotonin 2B receptor signaling is required for craniofacial morphogenesis and
jaw joint formation in Xenopus.

Reisoli E(1), De Lucchini S, Nardi I, Ori M.

Author information: 
(1)Unità di Biologia Cellulare e dello Sviluppo, Dipartimento di Biologia,
Università di Pisa, S.S.12 Abetone e Brennero 4, Pisa, Italy.

Serotonin (5-HT) is a neuromodulator that plays many different roles in adult and
embryonic life. Among the 5-HT receptors, 5-HT2B is one of the key mediators of
5-HT functions during development. We used Xenopus laevis as a model system to
further investigate the role of 5-HT2B in embryogenesis, focusing on craniofacial
development. By means of gene gain- and loss-of-function approaches and tissue
transplantation assays, we demonstrated that 5-HT2B modulates, in a
cell-autonomous manner, postmigratory skeletogenic cranial neural crest cell
(NCC) behavior without altering early steps of cranial NCC development and
migration. 5-HT2B overexpression induced the formation of an ectopic visceral
skeletal element and altered the dorsoventral patterning of the branchial arches.
Loss-of-function experiments revealed that 5-HT2B signaling is necessary for jaw 
joint formation and for shaping the mandibular arch skeletal elements. In
particular, 5-HT2B signaling is required to define and sustain the Xbap
expression necessary for jaw joint formation. To shed light on the molecular
identity of the transduction pathway acting downstream of 5-HT2B, we analyzed the
function of phospholipase C beta 3 (PLC) in Xenopus development and showed that
PLC is the effector of 5-HT2B during craniofacial development. Our results
unveiled an unsuspected role of 5-HT2B in craniofacial development and contribute
to our understanding of the interactive network of patterning signals that is
involved in the development and evolution of the vertebrate mandibular arch.

PMID: 20667918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Dev Cell. 2010 Jun 15;18(6):973-84. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2010.05.009.

Hand2 regulates extracellular matrix remodeling essential for gut-looping
morphogenesis in zebrafish.

Yin C(1), Kikuchi K, Hochgreb T, Poss KD, Stainier DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Programs in Developmental Biology, 
Genetics, and Human Genetics, Cardiovascular Research Institute, Liver Center,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.

Extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling is critical for organogenesis, yet its
molecular regulation is poorly understood. In zebrafish, asymmetric migration of 
the epithelial lateral plate mesoderm (LPM) displaces the gut leftward, allowing 
correct placement of the liver and pancreas. To observe LPM migration at cellular
resolution, we transgenically expressed EGFP under the control of the regulatory 
sequences of the bHLH transcription factor gene hand2. We found that laminin is
distributed along the LPM/gut boundary during gut looping, and that it appears to
become diminished by the migrating hand2-expressing cells. Laminin diminishment
is necessary for LPM migration and is dependent on matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)
activity. Loss of Hand2 function causes reduced MMP activity and prolonged
laminin deposition at the LPM/gut boundary, leading to failed asymmetric LPM
migration and gut looping. Our study reveals an unexpected role for Hand2, a key 
regulator of cell specification and differentiation, in modulating ECM remodeling
during organogenesis.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2908152
PMID: 20627079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Development. 2010 Aug 1;137(15):2507-17. doi: 10.1242/dev.049700. Epub 2010 Jun
23.

hand2 and Dlx genes specify dorsal, intermediate and ventral domains within
zebrafish pharyngeal arches.

Talbot JC(1), Johnson SL, Kimmel CB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA.
jtalbot@uoregon.edu

The ventrally expressed secreted polypeptide endothelin1 (Edn1) patterns the
skeleton derived from the first two pharyngeal arches into dorsal, intermediate
and ventral domains. Edn1 activates expression of many genes, including hand2 and
Dlx genes. We wanted to know how hand2/Dlx genes might generate distinct domain
identities. Here, we show that differential expression of hand2 and Dlx genes
delineates domain boundaries before and during cartilage morphogenesis. Knockdown
of the broadly expressed genes dlx1a and dlx2a results in both dorsal and
intermediate defects, whereas knockdown of three intermediate-domain restricted
genes dlx3b, dlx4b and dlx5a results in intermediate-domain-specific defects. The
ventrally expressed gene hand2 patterns ventral identity, in part by repressing
dlx3b/4b/5a. The jaw joint is an intermediate-domain structure that expresses
nkx3.2 and a more general joint marker, trps1. The jaw joint expression of trps1 
and nkx3.2 requires dlx3b/4b/5a function, and expands in hand2 mutants. Both
hand2 and dlx3b/4b/5a repress dorsal patterning markers. Collectively, our work
indicates that the expression and function of hand2 and Dlx genes specify major
patterning domains along the dorsoventral axis of zebrafish pharyngeal arches.

PMCID: PMC2927700
PMID: 20573696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Epigenetics. 2010 Aug 16;5(6):499-508. Epub 2010 Aug 16.

Genome-wide DNA methylation profiling of chronic lymphocytic leukemia allows
identification of epigenetically repressed molecular pathways with clinical
impact.

Tong WG(1), Wierda WG, Lin E, Kuang SQ, Bekele BN, Estrov Z, Wei Y, Yang H,
Keating MJ, Garcia-Manero G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, USA.

We performed a genome-wide analysis of aberrant DNA methylation in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) using methylated CpG island amplification (MCA)
coupled with a promoter microarray. We identified 280 potential targets of
aberrant DNA methylation in CLL. These genes were located more frequently in
chromosomes 19 (16%, p=0.001), 16 (11%, p=0.001), 17 (10%, p=0.02) and 11 (9%,
p=0.02) and could be grouped in several functional networks. Methylation status
was confirmed for 22 of these genes (SOX11, DLX1, FAM62C, SOX14, RSPO1, ADCY5,
HAND2,SPOCK, MLL, ING1, PRIMA1, BCL11B, LTBP2, BNC1, NR2F2, SALL1, GALGT2, LHX1, 
DLX4, KLK10, TFAP2 and APP) in 78 CLL patients by pyrosequencing. As a proof of
principle, we analyzed the expression of 2 genes, PRIMA1 and APP, in primary
cells and of GALGT2, TFAP2C and PRIMA1 in leukemia cells. There was an inverse
association between methylation and gene expression. This could be reversed by
treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine in cell lines. Treatment in a clinical
trial with 5-azacitidine resulted in decreased methylation of LINE, DLX4 and
SALL1 in the peripheral blood B-cells of patients with CLL. IgVH mutational
status or ZAP-70 expression were not associated with specific methylation
profiles. By multivariate analysis, methylation of LINE and APP was associated
with shorter overall survival (p = 0.045 and 0.0035, respectively). This study
demonstrates that aberrant DNA methylation is common and has potential prognostic
and therapeutic value in CLL.

PMCID: PMC3322493
PMID: 20484983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Circ Res. 2010 Jun 25;106(12):1818-28. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.110.217950. Epub
2010 Apr 22.

Tbx5 and Bmp signaling are essential for proepicardium specification in
zebrafish.

Liu J(1), Stainier DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Programs in Developmental Biology, 
Genetics and Human Genetics, Cardiovascular Research Institute, and Liver Center,
University of California, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.

RATIONALE: The proepicardial organ (PE) contributes to the cellular diversity of 
the developing heart by giving rise to the epicardium as well as vascular smooth 
muscle cells and fibroblasts. Despite the importance of these cells in cardiac
development, function and regeneration, the signals required for the
specification of the PE remain largely unexplored.
OBJECTIVE: We aim to identify the signaling molecules and transcription factors
that regulate PE specification.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Here, we present the first genetic evidence that bone
morphogenetic protein (Bmp) signaling in conjunction with the T-box transcription
factor Tbx5a is essential for PE specification in zebrafish. Specifically, Bmp4
from the cardiac region, but not the liver bud, acting through the type I BMP
receptor Acvr1l, is required for PE specification. By overexpressing a
dominant-negative form of a Bmp receptor at various embryonic stages, we
determined when Bmp signaling was required for PE specification. We also found
that overexpression of bmp2b right before PE specification led to the ectopic
expression of PE specific markers including tbx18. Furthermore, using
loss-of-function approaches, we discovered a previously unappreciated PE
specification role for Tbx5a at early somite stages; this role occurs earlier
than, and appears to be independent from, the requirement for Bmp signaling in
this process.
CONCLUSION: Altogether, these data lead us to propose that Tbx5a confers anterior
lateral plate mesodermal cells the competence to respond to Bmp signals and
initiate PE development.

PMCID: PMC2892550
PMID: 20413782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. PLoS Genet. 2010 Apr 8;6(4):e1000901. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000901.

Distinct roles of Hand2 in initiating polarity and posterior Shh expression
during the onset of mouse limb bud development.

Galli A(1), Robay D, Osterwalder M, Bao X, Bénazet JD, Tariq M, Paro R, Mackem S,
Zeller R.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics, Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel,
Switzerland. ag2994@columbia.edu

The polarization of nascent embryonic fields and the endowment of cells with
organizer properties are key to initiation of vertebrate organogenesis. One such 
event is antero-posterior (AP) polarization of early limb buds and activation of 
morphogenetic Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) signaling in the posterior mesenchyme, which
in turn promotes outgrowth and specifies the pentadactylous autopod. Inactivation
of the Hand2 transcriptional regulator from the onset of mouse forelimb bud
development disrupts establishment of posterior identity and Shh expression,
which results in a skeletal phenotype identical to Shh deficient limb buds. In
wild-type limb buds, Hand2 is part of the protein complexes containing Hoxd13,
another essential regulator of Shh activation in limb buds. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation shows that Hand2-containing chromatin complexes are bound to 
the far upstream cis-regulatory region (ZRS), which is specifically required for 
Shh expression in the limb bud. Cell-biochemical studies indicate that Hand2 and 
Hoxd13 can efficiently transactivate gene expression via the ZRS, while the Gli3 
repressor isoform interferes with this positive transcriptional regulation.
Indeed, analysis of mouse forelimb buds lacking both Hand2 and Gli3 reveals the
complete absence of antero-posterior (AP) polarity along the entire
proximo-distal axis and extreme digit polydactyly without AP identities. Our
study uncovers essential components of the transcriptional machinery and key
interactions that set-up limb bud asymmetry upstream of establishing the SHH
signaling limb bud organizer.

PMCID: PMC2851570
PMID: 20386744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Circ Res. 2010 Apr 30;106(8):1342-50. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.109.213132. Epub
2010 Mar 25.

Voltage-gated sodium channels are required for heart development in zebrafish.

Chopra SS(1), Stroud DM, Watanabe H, Bennett JS, Burns CG, Wells KS, Yang T,
Zhong TP, Roden DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, 2215B
Garland Ave, 1275 MRBIV Light Hall, Nashville, TN 37232-0575, USA.

RATIONALE: Voltage-gated sodium channels initiate action potentials in excitable 
tissues. Mice in which Scn5A (the predominant sodium channel gene in heart) has
been knocked out die early in development with cardiac malformations by
mechanisms which have yet to be determined.
OBJECTIVE: Here we addressed this question by investigating the role of cardiac
sodium channels in zebrafish heart development.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Transcripts of the functionally-conserved Scn5a homologs
scn5Laa and scn5Lab were detected in the gastrulating zebrafish embryo and
subsequently in the embryonic myocardium. Antisense knockdown of either channel
resulted in marked cardiac chamber dysmorphogenesis and perturbed looping. These 
abnormalities were associated with decreased expression of the myocardial
precursor genes nkx2.5, gata4, and hand2 in anterior lateral mesoderm and
significant deficits in the production of cardiomyocyte progenitors. These early 
defects did not appear to result from altered membrane electrophysiology, as
prolonged pharmacological blockade of sodium current failed to phenocopy channel 
knockdown. Moreover, embryos grown in calcium channel blocker-containing medium
had hearts that did not beat but developed normally.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings identify a novel and possibly nonelectrogenic role
for cardiac sodium channels in heart development.

PMCID: PMC2869449
PMID: 20339120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Genesis. 2010 Jun;48(6):262-373. doi: 10.1002/dvg.20625.

Spatio-temporal dynamics of gene expression of the Edn1-Dlx5/6 pathway during
development of the lower jaw.

Vieux-Rochas M(1), Mantero S, Heude E, Barbieri O, Astigiano S, Couly G, Kurihara
H, Levi G, Merlo GR.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR, Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris, France.

The morphogenesis of the vertebrate skull results from highly dynamic integrated 
processes involving the exchange of signals between the ectoderm, the endoderm,
and cephalic neural crest cells (CNCCs). Before migration CNCCs are not committed
to form any specific skull element, molecular signals exchanged in restricted
regions of tissue interaction are crucial in providing positional identity to the
CNCCs mesenchyme and activate the specific morphogenetic process of different
skeletal components of the head. In particular, the endothelin-1 (Edn1)-dependent
activation of Dlx5 and Dlx6 in CNCCs that colonize the first pharyngeal arch
(PA1) is necessary and sufficient to specify maxillo-mandibular identity. Here,
to better analyze the spatio-temporal dynamics of this process, we associate
quantitative gene expression analysis with detailed examination of skeletal
phenotypes resulting from combined allelic reduction of Edn1, Dlx5, and Dlx6. We 
show that Edn1-dependent and -independent regulatory pathways act at different
developmental times in distinct regions of PA1. The Edn1-->Dlx5/6-->Hand2 pathway
is already active at E9.5 during early stages of CNCCs colonization. At later
stages (E10.5) the scenario is more complex: we propose a model in which PA1 is
subdivided into four adjacent territories in which distinct regulations are
taking place. This new developmental model may provide a conceptual framework to 
interpret the craniofacial malformations present in several mouse mutants and in 
human first arch syndromes. More in general, our findings emphasize the
importance of quantitative gene expression in the fine control of morphogenetic
events.

2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20333701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Dev Biol. 2010 May 1;341(1):315-23. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.02.013. Epub 2010
Feb 18.

Evolution of oropharyngeal patterning mechanisms involving Dlx and endothelins in
vertebrates.

Kuraku S(1), Takio Y, Sugahara F, Takechi M, Kuratani S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Evolutionary Morphology, RIKEN Center for Developmental
Biology, 2-2-3 Minatojima-minami, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0047, Japan.
shigehiro.kuraku@uni-konstanz.de

In jawed vertebrates, the Dlx code, or nested expression patterns of Dlx genes,
specify the dorsoventral polarity of pharyngeal arches, downstream of
endothelin-1 (Edn-1) and its effectors, Bapx1 (Nkx3.2) and dHand (Hand2). To
elucidate the evolution of the specification mechanism of the oropharyngeal
skeletal system, lamprey homologs of Dlx, Edn, endothelin receptor (Ednr), Bapx1,
and dHand were identified. Our analysis suggested that the Edn gene family
emerged at the advent of vertebrates, and that gene duplications leading to the
different Edn gnathostome subtypes (Edn1-3) occurred before the
cyclostome-gnathostome split. This timing of gene duplications, giving rise to
multiple subtypes, was also implied for Dlx, Ednr, Hand, and Bapx. In lamprey
embryos, nested expressions of Dlx genes were not observed in pharyngeal arches, 
nor was any focal expression of Bapx1, known in gnathostomes to specify the jaw
joint. The dHand homolog, however, was expressed more intensively ventrally, as
in gnathostomes. Lamprey homologs of Edn-1 and EdnrA were also shown to be
expressed as described in mice, indicating involvement of this signaling pathway 
in the craniofacial patterning early in vertebrate evolution. These results
suggest that the last common ancestor of all the extant vertebrates would have
possessed basic gene repertoires involved in oropharyngeal patterning in
gnathostomes, but the elaborate genetic program leading to the Dlx code is likely
to have been acquired uniquely in gnathostomes.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20171204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Pediatr Cardiol. 2010 Apr;31(3):438-48. doi: 10.1007/s00246-010-9669-x. Epub 2010
Feb 14.

Gene replacement strategies to test the functional redundancy of basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor.

Firulli AB(1), Firulli BA, Wang J, Rogers RH, Conway SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Riley Heart Research Center, Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research,
Indiana University School of Medicine, 1044 West Walnut Street, Room R4 W379,
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors control developmental
decisions for a wide range of embryonic cell types. Hand1 and Hand2 are closely
related bHLH proteins that control cardiac, craniofacial, and limb development.
Within the developing heart, Hand1 expression becomes restricted predominantly to
the left ventricle, whereas Hand2 becomes restricted predominantly to the left
ventricle, for which findings have shown each Hand factor to be necessary for
normal chamber formation. Forced overexpression of Hand1 throughout the early
developing heart induces abnormal interventricular septal development, with
resulting pathogenesis of congenital heart defects. To investigate the potential 
transcriptional mechanisms involved in heart morphogenesis by Hand2, this study
used a replacement targeting approach to knock Hand2 into the Hand1 locus and
ectopically express one copy of Hand2 within the endogenous Hand1 expression
domain in the developing hearts of transgenic mice. The findings show that
high-percentage Hand1 ( Hand2 ) chimeras die at birth and exhibit a range of
congenital heart defects. These findings suggest that Hand factors may act via
unique transcriptional mechanisms mediated by bHLH factor partner choice,
supporting the notion that alterations of Hand factor stoichiometry may be as
deleterious to normal heart morphogenesis as Hand factor loss of function.

PMCID: PMC3581321
PMID: 20155416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Dev Biol. 2010 May 1;341(1):291-304. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.02.001. Epub 2010 
Feb 6.

Targeted deletion of Hand2 in cardiac neural crest-derived cells influences
cardiac gene expression and outflow tract development.

Holler KL(1), Hendershot TJ, Troy SE, Vincentz JW, Firulli AB, Howard MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences and Program in Neurosciences and Degenerative
Disease, Health Sciences Campus, University of Toledo, 3000 Arlington Ave.,
Toledo, OH 43614-1007, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix DNA binding protein Hand2 has critical functions in
cardiac development both in neural crest-derived and mesoderm-derived structures.
Targeted deletion of Hand2 in the neural crest has allowed us to genetically
dissect Hand2-dependent defects specifically in outflow tract and cardiac cushion
independent of Hand2 functions in mesoderm-derived structures. Targeted deletion 
of Hand2 in the neural crest results in misalignment of the aortic arch arteries 
and outflow tract, contributing to development of double outlet right ventricle
(DORV) and ventricular septal defects (VSD). These neural crest-derived
developmental anomalies are associated with altered expression of Hand2-target
genes we have identified by gene profiling. A number of Hand2 direct target genes
have been identified using ChIP and ChIP-on-chip analyses. We have identified and
validated a number of genes related to cell migration, proliferation/cell cycle
and intracellular signaling whose expression is affected by Hand2 deletion in the
neural crest and which are associated with development of VSD and DORV. Our data 
suggest that Hand2 is a multifunctional DNA binding protein affecting expression 
of target genes associated with a number of functional interactions in neural
crest-derived cells required for proper patterning of the outflow tract,
generation of the appropriate number of neural crest-derived cells for elongation
of the conotruncus and cardiac cushion organization. Our genetic model has made
it possible to investigate the molecular genetics of neural crest contributions
to outflow tract morphogenesis and cell differentiation.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2854279
PMID: 20144608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Neurosci. 2010 Jan 20;30(3):905-15. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5368-09.2010.

Neuroblastoma phox2b variants stimulate proliferation and dedifferentiation of
immature sympathetic neurons.

Reiff T(1), Tsarovina K, Majdazari A, Schmidt M, del Pino I, Rohrer H.

Author information: 
(1)Research Group Developmental Neurobiology, Department of Neurochemistry, Max
Planck Institute for Brain Research, 60528 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

Neuroblastoma is a pediatric tumor that is thought to arise from autonomic
precursors in the neural crest. Mutations in the PHOX2B gene have been observed
in familial and sporadic forms of neuroblastoma and represent the first defined
genetic predisposition for neuroblastoma. Here, we address the mechanisms that
may underlie this predisposition, comparing the function of wild-type and mutant 
Phox2b proteins ectopically expressed in proliferating, embryonic sympathetic
neurons. Phox2b displays a strong antiproliferative effect, which is lost in all 
Phox2b neuroblastoma variants analyzed. In contrast, an increase in sympathetic
neuron proliferation is elicited by Phox2b variants with mutations in the
homeodomain when endogenous Phox2b levels are lowered by siRNA-mediated knockdown
to mimic the situation of heterozygous PHOX2B mutations in neuroblastoma. The
increased proliferation is blocked by Hand2 knockdown and the antiproliferative
Phox2b effects are rescued by Hand2 overexpression, implying Hand2 in
Phox2b-mediated proliferation control. A Phox2b variant with a nonsense mutation 
in the homeodomain elicits, in addition, a decreased expression of characteristic
marker genes. Together, these results suggest that PHOX2B mutations predispose to
neuroblastoma by increasing proliferation and promoting dedifferentiation of
cells in the sympathoadrenergic lineage.

PMID: 20089899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Bone. 2010 May;46(5):1359-68. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2009.11.022. Epub 2009 Nov 22.

Hand2 regulates chondrogenesis in vitro and in vivo.

Abe M(1), Michikami I, Fukushi T, Abe A, Maeda Y, Ooshima T, Wakisaka S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Osaka University
Graduate School of Dentistry, 1-8 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, Japan.
m-abe@dent.osaka-u.ac.jp

Hand2 is a transcription factor of the basic helix-loop-helix family that plays
essential roles during development. Hand2 determines the anterior-posterior axis 
during limb development and there is also substantial evidence that Hand2
regulates limb skeletogenesis. However, little is known about how Hand2 might
regulate skeletogenesis. Here we show that, in a limb bud micromass culture
system, over-expression of Hand2 represses chondrogenesis and the expression of
chondrocytic genes, Sox9, type II collagen and aggrecan. Furthermore, we show
that Hand2 is induced by the activation of canonical Wnt signaling, which
strongly represses chondrogenesis. Surprisingly, Hand2 repressed chondrogenesis
in a DNA binding- and dimer formation-independent manner. To examine the in vivo 
role of Hand2 in mice, we targeted the expression of Hand2 to the cartilage using
regulatory elements from the collagen II gene. The resulting transgenic mice
displayed a dwarf phenotype, with axial, appendicular and craniofacial skeletal
deformities. Hand2 strongly inhibited chondrogenesis in the axial and cranial
base skeleton. In the sternum, Hand2 inhibited endochondral ossification by
slowing chondrocyte maturation. These data support a model of Hand2 regulating
endochondral ossification via at least two steps: (1) determination of the site
of chondrogenesis by outlining the region of the future cartilage template and
(2) regulation of the rate of chondrocyte maturation.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19932774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Dec 11;390(2):223-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.09.090. Epub 2009 Sep 26.

The bHLH transcription factor Hand2 regulates the expression of nanog in ANS
differentiation.

Hashimoto Y(1), Myojin R, Katoh N, Ohtsu M, Tashiro F, Onoda F, Murakami Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genome Biology, Department of Biological Science and Technology,
Faculty of Industrial Science and Technology, Tokyo University of Science, 2641
Yamazaki, Noda-shi, Chiba 278-8510, Japan.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor Hand2 is induced by bone
morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) in neural crest-derived precursor cells during the 
early stage of development of the autonomic nervous system (ANS). Previous
studies showed that Hand2 was essential for the ANS differentiation. However,
regulatory mechanism of pluripotent genes has not been elucidated in ANS
differentiation. Here, we show that Hand2 regulated nanog expression in ANS
differentiation. Our studies demonstrated that the forced expression of Hand2
promoted the ANS differentiation program in P19 embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells
without aggregation. Furthermore, our results suggested that Hand2 bound to the
promoter of nanog, a gene required for embryonic stem cells self-renewal, and
suppressed nanog expression after Hand2 induction. The rapid downregulation of
nanog mRNA during ANS differentiation correlated with the Hand2 transcriptional
activity and nanog promoter methylation. These findings are evidence for a
presence of the novel regulatory mechanism of nanog in ANS differentiation.

PMID: 19785992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Stem Cells Dev. 2010 Apr;19(4):503-12. doi: 10.1089/scd.2009.0179.

Clonal differentiation of skeletal muscle-derived CD34(-)/45(-) stem cells into
cardiomyocytes in vivo.

Tamaki T(1), Uchiyama Y, Okada Y, Tono K, Masuda M, Nitta M, Hoshi A, Akatsuka A.

Author information: 
(1)Muscle Physiology and Cell Biology Unit, Tokai University School of Medicine, 
Shimokasuya, Isehara, Kanagawa, Japan. tamaki@is.icc.u-tokai.ac.jp

The differentiation and/or therapeutic potential of skeletal muscle-derived stem 
cells for cardiac infarction have been studied extensively for use in cellular
cardiomyoplasty, as injured cardiomyocytes exhibit limited regenerative capacity.
We previously reported cardio-myogenic differentiation of skeletal muscle-derived
CD34+/45(-) (Sk-34) stem cells after therapeutic transplantation. However, the
clonal differentiation potential of these cells remains unknown. Here, we show
that skeletal muscle-derived CD34(-)/45(-) (Sk-DN) stem cells, which are situated
upstream of Sk-34 cells in the same lineage, exhibit clonal differentiation into 
cardiomyocytes after single cell-derived single-sphere implantation into
myocardium. Sk-DN cells were enzymatically isolated from green fluorescent
protein (GFP) transgenic mice and purified by flow cytometry, and were then
clonally cultured in collagen-based medium with bFGF and EGF after clonal cell
sorting. Single cell-derived single-sphere colonies of Sk-DN cells were directly 
implanted into the wild-type mouse myocardium. At 4 weeks after implantation,
donor cells exhibited typical cardiomyocyte structure with the formation of
gap-junctions between donor and recipient cells. Expression of specific mRNAs for
cardiomyocytes, such as cardiac actin and GATA-4, Nkx2-5, Isl-1, Mef2, and Hand2,
were also seen in clonal cell cultures of Sk-DN cells. Cell fusion-independent
differentiation was also confirmed by bulk cell transplantation using Cre- and
loxP (enhanced GFP)-mice. We conclude that Sk-DN cells can give rise to cardiac
muscle cells clonally, and that skeletal muscle includes a practical cell source 
for cellular cardiomyoplasty.

PMID: 19634996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Dev Biol. 2009 Sep 15;333(2):409-18. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.07.004. Epub 2009 
Jul 14.

Pbx acts with Hand2 in early myocardial differentiation.

Maves L(1), Tyler A, Moens CB, Tapscott SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Biology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA
98109, USA. lmaves@fhcrc.org

Transcription factors of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family are critical
regulators of muscle cell differentiation. For example, Myod drives skeletal
muscle differentiation, and Hand2 potentiates cardiac muscle differentiation.
Understanding how these bHLH factors regulate distinct transcriptional targets in
a temporally and spatially controlled manner is critical for understanding their 
activity in cellular differentiation. We previously showed that Pbx homeodomain
proteins modulate the activity of Myod to promote the differentiation of
fast-twitch skeletal muscle. Here, we test the hypothesis that Pbx proteins are
also necessary for cardiac muscle differentiation through interacting with Hand2.
We show that Pbx proteins are required for the activation of cardiac muscle
differentiation in zebrafish embryos. Loss of Pbx activity leads to delay of
myocardial differentiation and subsequent defective cardiac morphogenesis,
similar to reduced Hand2 activity. Genetic interaction experiments support the
hypothesis that Pbx proteins modulate the activity of Hand2 in myocardial
differentiation. Furthermore, we show that Pbx proteins directly bind the
promoter of the myocardial differentiation gene myl7 in vitro, supporting a
direct role for Pbx proteins in promoting cardiac muscle differentiation. Our
findings demonstrate new roles for Pbx proteins in vertebrate cardiac development
and also provide new insight into connections between the transcriptional
regulation of skeletal and cardiac muscle differentiation programs.

PMCID: PMC2752274
PMID: 19607825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Med Genet. 2009 Nov;46(11):730-5. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2009.066027. Epub 2009 May
7.

Genetic screening of 202 individuals with congenital limb malformations and
requiring reconstructive surgery.

Furniss D(1), Kan SH, Taylor IB, Johnson D, Critchley PS, Giele HP, Wilkie AO.

Author information: 
(1)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, OX3 9DS, UK.

BACKGROUND: Congenital limb malformations (CLMs) are common and present to a
variety of specialties, notably plastic and orthopaedic surgeons, and clinical
geneticists. The authors aimed to characterise causative mutations in an
unselected cohort of patients with CLMs requiring reconstructive surgery.
METHODS: 202 patients presenting with CLM were recruited. The authors obtained
G-banded karyotypes and screened EN1, GLI3, HAND2, HOXD13, ROR2, SALL1, SALL4,
ZRS of SHH, SPRY4, TBX5, TWIST1 and WNT7A for point mutations using denaturing
high performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) and direct sequencing. Multiplex
ligation dependent probe amplification (MLPA) kits were developed and used to
measure copy number in GLI3, HOXD13, ROR2, SALL1, SALL4, TBX5 and the ZRS of SHH.
RESULTS: Within the cohort, causative genetic alterations were identified in 23
patients (11%): mutations in GLI3 (n = 5), HOXD13 (n = 5), the ZRS of SHH (n =
4), and chromosome abnormalities (n = 4) were the most common lesions found.
Clinical features that predicted the discovery of a genetic cause included a
bilateral malformation, positive family history, and having increasing numbers of
limbs affected (all p<0.01). Additionally, specific patterns of malformation
predicted mutations in specific genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on higher mutation prevalence the authors propose that GLI3,
HOXD13 and the ZRS of SHH should be prioritised for introduction into molecular
genetic testing programmes for CLM. The authors have developed simple criteria
that can refine the selection of patients by surgeons for referral to clinical
geneticists. The cohort also represents an excellent resource to test for
mutations in novel candidate genes.

PMCID: PMC2764122
PMID: 19429598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Jun;37(10):e77. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp274. Epub 2009 May 6.

Labeled microRNA pull-down assay system: an experimental approach for
high-throughput identification of microRNA-target mRNAs.

Hsu RJ(1), Yang HJ, Tsai HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, National Taiwan University,
Taipei 106, Taiwan.

We developed a simple, direct and cost-effective approach to search for the most 
likely target genes of a known microRNA (miRNA) in vitro. We term this method
'labeled miRNA pull-down (LAMP)' assay system. Briefly, the pre-miRNA is labeled 
with digoxigenin (DIG), mixed with cell extracts and immunoprecipitated by
anti-DIG antiserum. When the DIG-labeled miRNA and bound mRNA complex are
obtained, the total cDNAs are then subcloned and sequenced, or RT-PCR-amplified, 
to search for the putative target genes of a known miRNA. After successfully
identifying the known target genes of Caenorhabditis elegans miRNAs lin-4 and
let-7 and zebrafish let-7, we applied LAMP to find the unknown target gene of
zebrafish miR-1, which resulted in the identification of hand2. We then confirmed
hand2 as a novel target gene of miR-1 by whole-mount in situ hybridization and
luciferase reporter gene assay. We further validated this target gene by
microarray analysis, and the results showed that hand2 is the top-scoring among
302 predicted putative target genes. We concluded that LAMP is an experimental
approach for high-throughput identification of the target gene of known miRNAs
from both C. elegans and zebrafish, yielding fewer false positive results than
those produced by using only the bioinformatics approach.

PMCID: PMC2691847
PMID: 19420057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. BMC Mol Biol. 2009 Apr 6;10:28. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-10-28.

Co-regulated expression of HAND2 and DEIN by a bidirectional promoter with
asymmetrical activity in neuroblastoma.

Voth H(1), Oberthuer A, Simon T, Kahlert Y, Berthold F, Fischer M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology and Hematology and Center of Molecular
Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University Children's Hospital, Cologne, Germany.
hvoth@gmx.de

BACKGROUND: HAND2, a key regulator for the development of the sympathetic nervous
system, is located on chromosome 4q33 in a head-to-head orientation with DEIN, a 
recently identified novel gene with stage specific expression in primary
neuroblastoma (NB). Both genes are expressed in primary NB as well as most NB
cell lines and are separated by a genomic sequence of 228 bp. The similar
expression profile of both genes suggests a common transcriptional regulation
mediated by a bidirectional promoter.
RESULTS: Northern Blot analysis of DEIN and HAND2 in 20 primary NBs indicated
concurrent expression levels of the two genes, which was confirmed by microarray 
analysis of 236 primary NBs (Pearson's correlation coefficient r = 0.65). While
DEIN expression in the latter cohort was associated with stage 4S (p = 0.02),
HAND2 expression was not associated with tumor stage. In contrast, both HAND2 and
DEIN transcript levels were highly associated with age at diagnosis <12 months (p
= 0.001). The intergenic region shows substantial homology in different species
(89%, 72% and 53% identity between human and mouse, chicken and zebrafish,
respectively) and contains many highly conserved putative transcription factor
binding sites. Using luciferase reporter gene constructs, asymmetrical
bidirectional promoter activity was found in four NB cell lines: In DEIN
orientation, an average 3.4 fold increase in activity was observed as compared to
the promoterless vector, whereas an average 15.4 fold activation was detected in 
HAND2 orientation. The presence of two highly conserved putative regulatory
elements, one of which was shown to enhance HAND2 expression in branchial arches 
previously, displayed weak repressor activity for both genes.
CONCLUSION: HAND2 and DEIN represent a gene pair that is tightly linked by a
bidirectional promoter in an evolutionary highly conserved manner. Expression of 
both genes in NB is co-regulated by asymmetrical activity of this promoter and
modulated by the activity of two cis-regulatory elements acting as weak
repressors. The concurrent quantitative and tissue specific expression of HAND2
and DEIN suggests a functional link between both genes.

PMCID: PMC2670301
PMID: 19348682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Dev Biol. 2009 Jun 1;330(1):131-41. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.03.021. Epub 2009
Mar 31.

Hand2 is required in the epithelium for palatogenesis in mice.

Xiong W(1), He F, Morikawa Y, Yu X, Zhang Z, Lan Y, Jiang R, Cserjesi P, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Department of Cell and Molecular Biology,
Tulane University, New Orleans, LA 70118, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor Hand2 has been implicated 
in the development of multiple organs, including craniofacial organs. Mice
carrying Hand2 hypomorphic alleles (Hand2(LoxP/-)) display a cleft palate
phenotype. A specific deletion of the Hand2 branchial arch-specific enhancer also
leads to a hypoplastic mandible and cleft palate formation in mice. However, the 
underlying mechanism of Hand2 regulation of palate development remains unknown.
Here we show that Hand2 is expressed in both the epithelium and mesenchyme of the
developing palate. While mesenchymal specific inactivation of Hand2 has no impact
on palate development, epithelial specific deletion of Hand2 creates a cleft
palate phenotype. Hand2 appears to exert distinct roles in the anterior and
posterior palate. In the anterior palate of Hand2(LoxP/-) mice, premature death
of periderm cells and a down-regulation of Shh are observed in the medial edge
epithelium (MEE), accompanied by a decreased level of cell proliferation in the
palatal mesenchyme. In the posterior palate, a lower dose of Hand2 causes
aberrant periderm cell death on the surface of the epithelium, triggering
abnormal fusion between the palatal shelf and mandible and preventing palatal
shelf elevation. We further demonstrate that BMP activities are essential for the
expression of Hand2 in the palate. We conclude that Hand2 is an intrinsic
regulator in the epithelium and is required for palate development.

PMCID: PMC2745957
PMID: 19341725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Dev Biol. 2009 May 15;329(2):191-200. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.02.020. Epub 2009
Feb 27.

The bHLH transcription factor Hand2 is essential for the maintenance of
noradrenergic properties in differentiated sympathetic neurons.

Schmidt M(1), Lin S, Pape M, Ernsberger U, Stanke M, Kobayashi K, Howard MJ,
Rohrer H.

Author information: 
(1)RG Developmental Neurobiology, Department of Neurochemistry, MPI for Brain
Research, Deutschordenstr. 46, 60528 Frankfurt/M, Germany.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor Hand2 is essential for the
proliferation and noradrenergic differentiation of sympathetic neuron precursors 
during development. Here we address the function of Hand2 in postmitotic,
differentiated sympathetic neurons. Knockdown of endogenous Hand2 in cultured E12
chick sympathetic neurons by siRNA results in a significant (about 60%) decrease 
in the expression of the noradrenergic marker genes dopamine-beta-hydroxylase
(DBH) and tyrosine hydroxylase (TH). In contrast, expression of the pan-neuronal 
genes TuJ1, HuC and SCG10 was not affected. To analyze the in vivo role of Hand2 
in differentiated sympathetic neurons we used mice harboring a conditional
Hand2-null allele and excised the gene by expression of Cre recombinase under
control of the DBH promotor. Mouse embryos homozygous for Hand2 gene deletion
showed decreased sympathetic neuron number and TH expression was strongly reduced
in the residual neuron population. The in vitro Hand2 knockdown also enhances the
CNTF-induced expression of the cholinergic marker genes vesicular acetylcholine
transporter (VAChT) and choline acetyltransferase (ChAT). Taken together, these
findings demonstrate that the Hand2 transcription factor plays a key role in
maintaining noradrenergic properties in differentiated neurons.

PMCID: PMC2746555
PMID: 19254708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Pathol. 2009 Jun;218(2):201-9. doi: 10.1002/path.2524.

Gene expression profiling provides insights into the pathways involved in solid
pseudopapillary neoplasm of the pancreas.

Cavard C(1), Audebourg A, Letourneur F, Audard V, Beuvon F, Cagnard N, Radenen B,
Varlet P, Vacher-Lavenu MC, Perret C, Terris B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin, Université Paris Descartes, CNRS (UMR 8104), Paris, France.

Solid-pseudopapillary neoplasms (SPNs) are rare human pancreatic neoplasms
usually associated with a good prognosis. In contrast to other pancreatic
tumours, aberrant activation of the Wnt-beta-catenin pathway appears to be a
constant feature in SPN. Aside from activation of the Wnt-beta-catenin pathway,
little is known about biological pathways deregulated in SPN. We carried out
transcriptome profiling of SPN to gain insights into the pathogenesis of these
tumours. As expected, the over-expression of AXIN2, TBX3, SP5 and NOTUM
demonstrated activation of the beta-catenin pathway. Members of the Notch pathway
(HEY1, HEY2, NOTCH2) were also up-regulated, relative to their expression in
ductal adenocarcinomas (DAC) or pancreatic endocrine tumours (PET). Other genes, 
such as EDN3, HAND2, netrin-G2 and the receptor netrin-G1 ligand, involved in
neural crest differentiation, were also identified as altered. Increased levels
of SOX10 and TuJ-1 proteins were also indicative of neural-like differentiation. 
In conclusion, SPN display a complex expression profile, distinct from that
observed in PET and DAC and involving both the beta-catenin and Notch pathways,
together with expression of neural differentiation markers.

PMID: 19235837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Eur J Hum Genet. 2009 Aug;17(8):1086-91. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2009.11. Epub 2009 Feb
18.

4q32-q35 and 6q16-q22 are valuable candidate regions for split hand/foot
malformation.

Niedrist D(1), Lurie IW, Schinzel A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Schwerzenbach,
Switzerland. niedrist@medgen.uzh.ch

On the basis of the Human Cytogenetic Database, a computerized catalog of the
clinical phenotypes associated with cytogenetically detectable human chromosome
aberrations, we collected from the literature 102 cases with chromosomal
aberrations and split hand/foot malformation or absent fingers/toes. Statistical 
analysis revealed a highly significant association (P<0.001) between the
malformation and the chromosomal bands 4q32-q35, 5q15, 6q16-q22 and 7q11.2-q22
(SHFM1). Considering these findings, we suggest additional SHFM loci on
chromosome 4q, 6q and probably 5q. The regions 4q and 6q have already been
discussed in the literature as additional SHFM loci. We now show further
evidence. In the proposed regions, there are interesting candidate genes such as,
on 4q: HAND2, FGF2, LEF1 and BMPR1B; on 5q: MSX2, FLT4, PTX1 and PDLIM7; and on
6q: SNX3, GJA1, HEY2 and Tbx18.

PMCID: PMC2986561
PMID: 19223930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Development. 2009 Mar;136(6):933-42. doi: 10.1242/dev.034025. Epub 2009 Feb 11.

DNA binding-dependent and -independent functions of the Hand2 transcription
factor during mouse embryogenesis.

Liu N(1), Barbosa AC, Chapman SL, Bezprozvannaya S, Qi X, Richardson JA,
Yanagisawa H, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, 6000 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor Hand2 is required for
growth and development of the heart, branchial arches and limb buds. To determine
whether DNA binding is required for Hand2 to regulate the growth and development 
of these different embryonic tissues, we generated mutant mice in which the Hand2
locus was modified by a mutation (referred to as Hand2(EDE)) that abolished the
DNA-binding activity of Hand2, leaving the remainder of the protein intact. In
contrast to Hand2 null embryos, which display right ventricular hypoplasia and
vascular abnormalities, causing severe growth retardation by E9.5 and death by
E10.5, early development of the heart appeared remarkably normal in homozygous
Hand2(EDE) mutant embryos. These mutant embryos also lacked the early defects in 
growth of the branchial arches seen in Hand2 null embryos and survived up to 2 to
3 days longer than did Hand2 null embryos. However, Hand2(EDE) mutant embryos
exhibited growth defects in the limb buds similar to those of Hand2 null embryos.
These findings suggest that Hand2 regulates tissue growth and development in vivo
through DNA binding-dependent and -independent mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC2727559
PMID: 19211672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Dev Biol. 2009 Apr 1;328(1):94-108. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.01.005. Epub 2009
Jan 13.

Elucidating timing and function of endothelin-A receptor signaling during
craniofacial development using neural crest cell-specific gene deletion and
receptor antagonism.

Ruest LB(1), Clouthier DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Biology, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO 
80045, USA.

Cranial neural crest cells (NCCs) play an intimate role in craniofacial
development. Multiple signaling cascades participate in patterning cranial NCCs, 
some of which are regulated by endothelin-A receptor (Ednra) signaling.
Ednra(-/-) embryos die at birth from severe craniofacial defects resulting from
disruption of neural crest cell patterning and differentiation. These defects
include homeotic transformation of lower jaw structures into upper jaw-like
structures, suggesting that some cephalic NCCs alter their "identity" in the
absence of Ednra signaling. To elucidate the temporal necessity for Ednra
signaling in vivo, we undertook two strategies. We first used a conditional
knockout strategy in which mice containing a conditionally targeted Ednra allele 
(Ednra(fl)) were bred with mice from the Hand2-Cre and Wnt1-Cre transgenic mouse 
strains, two strains in which Cre expression occurs at different time periods
within cranial NCCs. In our second approach, we used an Ednra-specific antagonist
to treat wild type pregnant mice between embryonic days E8.0 and E10.0, a time
frame encompassing the early migration and proliferation of cranial NCCs. The
combined results suggest that Ednra function is crucial for NCC development
between E8.25 and E9.0, a time period encompassing the arrival of NCCs in the
arches and/or early post-migratory patterning. After this time period, Ednra
signaling is dispensable. Interestingly, middle ear structures are enlarged and
malformed in a majority of Ednra(fl/fl);Wnt1-Cre embryos, instead resembling
structures found in extinct predecessors of mammals. These observations suggest
that the advent of Ednra signaling in cranial NCCs may have been a crucial event 
in the evolution of the mammalian middle ear ossicles.

PMCID: PMC2821796
PMID: 19185569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Development. 2009 Feb;136(4):615-25. doi: 10.1242/dev.029355. Epub 2009 Jan 14.

Hand2 controls osteoblast differentiation in the branchial arch by inhibiting DNA
binding of Runx2.

Funato N(1), Chapman SL, McKee MD, Funato H, Morris JA, Shelton JM, Richardson
JA, Yanagisawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3A 2B2, 
Canada.

Members of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family of transcription factors
regulate the specification and differentiation of numerous cell types during
embryonic development. Hand1 and Hand2 are expressed by a subset of neural crest 
cells in the anterior branchial arches and are involved in craniofacial
development. However, the precise mechanisms by which Hand proteins mediate
biological actions and regulate downstream target genes in branchial arches is
largely unknown. Here, we report that Hand2 negatively regulates intramembranous 
ossification of the mandible by directly inhibiting the transcription factor
Runx2, a master regulator of osteoblast differentiation. Hand proteins physically
interact with Runx2, suppressing its DNA binding and transcriptional activity.
This interaction is mediated by the N-terminal domain of the Hand protein and
requires neither dimerization with other bHLH proteins nor DNA binding. We
observed partial colocalization of Hand2 and Runx2 in the mandibular primordium
of the branchial arch, and downregulation of Hand2 precedes Runx2-driven
osteoblast differentiation. Hand2 hypomorphic mutant mice display insufficient
mineralization and ectopic bone formation in the mandible due to accelerated
osteoblast differentiation, which is associated with the upregulation and ectopic
expression of Runx2 in the mandibular arch. Here, we show that Hand2 acts as a
novel inhibitor of the Runx2-DNA interaction and thereby regulates osteoblast
differentiation in branchial arch development.

PMID: 19144722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2009 Jan;41(1):86-96.

Effects of methotrexate on the developments of heart and vessel in zebrafish.

Sun S(1), Gui Y, Wang Y, Qian L, Liu X, Jiang Q, Song H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 201102, China.

Methotrexate (MTX), an antagonist of folic acid, can inhibit dihydrofolate
reductase (DHFR) which is of great importance in the synthesis of tetrahydrofolic
acid and embryonic development. In this study, we found that after being exposed 
to 1.5 mM MTX at 6-10 hours post-fertilization, zebrafish embryos fail to form
normal cardiovascular system. In MTX-treated embryos, the morphological
development of ventricle and atrium was disrupted, the cardiac twist was
abnormal, the heart rate and ventricular shortening fraction were reduced, and
the vascular development was disrupted. We also found that either microinjection 
with dhfr-gfp mRNA or treatment with folinic acid calcium salt pentahydrate (CF) 
could cause improved development in the heart and vessels in MTX-treated embryos,
which proved that MTX induced the malformations by inhibiting DHFR. The
transcript levels of genes such as hand2, mef2a, mef2c, and flk-1 were reduced in
MTXtreated embryos. Compared with the MTX-treated group, the transcript levels of
hand2, mef2a, mef2c, and flk-1 were increased in the MTX 1 dhfr-gfp mRNA injected
group and in the MTX 1 CF group. Our results indicated that the disrupted
development of the heart and vessels in MTX-treated embryos is related to the
reduced transcript levels of hand2, mef2a, mef2c, and flk-1.

PMID: 19129954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Mar 1;18(5):847-60. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn410. Epub 2008 Dec 5.

A G220V substitution within the N-terminal transcription regulating domain of
HOXD13 causes a variant synpolydactyly phenotype.

Fantini S(1), Vaccari G, Brison N, Debeer P, Tylzanowski P, Zappavigna V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Via
Campi 213/D, 41100 Modena, Italy.

The 5' members of the HoxD gene cluster (paralogous groups 9-13) are crucial for 
correct vertebrate limb patterning. Mutations in the HOXD13 gene have been found 
to cause synpolydactyly (SPD) and other limb malformations in human. We report
the identification in a Greek family of a variant form of SPD caused by a novel
missense mutation that substitutes glycine for valine in position 220 (G220V) of 
HOXD13. This mutation represents the first substitution of an amino acid located 
outside of the HOXD13 homeodomain that causes autopodal limb malformations. We
have characterized this mutation at the molecular level and found that the G220V 
substitution causes a significant impairment of the capacity of HOXD13 to bind
DNA and regulate transcription. HOXD13(G220V) was found to be deficient in both
activating and repressing transcription through HOXD13-responsive regulatory
elements. In accordance with these results, a comparison of the activities of
HOXD13 and HOXD13(G220V) in vivo, using retrovirus-mediated misexpression in
developing chick limbs, showed that the G220V mutation impairs the capacity of
HOXD13 to perturb the development of proximal limb skeletal elements and to
ectopically activate the transcription of the Hand2 target gene. We moreover show
that the G220V mutation compromises the stability of the HOXD13 protein within
cells and causes its partial accumulation in the cytosol in the form of subtle
aggregates. Taken together, our results establish that the G220V substitution
does not produce a dominant-negative effect or a gain-of-function, but represents
a dominant loss-of-function mutation revealing haploinsufficiency of HOXD13 in
human.

PMID: 19060004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Dev Growth Differ. 2008 Dec;50(9):717-29. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-169X.2008.01069.x.

Retinoic acid affects craniofacial patterning by changing Fgf8 expression in the 
pharyngeal ectoderm.

Abe M(1), Maeda T, Wakisaka S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Osaka University
Graduate School of Dentistry, Suita, Osaka, Japan. m-abe@dent.osaka-u.ac.jp

Retinoic acid signaling plays important roles in establishing normal patterning
and cellular differentiation during embryonic development. In this study, we show
that single administration of retinoic acid at embryonic day 8.5 causes homeotic 
transformation of the lower jaw into upper jaw-like structures. This homeosis was
preceded by downregulation of Fgf8 and Sprouty expression in the proximal domain 
of the first pharyngeal arch. Downregulation of mesenchymal genes such as Dlx5,
Hand2, Tbx1 and Pitx2 was also observed. The oropharynx in retinoic acid-treated 
embryos was severely constricted. Consistent with this observation, Patched
expression in the arch endoderm and mesenchyme was downregulated. Thus, retinoic 
acid affects the expression of subsets of epithelial and mesenchymal genes,
possibly disrupting the regional identity of the pharyngeal arch.

PMID: 19046160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Dec 2;105(48):18806-11. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0807345105. Epub 2008 Nov 18.

An endothelin-1 switch specifies maxillomandibular identity.

Sato T(1), Kurihara Y, Asai R, Kawamura Y, Tonami K, Uchijima Y, Heude E, Ekker
M, Levi G, Kurihara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry and Metabolism, Graduate School of
Medicine, University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Articulated jaws are highly conserved structures characteristic of gnathostome
evolution. Epithelial-mesenchymal interactions within the first pharyngeal arch
(PA1) instruct cephalic neural crest cells (CNCCs) to form the different skeletal
elements of the jaws. The endothelin-1 (Edn1)/endothelin receptor type-A
(Ednra)-->Dlx5/6-->Hand2 signaling pathway is necessary for lower jaw formation. 
Here, we show that the Edn1 signaling is sufficient for the conversion of the
maxillary arch to mandibular identity. Constitutive activation of Ednra induced
the transformation of upper jaw, maxillary, structures into lower jaw,
mandibular, structures with duplicated Meckel's cartilage and dermatocranial jaws
constituted by 4 dentary bones. Misexpression of Hand2 in the Ednra domain caused
a similar transformation. Skeletal transformations are accompanied by
neuromuscular remodeling. Ednra is expressed by most CNCCs, but its constitutive 
activation affects predominantly PA1. We conclude that after migration CNCCs are 
not all equivalent, suggesting that their specification occurs in sequential
steps. Also, we show that, within PA1, CNCCs are competent to form both
mandibular and maxillary structures and that an Edn1 switch is responsible for
the choice of either morphogenetic program.

PMCID: PMC2596216
PMID: 19017795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Circ Res. 2008 Dec 5;103(12):1422-9. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.180083. Epub
2008 Nov 13.

Cardiac neural crest expression of Hand2 regulates outflow and second heart field
development.

Morikawa Y(1), Cserjesi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA
70118, USA.

The cardiac neural crest (cNC) lineage plays key roles in heart development by
directly contributing to heart structures and regulating development of other
heart lineages. The basic helix-loop-helix factor Hand2 regulates development of 
cardiovascular structures and NC-derived tissues including those that contribute 
to face and peripheral nervous system. Although Hand2 is expressed in cNC, its
role has not been examined because of an early embryonic lethality when Hand2 is 
deleted in the NC lineage. We find that the lethality is attributable to loss of 
norepinephrine synthesis that can be overcome by activating adrenergic receptors.
In rescued embryos, loss of Hand2 in the NC lineage leads to the misalignment of 
the outflow tract and aortic arch arteries. Defects include pulmonary stenosis,
interrupted aortic artery, retroesophageal right subclavian artery, and
ventricular septum defect, which resemble congenital heart defects attributed to 
defects in the NC. Hand2 functions in part by regulating signaling from the cNC
to other cardiac lineages but not by regulating migration or survival of the cNC.
Loss of Hand2 in NC also uncovered a novel role for the cNC in regulating
proliferation and differentiation of the second heart field-derived myocardium
that persists late into development. These results show that the cNC functions as
a major signaling center for heart development and Hand2 plays a pivotal role in 
regulating both cell-autonomous and -nonautonomous functions of the cNC.

PMID: 19008477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Circ Res. 2008 Dec 5;103(12):1483-91. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.177055. Epub
2008 Oct 23.

Homozygous missense N629D hERG (KCNH2) potassium channel mutation causes
developmental defects in the right ventricle and its outflow tract and embryonic 
lethality.

Teng GQ(1), Zhao X, Lees-Miller JP, Quinn FR, Li P, Rancourt DE, London B, Cross 
JC, Duff HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Libin Cardiovascular Institute, University of Calgary, Canada.

Loss-of-function mutations in the human ERG1 potassium channel (hERG1) frequently
underlie the long QT2 (LQT2) syndrome. The role of the ERG potassium channel in
cardiac development was elaborated in an in vivo model of a homozygous,
loss-of-function LQT2 syndrome mutation. The hERG N629D mutation was introduced
into the orthologous mouse gene, mERG, by homologous recombination in mouse
embryonic stem cells. Intact homozygous embryos showed abrupt cessation of the
heart beat. N629D/N629D embryos die in utero by embryonic day 11.5. Their
developmental defects include altered looping architecture, poorly developed
bulbus cordis, and distorted aortic sac and branchial arches. N629D/N629D
myocytes from embryonic day 9.5 embryos manifested complete loss of I(Kr)
function, depolarized resting potential, prolonged action potential duration
(LQT), failure to repolarize, and propensity to oscillatory arrhythmias.
N629D/N629D myocytes manifest calcium oscillations and increased sarcoplasmic
reticulum Ca(+2) content. Although the N629D/N629D protein is synthesized, it is 
mainly located intracellularly, whereas +/+ mERG protein is mainly in
plasmalemma. N629D/N629D embryos show robust apoptosis in craniofacial regions,
particularly in the first branchial arch and, to a lesser extent, in the cardiac 
outflow tract. Because deletion of Hand2 produces apoptosis, in similar regions
and with a similar final developmental phenotype, Hand2 expression was evaluated.
Robust decrease in Hand2 expression was observed in the secondary heart field in 
N629D/N629D embryos. In conclusion, loss of I(Kr) function in N629D/N629D
cardiovascular system leads to defects in cardiac ontogeny in the first branchial
arch, outflow tract, and the right ventricle.

PMCID: PMC2774899
PMID: 18948620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Genes Dev. 2008 Oct 1;22(19):2651-63. doi: 10.1101/gad.1693008.

A genome-scale analysis of the cis-regulatory circuitry underlying sonic
hedgehog-mediated patterning of the mammalian limb.

Vokes SA(1), Ji H, Wong WH, McMahon AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02138, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signals via Gli transcription factors to direct digit number
and identity in the vertebrate limb. We characterized the Gli-dependent
cis-regulatory network through a combination of whole-genome chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-on-chip and transcriptional profiling of the
developing mouse limb. These analyses identified approximately 5000 high-quality 
Gli3-binding sites, including all known Gli-dependent enhancers. Discrete binding
regions exhibit a higher-order clustering, highlighting the complexity of
cis-regulatory interactions. Further, Gli3 binds inertly to previously identified
neural-specific Gli enhancers, demonstrating the accessibility of their
cis-regulatory elements. Intersection of DNA binding data with gene expression
profiles predicted 205 putative limb target genes. A subset of putative
cis-regulatory regions were analyzed in transgenic embryos, establishing Blimp1
as a direct Gli target and identifying Gli activator signaling in a direct,
long-range regulation of the BMP antagonist Gremlin. In contrast, a long-range
silencer cassette downstream from Hand2 likely mediates Gli3 repression in the
anterior limb. These studies provide the first comprehensive characterization of 
the transcriptional output of a Shh-patterning process in the mammalian embryo
and a framework for elaborating regulatory networks in the developing limb.

PMCID: PMC2559910
PMID: 18832070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2008 Aug;28(9):1559-61, 1567.

[Plasmid-mediated miRNA-1-2 specifically inhibits Hand2 protein expression in
H9C2 cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Shan ZX(1), Lin QX, Deng CY, Zhou ZL, Zhang XC, Fu YH, Yu XY.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center of Medical Sciences, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital,
Guangzhou, China. zhixinshan@yahoo.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To construct an eukaryotic expression vector for miRNA-1-2 that can be
expressed in rat H9C2 cardiomyocytes.
METHODS: The precursor miRNA (pre-miRNA) DNA template for miRNA-1-2 was designed 
and generated by PCR amplification. The DNA template was inserted into the
hairpin RNA expression vector pSilence-4.1-neo and identified by DNA sequencing
analysis. The recombinant plasmid DNA was then transfected into H9C2 cells via
Lipofectamine, and the green fluorescence protein expression vector pEGFP-N3
served as the transfection marker. Twenty-four hours after transfection, the
total cellular RNA was extracted using TRIzol reagent, and thermoscript reverse
transcriptase (RT)-PCR was performed to determine miRNA-1-2 precursor expression.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: DNA sequencing indicated that the miR-1-2 expression
plasmid was correctly constructed. The precursor miRNA-1-2 was successfully
expressed in the H9C2 cells, and the expression of Hand2 protein could be
efficiently inhibited by miRNA-1.

PMID: 18819867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. EMBO Rep. 2008 Oct;9(10):1041-7. doi: 10.1038/embor.2008.161. Epub 2008 Aug 22.

HAND transcription factors are required for neonatal sympathetic neuron survival.

Doxakis E(1), Howard L, Rohrer H, Davies AM.

Author information: 
(1)Basic Neurosciences Division, Biomedical Research Foundation of the Academy of
Athens, Soranou Efesiou 4, Athens, Greece.

Expression of the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor HAND2 begins early 
in sympathetic neuron development and is essential for the differentiation of
noradrenergic neurons. Here, we show that the expression of HAND2 and related
HAND1 are maintained in sympathetic neurons throughout fetal and postnatal
development when these neurons depend on target-derived nerve growth factor (NGF)
for survival. Short interfering RNA knockdown of endogenous HAND2 and, to a
lesser extent, HAND1 in neonatal sympathetic neurons cultured with NGF, reduced
the expression of the NGF receptor tyrosine kinase TrkA (tropomyosin-related
kinase A), as well as neuronal survival. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis
showed that NGF promotes HAND2 binding to the TrkA minimal enhancer and that
transfection of sympathetic neurons with a TrkA expression plasmid rescued the
neurons from HAND knockdown. These findings show that HAND transcription factors 
have a crucial function in sustaining the survival of neonatal sympathetic
neurons with NGF by a feed-forward loop that maintains the expression of TrkA.

PMCID: PMC2572120
PMID: 18724272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. BMC Dev Biol. 2008 Jul 30;8:75. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-8-75.

Msx1 and Msx2 are required for endothelial-mesenchymal transformation of the
atrioventricular cushions and patterning of the atrioventricular myocardium.

Chen YH(1), Ishii M, Sucov HM, Maxson RE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, USC/Norris Comprehensive
Cancer Center and Hospital, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA 90089-9176, USA. yihuiche@gate.sinica.edu.tw

BACKGROUND: Msx1 and Msx2, which belong to the highly conserved Nk family of
homeobox genes, display overlapping expression patterns and redundant functions
in multiple tissues and organs during vertebrate development. Msx1 and Msx2 have 
well-documented roles in mediating epithelial-mesenchymal interactions during
organogenesis. Given that both Msx1 and Msx2 are crucial downstream effectors of 
Bmp signaling, we investigated whether Msx1 and Msx2 are required for the
Bmp-induced endothelial-mesenchymal transformation (EMT) during atrioventricular 
(AV) valve formation.
RESULTS: While both Msx1-/- and Msx2-/- single homozygous mutant mice exhibited
normal valve formation, we observed hypoplastic AV cushions and malformed AV
valves in Msx1-/-; Msx2-/- mutants, indicating redundant functions of Msx1 and
Msx2 during AV valve morphogenesis. In Msx1/2 null mutant AV cushions, we found
decreased Bmp2/4 and Notch1 signaling as well as reduced expression of Has2,
NFATc1 and Notch1, demonstrating impaired endocardial activation and EMT.
Moreover, perturbed expression of chamber-specific genes Anf, Tbx2, Hand1 and
Hand2 reveals mispatterning of the Msx1/2 double mutant myocardium and suggests
functions of Msx1 and Msx2 in regulating myocardial signals required for
remodelling AV valves and maintaining an undifferentiated state of the AV
myocardium.
CONCLUSION: Our findings demonstrate redundant roles of Msx1 and Msx2 in
regulating signals required for development of the AV myocardium and formation of
the AV valves.

PMCID: PMC2518925
PMID: 18667074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Dev Dyn. 2008 Aug;237(8):2147-57. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21621.

Xenopus zinc finger transcription factor IA1 (Insm1) expression marks
anteroventral noradrenergic neuron progenitors in Xenopus embryos.

Parlier D(1), Ariza A, Christulia F, Genco F, Vanhomwegen J, Kricha S, Souopgui
J, Bellefroid EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Embryologie Moléculaire, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Institut
de Biologie et de Médecine Moléculaires (IBMM), Gosselies, Belgium.

The evolutionarily conserved IA1 (Insm1) gene is strongly expressed in the
developing nervous system. Here, we show that IA1 is expressed during Xenopus
laevis embryogenesis in neural plate primary neurons as well as in a population
of uncharacterized anteroventral cells that form in front of the cement gland and
that we identified as noradrenergic neurons. We also show that the formation of
those anteroventral cells is dependent on BMPs and inhibited by Notch and that it
is regulated by the transcription factors Xash1, Phox2, and Hand2. Finally, we
provide functional evidence suggesting that IA1 may also play a role in their
formation. Together, our results reveal that IA1 constitutes a novel player
downstream of Xash1 in the formation of a previously unidentified population of
Xenopus noradrenergic primary neurons.

Copyright (c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18627098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Dev Biol. 2008 Aug 1;320(1):131-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.04.037. Epub 2008
May 8.

An absence of Twist1 results in aberrant cardiac neural crest morphogenesis.

Vincentz JW(1), Barnes RM, Rodgers R, Firulli BA, Conway SJ, Firulli AB.

Author information: 
(1)Riley Heart Research Center, Riley Hospital for Children, Department of
Pediatrics (Pediatric Cardiology), Indiana Medical School, 1044 W. Walnut St.,
Indianapolis, IN 46202-5225, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor Twist1 plays an essential role in
mesenchymal cell populations during embryonic development and in pathological
disease. Remodeling of the cardiac outflow tract (OFT) into the functionally
separate aortic arch and pulmonary trunk is dependent upon the dynamic,
coordinated contribution of multiple mesenchymal cell populations. Here, we
report that Twist1(-/-) mice exhibit OFTs that contain amorphic cellular nodules 
within their OFT endocardial cushions. The nodular mesenchyme expresses the
related bHLH factors Hand1 and Hand2, but reduced levels of the normal cushion
marker Periostin. Lineage mapping confirms that nodule cells are exclusively of
cardiac neural crest origin (cNCC), and are not ectopic cardiomyocytes or smooth 
muscle cells. These studies also reveal a delay in cNCC colonization of the OFT
cushions. Furthermore, these mapping studies uncover nodules in the pharyngeal
arches, and identify Twist1(-/-) neural crest cell defects within the dorsal
neural tube, which exhibits an expanded domain of Wnt1-Cre-lineage marked cells. 
Together, these data support a model where Twist1 is required both for proper
cNCC delamination, and for emigration from the dorsal neural tube and along cNCC 
migration pathways. Within the Twist1(-/-) neural crest cell populations that do 
emigrate to the OFT, a Hand-expressing subpopulation displays defective
maturation, tracking, and, presumably, cell-cell adhesion, further compromising
cNCC morphogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2572997
PMID: 18539270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Dev Biol. 2008 Jul 15;319(2):179-91. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.03.036. Epub 2008 
Apr 8.

Conditional deletion of Hand2 reveals critical functions in neurogenesis and cell
type-specific gene expression for development of neural crest-derived
noradrenergic sympathetic ganglion neurons.

Hendershot TJ(1), Liu H, Clouthier DE, Shepherd IT, Coppola E, Studer M, Firulli 
AB, Pittman DL, Howard MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Program in Neurosciences and Degenerative
Disease, University of Toledo Health Sciences Center, Toledo, OH 43614, USA.

Neural crest-derived structures that depend critically upon expression of the
basic helix-loop-helix DNA binding protein Hand2 for normal development include
craniofacial cartilage and bone, the outflow tract of the heart, cardiac cushion,
and noradrenergic sympathetic ganglion neurons. Loss of Hand2 is embryonic lethal
by E9.5, obviating a genetic analysis of its in-vivo function. We have overcome
this difficulty by specific deletion of Hand2 in neural crest-derived cells by
crossing our line of floxed Hand2 mice with Wnt1-Cre transgenic mice. Our
analysis of Hand2 knock-out in neural crest-derived cells reveals effects on
development in all neural crest-derived structures where Hand2 is expressed. In
the autonomic nervous system, conditional disruption of Hand2 results in a
significant and progressive loss of neurons as well as a significant loss of TH
expression. Hand2 affects generation of the neural precursor pool of cells by
affecting both the proliferative capacity of the progenitors as well as affecting
expression of Phox2a and Gata3, DNA binding proteins important for the cell
autonomous development of noradrenergic neurons. Our data suggest that Hand2 is a
multifunctional DNA binding protein affecting differentiation and cell
type-specific gene expression in neural crest-derived noradrenergic sympathetic
ganglion neurons. Hand2 has a pivotal function in a non-linear cross-regulatory
network of DNA binding proteins that affect cell autonomous control of
differentiation and cell type-specific gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2517160
PMID: 18501887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Dev Biol. 2008 Jun 1;318(1):52-64. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.02.061. Epub 2008
Mar 20.

Endoderm-derived Sonic hedgehog and mesoderm Hand2 expression are required for
enteric nervous system development in zebrafish.

Reichenbach B(1), Delalande JM, Kolmogorova E, Prier A, Nguyen T, Smith CM,
Holzschuh J, Shepherd IT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, University of Freiburg, Biology I,
Hauptstrasse 1, 79104 Freiburg, Germany.

The zebrafish enteric nervous system (ENS), like those of all other vertebrate
species, is principally derived from the vagal neural crest cells (NCC). The
developmental controls that govern the migration, proliferation and patterning of
the ENS precursors are not well understood. We have investigated the roles of
endoderm and Sonic hedgehog (SHH) in the development of the ENS. We show that
endoderm is required for the migration of ENS NCC from the vagal region to the
anterior end of the intestine. We show that the expression of shh and its
receptor ptc-1 correlate with the development of the ENS and demonstrate that
hedgehog (HH) signaling is required in two phases, a pre-enteric and an enteric
phase, for normal ENS development. We show that HH signaling regulates the
proliferation of vagal NCC and ENS precursors in vivo. We also show the zebrafish
hand2 is required for the normal development of the intestinal smooth muscle and 
the ENS. Furthermore we show that endoderm and HH signaling, but not hand2,
regulate gdnf expression in the intestine, highlighting a central role of
endoderm and SHH in patterning the intestine and the ENS.

PMCID: PMC2435286
PMID: 18436202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Dev Biol. 2008 May 15;317(2):497-507. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.02.048. Epub 2008
Mar 8.

Hoxd13 binds in vivo and regulates the expression of genes acting in key pathways
for early limb and skeletal patterning.

Salsi V(1), Vigano MA, Cocchiarella F, Mantovani R, Zappavigna V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Via G.
Campi 213/d, Modena 41100, Italy.

5' HoxD genes are required for the correct formation of limb skeletal elements.
Hoxd13, the most 5'-located HoxD gene, is important for patterning the most
distal limb region, and its mutation causes human limb malformation syndromes.
The mechanisms underlying the control of developmental processes by Hoxd13, and
by Hox genes in general, are still elusive, due to the limited knowledge on their
direct downstream target genes. We identified by ChIP-on-chip 248 known gene loci
bound invivo by Hoxd13. Genes relevant to limb patterning and skeletogenesis were
further analysed. We found that Hoxd13 binds invivo, in developing limbs, the
loci of Hand2, a gene crucial to limb AP axis patterning, of Meis1 and Meis2,
involved in PD patterning, of the Sfrp1, Barx1, and Fbn1 genes, involved in
skeletogenesis, and of the Dach1, Bmp2, Bmp4, andEmx2 genes. We show that Hoxd13 
misexpression in developing chick limbs alters the expression of the majority of 
these genes, supporting the conclusion that Hoxd13 directly regulates their
transcription. Our results indicate that 5' Hox proteins regulate directly both
key genes for early limb AP and PD axis patterning and genes involved, at later
stages, in skeletal patterning.

PMID: 18407260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. PLoS One. 2008 Mar 12;3(3):e1789. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0001789.

Cardiomyocyte formation by skeletal muscle-derived multi-myogenic stem cells
after transplantation into infarcted myocardium.

Tamaki T(1), Akatsuka A, Okada Y, Uchiyama Y, Tono K, Wada M, Hoshi A, Iwaguro H,
Iwasaki H, Oyamada A, Asahara T.

Author information: 
(1)Muscle Physiology & Cell Biology Unit, Tokai University School of Medicine,
Isehara, Kanagawa, Japan. tamaki@is.icc.u-tokai.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Cellular cardiomyoplasty for myocardial infarction has been developed
using various cell types. However, complete differentiation and/or
trans-differentiation into cardiomyocytes have never occurred in these transplant
studies, whereas functional contributions were reported.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Skeletal muscle interstitium-derived CD34(+)/CD45(-) (Sk-34)
cells were purified from green fluorescent protein transgenic mice by
flowcytometory. Cardiac differentiation of Sk-34 cells was examined by in vitro
clonal culture and co-culture with embryonic cardiomyocytes, and in vivo
transplantation into a nude rat myocardial infarction (MI) model (left
ventricle). Lower relative expression of cardiomyogenic transcription factors,
such as GATA-4, Nkx2-5, Isl-1, Mef2 and Hand2, was seen in clonal cell culture.
However, vigorous expression of these factors was seen on co-culture with
embryonic cardiomyocytes, together with formation of gap-junctions and
synchronous contraction following sphere-like colony formation. At 4 weeks after 
transplantation of freshly isolated Sk-34 cells, donor cells exhibited typical
cardiomyocyte structure with formation of gap-junctions, as well as intercalated 
discs and desmosomes, between donor and recipient and/or donor and donor cells.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis detecting the rat and mouse
genomic DNA and immunoelectron microscopy using anti-GFP revealed donor-derived
cells. Transplanted Sk-34 cells were incorporated into infarcted portions of
recipient muscles and contributed to cardiac reconstitution. Significant
improvement in left ventricular function, as evaluated by transthoracic
echocardiography and micro-tip conductance catheter, was also observed.
CONCLUSIONS AND SIGNIFICANCE: Skeletal muscle-derived multipotent Sk-34 cells
that can give rise to skeletal and smooth muscle cells as reported previously,
also give rise to cardiac muscle cells as multi-myogenic stem cells, and thus are
a potential source for practical cellular cardiomyoplasty.

PMCID: PMC2262151
PMID: 18335059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Biol Chem. 2008 Apr 25;283(17):11841-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M702563200. Epub 2008 
Feb 25.

HIF-1alpha signaling upstream of NKX2.5 is required for cardiac development in
Xenopus.

Nagao K(1), Taniyama Y, Kietzmann T, Doi T, Komuro I, Morishita R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Gene Therapy, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka
University, Suita 565-0871, Japan.

HIF-1alpha is originally identified as a transcription factor that activates gene
expression in response to hypoxia. In metazoans, HIF-1alpha functions as a master
regulator of oxygen homeostasis and regulates adaptive responses to change in
oxygen tension during embryogenesis, tissue ischemia, and tumorigenesis. Because 
Hif-1alpha-deficient mice exhibit a number of developmental defects, the precise 
role of HIF-1alpha in early cardiac morphogenesis has been uncertain. Therefore, 
to clarify the role of HIF-1alpha in heart development, we investigated the
effect of knockdown of HIF-1alpha in Xenopus embryos using antisense morpholino
oligonucleotide microinjection techniques. Knockdown of HIF-1alpha resulted in
defects of cardiogenesis. Whole mount in situ hybridization for cardiac troponin 
I (cTnI) showed the two separated populations of cardiomyocytes, which is
indicative of cardia bifida, in HIF-1alpha-depleted embryos. Furthermore, the
depletion of HIF-1alpha led to the reduction in cTnI expression, suggesting the
correlation between HIF-1alpha and cardiac differentiation. We further examined
the expression of several heart markers, nkx2.5, gata4, tbx5, bmp4, hand1, and
hand2 in HIF-1alpha-depleted embryos. Among them, the expression of nkx2.5 was
significantly reduced. Luciferase reporter assay using the Nkx2.5 promoter showed
that knockdown of HIF-1alpha decreased its promoter activity. The cardiac
abnormality in the HIF-1alpha-depleted embryo was restored with co-injection of
nkx2.5 mRNA. Collectively, these findings reveal that HIF-1alpha-regulated nkx2.5
expression is required for heart development in Xenopus.

PMID: 18303027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Mech Dev. 2008 May-Jun;125(5-6):517-26. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2008.01.001. Epub 2008
Jan 11.

Polydactyly in the mouse mutant Doublefoot involves altered Gli3 processing and
is caused by a large deletion in cis to Indian hedgehog.

Babbs C(1), Furniss D, Morriss-Kay GM, Wilkie AO.

Author information: 
(1)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, OX3 9DS, UK.

The mouse mutant Doublefoot (Dbf) shows preaxial polydactyly with 6-9
triphalangeal digits in all four limbs and additional abnormalities including a
broadened skull, hydrocephalus, and a thickened, kinked tail. The autopod
undergoes a characteristic expansion between late embryonic day (E) 10.5 and
E11.5, following the onset of ectopic Indian hedgehog (Ihh) expression in the
entire distal mesenchyme, except for the zone of polarising activity (ZPA), at
E10.5. We show here that limb prepattern, as indicated by expression of Gli3 and 
Hand2 at E9.5 is unaffected by the mutation. As both Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and Ihh
expression are present in Dbf limb buds at E10.5, we generated Dbf/(+);Shh(-/-)
mutants to analyse the effects of different patterns of Hedgehog activity on the 
limb phenotype and molecular differentiation. Dbf/(+) embryos lacking Shh showed 
postaxial as well as preaxial polydactyly, and the Ihh expression domain extended
posteriorly into the domain in which Shh is normally expressed, indicating loss
of ZPA identity. Differences in gene expression patterns in wild type, single and
compound mutants were associated with differences in Gli3 processing: an
increased ratio of Gli3 activator to Gli3 repressor was observed in the anterior 
half of Dbf/(+) limb buds and in both anterior and posterior halves of compound
mutant limb buds at E10.5. To identify the cause of Ihh misregulation in Dbf/(+) 
mutants, we sequenced approximately 20 kb of genomic DNA around Ihh but found no 
pathogenic changes. However, Southern blot analysis revealed a approximately 600 
kb deletion disrupting or deleting 25 transcripts, starting 50 kb 5' of Ihh and
extending away from the gene. The large deletion interval may explain the wide
range of abnormalities in Dbf/(+) mutants. However, we did not detect anologous
deletions in cases of Laurin-Sandrow syndrome, a human disorder that shows
phenotypic similarities to Dbf.

PMCID: PMC2428104
PMID: 18272352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Development. 2008 Feb;135(3):473-81. Epub 2007 Dec 19.

Insm1 (IA-1) is a crucial component of the transcriptional network that controls 
differentiation of the sympatho-adrenal lineage.

Wildner H(1), Gierl MS, Strehle M, Pla P, Birchmeier C.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Delbrück-Centrum for Molecular Medicine, Robert-Rössle-Strasse 10, 13125
Berlin, Germany.

Insm1 (IA-1) encodes a Zn-finger factor that is expressed in the developing
nervous system. We demonstrate here that the development of the sympatho-adrenal 
lineage is severely impaired in Insm1 mutant mice. Differentiation of
sympatho-adrenal precursors, as assessed by the expression of neuronal
subtype-specific genes such as Th and Dbh, is delayed in a pronounced manner,
which is accompanied by a reduced proliferation. Sympathetic neurons eventually
overcome the differentiation blockade and mature correctly, but sympathetic
ganglia remain small. By contrast, terminal differentiation of adrenal chromaffin
cells does not occur. The transcription factors Mash1 (Ascl1), Phox2a, Gata3 and 
Hand2 (previously dHand) control the differentiation of sympatho-adrenal
precursor cells, and their deregulated expression in Insm1 mutant mice
demonstrates that Insm1 acts in the transcriptional network that controls
differentiation of this lineage. Pronounced similarities between Mash1 and Insm1 
phenotypes are apparent, which suggests that Insm1 might mediate aspects of Mash1
function in the subtype-specific differentiation of sympatho-adrenal precursors. 
Noradrenaline is the major catecholamine produced by developing sympatho-adrenal 
cells and is required for fetal survival. We demonstrate that the fetal lethality
of Insm1 mutant mice is caused by catecholamine deficiency, which highlights the 
importance of Insm1 in the development of the sympatho-adrenal lineage.

PMID: 18094025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2007 Dec;19(6):618-27. Epub 2007 Nov 26.

Serum response factor micromanaging cardiogenesis.

Niu Z(1), Li A, Zhang SX, Schwartz RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cardiovascular Sciences, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
77030, USA.

Serum response factor (SRF), a cardiac-enriched transcription factor, is required
for the appearance of beating sarcomeres in the heart. SRF may also direct the
expression of microRNAs (miRs) that inhibit the expression of cardiac regulatory 
factors. The recent knockout of miR-1-2, an SRF gene target, showed defective
heart development, caused in part by the induction of GATA6, Irx4/5, and Hand2,
that may alter cardiac morphogenesis, channel activity, and cell cycling. SRF and
cofactors play an obligatory role in cardiogenesis, as major determinants of
myocyte differentiation not only by regulating the biogenesis of muscle
contractile proteins but also by driving the expression of silencer miRNA.

PMCID: PMC2735128
PMID: 18023168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Dev Biol. 2007 Oct 1;310(1):154-68. Epub 2007 Aug 3.

Hand transcription factors cooperatively regulate development of the distal
midline mesenchyme.

Barbosa AC(1), Funato N, Chapman S, McKee MD, Richardson JA, Olson EN, Yanagisawa
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA.

Hand proteins are evolutionally conserved basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
transcription factors implicated in development of neural crest-derived tissues, 
heart and limb. Hand1 is expressed in the distal (ventral) zone of the branchial 
arches, whereas the Hand2 expression domain extends ventrolaterally to occupy
two-thirds of the mandibular arch. To circumvent the early embryonic lethality of
Hand1 or Hand2-null embryos and to examine their roles in neural crest
development, we generated mice with neural crest-specific deletion of Hand1 and
various combinations of mutant alleles of Hand2. Ablation of Hand1 alone in
neural crest cells did not affect embryonic development, however, further
removing one Hand2 allele or deleting the ventrolateral branchial arch expression
of Hand2 led to a novel phenotype presumably due to impaired growth of the distal
midline mesenchyme. Although we failed to detect changes in proliferation or
apoptosis between the distal mandibular arch of wild-type and Hand1/Hand2
compound mutants at embryonic day (E)10.5, dysregulation of Pax9, Msx2 and Prx2
was observed in the distal mesenchyme at E12.5. In addition, the inter-dental
mesenchyme and distal symphysis of Meckel's cartilage became hypoplastic,
resulting in the formation of a single fused lower incisor within the hypoplastic
fused mandible. These findings demonstrate the importance of Hand transcription
factors in the transcriptional circuitry of craniofacial and tooth development.

PMCID: PMC2270479
PMID: 17764670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Dev Cell. 2007 Aug;13(2):254-67.

Vessel and blood specification override cardiac potential in anterior mesoderm.

Schoenebeck JJ(1), Keegan BR, Yelon D.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Program and Department of Cell Biology, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, New
York, NY 10016, USA.

Organ progenitors arise within organ fields, embryonic territories that are
larger than the regions required for organ formation. Little is known about the
regulatory pathways that define organ field boundaries and thereby limit organ
size. Here we identify a mechanism for restricting heart size through confinement
of the developmental potential of the heart field. Via fate mapping in zebrafish,
we locate cardiac progenitors within hand2-expressing mesoderm and demonstrate
that hand2 potentiates cardiac differentiation within this region. Beyond the
rostral boundary of hand2 expression, we find progenitors of vessel and blood
lineages. In embryos deficient in vessel and blood specification, rostral
mesoderm undergoes a fate transformation and generates ectopic cardiomyocytes.
Therefore, induction of vessel and blood specification represses cardiac
specification and delimits the capacity of the heart field. This regulatory
relationship between cardiovascular pathways suggests strategies for directing
progenitor cell differentiation to facilitate cardiac regeneration.

PMCID: PMC2709538
PMID: 17681136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Biol Chem. 2007 Sep 14;282(37):27536-46. Epub 2007 Jul 25.

Mutations within helix I of Twist1 result in distinct limb defects and variation 
of DNA binding affinities.

Firulli BA(1), Redick BA, Conway SJ, Firulli AB.

Author information: 
(1)Herman B. Wells Center for Pediatric Research, James Whitcomb Riley Hospital
for Children, Department of Pediatrics, Division of Cardiology, Indiana Medical
School, 1044 E. Walnut, Indianapolis, IN 46202-5225, USA.

Twist1 is a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) factor that plays an important role in 
limb development. Haploinsufficiency of Twist1 results in polydactyly via the
inability of Twist1 to antagonistically regulate the related factor Hand2. The
mechanism modulating Twist1-Hand2 antagonism is via phosphoregulation of
conserved threonine and serine residues in helix I of the bHLH domain.
Phosphoregulation alters the dimerization affinities for both proteins. Here we
show that the expression of Twist1 and Twist1 phosphoregulation mutants results
in distinct limb phenotypes in mice. In addition to dimer regulation, Twist1
phosphoregulation affects the DNA binding affinities of Twist1 in a
partner-dependent and cis-element-dependent manner. In order to gain a better
understanding of the specific Twist1 transcriptional complexes that function
during limb morphogensis, we employ a series of Twist1-tethered dimers that
include the known Twist1 partners, E12 and Hand2, as well as a tethered Twist1
homodimer. We show that these dimers behave in a manner similar to monomerically 
expressed bHLH factors and result in distinct limb phenotypes that correlate well
with those observed from the limb expression of Twist1 and Twist1
phosphoregulation mutants. Taken together, this study shows that the Twist1 dimer
affinity for a given partner can modulate the DNA binding affinity and that
Twist1 dimer choice determines phenotypic outcome during limb development.

PMCID: PMC2556885
PMID: 17652084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Chin Med J (Engl). 2007 Jul 5;120(13):1166-71.

Effect of dihydrofolate reductase gene knock-down on the expression of heart and 
neural crest derivatives expressed transcript 2 in zebrafish cardiac development.

Sun SN(1), Gui YH, Wang YX, Qian LX, Jiang Q, Liu D, Song HY.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China.

BACKGROUND: Folic acid is very important for embryonic development and
dihydrofolate reductase is one of the key enzymes in the process of folic acid
performing its biological function. Therefore, the dysfunction of dihydrofolate
reductase can inhibit the function of folic acid and finally cause the
developmental malformations. In this study, we observed the abnormal cardiac
phenotypes in dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) gene knock-down zebrafish embryos,
investigated the effect of DHFR on the expression of heart and neural crest
derivatives expressed transcript 2 (HAND2) and explored the possible mechanism of
DHFR knock-down inducing zebrafish cardiac malformations.
METHODS: Morpholino oligonucleotides were microinjected into fertilized eggs to
knock down the functions of DHFR or HAND2. Full length of HAND2 mRNA which was
transcribed in vitro was microinjected into fertilized eggs to overexpress HAND2.
The cardiac morphologies, the heart rates and the ventricular shortening fraction
were observed and recorded under the microscope at 48 hours post fertilization.
Whole-mount in situ hybridization and real-time PCR were performed to detect
HAND2 expression.
RESULTS: DHFR or HAND2 knock-down caused the cardiac malformation in zebrafish.
The expression of HAND2 was obviously reduced in DHFR knock-down embryos (P <
0.05). Microinjecting HAND2 mRNA into fertilized eggs can induce HAND2
overexpression. HAND2 overexpression rescued the cardiac malformation phenotypes 
of DHFR knock-down embryos.
CONCLUSIONS: DHFR plays a crucial role in cardiac development. The
down-regulation of HAND2 caused by DHFR knock-down is the possible mechanism of
DHFR knock-down inducing the cardiac malformation.

PMID: 17637246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Development. 2007 Aug;134(15):2871-9. Epub 2007 Jul 4.

Early developmental specification of the thyroid gland depends on han-expressing 
surrounding tissue and on FGF signals.

Wendl T(1), Adzic D, Schoenebeck JJ, Scholpp S, Brand M, Yelon D, Rohr KB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Developmental Biology, University of Cologne, Gyrhofstrasse 17, 
50923 Köln, Germany.

The thyroid is an endocrine gland in all vertebrates that develops from the
ventral floor of the anterior pharyngeal endoderm. Unravelling the molecular
mechanisms of thyroid development helps to understand congenital hypothyroidism
caused by the absence or reduction of this gland in newborn humans. Severely
reduced or absent thyroid-specific developmental genes concomitant with the
complete loss of the functional gland in the zebrafish hands off (han, hand2)
mutant reveals the han gene as playing a novel, crucial role in thyroid
development. han-expressing tissues surround the thyroid primordium throughout
development. Fate mapping reveals that, even before the onset of thyroid-specific
developmental gene expression, thyroid precursor cells are in close contact with 
han-expressing cardiac lateral plate mesoderm. Grafting experiments show that han
is required in surrounding tissue, and not in a cell-autonomous manner, for
thyroid development. Loss of han expression in the branchial arches and
arch-associated cells after morpholino knock-down of upstream regulator genes
does not impair thyroid development, indicating that other han-expressing
structures, most probably cardiac mesoderm, are responsible for the thyroid
defects in han mutants. The zebrafish ace (fgf8) mutant has similar thyroid
defects as han mutants, and chemical suppression of fibroblast growth factor
(FGF) signalling confirms that this pathway is required for thyroid development. 
FGF-soaked beads can restore thyroid development in han mutants, showing that
FGFs act downstream of or in parallel to han. These data suggest that loss of
FGF-expressing tissue in han mutants is responsible for the thyroid defects.

PMID: 17611226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Clin Invest. 2007 Jul;117(7):1794-804.

Wnt/beta-catenin signaling promotes expansion of Isl-1-positive cardiac
progenitor cells through regulation of FGF signaling.

Cohen ED(1), Wang Z, Lepore JJ, Lu MM, Taketo MM, Epstein DJ, Morrisey EE.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Institute, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The anterior heart field (AHF), which contributes to the outflow tract and right 
ventricle of the heart, is defined in part by expression of the LIM homeobox
transcription factor Isl-1. The importance of Isl-1-positive cells in cardiac
development and homeostasis is underscored by the finding that these cells are
required for cardiac development and act as cardiac stem/progenitor cells within 
the postnatal heart. However, the molecular pathways regulating these cells'
expansion and differentiation are poorly understood. We show that Isl-1-positive 
AHF progenitor cells in mice were responsive to Wnt/beta-catenin signaling, and
these responsive cells contributed to the outflow tract and right ventricle of
the heart. Loss of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in the AHF caused defective outflow
tract and right ventricular development with a decrease in Isl-1-positive
progenitors and loss of FGF signaling. Conversely, Wnt gain of function in these 
cells led to expansion of Isl-1-positive progenitors with a concomitant increase 
in FGF signaling through activation of a specific set of FGF ligands including
FGF3, FGF10, FGF16, and FGF20. These data reveal what we believe to be a novel
Wnt-FGF signaling axis required for expansion of Isl-1-positive AHF progenitors
and suggest future therapies to increase the number and function of these cells
for cardiac regeneration.

PMCID: PMC1891000
PMID: 17607356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Dev Biol. 2007 Aug 15;308(2):421-37. Epub 2007 Jun 4.

Msx1 and Msx2 regulate survival of secondary heart field precursors and
post-migratory proliferation of cardiac neural crest in the outflow tract.

Chen YH(1), Ishii M, Sun J, Sucov HM, Maxson RE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer 
Center and Hospital, University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine,
1441 Eastlake Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

Msx1 and Msx2 are highly conserved, Nk-related homeodomain transcription factors 
that are essential for a variety of tissue-tissue interactions during vertebrate 
organogenesis. Here we show that combined deficiencies of Msx1 and Msx2 cause
conotruncal anomalies associated with malalignment of the cardiac outflow tract
(OFT). Msx1 and Msx2 play dual roles in outflow tract morphogenesis by both
protecting secondary heart field (SHF) precursors against apoptosis and
inhibiting excessive proliferation of cardiac neural crest, endothelial and
myocardial cells in the conotruncal cushions. During incorporation of SHF
precursors into the OFT myocardium, ectopic apoptosis in the Msx1-/-; Msx2-/-
mutant SHF is associated with reduced expression of Hand1 and Hand2, which from
work on Hand1 and Hand2 mutants may be functionally important in the inhibition
of apoptosis in Msx1/2 mutants. Later during aorticopulmonary septation,
excessive proliferation in the OFT cushion mesenchyme and myocardium of Msx1-/-; 
Msx2-/- mutants is associated with premature down-regulation of p27(KIP1), an
inhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinases. Diminished accretion of SHF precursors to 
the elongating OFT myocardium and excessive accumulation of mesenchymal cells in 
the conotruncal cushions may work together to perturb the rotation of the truncus
arteriosus, leading to OFT malalignment defects including double-outlet right
ventricle, overriding aorta and pulmonary stenosis.

PMID: 17601530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Dev Biol. 2007 Aug 1;308(1):144-57. Epub 2007 May 24.

mef2ca is required in cranial neural crest to effect Endothelin1 signaling in
zebrafish.

Miller CT(1), Swartz ME, Khuu PA, Walker MB, Eberhart JK, Kimmel CB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, 1254 University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA.
ctm@stanford.edu

Mef2 genes encode highly conserved transcription factors involved in somitic and 
cardiac mesoderm development in diverse bilaterians. Vertebrates have multiple
mef2 genes. In mice, mef2c is required for heart and vascular development. We
show that a zebrafish mef2c gene (mef2ca) is required in cranial neural crest
(CNC) for proper head skeletal patterning. mef2ca mutants have head skeletal
phenotypes resembling those seen upon partial loss-of-function of endothelin1
(edn1). Furthermore, mef2ca interacts genetically with edn1, arguing that mef2ca 
functions within the edn1 pathway. mef2ca is expressed in CNC and this expression
does not require edn1 signaling. Mosaic analyses reveal that mef2ca is required
in CNC for pharyngeal skeletal morphogenesis. Proper expression of many
edn1-dependent target genes including hand2, bapx1, and gsc, depends upon mef2ca 
function. mef2ca plays a critical role in establishing the proper nested
expression patterns of dlx genes. dlx5a and dlx6a, known Edn1 targets, are
downregulated in mef2ca mutant pharyngeal arch CNC. Surprisingly, dlx4b and dlx3b
are oppositely affected in mef2ca mutants. dlx4b expression is abolished while
the edn1-dependent dlx3b is ectopically expressed in more dorsal CNC. Together
our results support a model in which CNC cells require mef2ca downstream of edn1 
signaling for proper craniofacial development.

PMCID: PMC2148033
PMID: 17574232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Dev Biol. 2007 Jul 1;307(1):114-26. Epub 2007 Apr 27.

Hand2 determines the noradrenergic phenotype in the mouse sympathetic nervous
system.

Morikawa Y(1), D'Autréaux F, Gershon MD, Cserjesi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Tulane University, 2000 Percival
Stern Hall, New Orleans, LA 70118, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor Hand2 has been shown to
play a role in the development of the mammalian sympathetic nervous system (SNS);
however, its precise role could not be uncovered because Hand2 is required for
early embryonic survival. We therefore generated a conditional Hand2 knockout
mouse line by excising Hand2 in Wnt1-Cre-expressing neural crest-derived cells.
These mice die at 12.5 dpc with embryos showing severe cardiovascular and facial 
defects. Crest-derived cells, however, populate sites of SNS development and
proliferate normally. Sympathetic precursors differentiate into neurons and
express the pan-neuronal markers, beta3-tubulin (Tuj1) and Hu showing that Hand2 
is not essential for SNS neuronal differentiation. To determine whether Hand2
regulates noradrenergic differentiation, the levels of the norepinephrine
biosynthetic enzymes, tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) and dopamine beta-hydroxylase
(DBH) was examined. Both enzymes were dramatically reduced in mutant embryos
suggesting that the primary role of Hand2 in the SNS is determination of neuronal
phenotype. Loss of Hand2 did not affect the expression of other members of the
transcriptional circuit regulating SNS development, including Phox2a/b, Mash1 and
Gata2/3; however, Hand2 was required for Hand1 expression. Our data suggest that 
the major role of Hand2 during SNS development is to permit sympathetic neurons
to acquire a catecholaminergic phenotype.

PMCID: PMC1952239
PMID: 17531968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Development. 2007 Jun;134(12):2237-49. Epub 2007 May 16.

Hand2 is necessary for terminal differentiation of enteric neurons from
crest-derived precursors but not for their migration into the gut or for
formation of glia.

D'Autréaux F(1), Morikawa Y, Cserjesi P, Gershon MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University, P&S, New York, 
NY 10032, USA.

Hand genes encode basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors that are expressed
in the developing gut, where their function is unknown. We now report that
enteric Hand2 expression is limited to crest-derived cells, whereas Hand1
expression is restricted to muscle and interstitial cells of Cajal. Hand2 is
developmentally regulated and is intranuclear in precursors but cytoplasmic in
neurons. Neurons develop in explants from wild-type but not Hand2(-/-) bowel,
although, in both, crest-derived cells are present and glia arise. Similarly,
small interfering RNA (siRNA) silencing of Hand2 in enteric crest-derived cells
prevents neuronal development. Terminally differentiated enteric neurons do not
develop after conditional inactivation of Hand2 in migrating crest-derived cells;
nevertheless, conditional Hand2 inactivation does not prevent precursors from
expressing early neural markers. We suggest that enteric neuronal development
occurs in stages and that Hand2 expression is required for terminal
differentiation but not for precursors to enter the neuronal lineage.

PMID: 17507395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Dev Cell. 2007 Apr;12(4):645-52.

The transcription factor MEF2C is required for craniofacial development.

Verzi MP(1), Agarwal P, Brown C, McCulley DJ, Schwarz JJ, Black BL.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute and Department of Biochemistry and
Biophysics, Mail Code 2240, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

MEF2 transcription factors are well-established regulators of muscle development.
We have discovered an unanticipated role for MEF2C in the neural crest, where
tissue-specific inactivation results in neonatal lethality due to severe
craniofacial defects. We show that MEF2C is required for expression of the Dlx5, 
Dlx6, and Hand2 transcription factor genes in the branchial arches, and we
identify a branchial arch-specific enhancer in the Dlx5/6 locus, which is
activated synergistically by MEF2C and Dlx5, demonstrating that these factors
interact to induce transcription. Mef2c and Dlx5/6 also interact genetically.
Mice heterozygous for either Dlx5/6 or Mef2c are normal at birth and survive to
weaning. By contrast, heterozygosity for both Mef2c and Dlx5/6 results in
defective palate development and neonatal lethality. Taken together, the studies 
presented here define a feed-forward transcriptional circuit between the MADS-box
transcription factor MEF2C and the homeodomain transcription factors Dlx5 and
Dlx6 in craniofacial development.

PMCID: PMC1920108
PMID: 17420000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Dev Dyn. 2007 Jan;236(1):93-105.

Expression of Hand2 is sufficient for neurogenesis and cell type-specific gene
expression in the enteric nervous system.

Hendershot TJ(1), Liu H, Sarkar AA, Giovannucci DR, Clouthier DE, Abe M, Howard
MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences and Program in Cellular and Molecular
Neurobiology, Medical University of Ohio, Toledo, Ohio 43614, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix DNA binding protein Hand2 is expressed in neural
crest-derived precursors of enteric neurons and has been shown to affect both
neurogenesis and neurotransmitter specification of noradrenergic sympathetic
ganglion neurons. In the current study, our goal was to determine whether Hand2
affects neurogenesis and/or expression of vasoactive intestinal polypeptide and
choline acetyltransferase in developing enteric neurons. Gain-of-function of
Hand2 in HNK-1(+) immmunoselected precursor cells resulted in increased
neurogenesis. The number of neurons expressing vasoactive intestinal polypeptide 
increased in response to Hand2 overexpression although choline acetyltransferase 
was not affected. Targeted deletion of Hand2 in neural crest cells resulted in
loss of all neurons expressing vasoactive intestinal polypeptide along the length
of the gastrointestinal tract, patterning defects in the myenteric plexus of the 
stomach, and altered number and morphology of neurons expressing TH. Our data
demonstrate that expression of Hand2 is sufficient and necessary for neurogenesis
and expression of a subset of cell type-specific markers in the developing
enteric nervous system.

PMID: 17075884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Circulation. 2006 Oct 24;114(17):1883-91.

Right ventricular function and failure: report of a National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute working group on cellular and molecular mechanisms of right heart
failure.

Voelkel NF(1), Quaife RA, Leinwand LA, Barst RJ, McGoon MD, Meldrum DR, Dupuis J,
Long CS, Rubin LJ, Smart FW, Suzuki YJ, Gladwin M, Denholm EM, Gail DB; National 
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Working Group on Cellular and Molecular
Mechanisms of Right Heart Failure.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Hypertension Center, University of Colorado at Denver and Health
Sciences Center, 4200 E Ninth Ave, MC: C272, Denver, CO 80262, USA.
norbert.voelkel@uchsc.edu

PMID: 17060398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Development. 2006 Oct;133(20):4015-24.

The bHLH transcription factor hand2 is essential for noradrenergic
differentiation of sympathetic neurons.

Lucas ME(1), Müller F, Rüdiger R, Henion PD, Rohrer H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Neurobiology, Molecular, Cellular and Developmental
Biology Program, Department of Neuroscience, The Ohio State University, 105
Rightmire Hall, 1060 Carmack Road, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor Hand2, together with Ascl1,
Phox2a, Phox2b and Gata2/Gata3, is induced by bone morphogenetic proteins in
neural crest-derived precursor cells during sympathetic neuron generation. Hand2 
overexpression experiments and the analysis of its function at the Dbh promotor
implicated Hand2 in the control of noradrenergic gene expression. Using the
zebrafish hand2 deletion mutant hands off, we have now investigated the
physiological role of hand2 in the development of sympathetic ganglia. In hands
off mutant embryos, sympathetic precursor cells aggregate to form normal
sympathetic ganglion primordia characterized by the expression of phox2b, phox2a 
and the achaete-scute family member zash1a/ascl1. The expression of the
noradrenergic marker genes th and dbh is strongly reduced, as well as the
transcription factors gata2 and tfap2a (Ap-2alpha). By contrast, generic neuronal
differentiation seems to be unaffected, as the expression of elavl3 (HuC) is not 
reduced in hands off sympathetic ganglia. These results demonstrate in vivo an
essential and selective function of hand2 for the noradrenergic differentiation
of sympathetic neurons, and implicates tfap2a and gata2 as downstream effectors.

PMID: 17008447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Development. 2006 Oct;133(19):3871-81. Epub 2006 Aug 30.

Gata3 participates in a complex transcriptional feedback network to regulate
sympathoadrenal differentiation.

Moriguchi T(1), Takako N, Hamada M, Maeda A, Fujioka Y, Kuroha T, Huber RE,
Hasegawa SL, Rao A, Yamamoto M, Takahashi S, Lim KC, Engel JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI 48109-0616, USA.

Gata3 mutant mice expire of noradrenergic deficiency by embryonic day (E) 11 and 
can be rescued pharmacologically or, as shown here, by restoring Gata3 function
specifically in sympathoadrenal (SA) lineages using the human DBH promoter to
direct Gata3 transgenic expression. In Gata3-null embryos, there was significant 
impairment of SA differentiation and increased apoptosis in adrenal chromaffin
cells and sympathetic neurons. Additionally, mRNA analyses of purified chromaffin
cells from Gata3 mutants show that levels of Mash1, Hand2 and Phox2b (postulated 
upstream regulators of Gata3) as well as terminally differentiated SA lineage
products (tyrosine hydroxylase, Th, and dopamine beta-hydroxylase, Dbh) are
markedly altered. However, SA lineage-specific restoration of Gata3 function in
the Gata3 mutant background rescues the expression phenotypes of the downstream, 
as well as the putative upstream genes. These data not only underscore the
hypothesis that Gata3 is essential for the differentiation and survival of SA
cells, but also suggest that their differentiation is controlled by mutually
reinforcing feedback transcriptional interactions between Gata3, Mash1, Hand2 and
Phox2b in the SA lineage.

PMID: 16943277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Br J Nutr. 2006 Sep;96(3):418-25.

Prevention of retinoic acid-induced early craniofacial abnormalities by folinic
acid and expression of endothelin-1/dHAND in the branchial arches in mouse.

Zhang Z(1), Xu Y, Li L, Han J, Zheng L, Liu P, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food Hygiene, Laboratory of Molecular Toxicology
and Developmental Molecular Biology, School of Public Health, Peking University, 
Beijing 100083, P.R. China.

Prevention of retinoic acid-induced craniofacial abnormalities by folinic acid,
and endothelin-1 (ET-1)/dHAND protein and mRNA expression were investigated in
mouse embryos using the whole embryo culture, streptavidin-biotin peroxidase
complex method, and whole-mount in situ hybridization. In the whole embryo
culture, 1.0 and 0.1 mm-folinic acid dose dependently prevented branchial region 
malformations and decreased defects by 93 % and 77 %, respectively. Folinic acid 
at concentrations of 1.0 and 0.1 mm significantly increased ET-1 and dHAND
protein expression levels compared to retinoic acid-exposed values in embryonic
branchial areas. Folinic acid also increased ET-1 and dHAND mRNA levels in the
same region. The present results suggest that folinic acid may prevent retinoic
acid-induced craniofacial abnormalities via increasing ET-1 and dHAND levels in
the branchial region during the organogenic period.

PMID: 16925845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Development. 2006 Jul;133(14):2649-59. Epub 2006 Jun 14.

Induction and prepatterning of the zebrafish pectoral fin bud requires axial
retinoic acid signaling.

Gibert Y(1), Gajewski A, Meyer A, Begemann G.

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl für Zoologie und Evolutionsbiologie, Department of Biology,
University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany.

Vertebrate forelimbs arise as bilateral appendages from the lateral plate
mesoderm (LPM). Mutants in aldh1a2 (raldh2), an embryonically expressed gene
encoding a retinoic acid (RA)-synthesizing enzyme, have been used to show that
limb development and patterning of the limb bud are crucially dependent on RA
signaling. However, the timing and cellular origin of RA signaling in these
processes have remained poorly resolved. We have used genetics and chemical
modulators of RA signaling to resolve these issues in the zebrafish. By rescuing 
pectoral fin induction in the aldh1a2/neckless mutant with exogenous RA and by
blocking RA signaling in wild-type embryos, we find that RA acts as a permissive 
signal that is required during the six- to eight-somite stages for pectoral fin
induction. Cell-transplantation experiments show that RA production is not only
crucially required from flanking somites, but is sufficient to permit fin bud
initiation when the trunk mesoderm is genetically ablated. Under the latter
condition, intermediate mesoderm alone cannot induce the pectoral fin field in
the LPM. We further show that induction of the fin field is directly followed by 
a continued requirement for somite-derived RA signaling to establish a prepattern
of anteroposterior fates in the condensing fin mesenchyme. This process is
mediated by the maintained expression of the transcription factor hand2, through 
which the fin field is continuously posteriorized, and lasts up to several hours 
prior to limb-budding. Thus, RA signaling from flanking somites plays a dual
early role in the condensing limb bud mesenchyme.

PMID: 16774994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Clin Sci (Lond). 2006 Jul;111(1):35-46.

Molecular mechanisms controlling the coupled development of myocardium and
coronary vasculature.

Bhattacharya S(1), Macdonald ST, Farthing CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Oxford, Wellcome Trust
Centre for Human Genetics, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK.
shoumo.bhattacharya@well.ox.ac.uk

Cardiac failure affects 1.5% of the adult population and is predominantly caused 
by myocardial dysfunction secondary to coronary vascular insufficiency. Current
therapeutic strategies improve prognosis only modestly, as the primary cause --
loss of normally functioning cardiac myocytes -- is not being corrected. Adult
cardiac myocytes are unable to divide and regenerate to any significant extent
following injury. New cardiac myocytes are, however, created during embryogenesis
from progenitor cells and then by cell division from existing cardiac myocytes.
This process is intimately linked to the development of coronary vasculature from
progenitors originating in the endothelium, the proepicardial organ and neural
crest. In this review, we systematically evaluate approx. 90 mouse mutations that
impair heart muscle growth during development. These studies provide genetic
evidence for interactions between myocytes, endothelium and cells derived from
the proepicardial organ and the neural crest that co-ordinate myocardial and
coronary vascular development. Conditional knockout and transgenic rescue
experiments indicate that Vegfa, Bmpr1a (ALK3), Fgfr1/2, Mapk14 (p38), Hand1,
Hand2, Gata4, Zfpm2 (FOG2), Srf and Txnrd2 in cardiac myocytes, Rxra and Wt1 in
the proepicardial organ, EfnB2, Tek, Mapk7, Pten, Nf1 and Casp8 in the
endothelium, and Bmpr1a and Pax3 in neural crest cells are key molecules
controlling myocardial development. Coupling of myocardial and coronary
development is mediated by BMP (bone morphogenetic protein), FGF (fibroblast
growth factor) and VEGFA (vascular endothelial growth factor A) signalling, and
also probably involves hypoxia. Pharmacological targeting of these molecules and 
pathways could, in principle, be used to recreate the embryonic state and achieve
coupled myocardial and coronary vascular regeneration in failing hearts.

PMID: 16764556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Clin Dysmorphol. 2006 Jul;15(3):127-32.

The tale of a nail sign in chromosome 4q34 deletion syndrome.

Vogt J(1), Ryan E, Tischkowitz MD, Reardon W, Brueton LA.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Genetics Unit, Birmingham Women's Hospital, Edgbaston, West Midlands,
UK. julie.vogt@bwhct.nhs.uk

Relatively, few reports of deletions involving the distal long arm of chromosome 
4 (4q) exist. Five further cases are described and the findings are compared with
those in previous literature reports. Distal 4q deletions may be recognized by
the distinctive appearance of the fifth finger, which is stiff with a hypoplastic
distal phalanx and a hooked or volar nail. All cases with this characteristic
fifth finger anomaly appear to have deletions involving 4q34.

PMID: 16760729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 May 30;103(22):8414-8. Epub 2006 May 22.

Developmental basis for hind-limb loss in dolphins and origin of the cetacean
bodyplan.

Thewissen JG(1), Cohn MJ, Stevens LS, Bajpai S, Heyning J, Horton WE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Northeastern Ohio Universities College of Medicine,
Rootstown, OH 44272, USA. thewisse@neoucom.edu

Among mammals, modern cetaceans (whales, dolphins, and porpoises) are unusual in 
the absence of hind limbs. However, cetacean embryos do initiate hind-limb bud
development. In dolphins, the bud arrests and degenerates around the fifth
gestational week. Initial limb outgrowth in amniotes is maintained by two
signaling centers, the apical ectodermal ridge (AER) and the zone of polarizing
activity (ZPA). Our data indicate that the cetacean hind-limb bud forms an AER
and that this structure expresses Fgf8 initially, but that neither the AER nor
Fgf8 expression is maintained. Moreover, Sonic hedgehog (Shh), which mediates the
signaling activity of the ZPA, is absent from the dolphin hind-limb bud. We find 
that failure to establish a ZPA is associated with the absence of Hand2, an
upstream regulator of Shh. Interpreting our results in the context of both the
cetacean fossil record and the known functions of Shh suggests that reduction of 
Shh expression may have occurred approximately 41 million years ago and led to
the loss of distal limb elements. The total loss of Shh expression may account
for the further loss of hind-limb elements that occurred near the origin of the
modern suborders of cetaceans approximately 34 million years ago. Integration of 
paleontological and developmental data suggests that hind-limb size was reduced
by gradually operating microevolutionary changes. Long after locomotor function
was totally lost, modulation of developmental control genes eliminated most of
the hind-limb skeleton. Hence, macroevolutionary changes in gene expression did
not drive the initial reduction in hind-limb size.

PMCID: PMC1482506
PMID: 16717186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Dev Biol. 2006 Jul 1;295(1):194-205. Epub 2006 Mar 30.

Zebrafish furin mutants reveal intricacies in regulating Endothelin1 signaling in
craniofacial patterning.

Walker MB(1), Miller CT, Coffin Talbot J, Stock DW, Kimmel CB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, 1254 University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA.
mwa@stowers-institute.org

Endothelin1 (Edn1) signaling promotes ventral character to the facial skeleton.
In zebrafish edn1 mutants, the ventral jaw structures are severely reduced and
fused to their dorsal counterparts, with a loss of joints that normally form at
an intermediate dorsal-ventral position. Loss of function at another locus,
sturgeon, also yields joint losses, but only mild reductions in the ventral jaw
structures. We show that sturgeon encodes one of two orthologs of Furin present
in zebrafish, and that both furin genes may function partially redundantly to
activate Edn1 signaling. Supporting this hypothesis, early expression of
edn1-dependent genes is downregulated in sturgeon (furinA) mutants. Later in
development, expression of most of these genes recovers to near wild-type levels 
in furinA mutants but not in edn1 mutants. The recovery explains the less severe 
furinA mutant skeletal phenotype and suggests that late gene expression is
dependent on a critical level of Edn1 signaling not present in the more severe
edn1 mutants. However, expression defects in the intermediate joint-forming
domains in both mutants persist, explaining the joint losses observed later in
both mutants. We further show that in both mutants the arches fail to correctly
undergo ventral elongation before skeletogenesis begins and propose a model in
which this failure is largely responsible for the loss of an Edn1-dependent
compartmentation of the arch into the intermediate and ventral domains.

PMID: 16678149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Development. 2006 Jun;133(11):2263-73. Epub 2006 May 3.

Pbx1/Pbx2 requirement for distal limb patterning is mediated by the hierarchical 
control of Hox gene spatial distribution and Shh expression.

Capellini TD(1), Di Giacomo G, Salsi V, Brendolan A, Ferretti E, Srivastava D,
Zappavigna V, Selleri L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Cornell University Weill Medical
School, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Vertebrate limb development occurs along three cardinal axes-proximodistal,
anteroposterior and dorsoventral-that are established via the organization of
signaling centers, such as the zone of polarizing activity (ZPA). Distal limb
development, in turn, requires a molecular feedback loop between the ZPA
expression of sonic hedgehog (Shh) and the apical ectodermal ridge. The TALE
homeoprotein Pbx1 has been shown to be essential for proximal limb development.
In this study, we first uncover that Pbx1 and Pbx2 are co-expressed in the
lateral plate and early limb field mesoderm. Later, Pbx2 is expressed throughout 
the limb, unlike Pbx1, which is expressed only in the proximal bud. By exploiting
a Pbx1/Pbx2 loss-of-function mouse model, we demonstrate that, despite the lack
of limb abnormalities in Pbx2-deficient (Pbx2(-/-)) embryos, compound Pbx1(-/-); 
Pbx2(+/-) mutants, in addition to their exacerbated proximal limb defects,
exhibit novel and severe distal abnormalities. Additionally, we reveal that
Pbx1(-/-); Pbx2(-/-) embryos lack limbs altogether. Furthermore, we establish
that, unlike in flies, where the leg develops independently of Hox and where the 
Pbx ortholog Exd is required for specification of proximal (but not distal)
limbs, in vertebrates, distal limb patterning is Pbx1/Pbx2 dependent. Indeed, we 
demonstrate that Pbx genetic requirement is mediated, at least in part, through
their hierarchical control of Hox spatial distribution and Shh expression.
Overall, we establish that, by controlling the spatial expression of Hox genes in
the posterior limb and regulating ZPA function, Pbx1/Pbx2 exert a primary
hierarchical function on Hox genes, rather than behaving merely as Hox ancillary 
factors.

PMID: 16672333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Auton Neurosci. 2006 Jun 30;126-127:225-31. Epub 2006 May 2.

Perspectives on integration of cell extrinsic and cell intrinsic pathways of
signaling required for differentiation of noradrenergic sympathetic ganglion
neurons.

Sarkar AA(1), Howard MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Program in Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology,
Medical University of Ohio, 3000 Arlington Avenue, Toledo, OH 43614, USA.

This review presents an analysis of current research aimed at deciphering the
interplay of cell extrinsic and intrinsic signals required for specification and 
differentiation of noradrenergic sympathetic ganglion neurons. The development of
noradrenergic sympathetic ganglion neurons depends upon expression of a core set 
of DNA regulatory molecules, including the Phox2 homeodomain proteins and the
basic helix-loop-helix proteins, HAND2 and MASH1 whose expression is dependent
upon cell extrinsic cues. Both bone morphogenetic protein(s) and cAMP have an
integral role in the specification/differentiation of noradrenergic sympathetic
ganglion neurons but how signaling downstream of these molecules is integrated
and identification of their particular functions is just beginning to be
elucidated. Data currently available suggests a model with BMP providing both
instructive and permissive cues in a pathway integrated by cAMP and MAPK by
activation of both canonical and non-canonical intracellular signaling cascades.

PMID: 16647305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Cell Biochem. 2006 Oct 1;99(2):478-84.

Regulation of dHAND protein expression by all-trans retinoic acid through
ET-1/ETAR signaling in H9c2 cells.

Li W(1), Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Development Molecular Biology, Department of Nutrition and Food 
Hygiene, School of Public Health, Peking University Health Science Center,
Beijing 100083, China.

dHAND is thought to be a cardiac-restricted transcription factor during embryonic
development. Vertebrate heart development involves many transcription factors
such as Nkx2.5, GATA, and tbx5. All-trans retinoic acid (AtRA), the oxidative
metabolite of vitamin A, can regulate the expression of these factors to affect
embryonic heart development. However, the action of atRA on the expression of
dHAND is rarely reported. To clarify whether atRA regulate the dHAND expression, 
we exposed cultured H9c2 cells (rat embryonic cardiomyocytes) to atRA and
detected the protein expression of dHAND by Western blot analysis. We observed
atRA can regulate the dHAND expression in a dose- and time-dependent manner. AtRA
also inhibited endothelin-1 (ET-1) expression in a time-dependent manner. Further
studies revealed that pretreatment with 10 microM BQ-123, a selective
endothelin-1 receptor (ETAR) antagonist, for 2 h can significantly counteract the
inhibition of 5 microM atRA treatment for 2 h of dHAND mRNA and protein
expression. Taken together, these results suggest that atRA regulates dHAND
expression by ET-1/ETAR signal transduction pathway in H9c2 cells. The mechanism 
of ET-1/ETAR signaling in controlling the level of dHAND protein is to reduce the
levels of dHAND mRNA. It is possible for atRA to exert its cardiac teratogenesis 
during vertebrate embryonic development in this way.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16619265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Apr 28;343(1):144-51. Epub 2006 Mar 2.

Essential role of Hand2 in interventricular septum formation and trabeculation
during cardiac development.

Togi K(1), Yoshida Y, Matsumae H, Nakashima Y, Kita T, Tanaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Japan.

Interventricular septum (IVS) formation is one of the key events in the
development of a four-chambered heart. We previously showed that the basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor Hand1 plays an important role in the
formation of the IVS. Here, we found that the other Hand gene, Hand2, regulated
expansion, trabeculation, and IVS formation in the embryonic heart. In transgenic
embryos expressing Hand2 in the whole ventricles, the boundary region between the
left and right ventricles expanded outwards, resulting in complete absence of the
IVS. Moreover, trabecular formation was observed even in a region where the IVS
was expected to form. In some transgenic embryos with heterogeneous expression of
the transgene, a muscular septum did not form in a region where Hand2 was
expressed, but an incomplete septum was identifiable in a region where Hand2 was 
not expressed, suggesting that septum formation was strictly regulated by the
expression domain of Hand2. Furthermore, expression of trabecular markers
including ANF, BNP, and connexin40 was significantly up-regulated in the
ventricles of Hand2 transgenic embryos as well as in H9c2 cells over-expressing
Hand2. These results suggested that the absence of Hand2 expression in the
interventricular boundary region inhibits expansion and trabeculation in this
area, contributing to the proper formation of the IVS.

PMID: 16530167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Development. 2006 Mar;133(6):1175-82. Epub 2006 Feb 8.

Hand, an evolutionarily conserved bHLH transcription factor required for
Drosophila cardiogenesis and hematopoiesis.

Han Z(1), Yi P, Li X, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center at Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

The Hand gene family encodes highly conserved basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
transcription factors that play crucial roles in cardiac and vascular development
in vertebrates. In Drosophila, a single Hand gene is expressed in the three major
cell types that comprise the circulatory system: cardioblasts, pericardial
nephrocytes and lymph gland hematopoietic progenitors, but its function has not
been determined. Here we show that Drosophila Hand functions as a potent
transcriptional activator, and converting it into a repressor blocks heart and
lymph gland formation. Disruption of Hand function by homologous recombination
also results in profound cardiac defects that include hypoplastic myocardium and 
a deficiency of pericardial and lymph gland hematopoietic cells, accompanied by
cardiac apoptosis. Targeted expression of Hand in the heart completely rescued
the lethality of Hand mutants, and cardiac expression of a human HAND gene, or
the caspase inhibitor P35, partially rescued the cardiac and lymph gland
phenotypes. These findings demonstrate evolutionarily conserved functions of HAND
transcription factors in Drosophila and mammalian cardiogenesis, and reveal a
previously unrecognized requirement of Hand genes in hematopoiesis.

PMID: 16467358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Mol Neurosci. 2005;27(3):281-92.

Phox2 and dHAND transcription factors select shared and unique target genes in
the noradrenergic cell type.

Rychlik JL(1), Hsieh M, Eiden LE, Lewis EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health and Sciences
University, Portland, OR, USA.

The noradrenergic cell type is characterized by the expression of proteins
involved in the biosynthesis, transport, and secretion of noradrenaline and is
dependent on the sequential and combinatorial expression of numerous
transcription factors, including Phox2a, Phox2b, dHAND, GATA2, GATA3, and MASH1. 
Phox2a and Phox2b transactivate the promoter of the gene encoding the
noradrenergic biosynthetic enzyme, dopamine beta-hydroxylase (DBH), and dHAND
potentiates the activity of Phox2a. In this study, we use chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays to identify target genes of the Phox2 proteins and
dHAND. All three proteins are bound to the DBH and PHOX2B promoter regions in
SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells. The interaction between Phox2a and dHAND is analyzed
by fluorescent anisotropy, which demonstrates that dHAND causes an eightfold
increase in the affinity of Phox2a for its recognition sites on the DBH promoter 
region. The Phox2 proteins are not found on the genes encoding other
noradrenergic enzymatic or transport proteins but are reciprocally bound to each 
other's promoters in SH-SY5Y cells. Together with Phox2a and Phox2b, dHAND is
bound to the PHOX2B promoter and is also associated with the GATA2 and eHAND
genes in the absence of the Phox2 proteins. These results demonstrate the direct 
interactions of the Phox2 and dHAND transcription factors within a noradrenergic 
cell type. The Phox2 proteins were found to share all target genes, whereas dHAND
binds to genes independently of Phox2a.

PMID: 16280598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Bioessays. 2005 Nov;27(11):1102-6.

A twisted hand: bHLH protein phosphorylation and dimerization regulate limb
development.

Cai J(1), Jabs EW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Center for Craniofacial Development and
Disorders, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. jcai@jhmi.edu

Saethre-Chotzen syndrome (SCS), a human autosomal dominant condition with limb
defects and craniosynostosis, is caused by haploinsufficiency of TWIST1, a basic 
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor. Until recently, the molecular
pathogenesis of the limb defects in SCS has not been well understood. Now,
Firulli et al.1 show in mouse and chick that ectopic expression of a related bHLH
protein, Hand2, results in phenocopies of the limb defects caused by Twist1
loss-of-function mutations. These two proteins interact in a dosage-dependent
antagonistic manner, and both can be regulated through phosphorylation at
conserved helix I amino acid residues. These findings provide an important link
between the misregulation of Twist1 dimerization and the limb phenotypes observed
in SCS.

Copyright (c) 2005 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 16237669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Dev Biol. 2005 Oct 15;286(2):521-36. Epub 2005 Sep 13.

BMP4 supports noradrenergic differentiation by a PKA-dependent mechanism.

Liu H(1), Margiotta JF, Howard MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Program in Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience,
Medical University of Ohio, 3000 Arlington Ave., Toledo, OH 43614, USA.

Differentiation of neural crest-derived noradrenergic neurons depends upon
signaling mediated downstream of BMP binding to cognate receptors and involving
cAMP. Compiled data from many groups suggest that neurogenesis and cell
type-specific noradrenergic marker gene regulation is coordinated through the
expression and function of the basic helix-loop-helix DNA binding protein HAND2
and the homeodomain DNA binding protein Phox2a. However, information detailing
how BMP-mediated signaling and signaling through cAMP are coordinated has been
lacking. We now provide compelling data suggesting that differentiation of
noradrenergic sympathetic ganglion neurons depends upon both canonical and
non-canonical pathways of BMP-mediated signaling. The non-canonical pathway
involves the activation of protein kinase A (PKA) independent of cAMP. This is a 
novel mechanism in neural crest-derived cells and is necessary to support
neurogenesis as well as aspects of DBH promoter regulation involving HAND2
phosphorylation and dimerization. The expression of transcripts encoding HAND2
and Phox2a is regulated via canonical BMP signaling and thus affects both
neurogenesis and cell type-specific gene expression. Interestingly, cAMP- and
MapK-mediated signaling modulate specific target sites in both the canonical and 
non-canonical BMP pathways. Activity of MapK is required for HAND2 transcription 
and thus affects neurogenesis. Signaling affected by cAMP is necessary for the
transcription of Phox2a as well as regulation of DBH promoter transactivation by 
Phox2a and HAND2. We suggest a comprehensive model that shows how BMP- and
cAMP-mediated intracellular signaling integrate neurogenesis and cell
type-specific noradrenergic marker gene expression and function.

PMID: 16165122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Dev Dyn. 2005 Nov;234(3):613-21.

The basic helix-loop-helix factor Hand 2 regulates autonomic nervous system
development.

Morikawa Y(1), Dai YS, Hao J, Bonin C, Hwang S, Cserjesi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Tulane University, New Orleans,
Louisiana 70118, USA.

Mammalian autonomic nervous system (ANS) development requires the combinatorial
action of a number of transcription factors, which include Mash 1, Phox 2b, and
GATA 3. Here we show that the bHLH transcription factor, Hand 2 (dHAND), is
expressed concurrently with Mash 1 during sympathetic nervous system (SNS)
development and that the expression of Hand 2 is not dependent on Mash 1. This
suggests that these two bHLH factors work in parallel during SNS development. We 
also show that ectopic expression of Hand 2 activates the neuronal program and
promotes the acquisition of a phenotype corresponding to peripheral neurons
including neurons of the SNS lineage in P19 embryonic carcinoma cells. We propose
that Hand 2 works in parallel with other members of the transcriptional network
to regulate ANS developmental but can ectopically activate the program by a
cross-regulatory mechanism that includes the activation of Mash 1. We show that
this function is dependent on its interaction with the histone acetyltransferase 
p300/CBP, indicating that Hand 2 functions to promote ANS development as part of 
a larger transcriptional complex.

Developmental Dynamics 234:602-612, 2005. (c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2653092
PMID: 16145670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Sep;25(18):8009-23.

PIAS1 activates the expression of smooth muscle cell differentiation marker genes
by interacting with serum response factor and class I basic helix-loop-helix
proteins.

Kawai-Kowase K(1), Kumar MS, Hoofnagle MH, Yoshida T, Owens GK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics, University of
Virginia, 415 Lane Road, MR5, Room 1220, P.O. Box 801394, Charlottesville, VA
22908, USA.

Although a critical component of vascular disease is modulation of the
differentiated state of vascular smooth muscle cells (SMC), the mechanisms
governing SMC differentiation are relatively poorly understood. We have
previously shown that E-boxes and the ubiquitously expressed class I basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins, including E2-2 and E12, are important in
regulation of the SMC differentiation marker gene, the SM alpha-actin gene. The
aim of the present study was to identify proteins that bind to class I bHLH
proteins in SMC and modulate transcriptional regulation of SMC differentiation
marker genes. Herein we report that members of the protein inhibitor of activated
STAT (PIAS) family interact with class I bHLH factors as well as serum response
factor (SRF). PIAS1 interacted with E2-2 and E12 based on yeast two-hybrid
screens, mammalian two-hybrid assays, and/or coimmunoprecipitation assays.
Overexpression of PIAS1 significantly activated the SM alpha-actin promoter and
mRNA expression, as well as SM myosin heavy chain and SM22alpha, whereas a small 
interfering RNA for PIAS1 decreased activity of these promoters, as well as
endogenous mRNA expression, and SRF binding to SM alpha-actin promoter within
intact chromatin in cultured SMC. Of significance, PIAS1 bound to SRF and
activated SM alpha-actin promoter expression in wild-type but not SRF(-/-)
embryonic stem cells. These results provide novel evidence that PIAS1 modulates
transcriptional activation of SMC marker genes through cooperative interactions
with both SRF and class I bHLH proteins.

PMCID: PMC1234309
PMID: 16135793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Biol Chem. 2005 Sep 16;280(37):32272-8. Epub 2005 Jul 25.

MEF2-dependent recruitment of the HAND1 transcription factor results in
synergistic activation of target promoters.

Morin S(1), Pozzulo G, Robitaille L, Cross J, Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cardiac Growth and Differentiation, Institut de Recherches
Cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), Quebec, Canada.

HAND proteins are tissue-restricted members of the basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor family that play critical roles in cell differentiation and 
organogenesis including placental, cardiovascular, and craniofacial development. 
Nevertheless, the molecular basis underlying the developmental action of HAND
proteins remains undefined. Within the embryo, HAND1 is first detected in the
developing heart where it becomes restricted to the atrial and left ventricular
compartments, a pattern identical to that of the Nppa gene, which encodes atrial 
natriuretic factor, the major secretory product of the heart. We hereby report
that the cardiac atrial natriuretic factor promoter is directly activated by
HAND1, making it the first known HAND1 transcriptional target. The action of
HAND1 does not require heterodimerization with class I basic helix-loop-helix
factors or DNA binding through E-box elements. Instead, HAND1 is recruited to the
promoter via physical interaction with MEF2 proteins. MEF2/HAND1 interaction
results in synergistic activation of MEF2-dependent promoters, and MEF2 binding
sites are sufficient to mediate this synergy. MEF2 binding to DNA is not enhanced
in the presence of HAND1. Instead, cooperativity likely results from
corecruitment of co-activators such as CREB-binding protein. The related HAND2
protein can also synergize with MEF2. Thus, HAND proteins act as cell-specific
developmental co-activators of the MEF2 family of transcription factors. These
findings identify a novel mechanism for HAND action in the heart and provide a
general paradigm to understand the mechanism of HAND action in organogenesis.

PMID: 16043483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Harvey Lect. 2002-2003;98:41-64.

A genetic blueprint for growth and development of the heart.

Olson EN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center at Dallas, Dallas, Texas, USA.

PMID: 16033157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Nature. 2005 Jul 14;436(7048):181-2.

Developmental biology: tiny brakes for a growing heart.

Bruneau BG.

Comment on
    Nature. 2005 Jul 14;436(7048):214-20.

PMID: 16015310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Nature. 2005 Jul 14;436(7048):214-20.

Serum response factor regulates a muscle-specific microRNA that targets Hand2
during cardiogenesis.

Zhao Y(1), Samal E, Srivastava D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics (Cardiology), University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center and Children's Medical Center Dallas, 6000 Harry Hines Boulevard, 
Dallas, Texas 75390-9148, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2005 Jul 14;436(7048):181-2.

Gradients of signalling and transcription factors govern many aspects of
embryogenesis, highlighting the need for spatiotemporal control of regulatory
protein levels. MicroRNAs are phylogenetically conserved small RNAs that regulate
the translation of target messenger RNAs, providing a mechanism for protein dose 
regulation. Here we show that microRNA-1-1 (miR-1-1) and miR-1-2 are specifically
expressed in cardiac and skeletal muscle precursor cells. We found that the miR-1
genes are direct transcriptional targets of muscle differentiation regulators
including serum response factor, MyoD and Mef2. Correspondingly, excess miR-1 in 
the developing heart leads to a decreased pool of proliferating ventricular
cardiomyocytes. Using a new algorithm for microRNA target identification that
incorporates features of RNA structure and target accessibility, we show that
Hand2, a transcription factor that promotes ventricular cardiomyocyte expansion, 
is a target of miR-1. This work suggests that miR-1 genes titrate the effects of 
critical cardiac regulatory proteins to control the balance between
differentiation and proliferation during cardiogenesis.

PMID: 15951802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Development. 2005 Jul;132(13):3103-11. Epub 2005 Jun 1.

Mouse intraflagellar transport proteins regulate both the activator and repressor
functions of Gli transcription factors.

Liu A(1), Wang B, Niswander LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado at Denver and Health Sciences
Center, Mailstop 8322, Box 6511, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

Intraflagellar transport (IFT) is an active event in which cargo is transported
along microtubules by motor proteins such as kinesin and dynein. IFT proteins are
required for the formation and maintenance of flagella and cilia. We have
previously shown that mouse mutants for two IFT proteins, IFT88 and IFT172, as
well as Kif3a, a subunit of mouse kinesin 2, exhibit ventral spinal cord
patterning defects that appear to result from reduced hedgehog (Hh) signaling.
Although genetic epistasis experiments place IFT proteins downstream of the Hh
receptor and upstream of the Gli transcription factors, the mechanism by which
IFT regulates Gli function is unknown. The developing limb provides an excellent 
system to study Hh signaling, in particular as it allows a biological and
molecular readout of both Gli activator and repressor function. Here we report
that homozygous mutants for flexo (Fxo), a hypomorphic allele of mouse IFT88
generated in our ENU mutagenesis screen, exhibit polydactyly in all four limbs.
Molecular analysis indicates that expression domains of multiple posteriorly
restricted genes are expanded anteriorly in the mutant limbs, similar to loss of 
Gli3 transcriptional repressor function. Sonic hedgehog (Shh) expression is
normal, yet Ptch1 and Gli1, two known targets of Hh signaling, are greatly
reduced, consistent with loss of Shh signaling. Expression of Gli3 and Hand2 in
the mutant limb indicates that the limb prepattern is abnormal. In addition, we
show that partial loss-of-function mutations in another mouse IFT gene, Ift52
(Ngd5), result in similar phenotypes and abnormal Hh signaling as Fxo, indicating
a general requirement for IFT proteins in Hh signaling and patterning of multiple
organs. Analysis of Ift88 and Shh double mutants indicates that, in mouse, IFT
proteins are required for both Gli activator and repressor functions, and Gli
proteins are insensitive to Hh ligand in the absence of IFT proteins. Finally,
our biochemical studies demonstrate that IFT proteins are required for
proteolytic processing of Gli3 in mouse embryos. In summary, our results indicate
that IFT function is crucial in the control of both the positive and negative
transcriptional activities of Gli proteins, and essential for Hh ligand-induced
signaling cascade.

PMID: 15930098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Clin Invest. 2005 Jun;115(6):1522-31. Epub 2005 May 12.

Morphogenesis of the right ventricle requires myocardial expression of Gata4.

Zeisberg EM(1), Ma Q, Juraszek AL, Moses K, Schwartz RJ, Izumo S, Pu WT.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Mutations in developmental regulatory genes have been found to be responsible for
some cases of congenital heart defects. One such regulatory gene is Gata4, a zinc
finger transcription factor. In order to circumvent the early embryonic lethality
of Gata4-null embryos and to investigate the role of myocardial Gata4 expression 
in cardiac development, we used Cre/loxP technology to conditionally delete Gata4
in the myocardium of mice at an early and a late time point in cardiac
morphogenesis. Early deletion of Gata4 by Nkx2-5Cre resulted in hearts with
striking myocardial thinning, absence of mesenchymal cells within the endocardial
cushions, and selective hypoplasia of the RV. RV hypoplasia was associated with
downregulation of Hand2, a transcription factor previously shown to regulate
formation of the RV. Cardiomyocyte proliferation was reduced, with a greater
degree of reduction in the RV than in the LV. Late deletion of Gata4 by Cre
recombinase driven by the alpha myosin heavy chain promoter did not selectively
affect RV development or generation of endocardial cushion mesenchyme but did
result in marked myocardial thinning with decreased cardiomyocyte proliferation, 
as well as double-outlet RV. Our results demonstrate a general role of myocardial
Gata4 in regulating cardiomyocyte proliferation and a specific, stage-dependent
role in regulating the morphogenesis of the RV and the atrioventricular canal.

PMCID: PMC1090473
PMID: 15902305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Stem Cells. 2005 Aug;23(7):923-30. Epub 2005 May 9.

Generation of peripheral sensory and sympathetic neurons and neural crest cells
from human embryonic stem cells.

Pomp O(1), Brokhman I, Ben-Dor I, Reubinoff B, Goldstein RS.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan 52900, Israel.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) have been directed to differentiate into
neuronal cells using many cell-culture techniques. Central nervous system cells
with clinical importance have been produced from hESCs. To date, however, there
have been no definitive reports of generation of peripheral neurons from hESCs.
We used a modification of the method of Sasai and colleagues for mouse and
primate embryonic stem cells to elicit neuronal differentiation from hESCs. When 
hESCs are cocultured with the mouse stromal line PA6 for 3 weeks, neurons are
induced that coexpress (a) peripherin and Brn3a, and (b) peripherin and tyrosine 
hydroxylase, combinations characteristic of peripheral sensory and sympathetic
neurons, respectively. In vivo, peripheral sensory and sympathetic neurons
develop from the neural crest (NC). Analysis of expression of mRNAs identified in
other species as NC markers reveals that the PA6 cells induce NC-like cells
before neuronal differentiation takes place. Several NC markers, including SNAIL,
dHAND, and Sox9, are increased at 1 week of coculture relative to naive cells.
Furthermore, the expression of several NC marker genes known to be downregulated 
upon in vivo differentiation of NC derivatives, was observed to be present at
lower levels at 3 weeks of PA6-hESC coculture than at 1 week. Our report is the
first on the expression of molecular markers of NC-like cells in primates, in
general, and in humans, specifically. Our results suggest that this system can be
used for studying molecular and cellular events in the almost inaccessible human 
NC, as well as for producing normal human peripheral neurons for developing
therapies for diseases such as familial dysautonomia.

PMID: 15883233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Development. 2005 Apr;132(8):1961-70.

Tbx3 can alter limb position along the rostrocaudal axis of the developing
embryo.

Rallis C(1), Del Buono J, Logan MP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, National Institute for Medical Research,
Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

The limbs of the vertebrate embryo form at precise locations along the body and
these positions are fixed across different species. The mechanisms that control
this process are not understood. Ectopic expression of Tbx3, a transcriptional
repressor that belongs to the Tbx2/3/4/5 subfamily of T-box transcriptional
regulators, in the forelimb results in a rostral shift in the position of the
limb along the main body axis. By contrast, a transcriptional activator form of
Tbx3 shifts the limb to more caudal locations. We also show that dHand and Gli3, 
genes previously implicated in anteroposterior pre-patterning of the limb-forming
region, are also involved in refining the position of the limbs. Our data suggest
a new role for Tbx3 in positioning the limb along the main body axis through a
genetic interplay between dHand and Gli3.

PMID: 15790970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Curr Biol. 2005 Mar 8;15(5):441-6.

Hand2 regulates epithelial formation during myocardial diferentiation.

Trinh LA(1), Yelon D, Stainier DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics Programs in Developmental Biology,
Genetics, and Human Genetics, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, California 94143, USA.

Erratum in
    Curr Biol. 2005 May 10;15(9):879-81.

Myocardial differentiation is initiated by the activation of
terminal-differentiation gene expression within a subset of cells in the anterior
lateral plate mesoderm. We have previously shown that shortly after this
activation, myocardial cells undergo epithelial maturation [1], suggesting that
myocardial differentiation encompasses both molecular and cellular changes. To
address the question of how the molecular programs driving myocardial gene
expression and the formation of the myocardial epithelium are integrated, we
analyzed the role of two essential myocardial terminal-differentiation factors,
Hand2 and Gata5, in myocardial epithelia formation. hand2 and gata5 mutants
exhibit a much-reduced number of myocardial cells and defects in myocardial gene 
expression [2,3]. We find that the few myocardial precursors that are present in 
hand2 mutants do not polarize. In contrast, embryos with reduced Gata5 function
exhibit polarized myocardial epithelia despite a similar reduction in myocardial 
precursor number, indicating that proper cell number is not required for
epithelial formation. Taken thogether, these results indicate that Hand2 is
uniquely required for myocardial polarization, a previously unappreciated role
for this critical transcription factor. Furthermore, these results demonstrate
that two independent processes, the polarizaton of myocardial precursors and the 
allocation of proper cell number, contribute to myocardial development.

PMID: 15786591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Nat Genet. 2005 Apr;37(4):373-81. Epub 2005 Feb 27.

Altered Twist1 and Hand2 dimerization is associated with Saethre-Chotzen syndrome
and limb abnormalities.

Firulli BA(1), Krawchuk D, Centonze VE, Vargesson N, Virshup DM, Conway SJ,
Cserjesi P, Laufer E, Firulli AB.

Author information: 
(1)Wells Center for Pediatric Research, James Whitcomb Riley Hospital for
Children, Department of Pediatrics, Indiana Medical School, 1044 W. Walnut R4
371, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202-5225, USA. tfirulli@iupui.edu

Autosomal dominant mutations in the gene encoding the basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor Twist1 are associated with limb and craniofacial defects in 
humans with Saethre-Chotzen syndrome. The molecular mechanism underlying these
phenotypes is poorly understood. We show that ectopic expression of the related
basic helix-loop-helix factor Hand2 phenocopies Twist1 loss of function in the
limb and that the two factors have a gene dosage-dependent antagonistic
interaction. Dimerization partner choice by Twist1 and Hand2 can be modulated by 
protein kinase A- and protein phosphatase 2A-regulated phosphorylation of
conserved helix I residues. Notably, multiple Twist1 mutations associated with
Saethre-Chotzen syndrome alter protein kinase A-mediated phosphorylation of
Twist1, suggesting that misregulation of Twist1 dimerization through either
stoichiometric or post-translational mechanisms underlies phenotypes of
individuals with Saethre-Chotzen syndrome.

PMCID: PMC2568820
PMID: 15735646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Dev Biol. 2005 Feb 1;278(1):175-92.

Restricted response of mesencephalic neural crest to sympathetic differentiation 
signals in the trunk.

Lee VM(1), Bronner-Fraser M, Baker CV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, Beckman Institute 139-74, California Institute of
Technology, Pasadena, California 91125, USA.

Lineage diversification in the vertebrate neural crest may occur via instructive 
signals acting on pluripotent cells, and/or via early specification of
subpopulations towards particular lineages. Mesencephalic neural crest cells
normally form cholinergic parasympathetic neurons in the ciliary ganglion, while 
trunk neural crest cells normally form both catecholaminergic and cholinergic
neurons in sympathetic ganglia. In contrast to trunk neural crest cells,
mesencephalic neural crest cells apparently fail to express the catecholaminergic
transcription factor dHAND in response to BMPs in the head environment. Here, we 
show that migrating quail mesencephalic neural crest cells grafted into the trunk
of host chick embryos colonise the sympathetic ganglia. While many express dHAND 
and form tyrosine hydroxylase (TH)-positive catecholaminergic neurons, the
proportion that expresses either dHAND or TH is significantly smaller than that
of quail trunk neural crest cells under the same conditions. Furthermore, the
proportion of quail mesencephalic neural crest cells that is TH+ in the
sympathetic ganglia decreases with time, while the proportion of TH+ quail trunk 
neural crest-derived cells increases. Thus, a subset of mesencephalic neural
crest cells fails to express dHAND or TH in the sympathetic ganglia, while a
further subset initiates but fails to maintain TH expression. Taken together, our
results suggest that a subpopulation of migrating mesencephalic neural crest
cells is refractory to catecholaminergic differentiation signals in the trunk. We
suggest that this heterogeneity, together with local signals that repress
catecholaminergic differentiation, may ensure that most ciliary neurons adopt a
cholinergic fate.

PMID: 15649470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Dev Biol. 2005 Feb 1;278(1):155-62.

Loss of Apaf-1 leads to partial rescue of the HAND2-null phenotype.

Aiyer AR(1), Honarpour N, Herz J, Srivastava D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at
Dallas, 6000 Harry Hines Boulevard, Room NA8.124, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA.

HAND2 is an essential transcription factor for cardiac, pharyngeal arch, and limb
development. Apoptosis in the HAND2-null embryo causes hypoplasia of the right
ventricle and pharyngeal arches leading to lethality by embryonic day (E)10.0
from heart failure. In order to investigate the role of apoptosis in inducing the
HAND2-null phenotype, we generated mouse embryos lacking both HAND2 and Apaf-1, a
central downstream mediator of mitochondrial damage-induced apoptosis. In
contrast to HAND2-/- embryos, HAND2-/-Apaf-1-/- embryos at E10.5-11.0 had
well-developed pharyngeal arches, aortic arch arteries, and no signs of cardiac
failure. TUNEL analysis through pharyngeal arches of HAND2-/-Apaf-1-/- embryos
revealed decreased apoptosis and the embryos had clearly patent aortic arch
arteries. However, ventricular hypoplasia and cell death were unchanged in these 
animals compared to HAND2-/- embryos, resulting in growth arrest at E11.0. Our
study suggests that loss of HAND2 in the pharyngeal arch mesenchyme leads to
apoptosis in an Apaf-1-dependent fashion and that, while loss of aortic arch
integrity contributes to the early lethality, the ventricular defects are
independent of arch development.

PMID: 15649468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Dev Biol. 2005 Jan 15;277(2):271-86.

Mechanisms and perspectives on differentiation of autonomic neurons.

Howard MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Medical College of Ohio, Toledo, OH 43614, USA.
mhoward@mco.edu

Neurons share many features in common but are distinguished by expression of
phenotypic characteristics that define their specific function, location, or
connectivity. One aspect of neuronal fate determination that has been extensively
studied is that of neurotransmitter choice. The generation of diversity of
neuronal subtypes within the developing nervous system involves integration of
extrinsic and intrinsic instructive cues resulting in the expression of a core
set of regulatory molecules. This review focuses on mechanisms of growth and
transcription factor regulation in the generation of peripheral neural
crest-derived neurons. Although the specification and differentiation of
noradrenergic neurons are the focus, I have tried to integrate these into a
larger picture providing a general roadmap for development of autonomic neurons. 
There is a core of DNA binding proteins required for the development of
sympathetic, parasympathetic, and enteric neurons, including Phox2 and MASH1,
whose specificity is regulated by the recruitment of additional transcriptional
regulators in a subtype-specific manner. For noradrenergic neurons, the basic
helix-loop-helix DNA binding protein HAND2 (dHAND) appears to serve this
function. The studies reviewed here support the notion that neurotransmitter
identity is closely linked to other aspects of neurogenesis and reveal a
molecular mechanism to coordinate expression of pan-neuronal genes with cell
type-specific genes.

PMID: 15617674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Development. 2005 Jan;132(1):189-201. Epub 2004 Dec 2.

The Hand1 and Hand2 transcription factors regulate expansion of the embryonic
cardiac ventricles in a gene dosage-dependent manner.

McFadden DG(1), Barbosa AC, Richardson JA, Schneider MD, Srivastava D, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, 6000 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors Hand1 and Hand2 display dynamic 
and spatially restricted expression patterns in the developing heart. Mice that
lack Hand2 die at embryonic day 10.5 from right ventricular hypoplasia and
vascular defects, whereas mice that lack Hand1 die at embryonic day 8.5 from
placental and extra-embryonic abnormalities that preclude analysis of its
potential role in later stages of heart development. To determine the cardiac
functions of Hand1, we generated mice harboring a conditional Hand1-null allele
and excised the gene by cardiac-specific expression of Cre recombinase. Embryos
homozygous for the cardiac Hand1 gene deletion displayed defects in the left
ventricle and endocardial cushions, and exhibited dysregulated ventricular gene
expression. However, these embryos survived until the perinatal period when they 
died from a spectrum of cardiac abnormalities. Creation of Hand1/2 double mutant 
mice revealed gene dose-sensitive functions of Hand transcription factors in the 
control of cardiac morphogenesis and ventricular gene expression. These findings 
demonstrate that Hand factors play pivotal and partially redundant roles in
cardiac morphogenesis, cardiomyocyte differentiation and cardiac-specific
transcription.

PMID: 15576406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Cell Biochem. 2004 Dec 15;93(6):1255-66.

Cooperative activation of atrial naturetic peptide promoter by dHAND and MEF2C.

Zang MX(1), Li Y, Xue LX, Jia HT, Jing H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition & Food Hygiene, School of Public Health, Laboratory of
Development Molecular Biology, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing, 
China.

An intricate array of cell-specific multiprotein complexes participate in
programs of cell-specific gene expression through combinatorial interaction with 
different transcription factors and cofactors. The dHAND basic helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) transcription factor, which is essential for heart development and extra
embryonic structures, is thought to regulate cardiomyocyte-specific gene
expression through combinatorial interactions with other cardiac-restricted
transcription factors such as GATA4 and NKX2.5. Here, we determine that dHAND
also interacts with the myocyte enhancer binding factor-2c (MEF2C) protein, which
belongs to MADS-box transcription factors and is essential for heart development.
dHAND and MEF2C synergistically activated expression of the atrial naturetic
peptide gene (ANP) in transfected HeLa cells. GST-pulldown and
immunoprecipitation assay demonstrate that full-length MEF2C protein is able to
interact with dHAND in vitro and in vivo, just like MEF2A and bHLH transcription 
factors MyoD in skeletal muscle cells. In addition, electrophoretic mobility
shift assays (EMSAs) demonstrate that MEF2C and dHAND do not influence each
other's DNA binding activity. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis
in H9c2 cells we show that dHAND interact with MEF2C to form protein complex and 
bind A/T sequence in promoter of ANP. Taken together with previous observations, 
these results suggest the existence of large multiprotein transcriptional complex
with core DNA binding proteins that physically interact with other
transcriptional factors to form favorable conformation to potentiate
transcription.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15486975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Biol Chem. 2004 Dec 24;279(52):54258-63. Epub 2004 Oct 14.

Cooperative interaction between the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor
dHAND and myocyte enhancer factor 2C regulates myocardial gene expression.

Zang MX(1), Li Y, Wang H, Wang JB, Jia HT.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Development Molecular Biology, Department of Nutrition and Food 
Hygiene, School of Public Health, Peking University Health Science Center,
Beijing 100083, China.

Cardiac-restricted transcription factors dHAND and myocyte enhancer factor 2C are
expressed in the developing heart and activate several cardiac promoters.
However, their regulatory mechanisms are still to be understood. To elucidate
their exact regulatory functions, we have developed an RNA interference strategy 
to specifically inhibit dHAND and myocyte enhancer factor 2C protein production
in H9c2 cells, which are derived from rat embryonic heart. Expression of
endogenous cardiac genes atrial natriuretic peptide and alpha-myosin heavy chain 
was down-regulated in H9c2 cells lacking both dHAND and myocyte enhancer factor
2C, indicating that these factors are required for the maintenance of the cardiac
genetic program. Consistent with these, expression of atrial natriuretic peptide 
and alpha-myosin heavy chain was up-regulated in H9c2 cells, which overexpressed 
dHAND and myocyte enhancer factor 2C. In addition, dHAND and myocyte enhancer
factor 2C interact to synergistically activate atrial natriuretic peptide and
alpha-myosin heavy chain transcription. Furthermore, chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis in H9c2 cells treated with phenylephrine showed that
dHAND and myocyte enhancer factor 2C protein complex bind to the A/T sequence on 
atrial natriuretic peptide promoter. Taken together, these results not only
suggest that the complex cis-trans interaction of dHAND, myocyte enhancer factor 
2C, and the target gene may fine-tune gene expression in cardiac myocytes but
also provide a molecular paradigm to elucidate the mechanisms of action of dHAND 
and myocyte enhancer factor 2C in the developing heart.

PMID: 15485823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Science. 2004 Sep 10;305(5690):1619-22.

Advanced cardiac morphogenesis does not require heart tube fusion.

Li S(1), Zhou D, Lu MM, Morrisey EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104,
USA.

The bilateral cardiac mesoderm migrates from the lateral region of the embryo to 
the ventral midline, where it fuses to form the primitive heart tube. It is
generally accepted that migration and fusion are essential for subsequent stages 
of cardiac morphogenesis. We present evidence that, in Foxp4 mutant embryonic
mice, each bilateral heart-forming region is capable of developing into a highly 
differentiated four-chambered mammalian heart in the absence of midline fusion.
These data demonstrate that left-right chamber specification, cardiac looping,
septation, cardiac myocyte differentiation, and endocardial cushion formation are
preprogrammed in the precardiac mesoderm and do not require midline positional
identity or heart tube fusion.

PMID: 15361625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Oct 8;323(1):168-74.

Differential cooperation between dHAND and three different E-proteins.

Murakami M(1), Kataoka K, Tominaga J, Nakagawa O, Kurihara H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Integrative Cell Biology, Department of Embryogenesis, Institute
of Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto University, 2-2-1 Honjo, Kumamoto,
Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan.

dHAND is a transcription factor belonging to the class B basic helix-loop-helix
protein family and is expressed during embryogenesis in the heart, branchial
arches, limb buds, and neural crest derivatives. Despite much study, the
molecular mechanisms involved in the regulation of dHAND activity are not well
understood. We therefore carried out yeast two-hybrid screening using full-length
dHAND as bait, which led to identification of several dHAND-binding proteins,
including three E-proteins: E2A, ME2, and ALF1. Subsequent analysis revealed that
although their heterodimerization and transcriptional activities were similar,
dHAND/E-protein heterodimers bind to an E-box element with differing affinities, 
suggesting they have distinct DNA binding specificities. Moreover, in situ
hybridization showed that E-protein genes are expressed fairly ubiquitously among
embryonic tissues, including the branchial arches and limb buds. By contrast,
little signal was detected in the heart, suggesting that dHAND complexes with
partners other than E-proteins in cardiac tissue.

Copyright 2004 Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 15351717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Development. 2004 Oct;131(19):4775-86. Epub 2004 Aug 25.

Essential role of Gata transcription factors in sympathetic neuron development.

Tsarovina K(1), Pattyn A, Stubbusch J, Müller F, van der Wees J, Schneider C,
Brunet JF, Rohrer H.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Hirnforschung, Abteilung Neurochemie, Deutschordenstr.
46, 60528 Frankfurt/Main, Germany.

Sympathetic neurons are specified during their development from neural crest
precursors by a network of crossregulatory transcription factors, which includes 
Mash1, Phox2b, Hand2 and Phox2a. Here, we have studied the function of Gata2 and 
Gata3 zinc-finger transcription factors in autonomic neuron development. In the
chick, Gata2 but not Gata3 is expressed in developing sympathetic precursor
cells. Gata2 expression starts after Mash1, Phox2b, Hand2 and Phox2a expression, 
but before the onset of the noradrenergic marker genes Th and Dbh, and is
maintained throughout development. Gata2 expression is affected in the chick
embryo by Bmp gain- and loss-of-function experiments, and by overexpression of
Phox2b, Phox2a, Hand2 and Mash1. Together with the lack of Gata2/3 expression in 
Phox2b knockout mice, these results characterize Gata2 as member of the
Bmp-induced cluster of transcription factors. Loss-of-function experiments
resulted in a strong reduction in the size of the sympathetic chain and in
decreased Th expression. Ectopic expression of Gata2 in chick neural crest
precursors elicited the generation of neurons with a non-autonomic, Th-negative
phenotype. This implies a function for Gata factors in autonomic neuron
differentiation, which, however, depends on co-regulators present in the
sympathetic lineage. The present data establish Gata2 and Gata3 in the chick and 
mouse, respectively, as essential members of the transcription factor network
controlling sympathetic neuron development.

PMID: 15329349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Mech Dev. 2004 Oct;121(10):1223-33.

Temporal requirement of signaling cascade involving endothelin-1/endothelin
receptor type A in branchial arch development.

Fukuhara S(1), Kurihara Y, Arima Y, Yamada N, Kurihara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Cell Biology, Institute of Molecular Embryology and 
Genetics, Kumamoto University, 2-2-1 Honjo, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan.

Intercellular interactions within the branchial arch (BA) system is essential for
craniofacial development. Endothelin-1 (ET-1), produced by the branchial
epithelium and core mesenchyme, acts on cranial neural crest-derived
ectomesenchymcal cells expressing endothelin A receptor (ETAR) and regulates
expression of crucial genes such as Dlx6, a member of distalless homeobox gene
family, and its downstream target dHAND, a basic helix-loop-helix transcription
factor. To investigate the role of ET-1 and subsequent signaling cascades in BA
development, we examined when and how they activate dHAND and Dlx6 expression.
ETAR blockade by BQ123 in mouse embryo culture has revealed that ET-1/ETAR
signaling is critical for dHAND and Dlx6 expression in the mandibular arch
mesenchyme around embryonic day (E)8.75-E9.0 and becomes dispensable by E9.5.
dHAND and Dlx6 expression after E9.5 was dependent on the presence of the
epithelium, which was partly mediated by FGF-like signals. These findings
indicate that ET-1/ETAR and subsequent epithelial signals are sequentially
involved in BA development by maintaining dHAND and Dlx6 expression. Furthermore,
discordance of dHAND and Dlx6 expression domains and heterogeneity with respect
to dependency on ET-1 and FGF-like signals suggest that genetic hierarchy
involving Dlx6 and dHAND is differently controlled among subdomains within the
mandibular arch.

PMID: 15327783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Development. 2004 Sep;131(18):4413-23. Epub 2004 Aug 11.

Endothelin-A receptor-dependent and -independent signaling pathways in
establishing mandibular identity.

Ruest LB(1), Xiang X, Lim KC, Levi G, Clouthier DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Craniofacial Biology and the Birth
Defects Center, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY 40292, USA.

The lower jaw skeleton is derived from cephalic neural crest (CNC) cells that
reside in the mandibular region of the first pharyngeal arch. Endothelin-A
receptor (Ednra) signaling in crest cells is crucial for their development, as
Ednra(-/-) mice are born with severe craniofacial defects resulting in neonatal
lethality. In this study, we undertook a more detailed analysis of mandibular
arch development in Ednra(-/-) embryos to better understand the cellular and
molecular basis for these defects. We show that most lower jaw structures in
Ednra(-/-) embryos undergo a homeotic transformation into maxillary-like
structures similar to those observed in Dlx5/Dlx6(-/-) embryos, though lower
incisors are still present in both mutant embryos. These structural changes are
preceded by aberrant expansion of proximal first arch gene expression into the
distal arch, in addition to the previously described loss of a Dlx6/Hand2
expression network. However, a small distal Hand2 expression domain remains.
Although this distal expression is not dependent on either Ednra or Dlx5/Dlx6
function, it may require one or more GATA factors. Using fate analysis, we show
that these distal Hand2-positive cells probably contribute to lower incisor
formation. Together, our results suggest that the establishment of a 'mandibular 
identity' during lower jaw development requires both Ednra-dependent and
-independent signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC2818681
PMID: 15306564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Eur J Biochem. 2004 Aug;271(16):3330-9.

Akt-dependent phosphorylation negatively regulates the transcriptional activity
of dHAND by inhibiting the DNA binding activity.

Murakami M(1), Kataoka K, Fukuhara S, Nakagawa O, Kurihara H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Integrative Cell Biology, Department of Embryogenesis, Institute
of Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto University, Japan.

HAND2/dHAND is a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor expressed in the
heart and neural crest derivatives during embryogenesis. Although dHAND is
essential for branchial arch, cardiovascular and limb development, its target
genes have not been identified. The regulatory mechanisms of dHAND function also 
remain relatively unknown. Here we report that Akt/PKB, a serine/threonine
protein kinase involved in cell survival, growth and differentiation,
phosphorylates dHAND and inhibits dHAND-mediated transcription. AU5-dHAND
expressed in 293T cells became phosphorylated, possibly at its Akt
phosphorylation motif, in the absence of kinase inhibitors, whereas the
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibitor wortmannin and the Akt inhibitor
NL-71-101, but not the p70 S6 kinase inhibitor rapamycin, significantly reduced
dHAND phosphorylation. Coexpression of HA-Akt augmented dHAND phosphorylation at 
multiple serine and threonine residues mainly located in the bHLH domain and, as 
a result, decreased the transcriptional activity of dHAND. Consistently, alanine 
mutation mimicking the nonphosphorylation state abolished the inhibitory effect
of Akt on dHAND, whereas aspartate mutation mimicking the phosphorylation state
resulted in a loss of dHAND transcriptional activity. These changes in dHAND
transcriptional activity were in parallel with changes in the DNA binding
activity rather than in dimerization activity. These results suggest that
Akt-mediated signaling may regulate dHAND transcriptional activity through the
modulation of its DNA binding activity during embryogenesis.

PMID: 15291810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today. 2004 Jun;72(2):190-9.

Understanding endothelin-1 function during craniofacial development in the mouse 
and zebrafish.

Clouthier DE(1), Schilling TF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Craniofacial Biology, University of
Louisville, Kentucky 40292, USA. clouthier@louisville.edu

Morphogenesis of the face and neck is driven by an intricate relay of signaling
molecules and transcription factors organized into hierarchical pathways. The
coordinated action of these pathways regulates the development of neural crest
cells within the pharyngeal arches, resulting in proper spatiotemporal formation 
of bone, cartilage, and connective tissue. While the functions of many genes
involved in these processes were initially elucidated through the use of knockout
technology in the mouse, increasing numbers of zebrafish craniofacial mutants
have led to a rapid expansion in the identification of genes involved in
craniofacial development. A comparative analysis of signaling pathways involved
in these processes between mouse and zebrafish holds the potential not only to
pinpoint conserved and therefore crucial gene functions in craniofacial
development, but also to rapidly identify and study downstream effectors. These
complementary approaches will also allow rapid identification of candidate genes 
and gene functions disrupted in human craniofacial dysmorphologies. In this brief
review, we present a comparative analysis of one molecule involved in
craniofacial development, endothelin-1, a small, secreted protein that is crucial
for patterning the neural crest cells that give rise to lower jaw and throat
structures.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15269892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Clin Genet. 2004 Aug;66(2):128-36.

Interstitial deletion of 10p and atrial septal defect in DiGeorge 2 syndrome.

Yatsenko SA(1), Yatsenko AN, Szigeti K, Craigen WJ, Stankiewicz P, Cheung SW,
Lupski JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA.

We present molecular genetic investigations of a 4-year-old boy with craniofacial
dysmorphism and developmental delay. Trivial mitral and tricuspid regurgitation
without gross structural abnormality was diagnosed by echocardiography.
High-resolution chromosome analysis revealed an interstitial deletion,
del(10)(p12.1p12.32). To characterize the deletion size and breakpoints, we
performed fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis using 27 BAC clones. Our
data demonstrate an approximately 5.5 Mb deletion del(10)(p12.1p12.31).
Surprisingly, the BAC clone RP11-56H7 that contains NEBL, an apparent downstream 
gene of the cardiogenic transcription factor HAND2 previously shown to be deleted
in the patients with DiGeorge 2 syndrome and 10p13 deletion, was deleted in our
patient with 10p12.1-p12.31 deletion. In addition, we provide clinical data and
results of molecular analysis for a patient with multiple congenital anomalies
including Ebstein's anomaly, kidney malformations, and 10p13-p14 deletion. We
also reviewed 19 patients with congenital heart defects and deletions involving
10p and propose that atrial septal defect (ASD) is a common cardiac anomaly
associated with DiGeorge 2 syndrome. Based on genotype-phenotype analysis of
published patients and those reported herein, we propose an approximately 1.0 Mb 
critical region between loci D10S547 and D10S2176 in 10p14 to be associated with 
ASD. Considering that septal defects are the most frequent congenital heart
anomaly, we suggest that further investigations in the 10p critical region are
important to identify gene(s) responsible for this common birth defect.

Copyright 2004 Blackwell Munksgaard

PMID: 15253763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. J Biol Chem. 2004 Sep 3;279(36):37685-92. Epub 2004 Jun 28.

Paraxis is a basic helix-loop-helix protein that positively regulates
transcription through binding to specific E-box elements.

Wilson-Rawls J(1), Rhee JM, Rawls A.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA.
nrawls@imap4.asu.edu

Members of the Twist subfamily of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors
are important for the specification of mesodermal derivatives during vertebrate
embryogenesis. This subfamily includes both transcriptional activators such as
scleraxis, Hand2, and Dermo-1 and repressors such as Twist and Hand1. Paraxis is 
a member of this subfamily, and it has been shown to regulate morphogenetic
events during somitogenesis, including the transition of cells from mesenchyme to
epithelium and maintaining anterior/posterior polarity. Mice deficient in paraxis
exhibit a caudal truncation of the axial skeleton and fusion of the vertebrae.
Considering the developmental importance of paraxis, it is important for future
studies to understand the molecular basis of its activity. Here we demonstrate
that paraxis can function as a transcriptional activator when it forms a
heterodimer with E12. Paraxis is able to bind to a set of E-boxes that overlaps
with the closely related scleraxis. Paraxis expression precedes that of scleraxis
in the region of the somite fated to form the axial skeleton and tendons and is
able to direct transcription from an E-box found in the scleraxis promoter.
Further, in the absence of paraxis, Pax-1 is no longer expressed in the somites
and presomitic mesoderm. These results suggest that paraxis may regulate early
events during chondrogenesis by positively directing transcription of
sclerotome-specific genes.

PMID: 15226298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Science. 2004 Jun 11;304(5677):1669-72.

A dual role for Hox genes in limb anterior-posterior asymmetry.

Zákány J(1), Kmita M, Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Animal Biology and National Program Frontiers in
Genetics, University of Geneva, Sciences III, Quai Ernest Ansermet 30, 1211
Geneva 4, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Science. 2004 Jun 11;304(5677):1610-1.

Anterior-to-posterior patterning, the process whereby our digits are differently 
shaped, is a key aspect of limb development. It depends on the localized
expression in posterior limb bud of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and the morphogenetic
potential of its diffusing product. By using an inversion of and a large
deficiency in the mouse HoxD cluster, we found that a perturbation in the early
collinear expression of Hoxd11, Hoxd12, and Hoxd13 in limb buds led to a loss of 
asymmetry. Ectopic Hox gene expression triggered abnormal Shh transcription,
which in turn induced symmetrical expression of Hox genes in digits, thereby
generating double posterior limbs. We conclude that early posterior restriction
of Hox gene products sets up an anterior-posterior prepattern, which determines
the localized activation of Shh. This signal is subsequently translated into
digit morphological asymmetry by promoting the late expression of Hoxd genes, two
collinear processes relying on opposite genomic topographies, upstream and
downstream Shh signaling.

PMID: 15192229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Science. 2004 Jun 11;304(5677):1610-1.

Developmental biology. Hox genes in the limb: a play in two acts.

Deschamps J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, Uppsalalaan 8, 3584CT Utrecht, Netherlands.
jacqueli@niob.knaw.nl

Comment on
    Science. 2004 Jun 11;304(5677):1669-72.

PMID: 15192209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Mech Dev. 2004 Jun;121(6):559-72.

Ablation of the CLP-1 gene leads to down-regulation of the HAND1 gene and
abnormality of the left ventricle of the heart and fetal death.

Huang F(1), Wagner M, Siddiqui MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Center for Cardiovascular and Muscle
Research, State University of New York, Health Science Center at Brooklyn, Box 5,
450 Clarkson Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11203, USA.

We have recently reported that cardiac lineage protein-1 (CLP-1), a nuclear
protein with an acidic region that constitutes a potential protein-protein
interaction domain, regulates transcription of the cardiac myosin light chain-2v 
(MLC-2v) gene promoter in a manner consistent with its being a transcriptional
co-activator or regulator. To test the postulate that CLP-1 is a regulator of
cardiac genes we ablated the CLP-1 gene in mice. Past embryonic day (E)16.5,
CLP-1 null alleles did not show Mendelian inheritance suggesting that absence of 
CLP-1 was lethal in late fetal stages. CLP-1 (-/-) fetal hearts exhibited a
reduced left ventricular chamber with thickened myocardial walls, features
suggestive of cardiac hypertrophy. Electron microscopic analysis of E16.5 CLP-1
(-/-) ventricular myocardium showed a marked decline in cell density and altered 
nuclear and myofibril morphologies similar to that seen in animal models of
hypertrophic heart. Analysis of contractile and non-contractile protein genes
known to be re-expressed during cardiac hypertrophy showed them to have higher
expression levels in CLP-1 (-/-) hearts thereby confirming the hypertrophic
phenotype at the molecular level. Analysis of cardiac development genes showed
that expression of the HAND1 transcription factor, a gene involved in patterning 
of the heart tube and down-regulated in hypertrophic hearts, was also
significantly reduced in CLP-1 (-/-) fetal hearts. CLP-1 and HAND1 have similar
expression patterns in the developing heart ventricles. These data suggest that
CLP-1 and the HAND transcription factors may be part of a genetic program
critical to proper heart development, perturbation of which can lead to
cardiomyopathy.

Copyright 2004 Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 15172687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jun;24(11):4627-35.

Role of Hand1/eHAND in the dorso-ventral patterning and interventricular septum
formation in the embryonic heart.

Togi K(1), Kawamoto T, Yamauchi R, Yoshida Y, Kita T, Tanaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Social Service, Kyoto University Hospital, 54
Shogoin-Kawahara-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. makoto@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Molecular mechanisms for the dorso-ventral patterning and interventricular septum
formation in the embryonic heart are unknown. To investigate a role of
Hand1/eHAND in cardiac chamber formation, we generated Hand1/eHAND knock-in mice 
where Hand1/eHAND cDNA was placed under the control of the MLC2V promoter. In
Hand1/eHAND knock-in mice, the outer curvature of the right and left ventricles
expanded more markedly. Moreover, there was no interventricular groove or septum 
formation, although molecularly, Hand1/eHAND knock-in hearts had two ventricles. 
However, the morphology of the inner curvature of the ventricles, the
atrioventricular canal, and the outflow tract was not affected by Hand1/eHAND
expression. Furthermore, expression of Hand1/eHAND in the whole ventricles
altered the expression patterns of Chisel, ANF, and Hand2/dHAND but did not
affect Tbx5 expression. In contrast, the interventricular septum formed normally 
in transgenic embryos overexpressing Hand1/eHAND in the right ventricle but not
in the boundary region. These results suggested that Hand1/eHAND is involved in
expansion of the ventricular walls and that absence of Hand1/eHAND expression in 
the boundary region between the right and left ventricles may be critical in the 
proper formation of the interventricular groove and septum. Furthermore,
Hand1/eHAND is not a master regulatory gene that specifies the left ventricle
myocyte lineage but may control the dorso-ventral patterning in concert with
additional genes.

PMCID: PMC416422
PMID: 15143159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Neurosci Res. 2004 Jun 1;76(5):613-22.

JAB1 enhances HAND2 transcriptional activity by regulating HAND2 DNA binding.

Dai YS(1), Hao J, Bonin C, Morikawa Y, Cserjesi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Cellular Biophysics, Columbia University, New
York, New York, USA.

HAND2 (also known as dHAND) is a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription
factor essential for development of the heart, limbs, and neural crest-derived
lineages. HAND2 expression is observed in a number of tissues derived from the
neural crest, including components of the peripheral nervous system, where it has
been shown to regulate sympathetic nervous system development. Here we show that 
HAND2 is expressed in both the sympathetic and the parasympathetic divisions of
the autonomic nervous system (ANS). How HAND2 functions during development of
these neuronal lineages is uncertain. An important mechanism involved in HAND2's 
function is its interactions with other proteins. To understand better the
molecular interactions regulating HAND2 during ANS development, we employed a
yeast two-hybrid screen to identify HAND2-interacting proteins. One protein
identified in this screen, Jun activation domain-binding protein (JAB1), is
involved in numerous cell processes, including regulation of transcription and
protein turnover. We show that JAB1 binds directly to the HLH domain of HAND2 and
increases HAND2 transcription-stimulating activity. However, JAB1 does not
contain a transcriptional activation domain, nor does it recruit an activation
domain to HAND2. Our data indicate that JAB1 augments HAND2 transcriptional
activity by enhancing HAND2 DNA binding. We further show that enhanced HAND2 DNA 
binding is mediated through the HLH domain and not through the DNA binding
domain. These results show that JAB1 regulates the transcriptional activity of
HAND2 in a unique manner that may account, in part, for the apparent ability of
this bHLH factor to regulate gene expression through numerous mechanisms.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15139020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Development. 2004 May;131(9):2195-204. Epub 2004 Apr 8.

Extra-embryonic vasculature development is regulated by the transcription factor 
HAND1.

Morikawa Y(1), Cserjesi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, Louisiana State University Health
Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor HAND1 (also called eHAND) 
is expressed in numerous tissues during development including the heart, limbs,
neural crest derivatives and extra-embryonic membranes. To investigate the role
of Hand1 during development, we generated a Hand1 knockout mouse. Hand1-null mice
survived to the nine somite stage at which time they succumbed to numerous
developmental defects. One striking defect in Hand1-null embryos was the
accumulation of hematopoietic cells between the yolk sac and the amnion because
of defects in the yolk sac vasculature. In Hand1-null yolk sacs, vasculogenesis
occurs but vascular refinement was arrested. Analysis of angiogenic genes in
extra-embryonic membranes showed that most are expressed at normal levels in
Hand1-null embryos but several, including Vegf, Ang1 and ephrin B2, and gene
components of the Notch pathway are upregulated. In the absence of Hand1 the
expression of the bHLH factor Hand2 is also enhanced. Although HAND1 and HAND2
share many structural features, and Hand2 is required for vasculature development
in yolk sacs, enhanced expression of Hand2 is insufficient to compensate for the 
loss of Hand1. The most striking aspect of the vascular defect in Hand1 mutant
yolk sacs is the abnormal distribution of smooth muscle cells. During normal
angiogenesis, vascular smooth muscle precursors are recruited to the
peri-endothelial tissue before differentiation, however, in Hand1 null yolk sacs,
smooth muscle cells are not recruited but differentiate in clusters distributed
throughout the mesoderm. These data indicate that Hand1 is required for
angiogenesis and vascular smooth muscle recruitment in the yolk sac.

PMID: 15073150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Mol Cell. 2003 Nov;12(5):1225-37.

PKA, PKC, and the protein phosphatase 2A influence HAND factor function: a
mechanism for tissue-specific transcriptional regulation.

Firulli BA(1), Howard MJ, McDaid JR, McIlreavey L, Dionne KM, Centonze VE,
Cserjesi P, Virshup DM, Firulli AB.

Author information: 
(1)Wells Center for Pediatric Research, James Whitcomb Riley Hospital for
Children, 702 Barnhill Drive, Room 2666, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2003 Nov;12(5):1061-2.

The bHLH factors HAND1 and HAND2 are required for heart, vascular, neuronal,
limb, and extraembryonic development. Unlike most bHLH proteins, HAND factors
exhibit promiscuous dimerization properties. We report that
phosphorylation/dephosphorylation via PKA, PKC, and a specific heterotrimeric
protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) modulates HAND function. The PP2A targeting-subunit
B56delta specifically interacts with HAND1 and -2, but not other bHLH proteins.
PKA and PKC phosphorylate HAND proteins in vivo, and only B56delta-containing
PP2A complexes reduce levels of HAND1 phosphorylation. During RCHOI trophoblast
stem cell differentiation, B56delta expression is downregulated and HAND1
phosphorylation increases. Mutations in phosphorylated residues result in altered
HAND1 dimerization and biological function. Taken together, these results suggest
that site-specific phosphorylation regulates HAND factor functional specificity.

PMID: 14636580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Mol Cell. 2003 Nov;12(5):1061-2.

Regulating intertwining proteins.

Murre C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, 0377, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Comment on
    Mol Cell. 2003 Nov;12(5):1225-37.

PMID: 14636564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Cell Sci. 2003 Dec 15;116(Pt 24):5005-13.

Cell history determines the maintenance of transcriptional differences between
left and right ventricular cardiomyocytes in the developing mouse heart.

Kelly RG(1), Lemonnier M, Zaffran S, Munk A, Buckingham ME.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS URA 2578, Department of Developmental Biology, Pasteur Institute, 25 Rue 
du Dr Roux, Paris 75015, France. rkelly@pasteur.fr

The molecular mechanisms that establish and maintain transcriptional differences 
between cardiomyocytes in the left and right ventricular chambers are unkown. We 
have previously analysed a myosin light chain 3f transgene containing an nlacZ
reporter gene, which is transcribed in left but not right ventricular
cardiomyocytes. In this report we examine the mechanisms involved in maintaining 
regionalised transgene expression. Primary cardiomyocytes prepared from left and 
right ventricular walls of transgenic mice were found to maintain transgene
expression status in culture. However, similar cultures prepared from
nontransgenic mice or rats show uniform expression after transient transfection
of Mlc3f constructs, suggesting that the mechanism responsible for differential
expression of the transgene between left and right ventricular cells does not
operate on transiently introduced molecules. These data suggest that
developmental cell history determines transgene expression status. Maintenance of
transgene expression status is regulated by a cell-autonomous mechanism that is
independent of DNA methylation, trichostatin A-sensitive histone deacetylation
and miss-expression of transcription factors that are expressed in the left or
right ventricles of the embryonic heart. Parallels between Mlc3f transgene
repression in right ventricular cardiomyocytes and polycomb-mediated silencing in
Drosophila suggest that Mlc3f regulatory sequences included on the transgene may 
contain a cellular memory module that is switched into an on or off state during 
early cardiogenesis. Epigenetic mechanisms may therefore be involved in
maintaining patterning of the mammalian myocardium.

PMID: 14625394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Development. 2003 Dec;130(24):5953-64. Epub 2003 Oct 22.

Tbx5 specifies the left/right ventricles and ventricular septum position during
cardiogenesis.

Takeuchi JK(1), Ohgi M, Koshiba-Takeuchi K, Shiratori H, Sakaki I, Ogura K,
Saijoh Y, Ogura T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and
Technology, 8916-5, Takayama, Ikoma, Nara 630-0101, Japan.

Extensive misexpression studies were carried out to explore the roles played by
Tbx5, the expression of which is excluded from the right ventricle (RV) during
cardiogenesis. When Tbx5 was misexpressed ubiquitously, ventricular septum was
not formed, resulting in a single ventricle. In such heart, left ventricle
(LV)-specific ANF gene was induced. In search of the putative RV factor(s), we
have found that chick Tbx20 is expressed in the RV, showing a complementary
fashion to Tbx5. In the Tbx5-misexpressed heart, this gene was repressed. When
misexpression was spatially partial, leaving small Tbx5-negative area in the
right ventricle, ventricular septum was shifted rightwards, resulting in a small 
RV with an enlarged LV. Focal expression induced an ectopic boundary of
Tbx5-positive and -negative regions in the right ventricle, at which an
additional septum was formed. Similar results were obtained from the transient
transgenic mice. In such hearts, expression patterns of dHAND and eHAND were
changed with definitive cardiac abnormalities. Furthermore, we report that human 
ANF promoter is synergistically activated by Tbx5, Nkx2.5 and GATA4. This
activation was abrogated by Tbx20, implicating the pivotal roles of interactions 
among these heart-specific factors. Taken together, our data indicate that Tbx5
specifies the identity of LV through tight interactions among several
heart-specific factors, and highlight the essential roles of Tbx5 in cardiac
development.

PMID: 14573514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Dev Biol. 2003 Oct 1;262(1):183-93.

HAND2 synergistically enhances transcription of dopamine-beta-hydroxylase in the 
presence of Phox2a.

Xu H(1), Firulli AB, Zhang X, Howard MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Medical College of Ohio, 3000
Arlington Ave., Toledo, OH 43614, USA.

Noradrenergic neuronal identity and differentiation are controlled by cascades of
transcription factors acting downstream of BMP4, including the basic
helix-loop-helix DNA binding protein HAND2 and the homeodomain factor Phox2a.
Dopamine-beta-hydroxylase (DBH) is the penultimate enzyme required for synthesis 
of norepinephrine and is thus a noradrenergic cell type-specific marker. We have 
examined the interaction of HAND2 and Phox2a at the DBH promoter. Using transient
transfection of P19 or NT-2 cells, HAND2 is shown to synergistically enhance
Phox2a-driven transcriptional activity at the DBH promoter, an effect that is
enhanced by cAMP. While mutation of the Phox2a homeodomain binding sites HD1,
HD2, and HD3 results in the loss of HAND2/Phox2a transactivation of DBH, it is
the interaction of HAND2/Phox2a at the CRE/AP1-HD1/2 domains in the DBH enhancer 
that are required for synergistic activation by HAND2. We find that HAND2
functions as a transcriptional activator without directly binding to E-box
sequences in the DBH promoter, suggesting that HAND2-mediated DBH activity occurs
by protein-protein interactions with other transcriptional regulators. Although
we were unable to detect interaction of HAND2 and Phox2a in IP/Western blots,
HAND2 synergistic activation of DBH is blocked by E1A, suggesting that HAND2
interacts with CBP (cAMP response element binding protein) in this
transcriptional complex. In the presence of the putative HAND2 dimerization
partner, E12, synergistic activation of DBH transcription is titrated away,
suggesting that HAND2 does not functionally dimerize with E12 in the DBH
transcription complex. Our data suggest that HAND2 regulates cell type-specific
expression of norepinephrine in concert with Phox2a by a novel mechanism.

PMID: 14512028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Biol Chem. 2003 Dec 5;278(49):49652-60. Epub 2003 Sep 23.

The interaction between dHAND and Arix at the dopamine beta-hydroxylase promoter 
region is independent of direct dHAND binding to DNA.

Rychlik JL(1), Gerbasi V, Lewis EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health and Science
University, Portland, Oregon 97239, USA. rychlikj@ohsu.edu

Dopamine beta-hydroxylase (DBH) catalyzes the production of norepinephrine, and
its expression defines the noradrenergic phenotype. Transcription factors dHAND, 
a basic helix-loop-helix protein, and Arix/Phox2a, a homeoprotein, have been
demonstrated to play a role in the differentiation and maintenance of
catecholaminergic neurons. Three Arix regulatory sites have been identified in
the DBH promoter proximal region, but there is no such evidence for dHAND.
Cotransfection with a DBH promoter-luciferase reporter construct plus dHAND or
dHAND-E12 expression plasmids did not alter luciferase activity, whereas
transfection with Arix resulted in a 2.5-fold stimulation of luciferase activity.
However, a 5.5-fold increase was observed when Arix and dHAND were combined, and 
an 8-fold level of expression was observed when Arix was transfected with a dHAND
mutant lacking the basic DNA-binding domain. When the homeodomain sites in the
DBH promoter proximal region were mutated, all activity was lost, demonstrating
dependence upon Arix-DNA interaction for transcriptional activation. In
electrophoretic mobility shift assays, the addition of dHAND decreased the amount
of Arix needed to elicit a mobility shift with the DBH homeodomain sites, and the
dHAND basic mutant potentiated Arix binding in a manner similar to wild-type
dHAND. The dHAND-Arix complex was dissociated upon the addition of an unlabeled
competitor containing a homeodomain, but not upon the addition of a competitor
containing E-boxes. Arix coprecipitated with antisera directed against
recombinant dHAND, demonstrating direct protein-protein interactions. These
results indicate that the activation of the DBH promoter by Arix is potentiated
by dHAND via a mechanism independent of a direct interaction of dHAND with DNA.

PMID: 14506227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Basic Res Cardiol. 2003 Sep;98(5):285-94. Epub 2003 Apr 16.

Upregulation of embryonic transcription factors in right ventricular hypertrophy.

Bär H(1), Kreuzer J, Cojoc A, Jahn L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Bergheimer Strasse 58, 69115 Heidelberg, Germany.
harald_baer@med.uni-heidelberg.de

Increased ventricular expression of genes encoding for various structural and
contractile proteins has been reported in cardiac hypertrophy. Mechanisms leading
to this altered gene expression are only partly understood. Recently, various
transcription factors (TF), among them GATA-4, Nkx-2.5/Csx, MEF-2 and the HAND
family (eHAND and dHAND), and their role in embryonic cardiac development have
been described. These transcription factors are known to have binding sites to
promotor regions of many genes known to be regulated in hypertrophy of adult
ventricular myocardium. We investigated the temporal and spatial expression
pattern of these transcription factors in a rat model of acute pressure-overload 
of the right ventricle, induced by banding (coarctation) of the pulmonary artery.
Expression of GATA-4, Nkx-2.5/Csx, MEF-2 and dHAND protein was found to increase 
in the right ventricle after the banding procedure as determined by
immunohistochemistry and western blotting. A marker of the onset of cardiac
hypertrophy was expression of ANP protein. We conclude that TF known to regulate 
embryonic heart development are involved in the adaptational response of adult
ventricular myocardium to pressure overload.

PMID: 12955401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Development. 2003 Oct;130(20):5043-52.

The zebrafish van gogh mutation disrupts tbx1, which is involved in the DiGeorge 
deletion syndrome in humans.

Piotrowski T(1), Ahn DG, Schilling TF, Nair S, Ruvinsky I, Geisler R, Rauch GJ,
Haffter P, Zon LI, Zhou Y, Foott H, Dawid IB, Ho RK.

Author information: 
(1)National Institutes of Health, NICHD, LMG, Bldg. 6B, 9000 Rockville Pike,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. piotrowski@neuro.utah.edu

The van gogh (vgo) mutant in zebrafish is characterized by defects in the ear,
pharyngeal arches and associated structures such as the thymus. We show that vgo 
is caused by a mutation in tbx1, a member of the large family of T-box genes.
tbx1 has been recently suggested to be a major contributor to the cardiovascular 
defects in DiGeorge deletion syndrome (DGS) in humans, a syndrome in which
several neural crest derivatives are affected in the pharyngeal arches. Using
cell transplantation studies, we demonstrate that vgo/tbx1 acts cell autonomously
in the pharyngeal mesendoderm and influences the development of neural
crest-derived cartilages secondarily. Furthermore, we provide evidence for
regulatory interactions between vgo/tbx1 and edn1 and hand2, genes that are
implicated in the control of pharyngeal arch development and in the etiology of
DGS.

PMID: 12952905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Biochemistry (Mosc). 2003 Jun;68(6):650-7.

Regulatory factors involved in cardiogenesis.

Zheng B(1), Wen JK, Han M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medicine,
Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang 050017, China. wjk@hebmu.edu.cn

Determination of factors involved in cardiogenesis is fundamental to our
understanding of heart growth and development. There are several families of
transcription factors that play a role in cardiomyogenesis including the Nkx2,
GATA, and MEF2 families. In this review, we describe factors implicated in
development of cardiac tissues followed by a description of interactions among
them.

PMID: 12943510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Gene. 2003 Jul 17;312:27-40.

A HANDful of questions: the molecular biology of the heart and neural crest
derivatives (HAND)-subclass of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors.

Firulli AB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Wells Center for Pediatric Research, James Whitcomb Riley Hospital for
Children, Indiana University School of Medicine, 702 Barnhill Drive, Room 2666,
Indianapolis, IN 46202-5225, USA. tfirulli@iupui.edu

The HAND subclass of basic Helix-loop-helix factors is comprised of two members
HAND1 and HAND2. HAND genes are present within the genomes of organisms ranging
from flies to man. Experiments employing chick embryology, tissue culture, and
gene targeting in mice show that HAND function is critical for the specification 
and/or differentiation of extraembryonic structures that include the yolk sac,
placenta, and the cells of the trophoblast lineages. HAND factors also play key
roles in cardiac, gut, sympathetic neuronal development and in the proper
development of tissues populated by HAND-expressing neural crest cells, including
regions of the developing vasculature, the limbs, the jaw, and teeth.
Surprisingly, nearly 10 years after their initial identification and
characterization, little is understood about the nature of the downstream target 
genes which HAND1 and HAND2 regulate, whether the nature of their transcriptional
regulation is positive or negative, or if they modulate genetic programs common
to these diverse tissue types or if they drive unique subsets of genes that
contribute to tissue identity. At the core of these questions is by which
mechanisms do HAND factors modulate biological activity? Do they behave like
classical class B bHLH factors or is their function more complex requiring a
rethinking of the dogma? What follows is a review of what is currently known
about HAND factors and a reflection on why elucidating their role in the
biological programs within which they participate has been so difficult.

PMID: 12909338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 2002;67:121-5.

Molecular mechanisms of ventricular hypoplasia.

Srivastava D(1), Gottlieb PD, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and Molecular Biology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390-9148, USA.

We have established the beginnings of a road map to understand how ventricular
cells become specified, differentiate, and expand into a functional cardiac
chamber (Fig. 5). The transcriptional networks described here provide clear
evidence that disruption of pathways affecting ventricular growth could be the
underlying etiology in a subset of children born with malformation of the right
or left ventricle. As we learn details of the precise mechanisms through which
the critical factors function, the challenge will lie in devising innovative
methods to augment or modify the effects of gene mutations on ventricular
development. Because most congenital heart disease likely occurs in a setting of 
heterozygous, predisposing mutations of one or more genes, modulation of activity
of critical pathways in a preventive fashion may be useful in averting disease in
genetically susceptible individuals.

PMID: 12858532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Development. 2003 Aug;130(15):3515-24.

The zebrafish fgf24 mutant identifies an additional level of Fgf signaling
involved in vertebrate forelimb initiation.

Fischer S(1), Draper BW, Neumann CJ.

Author information: 
(1)EMBL, Meyerhofstrasse 1, D-69117 Heidelberg, Germany.

The development of vertebrate limb buds is triggered in the lateral plate
mesoderm by a cascade of genes, including members of the Fgf and Wnt families, as
well as the transcription factor tbx5. Fgf8, which is expressed in the
intermediate mesoderm, is thought to initiate forelimb formation by activating
wnt2b, which then induces the expression of tbx5 in the adjacent lateral plate
mesoderm. Tbx5, in turn, is required for the activation of fgf10, which relays
the limb inducing signal to the overlying ectoderm. We show that the zebrafish
fgf24 gene, which belongs to the Fgf8/17/18 subfamily of Fgf ligands, acts
downstream of tbx5 to activate fgf10 expression in the lateral plate mesoderm. We
also show that fgf24 activity is necessary for the migration of tbx5-expressing
cells to the fin bud, and for the activation of shh, but not hand2, expression in
the posterior fin bud.

PMID: 12810598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Dev Dyn. 2003 Jun;227(2):280-90.

Intracellular calcium plays an essential role in cardiac development.

Porter GA Jr(1), Makuck RF, Rivkees SA.

Author information: 
(1)Yale Child Health Research Center and Department of Pediatrics, Division of
Cardiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut
06520-8064, USA. george.porter@yale.edu

Intracellular calcium signaling plays an essential role in cardiac physiology and
modulates cardiac gene expression. However, the role that intracellular calcium
signaling plays during cardiac development is not known. To address this issue,
we examined the effects of altered intracellular calcium levels on cardiac
morphogenesis. In acutely cultured mouse embryos, L-type calcium channel blockade
decreased resting intracellular calcium levels and inhibited calcium transients. 
Embryos cultured at embryonic day (E) 7.5-8.5 in the presence of the L-type
calcium channel blockers nifedipine and verapamil developed hearts that had a
large left ventricle, lacked a right ventricle and had a long, thin outflow
tract. If embryos were cultured at E7.5, calcium channel blockade also induced an
abnormal, anterior cardiac loop. These alterations in development were not due to
altered cardiac function, as heart rates at the end of the culture period were
not affected by calcium channel blockade and blood flow was observed. Treatment
with nifedipine altered the mRNA expression of the transcription factor Gata4,
which was absent in the developing ventricles, and the sarcomeric protein Mylpc
(myosin light chain 2V), which was decreased distal to the left ventricle and was
absent at the site of the developing right ventricle. In contrast, the expression
pattern of other cardiac transcription factor (Hand1, Hand2, Mef2c, Nkx2-5) and
cytoskeletal protein (Myhca, Tagln) mRNA did not change with calcium channel
blockade. These data demonstrate that proper intracellular calcium signaling is
essential for normal cardiac looping, gene expression, and organ development.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12761855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Dev Biol. 2003 May 15;257(2):263-77.

dHAND-Cre transgenic mice reveal specific potential functions of dHAND during
craniofacial development.

Ruest LB(1), Dager M, Yanagisawa H, Charité J, Hammer RE, Olson EN, Yanagisawa M,
Clouthier DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Craniofacial Biology, University of
Louisville, Louisville, KY 40292, USA.

Most of the bone, cartilage, and connective tissue of the craniofacial region
arise from cephalic neural crest cells. Presumably, patterning differences in
crest cells are a result of regional action of transcription factors within the
developing pharyngeal arches. The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor
dHAND/HAND2 is expressed throughout much of the neural crest-derived mesenchyme
of the pharyngeal arches, suggesting that it plays a crucial role in craniofacial
development. However, targeted inactivation of the dHAND gene results in
embryonic lethality by E10.5 due to vascular defects, preventing further analysis
of the role of dHAND in cephalic neural crest cell development. In order to
examine putative roles of dHAND during later stages of embryogenesis, we have
used a transgenic lineage marker approach, in which a portion of the dHAND
upstream region containing an enhancer that directs dHAND expression to the
pharyngeal arches is used to drive Cre recombinase expression. By crossing these 
dHAND-Cre transgenic mice with R26R mice, we can follow the fate of cells that
expressed dHAND at any time during development by examining beta-galactosidase
activity. We show that dHAND is first expressed in postmigratory cephalic neural 
crest cells within the pharyngeal arches. In older embryos,
beta-galactosidase-labeled cells are observed in most of the neural crest-derived
lower jaw skeleton and surrounding connective tissues. However, labeled cells
only contribute to substructures within the middle ear, indicating that our
transgene is not globally expressed in cephalic neural crest cells within the
pharyngeal arches. Moreover, dHAND-Cre mice will provide a valuable tool for
tissue-specific inactivation of gene expression in multiple tissue types of
neural crest origin.

PMCID: PMC2830752
PMID: 12729557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Dev Biol. 2003 Mar 15;255(2):230-7.

Galphaq and Galpha11 proteins mediate endothelin-1 signaling in neural
crest-derived pharyngeal arch mesenchyme.

Ivey K(1), Tyson B, Ukidwe P, McFadden DG, Levi G, Olson EN, Srivastava D, Wilkie
TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, , Dallas, TX 75390-9104, USA.

Endothelin-A (ET(A)) is a G-protein-coupled receptor expressed in the neural
crest-derived mesenchyme of the pharyngeal arches during craniofacial
development. Targeted deletion of the ET(A) receptor or its ligand endothelin-1
(ET-1) causes cleft palate and hypoplasia of the mandible, otic cup, and tympanic
ring. Previously we showed that Galpha(q)/Galpha(11)-null mice die around E11.0, 
whereas Galpha(q)((-/-))Galpha(11)((+/-)) mice survive to birth with hypomorphic 
phenotypes similar to, but less severe than, ET(A) or ET-1-null mice. To
determine whether ET-1 signaling is transduced by Galpha(q)/Galpha(11) proteins, 
we examined the expression patterns of several ET-1 dependent and independent
transcription factors in Galpha(q)/Galpha(11)-deficient embryos. Expression of
genes encoding the ET-1-dependent transcription factors Dlx3, Dlx6, dHAND, and
eHAND was specifically downregulated in the pharyngeal arches of
Galpha(q)/Galpha(11)-deficient mice. In contrast, pharyngeal arch expression of
the homeobox gene Msx1, which is not regulated by ET-1 signaling, was maintained 
in these embryos. We conclude that the Galpha(q) and Galpha(11) proteins serve as
the intracellular mediators of ET-1 signaling in the pharyngeal arch mesenchyme.

PMID: 12648486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Development. 2003 Apr;130(7):1353-65.

Two endothelin 1 effectors, hand2 and bapx1, pattern ventral pharyngeal cartilage
and the jaw joint.

Miller CT(1), Yelon D, Stainier DY, Kimmel CB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, 1254 University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA.
ctm@stanford.edu

A conserved endothelin 1 signaling pathway patterns the jaw and other pharyngeal 
skeletal elements in mice, chicks and zebrafish. In zebrafish, endothelin 1 (edn1
or sucker) is required for formation of ventral cartilages and joints in the
anterior pharyngeal arches of young larvae. Here we present genetic analyses in
the zebrafish of two edn1 downstream targets, the bHLH transcription factor Hand2
and the homeobox transcription factor Bapx1, that mediate dorsoventral (DV)
patterning in the anterior pharyngeal arches. First we show that edn1-expressing 
cells in the first (mandibular) and second (hyoid) pharyngeal arch primordia are 
located most ventrally and surrounded by hand2-expressing cells. Next we show
that along the DV axis of the early first arch primordia, bapx1 is expressed in
an intermediate domain, which later marks the jaw joint, and this expression
requires edn1 function. bapx1 function is required for formation of the jaw
joint, the joint-associated retroarticular process of Meckel's cartilage, and the
retroarticular bone. Jaw joint expression of chd and gdf5 also requires bapx1
function. Similar to edn1, hand2 is required for ventral pharyngeal cartilage
formation. However, the early ventral arch edn1-dependent expression of five
genes (dlx3, EphA3, gsc, msxe and msxb) are all present in hand2 mutants.
Further, msxe and msxb are upregulated in hand2 mutant ventral arches. Slightly
later, an edn1-dependent ventral first arch expression domain of gsc is absent in
hand2 mutants, providing a common downstream target of edn1 and hand2. In hand2
mutants, bapx1 expression is present at the joint region, and expanded ventrally.
In addition, expression of eng2, normally restricted to first arch dorsal
mesoderm, expands ventrally in hand2 and edn1 mutants. Thus, ventral pharyngeal
specification involves repression of dorsal and intermediate (joint region)
fates. Together our results reveal two critical edn1 effectors that pattern the
vertebrate jaw: hand2 specifies ventral pharyngeal cartilage of the lower jaw and
bapx1 specifies the jaw joint.

PMID: 12588851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Development. 2003 Mar;130(6):1069-78.

Targeted deletion of a branchial arch-specific enhancer reveals a role of dHAND
in craniofacial development.

Yanagisawa H(1), Clouthier DE, Richardson JA, Charité J, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center at Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor dHAND is expressed in the
mesenchyme of branchial arches and the developing heart. Mice homozygous for a
dHAND (Hand2) null mutation die early in embryogenesis from cardiac
abnormalities, precluding analysis of the potential role of dHAND in branchial
arch development. Two independent enhancers control expression of dHAND in the
heart and branchial arches. Endothelin-1 (ET-1) signaling regulates the branchial
arch enhancer and is required for dHAND expression in the branchial arches. To
determine the potential role of dHAND in branchial arch development and to assess
the role of the ET-1-dependent enhancer in dHAND regulation in vivo, we deleted
this enhancer by homologous recombination. Mice lacking the dHAND branchial arch 
enhancer died perinatally and exhibited a spectrum of craniofacial defects that
included cleft palate, mandibular hypoplasia and cartilage malformations.
Expression of dHAND was abolished in the ventolateral regions of the first and
second branchial arches in these mutant mice, but expression was retained in a
ventral domain where the related transcription factor eHAND is expressed. We
conclude that dHAND plays an essential role in patterning and development of
skeletal elements derived from the first and second branchial arches and that
there are heterogeneous populations of cells in the branchial arches that rely on
different cis-regulatory elements for activation of dHAND transcription.

PMID: 12571099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Nucl Cardiol. 2003 Jan-Feb;10(1):63-70.

Building a heart: implications for congenital heart disease.

Srivastava D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Tex 75390-9148, USA. Deepak.Srivastava@utsouthwestern.edu

PMID: 12569333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Genet Med. 2002 Nov-Dec;4(6):464-7.

Cardiac phenotypes in chromosome 4q- syndrome with and without a deletion of the 
dHAND gene.

Huang T(1), Lin AE, Cox GF, Golden WL, Feldman GL, Ute M, Schrander-Stumpel C,
Kamisago M, Vermeulen SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University California, Irvine,
California 92697, USA.

PURPOSE: Terminal deletions of chromosome 4q are commonly associated with
cardiovascular malformations (CVMs). The dHAND gene (HAND2 heart and neural crest
derivative express 2), a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor expressed in
the developing heart, maps to 4q33. A targeted deletion in mouse shows that dHAND
plays an important role in heart development, suggesting that haploinsufficiency 
of in patients with 4q deletions may be causal for CVMs. The purpose of this
study is to examine the possible association between dHAND haploinsufficiency
with the CVMs that occur in patients with 4q terminal deletions.
METHODS: Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was performed with a dHAND
human genomic probe on five patients with terminal deletion at 4q33 or 4q34.
RESULTS: Of the three patients with a deletion of the dHAND locus, two had CVM
(both valvar pulmonic stenosis). Of the two patients without a deletion of the
dHAND gene, one had a small atrial septal defect noted on autopsy. In one of the 
patients with breakpoint on chromosome 4 assigned to 4q34.2 by GTG-banding, FISH 
revealed deletion of the dHAND gene.
CONCLUSION: The results suggest that cardiac phenotypes are very variable in
patients with the terminal deletion of chromosome 4q and that haploinsufficiency 
of the dHAND is not necessarily associated with CVMs. The correct cytogenetic
interpretation of terminal chromosome deletions might be augmented by FISH.

PMID: 12509719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Genomics. 2002 Dec;80(6):593-600.

Genetic and comparative mapping of genes dysregulated in mouse hearts lacking the
Hand2 transcription factor gene.

Villanueva MP(1), Aiyer AR, Muller S, Pletcher MT, Liu X, Emanuel B, Srivastava
D, Reeves RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

The helix-loop-helix transcription factor HAND2 plays a vital role in the
development of the heart, limb, facies, and other neural crest-derived
structures. We used differential display analysis to identify 33 putative
HAND2-regulated ESTs that are differentially expressed in Hand2(-/-) vs wild-type
mice. We determined the positions on mouse and human genetic maps of 29 of these 
by using the T31 mouse Radiation Hybrid panel, comparison to human genomic
sequence, and comparative mapping. We examined the conserved chromosomal
locations for phenotypes that involve development of heart, face, and limb
structures that are affected by HAND2. One EST mapped to a region of conserved
synteny between mouse chromosome 2 and human chromosome 10p. RACE analysis
extended the sequence and identified this cDNA as the mouse ortholog of human
nebulette, an actin-binding protein expressed in fetal heart. Nebulette was shown
to be deleted in DiGeorge Syndrome 2 patients with the proximal deletion of human
10p13-p14 that is associated with cardiac and craniofacial abnormalities.

PMID: 12504851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Biotechniques. 2002 Dec;33(6):1236-8, 1240.

Promoterless luciferase reporter gene is transactivated by basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factors.

Hong SJ(1), Chae H, Kim KS.

Author information: 
(1)McLean Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 115 Mill Street, Belmont, MA 02478,
USA.

PMID: 12503306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Int J Dev Biol. 2002;46(7):975-82.

The mouse polydactylous mutation, luxate (lx), causes anterior shift of the
anteroposterior border in the developing hindlimb bud.

Yada Y(1), Makino S, Chigusa-Ishiwa S, Shiroishi T.

Author information: 
(1)Ochanomizu University, Tokyo, Japan.

Pattern formation along the anterior-posterior axis of the vertebrate limb is
established upon activation of Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) in the zone of polarizing
activity (ZPA). Since many mouse mutants with preaxial polydactyly show ectopic
expression of Shh at the anterior margin of the limb buds, it has been thought to
be a primary defect caused by these mutations. We show here that the mouse
mutation luxate (lx) exhibits dose-dependent reduction in the size of the Fgf8
expression domain in the ectoderm from the initial stage of limb development.
This aberration was independent of Fgf10 expression in the limb mesenchyme. Shh
was induced in the mesenchyme underlying the posterior end of the Fgf8 expression
domain, indicating an anterior shift of Shh expression in lx hindlimb buds. Prior
to the ectopic induction of Shh, the expression domains of genes downstream from 
Shh, namely dHAND, Gli1, Ptc and Gre, which are normally expressed in posterior
mesenchyme of limb buds, expanded anteriorly on the lx hindlimb buds. Conversely,
the expression domains of anterior mesenchymal markers such as Gli3and Alx4
decreased in size. Thus, ectopic Shh is not a primary defect of the lx mutation. 
Rather, our results indicate that the lx mutation affects the positioning of the 
anteroposterior border in developing hindlimb buds.

PMID: 12455637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Gene Expr. 2002;10(5-6):279-93.

Transcripts encoding HAND genes are differentially expressed and regulated by
BMP4 and GDNF in developing avian gut.

Wu X(1), Howard MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Medical College of Ohio, Toledo, 3000 
Arlington Ave., OH 43614, USA.

Growth and transcription factors provide important developmental cues to neural
crest-derived precursors of enteric neurons. The basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factors, HAND2 and HAND1, are expressed in the gastrointestinal
tract, but neither the growth factors that induce their expression nor the cell
types that express them in the gut are known. We show that transcripts encoding
HAND2 are expressed in all segments of the developing gut while those encoding
HAND1 are confined to the small intestine and colon. Using in situ hybridization 
combined with immunostaining using cell type-specific antigens, we demonstrate
that transcripts encoding HAND2 are expressed in neurons of both the myenteric
and submucosal ganglia. Transcripts encoding HAND1 are expressed by cells in the 
epithelial lining of the small intestine and colon. The differential localization
of HAND2 and HAND1 is reflected in nonoverlapping patterns of regulation by
gut-derived factors. The expression of transcripts encoding HAND2 is increased in
neural crest-derived cells when cocultured with E4 gut, suggesting a gut-derived 
factor regulates expression of HAND genes. Exposure of gut-derived neural
crest-derived cells to BMP4 significantly increased the expression of HAND2 in
all gut segments. In the esophagus and gizzard, where HAND1 is not normally
expressed, treatment with BMP4 induced the expression of transcripts encoding
HAND1 in nonneural crest-derived cells. GDNF failed to induce consistent
expression of transcripts encoding HAND2 in neural crest cells but did support a 
modest increase in HAND2 expression in gut-derived crest cells obtained from the 
esophagus and colon. GDNF had no detectable effect on the expression of
transcripts encoding HAND1. These results suggest; 1) that HAND2 has a function
in the development of enteric neurons, and 2) that BMP and GDNF differentially
regulate HAND2 and HAND1 gene expression in the developing gastrointestinal
tract.

PMID: 12450220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Dev Genes Evol. 2002 Nov;212(10):473-85. Epub 2002 Sep 21.

The highly conserved cardiogenic bHLH factor Hand is specifically expressed in
circular visceral muscle progenitor cells and in all cell types of the dorsal
vessel during Drosophila embryogenesis.

Kölsch V(1), Paululat A.

Author information: 
(1)Universität Marburg, Fachbereich Biologie-Entwicklungsbiologie, Karl von
Frisch Strasse, 35032 Marburg, Germany.

The highly conserved basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor Hand plays a
crucial role in cardiogenesis, limb formation and other developmental processes
of vertebrates. Humans, mice and other higher vertebrates have two related genes,
dHand (also known as Hand2, Hed, Thing2) and eHand (also known as Hand1, Hxt,
Thing1), whereas fish and Drosophila have only a single hand gene. We cloned
Drosophila hand and studied the embryonic expression in detail by using various
tissue-specific markers that allowed us to analyze the identity of
hand-expressing cells. We found hand to be expressed in the entire heart,
including all cardioblasts and pericardial cells, in the progenitors of the
circular visceral muscles, the lymph gland and garland cells, and in a few cells 
in the CNS. The expression of Drosophila hand starts after the inductive activity
of the early regulators in these tissues, e.g. Tinman and Bagpipe, suggesting a
role of Hand in differentiation rather than in tissue determination. In many
aspects the expression pattern of Drosophila hand resembles the patterns of its
vertebrates orthologues, for instance in cardiac tissues. We assume that Hand
proteins might play a highly conserved role throughout evolution.

PMID: 12424518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Development. 2002 Dec;129(24):5707-17.

Molecular control of ciliary neuron development: BMPs and downstream
transcriptional control in the parasympathetic lineage.

Müller F(1), Rohrer H.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Hirnforschung, Abteilung Neurochemie,
Deutschordenstrasse 46, 60528 Frankfurt/Main, Germany.

The generation of noradrenergic sympathetic neurons is controlled by BMPs and the
downstream transcription factors Mash1, Phox2b, Phox2a and dHand. We examined the
role of these signals in developing cholinergic parasympathetic neurons. The
expression of Mash1 (Cash1), Phox2b and Phox2a in the chick ciliary ganglion is
followed by the sequential expression of panneuronal, noradrenergic and
cholinergic marker genes. BMPs are expressed at the site where ciliary ganglia
form and are essential and sufficient for ciliary neuron development. Unlike
sympathetic neurons, ciliary neurons do not express dHand; noradrenergic gene
expression is eventually lost but can be maintained by ectopic dHand expression. 
Together, these results demonstrate a common BMP dependence of sympathetic
neurons and parasympathetic ciliary neurons and implicate dHand in the
maintenance of noradrenergic gene expression in the autonomic nervous system.

PMID: 12421710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Cell Tissue Res. 2002 Nov;310(2):201-12. Epub 2002 Sep 14.

Tooth-type specific expression of dHAND/Hand2: possible involvement in murine
lower incisor morphogenesis.

Abe M(1), Tamamura Y, Yamagishi H, Maeda T, Kato J, Tabata MJ, Srivastava D,
Wakisaka S, Kurisu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Osaka University
Graduate School of Dentistry, 1-8, Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.
makoto@dent.osaka-u.ac.jp

dHAND/Hand2 is a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor required for the
development of the heart, pharyngeal arches, and vasculature and is expressed
during embryogenesis. However, there are no reports on the involvement of the
dHAND gene in tooth development. In the present study, the expression of dHAND
was examined in developing tooth germs of mice. The dHAND gene was expressed in
the mesenchyme of the presumptive incisor region of the lower jaw at an early
stage and in the mesenchyme of the lower incisor tooth germ at a later stage.
However, the dHAND gene was not expressed in the upper incisor region or the
upper and lower molar regions during jaw development. Treatment of tooth germ
explants of lower incisors with antisense oligodeoxinucleotide (ODN) against
dHAND prevented the differentiation of tooth germ cells, including ameloblasts
and odontoblasts, the formation of dentin and enamel, and the proliferation of
tooth germ cells and increased the apoptosis of tooth germ cells, suggesting that
dHAND is essential for these cells during development. On the other hand, the
treatment of tooth germ explants of upper incisor and upper or lower molars did
not induce severe effects on their development. Treatment of the explants with
basic fibroblast growth factor in association with antisense ODN partially
rescued them from the effects of antisense ODN. The present results suggest that 
the dHAND gene plays important roles in type-specific development of lower
incisors, and that basic fibroblast growth factor is involved downstream of the
dHAND pathway in tooth germ cells.

PMID: 12397375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2002 Oct;34(10):1335-44.

The basic-helix-loop-helix transcription factor HAND2 directly regulates
transcription of the atrial naturetic peptide gene.

Thattaliyath BD(1), Firulli BA, Firulli AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Mail Code-7756, The University of Texas Health
Science Center at San Antonio, 7703 Floyd Curl Drive, San Antonio, TX 78229-3900,
USA.

Comment in
    J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2002 Oct;34(10):1287-91.

The HAND basic Helix-Loop-Helix (bHLH) transcription factors are essential for
the development of heart and extra embryonic structures. Although essential for
embryonic development, the molecular pathways in which HAND factors participate
are poorly understood. In efforts to identify downstream transcriptional targets,
we have determined that HAND2 regulates the transcription of the Atrial Naturetic
Peptide (ANP) gene. Results show that ANP expression is reduced in HAND2 null
mice. Transactivation assays show significant transcriptional upregulation of ANP
by HAND2 and cotransfection experiments using HAND2 and E12 suggest that an
E-protein/HAND heterodimer is the likely trans -acting complex. The required cis 
-elements reside within a 258bp proximal region that contains three
evolutionarily conserved Ebox consensus sites. Surprisingly, mutations in these
three sites suggest HAND2 activity is DNA-binding independent. In addition, HAND2
and the homeobox factor Nkx2.5 exhibit transcriptional synergy in the regulation 
of ANP. Taken together, this data shows that HAND2 is an upstream transcriptional
regulator of ANP expression, and furthermore HAND2 can synergistically interact
with Nkx2.5, showing a functional relationship between HAND2 and Nkx2.5
supporting the genetic observation, that mice null for both HAND2 and Nkx2.5 lack
ventricle specification.

PMID: 12392994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2002 Oct;34(10):1287-91.

Cardiac-specific gene expression: a HANDful of factors.

Miano JM.

Comment on
    J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2002 Oct;34(10):1335-44.

PMID: 12392986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Development. 2002 Oct;129(20):4729-38.

Development of chromaffin cells depends on MASH1 function.

Huber K(1), Brühl B, Guillemot F, Olson EN, Ernsberger U, Unsicker K.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroanatomy, Interdisciplinary Center for Neurosciences (IZN), University of 
Heidelberg, INF 307, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

The sympathoadrenal (SA) cell lineage is a derivative of the neural crest (NC),
which gives rise to sympathetic neurons and neuroendocrine chromaffin cells.
Signals that are important for specification of these two types of cells are
largely unknown. MASH1 plays an important role for neuronal as well as
catecholaminergic differentiation. Mash1 knockout mice display severe deficits in
sympathetic ganglia, yet their adrenal medulla has been reported to be largely
normal suggesting that MASH1 is essential for neuronal but not for neuroendocrine
differentiation. We show now that MASH1 function is necessary for the development
of the vast majority of chromaffin cells. Most adrenal medullary cells in
Mash1(-/-) mice identified by Phox2b immunoreactivity, lack the catecholaminergic
marker tyrosine hydroxylase. Mash1 mutant and wild-type mice have almost
identical numbers of Phox2b-positive cells in their adrenal glands at embryonic
day (E) 13.5; however, only one-third of the Phox2b-positive adrenal cell
population seen in Mash1(+/+) mice is maintained in Mash1(-/-) mice at birth.
Similar to Phox2b, cells expressing Phox2a and Hand2 (dHand) clearly outnumber
TH-positive cells. Most cells in the adrenal medulla of Mash1(-/-) mice do not
contain chromaffin granules, display a very immature, neuroblast-like phenotype, 
and, unlike wild-type adrenal chromaffin cells, show prolonged expression of
neurofilament and Ret comparable with that observed in wild-type sympathetic
ganglia. However, few chromaffin cells in Mash1(-/-) mice become PNMT positive
and downregulate neurofilament and Ret expression. Together, these findings
suggest that the development of chromaffin cells does depend on MASH1 function
not only for catecholaminergic differentiation but also for general chromaffin
cell differentiation.

PMID: 12361965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Oct 4;297(4):870-5.

HAND1 and HAND2 are expressed in the adult-rodent heart and are modulated during 
cardiac hypertrophy.

Thattaliyath BD(1), Livi CB, Steinhelper ME, Toney GM, Firulli AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, The University of Texas Health Science Center at San
Antonio, 7703 Floyd Curl Drive, Mail Code-7756, San Antonio, TX 78229-3900, USA.

The HAND basic Helix-Loop-Helix (bHLH) transcription factors are essential for
normal cardiac and extraembryonic development. Although highly evolutionarily
conserved genes, HAND cardiac expression patterns differ across species. Mouse
expression of HAND1 and HAND2 was reported absent in the adult heart. Human HAND 
genes are expressed in the adult heart and HAND1 expression is downregulated in
cardiomyopathies. As rodent and human expression profiles are inconsistent, we
re-examined expression of HAND1 and HAND2 in adult-rodent hearts. HAND1 and HAND2
are expressed in adult-rodent hearts and HAND2 is expressed in the atria.
Induction of cardiac hypertrophy shows modulation of HAND expression,
corresponding with observations in human cardiomyopathy. The downregulation of
HAND expression observed in rodent hypertrophy and human cardiomyopathy may
reflect a permissive role allowing, cardiomyocytes to reinitiate the fetal gene
program and initiate the adaptive physiological changes that allow the heart to
compensate (hypertrophy) for the increase in afterload.

PMID: 12359233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Development. 2002 Oct;129(19):4613-25.

Fgf8 is required for pharyngeal arch and cardiovascular development in the mouse.

Abu-Issa R(1), Smyth G, Smoak I, Yamamura K, Meyers EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Neonatal Perinatal Research Institute, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

We present here an analysis of cardiovascular and pharyngeal arch development in 
mouse embryos hypomorphic for Fgf8. Previously, we have described the generation 
of Fgf8 compound heterozygous (Fgf8(neo/-)) embryos. Although early analysis
demonstrated that some of these embryos have abnormal left-right (LR) axis
specification and cardiac looping reversals, the number and type of cardiac
defects present at term suggested an additional role for Fgf8 in cardiovascular
development. Most Fgf8(neo/-) mutant embryos survive to term with abnormal
cardiovascular patterning, including outflow tract, arch artery and intracardiac 
defects. In addition, these mutants have hypoplastic pharyngeal arches, small or 
absent thymus and abnormal craniofacial development. Neural crest cells (NCCs)
populate the pharyngeal arches and contribute to many structures of the face,
neck and cardiovascular system, suggesting that Fgf8 may be required for NCC
development. Fgf8 is expressed within the developing pharyngeal arch ectoderm and
endoderm during NCC migration through the arches. Analysis of NCC development in 
Fgf8(neo/-) mutant embryos demonstrates that NCCs are specified and migrate, but 
undergo cell death in areas both adjacent and distal to where Fgf8 is normally
expressed. This study defines the cardiovascular defects present in Fgf8 mutants 
and supports a role for Fgf8 in development of all the pharyngeal arches and in
NCC survival.

PMID: 12223417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Science. 2002 Oct 25;298(5594):827-30. Epub 2002 Sep 5.

Progression of vertebrate limb development through SHH-mediated counteraction of 
GLI3.

te Welscher P(1), Zuniga A, Kuijper S, Drenth T, Goedemans HJ, Meijlink F, Zeller
R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Faculty of Biology, Utrecht University,
Padualaan 8, NL-3584 CH Utrecht, Netherlands.

Distal limb development and specification of digit identities in tetrapods are
under the control of a mesenchymal organizer called the polarizing region. Sonic 
Hedgehog (SHH) is the morphogenetic signal produced by the polarizing region in
the posterior limb bud. Ectopic anterior SHH signaling induces digit duplications
and has been suspected as a major cause underlying congenital malformations that 
result in digit polydactyly. Here, we report that the polydactyly of
Gli3-deficient mice arises independently of SHH signaling. Disruption of one or
both Gli3 alleles in mouse embryos lacking Shh progressively restores limb distal
development and digit formation. Our genetic analysis indicates that SHH
signaling counteracts GLI3-mediated repression of key regulator genes, cell
survival, and distal progression of limb bud development.

PMID: 12215652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Development. 2002 Jul;129(13):3077-88.

Misexpression of dHAND induces ectopic digits in the developing limb bud in the
absence of direct DNA binding.

McFadden DG(1), McAnally J, Richardson JA, Charité J, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, 6000 Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA.

Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors control developmental
decisions in a wide range of embryonic cell types. The HLH motif mediates homo-
and heterodimerization, which juxtaposes the basic regions within the dimeric
complex to form a bipartite DNA binding domain that recognizes a DNA consensus
sequence known as an E-box. eHAND and dHAND (also known as HAND1 and HAND2) are
closely related bHLH proteins that control cardiac, craniofacial and limb
development. Within the developing limb, dHAND expression encompasses the zone of
polarizing activity in the posterior region, where it has been shown to be
necessary and sufficient to induce the expression of the morphogen sonic
hedgehog. Misexpression of dHAND in the anterior compartment of the limb bud
induces ectopic expression of sonic hedgehog, with resulting preaxial polydactyly
and mirror image duplications of posterior digits. To investigate the potential
transcriptional mechanisms involved in limb patterning by dHAND, we have
performed a structure-function analysis of the protein in cultured cells and
ectopically expressed dHAND mutant proteins in the developing limbs of transgenic
mice. We show that an N-terminal transcriptional activation domain, and the bHLH 
region, are required for E-box-dependent transcription in vitro. Remarkably,
however, digit duplication by dHAND requires neither the transcriptional
activation domain nor the basic region, but only the HLH motif. eHAND has a
similar limb patterning activity to dHAND in these misexpression experiments,
indicating a conserved function of the HLH regions of these proteins. These
findings suggest that dHAND may act via novel transcriptional mechanisms mediated
by protein-protein interactions independent of direct DNA binding.

PMID: 12070084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 5;277(27):24390-8. Epub 2002 May 6.

The transcription factors GATA4 and dHAND physically interact to synergistically 
activate cardiac gene expression through a p300-dependent mechanism.

Dai YS(1), Cserjesi P, Markham BE, Molkentin JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati, Children's Hospital
Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039, USA.

An intricate array of heterogeneous transcription factors participate in
programming tissue-specific gene expression through combinatorial interactions
that are unique to a given cell-type. The zinc finger-containing transcription
factor GATA4, which is widely expressed in mesodermal and endodermal derived
tissues, is thought to regulate cardiac myocyte-specific gene expression through 
combinatorial interactions with other semi-restricted transcription factors such 
as myocyte enhancer factor 2, nuclear factor of activated T-cells, serum response
factor, and Nkx2.5. Here we determined that GATA4 also interacts with the
cardiac-expressed basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor dHAND (also known
as HAND2). GATA4 and dHAND synergistically activated expression of
cardiac-specific promoters from the atrial natriuretic factor gene, the b-type
natriuretic peptide gene, and the alpha-myosin heavy chain gene. Using artificial
reporter constructs this functional synergy was shown to be GATA site-dependent, 
but E-box site-independent. A mechanism for the transcriptional synergy was
suggested by the observation that the bHLH domain of dHAND physically interacted 
with the C-terminal zinc finger domain of GATA4 forming a higher order complex.
This transcriptional synergy observed between GATA4 and dHAND was associated with
p300 recruitment, but not with alterations in DNA binding activity of either
factor. Moreover, the bHLH domain of dHAND directly interacted with the CH3
domain of p300 suggesting the existence of a higher order complex between GATA4, 
dHAND, and p300. Taken together with previous observations, these results suggest
the existence of an enhanceosome complex comprised of p300 and multiple
semi-restricted transcription factors that together specify tissue-specific gene 
expression in the heart.

PMID: 11994297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Nat Genet. 2002 May;31(1):25-32. Epub 2002 Apr 1.

Bop encodes a muscle-restricted protein containing MYND and SET domains and is
essential for cardiac differentiation and morphogenesis.

Gottlieb PD(1), Pierce SA, Sims RJ, Yamagishi H, Weihe EK, Harriss JV, Maika SD, 
Kuziel WA, King HL, Olson EN, Nakagawa O, Srivastava D.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology and Institute for Cellular and 
Molecular Biology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712, USA.
gottlieb@uts.cc.utexas.edu

Many transcription factors regulate specific temporal-spatial events during
cardiac differentiation; however, the mechanisms that regulate such events are
largely unknown. Using a modified subtractive hybridization method to identify
specific genes that influence early cardiac development, we found that Bop is
expressed specifically in cardiac and skeletal muscle precursors before
differentiation of these lineages. Bop encodes a protein containing MYND and SET 
domains, which have been shown to regulate transcription by mediating distinct
chromatin modifications. We show that m-Bop is a histone deacetylase-dependent
transcriptional repressor. Targeted deletion of Bop in mice disrupted maturation 
of ventricular cardiomyocytes and interfered with formation of the right
ventricle. Normal expression of Hand2, a transcription factor essential for right
ventricular development, in cardiomyocyte precursors is dependent upon m-Bop.
These results indicate that m-Bop is essential for cardiomyocyte differentiation 
and cardiac morphogenesis.

PMID: 11923873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Genes Dev. 2002 Feb 15;16(4):421-6.

Mutual genetic antagonism involving GLI3 and dHAND prepatterns the vertebrate
limb bud mesenchyme prior to SHH signaling.

te Welscher P(1), Fernandez-Teran M, Ros MA, Zeller R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Faculty of Biology, Utrecht University,
3584CH Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The bHLH transcription factor dHAND is required for establishment of SHH
signaling by the limb bud organizer in posterior mesenchyme, a step crucial to
development of vertebrate paired appendages. We show that the transcriptional
repressor GLI3 restricts dHAND expression to posterior mesenchyme prior to
activation of SHH signaling in mouse limb buds. dHAND, in turn, excludes anterior
genes such as Gli3 and Alx4 from posterior mesenchyme. Furthermore, genetic
interaction of GLI3 and dHAND directs establishment of the SHH/FGF signaling
feedback loop by restricting the BMP antagonist GREMLIN posteriorly. These
interactions polarize the nascent limb bud mesenchyme prior to SHH signaling.

PMCID: PMC155343
PMID: 11850405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Biol Chem. 2002 Apr 12;277(15):12604-12. Epub 2002 Jan 25.

The basic helix-loop-helix factor, HAND2, functions as a transcriptional
activator by binding to E-boxes as a heterodimer.

Dai YS(1), Cserjesi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Columbia University, New York, NY
10032, USA.

HAND2 (dHAND) is a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor expressed
in numerous tissues during development including the heart, limbs, and a subset
of neural crest derivatives. Functional analysis has shown that HAND2 is involved
in development of the branchial arches, heart, limb, vasculature, and nervous
system. Although it is essential for development of numerous tissues, little is
known about its mode of action. To this end, we have characterized HAND2
transcriptional regulatory mechanisms. Using mammalian one-hybrid analysis we
show that HAND2 contains a strong transcriptional activation domain in the
amino-terminal third of the protein. Like most tissue-restricted bHLH factors,
HAND2 heterodimerizes with the broadly expressed bHLH factors, the E-proteins. We
determined the consensus DNA binding site of HAND2 and show that HAND2 binds a
subset of E-boxes as a heterodimer with E12. Yeast two-hybrid screening of a
neuroblastoma cDNA library for HAND2-interacting proteins selected HAND2 and
numerous additional members of the E-protein family. Although HAND2 homodimer
formation was confirmed by in vitro analysis, HAND2 fails to homodimerize in a
mammalian two-hybrid assay but demonstrates robust HAND2/E12 interaction. We
conclude that HAND2 functions as a transcription activator by binding a subset of
E-boxes as a heterodimer with E-proteins.

PMID: 11812799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Dev Biol. 2001 Nov 15;239(2):190-203.

The combinatorial activities of Nkx2.5 and dHAND are essential for cardiac
ventricle formation.

Yamagishi H(1), Yamagishi C, Nakagawa O, Harvey RP, Olson EN, Srivastava D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Cardiology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, 6000 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, Texas
75390-9148, USA.

Nkx2.5/Csx and dHAND/Hand2 are conserved transcription factors that are
coexpressed in the precardiac mesoderm and early heart tube and control distinct 
developmental events during cardiogenesis. To understand whether Nkx2.5 and dHAND
may function in overlapping genetic pathways, we generated mouse embryos lacking 
both Nkx2.5 and dHAND. Mice heterozygous for mutant alleles of Nkx2.5 and dHAND
were viable. Although single Nkx2.5 or dHAND mutants have a morphological atrial 
and single ventricular chamber, Nkx2.5(-/-)dHAND(-/-) mutants had only a single
cardiac chamber which was molecularly defined as the atrium. Complete ventricular
dysgenesis was observed in Nkx2.5(-/-)dHAND(-/-) mutants; however, a precursor
pool of ventricular cardiomyocytes was identified on the ventral surface of the
heart tube. Because Nkx2.5 mutants failed to activate eHAND expression even in
the early precardiac mesoderm, the Nkx2.5(-/-)dHAND(-/-) phenotype appears to
reflect an effectively null state of dHAND and eHAND. Cell fate analysis in dHAND
mutants suggests a role of HAND genes in survival and expansion of the
ventricular segment, but not in specification of ventricular cardiomyocytes. Our 
molecular analyses also revealed the cooperative regulation of the homeodomain
protein, Irx4, by Nkx2.5 and dHAND. These studies provide the first demonstration
of gene mutations that result in ablation of the entire ventricular segment of
the mammalian heart, and reveal essential transcriptional pathways for
ventricular formation.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11784028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Dev Dyn. 2001 Dec;222(4):552-63.

Cardiac patterning and morphogenesis in zebrafish.

Yelon D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Program, Department of Cell Biology, Skirball Institute
of Biomolecular Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, New York, New
York 10016, USA. yelon@saturn.med.nyu.edu

Development of the embryonic vertebrate heart requires the precise coordination
of pattern formation and cell movement. Taking advantage of the availability of
zebrafish mutations that disrupt cardiogenesis, several groups have identified
key regulators of specific aspects of cardiac patterning and morphogenesis.
Several genes, including gata5, fgf8, bmp2b, one-eyed pinhead, and hand2, have
been shown to be relevant to the patterning events that regulate myocardial
differentiation. Studies of mutants with morphogenetic defects have indicated at 
least six genes that are essential for cardiac fusion and heart tube assembly,
including casanova, bonnie and clyde, gata5, one-eyed pinhead, hand2, miles
apart, and heart and soul. Furthermore, analysis of the jekyll gene has indicated
its important role during the morphogenesis of the atrioventricular valve.
Altogether, these data provide a substantial foundation for future investigations
of cardiac patterning, cardiac morphogenesis, and the relationship between these 
processes.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11748825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Genes Dev. 2001 Nov 15;15(22):3039-49.

Role of Dlx6 in regulation of an endothelin-1-dependent, dHAND branchial arch
enhancer.

Charité J(1), McFadden DG, Merlo G, Levi G, Clouthier DE, Yanagisawa M,
Richardson JA, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, Texas 75239-9148, USA.

Neural crest cells play a key role in craniofacial development. The endothelin
family of secreted polypeptides regulates development of several neural crest
sublineages, including the branchial arch neural crest. The basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor dHAND is also required for craniofacial
development, and in endothelin-1 (ET-1) mutant embryos, dHAND expression in the
branchial arches is down-regulated, implicating it as a transcriptional effector 
of ET-1 action. To determine the mechanism that links ET-1 signaling to dHAND
transcription, we analyzed the dHAND gene for cis-regulatory elements that
control transcription in the branchial arches. We describe an evolutionarily
conserved dHAND enhancer that requires ET-1 signaling for activity. This enhancer
contains four homeodomain binding sites that are required for branchial arch
expression. By comparing protein binding to these sites in branchial arch
extracts from endothelin receptor A (EdnrA) mutant and wild-type mouse embryos,
we identified Dlx6, a member of the Distal-less family of homeodomain proteins,
as an ET-1-dependent binding factor. Consistent with this conclusion, Dlx6 was
down-regulated in branchial arches from EdnrA mutant mice. These results suggest 
that Dlx6 acts as an intermediary between ET-1 signaling and dHAND transcription 
during craniofacial morphogenesis.

PMCID: PMC312822
PMID: 11711438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2001 Oct;18(4):394-406.

Two signal transduction pathways involved in the catecholaminergic
differentiation of avian neural crest-derived cells in vitro.

Wu X(1), Howard MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Medical College of Ohio, Toledo, Ohio 
43614, USA.

Molecules derived from the neural tube and found in chick embryo extract (CEE)
and bone morphogenetic proteins (BMP) support the differentiation of neural
crest-derived catecholaminergic (CA) neurons. We now report that intracellular
signaling resulting in the activation of Map kinase (MapK) or translocation of
Smad1 mediate the differentiation of CA neurons in response to CEE or BMP 4,
respectively. The differentiation of CA neurons was significantly reduced by
inhibiting MapK using PD98059 or by pan-specific blockade of tyrosine kinases
using Herbimycin A. In the presence of BMP 4 and inhibitors of MapK signaling,
differentiation of CA neurons was only moderately reduced. Independent of MapK,
BMP 4 induced translocation of Smad1 from the cytosol to the nucleus and induced 
transcription of dHAND, a DNA binding protein required for the differentiation of
CA neurons. The data suggest that CEE-derived factors and BMP4 support the
differentiation of CA neurons via independent signaling pathways.

PMID: 11640896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2001 Oct;33(10):1765-7.

Transcription factors and heart failure: does the stressed heart need a hand?

Pu WT, Izumo S.

Comment on
    J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2001 Sep;33(9):1607-14.

PMID: 11603918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2001 Sep;33(9):1607-14.

Human eHAND, but not dHAND, is down-regulated in cardiomyopathies.

Natarajan A(1), Yamagishi H, Ahmad F, Li D, Roberts R, Matsuoka R, Hill S,
Srivastava D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Intensive Care, Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, One
Baylor Plaza, Dallas, Texas 75390-9148, USA.

Comment in
    J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2001 Oct;33(10):1765-7.

The progression of cardiomyopathy to congestive heart failure is often associated
with the expression of fetal cardiac-specific genes. In mice, the basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factors, dHAND and eHAND, are expressed in a
cardiac chamber-specific fashion and are essential for fetal cardiac development,
but are down-regulated in the adult. Their expression in specific chambers of
healthy and diseased human hearts has not been studied previously. Human dHAND
and eHAND were mapped to human chromosomes 4q33 and 5q33, respectively, by
fluorescent in situ hybridization. RNA from the four chambers of healthy human
adult hearts, and from hearts of patients with several forms of cardiomyopathy,
was obtained and assayed for dHAND and eHAND expression. Unlike in mice, dHAND
expression was observed in all four chambers of the healthy human adult heart,
but was diminished in the right atrium. In contrast, eHAND was expressed in the
right and left ventricles, but was downregulated in both atrial chambers. We
examined tissue from 15 human cardiomyopathic hearts obtained during cardiac
transplantation or by endomyocardial biopsy for alterations in HAND gene
expression. dHAND expression was unchanged in all forms of cardiomyopathy tested.
However, cardiac expression of eHAND was severely down-regulated in six of six
patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy and six of six patients with dilated
cardiomyopathy. This study demonstrates that human dHAND and eHAND have unique
spatial patterns of expression within human cardiac chambers. Downregulation of
eHAND in ischemic and dilated cardiomyopathy suggests a correlation between eHAND
dysregulation and the evolution of a subset of cardiomyopathies.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11549340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Cell. 2001 Jun 1;105(5):599-612.

Cholesterol modification of sonic hedgehog is required for long-range signaling
activity and effective modulation of signaling by Ptc1.

Lewis PM(1), Dunn MP, McMahon JA, Logan M, Martin JF, St-Jacques B, McMahon AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, The Biolabs, Harvard University,
16 Divinity Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling from the posterior zone of polarizing activity
(ZPA) is the primary determinant of anterior-posterior polarity in the vertebrate
limb field. An active signal is produced by an autoprocessing reaction that
covalently links cholesterol to the N-terminal signaling moiety (N-Shh(p)),
tethering N-Shh(p) to the cell membrane. We have addressed the role played by
this lipophilic modification in Shh-mediated patterning of mouse digits. Both the
distribution and activity of N-Shh(p) indicate that N-Shh(p) acts directly over a
few hundred microns. In contrast, N-Shh, a form that lacks cholesterol, retains
similar biological activity to N-Shh(p), but signaling is posteriorly restricted.
Thus, cholesterol modification is essential for the normal range of signaling. It
also appears to be necessary for appropriate modulation of signaling by the Shh
receptor, Ptc1.

PMID: 11389830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Am J Med Genet. 2000 Winter;97(4):297-303.

Molecular determinants of left and right outflow tract obstruction.

Towbin JA(1), Belmont J.

Author information: 
(1)Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. jtowbin@bcm.tmc.edu

Congenital heart defects represent the most common group of human birth defects; 
they occur in 0.8-1% of live births and in 10% of spontaneously aborted fetuses. 
Heart defects seen in newborns typically represent specific morphogenetic defects
of individual chambers or regions of the heart, with the remaining portions of
the heart developing relatively normally. These developmental defects are
commonly compatible with the intrauterine circulation, where the pulmonary
circulation and systemic circulation work in concert, resulting in adequate
embryonic growth and development. After delivery, however, significant cardiac
symptoms develop. In many of these disorders, cyanosis is the earliest feature,
while in others, cardiovascular collapse occurs before diagnosis. In this review,
obstruction of the left and right sides of the heart are discussed. In these
disorders, ventricular hypoplasia resulting in single ventricle physiologic
characteristics is typical. The unaffected ventricle in these cases is usually
morphologically and physiologically normal. These conditions include hypoplastic 
left heart syndrome and aortic coarctation on the left side, pulmonary stenosis, 
tetralogy of Fallot, and other complex right ventricle obstructive disorders.
Many of these disorders occur in association with genetic syndromes identifiable 
by dysmorphic features. In some cases, the gene(s) has been identified or the
genetic pathway has been defined. The purpose of this review is to discuss the
molecular determinants of these obstructive disorders.

PMID: 11376441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Genes Dev. 2001 Apr 1;15(7):839-44.

Proper coronary vascular development and heart morphogenesis depend on
interaction of GATA-4 with FOG cofactors.

Crispino JD(1), Lodish MB, Thurberg BL, Litovsky SH, Collins T, Molkentin JD,
Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

GATA-family transcription factors are critical to the development of diverse
tissues. In particular, GATA-4 has been implicated in formation of the vertebrate
heart. As the mouse Gata-4 knock-out is early embryonic lethal because of a
defect in ventral morphogenesis, the in vivo function of this factor in heart
development remains unresolved. To search for a requirement for Gata4 in heart
development, we created mice harboring a single amino acid replacement in GATA-4 
that impairs its physical interaction with its presumptive cardiac cofactor
FOG-2. Gata4(ki/ki) mice die just after embryonic day (E) 12.5 exhibiting
features in common with Fog2(-/-) embryos as well as additional semilunar cardiac
valve defects and a double-outlet right ventricle. These findings establish an
intrinsic requirement for GATA-4 in heart development. We also infer that GATA-4 
function is dependent on interaction with FOG-2 and, very likely, an additional
FOG protein for distinct aspects of heart formation.

PMCID: PMC312667
PMID: 11297508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Dev Dyn. 2000 Dec;219(4):575-81.

Xenopus Hand2 expression marks anterior vascular progenitors but not the
developing heart.

Smith SJ(1), Kotecha S, Towers N, Mohun TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, National Institute for Medical Research,
The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London, United Kingdom.

We have isolated cDNAs encoding the bHLH protein Hand2 in the amphibian Xenopus
laevis and analysed Hand2 expression in early development from the onset of
gastrulation to feeding tadpole stages. XHand2 is expressed in the branchial arch
mesenchyme and also in small bilateral populations of cells in the anterior,
ventrolateral region of early tailbud embryos. At later stages, these punctate
Hand2-expressing cells are located at the sites of the forming common cardinal
veins, suggesting that they may constitute progenitors of vascular smooth muscle 
cells. Other Hand2-expressing cells are also associated with further components
of the forming anterior vasculature but are not detected in mature blood vessels.
Interestingly, no myocardial expression of XHand2 can be detected in the
developing tadpole heart, in marked contrast to results obtained with chick and
mouse embryos.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11084656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Development. 2000 Dec;127(24):5331-41.

A GATA-dependent right ventricular enhancer controls dHAND transcription in the
developing heart.

McFadden DG(1), Charité J, Richardson JA, Srivastava D, Firulli AB, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center at Dallas, 75390-9148, USA.

Heart formation in vertebrates is believed to occur in a segmental fashion, with 
discreet populations of cardiac progenitors giving rise to different chambers of 
the heart. However, the mechanisms involved in specification of different chamber
lineages are unclear. The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor dHAND is
expressed in cardiac precursors throughout the cardiac crescent and the linear
heart tube, before becoming restricted to the right ventricular chamber at the
onset of looping morphogenesis. dHAND is also expressed in the branchial arch
neural crest, which contributes to craniofacial structures and the aortic arch
arteries. Using a series of dHAND-lacZ reporter genes in transgenic mice, we show
that cardiac and neural crest expression of dHAND are controlled by separate
upstream enhancers and we describe a composite cardiac-specific enhancer that
directs lacZ expression in a pattern that mimics that of the endogenous dHAND
gene throughout heart development. Deletion analysis reduced this enhancer to a
1.5 kb region and identified subregions responsible for expression in the right
ventricle and cardiac outflow tract. Comparison of mouse regulatory elements
required for right ventricular expression to the human dHAND upstream sequence
revealed two conserved consensus sites for binding of GATA transcription factors.
Mutation of these sites abolished transgene expression in the right ventricle,
identifying dHAND as a direct transcriptional target of GATA factors during right
ventricle development. Since GATA factors are not chamber-restricted, these
findings suggest the existence of positive and/or negative coregulators that
cooperate with GATA factors to control right ventricular-specific gene expression
in the developing heart.

PMID: 11076755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Dec;20(23):8643-54.

Proteasome-mediated degradation of the coactivator p300 impairs cardiac
transcription.

Poizat C(1), Sartorelli V, Chung G, Kloner RA, Kedes L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetic Medicine and Department of Biochemistry & Molecular
Biology, Keck School of Medicine of the University of Southern California, USA.

The transcription of tissue-specific genes is controlled by regulatory factors
and cofactors and is suppressed in cardiac cells by the antineoplastic agent
doxorubicin. Here we show that exposure of cultured cardiomyocytes to doxorubicin
resulted in the rapid depletion of transcripts for MEF2C, dHAND, and NKX2.5,
three pivotal regulators of cardiac gene expression. Delivery of exogenous p300, 
a coactivator of MEF2C and NKX2.5 in cardiomyocytes, restored cardiac
transcription despite the presence of doxorubicin. Furthermore, p300 also
restored the accumulation of transcripts for MEF2C itself. Importantly,
cardiocytes exposed to doxorubicin displayed reduced levels of p300 proteins.
This was not due to alterations in the level of p300 transcripts; rather, and
surprisingly, doxorubicin promoted selective degradation of p300 mediated by the 
26S-proteasome machinery. Doxorubicin had no effect on the general level of
ubiquitinated proteins or on the levels of beta-catenin, a protein known to be
degraded by proteasome-mediated degradation. These results provide evidence for a
new mechanism of transcriptional repression caused by doxorubicin in which the
selective degradation of p300 results in reduced p300-dependent transcription,
including production of MEF2C mRNA.

PMCID: PMC86467
PMID: 11073966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2000 Sep;45(13 Suppl):2235-42.

[Genetic plan for the formation of cardiovascular system].

[Article in Japanese]

Umetani M(1), Kodama T, Hamakubo T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Tokyo, Japan.

PMID: 11021229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Nature. 2000 Aug 31;406(6799):953-4.

Developmental biology. Giving limbs a hand.

Cohn MJ.

PMID: 10984039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Development. 2000 Sep;127(18):4073-81.

The transcription factor dHAND is a downstream effector of BMPs in sympathetic
neuron specification.

Howard MJ(1), Stanke M, Schneider C, Wu X, Rohrer H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Medical College of Ohio, Toledo, OH
43614, USA.

The dHAND basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor is expressed in neurons of 
sympathetic ganglia and has previously been shown to induce the differentiation
of catecholaminergic neurons in avian neural crest cultures. We now demonstrate
that dHAND expression is sufficient to elicit the generation of ectopic
sympathetic neurons in vivo. The expression of the dHAND gene is controlled by
bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), as suggested by BMP4 overexpression in vivo
and in vitro, and by noggin-mediated inhibition of BMP function in vivo. The
timing of dHAND expression in sympathetic ganglion primordia, together with the
induction of dHAND expression in response to Phox2b implicate a role for dHAND as
transcriptional regulator downstream of Phox2b in BMP-induced sympathetic neuron 
differentiation.

PMID: 10952904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. J Biol Chem. 2000 Oct 27;275(43):33567-73.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors dHAND and eHAND exhibit
dimerization characteristics that suggest complex regulation of function.

Firulli BA(1), Hadzic DB, McDaid JR, Firulli AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, The University of Texas Health Science Center at San
Antonio, San Antonio, Texas 78229-3900, USA. firullia@UTHSCSA.edu

dHAND and eHAND are basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors expressed
during embryogenesis and are required for the proper development of cardiac and
extraembryonic tissues. HAND genes, like the myogenic bHLH genes, are classified 
as class B bHLH genes, which are expressed in a tissue-restricted pattern and
function by forming heterodimers with class A bHLH proteins. Myogenic bHLH genes 
are shown not to form homodimers efficiently, suggesting that their activity is
dependent on their E-protein partners. To identify HIPs (HAND-interacting
proteins) that regulate the activity of the HAND genes, we screened an
9.5-10.5-day-old mouse embryonic yeast two-hybrid library with eHAND. Several
HIPs held high sequence identity to eHAND, indicating that eHAND could form and
function as a homodimer. Based on the high degree of amino acid identity between 
eHAND and dHAND, it is possible that dHAND could also form homodimers and
heterodimers with eHAND. We show using yeast and mammalian two-hybrid assays as
well as biochemical pull-down assays that eHAND and dHAND are capable of forming 
both HAND homo- and heterodimers in vivo. To investigate whether HAND genes form 
heterodimers with other biologically relevant bHLH proteins, we tested and show
HAND heterodimerization with the recently identified Hairy-related transcription 
factors, HRT1-3. This finding is exciting, because both HRT and HAND genes are
coexpressed in the developing heart and limb and both have been implicated in
establishing tissue boundaries and pattern formation. Moreover, competition gel
shift analysis demonstrates that dHAND and eHAND can negatively regulate the DNA 
binding of MyoD/E12 heterodimers in a manner similar to MISTI and Id proteins,
suggesting a possible transcriptional inhibitory role for HAND genes. Taken
together, these results show that dHAND and eHAND can form homo- and heterodimer 
combinations with multiple bHLH partners and that this broad dimerization profile
reflects the mechanisms by which HAND genes regulate transcription.

PMCID: PMC2561327
PMID: 10924525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Mech Dev. 2000 Jul;95(1-2):231-7.

Conservation of sequence and expression of Xenopus and zebrafish dHAND during
cardiac, branchial arch and lateral mesoderm development.

Angelo S(1), Lohr J, Lee KH, Ticho BS, Breitbart RE, Hill S, Yost HJ, Srivastava 
D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
6000 Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas, TX 75235-9148, USA.

dHAND and eHAND are related basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors that are
expressed in the cardiac mesoderm and in numerous neural crest-derived cell types
in chick and mouse. To better understand the evolutionary development of
overlapping expression and function of the HAND genes during embryogenesis, we
cloned the zebrafish and Xenopus orthologues. Comparison of dHAND sequences in
zebrafish, Xenopus, chick, mouse and human demonstrated conservation throughout
the protein. Expression of dHAND in zebrafish was seen in the earliest precursors
of all lateral mesoderm at early gastrulation stages. At neurula and later
stages, dHAND expression was observed in lateral precardiac mesoderm, branchial
arch neural crest derivatives and posterior lateral mesoderm. At looping heart
stages, cardiac dHAND expression remained generalized with no apparent
regionalization. Interestingly, no eHAND orthologue was found in zebrafish. In
Xenopus, dHAND and eHAND were co-expressed in the cardiac mesoderm without the
segmental restriction seen in mice. Xenopus dHAND and eHAND were also expressed
bilaterally in the lateral mesoderm without any left-right asymmetry. Within the 
branchial arches, XdHAND was expressed in a broader domain than XeHAND, similar
to their mouse counterparts. Together, these data demonstrate conservation of
HAND structure and expression across species.

PMID: 10906469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Nat Genet. 2000 Jul;25(3):353-6.

A syndrome of tricuspid atresia in mice with a targeted mutation of the gene
encoding Fog-2.

Svensson EC(1), Huggins GS, Lin H, Clendenin C, Jiang F, Tufts R, Dardik FB,
Leiden JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Tricuspid atresia (TA) is a common form of congenital heart disease, accounting
for 1-3% of congenital cardiac disorders. TA is characterized by the congenital
agenesis of the tricuspid valve connecting the right atrium to the right
ventricle and both an atrial septal defect (ASD) and a ventricular septal defect 
(VSD). Some patients also have pulmonic stenosis, persistence of a left-sided
superior vena cava or transposition of the great arteries. Most cases of TA are
sporadic, but familial occurrences with disease in multiple siblings have been
reported. Gata4 is a zinc-finger transcription factor with a role in early
cardiac development. Gata4-deficient mice fail to form a ventral heart tube and
die of circulatory failure at embryonic day (E) 8.5 (refs 6,7). Zfpm2 (also known
as Fog-2) is a multi-zinc-finger protein that is co-expressed with Gata4 in the
developing heart beginning at E8.5 (refs 8-10). Zfpm2 interacts specifically with
the N-terminal zinc finger of Gata4 and represses Gata4-dependent transcription. 
Here we use targeted mutagenesis to explore the role of Zfpm2 in normal cardiac
development. Zfpm2-deficient mice died of congestive heart failure at E13 with a 
syndrome of tricuspid atresia that includes an absent tricuspid valve, a large
ASD, a VSD, an elongated left ventricular outflow tract, rightward displacement
of the aortic valve and pulmonic stenosis. These mice also display hypoplasia of 
the compact zone of the left ventricle. Our findings indicate the importance of
Zfpm2 in the normal looping and septation of the heart and suggest a genetic
basis for the syndrome of tricuspid atresia.

PMID: 10888889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Development. 2000 Jun;127(12):2573-82.

The bHLH transcription factor hand2 plays parallel roles in zebrafish heart and
pectoral fin development.

Yelon D(1), Ticho B, Halpern ME, Ruvinsky I, Ho RK, Silver LM, Stainier DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics and Programs in Developmental
Biology, Genetics and Human Genetics, University of California, San Francisco,
San Francisco, CA, USA.

The precursors of several organs reside within the lateral plate mesoderm of
vertebrate embryos. Here, we demonstrate that the zebrafish hands off locus is
essential for the development of two structures derived from the lateral plate
mesoderm - the heart and the pectoral fin. hands off mutant embryos have defects 
in myocardial development from an early stage: they produce a reduced number of
myocardial precursors, and the myocardial tissue that does form is improperly
patterned and fails to maintain tbx5 expression. A similar array of defects is
observed in the differentiation of the pectoral fin mesenchyme: small fin buds
form in a delayed fashion, anteroposterior patterning of the fin mesenchyme is
absent and tbx5 expression is poorly maintained. Defects in these mesodermal
structures are preceded by the aberrant morphogenesis of both the cardiogenic and
forelimb-forming regions of the lateral plate mesoderm. Molecular analysis of two
hands off alleles indicates that the hands off locus encodes the bHLH
transcription factor Hand2, which is expressed in the lateral plate mesoderm
starting at the completion of gastrulation. Thus, these studies reveal early
functions for Hand2 in several cellular processes and highlight a genetic
parallel between heart and forelimb development.

PMID: 10821756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Development. 2000 Jun;127(11):2461-70.

The bHLH transcription factor dHAND controls Sonic hedgehog expression and
establishment of the zone of polarizing activity during limb development.

Charité J(1), McFadden DG, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center at Dallas, Dallas, Texas 75390-9148, USA.

Limb outgrowth and patterning of skeletal elements are dependent on complex
tissue interactions involving the zone of polarizing activity (ZPA) in the
posterior region of the limb bud and the apical ectodermal ridge. The peptide
morphogen Sonic hedgehog (SHH) is expressed specifically in the ZPA and, when
expressed ectopically, is sufficient to mimic its functions, inducing tissue
growth and formation of posterior skeletal elements. We show that the basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor dHAND is expressed posteriorly in the
developing limb prior to Shh and subsequently occupies a broad domain that
encompasses the Shh expression domain. In mouse embryos homozygous for a dHAND
null allele, limb buds are severely underdeveloped and Shh is not expressed.
Conversely, misexpression of dHAND in the anterior region of the limb bud of
transgenic mice results in formation of an additional ZPA, revealed by ectopic
expression of Shh and its target genes, and resulting limb abnormalities that
include preaxial polydactyly with duplication of posterior skeletal elements.
Analysis of mouse mutants in which Hedgehog expression is altered also revealed a
feedback mechanism in which Hedgehog signaling is required to maintain the full
dHAND expression domain in the developing limb. Together, these findings identify
dHAND as an upstream activator of Shh expression and important transcriptional
regulator of limb development.

PMID: 10804186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Development. 2000 May;127(10):2133-42.

Role of dHAND in the anterior-posterior polarization of the limb bud:
implications for the Sonic hedgehog pathway.

Fernandez-Teran M(1), Piedra ME, Kathiriya IS, Srivastava D, Rodriguez-Rey JC,
Ros MA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Anatomía y Biología Celular, Universidad de Cantabria, Spain.

dHAND is a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor essential for
cardiovascular development. Here we analyze its pattern of expression and
functional role during chick limb development. dHAND expression was observed in
the lateral plate mesoderm prior to emergence of the limb buds. Coincident with
limb initiation, expression of dHAND became restricted to the posterior half of
the limb bud. Experimental procedures that caused mirror-image duplications of
the limb resulted in mirror-image duplications of the pattern of dHAND expression
along the anterior-posterior axis. Retroviral overexpression of dHAND in the limb
bud produced preaxial polydactyly, corresponding to mild polarizing activity at
the anterior border. At the molecular level, misexpression of dHAND caused
ectopic activation of members of the Sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway, including Gli 
and Patched, in the anterior limb bud. A subset of infected embryos displayed
ectopic anterior activation of Shh. Other factors implicated in
anterior-posterior polarization of the bud such as the most 5' Hoxd genes and
Bmp2 were also ectopically activated at the anterior border. Our results indicate
a role for dHAND in the establishment of anterior-posterior polarization of the
limb bud.

PMID: 10769237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Clin Invest. 2000 Feb;105(3):261-70.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, dHAND, is required for vascular 
development.

Yamagishi H(1), Olson EN, Srivastava D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Cardiology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75235, USA.

Reciprocal interactions between vascular endothelial cells and vascular
mesenchymal cells are essential for angiogenesis. Here we show that the basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor, dHAND/Hand2, is expressed in the
developing vascular mesenchyme and its derivative, vascular smooth muscle cells
(VSMCs). Targeted deletion of the dHAND gene in mice revealed severe defects of
embryonic and yolk sac vascular development by embryonic day 9.5. Vascular
endothelial cells expressed most markers of differentiation. Vascular mesenchymal
cells migrated appropriately but failed to make contact with vascular endothelial
cells and did not differentiate into VSMCs. In a screen for genes whose
expression was dependent upon dHAND (using subtractive hybridization comparing
wild-type and dHAND-null hearts), the VEGF(165) receptor, neuropilin-1, was found
to be downregulated in dHAND mutants. These results suggest that dHAND is
required for vascular development and regulates angiogenesis, possibly through a 
VEGF signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC377450
PMID: 10675351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Dev Biol. 2000 Jan 15;217(2):266-77.

Cardiac expression of the ventricle-specific homeobox gene Irx4 is modulated by
Nkx2-5 and dHand.

Bruneau BG(1), Bao ZZ, Tanaka M, Schott JJ, Izumo S, Cepko CL, Seidman JG,
Seidman CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, 02115, 
USA.

We report the isolation and characterization of the cDNAs encoded by the murine
and human homeobox genes, Irx4 (Iroquois homeobox gene 4). Mouse and human Irx4
proteins are highly conserved (83%) and their 63-aa homeodomain is more than 93% 
identical to that of the Drosophila Iroquois patterning genes. Human IRX4 maps to
chromosome 5p15.3, which is syntenic to murine chromosome 13. Irx4 transcripts
are present in the developing central nervous system, skin, and vibrissae, but
are predominantly expressed in the cardiac ventricles. In mice at embryonic day
(E) 7.5, Irx4 transcripts are found in the chorion and at low levels in a
discrete anterior domain of the cardiac primordia. During the formation of the
linear heart tube and its subsequent looping (E8.0-8.5), Irx4 expression is
restricted to the ventricular segment and is absent from both the posterior
(eventual atrial) and the anterior (eventual outflow tract) segments of the
heart. Throughout all subsequent stages in which the chambers of the heart become
morphologically distinct (E8.5-11) and into adulthood, cardiac Irx4 expression is
found exclusively in the ventricular myocardium. Irx4 gene expression was also
assessed in embryos with aberrant cardiac development: mice lacking RXRalpha or
MEF2c have normal Irx4 expression, but mice lacking the homeobox transcription
factor Nkx2-5 (Csx) have markedly reduced levels of Irx4 transcripts. dHand-null 
embryos initiate Irx4 expression, but cannot maintain normal levels. These data
indicate that the homeobox gene Irx4 is likely to be an important mediator of
ventricular differentiation during cardiac development, which is downstream of
Nkx2-5 and dHand.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10625552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Dev Biol. 1999 Nov 1;215(1):62-77.

Expression of HAND gene products may be sufficient for the differentiation of
avian neural crest-derived cells into catecholaminergic neurons in culture.

Howard M(1), Foster DN, Cserjesi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Medical College of Ohio, Toledo, Ohio, 43614, USA.
mhoward@mco.edu

Members of the basic helix-loop-helix family of DNA binding proteins have
important roles in the development of subpopulations of neural crest-derived
neurons. We have cloned the chicken homologues of dHAND (HAND2) and eHAND
(HAND1), basic helix-loop-helix DNA binding proteins whose neuronal expression is
restricted to sympathetic and enteric neural crest-derived ganglia. Transcripts
encoding dHAND and eHAND are expressed in sympathetic ganglia beginning at
Hamburger and Hamilton stage 17-18. Antisense blockade of transcripts encoding
HAND genes in neural crest-derived cells in vitro results in a significant
reduction in neurogenesis. Differentiation of catecholaminergic neurons is also
reduced by 52% if the expression of transcripts encoding dHAND and eHAND is
reduced using antisense oligonucleotide blockade. The effect on neurogenesis and 
phenotypic expression of neural crest-derived neurons is specific; blockade of
HAND gene expression has no apparent influence on the differentiation in vitro of
neural tube-derived neurons. Use of a replication-competent avian retrovirus to
constitutively express HAND genes in neural crest-derived cells in vitro, under
nonpermissive growth conditions in medium supplemented with 2% chick embryo
extract (CEE), induced precocious catecholaminergic differentiation. Constitutive
expression of HAND gene products resulted in a significant increase in
catecholaminergic differentiation of cells grown in medium supplemented with 10% 
CEE, a permissive growth condition for catecholaminergic development. These
results suggest that the expression by neural crest cells of dHAND and eHAND may 
be both sufficient and necessary for catecholaminergic phenotypic expression.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10525350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. J Cell Biochem. 1999 Sep 15;74(4):551-61.

Remodeling of the hypertrophied human myocardium by cardiac bHLH transcription
factors.

Ritter O(1), Haase H, Schulte HD, Lange PE, Morano I.

Author information: 
(1)Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, 13122 Berlin, Germany.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors eHAND and dHAND are involved in 
developmental cardiac growth and differentiation. We investigated HAND gene
expression in the normal and in the hypertrophied right and left ventricle of
patients with tetralogy of Fallot (ToF) and hypertrophic obstructive
cardiomyopathy (HOCM). HAND mRNA was constitutively expressed in the
hypertrophied heart and increased in the hypertrophic tissue of both patient
groups. HAND genes had a complementary left-right cardiac asymmetry of expression
with dHAND predominantly in the right and eHAND in the left ventricle. The two
cardiac bHLH factors have the ability to form heterodimers with the ubiquitous
bHLH protein E12, subsequently recognizing E-boxes in the promoter region of
target genes like ALC-1. We found a highly significant positive correlation
between HAND and ALC-1 mRNA. The total ALC-1 protein level in ToF was smaller
than in HOCM, although ALC-1 mRNA as well as HAND mRNA levels were significantly 
higher. ToF patients expressed around four times more ALC-1 mRNA for similar
amounts of ALC-1 than HOCM patients. Suggesting disturbed ALC-1 translation in
ToF, we found ALC-1 antisense mRNA expression in the hypertrophied, but not in
the normal, ventricles. The higher the antisense/sense ALC-1 mRNA ratio, the
lower ALC-1 protein was expressed.

Copyright 1999 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10440925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Mol Med Today. 1999 Jun;5(6):233.

Ubiquitination gene defect found in DiGeorge syndrome.

Fricker J.

Comment in
    Mol Med Today. 2000 Jan;6(1):10-1.

PMID: 10366814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Curr Opin Cardiol. 1999 May;14(3):263-8.

Developmental and genetic aspects of congenital heart disease.

Srivastava D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas 75235-9148, USA. dsriva@mednet.swmed.edu

Congenital heart defects (CHDs) are the result of abnormal cardiac mesoderm or
cardiac neural crest development. The molecular cause of most congenital heart
disease remains unknown, although numerous cardiac regulatory factors have
recently been described. dHAND and eHAND are basic helix-loop-helix transcription
factors expressed differentially in the right and left ventricles, respectively, 
and in the cardiac neural crest. Mice lacking dHAND have a hypoplastic right
ventricle and abnormal development of vessels arising from the heart and cell
death of craniofacial precursors. By searching for dHAND-dependent genes, a gene 
likely responsible for the cardiac and craniofacial defects associated with
chromosome 22q11 deletion has been identified. A systematic dissection of
molecular pathways involved in cardiogenesis should allow for further
identification of genes responsible for CHD.

PMID: 10358798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 1999 Feb;10(1):99-107.

Seeking a regulatory roadmap for heart morphogenesis.

Harvey RP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, St. Vincent's Hospital, Darlinghurst,
Australia.

Despite descriptive studies spanning centuries, we are still lacking an
integrated concept of how molecular patterning information is developed in the
heart, and how this information guides morphogenesis. With an increasing number
of regionally-expressed cardiac genes and transgenes being identified, along with
new animal models of cardiac dysmorphogenesis and an exciting array of genetic
tools for further dissection, the need for an integrated morphogenetic concept is
acute. Models invoking a linear array of cardiac segments are difficult to
reconcile with the observation that those segments are evident only on the outer 
curvature of the heart tube. Molecular and anatomical evidence supports the view 
that chamber specification is achieved by interpretation of dorso-ventral (inner 
curvature/outer curvature), as well as anterior-posterior patterning information 
in the primary heart tube. In this essay, I examine some of the issues
influencing and perhaps confusing our view of cardiac morphogenesis and briefly
discuss regulatory genes in the context of an evolving morphogenetic model.

PMID: 10355034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. J Biol Chem. 1999 May 14;274(20):14188-97.

Combinatorial interactions regulate cardiac expression of the murine
adenylosuccinate synthetase 1 gene.

Lewis AL(1), Xia Y, Datta SK, McMillin J, Kellems RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The mammalian heart begins contracting at the linear tube stage during
embryogenesis and continuously pumps, nonstop, throughout the entire lifetime of 
the animal. Therefore, the cardiac energy metabolizing pathways must be properly 
established and efficiently functioning. While the biochemistry of these pathways
is well defined, limited information regarding the regulation of cardiac
metabolic genes is available. Previously, we reported that 1.9 kilobase pairs of 
murine adenylosuccinate synthetase 1 gene (Adss1) 5'-flanking DNA directs high
levels of reporter expression to the adult transgenic heart. In this report, we
define the 1.9-kilobase pair fragment as a cardiac-specific enhancer that
controls correct spatiotemporal expression of a reporter similar to the
endogenous Adss1 gene. A 700-base pair fragment within this region activates a
heterologous promoter specifically in adult transgenic hearts. Proteins present
in a cardiac nuclear extract interact with potential transcription factor binding
sites of this region and these cis-acting sites play important regulatory roles
in the cardiac expression of this reporter. Finally, we report that several
different cardiac transcription factors trans-activate the 1.9HSCAT construct
through these sites and that combinations result in enhanced reporter expression.
Adss1 appears to be one of the first target genes identified for the bHLH factors
Hand1 and Hand2.

PMID: 10318837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Trends Cardiovasc Med. 1999 Jan-Feb;9(1-2):11-8.

HAND proteins: molecular mediators of cardiac development and congenital heart
disease.

Srivastava D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas 75235-9148, USA.

Congenital heart defects are the clinical manifestation of anomalies in embryonic
cardiac development. Such defects occur in distinct regions or chambers of the
heart. A molecular framework in which to consider cardiac development and
congenital heart disease in a segmental fashion has begun to emerge. dHAND and
eHAND are two related basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors that are
expressed in a complementary fashion in the developing right and left ventricles,
respectively. They are also expressed in the neural crest-derived cardiac outflow
tract and aortic arch arteries. Targeted mutations of dHAND and eHAND in mice
have revealed novel pathways of organogenesis in mesodermal and neural crest
derivatives. dHAND mutants exhibit hypoplasia of the right ventricle, branchial
arches, and aortic arch arteries. The distinct nature of cardiac defects in dHAND
mutants provides an entry into dissecting molecular pathways governing
morphogenesis of specific components of the heart. Congenital heart disease is
considered as a defect in segmental development of the heart and the role of
dHAND and eHAND in regulating such developmental pathways in normal and abnormal 
cardiogenesis is examined.

PMID: 10189962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Nat Genet. 1999 Mar;21(3):246-7.

Is the genetic basis of DiGeorge syndrome in HAND?

Baldini A.

PMID: 10080167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Science. 1999 Feb 19;283(5405):1091,1093.

A gene that scrambles your heart.

Hagmann M.

Comment in
    Science. 1999 Feb 19;283(5405):1158-61.

PMID: 10075562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Science. 1999 Feb 19;283(5405):1158-61.

A molecular pathway revealing a genetic basis for human cardiac and craniofacial 
defects.

Yamagishi H(1), Garg V, Matsuoka R, Thomas T, Srivastava D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Cardiology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, 6000 Harry Hines Boulevard, Room NA8.124, Dallas, TX
75235-9148, USA.

Comment on
    Science. 1999 Feb 19;283(5405):1091,1093.

Microdeletions of chromosome 22q11 are the most common genetic defects associated
with cardiac and craniofacial anomalies in humans. A screen for mouse genes
dependent on dHAND, a transcription factor implicated in neural crest
development, identified Ufd1, which maps to human 22q11 and encodes a protein
involved in degradation of ubiquitinated proteins. Mouse Ufd1 was specifically
expressed in most tissues affected in patients with 22q11 deletion syndrome. The 
human UFD1L gene was deleted in all 182 patients studied with 22q11 deletion, and
a smaller deletion of approximately 20 kilobases that removed exons 1 to 3 of
UFD1L was found in one individual with features typical of 22q11 deletion
syndrome. These data suggest that UFD1L haploinsufficiency contributes to the
congenital heart and craniofacial defects seen in 22q11 deletion.

PMID: 10024240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Lab Invest. 1999 Jan;79(1):67-79.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor dHAND, a marker gene for the
developing human sympathetic nervous system, is expressed in both high- and
low-stage neuroblastomas.

Gestblom C(1), Grynfeld A, Ora I, Ortoft E, Larsson C, Axelson H, Sandstedt B,
Cserjesi P, Olson EN, Påhlman S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund University, University Hospital MAS,
Malmö, Sweden.

Neuroblastoma is derived from the sympathetic nervous system and might arise as a
result of impaired differentiation, retaining the neuroblastic tumor cells in the
cell cycle. Thus, to understand the genesis of neuroblastoma, the study of
mechanisms and genes regulating normal sympathetic development is of potential
interest. The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors human achaete-scute
homolog-1 (HASH-1) and deciduum, heart, autonomic nervous system, and neural
crest derivatives (dHAND) are expressed in the sympathetic nervous system of
embryonic mice and chicken, with undetectable postnatal expression. By in situ
hybridization technique, we show that dHAND was expressed by human sympathetic
neuronal and extra-adrenal chromaffin cells throughout embryonic and fetal life, 
and was initially expressed in immature chromaffin cells of the adrenal gland.
With overt chromaffin differentiation, dHAND was down-regulated. HASH-1, in
contrast, was expressed in human sympathetic cells only at the earliest embryonic
ages examined (Week 6.5 to 7). All examined neuroblastoma specimens (25/25) and
all cell lines (5/5) had detectable dHAND mRNA levels. HASH-1 expression in tumor
specimens was more restricted, although all cell lines (5/5) were
HASH-1-positive. These results show that neuroblastoma tumors have retained
embryonic features, suggesting that many neuroblastomas are blocked at an early
stage of normal development when HASH-1 and dHAND are expressed. dHAND also
appears to be a reliable and potentially useful clinical diagnostic marker for
neuroblastoma, because expression was not dependent on tumor or differentiation
stages and other pediatric tumors were dHAND-negative.

PMID: 9952112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998 Dec 22;1443(3):393-9.

Molecular cloning of the human HAND2 gene.

Russell MW(1), Kemp P, Wang L, Brody LC, Izumo S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Communicable Diseases, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.mruss@umich.edu

We have cloned and characterized the coding sequence of the human HAND2 basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor. The amino acid sequence includes an
amino-terminal polyalanine repeat which is precisely conserved in the rat HAND2
gene. Northern analysis indicates that the HAND2 transcript is 2.3 kb in length
and strongly expressed in the human heart.

PMID: 9878849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Dev Biol. 1998 Jul 1;199(1):72-9.

A constitutive mutation of ALK5 disrupts cardiac looping and morphogenesis in
mice.

Charng MJ(1), Frenkel PA, Lin Q, Yamada M, Schwartz RJ, Olson EN, Overbeek P,
Schneider MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Erratum in
    Dev Biol 1998 Oct 15;202(2):315. Yumada M [corrected to Yamada M].

TGF beta family members are implicated in cardiac organogenesis, growth control, 
and positional information, including the direction of cardiac looping. However, 
genetic analysis of TGF beta signaling in mice has been confounded, in some
cases, by noncardiac and generalized defects. Hence, deciphering TGF beta
function in myocardium would benefit from cardiac-restricted mutations. We
developed a constitutively activated type I receptor, ALK5L193A,P194A,T204D, and 
directed it to embryonic myocardium in transgenic mice. Expression of the
activated ALK5 gene arrests looping morphogenesis and causes a linear, dilated,
hypoplastic heart tube, despite normal expression of Nkx2.5 and dHAND,
cardiogenic transcription factors whose absence provokes a similar phenotype.
Ventricular hypoplasia was associated with precocious induction of the
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, p21. Thus, an ALK5-sensitive pathway mediates 
looping, perhaps through control of cardiac myocyte proliferation.

PMID: 9676193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Development. 1998 Aug;125(16):3005-14.

A signaling cascade involving endothelin-1, dHAND and msx1 regulates development 
of neural-crest-derived branchial arch mesenchyme.

Thomas T(1), Kurihara H, Yamagishi H, Kurihara Y, Yazaki Y, Olson EN, Srivastava 
D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Cardiology and Department of Molecular
Biology and Oncology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas,
Texas 75235-9148, USA. edu.

Numerous human syndromes are the result of abnormal cranial neural crest
development. One group of such defects, referred to as CATCH-22 (cardiac defects,
abnormal facies, thymic hypoplasia, cleft palate, hypocalcemia, associated with
chromosome 22 microdeletion) syndrome, exhibit craniofacial and cardiac defects
resulting from abnormal development of the third and fourth neural crest-derived 
branchial arches and branchial arch arteries. Mice harboring a null mutation of
the endothelin-1 gene (Edn1), which is expressed in the epithelial layer of the
branchial arches and encodes for the endothelin-1 (ET-1) signaling peptide, have 
a phenotype similar to CATCH-22 syndrome with aortic arch defects and
craniofacial abnormalities. Here we show that the basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor, dHAND, is expressed in the mesenchyme underlying the
branchial arch epithelium. Further, dHAND and the related gene, eHAND, are
downregulated in the branchial and aortic arches of Edn1-null embryos. In mice
homozygous null for the dHAND gene, the first and second arches are hypoplastic
secondary to programmed cell death and the third and fourth arches fail to form. 
Molecular analysis revealed that most markers of the neural-crest-derived
components of the branchial arch are expressed in dHAND-null embryos, suggesting 
normal migration of neural crest cells. However, expression of the homeobox gene,
Msx1, was undetectable in the mesenchyme of dHAND-null branchial arches but
unaffected in the limb bud, consistent with the separable regulatory elements of 
Msx1 previously described. Together, these data suggest a model in which
epithelial secretion of ET-1 stimulates mesenchymal expression of dHAND, which
regulates Msx1 expression in the growing, distal branchial arch. Complete
disruption of this molecular pathway results in growth failure of the branchial
arches from apoptosis, while partial disruption leads to defects of branchial
arch derivatives, similar to those seen in CATCH-22 syndrome.

PMID: 9671575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Dev Biol. 1998 Apr 15;196(2):228-36.

The bHLH factors, dHAND and eHAND, specify pulmonary and systemic cardiac
ventricles independent of left-right sidedness.

Thomas T(1), Yamagishi H, Overbeek PA, Olson EN, Srivastava D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas 75235-9148, USA.

dHAND and eHAND are basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors that play
critical roles in cardiac development. The HAND genes have a complementary
left-right cardiac asymmetry of expression with dHAND predominantly on the right 
side and eHAND on the left side of the looped heart tube. Here we show that
although eHAND is asymmetrically expressed along the anterior-posterior and
dorsal-ventral embryonic axes, it is symmetrically expressed along the left-right
axis at early stages of embryonic and cardiac development. After cardiac looping,
dHAND and eHAND are expressed in the right (pulmonary) and left (systemic)
ventricles, respectively. The left-right (LR) sidedness of dHAND and eHAND
expression is demonstrated to be anatomically reversed in situs inversus
(inv/inv) mouse embryos; however, dHAND expression persists in the pulmonary
ventricle and eHAND in the systemic ventricle regardless of anatomic position,
indicating chamber specificity of expression. Previously we showed that
dHAND-null mice fail to form a right-sided pulmonary ventricle. Here mice
homozygous for the dHAND and inv mutations are demonstrated to have only a
right-sided ventricle which is morphologically a left (systemic) ventricle. These
data suggest that the HAND genes are involved in development of segments of the
heart tube which give rise to specific chambers of the heart during
cardiogenesis, rather than controlling the direction of cardiac looping by
interpreting the cascade of LR embryonic signals.

PMID: 9576835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Nat Genet. 1998 Mar;18(3):266-70.

Heart and extra-embryonic mesodermal defects in mouse embryos lacking the bHLH
transcription factor Hand1.

Firulli AB(1), McFadden DG, Lin Q, Srivastava D, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center at Dallas, 75235-9148, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors, Hand1 and Hand2 (refs
1,2), also called eHand/Hxt/Thing1 and dHand/Hed/Thing2 (refs 3,4), respectively,
are expressed in the heart and certain neural-crest derivatives during
embryogenesis. In addition, Hand1 is expressed in extraembryonic membranes,
whereas Hand2 is expressed in the deciduum. Previous studies have demonstrated
that Hand2 is required for formation of the right ventricle of the heart and the 
aortic arch arteries. We have generated a germline mutation in the mouse Hand1
gene by replacing the first coding exon with a beta-galactosidase reporter gene. 
Embryos homozygous for the Hand1 null allele died between embryonic days 8.5 and 
9.5 and exhibited yolk sac abnormalities due to a deficiency in extraembryonic
mesoderm. Heart development was also perturbed and did not progress beyond the
cardiac-looping stage. Our results demonstrate important roles for Hand1 in
extraembryonic mesodermal and heart development.

PMID: 9500550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Nat Genet. 1997 Jun;16(2):154-60.

Regulation of cardiac mesodermal and neural crest development by the bHLH
transcription factor, dHAND.

Srivastava D(1), Thomas T, Lin Q, Kirby ML, Brown D, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas 75235-9148, USA. dsriva@mednet.swmed.edu

Erratum in
    Nat Genet 1997 Aug;16(4):410.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 1997 Jun;16(2):119-21.

dHAND and eHAND are related basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors
that are expressed in mesodermal and neural crest-derived structures of the
developing heart. In contrast to their homogeneous expression during avian
cardiogenesis, during mouse heart development we show that dHAND and eHAND are
expressed in a complementary fashion and are restricted to segments of the heart 
tube fated to form the right and left ventricles, respectively. dHAND and eHAND
represent the earliest cardiac chamber-specific transcription factors yet
identified. Targeted gene deletion of dHAND in mouse embryos resulted in
embryonic lethality at embryonic day 10.5 from heart failure. Our description of 
the cardiac phenotype of dHAND mutant embryos is the first demonstration of a
single gene controlling the formation of the mesodermally derived right ventricle
and the neural crest-derived aortic arches and reveals a novel cardiogenic
subprogramme for right ventricular development.

PMID: 9171826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Ann Rheum Dis. 1996 Jan;55(1):25-9.

Association of hand and knee osteoarthritis: evidence for a polyarticular disease
subset.

Hirsch R(1), Lethbridge-Cejku M, Scott WW Jr, Reichle R, Plato CC, Tobin J,
Hochberg MC.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, Office 
of Prevention, Epidemiology and Clinical Applications, Bethesda, MD 20892-6500,
USA.

Erratum in
    Ann Rheum Dis 1996 Apr;55(4):272.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the association between hand and knee osteoarthritis (OA)
in a community based population.
METHODS: Radiographs of 695 participants aged > or = 40 years in the Baltimore
Longitudinal Study of Aging were read for changes of OA, using Kellgren-Lawrence 
grade > or = 2 as the case definition.
RESULTS: Logistic regression analyses, adjusting for age, gender and body mass
index, revealed a significant association between OA in the knee and the
following joint groups: distal and proximal interphalangeal (DIP, PIP) and Hand2 
(OA in two or more hand joint groups) for grade 2-4 and grade 3-4 disease, and
the first carpometacarpal (CMC1) joint for grade 3-4 disease.
CONCLUSION: There is an association between OA in hand sites and the knee. The
strength of the associations increases with increasing disease severity. For the 
PIP site, there is a trend toward increasing strength of association for
increasing numbers of affected joints and bilateral disease.

PMCID: PMC1010077
PMID: 8572729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Science. 1995 Dec 22;270(5244):1995-9.

A subclass of bHLH proteins required for cardiac morphogenesis.

Srivastava D(1), Cserjesi P, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston 77030, USA.

Skeletal muscle development is controlled by a family of muscle-specific basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors. Two bHLH genes, dHAND and eHAND,
have now been isolated that are expressed in the bilateral heart primordia and
subsequently throughout the primitive tubular heart and its derivatives during
chick and mouse embryogenesis. Incubation of stage 8 chick embryos with dHAND and
eHAND antisense oligonucleotides revealed that either oligonucleotide alone had
no effect on embryonic development, whereas together they arrested development at
the looping heart tube stage. Thus, dHAND and eHAND may play redundant roles in
the regulation of the morphogenetic events of vertebrate heart development.

PMID: 8533092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


