
1. PLoS One. 2016 Feb 26;11(2):e0150263. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0150263.
eCollection 2016.

The Transcription Factor Hand1 Is Involved In Runx2-Ihh-Regulated Endochondral
Ossification.

Laurie LE(1), Kokubo H(2,)(3,)(4), Nakamura M(1), Saga Y(2,)(3), Funato N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Medical and Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental
University (TMDU), Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Division of Mammalian Development,
National Institute of Genetics, Mishima, Shizuoka, Japan. (3)Department of
Genetics, The Graduate University for Advanced Studies, Mishima, Shizuoka, Japan.
(4)Department of Cardiovascular Physiology and Medicine, Graduate School of
Biomedical and Health Sciences, Hiroshima University, Minamiku, Hiroshima, Japan.

The developing long bone is a model of endochondral ossification that displays
the morphological layers of chondrocytes toward the ossification center of the
diaphysis. Indian hedgehog (Ihh), a member of the hedgehog family of secreted
molecules, regulates chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation, as well as
osteoblast differentiation, through the process of endochondral ossification.
Here, we report that the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor Hand1, which
is expressed in the cartilage primordia, is involved in proper osteogenesis of
the bone collar via its control of Ihh production. Genetic overexpression of
Hand1 in the osteochondral progenitors resulted in prenatal hypoplastic or
aplastic ossification in the diaphyses, mimicking an Ihh loss-of-function
phenotype. Ihh expression was downregulated in femur epiphyses of
Hand1-overexpressing mice. We also confirmed that Hand1 downregulated Ihh gene
expression in vitro by inhibiting Runx2 transactivation of the Ihh proximal
promoter. These results demonstrate that Hand1 in chondrocytes regulates
endochondral ossification, at least in part through the Runx2-Ihh axis.

PMCID: PMC4769249
PMID: 26918743  [PubMed - in process]


2. Placenta. 2016 Feb;38:16-23. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2015.12.002. Epub 2015 Dec
13.

Abnormal labyrinthine zone in the Hectd1-null placenta.

Sarkar AA(1), Sabatino JA(1), Sugrue KF(2), Zohn IE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience Research, Children's Research Institute, Children's
National Medical Center, Washington, DC 20010, USA. (2)Center for Neuroscience
Research, Children's Research Institute, Children's National Medical Center,
Washington, DC 20010, USA; Institute for Biomedical Sciences, The George
Washington University, Washington, DC 20052, USA. (3)Center for Neuroscience
Research, Children's Research Institute, Children's National Medical Center,
Washington, DC 20010, USA; Institute for Biomedical Sciences, The George
Washington University, Washington, DC 20052, USA. Electronic address:
izohn@cnmcresearch.org.

INTRODUCTION: The labyrinthine zone of the placenta is where exchange of
nutrients and waste occurs between maternal and fetal circulations. Proper
development of the placental labyrinth is essential for successful growth of the 
developing fetus and abnormalities in placental development are associated with
intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR), preeclampsia and fetal demise. Our
previous studies demonstrate that Hectd1 is essential for development of the
junctional and labyrinthine zones of the placenta. Here we further characterize
labyrinthine zone defects in the Hectd1 mutant placenta.
METHODS: The structure of the mutant placenta was compared to wildtype
littermates using histological methods. The expression of cell type specific
markers was examined by immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization.
RESULTS: Hectd1 is expressed in the labyrinthine zone throughout development and 
the protein is enriched in syncytiotrophoblast layer type I cells (SynT-I) and
Sinusoidal Trophoblast Giant cells (S-TGCs) in the mature placenta. Mutation of
Hectd1 results in pale placentas with frequent hemorrhages along with gross
abnormalities in the structure of the labyrinthine zone including a smaller
overall volume and a poorly elaborated fetal vasculature that contain fewer fetal
blood cells. Examination of molecular markers of labyrinthine trophoblast cell
types reveals increased Dlx3 positive cells and Syna positive SynT-I cells, along
with decreased Hand1 and Ctsq positive sinusoidal trophoblast giant cells
(S-TGCs).
DISCUSSION: Together these defects indicate that Hectd1 is required for
development of the labyrinthine zonethe mouse placenta.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4768308 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26907377  [PubMed - in process]


3. Biorheology. 2016 Feb 11. [Epub ahead of print]

The expression dynamics of mechanosensitive genes in extra-embryonic vasculature 
after heart starts to beat in chick embryo.

Rajendran S(1), Sundaresan L(1), Rajendran K(1), Selvaraj M(1), Gupta R(2,)(3),
Chatterjee S(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Biology Laboratory, AU-KBC Research Centre, Chennai, Tamil Nadu,
India. (2)SciGenom Labs Pvt. Ltd, CSEZ, Cochin, Kerala, India. (3)Medgenome Labs 
Pvt. Ltd, 3rd Floor, Narayana Health City, Bangalore, India. (4)Department of
Biotechnology, Anna University, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India.

BACKGROUND: Fluid flow plays an important role in vascular development. However, 
the detailed mechanisms, particularly the link between flow and modulation of
gene expression during vascular development, remain unexplored. In chick embryo, 
the key events of vascular development from initiation of heart beat to
establishment of effective blood flow occur between the stages HH10 and HH13.
Therefore we propose a novel in vivo model to study the flow experienced by
developing endothelium.
OBJECTIVE: Using this model, we aimed to capture the transcriptome dynamics of
the pre- and post-flow conditions.
METHODS: RNA was isolated from extra embryonic area vasculosa (EE-AV) pooled from
three chick embryos between HH10-HH13 and RNA sequencing was performed.
RESULTS: The whole transcriptome sequencing of chick identified up-regulation of 
some of the previously well-known mechanosensitive genes including NFR2, HAND1,
CTGF and KDR. GO analyses of the up-regulated genes revealed enrichment of
several biological processes including heart development, extracellular matrix
organization, cell-matrix adhesion, cell migration, blood vessel development,
patterning of blood vessels, collagen fibril organization. Genes encoding for gap
junctions proteins which are involved in vascular remodeling and arterial-venous 
differentiation, and genes involved in cell-cell adhesion, and ECM interactions
were significantly up-regulated. Validation of selected genes through semi
quantitative PCR was performed.
CONCLUSION: The study indicates that shear stress plays a major role in
development. Through appropriate validation, this platform can serve as an in
vivo model to study conditions of disturbed flow in pathology as well as normal
flow during development.

PMID: 26889656  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Stem Cells. 2016 Jan 5. doi: 10.1002/stem.2283. [Epub ahead of print]

MicroRNA-194 Regulates Hepatocytic Differentiation of Progenitor Cells by
Targeting YAP1.

Jung KH(1), McCarthy RL(2), Zhou C(1), Uprety N(1), Barton MC(2,)(3), Beretta
L(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, USA. (2)Department of Epigenetics and Molecular 
Carcinogenesis, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, USA. 
(3)The University of Texas Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences at Houston,
USA.

MicroRNA expression profiling in human liver progenitor cells following
hepatocytic differentiation identified miR-122 and miR-194 as the microRNAs most 
strongly upregulated during hepatocytic differentiation of progenitor cells.
MiR-194 was also highly upregulated following hepatocytic differentiation of
human embryonic stem cells (hESCs). Overexpression of miR-194 in progenitor cells
accelerated their differentiation into hepatocytes, as measured by morphological 
features such as canaliculi and expression of hepatocytic markers. Overexpression
of miR-194 in hESCs induced their spontaneous differentiation, a phenotype
accompanied with accelerated loss of the pluripotent factors OCT4 and NANOG and
decrease in mesoderm marker HAND1 expression. We then identified YAP1 as a direct
target of miR-194. Inhibition of YAP1 strongly induced hepatocytic
differentiation of progenitor cells and YAP1 overexpression reversed the
miR-194-induced hepatocytic differentiation of progenitor cells. In conclusion,
we identified miR-194 as a potent inducer of hepatocytic differentiation of
progenitor cells and further identified YAP1 as a mediator of miR-194's effects
on hepatocytic differentiation and liver progenitor cell fate. This article is
protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

© 2015 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 26731713  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2015 Nov 18. pii:
/j/cclm.ahead-of-print/cclm-2015-0766/cclm-2015-0766.xml. doi:
10.1515/cclm-2015-0766. [Epub ahead of print]

HAND1 loss-of-function mutation associated with familial dilated cardiomyopathy.

Zhou YM, Dai XY, Qiu XB, Yuan F, Li RG, Xu YJ, Qu XK, Huang RT, Xue S, Yang YQ.

BACKGROUND: The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor HAND1 is essential
for cardiac development and structural remodeling, and mutations in HAND1 have
been causally linked to various congenital heart diseases. However, whether
genetically compromised HAND1 predisposes to dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) in
humans remains unknown.
METHODS: The whole coding region and splicing junctions of the HAND1 gene were
sequenced in 140 unrelated patients with idiopathic DCM. The available family
members of the index patient carrying an identified mutation and 260 unrelated
ethnically matched healthy individuals used as controls were genotyped for HAND1.
The functional effect of the mutant HAND1 was characterized in contrast to its
wild-type counterpart by using a dual-luciferase reporter assay system.
RESULTS: A novel heterozygous HAND1 mutation, p.R105X, was identified in a family
with DCM transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait, which co-segregated with DCM
in the family with complete penetrance. The nonsense mutation was absent in 520
control chromosomes. Functional analyses unveiled that the mutant HAND1 had no
transcriptional activity. Furthermore, the mutation abolished the synergistic
activation between HAND1 and GATA4, another crucial cardiac transcription factors
that has been associated with various congenital cardiovascular malformations and
DCM.
CONCLUSIONS: This study firstly reports the association of HAND1 loss-of-function
mutation with increased susceptibility to DCM in humans, which provides novel
insight into the molecular mechanisms underpinning DCM.

PMID: 26581070  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 10;10(11):e0142442. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142442.
eCollection 2015.

The Efficient Derivation of Trophoblast Cells from Porcine In Vitro Fertilized
and Parthenogenetic Blastocysts and Culture with ROCK Inhibitor Y-27632.

Hou D(1), Su M(1), Li X(1), Li Z(1), Yun T(1), Zhao Y(1), Zhang M(2,)(3), Zhao
L(2,)(3), Li R(2,)(3), Yu H(1), Li X(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of National Education Ministry for Mammalian Reproductive
Biology and Biotechnology, Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot, Inner Mongolia, P. 
R. China. (2)State Key Laboratories of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, China. (3)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Xenotransplantation,
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.

Trophoblasts (TR) are specialized cells of the placenta and play an important
role in embryo implantation. The in vitro culture of trophoblasts provided an
important tool to investigate the mechanisms of implantation. In the present
study, porcine trophoblast cells were derived from pig in vitro fertilized (IVF) 
and parthenogenetically activated (PA) blastocysts via culturing in medium
supplemented with KnockOut serum replacement (KOSR) and basic fibroblast growth
factor (bFGF) on STO feeder layers, and the effect of ROCK (Rho-associated
coiled-coil protein kinases) inhibiter Y-27632 on the cell lines culture was
tested. 5 PA blastocyst derived cell lines and 2 IVF blastocyst derived cell
lines have been cultured more than 20 passages; one PA cell lines reached 110
passages without obvious morphological alteration. The derived trophoblast cells 
exhibited epithelium-like morphology, rich in lipid droplets, and had obvious
defined boundaries with the feeder cells. The cells were histochemically stained 
positive for alkaline phosphatase. The expression of TR lineage markers, such as 
CDX2, KRT7, KRT18, TEAD4, ELF5 and HAND1, imprinted genes such as IGF2, PEG1 and 
PEG10, and telomerase activity related genes TERC and TERF2 were detected by
immunofluorescence staining, reverse transcription PCR and quantitative real-time
PCR analyses. Both PA and IVF blastocysts derived trophoblast cells possessed the
ability to differentiate into mature trophoblast cells in vitro. The addition of 
Y-27632 improved the growth of both PA and IVF blastocyst derived cell lines and 
increased the expression of trophoblast genes. This study has provided an
alternative highly efficient method to establish trophoblast for research focused
on peri-implantation and placenta development in IVF and PA embryos.

PMCID: PMC4640852
PMID: 26555939  [PubMed - in process]


7. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 2;10(10):e0139342. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0139342.
eCollection 2015.

Identification of Target Genes Involved in Wound Healing Angiogenesis of
Endothelial Cells with the Treatment of a Chinese 2-Herb Formula.

Tam JC(1), Ko CH(1), Koon CM(1), Cheng Z(1), Lok WH(1), Lau CP(1), Leung PC(1),
Fung KP(2), Chan WY(3), Lau CB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chinese Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin,
New Territories, Hong Kong; State Key Laboratory of Phytochemistry and Plant
Resources in West China, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New
Territories, Hong Kong. (2)Institute of Chinese Medicine, The Chinese University 
of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong; State Key Laboratory of
Phytochemistry and Plant Resources in West China, The Chinese University of Hong 
Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong; School of Biomedical Sciences, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong. (3)School of
Biomedical Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New
Territories, Hong Kong.

Angiogenesis is vitally important in diabetic wound healing. We had previously
demonstrated that a Chinese 2-herb formula (NF3) significantly stimulated
angiogenesis of HUVEC in wound healing. However, the molecular mechanism has not 
yet been elucidated. In line with this, global expression profiling of
NF3-treated HUVEC was performed so as to assess the regulatory role of NF3
involved in the underlying signaling pathways in wound healing angiogenesis. The 
microarray results illustrated that different panels of differentially expressed 
genes were strictly governed in NF3-treated HUVEC in a time-regulated manner. The
microarray analysis followed by qRT-PCR and western blotting verification of
NF3-treated HUVEC at 6 h revealed the involvement of various genes in diverse
biological process, e.g., MAP3K14 in anti-inflammation; SLC5A8 in
anti-tumorogenesis; DNAJB7 in protein translation; BIRC5, EPCAM, INSL4, MMP8 and 
NPR3 in cell proliferation; CXCR7, EPCAM, HAND1 and MMP8 in migration; CXCR7,
EPCAM and MMP8 in tubular formation; and BIRC5, CXCR7, EPCAM, HAND1, MMP8 and UBD
in angiogenesis. After 16 h incubation of NF3, other sets of genes were shown
with differential expression in HUVEC, e.g., IL1RAPL2 and NR1H4 in
anti-inflammation; miR28 in anti-tumorogenesis; GRIN1 and LCN1 in anti-oxidation;
EPB41 in intracellular signal transduction; PRL and TFAP2A in cell proliferation;
miR28, PRL and SCG2 in cell migration; PRL in tubular formation; and miR28, NR1H4
and PRL in angiogenesis. This study provided concrete scientific evidence in
support of the regulatory role of NF3 on endothelial cells involved in wound
healing angiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4591983
PMID: 26430762  [PubMed - in process]


8. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2015 Aug 21. doi: 10.1071/RD15132. [Epub ahead of print]

Nuclear transfer alters placental gene expression and associated histone
modifications of the placental-specific imprinted gene pleckstrin homology-like
domain, family A, member 2 (PHLDA2) in cattle.

Arnold DR, Gaspar RC, da Rocha CV, Sangalli JR, de Bem TH, Corrêa CA, Penteado
JC, Meirelles FV, Lopes FL.

Abnormal placental development is frequent in nuclear transfer (NT) pregnancies
and is likely to be associated with altered epigenetic reprogramming. In the
present study, fetal and placental measurements were taken on Day 60 of gestation
in cows with pregnancies produced by AI, IVF and NT. Placentas were collected and
subjected to histological evaluation, the expression of genes important in
trophoblast differentiation and expression of the placental imprinted gene
pleckstrin homology-like domain, family A, member 2 (PHLDA2), as well as
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) for histone marks within the promoter of
PHLDA2. Fewer binucleated cells were observed in NT cotyledons, followed by IVF
and AI cotyledons (P < 0.05). Expression of heart and neural crest derivatives
expressed 1 (HAND1), placental lactogen (PL), pregnancy-associated glycoprotein 9
(PAG-9) and PHLDA2 was elevated in NT cotyledons compared with AI cotyledons.
Expression of PHLDA2 was higher in IVF than AI samples (P < 0.05). ChIP revealed 
an increase in the permissive mark dimethylation of lysine 4 on histone H3
(H3K4me2), surprisingly associated with the silent allele of PHLDA2, and a
decrease in the inhibitory mark H3K9me2 in NT samples. Thus, genes critical for
placental development were altered in NT placentas, including an imprinted gene. 
Allele-specific changes in the permissive histone mark in the PHLDA2 promoter
indicate misregulation of imprinting in clones. Abnormal trophoblast
differentiation could have resulted in lower numbers of binucleated cells
following NT. These results suggest that the altered expression of imprinted
genes associated with NT are also caused by changes in histone modifications.

PMID: 26293776  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. Gut Liver. 2016 Mar 23;10(2):228-36. doi: 10.5009/gnl14472.

Risk Factors for Metachronous Gastric Neoplasms in Patients Who Underwent
Endoscopic Resection of a Gastric Neoplasm.

Yoon H(1), Kim N(1,)(2), Shin CM(1), Lee HS(3), Kim BK(2), Kang GH(4), Kim JM(5),
Kim JS(2), Lee DH(1,)(2), Jung HC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital,
Seongnam, Korea. (2)Department of Internal Medicine and Liver Research Institute,
Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (3)Department of
Pathology, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, Korea.
(4)Department of Pathology, Laboratory of Epigenetics, Cancer Research Institute,
Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (5)Department of
Microbiology, Hanyang University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: To identify the risk factors for metachronous gastric neoplasms 
in patients who underwent an endoscopic resection of a gastric neoplasm.
METHODS: We prospectively collected clinicopathologic data and measured the
methylation levels of HAND1, THBD, APC, and MOS in the gastric mucosa by
methylation-specific real-time polymerase chain reaction in patients who
underwent endoscopic resection of gastric neoplasms.
RESULTS: A total of 257 patients with gastric neoplasms (113 low-grade
dysplasias, 25 highgrade dysplasias, and 119 early gastric cancers) were
enrolled. Metachronous gastric neoplasm developed in 7.4% of patients during a
mean follow-up of 52 months. The 5-year cumulative incidence of metachronous
gastric neoplasm was 4.8%. Multivariate analysis showed that moderate/severe
corpus intestinal metaplasia and family history of gastric cancer were
independent risk factors for metachronous gastric neoplasm development; the
hazard ratios were 4.12 (95% confidence interval [CI], 1.23 to 13.87; p=0.022)
and 3.52 (95% CI, 1.09 to 11.40; p=0.036), respectively. The methylation level of
MOS was significantly elevated in patients with metachronous gastric neoplasms
compared age- and sex-matched patients without metachronous gastric neoplasms
(p=0.020).
CONCLUSIONS: In patients who underwent endoscopic resection of gastric neoplasms,
moderate/severe corpus intestinal metaplasia and a family history of gastric
cancer were independent risk factors for metachronous gastric neoplasm, and MOS
was significantly hypermethylated in patients with metachronous gastric
neoplasms.

PMCID: PMC4780452
PMID: 26087797  [PubMed - in process]


10. Environ Toxicol. 2015 Apr 6. doi: 10.1002/tox.22142. [Epub ahead of print]

Disruption of cardiogenesis in human embryonic stem cells exposed to
trichloroethylene.

Jiang Y(1), Wang D, Zhang G, Wang G, Tong J, Chen T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Neurobiology, Medical College, Soochow
University, Suzhou, 215123, People's Republic of China; Jiangsu Key Laboratory of
Preventive and Translational Medicine for Geriatric Diseases, Soochow University,
Suzhou, 215123, People's Republic of China.

Trichloroethylene (TCE) is ubiquitous in our living environment, and prenatal
exposure to TCE is reported to cause congenital heart disease in humans. Although
multiple studies have been performed using animal models, they have limited value
in predicting effects on humans due to the unknown species-specific toxicological
effects. To test whether exposure to low doses of TCE induces developmental
toxicity in humans, we investigated the effect of TCE on human embryonic stem
cells (hESCs) and cardiomyocytes (derived from the hESCs). In the current study, 
hESCs cardiac differentiation was achieved by using differentiation medium
consisting of StemPro-34. We examined the effects of TCE on cell viability by
cell growth assay and cardiac inhibition by analysis of spontaneously beating
cluster. The expression levels of genes associated with cardiac differentiation
and Ca(2+) channel pathways were measured by immunofluorescence and qPCR. The
overall data indicated the following: (1) significant cardiac inhibition, which
was characterized by decreased beating clusters and beating rates, following
treatment with low doses of TCE; (2) significant up-regulation of the
Nkx2.5/Hand1 gene in cardiac progenitors and down regulation of the Mhc-7/cTnT
gene in cardiac cells; and (3) significant interference with Ca(2+) channel
pathways in cardiomyocytes, which contributes to the adverse effect of TCE on
cardiac differentiation during early embryo development. Our results confirmed
the involvement of Ca(2+) turnover network in TCE cardiotoxicity as reported in
animal models, while the inhibition effect of TCE on the transition of cardiac
progenitors to cardiomyocytes is unique to hESCs, indicating a species-specific
effect of TCE on heart development. This study provides new insight into TCE
biology in humans, which may help explain the development of congenital heart
defects after TCE exposure. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Environ Toxicol, 2015.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25847060  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 30;10(3):e0118573. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0118573.
eCollection 2015.

Transcriptomics of maternal and fetal membranes can discriminate between
gestational-age matched preterm neonates with and without cognitive impairment
diagnosed at 18-24 months.

Pappas A(1), Chaiworapongsa T(2), Romero R(3), Korzeniewski SJ(4), Cortez JC(1), 
Bhatti G(5), Gomez-Lopez N(6), Hassan SS(2), Shankaran S(1), Tarca AL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Perinatology Research Branch, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development / NIH / DHHS, Bethesda, MD and Detroit, MI,
United States of America; Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatal and
Perinatal Medicine, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, United States of
America. (2)Perinatology Research Branch, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development / NIH / DHHS, Bethesda, MD and
Detroit, MI, United States of America; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, United States of America. (3)Perinatology
Research Branch, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development / NIH / DHHS, Bethesda, MD and Detroit, MI, United States of
America; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI, United States of America; Department of Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, United States of
America. (4)Perinatology Research Branch, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development / NIH / DHHS, Bethesda, MD and
Detroit, MI, United States of America; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, United States of America; Department of
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI,
United States of America. (5)Perinatology Research Branch, Eunice Kennedy Shriver
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development / NIH / DHHS, Bethesda, 
MD and Detroit, MI, United States of America. (6)Perinatology Research Branch,
Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development /
NIH / DHHS, Bethesda, MD and Detroit, MI, United States of America; Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, United States of 
America; Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Wayne State University,
Detroit, MI, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Neurocognitive impairment among children born preterm may arise from 
complex interactions between genes and the intra-uterine environment.
OBJECTIVES: (1) To characterize the transcriptomic profiles of chorioamniotic
membranes in preterm neonates with and without neurocognitive impairment via
microarrays and (2) to determine if neonates with neurocognitive impairment can
be identified at birth.
MATERIALS/METHODS: A retrospective case-control study was conducted to examine
the chorioamniotic transcriptome of gestational-age matched very preterm neonates
with and without neurocognitive impairment at 18-24 months' corrected-age defined
by a Bayley-III Cognitive Composite Score <80 (n = 14 each). Pathway analysis
with down-weighting of overlapping genes (PADOG) was performed to identify KEGG
pathways relevant to the phenotype. Select differentially expressed genes were
profiled using qRT-PCR and a multi-gene disease prediction model was developed
using linear discriminant analysis. The model's predictive performance was tested
on a new set of cases and controls (n = 19 each).
RESULTS: 1) 117 genes were differentially expressed among neonates with and
without subsequent neurocognitive impairment (p<0.05 and fold change >1.5); 2)
Gene ontology analysis indicated enrichment of 19 biological processes and 3
molecular functions; 3)PADOG identified 4 significantly perturbed KEGG pathways: 
oxidative phosphorylation, Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease and
Huntington's disease (q-value <0.1); 4) 48 of 90 selected differentially
expressed genes were confirmed by qRT-PCR, including genes implicated in energy
metabolism, neuronal signaling, vascular permeability and response to injury
(e.g., up-regulation of SEPP1, APOE, DAB2, CD163, CXCL12, VWF; down-regulation of
HAND1, OSR1)(p<0.05); and 5) a multi-gene model predicted 18-24 month
neurocognitive impairment (using the ratios of OSR1/VWF and HAND1/VWF at birth)
in a larger, independent set (sensitivity = 74%, at specificity = 83%).
CONCLUSIONS: Gene expression patterns in the chorioamniotic membranes link
neurocognitive impairment in preterm infants to neurodegenerative disease
pathways and might be used to predict neurocognitive impairment. Further
prospective studies are needed.

PMCID: PMC4379164
PMID: 25822971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Toxicol Sci. 2015 Apr;40(2):251-61. doi: 10.2131/jts.40.251.

Hand1-Luc embryonic stem cell test (Hand1-Luc EST): a novel rapid and highly
reproducible in vitro test for embryotoxicity by measuring cytotoxicity and
differentiation toxicity using engineered mouse ES cells.

Le Coz F(1), Suzuki N, Nagahori H, Omori T, Saito K.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Health Science Laboratory, Sumitomo Chemical Co., Ltd.

The embryonic stem cell test (EST) is a promising alternative method for
evaluating embryotoxicity of test chemicals by measuring cytotoxicity and
differentiation toxicity using mouse ES cells. Differentiation toxicity is
analyzed by microscopically counting the beating of embryonic bodies after 10
days of culture. However, improvements are necessary to reduce the laborious
manipulations involved and the time required to obtain results. We have
previously reported the successful stable transfection of ES cells (ES-D3) with
the heart and neural crest derivatives expressed transcript 1 (Hand1) gene and
the establishment of a 96-well multi-plate-based new EST with luciferase reporter
assay 6 days after treatment with test chemicals. Now, we propose an even more
rapid and easier EST, named Hand1-Luc EST. We established another cell line to
monitor the Hand1 gene expression via a luciferase reporter gene. By mRNA
analysis and luciferase assay, we examined in detail the luciferase activity
during cell differentiation, which allowed us to reduce the time of measurement
from day 6 to day 5 (120 hr). Furthermore, the protocol was improved, with, among
others, the measurement of cytotoxicity and differentiation toxicity taking place
in the same 96-well round bottom plate instead of two different plates. With the 
positive control, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), and 9 test chemicals, data with high
reproducibility and very low variation (CV < 50%) in the relevant endpoints were 
obtained. This study shows that the Hand1-Luc EST could provide an accurate and
sensitive short-term test for prediction of embryotoxicants by measuring
cytotoxicity and differentiation toxicity from the same sample.

PMID: 25786529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Cardiovasc Res. 2015 Jun 1;106(3):520-9. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvv042. Epub 2015 Feb
17.

Role of common and rare variants in SCN10A: results from the Brugada syndrome QRS
locus gene discovery collaborative study.

Behr ER(1), Savio-Galimberti E(2), Barc J(3), Holst AG(4), Petropoulou E(5),
Prins BP(5), Jabbari J(6), Torchio M(7), Berthet M(8), Mizusawa Y(3), Yang T(2), 
Nannenberg EA(9), Dagradi F(7), Weeke P(2), Bastiaenan R(5), Ackerman MJ(10),
Haunso S(11), Leenhardt A(12), Kääb S(13), Probst V(14), Redon R(14), Sharma
S(5), Wilde A(15), Tfelt-Hansen J(11), Schwartz P(7), Roden DM(2), Bezzina CR(3),
Olesen M(16), Darbar D(2), Guicheney P(8), Crotti L(17); UK10K Consortium,
Jamshidi Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Research Centre, ICCS, St George's University of London, London
SW17 0RE, UK yjamshid@sgul.ac.uk ebehr@sgul.ac.uk. (2)Divisions of Cardiovascular
Medicine and Clinical Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA.
(3)Department of Clinical and Experimental Cardiology, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, Netherlands. (4)Laboratory for Molecular Cardiology, The Heart Centre,
Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark Danish National
Research Foundation Centre for Cardiac Arrhythmia, Copenhagen, Denmark Novo
Nordisk A/S, Denmark. (5)Human Genetics Research Centre, ICCS, St George's
University of London, London SW17 0RE, UK. (6)Laboratory for Molecular
Cardiology, The Heart Centre, Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark Danish National Research Foundation Centre for Cardiac
Arrhythmia, Copenhagen, Denmark LEO Pharma A/S, Denmark. (7)IRCCS Istituto
Auxologico Italiano, Center for Cardiac Arrhythmias of Genetic Origin, Milan,
Italy. (8)Inserm, UMR S1166, Faculté de Médecine Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris,
France Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR S1166, Paris, France
Institute of Cardiometabolism & Nutrition, ICAN, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital,
Paris, France. (9)Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam. (10)Division of Cardiovascular Diseases, Department of Internal
Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA Division of Pediatric Cardiology,
Department of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. 
(11)Laboratory for Molecular Cardiology, The Heart Centre, Rigshospitalet,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark Danish National Research Foundation
Centre for Cardiac Arrhythmia, Copenhagen, Denmark Department of Medicine and
Surgery, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. (12)AP-HP, Hôpital
Bichat, Service de Cardiologie et Centre de Référence des Maladies Cardiaques
Héréditaires, Paris, France. (13)Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum
München, Neuherberg, Germany. (14)Inserm, UMR 1087, l'institut du Thorax, Nantes,
France CHU Nantes, l'institut du Thorax, Service de Cardiologie, Nantes, France. 
(15)Department of Clinical and Experimental Cardiology, Academic Medical Center, 
Amsterdam, Netherlands Princess Al-Jawhara Al-Brahim Centre of Excellence in
Research of Hereditary Disorders, Jeddah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. (16)Laboratory
for Molecular Cardiology, The Heart Centre, Rigshospitalet, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark Danish National Research Foundation Centre for
Cardiac Arrhythmia, Copenhagen, Denmark. (17)IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, 
Center for Cardiac Arrhythmias of Genetic Origin, Milan, Italy Inserm, UMR 1087, 
l'institut du Thorax, Nantes, France Department of Molecular Medicine, University
of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.

Comment in
    Cardiovasc Res. 2015 Jun 1;106(3):351-2.

AIMS: Brugada syndrome (BrS) remains genetically heterogeneous and is associated 
with slowed cardiac conduction. We aimed to identify genetic variation in BrS
cases at loci associated with QRS duration.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A multi-centre study sequenced seven candidate genes
(SCN10A, HAND1, PLN, CASQ2, TKT, TBX3, and TBX5) in 156 Caucasian SCN5A
mutation-negative BrS patients (80% male; mean age 48) with symptoms (64%) and/or
a family history of sudden death (47%) or BrS (18%). Forty-nine variants were
identified: 18 were rare (MAF <1%) and non-synonymous; and 11/18 (61.1%), mostly 
in SCN10A, were predicted as pathogenic using multiple bioinformatics tools.
Allele frequencies were compared with the Exome Sequencing and UK10K Projects.
SKAT methods tested rare variation in SCN10A finding no statistically significant
difference between cases and controls. Co-segregation analysis was possible for
four of seven probands carrying a novel pathogenic variant. Only one pedigree
(I671V/G1299A in SCN10A) showed co-segregation. The SCN10A SNP V1073 was,
however, associated strongly with BrS [66.9 vs. 40.1% (UK10K) OR (95% CI) = 3.02 
(2.35-3.87), P = 8.07 × 10-19]. Voltage-clamp experiments for NaV1.8 were
performed for SCN10A common variants V1073, A1073, and rare variants of interest:
A200V and I671V. V1073, A200V and I671V, demonstrated significant reductions in
peak INa compared with ancestral allele A1073 (rs6795970).
CONCLUSION: Rare variants in the screened QRS-associated genes (including SCN10A)
are not responsible for a significant proportion of SCN5A mutation negative BrS. 
The common SNP SCN10A V1073 was strongly associated with BrS and demonstrated
loss of NaV1.8 function, as did rare variants in isolated patients.

Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. ©
The Author 2015. For permissions please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4447806 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25691538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Int J Cardiol. 2015 Mar 15;183:117-28. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2015.01.049. Epub
2015 Jan 27.

Signaling molecules, transcription growth factors and other regulators revealed
from in-vivo and in-vitro models for the regulation of cardiac development.

Meganathan K(1), Sotiriadou I(1), Natarajan K(1), Hescheler J(1), Sachinidis
A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Institute of Neurophysiology and
Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Germany.
(2)Center of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Institute of Neurophysiology and
Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Germany.
Electronic address: A.Sachinidis@uni-koeln.de.

Several in-vivo heart developmental models have been applied to decipher the
cardiac developmental patterning encompassing early, dorsal, cardiac and visceral
mesoderm as well as various transcription factors such as Gata, Hand, Tin, Dpp,
Pnr. The expression of cardiac specific transcription factors, such as Gata4,
Tbx5, Tbx20, Tbx2, Tbx3, Mef2c, Hey1 and Hand1 are of fundamental significance
for the in-vivo cardiac development. Not only the transcription factors, but also
the signaling molecules involved in cardiac development were conserved among
various species. Enrichment of the bone morphogenic proteins (BMPs) in the
anterior lateral plate mesoderm is essential for the initiation of myocardial
differentiation and the cardiac developmental process. Moreover, the expression
of a number of cardiac transcription factors and structural genes initiate
cardiac differentiation in the medial mesoderm. Other signaling molecules such as
TGF-beta, IGF-1/2 and the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) play a significant role 
in cardiac repair/regeneration, ventricular heart development and specification
of early cardiac mesoderm, respectively. The role of the Wnt signaling in cardiac
development is still controversial discussed, as in-vitro results differ
dramatically in relation to the animal models. Embryonic stem cells (ESC) were
utilized as an important in-vitro model for the elucidation of the cardiac
developmental processes since they can be easily manipulated by numerous
signaling molecules, growth factors, small molecules and genetic manipulation.
Finally, in the present review the dynamic role of the long noncoding RNA and
miRNAs in the regulation of cardiac development are summarized and discussed.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25662074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Anim Reprod Sci. 2015 Mar;154:128-41. doi: 10.1016/j.anireprosci.2015.01.012.
Epub 2015 Jan 31.

Isolation and characterization of trophoblast-derived stem-like cells from
peri-implantation porcine embryos.

Suasnavas EA(1), Heywood S(1), Ward A(1), Cox L(1), O'Grady M(1), Zhao Y(1),
Gilbert L(1), Isom SC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Dairy & Veterinary Sciences, Utah State University,
Logan, UT, USA. (2)Department of Animal Dairy & Veterinary Sciences, Utah State
University, Logan, UT, USA. Electronic address: clay.isom@usu.edu.

In mammals, the trophoblast lineage of the embryo is specified before
attachment/implantation to become the fetal portion of the placenta.
Trophoblast-derived cells were isolated and cultured from day 10 and day 13
porcine embryos and were grown in vitro in a defined, serum-free culture medium
for over 2 years without showing any signs of senescence. However,
trophoblast-derived cells placed into serum-containing medium rapidly senesce and
fail to proliferate. Semiquantitative and quantitative gene expression analyses
of cells in culture from 0 to 30 days confirmed the presence (and relative
abundance) of mRNA transcripts from genes involved in trophoblast function (CDX2,
TEAD4, CYP17A1, HSD17B1, FGFR2, PLET, HAND1) as well as some genes known to
mediate pluripotency (POU5F1, KLF4, CMYC). Protein immunolocalization
demonstrated expression of both trophoblast and mesenchymal cell markers. DNA
methylation patterns in promoters of three critical developmental genes (HAND1,
KLF4, TEAD4) did not change appreciably over 4 months of culture in vitro. It was
demonstrated that these trophoblast-derived cells are easily stably transfected
with an exogenous transgene (eGFP) by a variety of methods, and show the ability 
to survive and to be passaged repeatedly after transfection. In summary, early
embryonic porcine trophoblast-derived cells have demonstrated unique
characteristics, which means they could be used as valuable tools for laboratory 
work. Anticipated applications include the study of trophoblast physiology as
well as possible solutions for improving efficiency of transgenesis by somatic
cell nuclear transfer and for pluripotency reprogramming of cells.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 25660622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. EMBO J. 2015 Mar 12;34(6):759-77. doi: 10.15252/embj.201490542. Epub 2015 Jan 6.

Scl binds to primed enhancers in mesoderm to regulate hematopoietic and cardiac
fate divergence.

Org T(1), Duan D(1), Ferrari R(2), Montel-Hagen A(1), Van Handel B(1), Kerényi
MA(3), Sasidharan R(1), Rubbi L(1), Fujiwara Y(3), Pellegrini M(1), Orkin SH(3), 
Kurdistani SK(2), Mikkola HK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (2)Department of Biological Chemistry,
University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA Eli and Edythe Broad Stem Cell
Research Center, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (3)Department of
Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston, Howard Hughes Medical Institute 
Harvard Stem Cell Institute Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA Eli and Edythe Broad Stem Cell Research Center, 
University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA hmikkola@mcdb.ucla.edu.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2015 Mar 12;34(6):691-3.

Scl/Tal1 confers hemogenic competence and prevents ectopic cardiomyogenesis in
embryonic endothelium by unknown mechanisms. We discovered that Scl binds to
hematopoietic and cardiac enhancers that become epigenetically primed in
multipotent cardiovascular mesoderm, to regulate the divergence of hematopoietic 
and cardiac lineages. Scl does not act as a pioneer factor but rather exploits a 
pre-established epigenetic landscape. As the blood lineage emerges, Scl binding
and active epigenetic modifications are sustained in hematopoietic enhancers,
whereas cardiac enhancers are decommissioned by removal of active epigenetic
marks. Our data suggest that, rather than recruiting corepressors to enhancers,
Scl prevents ectopic cardiogenesis by occupying enhancers that cardiac factors,
such as Gata4 and Hand1, use for gene activation. Although hematopoietic Gata
factors bind with Scl to both activated and repressed genes, they are dispensable
for cardiac repression, but necessary for activating genes that enable
hematopoietic stem/progenitor cell development. These results suggest that a
unique subset of enhancers in lineage-specific genes that are accessible for
regulators of opposing fates during the time of the fate decision provide a
platform where the divergence of mutually exclusive fates is orchestrated.

© 2015 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4369313
PMID: 25564442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Stem Cell Res. 2014 Nov;13(3 Pt A):478-91. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2014.07.007. Epub
2014 Jul 30.

Hypoxic stress induces, but cannot sustain trophoblast stem cell differentiation 
to labyrinthine placenta due to mitochondrial insufficiency.

Xie Y(1), Zhou S(2), Jiang Z(1), Dai J(1), Puscheck EE(2), Lee I(3), Parker G(4),
Hüttemann M(5), Rappolee DA(6).

Author information: 
(1)CS Mott Center for Human Growth and Development, Department of Ob/Gyn,
Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201, USA. (2)CS Mott Center for Human Growth and
Development, Department of Ob/Gyn, Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility,
Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201, USA; Program for
Reproductive Sciences, Department of Physiology, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201, USA. (3)College of Medicine, Dankook University,
Cheonan-si, Chungcheongnam-do 330-714, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of
Pediatrics and Children's Hospital of Michigan, Wayne State University School of 
Medicine, USA. (5)Center for Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Wayne State
University School of Medicine, USA. (6)CS Mott Center for Human Growth and
Development, Department of Ob/Gyn, Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility,
Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201, USA; Program for
Reproductive Sciences, Department of Physiology, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201, USA; Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State
University School of Medicine, USA; Institutes for Environmental Health Science, 
Wayne State University School of Medicine, USA; Department of Biology, University
of Windsor, Windsor, ON N9B 3P4, Canada. Electronic address:
drappole@med.wayne.edu.

Dysfunctional stem cell differentiation into placental lineages is associated
with gestational diseases. Of the differentiated lineages available to
trophoblast stem cells (TSC), elevated O2 and mitochondrial function are
necessary to placental lineages at the maternal-placental surface and important
in the etiology of preeclampsia. TSC lineage imbalance leads to embryonic failure
during uterine implantation. Stress at implantation exacerbates stem cell
depletion by decreasing proliferation and increasing differentiation. In an
implantation site O2 is normally ~2%. In culture, exposure to 2% O2 and
fibroblast growth factor 4 (FGF4) enabled the highest mouse TSC multipotency and 
proliferation. In contrast, hypoxic stress (0.5% O2) initiated the most TSC
differentiation after 24h despite exposure to FGF4. However, hypoxic stress
supported differentiation poorly after 4-7 days, despite FGF4 removal. At all
tested O2 levels, FGF4 maintained Warburg metabolism; mitochondrial inactivity
and aerobic glycolysis. However, hypoxic stress suppressed mitochondrial membrane
potential and maintained low mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase (oxidative
phosphorylation/OxPhos), and high pyruvate kinase M2 (glycolysis) despite FGF4
removal. Inhibiting OxPhos inhibited optimum differentiation at 20% O2. Moreover,
adding differentiation-inducing hyperosmolar stress failed to induce
differentiation during hypoxia. Thus, differentiation depended on OxPhos at 20%
O2; hypoxic and hyperosmolar stresses did not induce differentiation at 0.5% O2. 
Hypoxia-limited differentiation and mitochondrial inhibition and activation
suggest that differentiation into two lineages of the labyrinthine placenta
requires O2>0.5-2% and mitochondrial function. Stress-activated protein kinase
increases an early lineage and suppresses later lineages in proportion to the
deviation from optimal O2 for multipotency, thus it is the first enzyme reported 
to prioritize differentiation.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC4253717
PMID: 25239494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 28;9(8):e106318. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0106318.
eCollection 2014.

Characterization of circulating microRNA expression in patients with a
ventricular septal defect.

Li D(1), Ji L(2), Liu L(3), Liu Y(2), Hou H(2), Yu K(2), Sun Q(2), Zhao Z(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Health Statistics, School of Public Health,
Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong Province, China; School of Public Health,
Taishan Medical University, Tai'an, Shandong Province, China. (2)School of Public
Health, Taishan Medical University, Tai'an, Shandong Province, China. (3)Tai'an
Children's Hospital, Tai'an, Shandong Province, China. (4)Department of
Epidemiology and Health Statistics, School of Public Health, Shandong University,
Jinan, Shandong Province, China.

OBJECTIVES: Ventricular septal defect (VSD), one of the most common types of
congenital heart disease (CHD), results from a combination of environmental and
genetic factors. Recent studies demonstrated that microRNAs (miRNAs) are involved
in development of CHD. This study was to characterize the expression of miRNAs
that might be involved in the development or reflect the consequences of VSD.
METHODS: MiRNA microarray analysis and reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) were employed to determine the miRNA expression profile from 3 
patients with VSD and 3 VSD-free controls. 3 target gene databases were employed 
to predict the target genes of differentially expressed miRNAs. miRNAs that were 
generally consensus across the three databases were selected and then
independently validated using real time PCR in plasma samples from 20 VSD
patients and 15 VSD-free controls. Target genes of validated 8 miRNAs were
predicted using bioinformatic methods.
RESULTS: 36 differentially expressed miRNAs were found in the patients with VSD
and the VSD-free controls. Compared with VSD-free controls, expression of 15
miRNAs were up-regulated and 21 miRNAs were downregulated in the VSD group. 15
miRNAs were selected based on database analysis results and expression levels of 
8 miRNAs were validated. The results of the real time PCR were consistent with
those of the microarray analysis. Gene ontology analysis indicated that the top
target genes were mainly related to cardiac right ventricle morphogenesis.
NOTCH1, HAND1, ZFPM2, and GATA3 were predicted as targets of hsa-let-7e-5p,
hsa-miR-222-3p and hsa-miR-433.
CONCLUSION: We report for the first time the circulating miRNA profile for
patients with VSD and showed that 7 miRNAs were downregulated and 1 upregulated
when matched to VSD-free controls. Analysis revealed target genes involved in
cardiac development were probably regulated by these miRNAs.

PMCID: PMC4148428
PMID: 25165856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2014 Jul 29;5(4):89. doi: 10.1186/scrt478.

Hearty miR-363 controls HAND1 in cardiac cell specification.

Gupta MK, Rao TN.

Comment on
    Stem Cell Res Ther. 2014;5(3):75.

MicroRNAs regulate target gene expression post-transcriptionally in a myriad of
cell types and play critical roles in diverse physiological and pathological
processes, including cardiomyocyte development, differentiation, and
regeneration. The recent publication in Stem Cell Research and Therapy by Wagh
and colleagues reports a novel regulatory role for miR-363 in cardiomyocyte
specification. By employing microRNA expression profiling and functional
knockdown studies on human embryonic stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes, the
authors identified miR-363 as an upstream negative regulator of left ventricular 
specification transcription factor HAND1.

PMCID: PMC4282149
PMID: 25157599  [PubMed - in process]


20. Development. 2014 Aug;141(15):3050-61. doi: 10.1242/dev.107680.

Hand1 phosphoregulation within the distal arch neural crest is essential for
craniofacial morphogenesis.

Firulli BA(1), Fuchs RK(2), Vincentz JW(1), Clouthier DE(3), Firulli AB(4).

Author information: 
(1)Riley Heart Research Center, Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research,
Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Departments of Anatomy and Medical,
Biochemistry, and Molecular Genetics, Indiana Medical School, 1044 W. Walnut
Street, Indianapolis, IN 46202-5225, USA. (2)Department of Physical Therapy and
the Center for Translational Musculoskeletal Research, School of Health and
Rehabilitation Science, Indiana University, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.
(3)Department of Craniofacial Biology, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical
Campus, 12801 E 17th Avenue, Rm. 11-109, MS 8120, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. (4)Riley
Heart Research Center, Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Division of 
Pediatric Cardiology, Departments of Anatomy and Medical, Biochemistry, and
Molecular Genetics, Indiana Medical School, 1044 W. Walnut Street, Indianapolis, 
IN 46202-5225, USA tfirulli@iupui.edu.

In this study we examine the consequences of altering Hand1 phosphoregulation in 
the developing neural crest cells (NCCs) of mice. Whereas Hand1 deletion in NCCs 
reveals a nonessential role for Hand1 in craniofacial development and embryonic
survival, altering Hand1 phosphoregulation, and consequently Hand1 dimerization
affinities, in NCCs results in severe mid-facial clefting and neonatal death.
Hand1 phosphorylation mutants exhibit a non-cell-autonomous increase in
pharyngeal arch cell death accompanied by alterations in Fgf8 and Shh pathway
expression. Together, our data indicate that the extreme distal pharyngeal arch
expression domain of Hand1 defines a novel bHLH-dependent activity, and that
disruption of established Hand1 dimer phosphoregulation within this domain
disrupts normal craniofacial patterning.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4197675
PMID: 25053435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 22;9(7):e102796. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102796.
eCollection 2014.

Directed differentiation of patient-specific induced pluripotent stem cells
identifies the transcriptional repression and epigenetic modification of NKX2-5, 
HAND1, and NOTCH1 in hypoplastic left heart syndrome.

Kobayashi J(1), Yoshida M(2), Tarui S(1), Hirata M(1), Nagai Y(3), Kasahara S(1),
Naruse K(3), Ito H(2), Sano S(1), Oh H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Okayama University Graduate School of
Medicine, Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Japan. (2)Department
of Cardiovascular Medicine, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine,
Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Japan. (3)Department of
Cardiovascular Physiology, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine,
Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Japan. (4)Department of
Regenerative Medicine, Center for Innovative Clinical Medicine, Okayama
University Hospital, Okayama, Japan.

The genetic basis of hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS) remains unknown, and 
the lack of animal models to reconstitute the cardiac maldevelopment has hampered
the study of this disease. This study investigated the altered control of
transcriptional and epigenetic programs that may affect the development of HLHS
by using disease-specific induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells. Cardiac
progenitor cells (CPCs) were isolated from patients with congenital heart
diseases to generate patient-specific iPS cells. Comparative gene expression
analysis of HLHS- and biventricle (BV) heart-derived iPS cells was performed to
dissect the complex genetic circuits that may promote the disease phenotype. Both
HLHS- and BV heart-derived CPCs were reprogrammed to generate disease-specific
iPS cells, which showed characteristic human embryonic stem cell signatures,
expressed pluripotency markers, and could give rise to cardiomyocytes. However,
HLHS-iPS cells exhibited lower cardiomyogenic differentiation potential than
BV-iPS cells. Quantitative gene expression analysis demonstrated that
HLHS-derived iPS cells showed transcriptional repression of NKX2-5, reduced
levels of TBX2 and NOTCH/HEY signaling, and inhibited HAND1/2 transcripts
compared with control cells. Although both HLHS-derived CPCs and iPS cells showed
reduced SRE and TNNT2 transcriptional activation compared with BV-derived cells, 
co-transfection of NKX2-5, HAND1, and NOTCH1 into HLHS-derived cells resulted in 
synergistic restoration of these promoters activation. Notably, gain- and
loss-of-function studies revealed that NKX2-5 had a predominant impact on NPPA
transcriptional activation. Moreover, differentiated HLHS-derived iPS cells
showed reduced H3K4 dimethylation as well as histone H3 acetylation but increased
H3K27 trimethylation to inhibit transcriptional activation on the NKX2-5
promoter. These findings suggest that patient-specific iPS cells may provide
molecular insights into complex transcriptional and epigenetic mechanisms, at
least in part, through combinatorial expression of NKX2-5, HAND1, and NOTCH1 that
coordinately contribute to cardiac malformations in HLHS.

PMCID: PMC4106834
PMID: 25050861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Jul 17;5:e1324. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.283.

Integrative epigenome analysis identifies a Polycomb-targeted differentiation
program as a tumor-suppressor event epigenetically inactivated in colorectal
cancer.

Tan J(1), Yang X(1), Jiang X(1), Zhou J(2), Li Z(1), Lee PL(1), Li B(3), Robson
P(4), Yu Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Therapeutics and Stratified Oncology, Genome Institute of Singapore,
A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology and Research), Biopolis, Singapore.
(2)Department of Medicine, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University
of Singapore, Singapore. (3)Bio-X Institutes, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of 
Developmental and Neuropsychiatric Disorders, Ministry of Education, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. (4)1] Stem Cell and Developmental Biology,
Genome Institute of Singapore, A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology and
Research), Biopolis, Singapore [2] Department of Biological Sciences, National
University of Singapore, Singapore.

Aberrant DNA hypermethylation in human cancer has been associated with Polycomb
target genes in embryonic stem (ES) cells, but a functional link of the
Polycomb-targeted differentiation program to tumorigenesis remains to be
established. Here, through epigenome analysis correlating DNA hypermethylation in
colon cancer with ES cell pluripotency and differentiation, we identified a set
of DNA hypermethylated genes in cancer cells that are Polycomb targets strongly
associated with ES cell differentiation, including HAND1, a developmental
regulator. Intriguingly, HAND1 is silenced in over 90% of human primary
colorectal tumors, and re-expression of HAND1 in colon cancer cells induces
terminal differentiation, inhibits proliferation and prevents xenograft tumor
formation. Moreover, hypermethylated HAND1 has a minimum enrichment of
EZH2-H3K27me3 in cancer cells, but becomes EZH2 bound and bivalent upon the loss 
of DNA methylation, suggesting a sequential gene silencing event during
oncogenesis. These findings established a functional role of Polycomb-targeted
differentiation program as a tumor-suppressor event epigenetically inactivated in
human cancer.

PMCID: PMC4123077
PMID: 25032847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2014 Jun 6;5(3):75. doi: 10.1186/scrt464.

MicroRNA-363 negatively regulates the left ventricular determining transcription 
factor HAND1 in human embryonic stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes.

Wagh V, Pomorski A, Wilschut KJ, Piombo S, Bernstein HS.

Comment in
    Stem Cell Res Ther. 2014;5(4):89.

INTRODUCTION: Posttranscriptional control of mRNA by microRNA (miRNA) has been
implicated in the regulation of diverse biologic processes from directed
differentiation of stem cells through organism development. We describe a unique 
pathway by which miRNA regulates the specialized differentiation of cardiomyocyte
(CM) subtypes.
METHODS: We differentiated human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) to cardiac
progenitor cells and functional CMs, and characterized the regulated expression
of specific miRNAs that target transcriptional regulators of left/right
ventricular-subtype specification.
RESULTS: From >900 known human miRNAs in hESC-derived cardiac progenitor cells
and functional CMs, a subset of differentially expressed cardiac miRNAs was
identified, and in silico analysis predicted highly conserved binding sites in
the 3'-untranslated regions (3'UTRs) of
Hand-and-neural-crest-derivative-expressed (HAND) genes 1 and 2 that are involved
in left and right ventricular development. We studied the temporal and spatial
expression patterns of four miRNAs in differentiating hESCs, and found that
expression of miRNA (miR)-363, miR-367, miR-181a, and miR-181c was specific for
stage and site. Further analysis showed that miR-363 overexpression resulted in
downregulation of HAND1 mRNA and protein levels. A dual luciferase reporter assay
demonstrated functional interaction of miR-363 with the full-length 3'UTR of
HAND1. Expression of anti-miR-363 in-vitro resulted in enrichment for
HAND1-expressing CM subtype populations. We also showed that BMP4 treatment
induced the expression of HAND2 with less effect on HAND1, whereas miR-363
overexpression selectively inhibited HAND1.
CONCLUSIONS: These data show that miR-363 negatively regulates the expression of 
HAND1 and suggest that suppression of miR-363 could provide a novel strategy for 
generating functional left-ventricular CMs.

PMCID: PMC4097848
PMID: 24906886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. BMC Cancer. 2014 May 2;14:309. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-309.

MicroRNAs define distinct human neuroblastoma cell phenotypes and regulate their 
differentiation and tumorigenicity.

Samaraweera L(1), Grandinetti KB, Huang R, Spengler BA, Ross RA.

Author information: 
(1)Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300, Morris Park Ave, Bronx, NY 10461,
USA. leleesha.samaraweera@einstein.yu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Neuroblastoma (NB) is the most common extracranial solid tumor in
children. NB tumors and derived cell lines are phenotypically heterogeneous. Cell
lines are classified by phenotype, each having distinct differentiation and
tumorigenic properties. The neuroblastic phenotype is tumorigenic, has neuronal
features and includes stem cells (I-cells) and neuronal cells (N-cells). The
non-neuronal phenotype (S-cell) comprises cells that are non-tumorigenic with
features of glial/smooth muscle precursor cells. This study identified miRNAs
associated with each distinct cell phenotypes and investigated their role in
regulating associated differentiation and tumorigenic properties.
METHODS: A miRNA microarray was performed on the three cell phenotypes and
expression verified by qRT-PCR. miRNAs specific for certain cell phenotypes were 
modulated using miRNA inhibitors or stable transfection. Neuronal differentiation
was induced by RA; non-neuronal differentiation by BrdU. Changes in
tumorigenicity were assayed by soft agar colony forming ability. N-myc binding to
miR-375 promoter was assayed by chromatin-immunoprecipitation.
RESULTS: Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of miRNA microarray data segregated
neuroblastic and non-neuronal cell lines and showed that specific miRNAs define
each phenotype. qRT-PCR validation confirmed that increased levels of miR-21,
miR-221 and miR-335 are associated with the non-neuronal phenotype, whereas
increased levels of miR-124 and miR-375 are exclusive to neuroblastic cells.
Downregulation of miR-335 in non-neuronal cells modulates expression levels of
HAND1 and JAG1, known modulators of neuronal differentiation. Overexpression of
miR-124 in stem cells induces terminal neuronal differentiation with reduced
malignancy. Expression of miR-375 is exclusive for N-myc-expressing neuroblastic 
cells and is regulated by N-myc. Moreover, miR-375 downregulates expression of
the neuronal-specific RNA binding protein HuD.
CONCLUSIONS: Thus, miRNAs define distinct NB cell phenotypes. Increased levels of
miR-21, miR-221 and miR-335 characterize the non-neuronal, non-malignant
phenotype and miR-335 maintains the non-neuronal features possibly by blocking
neuronal differentiation. miR-124 induces terminal neuronal differentiation with 
reduction in malignancy. Data suggest N-myc inhibits neuronal differentiation of 
neuroblastic cells possibly by upregulating miR-375 which, in turn, suppresses
HuD. As tumor differentiation state is highly predictive of patient survival, the
involvement of these miRNAs with NB differentiation and tumorigenic state could
be exploited in the development of novel therapeutic strategies for this
enigmatic childhood cancer.

PMCID: PMC4038381
PMID: 24885481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Dev Biol. 2014 Aug 15;392(2):344-57. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.05.012. Epub 2014 
May 22.

Elf5 counteracts precocious trophoblast differentiation by maintaining Sox2 and 3
and inhibiting Hand1 expression.

Pearton DJ(1), Smith CS(2), Redgate E(3), van Leeuwen J(4), Donnison M(5),
Pfeffer PL(6).

Author information: 
(1)AgResearch Ruakura, 10 Bisley Road, Hamilton 3214, New Zealand. Electronic
address: dpearton@gmail.com. (2)AgResearch Ruakura, 10 Bisley Road, Hamilton
3214, New Zealand. Electronic address: craig.smith@nd.edu.au. (3)AgResearch
Ruakura, 10 Bisley Road, Hamilton 3214, New Zealand. Electronic address:
redgate.emma@gmail.com. (4)AgResearch Ruakura, 10 Bisley Road, Hamilton 3214, New
Zealand; Department of Biological Sciences, University of Waikato, Hamilton 3214,
New Zealand. (5)AgResearch Ruakura, 10 Bisley Road, Hamilton 3214, New Zealand.
(6)AgResearch Ruakura, 10 Bisley Road, Hamilton 3214, New Zealand; School of
Biological Sciences, Victoria University of Wellington, PO Box 600, Wellington
6140, New Zealand. Electronic address: drplpepper@gmail.com.

In mice the transcription factor Elf5 is necessary for correct trophoblast
development. Upon knockdown of Elf5, TS cells display neither a decrease in
proliferation nor an increase in cell death but rather an increased propensity to
differentiate. Such cells rapidly lose Sox2 and 3 expression, while transiently
upregulating the giant cell differentiation determinant gene Hand1. Other genes
affected within 24h of Elf5 knock-down, many of which have not previously been
implicated in trophoblast development, exhibited in vivo expression domains and
in vitro expression responses consistent with Elf5 having a role in counteracting
trophoblast differentiation. In an ES to TS differentiation assay using Cdx2
overexpression with Elf5 loss of function cell lines, it was shown that Elf5 is
necessary to prevent terminal trophoblast differentiation. This data thus suggest
that Elf5 is a gatekeeper for the TS to differentiated trophoblast transition
thereby preventing the precocious differentiation of the undifferentiated
extraembryonic ectoderm.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24859262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Toxicol Lett. 2014 Aug 4;228(3):140-6. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2014.05.011. Epub
2014 May 21.

Prenatal alcohol exposure causes the over-expression of DHAND and EHAND by
increasing histone H3K14 acetylation in C57 BL/6 mice.

Zhang W(1), Peng C(1), Zheng M(1), Gao W(1), Zhu J(2), Lv T(1), Liu L(2), Liu
Z(3), Li H(1), Xv Y(1), Tian J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Heart Centre, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, 
PR China; Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child Development and
Disorders, Chongqing, PR China. (2)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child 
Development and Disorders, Chongqing, PR China; Chongqing International Science
and Technology Cooperation Center for Child Development and Disorders, Chongqing,
PR China; Chongqing Key Laboratory of Translational Medical Research in Cognitive
Development and Learning and Memory Disorders, Chongqing, PR China. (3)Ohio State
University Medical Center, Richard Ross Heart Hospital Cardiology, Columbus, OH, 
USA. (4)Heart Centre, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University,
Chongqing, PR China. Electronic address: jietian@cqmu.edu.cn.

Prenatal alcohol exposure leads to congenital heart abnormal development, its
mechanisms are still unknown. Recent reports have associated alcohol exposure
with histone H3 acetylation. In the present study, we have performed the
experiments to test the hypothesis that histone H3K14 acetylation is the key role
in the fetal heart leads to over-expression of cardiac specific genes DHAND and
EHAND caused by prenatal alcohol exposure. Seventy pregnant C57BL/6 mice were
divided randomly into seven groups (n=10). They were the untreated group,
dimethyl sulfoxide group, alcohol exposure group, curcumin treatment group, both 
alcohol and curcumin treatment group, SAHA treatment group, both alcohol and SAHA
treatment group. Fetal mouse hearts were collected on embryonic day 14.5. The
changes of HATs activities, the acetylation levels of histone H3K14 (H3K14ac),
the expression levels of cardiac specific genes DHAND and EHAND, and structure of
chromatin were determined. Our data indicates that curcumin and SAHA
significantly reduces and increases the activities of HATs and the levels of
histone H3K14ac in fetal hearts, respectively. The expression of DHAND and EHAND 
is significantly down-regulated and up-regulated in the groups treated with
curcumin and SAHA. Furthermore, our results from ChIP assays have shown that the 
histone H3K14ac connects with the DHAND and EHAND genes are significantly
inhibited by curcumin and simulated by SAHA. Our study suggests that prenatal
alcohol exposure causes the over-expression of DHAND and EHAND by increasing
H3K14ac in mice.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24857828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Int J Genomics. 2014;2014:165175. doi: 10.1155/2014/165175. Epub 2014 Mar 27.

Expression data analysis to identify biomarkers associated with asthma in
children.

Xu W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Rizhao City People's Hospital, No. 126 Donggang
Area, Tai'an Road, Rizhao City, Shandong 276800, China.

Asthma is characterized by recurrent episodes of wheezing, shortness of breath,
chest tightness, and coughing. It is usually caused by a combination of complex
and incompletely understood environmental and genetic interactions. We obtained
gene expression data with high-throughput screening and identified biomarkers of 
children's asthma using bioinformatics tools. Next, we explained the pathogenesis
of children's asthma from the perspective of gene regulatory networks: DAVID was 
applied to perform Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway
enriching analysis for the top 3000 pairs of relationships in differentially
regulatory network. Finally, we found that HAND1, PTK1, NFKB1, ZIC3, STAT6, E2F1,
PELP1, USF2, and CBFB may play important roles in children's asthma initiation.
On account of regulatory impact factor (RIF) score, HAND1, PTK7, and ZIC3 were
the potential asthma-related factors. Our study provided some foundations of a
strategy for biomarker discovery despite a poor understanding of the mechanisms
underlying children's asthma.

PMCID: PMC3985200
PMID: 24790987  [PubMed]


28. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Jul 1;23(13):1501-14. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0329. Epub 2014 
Apr 10.

Establishment of bovine trophoblast stem-like cells from in vitro-produced
blastocyst-stage embryos using two inhibitors.

Huang X(1), Han X, Uyunbilig B, Zhang M, Duo S, Zuo Y, Zhao Y, Yun T, Tai D, Wang
C, Li J, Li X, Li R.

Author information: 
(1)1 The Key Laboratory of National Education Ministry for Mammalian Reproductive
Biology and Biotechnology, Inner Mongolia University , Hohhot, China .

The trophoblast (TR) is the first to differentiate during mammalian embryogenesis
and play a pivotal role in the development of the placenta. We used a dual
inhibitor system (PD0325901 and CHIR99021) with mixed feeders to successfully
obtain bovine trophoblast stem-like (bTS) cells, which were similar in phenotype 
to mouse trophoblast stem cells (TSCs). The bTS cells that were generated using
this system continually proliferated, displayed a normal diploid karyotype, and
had no signs of altered morphology or differentiation even after 150 passages.
These cells exhibited alkaline phosphatase (AP) activity and expressed
pluripotency markers, such as OCT4, NANOG, SOX2, SSEA-1, SSEA-4, TRA-1-60, and
TRA-1-81, and TR lineage markers such as CDX2, as determined by both
immunofluorescence and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). 
Additionally, these cells generated dome-like structures, formed teratomas when
injected into NOD-SCID mice, and differentiated into placenta TR cells in vitro. 
The microarray analysis of bTS cells showed high expression levels of many TR
markers, such as TEAD4, EOMES, GATA3, ETS2, TFAP2A, ELF5, SMARCA4 (BRG1), CDH3,
MASH2, HSD17B1, CYP11A1, PPARG, ID2, GCM1, HAND1, TDK, PAG, IFN-t, and THAP11.
The expression of many pluripotency markers, such as OCT4, SOX2, NANOG, and GDF3,
was lower in bTS cells compared with in vitro-produced blastocysts; however,
compared with bovine fetal fibroblasts, the expression of these pluripotency
markers was elevated in bTS cells. The DNA methylation status of the promoter
regions of OCT4, NANOG, and SOX2 was investigated, which were significantly
higher in bTS cells (OCT4 23.90%, NANOG 74.40%, and SOX2 8.50%) compared with
blastocysts (OCT4 8.90%, NANOG 34.4%, and SOX2 3.80%). In contrast, two promoter 
regions of CDX2 were hypomethylated in bTS cells (13.80% and 3.90%) compared with
blastocysts (18.80% and 9.10%). The TSC lines that were established in this study
may be used either for basic research that is focused on peri-implantation and
placenta development or as donor cells for transgenic animal production.

PMID: 24605918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Feb 15;306(4):E443-56. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00478.2013. Epub 2013 Dec 24.

Characterization of the adverse effects of nicotine on placental development: in 
vivo and in vitro studies.

Holloway AC(1), Salomon A, Soares MJ, Garnier V, Raha S, Sergent F, Nicholson CJ,
Feige JJ, Benharouga M, Alfaidy N.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Grenoble, France;

In utero exposure to nicotine is associated with increased risk of numerous
adverse fetal and neonatal outcomes, which suggests that it acts directly to
affect placental development and the establishment of the fetomaternal
circulation (FC). This study used both in vivo [Wistar rats treated with 1 mg/kg 
nicotine from 2 wk prior to mating until gestational day (GD) 15] and in vitro
(RCHO-1 cell line; treated with 10(-9) to 10(-3)M nicotine) models to examine the
effects of nicotine on these pathways. At GD 15, control and treated placentas
were examined for the impact of nicotine on 1) trophoblast invasion,
proliferation, and degree of hypoxia, 2) labyrinth vascularization, 3) expression
of key genes of placental development, and 4) expression of placental angiogenic 
factors. The RCHO-1 cell line was used to determine the direct effects of
nicotine on trophoblast differentiation. Our in vivo experiments show that
nicotine inhibits trophoblast interstitial invasion, increases placental hypoxia,
downregulates labyrinth vascularization as well as key transcription factors
Hand1 and GCM1, and decreases local and circulating EG-VEGF, a key placental
angiogenic factor. The in vitro experiments confirmed the inhibitory effects of
nicotine on the trophoblast migration, invasion, and differentiation processes
and demonstrated that those effects are most likely due to a dysregulation in the
expression of nicotine receptors and a decrease in MMP9 activity. Taken together,
these data suggest that adverse effects of maternal smoking on pregnancy outcome 
are due in part to direct and endocrine effects of nicotine on the main processes
of placental development and establishment of FC.

PMID: 24368670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 21;8(10):e77784. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077784.
eCollection 2013.

Transcriptome-guided functional analyses reveal novel biological properties and
regulatory hierarchy of human embryonic stem cell-derived ventricular
cardiomyocytes crucial for maturation.

Poon E(1), Yan B, Zhang S, Rushing S, Keung W, Ren L, Lieu DK, Geng L, Kong CW,
Wang J, Wong HS, Boheler KR, Li RA.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell & Regenerative Medicine Consortium, LKS Faculty of Medicine,
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

Human (h) embryonic stem cells (ESC) represent an unlimited source of
cardiomyocytes (CMs); however, these differentiated cells are immature. Thus far,
gene profiling studies have been performed with non-purified or non-chamber
specific CMs. Here we took a combinatorial approach of using systems biology to
guide functional discoveries of novel biological properties of purified
hESC-derived ventricular (V) CMs. We profiled the transcriptomes of hESCs, hESC-,
fetal (hF) and adult (hA) VCMs, and showed that hESC-VCMs displayed a unique
transcriptomic signature. Not only did a detailed comparison between hESC-VCMs
and hF-VCMs confirm known expression changes in metabolic and contractile genes, 
it further revealed novel differences in genes associated with reactive oxygen
species (ROS) metabolism, migration and cell cycle, as well as potassium and
calcium ion transport. Following these guides, we functionally confirmed that
hESC-VCMs expressed IKATP with immature properties, and were accordingly
vulnerable to hypoxia/reoxygenation-induced apoptosis. For mechanistic insights, 
our coexpression and promoter analyses uncovered a novel transcriptional
hierarchy involving select transcription factors (GATA4, HAND1, NKX2.5, PPARGC1A 
and TCF8), and genes involved in contraction, calcium homeostasis and metabolism.
These data highlight novel expression and functional differences between
hESC-VCMs and their fetal counterparts, and offer insights into the underlying
cell developmental state. These findings may lead to mechanism-based methods for 
in vitro driven maturation.

PMCID: PMC3804624
PMID: 24204964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. BMC Med Genomics. 2013 Nov 1;6:46. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-6-46.

DNA methylation status of NKX2-5, GATA4 and HAND1 in patients with tetralogy of
fallot.

Sheng W, Qian Y, Wang H, Ma X, Zhang P, Diao L, An Q, Chen L, Ma D(1), Huang G.

Author information: 
(1)Children Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai 201102, China.
duanma@yahoo.cn.

BACKGROUND: NKX2-5, GATA4 and HAND1 are essential for heart development, however,
little is known regarding their epigenetic regulation in the pathogenesis of
tetralogy of fallot (TOF).
METHODS: Methylation levels were measured in three regions of NKX2-5 (M1:
-1596 bp<U+2009>~<U+2009>-1374 bp, M2: -159 bp<U+2009>~<U+2009>217 bp and M3: 1058 bp<U+2009>~<U+2009>1524 bp), one region 
of GATA4 (M: -392 bp<U+2009>~<U+2009>107 bp) and three regions of HAND1 (M1: -887 bp<U+2009>~<U+2009>-414 bp,
M2: -436 bp<U+2009>~<U+2009>2 bp and M3: 37 bp<U+2009>~<U+2009>398 bp) using the Sequenom MassARRAY platform.
QRT-PCR was used to analyze NKX2-5 and HAND1 mRNA levels in the right ventricular
myocardium of TOF patients.
RESULTS: TOF patients had a significantly higher NKX2-5_M3 median methylation
level than controls (41.65% vs. 22.18%; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0074; interquartile range [IQR]:
30.46%-53.35%, N<U+2009>=<U+2009>30 and 20.07%-24.31%, N<U+2009>=<U+2009>5; respectively). The HAND1_M1
median methylation level was also significantly higher in TOF patients than
controls (30.05% vs. 17.54%; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0054; IQR: 20.77%-40.89%, N<U+2009>=<U+2009>30 and IQR:
14.69%-20.64%; N<U+2009>=<U+2009>6; respectively). The methylation statuses of NKX2-5_M1,
NKX2-5_M2, GATA4_M, HAND1_M2 or HAND1_M3 were not significantly different in TOF 
patients compared to controls. The methylation values for NKX2-5_M3 were
negatively correlated with mRNA levels (r<U+2009>=<U+2009>- 0.463, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.010, N<U+2009>=<U+2009>30) and there
was a significant association between HAND1_M1 methylation status and mRNA levels
(r<U+2009>=<U+2009>- 0.524, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.003, N<U+2009>=<U+2009>30) in TOF patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Aberrant methylation statuses of the NKX2-5 gene body and HAND1
promoter regions are associated with the regulation of gene transcription in TOF 
patients and may play an important role in the pathogenesis of TOF.

PMCID: PMC3819647
PMID: 24182332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2014 Oct;26(8):1166-75. doi: 10.1071/RD13169.

EZH2 is essential for development of mouse preimplantation embryos.

Huang XJ(1), Wang X(1), Ma X(1), Sun SC(1), Zhou X(1), Zhu C(1), Liu H(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Nanjing Agricultural University,
Weigang No.1, Nanjing 210095, China. (2)Corresponding author. Email:

Enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (Ezh2) is essential for the development of the
early mouse preimplantation embryo. Loss of Ezh2 results in embryonic lethality
in mice. Ezh2-deficient embryos display impaired outgrowth potential, defective
establishment of Ezh2-null embryonic stem (ES) cells and adherence and
differentiation of the trophoblast layer into giant cells. We investigated if
Ezh2 controls the fate of embryos at an earlier stage by treating with
cycloheximide (CHX) or microinjecting short interfering RNA (siRNA) to restrict
embryonic Ezh2 expression during preimplantation. CHX inhibited de novo EZH2
protein synthesis in zygotes, suggesting that EZH2 requires de novo synthesis
during post-fertilisation stages. We found that loss of Ezh2 at the pronuclear
stage caused severe growth retardation and reduced blastocyst formation.
Expression of the pluripotency-associated markers Oct4, Sox2 and Nanog were
significantly decreased in embryos that had been injected with Ezh2 siRNA. In
addition, Ezh2 loss induced upregulated expression of genes related to the
differentiation of germ layers, including Gata6, Hoxb1 and Hand1. Finally,
apoptosis was increased in the blastocyst embryos with Ezh2 knockdown.
Modification of histone H3-Lysine 27 de-methylation and tri-methylation
(H3K27me2/3) was strongly reduced in Ezh2 siRNA embryos. We conclude that Ezh2 is
essential for early preimplantation embryo development through the regulation of 
epigenetic modification and apoptosis.

PMID: 24153105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Postepy Hig Med Dosw (Online). 2013 Sep 10;67:950-7. doi:
10.5604/17322693.1066060.

[Morphological and molecular bases of cardiac development].

[Article in Polish]

Kobylinska J(1), Dworzanski W, Cendrowska-Pinkosz M, Dworzanska A,
Hermanowicz-Dryka T, Kiszka J, Staroslawska E, Burdan F.

Author information: 
(1)Katedra i Zaklad Anatomii Prawidlowej Czlowieka Uniwersytet Medyczny w
Lublinie.

The heart is a mesoderm-derived organ, whose formation is regulated by various
genes. Initially, the most important is expression of Nkx2.5, CR1, pitx2, anf and
mhc2a, which are responsible for differentiation of cardiomyocytes. In a later
phase activation of mhc2b, pitx2c, mesp1, pcmf1, vmhc, xin, mcl2v, mlc2a, mlc2a, 
mef2, hand1 and hand2 was revealed. Their expression is regulated by various
molecules, including transcription (XIN, GATA, MEF, Tbx5, Baf60c, PECAM, tie-2,
MEF2) and growth (VEGF, FGF, PDGF) factors, as well as proteins (i.e.,
dickkopf-1, cerberus, cytotactin, fibrillin, nodal, thrombomodulin, Wnt, bone
morphometric ones - BMP2, BMP 4, BMP5, BMP7) and other substances, such as
retinoid and folic acid. Crucial steps in cardiac organogenesis are development
of the ventricle and atrial formation, as well as septation and valve formation. 
Any disturbances of such processes may lead to various congenital heart diseases 
and defects that could be initiated by various genetic, epigenetic or
environmental factors. The most common heart malformations are: stenosis
(coarctation) of the aorta and pulmonary trunk, bicuspid aortic valve, atrial
and/or ventricular septal defect, persistent truncus arteriosus (Botallo duct),
transposition of the great vessels, tricuspid atresia, hypoplastic left and right
heart, as well as syndrome of Lutembachera, Cantrell, Ebstein, Eisenmenger and
Shone and trilogy, tetralogy, pentalogy of Fallot.

PMID: 24088538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. PLoS Biol. 2013 Sep;11(9):e1001666. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001666. Epub 2013 
Sep 24.

Hypoxic regulation of hand1 controls the fetal-neonatal switch in cardiac
metabolism.

Breckenridge RA(1), Piotrowska I, Ng KE, Ragan TJ, West JA, Kotecha S, Towers N, 
Bennett M, Kienesberger PC, Smolenski RT, Siddall HK, Offer JL, Mocanu MM, Yelon 
DM, Dyck JR, Griffin JL, Abramov AY, Gould AP, Mohun TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology, MRC-National Institute for Medical Research, London,
United Kingdom ; Division of Medicine, University College London, London, United 
Kingdom.

Erratum in
    PLoS Biol. 2013 Dec;11(12).
doi:10.1371/annotation/a9a7f37a-3fa7-4f7f-8310-1339bf5a666e.

Comment in
    PLoS Biol. 2013 Sep;11(9):e1001664.

Cardiomyocytes are vulnerable to hypoxia in the adult, but adapted to hypoxia in 
utero. Current understanding of endogenous cardiac oxygen sensing pathways is
limited. Myocardial oxygen consumption is determined by regulation of energy
metabolism, which shifts from glycolysis to lipid oxidation soon after birth, and
is reversed in failing adult hearts, accompanying re-expression of several
"fetal" genes whose role in disease phenotypes remains unknown. Here we show that
hypoxia-controlled expression of the transcription factor Hand1 determines oxygen
consumption by inhibition of lipid metabolism in the fetal and adult
cardiomyocyte, leading to downregulation of mitochondrial energy generation.
Hand1 is under direct transcriptional control by HIF1a. Transgenic mice
prolonging cardiac Hand1 expression die immediately following birth, failing to
activate the neonatal lipid metabolising gene expression programme. Deletion of
Hand1 in embryonic cardiomyocytes results in premature expression of these genes.
Using metabolic flux analysis, we show that Hand1 expression controls
cardiomyocyte oxygen consumption by direct transcriptional repression of lipid
metabolising genes. This leads, in turn, to increased production of lactate from 
glucose, decreased lipid oxidation, reduced inner mitochondrial membrane
potential, and mitochondrial ATP generation. We found that this pathway is active
in adult cardiomyocytes. Up-regulation of Hand1 is protective in a mouse model of
myocardial ischaemia. We propose that Hand1 is part of a novel regulatory pathway
linking cardiac oxygen levels with oxygen consumption. Understanding hypoxia
adaptation in the fetal heart may allow development of strategies to protect
cardiomyocytes vulnerable to ischaemia, for example during cardiac ischaemia or
surgery.

PMCID: PMC3782421
PMID: 24086110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. PLoS Biol. 2013 Sep;11(9):e1001664. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001664. Epub 2013 
Sep 24.

Fine-tuning metabolic switches.

Sedwick C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Freelance Science Writer, San Diego, California, United States of America.

Comment on
    PLoS Biol. 2013 Sep;11(9):e1001666.
    PLoS Biol. 2013 Sep;11(9):e1001665.

PMCID: PMC3782418
PMID: 24086108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Biomaterials. 2013 Dec;34(38):9789-802. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2013.08.084. 
Epub 2013 Sep 23.

BMP10 as a potent inducer of trophoblast differentiation in human embryonic and
induced pluripotent stem cells.

Lichtner B(1), Knaus P, Lehrach H, Adjaye J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vertebrate Genomics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular
Genetics, Ihnestr. 63-73, 14195 Berlin, Germany; Department of Biology, Chemistry
and Pharmacy, Institute of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Freie Universität Berlin, 
Thielallee 63, 14195 Berlin, Germany.

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are known to induce diverse differentiation
fates in human embryonic stem cells (hESCs). In the present study, we compared
the potency at which BMP5, BMP10 and BMP13, which are members of distinct BMP
subgroups due to differences in sequential and structural homology, induce
differentiation in hESCs and human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs). We
observed, in agreement with previous BMP4 model studies, that all ligands induced
differentiation to the trophoblast lineage in the absence of bFGF. However,
distinct BMPs exerted differences in the kinetics of induced differentiation,
with BMP10 being the most potent. hiPSCs and hESCs shared comparable expression
patterns of BMP type-I and -II receptor subtypes, which might explain conserved
properties with respect to ligand potency and activation of SMAD-dependent (via
SMAD1/5/8) and -independent (via MAPK p38) signal transduction pathways. The
tested BMPs had distinct and also conserved target genes such as CDX2, DLX3,
DLX5, GATA2, GATA3, HAND1, ID2, MSX2 and TFAP2A, known to be associated with the 
emergence of trophoblast cells. hESCs induced expression of the BMP antagonist
NOGGIN as a protection mechanism to constrict extensive BMP action. Unlike BMP4, 
BMP10 has been shown to be resistant to NOGGIN-induced inhibition which in part
might explain its potency. BMPs, in particular BMP4, are commonly used cytokines 
in differentiation protocols to generate diverse mesoderm- and endoderm-derivates
from human pluripotent stem cells. Our study has identified BMP10, a
cardiac-specific protein, as a superior alternative to BMP4 for inducing
trophoblast differentiation in human pluripotent stem cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24070570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Reproduction. 2013 Oct 23;146(6):569-79. doi: 10.1530/REP-13-0212. Print 2013
Dec.

Effects of TET1 knockdown on gene expression and DNA methylation in porcine
induced pluripotent stem cells.

Fan A(1), Ma K, An X, Ding Y, An P, Song G, Tang L, Zhang S, Zhang P, Tan W, Tang
B, Zhang X, Li Z.

Author information: 
(1)Jilin Provincial Key Laboratory of Animal Embryo Engineering, The Center for
Animal Embryo Engineering of Jilin Province, College of Veterinary Medicine.

TET1 is implicated in maintaining the pluripotency of embryonic stem cells.
However, its precise effects on induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), and
particularly on porcine iPSCs (piPSCs), are not well defined. To investigate the 
role of TET1 in the pluripotency and differentiation of piPSCs, piPSCs were
induced from porcine embryonic fibroblasts by overexpression of POU5F1 (OCT4),
SOX2, KLF4, and MYC (C-MYC). siRNAs targeting to TET1 were used to transiently
knockdown the expression of TET1 in piPSCs. Morphological abnormalities and loss 
of the undifferentiated state of piPSCs were observed in the piPSCs after the
downregulation of TET1. The effects of TET1 knockdown on the expression of key
stem cell factors and differentiation markers were analyzed to gain insights into
the molecular mechanisms underlying the phenomenon. The results revealed that
knockdown of TET1 resulted in the downregulated expression of
pluripotency-related genes, such as LEFTY2, KLF2, and SOX2, and the upregulated
expression of differentiation-related genes including PITX2, HAND1, GATA6, and
LEF1. However, POU5F1, MYC, KLF4, and NANOG were actually not downregulated.
Further analysis showed that the methylation levels of the promoters for POU5F1
and MYC increased significantly after TET1 downregulation, whereas there were no 
obvious changes in the promoters of SOX2, KLF4, and NANOG. The methylation of the
whole genome increased, while hydroxymethylation slightly declined. Taken
together, these results suggest that TET1 may play important roles in the
self-renewal of piPSCs and the maintenance of their characteristics by regulating
the expression of genes and the DNA methylation.

PMID: 24051058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Aging Dis. 2013 Jun 20;4(4):186-200. Print 2013 Aug.

Functional Analysis and Molecular Docking studies of Medicinal Compounds for AChE
and BChE in Alzheimer's Disease and Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus.

Kaladhar DS(1), Yarla NS, Anusha N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry/Bioinformatics, GIS, GITAM University,
Visakhapatnam-530045, AP, India.

Acetylcholinesterase and Butyrylcholinesterase share unravelling link with
components of metabolic syndromes that's characterised by low levels of HDL
cholesterol, obesity, high fast aldohexose levels, hyper-trigliceridaemia and
high blood pressure, by regulation of cholinergic transmission and therefore the 
enzyme activity within a living system. The phosphomotifs associated with amino
acid and tyrosine binding motifs in AChE and BChE were known to be common.
Phylogenetic tree was constructed to these proteins usinf UPGMA and Maximum
Likelihood methods in MEGA software has shown interaction of AChE and BChE with
ageing diseases like Alzheimer's disease and Diabetes. AChE has shown closely
related to BChE, retinol dehydrogenase and ß-polypeptide. The present studies is 
also accomplished that AChE, BChE, COLQ, HAND1, APP, NLGN2 and NGF proteins has
interactions with diseases such as Alzheimer's and D2M using Pathwaylinker and
STRING. Medicinal compounds like Ortho-7, Dibucaine and HI-6 are predicted as
good targets for modeled AChE and BChE proteins based on docking studies. Hence
perceptive studies of cholinesterase structure and the biological mechanisms of
inhibition are necessary for effective drug development.

PMCID: PMC3733582
PMID: 23936743  [PubMed]


39. Dev Biol. 2013 Oct 15;382(2):470-81. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.07.025. Epub 2013 
Aug 1.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor Hand1 regulates mouse development
as a homodimer.

Hu D(1), Scott IC, Snider F, Geary-Joo C, Zhao X, Simmons DG, Cross JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada; Department of Comparative Biology and
Experimental Medicine, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Calgary,
Calgary, AB, Canada; Center for Stem Cell Application and Research, Union
Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 
Wuhan, China. Electronic address: dhu2007@gmail.com.

Hand1 is a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor that is essential for
development of the placenta, yolk sac and heart during mouse development. While
Hand1 is essential for trophoblast giant cell (TGC) differentiation, its
potential heterodimer partners are not co-expressed in TGCs. To test the
hypothesis that Hand1 functions as homodimer, we generated knock-in mice in which
the Hand1 gene was altered to encode a tethered homodimer (TH). Some Hand1(TH/-) 
conceptuses in which the only form of Hand1 is Hand1(TH) are viable and fertile, 
indicating that homodimer Hand1 is sufficient for mouse survival. ~2/3 of
Hand1(TH/-) and all Hand1(TH/TH) mice died in utero and displayed severe
placental defects and variable cardial and cranial-facial abnormalities,
indicating a dosage-dependent effect of Hand1(TH). Meanwhile, expression of the
Hand1(TH) protein did not have negative effects on viability or fertility in all 
Hand1(TH/+) mice. These data imply that Hand1 homodimer plays a dominant role
during development and its expression dosage is critical for survival, whereas
Hand1 heterodimers can be either dispensable or play a regulatory role to
modulate the activity of Hand1 homodimer in vivo.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23911935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Sep 6;438(4):753-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.07.081. Epub 2013 Jul 27.

N-Cadherin is a prospective cell surface marker of human mesenchymal stem cells
that have high ability for cardiomyocyte differentiation.

Ishimine H(1), Yamakawa N, Sasao M, Tadokoro M, Kami D, Komazaki S, Tokuhara M,
Takada H, Ito Y, Kuno S, Yoshimura K, Umezawa A, Ohgushi H, Asashima M, Kurisaki 
A.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Stem Cell Engineering, National Institute of Advanced
Industrial Science and Technology, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are among the most promising sources of stem cells 
for regenerative medicine. However, the range of their differentiation ability is
very limited. In this study, we explored prospective cell surface markers of
human MSCs that readily differentiate into cardiomyocytes. When the
cardiomyogenic differentiation potential and the expression of cell surface
markers involved in heart development were analyzed using various immortalized
human MSC lines, the MSCs with high expression of N-cadherin showed a higher
probability of differentiation into beating cardiomyocytes. The differentiated
cardiomyocytes expressed terminally differentiated cardiomyocyte-specific markers
such as a-actinin, cardiac troponin T, and connexin-43. A similar correlation was
observed with primary human MSCs derived from bone marrow and adipose tissue.
Moreover, N-cadherin-positive MSCs isolated with N-cadherin antibody-conjugated
magnetic beads showed an apparently higher ability to differentiate into
cardiomyocytes than the N-cadherin-negative population. Quantitative polymerase
chain reaction analyses demonstrated that the N-cadherin-positive population
expressed significantly elevated levels of cardiomyogenic progenitor-specific
transcription factors, including Nkx2.5, Hand1, and GATA4 mRNAs. Our results
suggest that N-cadherin is a novel prospective cell surface marker of human MSCs 
that show a better ability for cardiomyocyte differentiation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23899519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Mol Reprod Dev. 2013 Oct;80(10):826-39. doi: 10.1002/mrd.22212. Epub 2013 Aug 30.

CDX2 regulates multiple trophoblast genes in bovine trophectoderm CT-1 cells.

Schiffmacher AT(1), Keefer CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Avian Sciences, University of Maryland, College Park,
Maryland.

The bovine trophectoderm (TE) undergoes a dramatic morphogenetic transition prior
to uterine endometrial attachment. Many studies have documented
trophoblast-specific gene expression profiles at various pre-attachment stages,
yet genetic interactions within the transitioning TE gene regulatory network are 
not well characterized. During bovine embryogenesis, transcription factors OCT4
and CDX2 are co-expressed during early trophoblast elongation. In this study, the
bovine trophectoderm-derived CT-1 cell line was utilized as a genetic model to
examine the roles of CDX2 and OCT4 within the bovine trophoblast gene regulatory 
network. An RT-PCR screen for TE-lineage transcription factors identified
expression of CDX2, ERRB, ID2, SOX15, ELF5, HAND1, and ASCL2. CT-1 cells also
express a nuclear-localized, 360 amino acid OCT4 ortholog of the
pluripotency-specific human OCT4A. To delineate the roles of CDX2 and OCT4 within
the CT-1 gene network, CDX2 and OCT4 levels were manipulated via overexpression
and siRNA-mediated knockdown. An increase in CDX2 negatively regulated OCT4
expression, but increased expression of IFNT, HAND1, ASCL2, SOX15, and ELF5. A
reduction of CDX2 levels exhibited a reciprocal effect, resulting in decreased
expression of IFNT, HAND1, ASCL2, and SOX15. Both overexpression and knockdown of
CDX2 increased ETS2 transcription. In contrast to CDX2, manipulation of OCT4
levels only revealed a positive autoregulatory mechanism and upregulation of
ASCL2. Together, these results suggest that CDX2 is a core regulator of multiple 
trophoblast genes within CT-1 cells.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23836438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2013 Nov;57(11):2029-38. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201300061. Epub
2013 Jun 19.

Effects of supplementing different ratios of omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids in
western-style diets on cow's milk protein allergy in a mouse model.

Thang CL(1), Boye JI, Shi HN, Zhao X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Macdonald Campus, McGill University, Lakeshore, 
Quebec, Canada.

SCOPE: This study investigated the effects of supplementing different ratios of
omega-6 and omega-3 fatty acids (O6H = 10:1, O3O6 = 4:1, and O3H = 1:4) to
western-style diets on cow ß-lactoglobulin (BLG) induced allergic reactions in
Balb/c mice.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Three-week-old mice were randomly assigned to three diet
groups (n = 20/group). At 9 wk of age, half of the mice from each dietary
treatment (n = 10) were intraperitoneally (i.p.) sensitized with three weekly
doses of BLG and alum while the remaining half from each group was sham
sensitized (controls). One week after the final sensitization, all mice were
orally challenged with BLG. Elevated BLG-specific serum Igs were observed in all 
sensitized and challenged mice. IFN-<U+03B3>, MCP-1, and IL-12p40 concentrations from
lymphocytes of mesenteric lymph nodes were highest in O3H mice, compared to O3O6 
and O6H mice. O6H mice had the highest IL-4 concentrations from splenic
lymphocytes and a significantly lower rectal temperature after the challenge in
comparison to O3O6 and O3H mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that the <U+03C9>-3 PUFA rich diets alleviated the
severity of allergic reactions, and may modulate immune response toward T helper 
cell (Th)1-favoured immune response while the <U+03C9>-6 PUFA rich diet exhibited no
allergy alleviation with a stronger Th2 polarized immune response.

© 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23780918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Ann Rheum Dis. 2014 Jun;73(6):1240-5. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2012-202675. Epub 
2013 Jun 5.

Ethnic specificity of lupus-associated loci identified in a genome-wide
association study in Korean women.

Lee HS(1), Kim T, Bang SY, Na YJ, Kim I, Kim K, Kim JH, Chung YJ, Shin HD, Kang
YM, Shim SC, Suh CH, Park YB, Kim JS, Kang C, Bae SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Hanyang University Hospital for Rheumatic
Diseases, , Seoul, Korea.

OBJECTIVES: To identify novel genetic candidates for systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE) in the Korean population, and to validate the risk loci for SLE identified 
in previous genome-wide association studies (GWAS).
METHODS: We performed a GWAS in 400 Korean female SLE patients and 445 controls. 
Selected single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) were then replicated in an
independent cohort of 385 SLE patients and 583 controls (replication cohort 1),
and in a further 811 SLE patients and 1502 controls (replication cohort 2).
RESULTS: In the GWAS phase, rs9275428 located near HLA-DQB1 showed the strongest 
association with SLE (OR 0.50, false discovery rate (FDR) p=3.07×10(-6)).
Although no loci reached genome-wide significance outside major
histocompatibility complex (MHC), C8orf13-BLK, STAT4, CSMD1, DIAPH3, GLDC and
TNFSF4 showed FDR p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05. Our results suggest that STAT4, BLK, IRF5,
PTTG1-miR-146a, UBE2L3 and TNFAIP3 are shared susceptibility loci among
Caucasians and Asians, while ETS1, IKZF1, SLC15A4 are likely to be Asian-specific
loci. In a combined analysis of 1596 SLE patients and 2540 controls for selected 
22 candidate SNP, STAT4 and BLK as positive controls showed a strong association 
with SLE (FDR p=9.85×10(-13) and 2.28×10(-8), respectively). Of these, 16
candidates (PEX5L, TRAJ50, MYO18B, SOS1, ARHGAP26, SMURF1, CADPS, HAND1, FAM78B, 
DIAPH3, TBL1XR1, CSMD1, ZBTB20, C3orf21, HIPK1 and AP001042.1) showed only
nominal significance (7.05×10(-4)=FDR p=4.38×10(-2)).
CONCLUSIONS: There are similarities and differences in genetic susceptibility for
SLE between Caucasian and Asian ethnic groups. Although 16 putative novel loci
for SLE have been suggested in the Korean population, further research on a
larger sample is required to discriminate truth from error.

PMID: 23740238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Dev Biol. 2013 Aug 15;380(2):286-98. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.04.027. Epub 2013 
May 3.

The LIM-Homeodomain transcription factor Islet-1 is required for the development 
of sympathetic neurons and adrenal chromaffin cells.

Huber K(1), Narasimhan P, Shtukmaster S, Pfeifer D, Evans SM, Sun Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Anatomy and Cell Biology, Department of Molecular Embryology,
Albert-Ludwigs-University, Freiburg, Germany. katrin.huber@anat.uni-freiburg.de

Islet-1 is a LIM-Homeodomain transcription factor with important functions for
the development of distinct neuronal and non-neuronal cell populations. We show
here that Islet-1 acts genetically downstream of Phox2B in cells of the
sympathoadrenal cell lineage and that the development of sympathetic neurons and 
chromaffin cells is impaired in mouse embryos with a conditional deletion of
Islet-1 controlled by the wnt1 promotor. Islet-1 is not essential for the initial
differentiation of sympathoadrenal cells, as indicated by the correct expression 
of pan-neuronal and catecholaminergic subtype specific genes in primary
sympathetic ganglia of Islet-1 deficient mouse embryos. However, our data
indicate that the subsequent survival of sympathetic neuron precursors and their 
differentiation towards TrkA expressing neurons depends on Islet-1 function. In
contrast to spinal sensory neurons, sympathetic neurons of Islet-1 deficient mice
did not display ectopic expression of genes normally present in the CNS. In
Islet-1 deficient mouse embryos the numbers of chromaffin cells were only mildly 
reduced, in contrast to that of sympathetic neurons, but the initiation of the
adrenaline synthesizing enzyme PNMT was abrogated and the expression level of
chromogranin A was diminished. Microarray analysis revealed that developing
chromaffin cells of Islet-1 deficient mice displayed normal expression levels of 
TH, DBH and the transcription factors Phox2B, Mash-1, Hand2, Gata3 and Insm1, but
the expression levels of the transcription factors Gata2 and Hand1, and AP-2ß
were significantly reduced. Together our data indicate that Islet-1 is not
essentially required for the initial differentiation of sympathoadrenal cells,
but has an important function for the correct subsequent development of
sympathetic neurons and chromaffin cells.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23648511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Mol Cells. 2013 Feb;35(2):99-105. doi: 10.1007/s10059-013-2289-6. Epub 2013 Feb
21.

Identification and promoter analysis of PERV LTR subtypes in NIH-miniature pig.

Jung YD(1), Ha HS, Park SJ, Oh KB, Im GS, Kim TH, Seong HH, Kim HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, College of Natural Sciences, Pusan National
University, Busan 609-735, Korea.

Porcine endogenous retroviruses (PERVs) are integrated into the genomes of all
pigs. Since some PERVs can also infect human cells, they represent a potential
risk for xenotransplantation involving pig cells or organs. The long terminal
repeat (LTR) elements of PERVs show promoter activity that can affect human
functional genes; therefore, we examined these elements in this study. We
detected several expressed LTRs in the NIH-miniature pig liver, among which we
identified 9 different subtypes. When these LTRs were compared, distinct
structures that contained several insertion and deletion (INDEL) events and
tandem repeats were identified in the U3 region. The transcriptional activity of 
the 9 LTR subtypes was analyzed in the PK15 porcine cell line and in the HepG2
and Hep3B human liver cell lines, and transcriptional regulation was found to be 
different in the 3 cell lines. The D LTR subtype was found to have stronger
promoter activity than all other types in 4 different human cell lines (HepG2,
Hep3B, U251, and 293). Using computational approaches, the D type was shown to
contain 4 transcription factor-binding sites distinct from those in the U3
regions of the other subtypes. Therefore, deletion mutants were constructed and
examined by a transient transfection luciferase assay. The results of this
analysis indicated that the binding site for the Hand1:E47 transcription factor
might play a positive role in the transcriptional regulation of PERV LTR subtype 
D in human liver cell lines.

PMCID: PMC3887905
PMID: 23456331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Gastric Cancer. 2013 Oct;16(4):488-97. doi: 10.1007/s10120-012-0230-x. Epub 2013 
Jan 6.

Altered mucosal DNA methylation in parallel with highly active Helicobacter
pylori-related gastritis.

Yoshida T(1), Kato J, Maekita T, Yamashita S, Enomoto S, Ando T, Niwa T, Deguchi 
H, Ueda K, Inoue I, Iguchi M, Tamai H, Ushijima T, Ichinose M.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Wakayama Medical University, 811-1
Kimiidera, Wakayama, Wakayama, 641-0012, Japan, tayoshid@wakayama-med.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Chronic inflammation triggered by Helicobacter pylori causes altered 
DNA methylation in stomach mucosae, which is deeply involved in gastric
carcinogenesis. This study aimed to elucidate the correlation between altered
mucosal DNA methylation levels and activity of H. pylori-related gastritis,
because inflammatory activity shows particular correlations with the development 
of diffuse-type cancer.
METHODS: Methylation levels in stomach mucosae of 78 healthy volunteers were
determined by real-time methylation-specific PCR or bisulfite pyrosequencing.
Examined loci were the promoter CpG islands of six genes (FLNc, HAND1, THBD,
p41ARC, HRASLS, and LOX) and the CpG sites of non-coding repetitive elements (Alu
and Sata) that are reportedly altered by H. pylori infection. Activity of H.
pylori-related gastritis was evaluated using two serum markers: H. pylori
antibody titer and pepsinogen II.
RESULTS: Methylation levels of the six CpG islands were consistently increased,
and those of the two repetitive elements were consistently decreased in a
stepwise manner with the activity of gastric inflammation as represented by serum
marker levels. Each serum marker level was well correlated with the overall DNA
methylation status of stomach mucosa, and these two serologic markers were
additive in the detection of the mucosa with severely altered DNA methylation.
CONCLUSIONS: Alteration in mucosal DNA methylation level was closely correlated
with activity of H. pylori-related gastritis as evaluated by serum markers. The
observed correlation between altered DNA methylation levels and activity of H.
pylori-related gastritis appears to be one of the relevant molecular mechanisms
underlying the development of diffuse-type cancer.

PMID: 23292007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Biosci Bioeng. 2013 Feb;115(2):200-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2012.08.018. Epub
2012 Oct 5.

Comparative analysis of cardiomyocyte differentiation from human embryonic stem
cells under 3-D and 2-D culture conditions.

Pal R(1), Mamidi MK, Das AK, Bhonde R.

Author information: 
(1)Manipal Institute of Regenerative Medicine, Manipal University Branch Campus, 
Yelahanka, Bangalore 560 065, India. rajarshi.pal@manipal.edu

Erratum in
    J Biosci Bioeng. 2014 Jan;117(1):134.

Post-myocardial infarction cardiomyocytes are the most important target cell
types for cardiac repair. Many of the applications envisaged for human embryonic 
stem cells (hESC)-derived cardiomyocytes demand that the differentiation
procedure be robust, cost effective and high yielding. Various lines of evidence 
including our earlier study suggest that hESCs have distinct preferences to
become heart cells. However, a direct comparison between different protocols has 
not yet been reported to date. Here, we performed a logical and systematic
comparison of cardiomyocytes obtained from hESCs via embryoid bodies (EBs) in
suspension versus adherent static cultures of feeder-free hES colonies
representing three-dimensional (3-D) and two-dimensional (2-D) culture systems,
respectively. An in-depth characterization of the beating cells revealed
appropriate cardiac marker expression both at gene and protein levels. Despite
using similar media, 3-D and 2-D cultures showed significant variation in growth 
and ability to form beating areas. While the expression of pre-cardiac mesoderm
markers like GATA-4, HAND1, Myf5, Msx1, and BMP-IIR remained unaltered; levels of
functional heart-specific markers such as MLC-2A/2V, cTnT, ANP, Phospholamban,
a-MHC and KV4.3 were substantially up-regulated in 3-D compared to 2-D cultures. 
Concurrently we observed a sharp decline in the expression of ESC, ectoderm and
endoderm markers including Oct-4, Sox-2, NFH, Sox-1, Sox-17 and AFP. Further
immunocytochemistry and flow cytometry demonstrated a higher percentage of cells 
positive for Brachyury, desmin and cardiac troponin in 3-D cultures. Our results 
underscore the higher efficiency of cardiomyocytes derived via 3-D cultures. This
finding enriches our basic understanding of the differentiation pattern in
hESC-derived cardiomyocytes.

Copyright © 2012 The Society for Biotechnology, Japan. Published by Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 23040993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Feb 15;22(4):654-67. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0181. Epub 2012
Nov 7.

The histone methyltransferase inhibitor BIX01294 enhances the cardiac potential
of bone marrow cells.

Mezentseva NV(1), Yang J, Kaur K, Iaffaldano G, Rémond MC, Eisenberg CA,
Eisenberg LM.

Author information: 
(1)New York Medical College/Westchester Medical Center Stem Cell Laboratory,
Department of Physiology, New York Medical College, Valhalla, New York, USA.

Bone marrow (BM) has long been considered a potential stem cell source for
cardiac repair due to its abundance and accessibility. Although previous
investigations have generated cardiomyocytes from BM, yields have been low, and
far less than produced from ES or induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). Since
differentiation of pluripotent cells is difficult to control, we investigated
whether BM cardiac competency could be enhanced without making cells pluripotent.
From screens of various molecules that have been shown to assist iPSC production 
or maintain the ES cell phenotype, we identified the G9a histone
methyltransferase inhibitor BIX01294 as a potential reprogramming agent for
converting BM cells to a cardiac-competent phenotype. BM cells exposed to
BIX01294 displayed significantly elevated expression of brachyury, Mesp1, and
islet1, which are genes associated with embryonic cardiac progenitors. In
contrast, BIX01294 treatment minimally affected ectodermal, endodermal, and
pluripotency gene expression by BM cells. Expression of cardiac-associated genes 
Nkx2.5, GATA4, Hand1, Hand2, Tbx5, myocardin, and titin was enhanced 114, 76,
276, 46, 635, 123, and 5-fold in response to the cardiogenic stimulator Wnt11
when BM cells were pretreated with BIX01294. Immunofluorescent analysis
demonstrated that BIX01294 exposure allowed for the subsequent display of various
muscle proteins within the cells. The effect of BIX01294 on the BM cell phenotype
and differentiation potential corresponded to an overall decrease in methylation 
of histone H3 at lysine9, which is the primary target of G9a histone
methyltransferase. In summary, these data suggest that BIX01294 inhibition of
chromatin methylation reprograms BM cells to a cardiac-competent progenitor
phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3564468
PMID: 22994322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Bioinformatics. 2012 Sep 15;28(18):i626-i632. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bts385.

A novel approach for resolving differences in single-cell gene expression
patterns from zygote to blastocyst.

Buettner F(1), Theis FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioinformatics and Systems Biology, Helmholtz-Zentrum München,
85764 Neuherberg, Germany. f.buettner@helmholtz-muenchen.de

MOTIVATION: Single-cell experiments of cells from the early mouse embryo yield
gene expression data for different developmental stages from zygote to
blastocyst. To better understand cell fate decisions during differentiation, it
is desirable to analyse the high-dimensional gene expression data and assess
differences in gene expression patterns between different developmental stages as
well as within developmental stages. Conventional methods include univariate
analyses of distributions of genes at different stages or multivariate linear
methods such as principal component analysis (PCA). However, these approaches
often fail to resolve important differences as each lineage has a unique gene
expression pattern which changes gradually over time yielding different gene
expressions both between different developmental stages as well as heterogeneous 
distributions at a specific stage. Furthermore, to date, no approach taking the
temporal structure of the data into account has been presented.
RESULTS: We present a novel framework based on Gaussian process latent variable
models (GPLVMs) to analyse single-cell qPCR expression data of 48 genes from
mouse zygote to blastocyst as presented by (Guo et al., 2010). We extend GPLVMs
by introducing gene relevance maps and gradient plots to provide interpretability
as in the linear case. Furthermore, we take the temporal group structure of the
data into account and introduce a new factor in the GPLVM likelihood which
ensures that small distances are preserved for cells from the same developmental 
stage. Using our novel framework, it is possible to resolve differences in gene
expressions for all developmental stages. Furthermore, a new subpopulation of
cells within the 16-cell stage is identified which is significantly more
trophectoderm-like than the rest of the population. The trophectoderm-like
subpopulation was characterized by considerable differences in the expression of 
Id2, Gata4 and, to a smaller extent, Klf4 and Hand1. The relevance of Id2 as
early markers for TE cells is consistent with previously published results.
AVAILABILITY: The mappings were implemented based on Prof. Neil Lawrence's FGPLVM
toolbox(1); extensions for relevance analysis and including the structure of the 
data can be obtained from one of the authors' homepage.(2)
CONTACT: f.buettner@helmholtz-muenchen.de.

PMCID: PMC3436812
PMID: 22962491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. BioData Min. 2012 Aug 29;5(1):12. doi: 10.1186/1756-0381-5-12.

Finding biomarkers in non-model species: literature mining of transcription
factors involved in bovine embryo development.

Turenne N(1), Tiys E, Ivanisenko V, Yudin N, Ignatieva E, Valour D, Degrelle SA, 
Hue I.

Author information: 
(1)INRA, SenS, UR1326, IFRIS, Champs-sur-Marne, F-77420, France.
nturenne@jouy.inra.fr.

BACKGROUND: Since processes in well-known model organisms have specific features 
different from those in Bos taurus, the organism under study, a good way to
describe gene regulation in ruminant embryos would be a species-specific
consideration of closely related species to cattle, sheep and pig. However, as
highlighted by a recent report, gene dictionaries in pig are smaller than in
cattle, bringing a risk to reduce the gene resources to be mined (and so for
sheep dictionaries). Bioinformatics approaches that allow an integration of
available information on gene function in model organisms, taking into account
their specificity, are thus needed. Besides these closely related and
biologically relevant species, there is indeed much more knowledge of (i)
trophoblast proliferation and differentiation or (ii) embryogenesis in human and 
mouse species, which provides opportunities for reconstructing proliferation
and/or differentiation processes in other mammalian embryos, including ruminants.
The necessary knowledge can be obtained partly from (i) stem cell or cancer
research to supply useful information on molecular agents or molecular
interactions at work in cell proliferation and (ii) mouse embryogenesis to supply
useful information on embryo differentiation. However, the total number of
publications for all these topics and species is great and their manual
processing would be tedious and time consuming. This is why we used text mining
for automated text analysis and automated knowledge extraction. To evaluate the
quality of this "mining", we took advantage of studies that reported gene
expression profiles during the elongation of bovine embryos and defined a list of
transcription factors (or TF, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>64) that we used as biological "gold standard".
When successful, the "mining" approach would identify them all, as well as novel 
ones.
METHODS: To gain knowledge on molecular-genetic regulations in a non model
organism, we offer an approach based on literature-mining and score arrangement
of data from model organisms. This approach was applied to identify novel
transcription factors during bovine blastocyst elongation, a process that is not 
observed in rodents and primates. As a result, searching through human and mouse 
corpuses, we identified numerous bovine homologs, among which 11 to 14% of
transcription factors including the gold standard TF as well as novel TF
potentially important to gene regulation in ruminant embryo development. The
scripts of the workflow are written in Perl and available on demand. They require
data input coming from all various databases for any kind of biological issue
once the data has been prepared according to keywords for the studied topic and
species; we can provide data sample to illustrate the use and functionality of
the workflow.
RESULTS: To do so, we created a workflow that allowed the pipeline processing of 
literature data and biological data, extracted from Web of Science (WoS) or
PubMed but also from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), Gene Ontology (GO), Uniprot, 
HomoloGene, TcoF-DB and TFe (TF encyclopedia). First, the human and mouse
homologs of the bovine proteins were selected, filtered by text corpora and
arranged by score functions. The score functions were based on the gene name
frequencies in corpora. Then, transcription factors were identified using TcoF-DB
and double-checked using TFe to characterise TF groups and families. Thus, among 
a search space of 18,670 bovine homologs, 489 were identified as transcription
factors. Among them, 243 were absent from the high-throughput data available at
the time of the study. They thus stand so far for putative TF acting during
bovine embryo elongation, but might be retrieved from a recent RNA sequencing
dataset (Mamo et al. , 2012). Beyond the 246 TF that appeared expressed in bovine
elongating tissues, we restricted our interpretation to those occurring within a 
list of 50 top-ranked genes. Among the transcription factors identified therein, 
half belonged to the gold standard (ASCL2, c-FOS, ETS2, GATA3, HAND1) and half
did not (ESR1, HES1, ID2, NANOG, PHB2, TP53, STAT3).
CONCLUSIONS: A workflow providing search for transcription factors acting in
bovine elongation was developed. The model assumed that proteins sharing the same
protein domains in closely related species had the same protein functionalities, 
even if they were differently regulated among species or involved in somewhat
different pathways. Under this assumption, we merged the information on different
mammalian species from different databases (literature and biology) and proposed 
489 TF as potential participants of embryo proliferation and differentiation,
with (i) a recall of 95% with regard to a biological gold standard defined in
2011 and (ii) an extension of more than 3 times the gold standard of TF detected 
so far in elongating tissues. The working capacity of the workflow was supported 
by the manual expertise of the biologists on the results. The workflow can serve 
as a new kind of bioinformatics tool to work on fused data sources and can thus
be useful in studies of a wide range of biological processes.

PMCID: PMC3563503
PMID: 22931563  [PubMed]


51. Oncogene. 2013 Jul 25;32(30):3559-68. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.362. Epub 2012 Aug
20.

The DNA methylation landscape of small cell lung cancer suggests a
differentiation defect of neuroendocrine cells.

Kalari S(1), Jung M, Kernstine KH, Takahashi T, Pfeifer GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, 
Duarte, CA, USA.

Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is a disease characterized by aggressive clinical
behavior and lack of effective therapy. Owing to its tendency for early
dissemination, only a third of patients have limited-stage disease at the time of
diagnosis. SCLC is thought to derive from pulmonary neuroendocrine cells.
Although several molecular abnormalities in SCLC have been described, there are
relatively few studies on epigenetic alterations in this type of tumor. Here, we 
have used methylation profiling with the methylated-CpG island recovery assay in 
combination with microarrays and conducted the first genome-scale analysis of
methylation changes that occur in primary SCLC and SCLC cell lines. Among the
hundreds of tumor-specifically methylated genes discovered, we identified 73 gene
targets that are methylated in >77% of primary SCLC tumors, most of which have
never been linked to aberrant methylation in tumors. These methylated targets
have potential for biomarker development for early detection and therapeutic
management of SCLC. SCLC cell lines had a greater number of hypermethylated genes
than primary tumors. Gene ontology analysis indicated a significant enrichment of
methylated genes functioning as transcription factors and in processes of
neuronal differentiation. Motif analysis of tumor-specific methylated regions
identified enrichment of binding sites for several neural cell fate-specifying
transcription factors including NEUROD1, HAND1, ZNF423 and REST. We hypothesize
that two potential mechanisms, loss of cell fate-determining transcription
factors by methylation of their promoters and functional inactivation of their
corresponding genomic-binding sites by DNA methylation, can promote a
differentiation defect of neuroendocrine cells thus enhancing the ability of
tumor progenitor cells to transition toward SCLC.

PMCID: PMC3625455
PMID: 22907430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Int J Mol Med. 2012 Nov;30(5):1095-104. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2012.1092. Epub 2012
Aug 9.

microRNA expression profiling of the developing mouse heart.

Cao L(1), Kong LP, Yu ZB, Han SP, Bai YF, Zhu J, Hu X, Zhu C, Zhu S, Guo XR.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Department of Ultrasound,
Nanjing Maternal and Child Health Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing
210029, PR China.

microRNAs (miRNAs) play an important role in regulating normal organ physiology
and development. Many miRNAs show spatially and temporally restricted expression 
patterns during embryogenesis and organogenesis. This study aimed to characterize
the miRNA profile of the fetal mouse heart at 4 key time-points [embryonic day
(E)12.5, E14.5, E16.5 and E18.5] in its development, by performing a sequencing
by oligonucleotide ligation and detection (SOLiD) miRNA screen. The 4 time-points
were designated as groups M1 (E18.5), M2 (E16.5), M3 (E14.5) and M4 (E12.5).
miRNAs found to have consistent fold-changes of >2.0) between the 4 time-points
were selected for further analysis. Ten miRNAs (mmu-miR-23b, mmu-miR-24,
mmu-miR-23a, mmu-miR-375, mmu-miR-29a, mmu-miR-93, mmu-miR-21, mmu-miR-25,
mmu-let-7b and mmu-miR-27b) that were the most highly expressed in the 4 groups, 
including the percentage >1% of total read counts, were identified. No miRNA was 
consistently downregulated or upregulated. There were 16 differentially expressed
miRNAs between the later development group (M1+M2) and the early development
group (M3+M4), which were validated by quantitative real-time PCR. Several
members of the let-7 miRNA cluster (mmu-let-7a/7d/7e/7f) were upregulated in the 
later development group compared with the early development group. A network
analysis of the predicted targets of mmu-let-7a/7d/7e/7f identified 5 target
genes (FOXP1, TBX5, HAND1, AKT2 and PPARGC1A), known to be involved in cardiac
development. Therefore, this study identified several miRNAs that are abundantly 
expressed in the developing heart, several of which are differentially expressed 
in the 4 time-points studied. Findings of this analysis may thus clarify the
mechanisms of normal heart development and provide a physiological basis for
future studies on congenital heart disease.

PMID: 22895573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Pathol. 2012 Nov;228(3):366-77. doi: 10.1002/path.4075. Epub 2012 Aug 2.

Iron overload signature in chrysotile-induced malignant mesothelioma.

Jiang L(1), Akatsuka S, Nagai H, Chew SH, Ohara H, Okazaki Y, Yamashita Y,
Yoshikawa Y, Yasui H, Ikuta K, Sasaki K, Kohgo Y, Hirano S, Shinohara Y, Kohyama 
N, Takahashi T, Toyokuni S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Biological Responses, Nagoya University Graduate
School of Medicine, 65 Tsurumai-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya 466-8550, Japan.

Exposure to asbestos is a risk for malignant mesothelioma (MM) in humans. Among
the commercially used types of asbestos (chrysotile, crocidolite, and amosite),
the carcinogenicity of chrysotile is not fully appreciated. Here, we show that
all three asbestos types similarly induced MM in the rat peritoneal cavity and
that chrysotile caused the earliest mesothelioma development with a high fraction
of sarcomatoid histology. The pathogenesis of chrysotile-induced mesothelial
carcinogenesis was closely associated with iron overload: repeated administration
of an iron chelator, nitrilotriacetic acid, which promotes the Fenton reaction,
significantly reduced the period required for carcinogenesis; massive iron
deposition was found in the peritoneal organs with high serum ferritin; and
homozygous deletion of the CDKN2A/2B/ARF tumour suppressor genes, the most
frequent genomic alteration in human MM and in iron-induced rodent
carcinogenesis, was observed in 92.6% of the cases studied with array-based
comparative genomic hybridization. The induced rat MM cells revealed high
expression of mesoderm-specific transcription factors, Dlx5 and Hand1, and showed
an iron regulatory profile of active iron uptake and utilization. These data
indicate that chrysotile is a strong carcinogen when exposed to mesothelia,
acting through the induction of local iron overload. Therefore, an intervention
to remove local excess iron might be a strategy to prevent MM after asbestos
exposure.

Copyright © 2012 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 22864872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Toxicol Sci. 2012;37(4):845-51.

Assessment of technical protocols for novel embryonic stem cell tests with
molecular markers (Hand1- and Cmya1-ESTs): a preliminary cross-laboratory
performance analysis.

Suzuki N, Yamashita N, Koseki N, Yamada T, Kimura Y, Aiba S, Toyoizumi T,
Watanabe M, Ohta R, Tanaka N, Saito K.

The Hand1- and Cmya1-ESTs are novel short-term tests for embryotoxic chemicals
using genetically engineering mouse ES cells for luciferase reporter gene assays.
These ESTs allow convenient determination of differentiation toxicity and cell
viability in a short duration with high throughput 96-well microplates for
prediction of embryotoxicity of chemicals. To assess the Hand1-EST technical
protocol, we firstly compared reporter gene assay and cytotoxicity test data for 
a representative compound (hydroxyurea) from four different laboratories with
tests carried out under the same experimental conditions. Extensive
investigations of the Hand1- and Cmya1-ESTs were then performed to explore
reproducibility by comparing a set of 6 well-known test chemicals, including
hydroxyurea, across the laboratories. The results gave good correspondence in all
four laboratories, indicating that transferability, intra-laboratory variability 
and inter-laboratory variability of the present technical protocols of the ESTs
were sufficient to conduct further validation studies.

PMID: 22863864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Parasite Immunol. 2012 Oct;34(10):473-85. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3024.2012.01382.x.

Cryptosporidium parvum antigens induce mouse and human dendritic cells to
generate Th1-enhancing cytokines.

Bedi B(1), Mead JR.

Author information: 
(1)Atlanta VA Medical Center, Decatur, GA 30033, USA.

Cryptosporidium parvum is an opportunistic intracellular parasite that causes
mild to severe diarrhoea, which can be life-threatening in an immunocompromised
host. To increase our understanding of the mechanisms that play a role in host
immune responses, we investigated the effects of C. parvum antigens on the
phenotype of mouse and human dendritic cells (DCs). Cryptosporidium parvum
antigens induced DC activation as indicated by upregulation of the maturation
marker CD209, as well as by the production of the cytokines interleukin-12 p70,
IL-2, IL-1beta, IL-6. In particular, significant increases in the expression of
IL-12 p70 were observed from mouse DCs derived from bone marrow in response to
solubilized sporozoite antigen and the recombinant cryptosporidial antigens, Cp40
and Cp23. We observed a small but significant increase in IL-18 expression
following the exposure to Cp40. We found that the induction of Th1 cytokines was 
MyD88 dependent (MyD88 knockout mouse DCs were unresponsive). Additionally, both 
sporozoite preparations (solubilized and live) significantly induced IL-12
production by human monocytic dendritic cells (MoDCs). This finding indicates
that solubilized as well as recombinant antigens can induce the maturation of DCs
and subsequently initiate an innate immune response.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22803713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. BMC Med Genomics. 2012 Jun 6;5:20. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-5-20.

LINE-1 methylation status and its association with tetralogy of fallot in
infants.

Sheng W(1), Wang H, Ma X, Qian Y, Zhang P, Wu Y, Zheng F, Chen L, Huang G, Ma D.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Ministry of Education, Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Shanghai
Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China.

BACKGROUND: Methylation levels of long interspersed nucleotide elements (LINE-1) 
are representative of genome-wide methylation status and play an important role
in maintaining genomic stability and gene expression. To derive insight into the 
association between genome-wide methylation status and tetralogy of fallot (TOF),
we compared the methylation status of LINE-1 element between TOF patients and
controls. The methylation of the NKX 2-5, HAND 1, and TBX 20 promoter regions was
also evaluated.
METHODS: Genomic DNA from right ventricular tissue samples was obtained from 32
patients with TOF and 15 control subjects. Sequenom MassARRAY platform was
performed to examine the methylation levels of LINE-1, NKX2-5, HAND1 and TBX20.
Mann-Whitney U test was used to compare differences in methylation levels between
two groups.
RESULTS: The methylation level of LINE-1 was significantly lower in patients with
TOF, with a median of 57.95% (interquartile range [IQR]: 56.10%-60.04%), as
opposed to 59.70% in controls (IQR: 59.00%-61.30%; P = 0.0021). The highest
LINE-1 methylation level was 61.3%. The risk of TOF increased in subjects with
the lowest methylation levels (less than or equal to 59.0%; OR = 14.7, 95% CI:
1.8-117.7, P = 0.014) and in those with medium methylation levels (59.0%-61.3%;
OR = 2.0, 95% CI: 0.3-14.2, P = 0.65). An ROC curve analysis showed a relatively 
high accuracy of using the LINE-1 methylation level in predicting the presence of
TOF (AUC = 0.78, 95% CI: 0.65-0.91; P = 0.002). The association of the LINE-1
methylation level with TOF was only observed in males (P = 0.006) and not in
females (P = 0.25). Neither age nor gender was found to be associated with the
LINE-1 methylation level in patients or controls. Higher methylation levels of
NKX2-5 and HAND1 and lower methylation levels of TBX20 were also observed in
patients with TOF than in controls. No association was found between the
methylation levels of NKX2-5, HAND1 and TBX 20 with the LINE-1 methylation level.
CONCLUSIONS: Lower LINE-1 methylation levels are associated with increased risk
of TOF and may provide important clues for the development of TOF.

PMCID: PMC3408368
PMID: 22672592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Mol Reprod Dev. 2012 Jul;79(7):445-50. doi: 10.1002/mrd.22052. Epub 2012 May 31.

Effect of vitrification on promoter methylation and the expression of
pluripotency and differentiation genes in mouse blastocysts.

Zhao XM(1), Du WH, Hao HS, Wang D, Qin T, Liu Y, Zhu HB.

Author information: 
(1)Embryo Biotechnology and Reproduction Laboratory, Institute of Animal Science,
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Haidian District, Beijing, PR China.

The present study was designed to determine the effects of vitrification on
promoter methylation and the expression levels of pluripotency and
differentiation genes in mouse blastocysts. Promoter region CpG methylation
patterns and the expression levels of octamer-binding transcription factor
(Oct4), Nanog homeobox (Nanog), caudal-type homeobox 2 (Cdx2), and heart and
neural crest derivatives-expressed transcript 1 (Hand1) were analyzed in fresh
and vitrified mouse blastocysts. Methylation was measured by bisulphate
mutagenesis and sequencing; gene expression was determined by real-time reverse
transcription-PCR. The results showed that vitrification significantly reduced
the methylation levels of the Oct4 (85% vs. 62.5%), Nanog (77.5% vs. 55%), and
Cdx2 promoters (4.6% vs. 1.4%; P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) in mouse blastocysts, which correlated
with increased expression of Oct4 and Nanog in vitrified blastocysts. Hand1
promoter methylation was not significantly different in the fresh (17.9%) versus 
vitrification group (21.4%; P<U+2009>><U+2009>0.05). The expression levels of Cdx2 and Hand1
were not significantly different in fresh and vitrified blastocysts. In
conclusion, vitrification significantly decreased Oct4, Nanog, and Cdx2 promoter 
methylation in mouse blastocysts, which correlated with increased expression of
Oct4 and Nanog.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22618890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Cell Sci. 2012 Aug 15;125(Pt 16):3893-903. doi: 10.1242/jcs.106435. Epub 2012
May 2.

Dual function of the UNC-45b chaperone with myosin and GATA4 in cardiac
development.

Chen D(1), Li S, Singh R, Spinette S, Sedlmeier R, Epstein HF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Texas Medical
Branch, TX 77555-0641, USA.

Cardiac development requires interplay between the regulation of gene expression 
and the assembly of functional sarcomeric proteins. We report that UNC-45b
recessive loss-of-function mutations in C3H and C57BL/6 inbred mouse strains
cause arrest of cardiac morphogenesis at the formation of right heart structures 
and failure of contractile function. Wild-type C3H and C57BL/6 embryos at the
same stage, E9.5, form actively contracting right and left atria and ventricles. 
The known interactions of UNC-45b as a molecular chaperone are consistent with
diminished accumulation of the sarcomeric myosins, but not their mRNAs, and the
resulting decreased contraction of homozygous mutant embryonic hearts. The novel 
finding that GATA4 accumulation is similarly decreased at the protein but not
mRNA levels is also consistent with the function of UNC-45b as a chaperone. The
mRNAs of known downstream targets of GATA4 during secondary cardiac field
development, the cardiogenic factors Hand1, Hand2 and Nkx-2.5, are also
decreased, consistent with the reduced GATA4 protein accumulation. Direct binding
studies show that the UNC-45b chaperone forms physical complexes with both the
alpha and beta cardiac myosins and the cardiogenic transcription factor GATA4.
Co-expression of UNC-45b with GATA4 led to enhanced transcription from GATA
promoters in naïve cells. These novel results suggest that the heart-specific
UNC-45b isoform functions as a molecular chaperone mediating contractile function
of the sarcomere and gene expression in cardiac development.

PMCID: PMC3462083
PMID: 22553207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Diabetologia. 2012 Aug;55(8):2238-45. doi: 10.1007/s00125-012-2547-8. Epub 2012
Apr 11.

Acceleration of diabetes development in CXC chemokine receptor 3
(CXCR3)-deficient NOD mice.

Yamada Y(1), Okubo Y, Shimada A, Oikawa Y, Yamada S, Narumi S, Matsushima K, Itoh
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Keio University School of Medicine, 35
Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, 160-8582, Japan.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The aim of this study was to understand the role of CXC
chemokine receptor 3 (CXCR3), a T-helper 1(Th1) type chemokine receptor, in the
pathogenesis of type 1 diabetes.
METHODS: We observed the incidence of diabetes in Cxcr3 homozygous knockout mice.
We compared the expression pattern of various cytokines and chemokines and the
frequency of FOXP3(+) cells in the pancreas and pancreatic lymph nodes from Cxcr3
( -/- ) NOD mice and wild-type NOD mice. In addition, we observed the migration
ability of CXCR3(+)CD4(+) cells to pancreatic islets upon adoptive transfer.
Finally, we examined whether Cxcr3 (+) regulatory T cells (Tregs) actually
suppressed the onset of diabetes in vivo.
RESULTS: Cxcr3 ( -/- ) NOD mice developed spontaneous diabetes earlier than did
wild-type NOD mice. In Cxcr3 ( -/- ) NOD mice, Tregs were more frequent in
pancreatic lymph nodes and less frequent in pancreatic islets than in wild-type
NOD mice. While transferred CXCR3(-)CD4(+) cells from wild-type NOD mice did not 
infiltrate pancreatic islets of NOD-severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) mice,
CXCR3(+)CD4(+) cells from the same mice migrated into the recipient islets and
contained Forkhead box P3 (FOXP3) upon adoptive transfer. Moreover, CD4(+)CD25(+)
cells from wild-type NOD mice suppressed and delayed the onset of diabetes
compared with those from Cxcr3 ( -/- ) NOD mice in a cyclophosphamide-induced
diabetes model system.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The mechanism of accelerated diabetes onset in Cxcr3 
( -/- ) NOD mice was considered to be due to the lack of hybrid Tregs
(CXCR3(+)FOXP3(+)CD4(+) cells), which could effectively migrate into and regulate
Th1 inflammation in local lesions under Cxcr3 knockout conditions.

PMID: 22487925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Pediatr Cardiol. 2012 Aug;33(6):923-8. doi: 10.1007/s00246-012-0248-1. Epub 2012 
Mar 3.

Ontogeny of cardiac sympathetic innervation and its implications for cardiac
disease.

Vincentz JW(1), Rubart M, Firulli AB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Departments of Anatomy, Biochemistry, and
Medical and Molecular Genetics, Riley Heart Research Center, Wells Center for
Pediatric Research, Indiana Medical School, 1044W. Walnut Street, Indianapolis,
IN 46202-5225, USA.

The vertebrate heart is innervated by the sympathetic and parasympathetic
components of the peripheral autonomic nervous system, which regulates its
contractile rate and force. Understanding the mechanisms that control sympathetic
neuronal growth, differentiation, and innervation of the heart may provide
insight into the etiology of cardiac arrhythmogenesis. This review provides an
overview of the cell signaling pathways and transcriptional effectors that
regulate both the noradrenergic gene program during sympathetic neurogenesis and 
regional nerve density during cardiac innervation. Recent studies exploring
transcriptional regulation of the bHLH transcription factor Hand1 in developing
sympathetic neurons are explored, and how the Hand1 sympathetic neuron-specific
cis-regulatory element may be used further to assess the contribution of altered 
sympathetic innervation to human cardiac disease is discussed.

PMCID: PMC3391355
PMID: 22395650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Neurosci. 2012 Feb 8;32(6):2110-20. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3584-11.2012.

A Phox2- and Hand2-dependent Hand1 cis-regulatory element reveals a unique gene
dosage requirement for Hand2 during sympathetic neurogenesis.

Vincentz JW(1), VanDusen NJ, Fleming AB, Rubart M, Firulli BA, Howard MJ, Firulli
AB.

Author information: 
(1)Riley Heart Research Center, Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research,
Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Anatomy, Indiana Medical School, 
Indianapolis, Indiana 46202-5225, USA.

Neural crest cell specification and differentiation to a sympathetic neuronal
fate serves as an important model for neurogenesis and depends upon the function 
of both bHLH transcription factors, notably Hand2, and homeodomain transcription 
factors, including Phox2b. Here, we define a 1007 bp cis-regulatory element 5' of
the Hand1 gene sufficient to drive reporter expression within the sympathetic
chain of transgenic mice. Comparative genomic analyses uncovered evolutionarily
conserved consensus-binding sites within this element, which chromatin
immunoprecipitation and electrophoretic mobility shift assays confirm are bound
by Hand2 and Phox2b. Mutational analyses revealed that the conserved Phox2 and
E-box binding sites are necessary for proper cis-regulatory element activity, and
expression analyses on both Hand2 conditionally null and hypomorphic backgrounds 
demonstrate that Hand2 is required for reporter activation in a gene
dosage-dependent manner. We demonstrate that Hand2 and Hand1 differentially bind 
the E-boxes in this cis-regulatory element, establishing molecular differences
between these two factors. Finally, we demonstrate that Hand1 is dispensable for 
normal tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) and dopamine ß-hydroxylase (DBH) expression in
sympathetic neurons, even when Hand2 gene dosage is concurrently reduced by half.
Together, these data define a tissue-specific Hand1 cis-regulatory element
controlled by two factors essential for the development of the sympathetic
nervous system and provide in vivo regulatory evidence to support previous
findings that Hand2, rather than Hand1, is predominantly responsible for
regulating TH, DBH, and Hand1 expression in developing sympathetic neurons.

PMCID: PMC3324095
PMID: 22323723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Development. 2012 Feb;139(4):709-19. doi: 10.1242/dev.073197. Epub 2012 Jan 4.

Bmp signaling regulates a dose-dependent transcriptional program to control
facial skeletal development.

Bonilla-Claudio M(1), Wang J, Bai Y, Klysik E, Selever J, Martin JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of Medicine,
One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

We performed an in depth analysis of Bmp4, a critical regulator of development,
disease, and evolution, in cranial neural crest (CNC). Conditional Bmp4
overexpression, using a tetracycline-regulated Bmp4 gain-of-function allele,
resulted in facial skeletal changes that were most dramatic after an E10.5 Bmp4
induction. Expression profiling uncovered a signature of Bmp4-induced genes (BIG)
composed predominantly of transcriptional regulators that control self-renewal,
osteoblast differentiation and negative Bmp autoregulation. The complimentary
experiment, CNC inactivation of Bmp2, Bmp4 and Bmp7, resulted in complete or
partial loss of multiple CNC-derived skeletal elements, revealing a crucial
requirement for Bmp signaling in membranous bone and cartilage development.
Importantly, the BIG signature was reduced in Bmp loss-of-function mutants,
indicating Bmp-regulated target genes are modulated by Bmp dose. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) revealed a subset of the BIG signature, including
Satb2, Smad6, Hand1, Gadd45<U+03B3> and Gata3, that was bound by Smad1/5 in the
developing mandible, revealing direct Smad-mediated regulation. These data
support the hypothesis that Bmp signaling regulates craniofacial skeletal
development by balancing self-renewal and differentiation pathways in CNC
progenitors.

PMCID: PMC3265059
PMID: 22219353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Am J Cancer Res. 2012;2(1):116-29. Epub 2011 Nov 21.

Prognostic significance of aberrant gene methylation in gastric cancer.

Shi J, Zhang G, Yao D, Liu W, Wang N, Ji M, He N, Shi B, Hou P.

Promoter methylation acts as an important alternative to genetic alterations for 
gene inactivation in gastric carcinogenesis. Although a number of gastric
cancer-associated genes have been found to be methylated in gastric cancer,
valuable methylation markers for early diagnosis and prognostic evaluation of
this cancer remain largely unknown. In the present study, we used
methylation-specific PCR (MSP) to analyze promoter methylation of 9 gastric
cancer-associated genes, including MLF1, MGMT, p16, RASSF2, hMLH1, HAND1, HRASLS,
TM, and FLNc, and their association with clinicopathological characteristics and 
clinical outcome in a large cohort of gastric cancers. Our data showed that all
of these genes were aberrantly methylated in gastric cancer, ranging from 8% to
51%. Moreover, gene methylation was strongly associated with certain
clinicopathological characteristics, such as tumor differentiation, lymph node
metastasis, and cancer-related death. Of interest, methylation of MGMT, p16,
RASSF2, hMLH1, HAND1, and FLNc was closely associated with poor survival in
gastric cancer, particularly MGMT, p16, RASSF2 and FLNc. Thus, our findings
suggested these epigenetic events may contribute to the initiation and
progression of gastric cancer. Importantly, methylation of some genes were
closely relevant to poor prognosis in gastric cancer, providing the strong
evidences that these hypermethylated genes may be served as valuable biomarkers
for prognostic evaluation in this cancer.

PMCID: PMC3236575
PMID: 22206050  [PubMed]


64. EMBO J. 2011 Nov 15;30(24):4874-84. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.407.

FGF signalling inhibits neural induction in human embryonic stem cells.

Greber B(1), Coulon P, Zhang M, Moritz S, Frank S, Müller-Molina AJ, Araúzo-Bravo
MJ, Han DW, Pape HC, Schöler HR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Max Planck Institute for
Molecular Biomedicine, Münster, Germany.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) can exit the self-renewal programme, through
the action of signalling molecules, at any given time and differentiate along the
three germ layer lineages. We have systematically investigated the specific roles
of three signalling pathways, TGFß/SMAD2, BMP/SMAD1, and FGF/ERK, in promoting
the transition of hESCs into the neuroectoderm lineage. In this context,
inhibition of SMAD2 and ERK signalling served to cooperatively promote exit from 
hESC self-renewal through the rapid downregulation of NANOG and OCT4. In
contrast, inhibition of SMAD1 signalling acted to maintain SOX2 expression and
prevent non-neural differentiation via HAND1. Inhibition of FGF/ERK upregulated
OTX2 that subsequently induced the neuroectodermal fate determinant PAX6,
revealing a novel role for FGF2 in indirectly repressing PAX6 in hESCs. Combined 
inhibition of the three pathways hence resulted in highly efficient neuroectoderm
formation within 4 days, and subsequently, FGF/ERK inhibition promoted rapid
differentiation into peripheral neurons. Our study assigns a novel, biphasic role
to FGF/ERK signalling in the neural induction of hESCs, which may also have
utility for applications requiring the rapid and efficient generation of
peripheral neurons.

PMCID: PMC3243624
PMID: 22085933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Oct;155A(10):2416-21.

Somatic mutations in NKX25, GATA4, and HAND1 are not a common cause of tetralogy
of Fallot or hypoplastic left heart.

Esposito G(1), Butler TL, Blue GM, Cole AD, Sholler GF, Kirk EP, Grossfeld P,
Perryman BM, Harvey RP, Winlaw DS.

Author information: 
(1)Kids Heart Research, The Childrens Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, Australia.

The majority of congenital heart disease (CHD) occurs as a sporadic finding, with
a minority of cases associated with a known genetic abnormality. Combinations of 
genetic and environmental factors are implicated, with the recent and intriguing 
hypothesis that an apparently high rate of somatic mutations might explain some
sporadic CHD. We used samples of right ventricular myocardium from patients
undergoing surgical repair of tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) and hypoplastic left
heart (HLH) to examine the incidence of somatic mutation in cardiac tissue. TOF
is a common form of cyanotic CHD, occurring in 3.3 per 10,000 live births. HLH is
a rare defect in which the left side of the heart is severely under-developed.
Both are severe malformations whose genetic etiology is largely unknown. We
carried out direct sequence analysis of the NKX25 and GATA4 genes from fresh
frozen cardiac tissues and matched blood samples of nine TOF patients. Analysis
of NKX25, GATA4, and HAND1 was performed from cardiac tissue of 24 HLH patients 
and three matched blood samples. No somatic or germline mutations were identified
in the TOF or HLH patients. Although limited by sample size, our study suggests
that somatic mutations in NKX25 and GATA4 are not a common cause of isolated TOF
or HLH.

PMID: 22043484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Clin Chim Acta. 2012 Apr 11;413(7-8):675-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2011.10.014. Epub 
2011 Oct 18.

Two novel HAND1 mutations in Chinese patients with ventricular septal defect.

Cheng Z(1), Lib L, Li Z, Liu M, Yan J, Wang B, Ma X.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: The HAND1 gene encodes a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription 
factor which plays an essential role in the development of heart. Mutations in
HAND1 have been identified in congenital heart disease (CHD) patients with
hypoplastic hearts and septal defects. The spectrum of CHD relating to HAND1
mutations needs further study.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We screened HAND1 coding regions for mutations in 498
Chinese patients with CHD and 250 control subjects. We identified two novel
non-synonymous mutations, c.217G>A (p.Gly73Ser) and c.456G>T (p.Lys152Asn), in
the patients with ventricular septal defect (VSD). The two mutations were located
in HAND1 evolutionarily conserved residues and enhanced the capability of HAND1
to form homodimers.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report of mutations in the HAND1 gene in Chinese
patients with VSD and provides new insight into the etiology of VSD.

Copyright Â© 2011. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 22032825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Congenit Heart Dis. 2011 Nov-Dec;6(6):592-602. doi:
10.1111/j.1747-0803.2011.00582.x. Epub 2011 Oct 20.

Microdeletions and microduplications in patients with congenital heart disease
and multiple congenital anomalies.

Goldmuntz E(1), Paluru P, Glessner J, Hakonarson H, Biegel JA, White PS, Gai X,
Shaikh TH.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Cardiology Human Genetics Oncology Center for Applied Genomics
Center for Biomedical Informatics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Multiple genetic syndromes are caused by recurrent chromosomal
microdeletions or microduplications. The increasing use of high-resolution
microarrays in clinical analysis has allowed the identification of previously
undetectable submicroscopic copy number variants (CNVs) associated with genetic
disorders. We hypothesized that patients with congenital heart disease and
additional dysmorphic features or other anomalies would be likely to harbor
previously undetected CNVs, which might identify new disease loci or
disease-related genes for various cardiac defects.
DESIGN: Copy number analysis with single nucleotide polymorphism-based,
oligonucleotide microarrays was performed on 58 patients with congenital heart
disease and other dysmorphic features and/or other anomalies. The observed CNVs
were validated using independent techniques and validated CNVs were further
analyzed using computational algorithms and comparison with available control CNV
datasets in order to assess their pathogenic potential.
RESULTS: Potentially pathogenic CNVs were detected in twelve of 58 patients
(20.7%), ranging in size from 240 Kb to 9.6 Mb. These CNVs contained between 1
and 55 genes, including NRP1, NTRK3, MESP1, ADAM19, and HAND1, all of which are
known to participate in cardiac development.
CONCLUSIONS: Genome-wide analysis in patients with congenital heart disease and
additional phenotypes has identified potentially pathogenic CNVs affecting genes 
involved in cardiac development. The identified variant loci and the genes within
them warrant further evaluation in similarly syndromic and nonsyndromic cardiac
cohorts.

© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4575121
PMID: 22010865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Toxicol Sci. 2011 Oct;36(5):569-85.

Analysis of altered gene expression specific to embryotoxic chemical treatment
during embryonic stem cell differentiation into myocardiac and neural cells.

Suzuki N(1), Ando S, Sumida K, Horie N, Saito K.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Health Science Laboratory, Sumitomo Chemical Co., Ltd., Osaka,
Japan. suzukin7@sc.sumitomo-chem.co.jp

Embryonic stem cells (ES cells), pluripotent cells derived from the inner cell
mass of blastocysts, differentiate in vitro into a variety of cell types
representing all three germ layers. They therefore constitute one of the most
promising in vitro tools for developmental toxicology. To assess the
developmental toxicity of chemicals using ES cells easily, identification of
effective marker genes is a high priority. We report here altered gene expression
during ES cell differentiation into myocardiac and neural cells on treatment with
some embryotoxic and non-embryotoxic chemicals. Decreases in several
undifferentiated markers such as Oct3/4 and Nanog, and elevated expression of
genes associated with heart development or the central nervous system,
respectively, were found on microarray analysis. Under differentiation of ES
cells into myocardic cells, 107 genes were substantially up-regulated. Decrease
in the expression of 13 genes of these (Hand1, Pim2, Tbx20, Myl4, Myl7, Hbb-bh1, 
Hba-a1, Col1a2, Hba-x, Cmya1, Pitx2, Smyd1 and Adam19) was observed specifically 
by embryotoxic chemicals. Of the 107 genes up-regulated under differentiation
into neurons, 22 genes (Map2, Cpe, Marcks, Ptbp2, Sox11, Tubb2b, Vim, Arx, Emx2, 
Pax6, Basp1, Ddr1, Ndn, Sfrp, Ttc3, Ubqln2, Six3, Dcx, L1cam, Reln, Wnt1 and
Nnat) showed reduced expression specifically by embryotoxic chemicals. Almost all
gene sets identified in this study are known to be indispensable for
differentiation and development of heart and brain tissues, and thus may serve in
early detection or prediction of embryotoxicity of chemicals in vitro.

PMID: 22008533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Dev Biol. 2011 Dec 15;360(2):381-90. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.09.023. Epub 2011 
Oct 1.

Myocardial Tbx20 regulates early atrioventricular canal formation and endocardial
epithelial-mesenchymal transition via Bmp2.

Cai X(1), Nomura-Kitabayashi A, Cai W, Yan J, Christoffels VM, Cai CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Center for Molecular
Cardiology of the Child Health and Development Institute, the Black Family Stem
Cell Institute, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029, USA.

During early embryogenesis, the formation of the cardiac atrioventricular canal
(AVC) facilitates the transition of the heart from a linear tube into a chambered
organ. However, the genetic pathways underlying this developmental process are
poorly understood. The T-box transcription factor Tbx20 is expressed
predominantly in the AVC of early heart tube. It was shown that Tbx20 activates
Nmyc1 and suppresses Tbx2 expression to promote proliferation and specification
of the atrial and ventricular chambers, yet it is not known if Tbx20 is involved 
in early AVC development. Here, we report that mice lacking Tbx20 in the AVC
myocardium fail to form the AVC constriction, and the endocardial
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is severely perturbed. Tbx20 maintains
expression of a variety of genes, including Bmp2, Tbx3 and Hand1 in the AVC
myocardium. Intriguingly, we found Bmp2 downstream genes involved in the EMT
initiation are also downregulated. In addition, re-expression of Bmp2 in the AVC 
myocardium substantially rescues the EMT defects resulting from the lack of
Tbx20, suggesting Bmp2 is one of the key downstream targets of Tbx20 in AVC
development. Our data support a complex signaling network with Tbx20 suppressing 
Tbx2 in the AVC myocardium but also indirectly promoting Tbx2 expression through 
Bmp2. The spatiotemporal expression of Tbx2 in the AVC appears to be balanced
between these two opposing signals. Overall, our study provides genetic evidence 
that Tbx20 has essential roles in regulating AVC development that coordinate
early cardiac chamber formation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3217163
PMID: 21983003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Toxicol Sci. 2011 Dec;124(2):460-71. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfr250. Epub 2011 Sep
29.

Evaluation of novel high-throughput embryonic stem cell tests with new molecular 
markers for screening embryotoxic chemicals in vitro.

Suzuki N(1), Ando S, Yamashita N, Horie N, Saito K.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Health Science Laboratory, Sumitomo Chemical Co., Ltd,
Konohana-ku, Osaka 554-8558, Japan.

The embryonic stem cell test (EST) is a validated in vitro alternative test for
prediction of embryotoxicity with inhibition of cardiomyocyte differentiation
under the microscope as beating areas at day 10 as an endpoint. However,
improvements are necessary for regulatory acceptance and application to
high-throughput screening. We have previously reported that heart and neural
crest derivatives expressed transcript 1 (Hand1), a transcription factor
essential for mammalian heart development, and cardiomyopathy associated 1
(Cmya1), an intercalated disk protein implicated in cardiac morphogenesis, are
quantitative and objective molecular endpoints for predicting embryotoxicity,
detected at day 6 when mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells differentiate into
cardiomyocytes. In established stable transgenic ES cells with Hand1 or Cmya1
promoters upstream of luciferase reporter gene, changes in each gene expression
were found to be coincident with those in luciferase activities during
cardiomyocyte differentiation, suggesting that monitoring might be possible by
chemiluminescent determination. In our novel EST, differentiation toxicity and
cytotoxicity of test chemicals were here analyzed using ES cells and 3T3
fibroblasts by this approach in 96-microwell plates. Extensive investigations
were performed to explore predictive power and validity by comparing a set of 24 
well-known test chemicals. The novel EST offers high predictability and accuracy 
with a reduced test duration and manpower compared with the original EST
protocol, thus providing a new rapid and sensitive in vitro method for screening 
embryotoxicants.

PMID: 21964422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Mech Dev. 2011 Sep-Dec;128(7-10):327-41. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2011.06.002. Epub
2011 Jul 8.

Fgf is required to regulate anterior-posterior patterning in the Xenopus lateral 
plate mesoderm.

Deimling SJ(1), Drysdale TA.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Health Research Institute, 800 Commissioners Road E., London,
Ontario, Canada.

Given that the lateral plate mesoderm (LPM) gives rise to the cardiovascular
system, identifying the cascade of signalling events that subdivides the LPM into
distinct regions during development is an important question. Retinoic acid (RA) 
is known to be necessary for establishing the expression boundaries of important 
transcription factors that demarcate distinct regions along the anterior
posterior axis of the LPM. Here, we demonstrate that fibroblast growth factor
(Fgf) signalling is also necessary for regulating the expression domains of the
same transcription factors (nkx2.5, foxf1, hand1 and sall3) by restricting the RA
responsive LPM domains. When Fgf signalling is inhibited in neurula stage
embryos, the more posterior LPM expression domains are lost, while the more
anterior domains are extended further posterior. The domain changes are
maintained throughout development as Fgf inhibition results in similar domain
changes in late stage embryos. We also demonstrate that Fgf signalling is
necessary for both the initiation of heart specification, and for maintaining
heart specification until overt differentiation occurs. Fgf signalling is also
necessary to restrict vascular patterning and create a vascular free domain in
the posterior end of the LPM that correlates with the expression of hand1.
Finally, we show cross talk between the RA and Fgf signalling pathways in the
patterning of the LPM. We suggest that this tissue wide patterning event, active 
during the neurula stage, is an initial step in regional specification of the
LPM, and this process is an essential early event in LPM patterning.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21763769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Biol Reprod. 2011 Oct;85(4):779-87. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.092809. Epub 2011
Jul 6.

Generation of colonies of induced trophoblast cells during standard reprogramming
of porcine fibroblasts to induced pluripotent stem cells.

Ezashi T(1), Matsuyama H, Telugu BP, Roberts RM.

Author information: 
(1)Bond Life Sciences Center and Division of Animal Sciences, University of
Missouri, Columbia, Missouri, USA.

During reprogramming of porcine mesenchymal cells with a four-factor
(POU5F1/SOX2/KLF4/MYC) mixture of vectors, a fraction of the colonies had an
atypical phenotype and arose earlier than the recognizable porcine induced
pluripotent stem (iPS) cell colonies. Within days after each passage, patches of 
cells with an epithelial phenotype formed raised domes, particularly under 20%
O(2) conditions. Relative to gene expression of the iPS cells, there was
up-regulation of genes for transcription factors associated with trophoblast (TR)
lineage emergence, e.g., GATA2, PPARG, MSX2, DLX3, HAND1, GCM1, CDX2, ID2, ELF5, 
TCFAP2C, and TEAD4 and for genes required for synthesis of products more typical 
of differentiated TR, such as steroids (HSD17B1, CYP11A1, and STAR),
pregnancy-associated glycoproteins (PAG6), and select cytokines (IFND, IFNG, and 
IL1B). Although POU5F1 was down-regulated relative to that in iPS cells, it was
not silenced in the induced TR (iTR) cells over continued passage. Like iPS
cells, iTR cells did not senesce on extended passage and displayed high
telomerase activity. Upon xenografting into immunodeficient mice, iTR cells
formed nonhemorrhagic teratomas composed largely of layers of epithelium
expressing TR markers. When cultured under conditions that promoted embryoid body
formation, iTR cells formed floating spheres consisting of a single epithelial
sheet whose cells were tethered laterally by desmosome-like structures. In
conclusion, reprogramming of porcine fibroblasts to iPS cells generates, as a
by-product, colonies composed of self-renewing populations of TR cells, possibly 
containing TR stem cells.

PMCID: PMC3184293
PMID: 21734265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Mol Reprod Dev. 2011 Jul;78(7):519-28. doi: 10.1002/mrd.21342. Epub 2011 Jun 27.

Eomesodermin, HAND1, and CSH1 proteins are induced by cellular stress in a
stress-activated protein kinase-dependent manner.

Awonuga AO(1), Zhong W, Abdallah ME, Slater JA, Zhou SC, Xie YF, Puscheck EE,
Rappolee DA.

Author information: 
(1)C.S. Mott Center for Human Growth and Development, Department of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, Wayne
State University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan 48201, USA.

Eomesodermin (Eomes) is a transcription factor essential for trophoblast
development. Stress stimuli activate stress-activated protein kinase (MAPK8/9)
and modulate transcription factors in trophoblast stem cells (TSC). In this
study, we test the hypothesis that stress-induced Eomes upregulation and
downstream trophoblast development are MAPK8/9-dependent. Immunocytochemical and 
immunoblot assays suggest that Eomes is induced by hyperosmolar stress in a dose-
and time-dependent manner. Two MAPK8/9 inhibitors that work by different
mechanisms, LJNKl1 and SP600125, block induction of Eomes protein by stress.
During normal TSC differentiation, the transcription factor heart and neural
crest derivatives expressed 1 (HAND1) is dependent on Eomes, and chorionic
somatomammotropin hormone 1 (CSH1) expression is dependent on HAND1. Similar to
Eomes, HAND1 and CSH1 induction by stress are MAPK8/9-dependent, and CSH1 is
induced in nearly all stressed TSC. CSH1 induction normally requires
downregulation of the transcription factor inhibitor of differentiation 2 (ID2)
as well as HAND1 upregulation. It was shown previously that hyperosmolar stress
induces AMP-activated protein kinase (PRKAA1/2)-dependent ID2 loss in a
MAPK8/9-independent manner. Inhibition of PRKAA1/2 with compound C and LJNKl1,
more than MAPK8/9 inhibitors alone, inhibits the induction of CSH1 by stress.
Taken together these data suggest that stress-induced MAPK8/9 and PRKAA1/2
regulate transcription factors Eomes/HAND1 and ID2, respectively. Together this
network mediates induction of CSH1 by stress. Therefore, stress triggers a
proportional increase in a normal early TSC differentiation event that could be
adaptive in inducing CSH1. But the flexibility of TSC to undergo stress-induced
differentiation could lead to pathophysiological consequences if stress endured
and TSC differentiation became unbalanced.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3140599
PMID: 21710638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Reprod Dev. 2011 Sep;57(4):518-25. Epub 2011 May 23.

Regulation of trophoblast-specific factors by GATA2 and GATA3 in bovine
trophoblast CT-1 cells.

Bai H(1), Sakurai T, Someya Y, Konno T, Ideta A, Aoyagi Y, Imakawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Agricultural and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan.

Numerous transcription factors that regulate trophoblast developmental processes 
have been identified; however, the regulation of trophoblast-specific gene
expression has not been definitively characterized. While a new role of Gata3 in 
trophoblast development was being demonstrated in mice, we examined effects of
GATA transcription factors on conceptus interferon tau (IFNT), a major
trophectoderm factor in ruminants. In this study, expression patterns of
trophoblast ASCL2, CDX2, CSH1, ELF5, HAND1, IFNT, and TKDP1 mRNAs were initially 
examined, from which ASCL2, CDX2, IFNT, and TKDP1 mRNAs were found to be similar 
to those of GATA2 and GATA3 in days 17, 20, and 22 (day 0=day of estrus) bovine
conceptuses. A chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay revealed that
endogenous GATA2 and GATA3 occupied GATA binding sites on the upstream regions of
CSH1, IFNT, and TKDP1 genes and on the intron 1 region of CDX2 gene in bovine
trophoblast CT-1 cells. In transient transfection analyses of the upstream region
of bovine CSH1, and IFNT or the intron 1 region of CDX2 gene, over-expression of 
GATA2 induced transactivation of these trophoblast-specific genes in bovine
non-trophoblast ear fibroblast EF cells, but over-expression of GATA3 did not
substantially affect their transactivation. In CT-1 cells, endogenous CDX2 and
IFNT mRNAs were down-regulated by GATA2 siRNA, while endogenous ASCL2 and CDX2
mRNAs were down-regulated by GATA3 siRNA. Our results indicate that in addition
to trophectoderm lineage specification, GATA2 and/or GATA3 are involved in the
regulation of trophoblast-specific gene transcription in bovine trophoblast CT-1 
cells.

PMID: 21606631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Jul 1;410(2):183-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.05.011. Epub 2011 May 7.

A novel Fbxo25 acts as an E3 ligase for destructing cardiac specific
transcription factors.

Jang JW(1), Lee WY, Lee JH, Moon SH, Kim CH, Chung HM.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Research Laboratory, Department of Developmental Biology, CHA
University, Seoul 135-907, Republic of Korea.

Alterations in ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) have been implicated in the
etiology of human cardiovascular diseases. Skp1/Cul1/F-box (SCF) ubiquitin E3
ligase complex plays a pivotal role in ubiquitination of cardiac proteins.
However, a specific ubiquitin E3 ligase responsible for the destruction of
cardiac transcription factors such as Nkx2-5, Isl1, Mef2C, and Tbx5 remains
elusive to date. Here, we show that a novel F-box containing Fbxo25 is
cardiac-specific and acts as an ubiquitin E3 ligase for cardiac transcription
factors. Fbxo25 expression was nuclei-specific in vitro and cardiomyocytes.
Expression level of Fbxo25 was higher in a fetal heart than an adult. Moreover,
Fbxo25 expression was increased along with those of cardiac-specific genes during
cardiomyocyte development from ESCs. Fbxo25 expression facilitated protein
degradation of Nkx2-5, Isl1, Hand1, and Mef2C. Especially, Fbxo25 ubiquitinated
Nkx2-5, Isl1, and Hand1. Altogether, Fbxo25 acts as an ubiquitin E3 ligase to
target cardiac transcription factors including Nkx2-5, Isl1, and Hand1,
indicating that cardiac protein homeostasis through Fbxo25 has a pivotal impact
on cardiac development.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 21596019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Anadolu Kardiyol Derg. 2011 Jun;11(4):319-28. doi: 10.5152/akd.2011.083. Epub
2011 May 11.

Sequence variations of NKX2-5 and HAND1 genes in patients with atrial isomerism.

Hatemi AC(1), Güleç C, Cine N, Vural B, Hatirnaz O, Sayitoglu M, Oztunç F, Saltik
L, Kansiz E, Erginel Ünaltuna N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Istanbul University Cardiology
Institute, Istanbul, Turkey. hatemi@superonline.com

OBJECTIVE: Atrial isomerism is a congenital disorder, which is characterized by
lateralization defects in normally asymmetrical developing organs like the heart.
Atrial isomerism is supposed to be caused by molecular defects during early
development. The NKX2-5 is a cardiac specific transcription factor, which
initiates and regulates downstream transcriptional cascades of cardiogenesis. The
HAND1 is another transcription factor expressed in the heart, and it is
characterized by an asymmetrical pattern of expression. In this study, we aimed
to test whether mutations in NKX2-5 and HAND1 genes play a role in the etiology
of atrial isomerism.
METHODS: This case-control study consisted of 70 patients who underwent surgical 
treatment for congenital heart defects including atrial isomerism, 80 healthy
subjects (HAND1 gene) and 40 healthy subjects (NKX2-5 gene). All exons and
exon-intron boundaries of NKX2-5 and HAND1 genes were analyzed by SSCP, and
suspected samples were sequenced for mutation analysis. Digestion with
appropriate restriction enzymes was performed for analysis of known mutations and
polymorphisms. The frequencies of the alleles and the genotypes were compared
among patient and control groups using the Chi-square and the Fisher tests when
appropriate.
RESULTS: In intronic region of HAND1 gene, we identified a C>G substitution both 
in patients and controls. Frequency of mutant allele (11, 42%) was found higher
(p=0.046) in patient group than that of the control group (2.5%). Association
between atrial isomerism and genotypes with mutant allele was found borderline
significant (p=0.054). In NKX2-5 gene, we identified heterozygous Q170X
(Gln170ter) mutation in one patient. We did not found any correlation between
defined sequence variations and clinical properties of the patients.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that mutations or sequence variations in HAND1 or
NKX2-5 genes may play role in etiology or pathogenesis of atrial isomerism.

PMID: 21561848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 29;6(4):e19251. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019251.

Phosphorylation of the Twist1-family basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors
is involved in pathological cardiac remodeling.

Lu S(1), Nie J, Luan Q, Feng Q, Xiao Q, Chang Z, Shan C, Hess D, Hemmings BA,
Yang Z.

Author information: 
(1)The Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Model Animal for Disease Study,
Model Animal Research Center, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China.

BACKGROUND: The Twist1-family basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors
including Twist1, Hand1 and Hand2, play an essential role in heart development
and are implicated in pathological heart remodeling. Previously, it was reported 
that these bHLH transcription factors can be regulated by phosphorylation within 
the basic-helix I domain, which is involved in developmental processes such as
limb formation and trophoblast differentiation. However, how phosphorylation of
Twist1 family functions in post-natal heart is elusive.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here, we generated transgenic mice with over-expression of
Hand1 and Twist1 mutants (to mimic or to abolish phosphorylation) in
cardiomyocytes and found pathological cardiac remodeling leading to heart failure
and sudden death. Gene expression profile analysis revealed up-regulation of
growth-promoting genes and down-regulation of metabolic genes. It is well known
that aberrant activation of Akt signaling causes pathological cardiac remodeling 
and results in heart failure. The basic-helix I domain of Twist1 family members
contain Akt substrate consensus motif and may be downstream targets of Akt
signaling. Using biochemical analysis, we demonstrated that Hand1 and Twist1 were
phosphorylated by Akt in the basic-helix I domain. Phosphorylation of Hand1
regulated its transcriptional activation of luciferase reporter genes and DNA
binding ability.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides novel insights into the regulation of Twist1
family in cardiac remodeling and suggests that the Twist1 family can be regulated
by Akt signaling.

PMCID: PMC3084786
PMID: 21559426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Pathology. 2011 Jun;43(4):322-6. doi: 10.1097/PAT.0b013e32834635a9.

Investigation of somatic NKX2-5, GATA4 and HAND1 mutations in patients with
tetralogy of Fallot.

Wang J(1), Lu Y, Chen H, Yin M, Yu T, Fu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Research Division of Birth Defects, Institute of Pediatric Translational
Medicine, Shanghai, PR China.

AIMS: Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) is the most common type of congenital heart
disease (CHD). Several genes essential for heart development have been
identified. In recent years, there have been a few reports of the high frequency 
of somatic mutation in the heart tissues of CHD patients. The majority of
findings were reported by the same investigators using formalin fixed tissues. In
this study, we investigate the possibility of somatic mutation in fresh
pathological cardiac tissues.
METHODS: We sequenced all exons and their boundaries of the NKX2-5, GATA4 and
HAND1 genes from the right ventricular outflow tract muscle and peripheral blood 
of 38 unrelated non-syndromic TOF children who had undergone routine surgery. The
same group of genes was also sequenced in the peripheral blood of 105 control
subjects. We also compared the DNA yield in different tissue storage methods and 
sequenced 10 formalin fixed specimens.
RESULTS: Sequencing cardiac muscle and peripheral blood from the same patient
showed identical findings. The previously reported p.Pro407Gln mutation in GATA4 
gene and a novel heterozygous p.Ala58Glu mutation in HAND1 gene were identified
in two of the 38 patients, both in the affected cardiac tissues and in the
lymphocytes. These mutations were not seen in any control subjects. The formalin 
fixation rendered less DNA yield than the frozen method, but no artificial
mutations were generated.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study shows no evidence of somatic NKX2-5, GATA4 and HAND1
mutations playing a role in the pathogenesis of TOF. Our findings suggest that
the GATA4 and HAND1 germline mutations are associated with non-syndromic CHD.

PMID: 21519287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2011 Jun;91(6):485-94. doi:
10.1002/bdra.20796. Epub 2011 Apr 1.

Hand factors as regulators of cardiac morphogenesis and implications for
congenital heart defects.

Vincentz JW(1), Barnes RM, Firulli AB.

Author information: 
(1)Riley Heart Research Center, Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Division of 
Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Anatomy, Indiana Medical School,
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Almost 15 years of careful study have established the related basic
Helix-Loop-Helix (bHLH) transcription factors Hand1 and Hand2 as critical for
heart development across evolution. Hand factors make broad contributions,
revealed through animal models, to the development of multiple cellular lineages 
that ultimately contribute to the heart. They perform critical roles in
ventricular cardiomyocyte growth, differentiation, morphogenesis, and conduction.
They are also important for the proper development of the cardiac outflow tract, 
epicardium, and endocardium. Molecularly, they function both through DNA binding 
and through protein-protein interactions, which are regulated transcriptionally, 
posttranscriptionally by microRNAs, and posttranslationally through
phosphoregulation. Although direct Hand factor transcriptional targets are
progressively being identified, confirmed direct targets of Hand factor
transcriptional activity in the heart are limited. Identification of these
targets will be critical to model the mechanisms by which Hand factor bHLH
interactions affect developmental pathways. Improved understanding of Hand
factor-mediated transcriptional cascades will be necessary to determine how Hand 
factor dysregulation translates to human disease phenotypes. This review
summarizes the insight that animal models have provided into the regulation and
function of these factors during heart development, in addition to the recent
findings that suggest roles for HAND1 and HAND2 in human congenital heart
disease.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3119928
PMID: 21462297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Clin Genet. 2012 Jun;81(6):542-54. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2011.01674.x. Epub
2011 Apr 25.

Identification of de novo mutations and rare variants in hypoplastic left heart
syndrome.

Iascone M(1), Ciccone R, Galletti L, Marchetti D, Seddio F, Lincesso AR, Pezzoli 
L, Vetro A, Barachetti D, Boni L, Federici D, Soto AM, Comas JV, Ferrazzi P,
Zuffardi O.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio di Genetica Medica, Ospedali Riuniti, Bergamo, Italy.

Hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS) is one of the most severe congenital heart
malformations, characterized by underdevelopment of the structures in the left
heart-aorta complex. The majority of cases are sporadic. Although multiple
genetic loci have been tentatively implicated in HLHS, no gene or pathway seems
to be specifically associated with the disease. To elucidate the genetic basis of
HLHS, we analyzed 53 well-characterized patients with isolated HLHS using an
integrated genomic approach that combined DNA sequencing of five candidate genes 
(NKX2-5, NOTCH1, HAND1, FOXC2 and FOXL1) and genome-wide screening by
high-resolution array comparative genomic hybridization. In 30 patients, we
identified two novel de novo mutations in NOTCH1, 23 rare patients inherited gene
variants in NOTCH1, FOXC2 and FOXL1, and 33 rare patients mostly inherited
copy-number variants. Some of the identified variations coexisted in the same
patient. The biological significance of such rare variations is unknown, but our 
findings strengthen the role of NOTCH pathway in cardiac valve development,
indicating that HLHS is, at least in part, a 'valve' disease. This is the first
report of de novo mutations associated with isolated HLHS. Moreover, the
coexistence of multiple rare variants suggests in some cases a cumulative effect,
as shown for other complex disease.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 21457232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Circ Res. 2011 Apr 15;108(8):940-9. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.110.233171. Epub 2011
Feb 24.

Hand2 loss-of-function in Hand1-expressing cells reveals distinct roles in
epicardial and coronary vessel development.

Barnes RM(1), Firulli BA, VanDusen NJ, Morikawa Y, Conway SJ, Cserjesi P,
Vincentz JW, Firulli AB.

Author information: 
(1)Riley Heart Research Center, Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Division of 
Pediatric Cardiology, Departments of Anatomy and Medical and Molecular Genetics, 
Indiana Medical School, Indianapolis, 46202-5225, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2011 Apr 15;108(8):900-2.

RATIONALE: The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors Hand1 and
Hand2 are essential for embryonic development. Given their requirement for
cardiogenesis, it is imperative to determine their impact on cardiovascular
function.
OBJECTIVE: To deduce the role of Hand2 within the epicardium.
METHOD AND RESULTS: We engineered a Hand1 allele expressing Cre recombinase.
Cardiac Hand1 expression is largely limited to cells of the primary heart field, 
overlapping little with Hand2 expression. Hand1 is expressed within the septum
transversum, and the Hand1 lineage marks the proepicardial organ and epicardium. 
To examine Hand factor functional overlap, we conditionally deleted Hand2 from
Hand1-expressing cells. Hand2 mutants display defective epicardialization and
fail to form coronary arteries, coincident with altered extracellular matrix
deposition and Pdgfr expression.
CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate a hierarchal relationship whereby transient
Hand1 septum transversum expression defines epicardial precursors that are
subsequently dependent on Hand2 function.

PMCID: PMC3086599
PMID: 21350214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Cell Biol Int. 2011 Jun;35(6):587-91. doi: 10.1042/CBI20100452.

Gelatin induces trophectoderm differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells.

Peng S(1), Hua J, Cao X, Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest AF University, Yangling, Shaanxi
712100, Peoples Republic of China. pengsha123@yahoo.com.cn

In this study, we selected gelatin as ECM (extracellular matrix) to support
differentiation of mES (mouse embryonic stem) cells into TE (trophectoderm), as
gelatin was less expensive and widely used. We found that 0.2% and 1.5% gelatin
were the suitable concentrations to induce TE differentiation by means of
detecting Cdx2 expression using real-time PCR. Moreover, about 15% cells were
positive for Cdx2 staining after 6 days differentiation. We discovered that the
expressions of specific markers for TE, such as Cdx2, Eomes, Hand1 and Esx1 were 
prominently increased after gelatin induction. Meanwhile, the expression of Oct4 
was significantly decreased. We also found that inhibition of the BMP (bone
morphogenetic protein) signalling by Noggin could promote mES cells
differentiation into TE, whereas inhibition of the Wnt signalling by Dkk1 had the
contrary effect. This could be used as a tool to study the differentiation and
function of early trophoblasts as well as further elucidating the molecular
mechanism during abnormal placental development.

PMID: 21091439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jan 14;286(2):1037-45. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.170050. Epub 2010 
Nov 9.

Sall1 regulates embryonic stem cell differentiation in association with nanog.

Karantzali E(1), Lekakis V, Ioannou M, Hadjimichael C, Papamatheakis J,
Kretsovali A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation of Research and
Technology Hellas, 70013 Heraklio, Crete, Greece.

Sall1 is a multi-zinc finger transcription factor that regulates kidney
organogenesis. It is considered to be a transcriptional repressor, preferentially
localized on heterochromatin. Mutations or deletions of the human SALL1 gene are 
associated with the Townes-Brocks syndrome. Despite its high expression, no
function was yet assigned for Sall1 in embryonic stem (ES) cells. In the present 
study, we show that Sall1 is expressed in a differentiation-dependent manner and 
physically interacts with Nanog and Sox2, two components of the core pluripotency
network. Genome-wide mapping of Sall1-binding loci has identified 591 genes, 80% 
of which are also targeted by Nanog. A large proportion of these genes are
related to self-renewal and differentiation. Sall1 positively regulates and
synergizes with Nanog for gene transcriptional regulation. In addition, our data 
show that Sall1 suppresses the ectodermal and mesodermal differentiation.
Specifically, the induction of the gastrulation markers T brachyury, Goosecoid,
and Dkk1 and the neuroectodermal markers Otx2 and Hand1 was inhibited by Sall1
overexpression during embryoid body differentiation. These data demonstrate a
novel role for Sall1 as a member of the transcriptional network that regulates
stem cell pluripotency.

PMCID: PMC3020710
PMID: 21062744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Nat Commun. 2010 Jul 27;1:46. doi: 10.1038/ncomms1041.

Identification of Thymosin ß4 as an effector of Hand1-mediated vascular
development.

Smart N(1), Dubé KN, Riley PR.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, UCL-Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford Street,
London WC1N 1EH, UK.

The bHLH transcription factor Hand1 (Heart and neural crest-derived transcript-1)
has a fundamental role in cardiovascular development; however, the molecular
mechanisms have not been elucidated. In this paper we identify Thymosin ß4
(Tß4/Tmsb4x), which encodes an actin monomer-binding protein implicated in cell
migration and angiogenesis, as a direct target of Hand1. We demonstrate that
Hand1 binds an upstream regulatory region proximal to the promoter of Tß4 at
consensus Thing1 and E-Box sites and identify both activation and repression of
Tß4 by Hand1, through direct binding within either non-canonical or canonical
E-boxes, providing new insight into gene regulation by bHLH transcription
factors. Hand1-mediated activation of Tß4 is essential for yolk sac
vasculogenesis and embryonic survival, and administration of synthetic TB4
partially rescues yolk sac capillary plexus formation in Hand1-null embryos.
Thus, we identify an in vivo downstream target of Hand1 and reveal impaired yolk 
sac vasculogenesis as a primary cause of early embryonic lethality following loss
of this critical bHLH factor.

PMCID: PMC2963826
PMID: 20975697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Dev Dyn. 2010 Nov;239(11):3086-97. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22428.

Analysis of the Hand1 cell lineage reveals novel contributions to cardiovascular,
neural crest, extra-embryonic, and lateral mesoderm derivatives.

Barnes RM(1), Firulli BA, Conway SJ, Vincentz JW, Firulli AB.

Author information: 
(1)Riley Heart Research Center, Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Division of 
Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Anatomy, Indiana Medical School,
Indianapolis, Indiana 46202-5225, USA.

The basic Helix-Loop-Helix (bHLH) transcription factors Hand1 and Hand2 play
critical roles in the development of multiple organ systems during embryogenesis.
The dynamic expression patterns of these two factors within developing tissues
obfuscate their respective unique and redundant organogenic functions. To define 
cell lineages potentially dependent upon Hand gene expression, we generated a
mutant allele in which the coding region of Hand1 is replaced by Cre recombinase.
Subsequent Cre-mediated activation of ß-galactosidase or eYFP reporter alleles
enabled lineage trace analyses that clearly define the fate of Hand1-expressing
cells. Hand1-driven Cre marks specific lineages within the extra embryonic
tissues, placenta, sympathetic nervous system, limbs, jaw, and several cell types
within the cardiovascular system. Comparisons between Hand1 expression and
Hand1-lineage greatly refine our understanding of its dynamic spatial-temporal
expression domains and raise the possibility of novel Hand1 functions in
structures not thought to be Hand1-dependent.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2965316
PMID: 20882677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Dev Dyn. 2010 Oct;239(10):2748-60. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22402.

Analysis of a Hand1 hypomorphic allele reveals a critical threshold for embryonic
viability.

Firulli BA(1), McConville DP, Byers JS 3rd, Vincentz JW, Barnes RM, Firulli AB.

Author information: 
(1)Riley Heart Research Center, Herman B. Wells Center for Pediatric Research
Division of Pediatrics Cardiology, Departments of Anatomy and Medical and
Molecular Genetics, Indiana Medical School, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202-5225,
USA.

Loss-of-function analysis of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription
factor Hand1 indicates critical roles in development. In an effort to generate a 
Hand1 cDNA knock-in reporter mouse, we generated two hypomorphic alleles, which
extend embryonic survival to between embryonic day (E) 10.5 and E12.5. Heart
morphogenesis appears largely normal; however, hypomorphic mice display thin left
ventricular myocardium and reduction in pharyngeal mesoderm. Caudal defects,
large allantois, and thickened yolk sac are observed and consistent with systemic
Hand1 gene deletion. Hand1 mRNA is expressed at 30% of wild-type littermates and 
known Hand1-dependent genes show intermediate expression compared with wild-type 
and Hand1 null mice. Interestingly, putative bHLH partners, Hand2 and Twist1,
show altered expression in both Hand1 null and hypomorphic backgrounds and
intercrossing the Hand1 hypomorphic mice onto the Hand2 systemic null background 
exacerbates the cardiac and lateral mesoderm phenotypes. Together, these data
define a critical threshold of Hand1 expression that is necessary for embryonic
survival.

PMCID: PMC2967597
PMID: 20737509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Circ Res. 2010 Sep 17;107(6):715-27. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.110.218693. Epub
2010 Jul 22.

Neuregulin 1 sustains the gene regulatory network in both trabecular and
nontrabecular myocardium.

Lai D(1), Liu X, Forrai A, Wolstein O, Michalicek J, Ahmed I, Garratt AN,
Birchmeier C, Zhou M, Hartley L, Robb L, Feneley MP, Fatkin D, Harvey RP.

Author information: 
(1)Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, Lowy Packer Building, 405 Liverpool
St, Darlinghurst 2010, Australia.

RATIONALE: The cardiac gene regulatory network (GRN) is controlled by
transcription factors and signaling inputs, but network logic in development and 
it unraveling in disease is poorly understood. In development, the
membrane-tethered signaling ligand Neuregulin (Nrg)1, expressed in endocardium,
is essential for ventricular morphogenesis. In adults, Nrg1 protects against
heart failure and can induce cardiomyocytes to divide.
OBJECTIVE: To understand the role of Nrg1 in heart development through analysis
of null and hypomorphic Nrg1 mutant mice.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Chamber domains were correctly specified in Nrg1 mutants,
although chamber-restricted genes Hand1 and Cited1 failed to be activated. The
chamber GRN subsequently decayed with individual genes exhibiting decay patterns 
unrelated to known patterning boundaries. Both trabecular and nontrabecular
myocardium were affected. Network demise was spatiotemporally dynamic, the most
sensitive region being the central part of the left ventricle, in which the GRN
underwent complete collapse. Other regions were partially affected with graded
sensitivity. In vitro, Nrg1 promoted phospho-Erk1/2-dependent transcription
factor expression, cardiomyocyte maturation and cell cycle inhibition. We
monitored cardiac pErk1/2 in embryos and found that expression was Nrg1-dependent
and levels correlated with cardiac GRN sensitivity in mutants.
CONCLUSIONS: The chamber GRN is fundamentally labile and dependent on signaling
from extracardiac sources. Nrg1-ErbB1/4-Erk1/2 signaling critically sustains
elements of the GRN in trabecular and nontrabecular myocardium, challenging our
understanding of Nrg1 function. Transcriptional decay patterns induced by reduced
Nrg1 suggest a novel mechanism for cardiac transcriptional regulation and
dysfunction in disease, potentially linking biomechanical feedback to molecular
pathways for growth and differentiation.

PMID: 20651287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Placenta. 2010 Jul;31(7):630-40. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2010.05.001. Epub 2010
May 31.

New insights for Ets2 function in trophoblast using lentivirus-mediated gene
knockdown in trophoblast stem cells.

Odiatis C(1), Georgiades P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Cyprus, University Campus,
Nicosia, Cyprus.

Mouse trophoblast stem (TS) cells represent a unique in vitro system that
provides an unlimited supply of TS cells for the study of trophoblast
differentiation and TS cell self-renewal. Although the mouse transcription factor
Ets2 is required for TS cell self-renewal, its role in this and in TS cell
differentiation has not been explored fully, partly due to the early lethality of
Ets2 null mice. To address this, we developed a novel lentivirus-based system
that resulted in efficient Ets2 knockdown in the overwhelming majority of TS
cells. This system enables functional studies in TS cells, especially for genes
required for TS cell self-renewal because TS cell derivation using gene-knockout 
embryos for such genes depends on TS cell self-renewal. Using
morphological/morphometric criteria and gene expression analysis, we show that
the requirement for Ets2 in self-renewal of TS cells cultured in 'stem cell
medium' (SCM) involves maintenance of the expression of genes that inhibit TS
cell differentiation in SCM, such as Cdx2 and Esrrb, and preservation of the
undifferentiated TS cell morphology. During TS cell differentiation caused by
Cdx2/Esrrb downregulation, due to either Ets2 knockdown in SCM or culture in
differentiation medium (DM), Ets2 is also required for the promotion of
trophoblast giant cell (TGC) and junctional zone trophoblast (JZT)
differentiation. This TGC differentiation involves Ets2-dependent expression of
Hand1, a gene required for the differentiation of all TGC types. This study
uncovers new roles for Ets2 in TS cell self-renewal and differentiation and
demonstrates the usefulness of this lentivirus system for gene function studies
in TS cells.

PMID: 20569982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Genesis. 2010 Aug;48(8):479-84. doi: 10.1002/dvg.20644.

A Tlx2-Cre mouse line uncovers essential roles for hand1 in extraembryonic and
lateral mesoderm.

Maska EL, Cserjesi P, Hua LL, Garstka ME, Brody HM, Morikawa Y.

Hand1 regulates development of numerous tissues within the embryo, extraembryonic
mesoderm, and trophectoderm. Systemic loss of Hand1 results in early embryonic
lethality but the cause has remained unknown. To determine if Hand1 expression in
extraembryonic mesoderm is essential for embryonic survival, Hand1 was
conditionally deleted using the HoxB6-Cre mouse line that expresses Cre in
extraembryonic and lateral mesoderm. Deletion of Hand1 using HoxB6-Cre resulted
in embryonic lethality identical to systemic knockout. To determine if lethality 
is due to Hand1 function in extraembryonic mesoderm or lateral mesoderm, we
generated a Tlx2-Cre mouse line expressing Cre in lateral mesoderm but not
extraembryonic tissues. Deletion of Hand1 using the Tlx2-Cre line results in
embryonic survival with embryos exhibiting herniated gut and thin enteric smooth 
muscle. Our results show that Hand1 regulates development of lateral mesoderm
derivatives and its loss in extraembryonic mesoderm is the primary cause of
lethality in Hand1-null embryos.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2955361
PMID: 20506548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. PLoS One. 2010 May 21;5(5):e10709. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010709.

A data integration approach to mapping OCT4 gene regulatory networks operative in
embryonic stem cells and embryonal carcinoma cells.

Jung M(1), Peterson H, Chavez L, Kahlem P, Lehrach H, Vilo J, Adjaye J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Embryology and Aging Group, Department of Vertebrate Genomics,
Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. jung@molgen.mpg.de

It is essential to understand the network of transcription factors controlling
self-renewal of human embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and human embryonal carcinoma
cells (ECs) if we are to exploit these cells in regenerative medicine regimes.
Correlating gene expression levels after RNAi-based ablation of OCT4 function
with its downstream targets enables a better prediction of motif-specific driven 
expression modules pertinent for self-renewal and differentiation of embryonic
stem cells and induced pluripotent stem cells.We initially identified putative
direct downstream targets of OCT4 by employing CHIP-on-chip analysis. A
comparison of three peak analysis programs revealed a refined list of OCT4
targets in the human EC cell line NCCIT, this list was then compared to
previously published OCT4 CHIP-on-chip datasets derived from both ES and EC
cells. We have verified an enriched POU-motif, discovered by a de novo approach, 
thus enabling us to define six distinct modules of OCT4 binding and regulation of
its target genes.A selection of these targets has been validated, like NANOG,
which harbours the evolutionarily conserved OCT4-SOX2 binding motif within its
proximal promoter. Other validated targets, which do not harbour the classical
HMG motif are USP44 and GADD45G, a key regulator of the cell cycle.
Over-expression of GADD45G in NCCIT cells resulted in an enrichment and
up-regulation of genes associated with the cell cycle (CDKN1B, CDKN1C, CDK6 and
MAPK4) and developmental processes (BMP4, HAND1, EOMES, ID2, GATA4, GATA5, ISL1
and MSX1). A comparison of positively regulated OCT4 targets common to EC and ES 
cells identified genes such as NANOG, PHC1, USP44, SOX2, PHF17 and OCT4, thus
further confirming their universal role in maintaining self-renewal in both cell 
types. Finally we have created a user-friendly database
(http://biit.cs.ut.ee/escd/), integrating all OCT4 and stem cell related datasets
in both human and mouse ES and EC cells.In the current era of systems biology
driven research, we envisage that our integrated embryonic stem cell database
will prove beneficial to the booming field of ES, iPS and cancer research.

PMCID: PMC2873957
PMID: 20505756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Cancer Sci. 2010 Jun;101(6):1337-46. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2010.01535.x. Epub 
2010 Feb 18.

Role of Helicobacter pylori infection in aberrant DNA methylation along multistep
gastric carcinogenesis.

Shin CM(1), Kim N, Jung Y, Park JH, Kang GH, Kim JS, Jung HC, Song IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

CpG island hypermethylation is frequently found during gastric carcinogenesis. We
investigated methylation profiles of p16, LOX, HAND1, THBD, p41ARC, and APC along
multistep gastric carcinogenesis and determined their association with
Helicobacter pylori infection. Methylation levels in these six genes were
evaluated in noncancerous gastric biopsy specimens using quantitative
methylation-specific PCR in 459 patients with gastric cancer (GC), 137 with
dysplasia, and 248 controls. Controls were divided into four subgroups sorted by 
current H. pylori infection status (active vs past or negative infection) and the
presence of intestinal metaplasia (IM). In controls, active H. pylori infection
significantly increased methylation levels in THBD, LOX, and HAND1 (all P <
0.001), and hypermethylation of THBD, HAND1, and APC was associated with IM.
Aberrant DNA hypermethylation was correlated well with activity of H.
pylori-associated gastritis. However, methylation levels in LOX, HAND1, THBD, and
p41ARC remained increased in cases with past H. pylori infection compared to
those that were H. pylori negative (all P < 0.05). Hypermethylation of THBD, and 
possibly p16, was significantly associated with GC, regardless of the status of
current H. pylori infection (all P < 0.05). These results suggest that aberrant
DNA hypermethylation caused by H. pylori-associated gastritis occurs in a
gene-specific manner along gastric carcinogenesis, which can be persistent even
after the disappearance of H. pylori. Aberrant methylation of THBD might provide 
a link between H. pylori infection and development of GC.

PMID: 20345486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Genetika. 2010 Feb;46(2):282-6.

[Expression of early developmental genes in vole Microtus rossiaemeridionalis].

[Article in Russian]

Sorokin MA, Medvedev SP, Shevchenko AI, Slyn'ko NM, Zakiian SM.

The expression of genes Sox2, Klf4, Myc, Sall4, Gata6, Foxa2, Hnf4a, Cdx2, Esrrb,
Hand1 in cultivated cells, embryos and organs of adult voles Microtus
rossiaemeridionalis was studied. High resemblance of the expression patterns of
these genes in the organs of adult voles, mice and humans was demonstrated. It
was established that genes Gata6, Foxa2 and Hnf4a were specifically expressed in 
vole extraembryonic endoderm cells, while Cdx2 and Handl genes, in trophoblast
stem cells. This shows that these genes can be used markers for corresponding
vole cell lines. Indirect confirmation pointing to the fact that Oct4 gene is a
marker gene for epiblast cells both in the vole and mouse was obtained.

PMID: 20297663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. BMC Dev Biol. 2010 Mar 7;10:27. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-10-27.

DNA methylation patterns in tissues from mid-gestation bovine foetuses produced
by somatic cell nuclear transfer show subtle abnormalities in nuclear
reprogramming.

Couldrey C(1), Lee RS.

Author information: 
(1)AgResearch, Reproductive Technologies Group, Ruakura Research Centre, East
Street, Private Bag 3123, Hamilton, New Zealand.

BACKGROUND: Cloning of cattle by somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) is
associated with a high incidence of pregnancy failure characterized by abnormal
placental and foetal development. These abnormalities are thought to be due, in
part, to incomplete re-setting of the epigenetic state of DNA in the donor
somatic cell nucleus to a state that is capable of driving embryonic and foetal
development to completion. Here, we tested the hypothesis that DNA methylation
patterns were not appropriately established during nuclear reprogramming
following SCNT. A panel of imprinted, non-imprinted genes and satellite repeat
sequences was examined in tissues collected from viable and failing mid-gestation
SCNT foetuses and compared with similar tissues from gestation-matched normal
foetuses generated by artificial insemination (AI).
RESULTS: Most of the genomic regions examined in tissues from viable and failing 
SCNT foetuses had DNA methylation patterns similar to those in comparable tissues
from AI controls. However, statistically significant differences were found
between SCNT and AI at specific CpG sites in some regions of the genome,
particularly those associated with SNRPN and KCNQ1OT1, which tended to be
hypomethylated in SCNT tissues. There was a high degree of variation between
individuals in methylation levels at almost every CpG site in these two regions, 
even in AI controls. In other genomic regions, methylation levels at specific CpG
sites were tightly controlled with little variation between individuals. Only one
site (HAND1) showed a tissue-specific pattern of DNA methylation. Overall, DNA
methylation patterns in tissues of failing foetuses were similar to apparently
viable SCNT foetuses, although there were individuals showing extreme deviant
patterns.
CONCLUSION: These results show that SCNT foetuses that had developed to
mid-gestation had largely undergone nuclear reprogramming and that the epigenetic
signature at this stage was not a good predictor of whether the foetus would
develop to term or not.

PMCID: PMC2848150
PMID: 20205951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Pediatr Cardiol. 2010 Apr;31(3):438-48. doi: 10.1007/s00246-010-9669-x. Epub 2010
Feb 14.

Gene replacement strategies to test the functional redundancy of basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor.

Firulli AB(1), Firulli BA, Wang J, Rogers RH, Conway SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Riley Heart Research Center, Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research,
Indiana University School of Medicine, 1044 West Walnut Street, Room R4 W379,
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors control developmental
decisions for a wide range of embryonic cell types. Hand1 and Hand2 are closely
related bHLH proteins that control cardiac, craniofacial, and limb development.
Within the developing heart, Hand1 expression becomes restricted predominantly to
the left ventricle, whereas Hand2 becomes restricted predominantly to the left
ventricle, for which findings have shown each Hand factor to be necessary for
normal chamber formation. Forced overexpression of Hand1 throughout the early
developing heart induces abnormal interventricular septal development, with
resulting pathogenesis of congenital heart defects. To investigate the potential 
transcriptional mechanisms involved in heart morphogenesis by Hand2, this study
used a replacement targeting approach to knock Hand2 into the Hand1 locus and
ectopically express one copy of Hand2 within the endogenous Hand1 expression
domain in the developing hearts of transgenic mice. The findings show that
high-percentage Hand1 ( Hand2 ) chimeras die at birth and exhibit a range of
congenital heart defects. These findings suggest that Hand factors may act via
unique transcriptional mechanisms mediated by bHLH factor partner choice,
supporting the notion that alterations of Hand factor stoichiometry may be as
deleterious to normal heart morphogenesis as Hand factor loss of function.

PMCID: PMC3581321
PMID: 20155416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2010 May;46(5):416-30. doi:
10.1007/s11626-009-9266-6. Epub 2009 Dec 24.

BMP4 induction of trophoblast from mouse embryonic stem cells in defined culture 
conditions on laminin.

Hayashi Y(1), Furue MK, Tanaka S, Hirose M, Wakisaka N, Danno H, Ohnuma K, Oeda
S, Aihara Y, Shiota K, Ogura A, Ishiura S, Asashima M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences (Biology), Graduate School of Arts and Sciences,
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, 153-8902, Japan.

Because mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) do not contribute to the formation of 
extraembryonic placenta when they are injected into blastocysts, it is believed
that mESCs do not differentiate into trophoblast whereas human embryonic stem
cells (hESCs) can express trophoblast markers when exposed to bone morphogenetic 
protein 4 (BMP4) in vitro. To test whether mESCs have the potential to
differentiate into trophoblast, we assessed the effect of BMP4 on mESCs in a
defined monolayer culture condition. The expression of trophoblast-specific
transcription factors such as Cdx2, Dlx3, Esx1, Gata3, Hand1, Mash2, and Plx1 was
specifically upregulated in the BMP4-treated differentiated cells, and these
cells expressed trophoblast markers. These results suggest that BMP4 treatment in
defined culture conditions enabled mESCs to differentiate into trophoblast. This 
differentiation was inhibited by serum or leukemia inhibitory factor, which are
generally used for mESC culture. In addition, we studied the mechanism underlying
BMP4-directed mESC differentiation into trophoblast. Our results showed that BMP4
activates the Smad pathway in mESCs inducing Cdx2 expression, which plays a
crucial role in trophoblast differentiation, through the binding of Smad protein 
to the Cdx2 genomic enhancer sequence. Our findings imply that there is a common 
molecular mechanism underlying hESC and mESC differentiation into trophoblast.

PMCID: PMC2862943
PMID: 20033790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Clin Cancer Res. 2010 Jan 1;16(1):21-33. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-2006. Epub
2009 Dec 22.

Three DNA methylation epigenotypes in human colorectal cancer.

Yagi K(1), Akagi K, Hayashi H, Nagae G, Tsuji S, Isagawa T, Midorikawa Y,
Nishimura Y, Sakamoto H, Seto Y, Aburatani H, Kaneda A.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Science Division, Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Research
Center for Advanced Science and Technology, Translational Systems Biology and
Medicine Initiative, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo,
Japan.

PURPOSE: Whereas the CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) in colorectal cancer 
associates with microsatellite instability (MSI)-high and BRAF-mutation(+), the
existence of an intermediate-methylation subgroup associated with
KRAS-mutation(+) is controversial, and suitable markers for the subgroup have yet
to be developed. Our aim is to clarify DNA methylation epigenotypes of colorectal
cancer more comprehensively.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: To select new methylation markers on a genome-wide scale, we
did methylated DNA immunoprecipitation-on-chip analysis of colorectal cancer cell
lines and re-expression array analysis by 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine/Trichostatin A
treatment. Methylation levels were analyzed quantitatively in 149 colorectal
cancer samples using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time-of-flight
mass spectrometry. Colorectal cancer was epigenotyped by unsupervised two-way
hierarchical clustering method.
RESULTS: Among 1,311 candidate silencing genes, 44 new markers were selected and 
underwent quantitative methylation analysis in colorectal cancer samples together
with 16 previously reported markers. Colorectal cancer was clustered into high-, 
intermediate-, and low-methylation epigenotypes. Methylation markers were
clustered into two major groups: group 1 showing methylation in high-methylation 
epigenotype, and group 2 showing methylation in high- and
intermediate-methylation epigenotypes. A two-step marker panel deciding
epigenotypes was developed with 95% accuracy: the 1st panel consisting of three
group-1 markers (CACNA1G, LOX, SLC30A10) to extract high-methylation epigenotype,
and the 2nd panel consisting of four group-2 markers (ELMO1, FBN2, THBD, HAND1)
and SLC30A10 again to divide the remains into intermediate- and low-methylation
epigenotypes. The high-methylation epigenotype correlated significantly with
MSI-high and BRAF-mutation(+) in concordance with reported CIMP.
Intermediate-epigenotype significantly correlated with KRAS-mutation(+).
KRAS-mutation(+) colorectal cancer with intermediate-methylation epigenotype
showed significantly worse prognosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Three methylation epigenotypes exist in colorectal cancer, and
suitable classification markers have been developed. Intermediate-methylation
epigenotype with KRAS-mutation(+) correlated with worse prognosis.

PMID: 20028768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Curr Stem Cell Res Ther. 2010 Mar;5(1):2-12.

Rho kinase inhibitor y27632 alters the balance between pluripotency and early
differentiation events in human embryonic stem cells.

Sivasubramaniyan K(1), Pal R, Totey S, Bhat VS, Totey S.

Author information: 
(1)Stempeutics Research Pvt. Ltd., Manipal Hospital, Bangalore-560 017, India.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESC) differentiate spontaneously in culture and
develop a complex microenvironment comprising of autologously derived niche that 
in turn supports their pluripotency. The basic hypothesis that we deal with is
that hESCs undergoing differentiation, sequentially generate trophectoderm and
endoderm lineages and thereafter influence further events through the production 
of growth factors. These factors control the fate of hESCs either by promoting or
retarding the recruitment of new cells in the differentiation program. This
scenario therefore represents an analog of the in vivo situation in which
extra-embryonic tissues influence the behavior of the inner cell mass (ICM). The 
premise of the paper is the Rho kinase inhibitor Y27632 that can spatiotemporally
alter this balance between pluripotency and differentiation. To evaluate the
composition and inclination of lineage specification during spontaneous
differentiation, we have studied the hESC colonies and their surrounding niche as
interdependent entities. We show that the population of fibroblastic niche that
surrounds hESC colonies co-expresses trophectoderm and niche cell markers
including SSEA1, hCG, progesterone, HAND1, pSmad1 and FGFR1 as early as day 4. A 
sudden increase in the expression of GATA4 and AFP secretion indicated putative
endoderm formation on day 6 in both control and Y27632 treated cultures. On day
6, 20 microM of Y27632 supplementation significantly reduced the
trophectoderm-like niche population without affecting endoderm formation,
enhanced the average size and number of hESC colonies, decreased IGF1 secretion
thereby improving the pluripotency. Overall our findings support the afore
mentioned hypothesis and demonstrate that closely packed epithelial
trophectoderm-like cells bordering the hESC colonies present an initial and
imminent localized niche which is spatiotemporally regulated. Such advances in
understanding the behavior and modulation of hESC and its surrounding niche would
facilitate better differentiation protocols for applications in regenerative
medicine and drug screening.

PMID: 19951253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. PLoS One. 2009 Nov 3;4(11):e7684. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007684.

Mbd3, a component of NuRD/Mi-2 complex, helps maintain pluripotency of mouse
embryonic stem cells by repressing trophectoderm differentiation.

Zhu D(1), Fang J, Li Y, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Developmental Biology, Institute of Genetics and
Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Embryonic stem cells (ES cells) can differentiate into cells derived from all
three germ layers and extraembryonic tissues. While transcription factors such
as, Oct4 and Nanog are well known for their requirements for undifferentiated ES 
cell growth, mechanisms of epigenetic repression of germ layer specific
differentiation in ES cells are not well understood. Here, we investigate
functions of Mbd3, a component of nucleosome remodeling and histone deacetylation
complex (NuRD/Mi-2) in mouse ES cells. We find that compared to wild type ES
cells, Mbd3 knockdown cells show elevated RNA expression of trophectoderm
markers, including Cdx2, Eomesodermin, and Hand1. In parallel, these cells show
an increased acetylation level of histone 3 in promoters of the respective genes,
suggesting Mbd3 plays a role in repression of these genes in undifferentiated ES 
cells. However, these changes are not sufficient for definitive differentiation
to trophectoderm (TE) in chimeric embryos. When further cultured in ES medium
without LIF or in trophoblast stem (TS) cell medium, Mbd3 knockdown cells
differentiate into TE cells, which express Cdx2 and, at later stages, trophoblast
lineage specific marker Cadherin 3. These results suggest that Mbd3 helps
restrict ES cells from differentiating towards the trophectoderm lineage and is
an important epigenetic player in maintaining full pluripotency of mouse ES
cells.

PMCID: PMC2766630
PMID: 19888462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Biol Reprod. 2010 Jan;82(1):214-23. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.109.078717. Epub 2009
Sep 23.

Critical function of AP-2 gamma/TCFAP2C in mouse embryonic germ cell maintenance.

Weber S(1), Eckert D, Nettersheim D, Gillis AJ, Schäfer S, Kuckenberg P,
Ehlermann J, Werling U, Biermann K, Looijenga LH, Schorle H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Department of Developmental Pathology, University of
Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

Formation of the germ cell lineage involves multiple processes, including
repression of somatic differentiation and reacquisition of pluripotency as well
as a unique epigenetic constitution. The transcriptional regulator Prdm1 has been
identified as a main coordinator of this process, controlling epigenetic
modification and gene expression. Here we report on the expression pattern of the
transcription factor Tcfap2c, a putative downstream target of Prdm1, during
normal mouse embryogenesis and the consequences of its specific loss in
primordial germ cells (PGCs) and their derivatives. Tcfap2c is expressed in PGCs 
from Embryonic Day 7.25 (E 7.25) up to E 12.5, and targeted disruption resulted
in sterile animals, both male and female. In the mutant animals, PGCs were
specified but were lost around E 8.0. PGCs generated in vitro from embryonic stem
cells lacking TCFAP2C displayed induction of Prdm1 and Dppa3. Upregulation of
Hoxa1, Hoxb1, and T together with lack of expression of germ cell markers such
Nanos3, Dazl, and Mutyh suggested that the somatic gene program is induced in
TCFAP2C-deficient PGCs. Repression of TCFAP2C in TCam-2, a human PGC-resembling
seminoma cell line, resulted in specific upregulation of HOXA1, HOXB1, MYOD1, and
HAND1, indicative of mesodermal differentiation. Expression of genes indicative
of ectodermal, endodermal, or extraembryonic differentiation, as well as the
finding of no change to epigenetic modifications, suggested control by other
factors. Our results implicate Tcfap2c as an important effector of Prdm1 activity
that is required for PGC maintenance, most likely mediating Prdm1-induced
suppression of mesodermal differentiation.

PMID: 19776388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Cancer Res. 2009 Sep 15;69(18):7412-21. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-0116. Epub 
2009 Sep 1.

DNMT1 and DNMT3B modulate distinct polycomb-mediated histone modifications in
colon cancer.

Jin B(1), Yao B, Li JL, Fields CR, Delmas AL, Liu C, Robertson KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Cancer Research Center,
Medical College of Georgia, Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA.

DNA methylation patterns are established and maintained by three DNA
methyltransferases (DNMT): DNMT1, DNMT3A, and DNMT3B. Although essential for
development, methylation patterns are frequently disrupted in cancer and
contribute directly to carcinogenesis. Recent studies linking polycomb group
repression complexes (PRC1 and PRC2) to the DNMTs have begun to shed light on how
methylation is targeted. We identified previously a panel of genes regulated by
DNMT3B. Here, we compare these with known polycomb group targets to show that
approximately 47% of DNMT3B regulated genes are also bound by PRC1 or PRC2. We
chose 44 genes coregulated by DNMT3B and PRC1/PRC2 to test whether these criteria
would accurately identify novel targets of epigenetic silencing in colon cancer. 
Using reverse transcription-PCR, bisulfite genomic sequencing, and
pyrosequencing, we show that the majority of these genes are frequently silenced 
in colorectal cancer cell lines and primary tumors. Some of these, including
HAND1, HMX2, and SIX3, repressed cell growth. Finally, we analyzed the histone
code, DNMT1, DNMT3B, and PRC2 binding by chromatin immunoprecipitation at
epigenetically silenced genes to reveal a novel link between DNMT3B and the mark 
mediated by PRC1. Taken together, these studies suggest that patterns of
epigenetic modifiers and the histone code influence the propensity of a gene to
become hypermethylated in cancer and that DNMT3B plays an important role in
regulating PRC1 function.

PMCID: PMC2745494
PMID: 19723660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Mech Dev. 2009 Oct;126(10):913-23. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2009.07.001. Epub 2009 Jul 
10.

Retinoic acid regulates anterior-posterior patterning within the lateral plate
mesoderm of Xenopus.

Deimling SJ(1), Drysdale TA.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Health Research Institute, London, Ont., Canada N6C2V5.

The lateral plate mesoderm (LPM) lines the body cavities, gives rise to the heart
and circulatory system and is responsible for patterning the underlying endoderm.
We describe gene expression domains within the lateral plate mesoderm of the
neurula stage Xenopus embryo that demonstrate a marked anterior posterior pattern
in that tissue. FoxF1 and Nkx-2.5 are expressed in the anterior LPM, Hand1 in the
middle and Xsal-1 in the posterior LPM. Since retinoic acid is known to pattern
many tissues during development, and RALDH2, the enzyme primarily responsible for
retinoic acid synthesis, is expressed in the anterior and dorsal LPM, we
hypothesized that retinoic acid is necessary for correct patterning of the LPM.
Exposure to exogenous retinoic acid during neurulation led to an expansion of the
anterior and middle expression domains and a reduction of the posterior domain
whereas exposure to a retinoic acid antagonist resulted in smaller anterior and
middle expression domains. Furthermore, inhibition of RALDH2, which should
decrease endogenous RA levels, caused a reduction of anterior domains indicating 
that endogenous RA is necessary for regulating their size. After altering
retinoic acid signaling in a temporally restricted window, the displaced
anterior-posterior pattern is maintained until gut looping, as demonstrated by
permanently altered Hand1, FoxF1, xHoxC-10, and Pitx2 expression domains. We
conclude that the broad expression domains of key transcription factors
demonstrate a novel anterior-posterior pattern within the LPM and that retinoic
acid can regulate the size of these domains in a coordinated manner.

PMID: 19595764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Oct 1;18(19):3567-78. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp305. Epub 2009 Jul 
7.

A functional genetic study identifies HAND1 mutations in septation defects of the
human heart.

Reamon-Buettner SM(1), Ciribilli Y, Traverso I, Kuhls B, Inga A, Borlak J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, Fraunhofer Institute of
Toxicology and Experimental Medicine, Nikolai-Fuchs-Strasse 1, D-30625, Hannover,
Germany.

Heart and neural crest derivatives expressed 1 (HAND1) is a basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor essential for mammalian heart
development. Absence of Hand1 in mice results in embryonal lethality, as well as 
in a wide spectrum of cardiac abnormalities including failed cardiac looping,
defective chamber septation and impaired ventricular development. Therefore,
Hand1 is a strong candidate for the many cardiac malformations observed in human 
congenital heart disease (CHD). Recently, we identified a loss-of-function
frameshift mutation (p.A126fs) in the bHLH domain of HAND1 frequent in
hypoplastic hearts. This finding prompted us to continue our search for HAND1
gene mutations in a different cohort of malformed hearts affected primarily by
septation defects. Indeed, in tissue samples of septal defects, we detected 32
sequence alterations leading to amino acid change, of which 12 are in the bHLH
domain of HAND1. Interestingly, 10 sequence alterations, such as p.L28H and
p.L138P, had been identified earlier in hypoplastic hearts, but the frequent
p.A126fs mutation was absent except in one aborted case with ventricular septal
defect and outflow tract abnormalities. Functional studies in yeast and mammalian
cells enabled translation of sequence alterations to HAND1 transcriptional
activity, which was reduced or abolished by certain mutations, notably p.L138P.
Our results suggest that HAND1 may also be affected in septation defects of the
human hearts, and thus has a broader role in human heart development and CHD.

PMID: 19586923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Stem Cells. 2009 Jul;27(7):1516-23. doi: 10.1002/stem.79.

The role of PTIP in maintaining embryonic stem cell pluripotency.

Kim D(1), Patel SR, Xiao H, Dressler GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109,
USA.

Pax transactivation domain-interacting protein (PTIP) is a ubiquitously
expressed, nuclear protein that is part of a histone H3K4 methyltransferase
complex and is essential for embryonic development. Methylation of H3K4 is an
epigenetic mark found on many critical developmental regulatory genes in
embryonic stem (ES) cells and, together with H3K27 methylation, constitutes a
bivalent epigenetic signature. To address the function of PTIP in ES cells, we
generated ES cell lines from a floxed ptip allele and deleted PTIP function with 
Cre recombinase. The ptip(-/-) ES cell lines exhibited a high degree of
spontaneous differentiation to trophectoderm and a loss of pluripotency. Reduced 
levels of Oct4 expression and H3K4 methylation were observed. Upon
differentiation, ptip(-/-) embryoid bodies showed reduced levels of marker gene
expression for all three primary germ layers. These results suggest that the
maintenance of H3K4 methylation is essential and requires PTIP function during
the in vitro propagation of pluripotent ES cells.

PMCID: PMC3084012
PMID: 19544464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Melanoma Res. 2009 Jun;19(3):146-55.

CpG island methylation profiling in human melanoma cell lines.

Tellez CS(1), Shen L, Estécio MR, Jelinek J, Gershenwald JE, Issa JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas, USA. ctellez@lrri.org

A better understanding of key molecular changes during the pathogenesis of
melanoma could impact strategies to reduce mortality from this cancer. Two
epigenetic events involved in the pathogenesis of cancer are hypermethylation of 
tumor-suppressor gene promoters associated with transcriptional repression and
hypomethylation associated with gene reexpression and genomic instability. We
analyzed 16 melanoma cell lines for aberrant hypermethylation of 15 cancer-linked
genes (ER alpha, MGMT, RAR beta 2, RIL, RASSF1A, PAX7, PGR beta, PAX2, NKX2-3,
OLIG2, HAND1, ECAD, CDH13, MLH1, and p16) and hypomethylation of two genes
(MAGEA1, maspin) and two repetitive sequences (LINE-1 and Alu) using
pyrosequencing. We observed hypermethylation of ER alpha in 50% of the cell
lines, MGMT (50%), RAR beta 2 (44%), RIL (88%), RASSF1A (69%), PAX7 (31%), PGR
beta (56%), PAX2 (38%), NKX2-3 (63%), OLIG2 (63%), HAND1 (63%), ECAD (88%), CDH13
(44%), MLH1 (0%), and p16 (6%). In human melanoma cell lines, hypomethylation of 
MAGEA1 (44%), maspin (25%), LINE-1 (75%), and Alu (13%) is frequently observed.
We analyzed a panel of cell lines for BRAF V600E and NRAS codon 61 mutations. In 
melanoma cell lines, the BRAF and NRAS mutations had no association with aberrant
methylation. We found that the cumulative aberrant hypermethylation of the gene
promoters was correlated with the level of global DNA methylation. We conclude
that aberrant hypermethylation, is frequent in melanoma cell lines, directly
correlated with global DNA methylation, and independent of BRAF and NRAS
mutations.

PMID: 19441164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2009 Jul;47(1):133-41. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2009.04.007. Epub
2009 Apr 17.

Overexpression of the transcription factor Hand1 causes predisposition towards
arrhythmia in mice.

Breckenridge RA(1), Zuberi Z, Gomes J, Orford R, Dupays L, Felkin LE, Clark JE,
Magee AI, Ehler E, Birks EJ, Barton PJ, Tinker A, Mohun TJ.

Author information: 
(1)MRC National Institute for Medical Research, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.
rbrecke@nimr.mrc.ac.uk

Elevated levels of the cardiac transcription factor Hand1 have been reported in
several adult cardiac diseases but it is unclear whether this change is itself
maladaptive with respect to heart function. To test this possibility, we have
developed a novel, inducible transgenic system, and used it to overexpress Hand1 
in adult mouse hearts. Overexpression of Hand1 in the adult mouse heart leads to 
mild cardiac hypertrophy and a reduction in life expectancy. Treated mice show no
significant fibrosis, myocyte disarray or congestive heart failure, but have a
greatly reduced threshold for induced ventricular tachycardia, indicating a
predisposition to cardiac arrhythmia. Within 48 h, they show a significant loss
of connexin43 protein from cardiac intercalated discs, with increased
intercalated disc beta-catenin expression at protein and RNA levels. These
changes are sustained during prolonged Hand1 overexpression. We propose that
cardiac overexpression of Hand1 offers a useful mouse model of arrhythmogenesis
and elevated HAND1 may provide one of the molecular links between the failing
heart and arrhythmia.

PMID: 19376125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Biol Reprod. 2009 Jul;81(1):207-21. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.073312. Epub 2009
Feb 18.

Csf2 null mutation alters placental gene expression and trophoblast glycogen cell
and giant cell abundance in mice.

Sferruzzi-Perri AN(1), Macpherson AM, Roberts CT, Robertson SA.

Author information: 
(1)Research Centre for Reproductive Health, School of Paediatrics and
Reproductive Health, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia,
Australia.

Genetic deficiency in granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (CSF2,
GM-CSF) results in altered placental structure in mice. To investigate the
mechanism of action of CSF2 in placental morphogenesis, the placental gene
expression and cell composition were examined in Csf2 null mutant and wild-type
mice. Microarray and quantitative RT-PCR analyses on Embryonic Day (E) 13
placentae revealed that the Csf2 null mutation caused altered expression of 17
genes not previously known to be associated with placental development, including
Mid1, Cd24a, Tnfrsf11b, and Wdfy1. Genes controlling trophoblast differentiation 
(Ascl2, Tcfeb, Itgav, and Socs3) were also differentially expressed. The CSF2
ligand and the CSF2 receptor alpha subunit were predominantly synthesized in the 
placental junctional zone. Altered placental structure in Csf2 null mice at E15
was characterized by an expanded junctional zone and by increased Cx31(+)
glycogen cells and cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1C (CDKN1C(+), P57(Kip2+))
giant cells, accompanied by elevated junctional zone transcription of genes
controlling spongiotrophoblast and giant cell differentiation and secretory
function (Ascl2, Hand1, Prl3d1, and Prl2c2). Granzyme genes implicated in tissue 
remodeling and potentially in trophoblast invasion (Gzmc, Gzme, and Gzmf) were
downregulated in the junctional zone of Csf2 null mutant placentae. These data
demonstrate aberrant placental gene expression in Csf2 null mutant mice that is
associated with altered differentiation and/or functional maturation of
junctional zone trophoblast lineages, glycogen cells, and giant cells. We
conclude that CSF2 is a regulator of trophoblast differentiation and placental
development, which potentially influences the functional capacity of the placenta
to support optimal fetal growth in pregnancy.

PMCID: PMC3093993
PMID: 19228596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Cell Biochem. 2009 Mar 1;106(4):546-52. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22012.

FGF8 regulates myogenesis and induces Runx2 expression and osteoblast
differentiation in cultured cells.

Omoteyama K(1), Takagi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Division of Functional Morphology, Dental Research
Center, Nihon University School of Dentistry, Tokyo, Japan.

In the current study, treatment of the rat osteogenic cell line ROB-C26 cells
with fibroblast growth factor 8 (FGF8) stimulated alkaline phosphatase (ALP)
activity, and also induced the expression of the Runx2 transcription factor, and 
increased the activity of a luciferase reporter gene containing the osteocalcin
(OCN) promoter and six copies of the osteoblast specific cis-acting element 2
(OSE2) response element. In contrast, FGF8 treatment of the mouse myoblast cell
line C2C12 inhibited the expression of desmin and the synthesis of myotubes. The 
expression of MyoD, Myogenin, Foxc2, and Hand1 was also decreased by FGF8.
Transient expression of Foxc2 in C2C12 cells induced the expression of Hand1, and
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis indicated that Foxc2 binds to the
promoter region of the Hand1 gene. These results indicated that Foxc2 is directly
involved in the regulation of Hand1 expression. The results of the current study 
indicate that FGF8 regulates myoblast differentiation through the regulation of
MyoD expression, and that this regulation is independent of Hand1 in cultured
cells. Conversely, FGF8 supports bone development and cell differentiation though
the induction of Runx2 expression.

PMID: 19170063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Development. 2009 Feb;136(4):615-25. doi: 10.1242/dev.029355. Epub 2009 Jan 14.

Hand2 controls osteoblast differentiation in the branchial arch by inhibiting DNA
binding of Runx2.

Funato N(1), Chapman SL, McKee MD, Funato H, Morris JA, Shelton JM, Richardson
JA, Yanagisawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3A 2B2, 
Canada.

Members of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family of transcription factors
regulate the specification and differentiation of numerous cell types during
embryonic development. Hand1 and Hand2 are expressed by a subset of neural crest 
cells in the anterior branchial arches and are involved in craniofacial
development. However, the precise mechanisms by which Hand proteins mediate
biological actions and regulate downstream target genes in branchial arches is
largely unknown. Here, we report that Hand2 negatively regulates intramembranous 
ossification of the mandible by directly inhibiting the transcription factor
Runx2, a master regulator of osteoblast differentiation. Hand proteins physically
interact with Runx2, suppressing its DNA binding and transcriptional activity.
This interaction is mediated by the N-terminal domain of the Hand protein and
requires neither dimerization with other bHLH proteins nor DNA binding. We
observed partial colocalization of Hand2 and Runx2 in the mandibular primordium
of the branchial arch, and downregulation of Hand2 precedes Runx2-driven
osteoblast differentiation. Hand2 hypomorphic mutant mice display insufficient
mineralization and ectopic bone formation in the mandible due to accelerated
osteoblast differentiation, which is associated with the upregulation and ectopic
expression of Runx2 in the mandibular arch. Here, we show that Hand2 acts as a
novel inhibitor of the Runx2-DNA interaction and thereby regulates osteoblast
differentiation in branchial arch development.

PMID: 19144722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Oncogene. 2009 Feb 12;28(6):876-85. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.438. Epub 2008 Dec 8.

HAND1 gene expression is negatively regulated by the High Mobility Group A1
proteins and is drastically reduced in human thyroid carcinomas.

Martinez Hoyos J(1), Ferraro A, Sacchetti S, Keller S, De Martino I, Borbone E,
Pallante P, Fedele M, Montanaro D, Esposito F, Cserjesi P, Chiariotti L, Troncone
G, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare e/o Istituto di
Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR, Facoltà di Medicina e Chirurgia
di Napoli, Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, Naples, Italy.

HMGA1 proteins exert their major physiological function during embryonic
development and play a critical role in neoplastic transformation. Here, we show 
that Hand1 gene, which codes for a transcription factor crucial for
differentiation of trophoblast giant cells and heart development, is upregulated 
in hmga1 minus embryonic stem cells. We demonstrate that HMGA1 proteins bind
directly to Hand1 promoter both in vitro and in vivo and inhibit Hand1 promoter
activity. We have also investigated HAND1 expression in human thyroid carcinoma
cell lines and tissues, in which HMGA proteins are overexpressed, with respect to
normal thyroid; an inverse correlation between HMGA1 and HAND1 expression was
found in all thyroid tumor histotypes. A correlation between HAND1 gene
repression and promoter hypermethylation was found in anaplastic carcinomas but
not in other thyroid tumor histotypes. Therefore, we can hypothesize that HMGA1
overexpression plays a key role on HAND1 silencing in differentiated thyroid
carcinomas and that promoter hypermethylation occurs in later stages of thyroid
tumor progression. Finally, the restoration of the HAND1 gene expression reduces 
the clonogenic ability of two human thyroid carcinoma-derived cell lines,
suggesting that HAND1 downregulation may have a role in the process of thyroid
carcinogenesis.

PMID: 19060921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Nov 18;105(46):17824-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0805491105. Epub 2008 Nov 12.

Serum response factor orchestrates nascent sarcomerogenesis and silences the
biomineralization gene program in the heart.

Niu Z(1), Iyer D, Conway SJ, Martin JF, Ivey K, Srivastava D, Nordheim A,
Schwartz RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Development, Section of Cardiovascular Sciences,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Our conditional serum response factor (SRF) knockout, Srf (Cko), in the
heart-forming region blocked the appearance of rhythmic beating myocytes, one of 
the earliest cardiac defects caused by the ablation of a cardiac-enriched
transcription factor. The appearance of Hand1 and Smyd1, transcription and
chromatin remodeling factors; Acta1, Acta2, Myl3, and Myom1, myofibril proteins; 
and calcium-activated potassium-channel gene activity (KCNMB1), the channel
protein, were powerfully attenuated in the Srf(CKO) mutant hearts. A requisite
role for combinatorial cofactor interactions with SRF, as a major determinant for
regulating the appearance of organized sarcomeres, was shown by viral rescue of
SRF-null ES cells with SRF point mutants that block cofactor interactions. In the
absence of SRF genes associated with biomineralization, GATA-6, bone
morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4), and periostin were strongly up-regulated,
coinciding with the down regulation of many SRF dependent microRNA, including
miR1, which exerted robust silencer activity over the induction of GATA-6 leading
to the down regulation of BMP4 and periostin.

PMCID: PMC2584699
PMID: 19004760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Biol Reprod. 2009 Feb;80(2):227-34. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.070920. Epub 2008
Oct 29.

Glial cells missing homologue 1 is induced in differentiating equine chorionic
girdle trophoblast cells.

de Mestre AM(1), Miller D, Roberson MS, Liford J, Chizmar LC, McLaughlin KE,
Antczak DF.

Author information: 
(1)Baker Institute for Animal Health and Department of Biomedical Sciences,
College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA. 
ademestre@rvc.ac.uk

The objective of this study was to identify transcription factors associated with
differentiation of the chorionic girdle, the invasive form of equine trophoblast.
The expression patterns of five transcription factors were determined on a panel 
of conceptus tissues from early horse pregnancy. Tissues from Days 15 through 46 
were tested. Eomesodermin (EOMES), glial cells missing homologue 1 (GCM1), heart 
and neural crest derivatives expressed transcript 1 (HAND1), caudal type homeobox
2 (CDX2), and distal-less homeobox 3 (DLX3) were detected in horse trophoblast,
but the expression patterns for these genes varied. EOMES had the most restricted
distribution, while DLX3 CDX2, and HAND1 were widely expressed. GCM1 seemed to
increase in the developing chorionic girdle, and this was confirmed by
quantitative RT-PCR assays. GCM1 expression preceded a striking increase in
expression of equine chorionic gonadotropin beta (CGB) in the chorionic girdle,
and binding sites for GCM1 were discovered in the promoter region of the CGB
gene. GCM1, CGB, and CGA mRNA were expressed preferentially in binucleate cells
as opposed to uninucleate cells of the chorionic girdle. Based on these findings,
it is likely that GCM1 has a role in differentiation and function of the invasive
trophoblast of the equine chorionic girdle and endometrial cups. The equine
binucleate chorionic girdle (CG) secreting trophoblast shares molecular,
morphological, and functional characteristics with human syncytiotrophoblast and 
represents a model for studies of human placental function.

PMCID: PMC2804814
PMID: 18971425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Cloning Stem Cells. 2008 Dec;10(4):495-502. doi: 10.1089/clo.2008.0030.

BMP4 induces primitive endoderm but not trophectoderm in monkey embryonic stem
cells.

Kobayashi M(1), Takada T, Takahashi K, Noda Y, Torii R.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Animal Life Science, Shiga University of Medical Science, 
Otsu, Shiga, Japan.

Monkey embryonic stem (ES) cells share similar characteristics to human ES cells 
and provide a primate model of allotransplantation, which allows to validate
efficacy and safety of cell transplantation therapy in regenerative medicine.
Bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4) is known to promote trophoblast
differentiation in human ES cells in contrast to mouse ES cells where BMP4
synergistically maintains self-renewal with leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF),
which represents a significant difference in signal transduction of self-renewal 
and differentiation between murine and human ES cells. As the similarity of the
differentiation mechanism between monkey and human ES cells is of critical
importance for their use as a primate model system, we investigated whether BMP4 
induces trophoblast differentiation in monkey ES cells. Interestingly, BMP4 did
not induce trophoblast differentiation, but instead induced primitive endoderm
differentiation. Prominent downregulation of Sox2, which plays a pivotal role not
only in pluripotency but also placenta development, was observed in cells treated
with BMP4. In addition, upregulation of Hand1, Cdx2, and chorionic gonadotropin
beta (CG-beta), which are markers of trophoblast, was not observed. In contrast, 
BMP4 induced significant upregulation of Gata6, Gata4, and LamininB1, suggesting 
differentiation into the primitive endoderm, visceral endoderm, and parietal
endoderm, respectively. The threshold of BMP4 activity was estimated as about 10 
ng/mL. These findings suggest that BMP4 induced differentiation into the
primitive endoderm lineage but not into trophoblast in monkey ES cells.

PMID: 18823266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. EMBO Rep. 2008 Oct;9(10):1041-7. doi: 10.1038/embor.2008.161. Epub 2008 Aug 22.

HAND transcription factors are required for neonatal sympathetic neuron survival.

Doxakis E(1), Howard L, Rohrer H, Davies AM.

Author information: 
(1)Basic Neurosciences Division, Biomedical Research Foundation of the Academy of
Athens, Soranou Efesiou 4, Athens, Greece.

Expression of the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor HAND2 begins early 
in sympathetic neuron development and is essential for the differentiation of
noradrenergic neurons. Here, we show that the expression of HAND2 and related
HAND1 are maintained in sympathetic neurons throughout fetal and postnatal
development when these neurons depend on target-derived nerve growth factor (NGF)
for survival. Short interfering RNA knockdown of endogenous HAND2 and, to a
lesser extent, HAND1 in neonatal sympathetic neurons cultured with NGF, reduced
the expression of the NGF receptor tyrosine kinase TrkA (tropomyosin-related
kinase A), as well as neuronal survival. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis
showed that NGF promotes HAND2 binding to the TrkA minimal enhancer and that
transfection of sympathetic neurons with a TrkA expression plasmid rescued the
neurons from HAND knockdown. These findings show that HAND transcription factors 
have a crucial function in sustaining the survival of neonatal sympathetic
neurons with NGF by a feed-forward loop that maintains the expression of TrkA.

PMCID: PMC2572120
PMID: 18724272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. BMC Dev Biol. 2008 Jul 30;8:75. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-8-75.

Msx1 and Msx2 are required for endothelial-mesenchymal transformation of the
atrioventricular cushions and patterning of the atrioventricular myocardium.

Chen YH(1), Ishii M, Sucov HM, Maxson RE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, USC/Norris Comprehensive
Cancer Center and Hospital, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA 90089-9176, USA. yihuiche@gate.sinica.edu.tw

BACKGROUND: Msx1 and Msx2, which belong to the highly conserved Nk family of
homeobox genes, display overlapping expression patterns and redundant functions
in multiple tissues and organs during vertebrate development. Msx1 and Msx2 have 
well-documented roles in mediating epithelial-mesenchymal interactions during
organogenesis. Given that both Msx1 and Msx2 are crucial downstream effectors of 
Bmp signaling, we investigated whether Msx1 and Msx2 are required for the
Bmp-induced endothelial-mesenchymal transformation (EMT) during atrioventricular 
(AV) valve formation.
RESULTS: While both Msx1-/- and Msx2-/- single homozygous mutant mice exhibited
normal valve formation, we observed hypoplastic AV cushions and malformed AV
valves in Msx1-/-; Msx2-/- mutants, indicating redundant functions of Msx1 and
Msx2 during AV valve morphogenesis. In Msx1/2 null mutant AV cushions, we found
decreased Bmp2/4 and Notch1 signaling as well as reduced expression of Has2,
NFATc1 and Notch1, demonstrating impaired endocardial activation and EMT.
Moreover, perturbed expression of chamber-specific genes Anf, Tbx2, Hand1 and
Hand2 reveals mispatterning of the Msx1/2 double mutant myocardium and suggests
functions of Msx1 and Msx2 in regulating myocardial signals required for
remodelling AV valves and maintaining an undifferentiated state of the AV
myocardium.
CONCLUSION: Our findings demonstrate redundant roles of Msx1 and Msx2 in
regulating signals required for development of the AV myocardium and formation of
the AV valves.

PMCID: PMC2518925
PMID: 18667074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Dev Biol. 2008 Aug 1;320(1):131-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.04.037. Epub 2008
May 8.

An absence of Twist1 results in aberrant cardiac neural crest morphogenesis.

Vincentz JW(1), Barnes RM, Rodgers R, Firulli BA, Conway SJ, Firulli AB.

Author information: 
(1)Riley Heart Research Center, Riley Hospital for Children, Department of
Pediatrics (Pediatric Cardiology), Indiana Medical School, 1044 W. Walnut St.,
Indianapolis, IN 46202-5225, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor Twist1 plays an essential role in
mesenchymal cell populations during embryonic development and in pathological
disease. Remodeling of the cardiac outflow tract (OFT) into the functionally
separate aortic arch and pulmonary trunk is dependent upon the dynamic,
coordinated contribution of multiple mesenchymal cell populations. Here, we
report that Twist1(-/-) mice exhibit OFTs that contain amorphic cellular nodules 
within their OFT endocardial cushions. The nodular mesenchyme expresses the
related bHLH factors Hand1 and Hand2, but reduced levels of the normal cushion
marker Periostin. Lineage mapping confirms that nodule cells are exclusively of
cardiac neural crest origin (cNCC), and are not ectopic cardiomyocytes or smooth 
muscle cells. These studies also reveal a delay in cNCC colonization of the OFT
cushions. Furthermore, these mapping studies uncover nodules in the pharyngeal
arches, and identify Twist1(-/-) neural crest cell defects within the dorsal
neural tube, which exhibits an expanded domain of Wnt1-Cre-lineage marked cells. 
Together, these data support a model where Twist1 is required both for proper
cNCC delamination, and for emigration from the dorsal neural tube and along cNCC 
migration pathways. Within the Twist1(-/-) neural crest cell populations that do 
emigrate to the OFT, a Hand-expressing subpopulation displays defective
maturation, tracking, and, presumably, cell-cell adhesion, further compromising
cNCC morphogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2572997
PMID: 18539270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Development. 2008 Jun;135(12):2083-91. doi: 10.1242/dev.020099. Epub 2008 Apr 30.

Early patterning of the chorion leads to the trilaminar trophoblast cell
structure in the placental labyrinth.

Simmons DG(1), Natale DR, Begay V, Hughes M, Leutz A, Cross JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Biology and Experimental Medicine, Faculty of
Veterinary Medicine, The University of Calgary, 3330 Hospital Drive NW, Calgary, 
AB, T2N 4N1, Canada.

The labyrinth of the rodent placenta contains villi that are the site of nutrient
exchange between mother and fetus. They are covered by three trophoblast cell
types that separate the maternal blood sinusoids from fetal capillaries--a single
mononuclear cell that is a subtype of trophoblast giant cell (sinusoidal or
S-TGC) with endocrine function and two multinucleated syncytiotrophoblast layers,
each resulting from cell-cell fusion, that function in nutrient transport. The
developmental origins of these cell types have not previously been elucidated. We
report here the discovery of cell-layer-restricted genes in the mid-gestation
labyrinth (E12.5-14.5) including Ctsq in S-TGCs (also Hand1-positive), Syna in
syncytiotrophoblast layer I (SynT-I), and Gcm1, Cebpa and Synb in
syncytiotrophoblast layer II (SynT-II). These genes were also expressed in
distinct layers in the chorion as early as E8.5, prior to villous formation.
Specifically, Hand1 was expressed in apical cells lining maternal blood spaces
(Ctsq is not expressed until E12.5), Syna in a layer immediately below, and Gcm1,
Cebpa and Synb in basal cells in contact with the allantois. Cebpa and Synb were 
co-expressed with Gcm1 and were reduced in Gcm1 mutants. By contrast, Hand1 and
Syna expression was unaltered in Gcm1 mutants, suggesting that Gcm1-positive
cells are not required for the induction of the other chorion layers. These data 
indicate that the three differentiated trophoblast cell types in the labyrinth
arise from distinct and autonomous precursors in the chorion that are patterned
before morphogenesis begins.

PMCID: PMC3159581
PMID: 18448564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Neurosci. 2008 Mar 26;28(13):3264-76. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4980-07.2008.

Loss of astrocytic domain organization in the epileptic brain.

Oberheim NA(1), Tian GF, Han X, Peng W, Takano T, Ransom B, Nedergaard M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Glial Disease and Therapeutics, Center for Translational
Neuromedicine, Department of Neurosurgery, University of Rochester Medical
Center, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

Comment in
    Epilepsy Curr. 2009 Jul-Aug;9(4):113-5.

Gliosis is a pathological hallmark of posttraumatic epileptic foci, but little is
known about these reactive astrocytes beyond their high glial fibrillary acidic
protein (GFAP) expression. Using diolistic labeling, we show that cortical
astrocytes lost their nonoverlapping domain organization in three mouse models of
epilepsy: posttraumatic injury, genetic susceptibility, and systemic kainate
exposure. Neighboring astrocytes in epileptic mice showed a 10-fold increase in
overlap of processes. Concurrently, spine density was increased on dendrites of
excitatory neurons. Suppression of seizures by the common antiepileptic,
valproate, reduced the overlap of astrocytic processes. Astrocytic domain
organization was also preserved in APP transgenic mice expressing a mutant
variant of human amyloid precursor protein despite a marked upregulation of GFAP.
Our data suggest that loss of astrocytic domains was not universally associated
with gliosis, but restricted to seizure pathologies. Reorganization of astrocytes
may, in concert with dendritic sprouting and new synapse formation, form the
structural basis for recurrent excitation in the epileptic brain.

PMID: 18367594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Biol Chem. 2008 Apr 25;283(17):11841-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M702563200. Epub 2008 
Feb 25.

HIF-1alpha signaling upstream of NKX2.5 is required for cardiac development in
Xenopus.

Nagao K(1), Taniyama Y, Kietzmann T, Doi T, Komuro I, Morishita R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Gene Therapy, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka
University, Suita 565-0871, Japan.

HIF-1alpha is originally identified as a transcription factor that activates gene
expression in response to hypoxia. In metazoans, HIF-1alpha functions as a master
regulator of oxygen homeostasis and regulates adaptive responses to change in
oxygen tension during embryogenesis, tissue ischemia, and tumorigenesis. Because 
Hif-1alpha-deficient mice exhibit a number of developmental defects, the precise 
role of HIF-1alpha in early cardiac morphogenesis has been uncertain. Therefore, 
to clarify the role of HIF-1alpha in heart development, we investigated the
effect of knockdown of HIF-1alpha in Xenopus embryos using antisense morpholino
oligonucleotide microinjection techniques. Knockdown of HIF-1alpha resulted in
defects of cardiogenesis. Whole mount in situ hybridization for cardiac troponin 
I (cTnI) showed the two separated populations of cardiomyocytes, which is
indicative of cardia bifida, in HIF-1alpha-depleted embryos. Furthermore, the
depletion of HIF-1alpha led to the reduction in cTnI expression, suggesting the
correlation between HIF-1alpha and cardiac differentiation. We further examined
the expression of several heart markers, nkx2.5, gata4, tbx5, bmp4, hand1, and
hand2 in HIF-1alpha-depleted embryos. Among them, the expression of nkx2.5 was
significantly reduced. Luciferase reporter assay using the Nkx2.5 promoter showed
that knockdown of HIF-1alpha decreased its promoter activity. The cardiac
abnormality in the HIF-1alpha-depleted embryo was restored with co-injection of
nkx2.5 mRNA. Collectively, these findings reveal that HIF-1alpha-regulated nkx2.5
expression is required for heart development in Xenopus.

PMID: 18303027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 May 15;17(10):1397-405. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn027. Epub 2008
Feb 14.

A loss-of-function mutation in the binding domain of HAND1 predicts hypoplasia of
the human hearts.

Reamon-Buettner SM(1), Ciribilli Y, Inga A, Borlak J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, Fraunhofer Institute of
Toxicology and Experimental Medicine, Nikolai-Fuchs-Strasse 1, D-30625 Hannover, 
Germany.

Hypoplasia of the human heart is the most severe form of congenital heart disease
(CHD) and usually lethal during early infancy. It is a leading cause of neonatal 
loss, especially in infants diagnosed with hypoplastic left heart syndrome
(HLHS), a condition where the left side of the heart including the aorta, aortic 
valve, left ventricle (LV) and mitral valve are underdeveloped. The molecular
causes of HLHS are unclear, but the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription
factor heart and neural crest derivatives expressed 1 (Hand1), may be a candidate
culprit for this condition. The absence of Hand1 in mice resulted in the failure 
of rightward looping of the heart tube, a severely hypoplastic LV and outflow
tract abnormalities. Nonetheless, no HAND1 mutations associated with human CHD
have been reported so far. We sequenced the human HAND1 gene in heart tissues
derived from 31 unrelated patients diagnosed with hypoplastic hearts. We detected
in 24 of 31 hypoplastic ventricles, a common frameshift mutation (A126fs) in the 
bHLH domain, which is necessary for DNA binding and combinatorial interactions.
The resulting mutant protein, unlike wild-type (wt) HAND1, was unable to modulate
transcription of reporter constructs containing specific DNA-binding sites. Thus,
in hypoplastic human hearts HAND1 function is impaired.

PMID: 18276607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Cell Cycle. 2008 Jan 1;7(1):17-23. Epub 2007 Oct 29.

Cell cycle switch to endocycle: the nucleolus lends a hand.

Martindill DM(1), Riley PR.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, UCL Institute of Child Health, London, United
Kingdom.

The bHLH transcription factor Hand1 is essential for placentation and cardiac
morphogenesis but how its developmental activity is regulated is largely unknown.
We recently showed that Hand1 is sequestered in the nucleoli of rodent
trophoblast stem (TS) cells by the I-mfa domain-containing protein HICp40 and
that this is associated with their proliferation and continuing self-renewal.
However when these cells commit to differentiate into trophoblast giant (TG)
cells, Hand1 is phosphorylated by the polo-like kinase Plk4 (Sak) and released
into the nucleus to activate downstream target genes. This event underlies the
release of Hand1 from the nucleolus and represents the 'molecular switch' that
promotes mitotic cell cycle exit and the onset of endoreduplication. In this
brief discussion we examine the wider implications of these findings and address 
some of the unanswered questions that remain.

PMID: 18196965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Regen Med. 2008 Jan;3(1):23-31.

Endotoxin-induced silencing of mesoderm induction and functional differentiation:
role of HMGB1 in pluripotency and infection.

Sivasubramaniyan K(1), Atluri RR, Sarda K, Arvind M, Balaji V, Deb KD.

Author information: 
(1)Manipal University, Embryonic Stem Cell and Developmental Biology Program,
Manipal Institute of Regenerative Medicine, #10 Service Road, Domlur Layout,
Bangalore 560071, India.

OBJECTIVES: Mechanisms underpinning Gram-negative bacterial vaginosis-induced
birth anomalies are obscure. Ethical issues limit such studies on
peri-implantation-stage human embryos. Here we have used embryoid bodies (EBs) as
an in vitro model to examine the effect of Gram-negative bacterial
endotoxins/lipopolysaccharides (LPS) on the faithful induction of germ lineages
during embryogenesis. The role of LPS-inducible cytokine and pluripotency-related
DNA-binding protein HMGB1 was also studied in these EBs.
METHODS: EBs derived from the human embryonic stem cell line HUES9 were exposed
to 12.5 pg/ml of LPS for 48 h. The expression profile of the ectoderm, endoderm, 
mesoderm and trophectoderm lineage markers, such as beta III-tubulin, GATA4,
BMP2, Brachury and beta-hCG, were studied, by RT-PCR and immunofluorescence.
Inhibition of mesoderm induction was confirmed by RT-PCR analysis for hANP, cTnT,
ABCG2, GATA2, BMP4 and HAND1. Osteoblast differentiation was induced in the EBs, 
and confirmed by von Kosa and Alizarin red staining. A comet assay was also
carried out to assess the degree of apoptosis in these EBs.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: We found that the LPS-treated EBs were selectively
silenced for mesoderm markers and failed to differentiate into functional
osteoblasts. HMGB1 expression was absent in the normal EBs and was found to be
localized in the cytoplasm of the LPS-treated EBs. Overall, our data indicate
that endotoxin-induced HMGB1 expression in the peri-implantation-stage embryos
can bring about severe birth defects of, for example, the bone and heart. This
study also indicates that HMGB1 could be involved in maintenance of pluripotency 
in the human embryonic stem cells by impeding their differentiation.

PMID: 18154460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Nat Cell Biol. 2007 Oct;9(10):1127-9.

Cell fate in the Hand of Plk4.

Tanenbaum ME, Medema RH.

Comment on
    Nat Cell Biol. 2007 Oct;9(10):1131-41.

PMID: 17909526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Nat Cell Biol. 2007 Oct;9(10):1131-41. Epub 2007 Sep 23.

Nucleolar release of Hand1 acts as a molecular switch to determine cell fate.

Martindill DM(1), Risebro CA, Smart N, Franco-Viseras Mdel M, Rosario CO, Swallow
CJ, Dennis JW, Riley PR.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, UCL Institute of Child Health, London, WC1N 1EH, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2007 Oct;9(10):1127-9.

The bHLH transcription factor Hand1 is essential for placentation and cardiac
morphogenesis in the developing embryo. Here we implicate Hand1 as a molecular
switch that determines whether a trophoblast stem cell continues to proliferate
or commits to differentiation. We identify a novel interaction of Hand1 with a
protein that contains an I-mfa (inhibitor of myogenic factor) domain that anchors
Hand1 in the nucleolus where it negatively regulates Hand1 activity. In the
trophoblast stem-cell line Rcho-1, nucleolar sequestration of Hand1 accompanies
sustained cell proliferation and renewal, whereas release of Hand1 into the
nucleus leads to its activation, thus committing cells to a differentiated
giant-cell fate. Site-specific phosphorylation is required for nucleolar release 
of Hand1, for its dimerization and biological function, and this is mediated by
the non-canonical polo-like kinase Plk4 (Sak). Sak is co-expressed in Rcho-1
cells, localizes to the nucleolus during G2 and phosphorylates Hand1 as a
requirement for trophoblast stem-cell commitment to a giant-cell fate. This study
defines a novel cellular mechanism for regulating Hand1 that is a crucial step in
the stem-cell differentiation pathway.

PMID: 17891141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Dev Biol. 2007 Oct 1;310(1):154-68. Epub 2007 Aug 3.

Hand transcription factors cooperatively regulate development of the distal
midline mesenchyme.

Barbosa AC(1), Funato N, Chapman S, McKee MD, Richardson JA, Olson EN, Yanagisawa
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA.

Hand proteins are evolutionally conserved basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
transcription factors implicated in development of neural crest-derived tissues, 
heart and limb. Hand1 is expressed in the distal (ventral) zone of the branchial 
arches, whereas the Hand2 expression domain extends ventrolaterally to occupy
two-thirds of the mandibular arch. To circumvent the early embryonic lethality of
Hand1 or Hand2-null embryos and to examine their roles in neural crest
development, we generated mice with neural crest-specific deletion of Hand1 and
various combinations of mutant alleles of Hand2. Ablation of Hand1 alone in
neural crest cells did not affect embryonic development, however, further
removing one Hand2 allele or deleting the ventrolateral branchial arch expression
of Hand2 led to a novel phenotype presumably due to impaired growth of the distal
midline mesenchyme. Although we failed to detect changes in proliferation or
apoptosis between the distal mandibular arch of wild-type and Hand1/Hand2
compound mutants at embryonic day (E)10.5, dysregulation of Pax9, Msx2 and Prx2
was observed in the distal mesenchyme at E12.5. In addition, the inter-dental
mesenchyme and distal symphysis of Meckel's cartilage became hypoplastic,
resulting in the formation of a single fused lower incisor within the hypoplastic
fused mandible. These findings demonstrate the importance of Hand transcription
factors in the transcriptional circuitry of craniofacial and tooth development.

PMCID: PMC2270479
PMID: 17764670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Transplantation. 2007 Jul 27;84(2):214-22.

PD-1-PD-L1 pathway is involved in suppressing alloreactivity of heart
infiltrating t cells during murine gvhd across minor histocompatibility antigen
barriers.

Schilbach K(1), Schick J, Wehrmann M, Wollny G, Simon P, Schlegel PG, Eyrich M.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany.
knschilb@med.uni-tuebingen.de

Erratum in
    Transplantation. 2008 Mar 27;85(6):910. Perikles, Simon [corrected to Simon,
Perikles].

BACKGROUND: Graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) is still a major cause of morbidity 
and mortality after allogeneic stem cell transplantation. GVHD mainly affects
skin, liver, and intestine, whereas other organs usually are spared. In the
present study, we wanted to investigate whether local regulatory T cells (Treg)
or differential expression of immunomodulatory molecules contribute to organ
specificity of GVHD.
METHODS: In a murine B10.D2->BALB/c (both H-2) model, GVHD was induced by
transplantation of 1x10 bone marrow and 1x10 spleen cells. We compared expression
of T-cell and dendritic cell markers, CD40-CD40L, various B7 family members,
FoxP3, and Th1/Th2 cytokines between ileum (GVHD-target organ) and heart
(nontarget organ).
RESULTS: GVHD was documented by an increase of CD4 T cells with accompanying
tissue destruction in ileum but not in heart. We found a significantly increased 
expression of PD-L1 in heart on day 14 and 21 as well as of CTLA-4 on day 21
after transplantation, whereas all other molecules were not different between
heart and ileum. In heart, PD-L1 was expressed on lymphoid cells, endothelial
cells, CD8alpha+CD11c+DCs, and up-regulated during GVHD. In contrast, in the
ileum only endothelial cells stained weekly positive for PD-L1. Furthermore, we
could not find any evidence for the presence of Tregs in the heart.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate that immunomodulatory molecules such as PD-L1
rather than Tregs play pivotal roles in the tissue-specific regulation of
alloresponses. Further studies are needed to refine the significance of the PD-L1
pathway in GVHD and its versatility for therapeutic intervention.

PMID: 17667813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Vaccine. 2007 Aug 14;25(33):6224-31. Epub 2007 Jun 21.

Intrarectal immunization of mice with VP6 and either LT(R192G) or CTA1-DD as
adjuvant protects against fecal rotavirus shedding after EDIM challenge.

McNeal MM(1), Basu M, Bean JA, Clements JD, Lycke NY, Ramne A, Löwenadler B, Choi
AH, Ward RL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Intranasal or oral delivery of the chimeric rotavirus VP6 protein MBP::VP6 to
mice elicited >90% reductions in fecal rotavirus shedding after murine rotavirus 
challenge. Protection depended on co-administration of adjuvants, the most
effective being bacterial toxins. Because of safety and efficacy concerns
following intranasal or oral toxin delivery, protective efficacy of MBP::VP6
after intrarectal delivery with toxin adjuvants was determined and compared to
that induced after intranasal and oral immunization. Adult BALB/c mice were
orally challenged with the murine rotavirus strain EDIM 4 weeks after their
second immunization with MBP::VP6 and either LT(R192G), an attenuated Escherichia
coli heat-labile toxin, or CTA1-DD, a cholera toxin derivative. Reductions in
fecal rotavirus shedding were then determined relative to mock-immunized mice.
Immunization with MBP::VP6 and either adjuvant by any route (except oral
immunization with CTA1-DD) significantly (P<0.0001) reduced rotavirus shedding.
As was previously found after oral and intranasal immunization, intrarectal
immunization with MBP::VP6 and adjuvant was associated with T cell responses
(IFNgamma and IL-17) but not B cell (antibody) responses.

PMID: 17629371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Stem Cells Dev. 2007 Jun;16(3):393-402.

Simultaneous differentiation of endothelial and trophoblastic cells derived from 
human embryonic stem cells.

Peiffer I(1), Belhomme D, Barbet R, Haydont V, Zhou YP, Fortunel NO, Li M,
Hatzfeld A, Fabiani JN, Hatzfeld JA.

Author information: 
(1)Human Stem Cell Laboratory, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique,
94801 Villejuif Cedex, France. peiffeisa@yahoo.fr

Here we present a simple two-step in vitro model of vascularized trophoblastic
tissue derived from human embryonic stem (hES) cells. The first step is the
formation of cystic embryoid bodies (EBs) in suspension in a semisolid methyl
cellulose medium, within which an endothelial platelet/endothelial cell adhesion 
molecule-1 (PECAM-1(+)) cell network develops. In a second step, deposition of
these EBs on the bottom of nontreated, polystyrene tissue culture plates, leads
by centrifugal outgrowth of the EB to the emergence of an adherent cell layer,
with which a PECAM-1(+) network is associated. Cells of this adherent layer
expressed VE-cadherin (CD144), PECAM-1 (CD31), and alpha-fetoprotein (alpha-FP). 
Trophoblastic differentiation was strongly suggested by the secretion of
beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (beta-hCG) and by the presence of the
cytotrophoblast and syncytiotrophoblast marker GB25. The INSL4 gene, a cyto and
syncytio-trophoblast marker, was also highly expressed in the adherent layer, as 
well as other trophoblast genes such as CGA, CDX1, CDX2, and HAND1, compared to
hES cell gene expression taken as reference. In contrast, expression of
self-renewal genes, such as TERT, POU5F1, ZFP42, GDF3, and NODAL were decreased. 
No ectodermal or endodermal genes were expressed, but the mesodermal genes
PECAM-1 and GATA2 were. The possibility of removing the EBs during the second
step would permit analysis of their relative contribution to angiogenesis or
possible hemangioblast formation, compared to that of the trophoblastic adherent 
layer. This primitive vascularized trophoblastic model could also provide a tool 
to study early steps of normal and pathological placental development.

PMID: 17610369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Dev Biol. 2007 Aug 15;308(2):421-37. Epub 2007 Jun 4.

Msx1 and Msx2 regulate survival of secondary heart field precursors and
post-migratory proliferation of cardiac neural crest in the outflow tract.

Chen YH(1), Ishii M, Sun J, Sucov HM, Maxson RE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer 
Center and Hospital, University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine,
1441 Eastlake Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

Msx1 and Msx2 are highly conserved, Nk-related homeodomain transcription factors 
that are essential for a variety of tissue-tissue interactions during vertebrate 
organogenesis. Here we show that combined deficiencies of Msx1 and Msx2 cause
conotruncal anomalies associated with malalignment of the cardiac outflow tract
(OFT). Msx1 and Msx2 play dual roles in outflow tract morphogenesis by both
protecting secondary heart field (SHF) precursors against apoptosis and
inhibiting excessive proliferation of cardiac neural crest, endothelial and
myocardial cells in the conotruncal cushions. During incorporation of SHF
precursors into the OFT myocardium, ectopic apoptosis in the Msx1-/-; Msx2-/-
mutant SHF is associated with reduced expression of Hand1 and Hand2, which from
work on Hand1 and Hand2 mutants may be functionally important in the inhibition
of apoptosis in Msx1/2 mutants. Later during aorticopulmonary septation,
excessive proliferation in the OFT cushion mesenchyme and myocardium of Msx1-/-; 
Msx2-/- mutants is associated with premature down-regulation of p27(KIP1), an
inhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinases. Diminished accretion of SHF precursors to 
the elongating OFT myocardium and excessive accumulation of mesenchymal cells in 
the conotruncal cushions may work together to perturb the rotation of the truncus
arteriosus, leading to OFT malalignment defects including double-outlet right
ventricle, overriding aorta and pulmonary stenosis.

PMID: 17601530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Dev Biol. 2007 Jul 1;307(1):114-26. Epub 2007 Apr 27.

Hand2 determines the noradrenergic phenotype in the mouse sympathetic nervous
system.

Morikawa Y(1), D'Autréaux F, Gershon MD, Cserjesi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Tulane University, 2000 Percival
Stern Hall, New Orleans, LA 70118, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor Hand2 has been shown to
play a role in the development of the mammalian sympathetic nervous system (SNS);
however, its precise role could not be uncovered because Hand2 is required for
early embryonic survival. We therefore generated a conditional Hand2 knockout
mouse line by excising Hand2 in Wnt1-Cre-expressing neural crest-derived cells.
These mice die at 12.5 dpc with embryos showing severe cardiovascular and facial 
defects. Crest-derived cells, however, populate sites of SNS development and
proliferate normally. Sympathetic precursors differentiate into neurons and
express the pan-neuronal markers, beta3-tubulin (Tuj1) and Hu showing that Hand2 
is not essential for SNS neuronal differentiation. To determine whether Hand2
regulates noradrenergic differentiation, the levels of the norepinephrine
biosynthetic enzymes, tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) and dopamine beta-hydroxylase
(DBH) was examined. Both enzymes were dramatically reduced in mutant embryos
suggesting that the primary role of Hand2 in the SNS is determination of neuronal
phenotype. Loss of Hand2 did not affect the expression of other members of the
transcriptional circuit regulating SNS development, including Phox2a/b, Mash1 and
Gata2/3; however, Hand2 was required for Hand1 expression. Our data suggest that 
the major role of Hand2 during SNS development is to permit sympathetic neurons
to acquire a catecholaminergic phenotype.

PMCID: PMC1952239
PMID: 17531968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Development. 2007 Jun;134(12):2237-49. Epub 2007 May 16.

Hand2 is necessary for terminal differentiation of enteric neurons from
crest-derived precursors but not for their migration into the gut or for
formation of glia.

D'Autréaux F(1), Morikawa Y, Cserjesi P, Gershon MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University, P&S, New York, 
NY 10032, USA.

Hand genes encode basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors that are expressed
in the developing gut, where their function is unknown. We now report that
enteric Hand2 expression is limited to crest-derived cells, whereas Hand1
expression is restricted to muscle and interstitial cells of Cajal. Hand2 is
developmentally regulated and is intranuclear in precursors but cytoplasmic in
neurons. Neurons develop in explants from wild-type but not Hand2(-/-) bowel,
although, in both, crest-derived cells are present and glia arise. Similarly,
small interfering RNA (siRNA) silencing of Hand2 in enteric crest-derived cells
prevents neuronal development. Terminally differentiated enteric neurons do not
develop after conditional inactivation of Hand2 in migrating crest-derived cells;
nevertheless, conditional Hand2 inactivation does not prevent precursors from
expressing early neural markers. We suggest that enteric neuronal development
occurs in stages and that Hand2 expression is required for terminal
differentiation but not for precursors to enter the neuronal lineage.

PMID: 17507395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2006 Nov;15(11):2317-21.

Higher methylation levels in gastric mucosae significantly correlate with higher 
risk of gastric cancers.

Nakajima T(1), Maekita T, Oda I, Gotoda T, Yamamoto S, Umemura S, Ichinose M,
Sugimura T, Ushijima T, Saito D.

Author information: 
(1)Endoscopy Division, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Helicobacter pylori infection potently induces methylation of CpG
islands in gastric mucosae, which is considered to decrease to a certain level
after active H. pylori infection discontinues. Noncancerous gastric mucosae of H.
pylori-negative cases with a gastric cancer had higher methylation levels than
those of H. pylori-negative healthy individuals. Here, using cases with multiple 
gastric cancers, we analyzed whether the higher methylation levels correlated
with the higher risk of gastric cancers.
METHODS: Twenty-six healthy volunteers (HV), 30 cases with a single
well-differentiated gastric cancer (S cases), and 32 cases with multiple
well-differentiated gastric cancers (M cases) were recruited. H. pylori infection
status was analyzed by the culture method. Methylation levels were quantified by 
real-time methylation-specific PCR of seven CpG islands.
RESULTS: In H. pylori-negative individuals, significant increasing trends were
present in the order of HV, S cases, and M cases for FLNc and HAND1 methylation
levels (P < 0.01, Spearman's rank-order test). Furthermore, the FLNc methylation 
level of M cases was significantly higher than that of S cases (P < 0.01, t
test). Even adjusted by the extent of gastric atrophy, the FLNc methylation level
retained a significant increasing trend (P = 0.03). In contrast, methylation
levels in H. pylori-positive individuals were increased to various degrees in all
the three groups.
CONCLUSIONS: In H. pylori-negative individuals, methylation levels in gastric
mucosae significantly increased in cases with a single gastric cancer and more in
cases with multiple gastric cancers. Quantitative analysis of methylation levels 
is a promising risk marker for gastric cancers.

PMID: 17119066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Development. 2006 Nov;133(22):4595-606. Epub 2006 Oct 18.

Hand1 regulates cardiomyocyte proliferation versus differentiation in the
developing heart.

Risebro CA(1), Smart N, Dupays L, Breckenridge R, Mohun TJ, Riley PR.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, UCL Institute of Child Health, London WC1N 1EH, UK.

The precise origins of myocardial progenitors and their subsequent contribution
to the developing heart has been an area of considerable activity within the
field of cardiovascular biology. How these progenitors are regulated and what
signals are responsible for their development are, however, much less well
understood. Clearly, not only is there a need to identify factors that regulate
the transition from proliferation of cardioblasts to differentiation of cardiac
muscle, but it is also necessary to identify factors that maintain an adequate
pool of undifferentiated myocyte precursors as a prerequisite to preventing organ
hypoplasia and congenital heart disease. Here, we report how upregulation of the 
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor Hand1, restricted exclusively 
to Hand1-expressing cells, brings about a significant extension of the heart tube
and extraneous looping caused by the elevated proliferation of cardioblasts in
the distal outflow tract. This activity is independent of the further recruitment
of extracardiac cells from the secondary heart field and permissive for the
continued differentiation of adjacent myocardium. Culture studies using embryonic
stem (ES) cell-derived cardiomyocytes revealed that, in a Hand1-null background, 
there is significantly elevated cardiomyocyte differentiation, with an apparent
default mesoderm pathway to a cardiomyocyte fate. However, Hand1 gain of function
maintains proliferating precursors resulting in delayed and significantly reduced
cardiomyocyte differentiation that is mediated by the prevention of cell-cycle
exit, by G1 progression and by increased cell division. Thus, this work
identifies Hand1 as a crucial cardiac regulatory protein that controls the
balance between proliferation and differentiation in the developing heart, and
fills a significant gap in our understanding of how the myocardium of the
embryonic heart is established.

PMID: 17050624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Leukoc Biol. 2007 Jan;81(1):344-54. Epub 2006 Oct 5.

Differential involvement of RelB in morphine-induced modulation of chemotaxis,
NO, and cytokine production in murine macrophages and lymphocytes.

Martucci C(1), Franchi S, Lattuada D, Panerai AE, Sacerdote P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Milano, Via Vanvitelli 32, 20129
Milano, Italy.

Acute morphine impairs innate and acquired immunity. The mechanisms involved in
immunosuppression have not been well defined yet. The transcription factor
NF-kappaB is a central regulator of immunity, and of the NF-kappaB family, RelB
is particularly involved in the expression of genes important in immune
responses. We investigated the involvement of RelB in morphine-induced
immunosuppression in mice deficient for the RelB factor. RelB-/- mice and
wild-type (WT) controls were injected s.c. with morphine 20 mg/Kg, and 1 h later,
immune parameters were evaluated. Morphine significantly reduced macrophage
production of the proinflammatory cytokines IL-1beta, TNF-alpha, and IL-12 in WT 
animals, and the drug failed to diminish the production of these cytokines in the
RelB-/- mice. In contrast, the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 was similarly
affected in the two strains. Macrophage NO production was modulated by morphine
in WT animals only, and morphine similarly decreased macrophage chemotaxis in the
presence or in the absence of RelB. When Th1 and Th2 cytokines were evaluated, we
observed a clear morphine-induced reduction of IL-2 and IFN-gamma production by
WT splenocytes, whereas no effect of the drug was observed in RelB-/- mice. On
the contrary, the production of the Th2 cytokines IL-4 and IL-10 was lessened to 
the same degree by morphine in WT and RelB-/- mice. In conclusion, our data
suggest that RelB is an important target for morphine modulation of
proinflammatory and Th1 cytokines. They also indicate that morphine uses multiple
intracellular pathways to exert its generalized immunosuppression.

PMID: 17023558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Oct 6;348(4):1419-28. Epub 2006 Aug 10.

Analysis of nuclear reprogramming in cloned miniature pig embryos by expression
of Oct-4 and Oct-4 related genes.

Lee E(1), Lee SH, Kim S, Jeong YW, Kim JH, Koo OJ, Park SM, Hashem MA, Hossein
MS, Son HY, Lee CK, Hwang WS, Kang SK, Lee BC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Theriogenology and Biotechnololgy, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, South Korea.

Xenotransplantation is a rapidly expanding field of research and cloned miniature
pigs have been considered as a model animal for it. However, the efficiency of
somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) is extremely low, with most clones resulting
in early lethality and several kinds of aberrant development. A possible
explanation for the developmental failure of SCNT embryos is insufficient
reprogramming of the somatic cell nucleus by the oocyte. In order to test this,
we analyzed the reprogramming capacity of differentiated fibroblast cell nuclei
and embryonic germ cell nuclei with Oct-4 and Oct-4 related genes (Ndp5211,
Dppa2, Dppa3, and Dppa5), which are important for embryonic development, Hand1
and GATA-4, which are important for placental development, as molecular markers
using RT-PCR. The Oct-4 expression level was significantly lower (P<0.05) in
cloned hatched blastocysts derived from fibroblasts and many of
fibroblast-derived clones failed to reactivate at least one of the tested genes, 
while most of the germ cell clones and control embryos correctly expressed these 
genes. In conclusion, our results suggest that the reprogramming of
fibroblast-derived cloned embryos is highly aberrant and this improper
reprogramming could be one reason of the early lethality and post-implantation
anomalies of somatic cell-derived clones.

PMID: 16920069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Reproduction. 2006 Aug;132(2):279-90.

Somatic cell nuclear transfer alters peri-implantation trophoblast
differentiation in bovine embryos.

Arnold DR(1), Bordignon V, Lefebvre R, Murphy BD, Smith LC.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche en reproduction animale, Faculté de médecine vétérinaire, 
Université de Montréal, St-Hyacinthe, Québec, Canada J2S 7C6.

Abnormal placental development limits success in ruminant pregnancies derived
from somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT), due to reduction in placentome number 
and consequently, maternal/fetal exchange. In the primary stages of an
epithelial-chorial association, the maternal/fetal interface is characterized by 
progressive endometrial invasion by specialized trophoblast binucleate/giant
cells (TGC). We hypothesized that dysfunctional placentation in SCNT pregnancies 
results from aberration in expression of genes known to be necessary for
trophoblast proliferation (Mash2), differentiation (Hand1), and function (IFN-tau
and PAG-9). We, therefore, compared the expression of these factors in
trophoblast from bovine embryos derived from artificial insemination (AI), in
vitro fertilization (IVF), and SCNT prior to (day 17) and following (day 40 of
gestation) implantation, as well as TGC densities and function. In
preimplantation embryos, Mash2 mRNA was more abundant in SCNT embryos compared to
AI, while Hand1 was highest in AI and IVF relative to SCNT embryos. IFN-tau mRNA 
abundance did not differ among groups. PAG-9 mRNA was undetectable in SCNT
embryos, present in IVF embryos and highest in AI embryos. In postimplantation
pregnancies, SCNT fetal cotyledons displayed higher Mash2 and Hand1 than AI and
IVF tissues. Allelic expression of Mash2 was not different among the groups,
which suggests that elevated mRNA expression was not due to altered imprinting
status of Mash2. The day 40 SCNT cotyledons had the fewest number of TGC compared
to IVF and AI controls. Thus, expression of genes critical to normal placental
development is altered in SCNT bovine embryos, and this is expected to cause
abnormal trophoblast differentiation and contribute to pregnancy loss.

PMID: 16885536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Clin Sci (Lond). 2006 Jul;111(1):35-46.

Molecular mechanisms controlling the coupled development of myocardium and
coronary vasculature.

Bhattacharya S(1), Macdonald ST, Farthing CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Oxford, Wellcome Trust
Centre for Human Genetics, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK.
shoumo.bhattacharya@well.ox.ac.uk

Cardiac failure affects 1.5% of the adult population and is predominantly caused 
by myocardial dysfunction secondary to coronary vascular insufficiency. Current
therapeutic strategies improve prognosis only modestly, as the primary cause --
loss of normally functioning cardiac myocytes -- is not being corrected. Adult
cardiac myocytes are unable to divide and regenerate to any significant extent
following injury. New cardiac myocytes are, however, created during embryogenesis
from progenitor cells and then by cell division from existing cardiac myocytes.
This process is intimately linked to the development of coronary vasculature from
progenitors originating in the endothelium, the proepicardial organ and neural
crest. In this review, we systematically evaluate approx. 90 mouse mutations that
impair heart muscle growth during development. These studies provide genetic
evidence for interactions between myocytes, endothelium and cells derived from
the proepicardial organ and the neural crest that co-ordinate myocardial and
coronary vascular development. Conditional knockout and transgenic rescue
experiments indicate that Vegfa, Bmpr1a (ALK3), Fgfr1/2, Mapk14 (p38), Hand1,
Hand2, Gata4, Zfpm2 (FOG2), Srf and Txnrd2 in cardiac myocytes, Rxra and Wt1 in
the proepicardial organ, EfnB2, Tek, Mapk7, Pten, Nf1 and Casp8 in the
endothelium, and Bmpr1a and Pax3 in neural crest cells are key molecules
controlling myocardial development. Coupling of myocardial and coronary
development is mediated by BMP (bone morphogenetic protein), FGF (fibroblast
growth factor) and VEGFA (vascular endothelial growth factor A) signalling, and
also probably involves hypoxia. Pharmacological targeting of these molecules and 
pathways could, in principle, be used to recreate the embryonic state and achieve
coupled myocardial and coronary vascular regeneration in failing hearts.

PMID: 16764556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Differentiation. 2006 Jun;74(5):212-21.

Sox15 enhances trophoblast giant cell differentiation induced by Hand1 in mouse
placenta.

Yamada K(1), Kanda H, Tanaka S, Takamatsu N, Shiba T, Ito M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, School of Science, Kitasato University, 1-15-1
Kitasato, Sagamihara, Kanagawa 228-8555, Japan.

Some members of the Sry-type HMG box (Sox) protein family play important roles in
embryogenesis as transcription factors. Here, we report that Sox15 transcripts
were much more abundant in mouse placenta than in the fetus, the yolk sac, or
several adult tissues. In situ hybridization analysis of the mouse E8.0 conceptus
indicated that Sox15 mRNA was predominantly expressed in the trophoblast giant
cells of the placenta. We also observed that the amount of Sox15 mRNA
dramatically increased during the differentiation of mouse trophoblast stem
cells. Ectopic expression of Sox15 in Rat choriocarcinoma cells enhanced the
giant cell differentiation induced by a bHLH transcription factor, Hand1. Binding
experiments in cotransfected 293 T cells and in vitro revealed that Sox15
interacted with Hand1. We next examined the effects of this interaction on the
transcriptional activity of Hand1 and Sox15 using the luciferase reporter assay. 
Overexpression of Hand1 repressed the Sox15-driven reporter expression, but Sox15
enhanced the Hand1-driven transcription. This enhancement required both the
Hand1-binding region and the transactivation domain of Sox15. These results may
suggest that the increased transcriptional activity of Hand1 caused by Sox15
might promote the transcription of the target gene resulting in the trophoblast
giant cell differentiation in the mouse placenta.

PMID: 16759287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Clin Cancer Res. 2006 May 15;12(10):2995-3002.

CpG island methylation status in gastric carcinoma with and without infection of 
Epstein-Barr virus.

Chang MS(1), Uozaki H, Chong JM, Ushiku T, Sakuma K, Ishikawa S, Hino R, Barua
RR, Iwasaki Y, Arai K, Fujii H, Nagai H, Fukayama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine and Genome Science
Division, Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, University of
Tokyo, Bunkyo, Tokyo, Japan.

PURPOSE: EBV-associated gastric carcinoma shows global CpG island methylation of 
the promoter region of various cancer-related genes. To further clarify the
significance of CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) status in gastric
carcinoma, we investigated methylation profile and clinicopathologic features
including overall survival in four subgroups defined by EBV infection and CIMP
status: EBV-associated gastric carcinoma and EBV-negative/CIMP-high (H),
EBV-intermediate (I), and EBV-negative (N) gastric carcinoma.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Methylation-specific PCR was applied to 106 gastric
carcinoma cases. CIMP-N, CIMP-I, and CIMP-H status was determined by the number
(0, 1-3, and 4-5, respectively) of methylated marker genes (LOX, HRASLS, FLNc,
HAND1, and TM), that were newly identified as highly methylated in gastric cancer
cell lines. The methylation status of 10 other cancer-related genes (p14, p15,
p16, p73, TIMP-3, E-cadherin, DAPK, GSTP1, hMLH1, and MGMT) was also evaluated.
RESULTS: Nearly all (14 of 15) of EBV-associated gastric carcinoma exhibited
CIMP-H, constituting a homogenous group (14%). EBV-negative gastric carcinoma
consisted of CIMP-H (24%), CIMP-I (38%), and CIMP-N (24%). EBV-associated gastric
carcinoma showed significantly higher frequencies of methylation of
cancer-related genes (mean number +/- SD = 6.9 +/- 1.5) even if compared with
EBV-negative/CIMP-H gastric carcinoma (3.5 +/- 1.8). Among EBV-negative gastric
carcinoma subgroups, CIMP-H gastric carcinoma showed comparatively higher
frequency of methylation than CIMP-I or CIMP-N, especially of p16 and hMLH1.
CIMP-N gastric carcinoma predominantly consisted of advanced carcinoma with
significantly higher frequency of lymph node metastasis. The prognosis of the
patients of CIMP-N was significantly worse compared with other groups overall by 
univariate analysis (P = 0.0313).
CONCLUSION: The methylation profile of five representative genes is useful to
stratify gastric carcinomas into biologically different subgroups. EBV-associated
gastric carcinoma showed global CpG island methylation, comprising a
pathogenetically distinct subgroup in CIMP-H gastric carcinoma.

PMID: 16707594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Dev Biol. 2006 Jun 15;294(2):445-56. Epub 2006 Apr 17.

Post-implantation mouse conceptuses produce paracrine signals that regulate the
uterine endometrium undergoing decidualization.

Bany BM(1), Cross JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary,
Calgary, Canada. bbany@siumed.edu

The uterus undergoes a series of dramatic changes in response to an implanting
conceptus that, in some mammalian species, includes differentiation of the
endometrial stroma into decidual tissue. This process, called decidualization,
can be induced artificially in rodents indicating that the conceptus may not be
essential for a proper maternal response in early pregnancy. In order to test
this hypothesis, we determined if and how the conceptus affects uterine gene
expression. We identified 5 genes (Angpt1, Angpt2, Dtprp, G1p2 and Prlpa) whose
steady-state levels in the uterus undergoing decidualization depends on the
presence of a conceptus. In situ hybridization revealed region-specific effects
which suggested that various components of the conceptus and more than one signal
from the conceptus are likely responsible for altering decidual cell function.
Using cell culture models we found that trophoblast giant cells secrete a type I 
interferon-like molecule which can induce G1p2 expression in endometrial stromal 
cells. Finally, decidual Prlpa expression was reduced in the uterus adjacent to
Hand1- and Ets2-deficient embryos, suggesting that normal trophoblast giant cells
in the placenta are required for the conceptus-dependent effects on Prlpa
expression in the mesometrial decidua. Overall, these results provide support for
the hypothesis that molecular signals from the mouse conceptus have local effects
on uterine gene expression during decidualization.

PMID: 16616120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Apr 28;343(1):144-51. Epub 2006 Mar 2.

Essential role of Hand2 in interventricular septum formation and trabeculation
during cardiac development.

Togi K(1), Yoshida Y, Matsumae H, Nakashima Y, Kita T, Tanaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Japan.

Interventricular septum (IVS) formation is one of the key events in the
development of a four-chambered heart. We previously showed that the basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor Hand1 plays an important role in the
formation of the IVS. Here, we found that the other Hand gene, Hand2, regulated
expansion, trabeculation, and IVS formation in the embryonic heart. In transgenic
embryos expressing Hand2 in the whole ventricles, the boundary region between the
left and right ventricles expanded outwards, resulting in complete absence of the
IVS. Moreover, trabecular formation was observed even in a region where the IVS
was expected to form. In some transgenic embryos with heterogeneous expression of
the transgene, a muscular septum did not form in a region where Hand2 was
expressed, but an incomplete septum was identifiable in a region where Hand2 was 
not expressed, suggesting that septum formation was strictly regulated by the
expression domain of Hand2. Furthermore, expression of trabecular markers
including ANF, BNP, and connexin40 was significantly up-regulated in the
ventricles of Hand2 transgenic embryos as well as in H9c2 cells over-expressing
Hand2. These results suggested that the absence of Hand2 expression in the
interventricular boundary region inhibits expansion and trabeculation in this
area, contributing to the proper formation of the IVS.

PMID: 16530167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Cancer. 2006 Mar 15;106(6):1250-9.

Accumulation of DNA methylation is associated with tumor stage in gastric cancer.

Oue N(1), Mitani Y, Motoshita J, Matsumura S, Yoshida K, Kuniyasu H, Nakayama H, 
Yasui W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences,
Hiroshima University, Kasumi 1-2-3, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8551, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The authors purpose in this study was to clarify the difference in
terms of clinicopathologic features between gastric cancer (GC) with high numbers
of DNA methylated genes and CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP)-positive GC as
originally defined.
METHODS: We analyzed DNA methylation of 12 tumor-related genes (hMLH1, MGMT,
p16(INK4a), CDH1, RAR-beta, HLTF, RIZ1, TM, FLNc, LOX, HRASLS, HAND1) in 75
samples of GC from 75 patients, 25 samples of corresponding nonneoplastic mucosa 
from 25 patients, and 10 samples of normal gastric mucosa from 10 healthy young
individuals by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and bisulfite
PCR. We also investigated CIMP status by examining the methylation of five MINT
loci and p53 mutation status by PCR single-strand conformation polymorphism. We
measured levels of expression of mRNAs for these 12 genes by quantitative reverse
transcription PCR in 50 GC specimens.
RESULTS: The average number of methylated genes per tumor was 4.83. DNA
methylation of each gene was correlated with low expression of the respective
mRNA. High methylation (GC with 5 or more methylated genes) was detected in 39
(52.0%) of 75 GCs. Twenty-nine (37.8%) of 75 GCs were CIMP-positive. DNA
methylation of each of the 12 genes was observed more frequently in the
high-methylation group than in the low-methylation group. Methylation of 6
specific genes occurred more frequently in CIMP-positive GC than in CIMP-negative
GC. Methylation of the remaining 6 genes was not correlated with CIMP-status.
High methylation was found more frequently in Stage III/IV GC (26 of 40 cases,
65.0%) than in Stage I/II GC (13 of 35 cases, 37.1%, P = 0.029).CONCLUSIONS.These
findings indicate that GCs with higher numbers of methylated genes have more
distinct DNA methylation profiles than the originally defined CIMP-positive GCs. 
DNA methylation of tumor-related genes accumulates in conjunction with tumor
progression.

(c) 2006 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 16475210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Clin Cancer Res. 2006 Feb 1;12(3 Pt 1):989-95.

High levels of aberrant DNA methylation in Helicobacter pylori-infected gastric
mucosae and its possible association with gastric cancer risk.

Maekita T(1), Nakazawa K, Mihara M, Nakajima T, Yanaoka K, Iguchi M, Arii K,
Kaneda A, Tsukamoto T, Tatematsu M, Tamura G, Saito D, Sugimura T, Ichinose M,
Ushijima T.

Author information: 
(1)Carcinogenesis Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tsukiji,
Tokyo, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: Risk prediction of gastric cancers is important to implement
appropriate screening procedures. Although aberrant DNA methylation is deeply
involved in gastric carcinogenesis, its induction by Helicobacter pylori, a
strong gastric carcinogen, is unclear. Here, we analyzed the effect of H. pylori 
infection on the quantity of methylated DNA molecules in noncancerous gastric
mucosae and examined its association with gastric cancer risk.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Gastric mucosae were collected from 154 healthy volunteers
(56 H. pylori negative and 98 H. pylori positive) and 72 cases with
differentiated-type gastric cancers (29 H. pylori negative and 43 H. pylori
positive) by endoscopy. The numbers of DNA molecules methylated and unmethylated 
for eight regions of seven CpG islands (CGI) were quantified by quantitative PCR 
after bisulfite modification, and fractions of methylated molecules (methylation 
levels) were calculated.
RESULTS: Among healthy volunteers, methylation levels of all the eight regions
were 5.4- to 303-fold higher in H. pylori positives than in H. pylori negatives
(P < 0.0001). Methylation levels of the LOX, HAND1, and THBD promoter CGIs and
p41ARC exonic CGI were as high as 7.4% or more in H. pylori-positive individuals.
Among H. pylori-negative individuals, methylation levels of all the eight regions
were 2.2- to 32-fold higher in gastric cancer cases than in age-matched healthy
volunteers (P < or = 0.01). Among H. pylori-positive individuals, methylation
levels were highly variable, and that of only HAND1 was significantly increased
in gastric cancer cases (1.4-fold, P = 0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: It was indicated that H. pylori infection potently induces
methylation of CGIs to various degrees. Methylation levels of specific CGIs
seemed to reflect gastric cancer risk in H. pylori-negative individuals.

PMID: 16467114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Stem Cells. 2006 Jun;24(6):1467-75. Epub 2006 Feb 2.

Differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells after RNA interference-mediated
silencing of OCT4 and Nanog.

Hough SR(1), Clements I, Welch PJ, Wiederholt KA.

Author information: 
(1)Research and Development Division, Gene Regulation Group, Invitrogen
Corporation, Carlsbad, California 92008, USA. shelley.hough@invitrogen.com

RNA interference (RNAi) holds great promise as a tool to study the basic biology 
of stem cells or to direct differentiation in a specific manner. Barriers to
achieving efficient and specific gene silencing in RNAi experiments include
limitations in transfection efficiency and in the efficacy and specificity of
RNAi silencing effectors. Here, we combine methods of efficient lipid-mediated
delivery with chemically modified RNAi compounds to silence genes related to
pluripotency, in order to direct differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells.
After transfection of embryonic stem cells with OCT4- or Nanog-targeted RNAi
compounds, levels of OCT4 or Nanog transcript and protein were reduced
accordingly. Reduction in OCT4 expression correlated with induction of
trophectoderm genes Cdx2, Hand1, and PL-1, with formation of cells with
trophoblast giant cell phenotype after 6 days. Reduction in Nanog expression
correlated with induction of extraembryonic endoderm genes GATA4, GATA6, and
laminin B1, with subsequent generation of groups of cells with parietal endoderm 
phenotype. Our results indicate that transient inhibition of OCT4 or Nanog by
RNAi compounds is sufficient to induce differentiation toward extraembryonic
lineages, which supports the model that these transcription factors function in a
dose-dependent manner to influence cell fate.

PMID: 16456133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Dev Biol. 2006 Mar 1;291(1):96-109. Epub 2006 Jan 19.

Retinoic acid signaling is essential for formation of the heart tube in Xenopus.

Collop AH(1), Broomfield JA, Chandraratna RA, Yong Z, Deimling SJ, Kolker SJ,
Weeks DL, Drysdale TA.

Author information: 
(1)Childrens Health Research Institute, 800 Commissioners Rd. E. London, Ontario,
Canada N6C 2V5.

Retinoic acid is clearly important for the development of the heart. In this
paper, we provide evidence that retinoic acid is essential for multiple aspects
of cardiogenesis in Xenopus by examining embryos that have been exposed to
retinoic acid receptor antagonists. Early in cardiogenesis, retinoic acid alters 
the expression of key genes in the lateral plate mesoderm including Nkx2.5 and
HAND1, indicating that early patterning of the lateral plate mesoderm is, in
part, controlled by retinoic acid. We found that, in Xenopus, the transition of
the heart from a sheet of cells to a tube required retinoic acid signaling. The
requirement for retinoic acid signaling was determined to take place during a
narrow window of time between embryonic stages 14 and 18, well before heart tube 
closure. At the highest doses used, the lateral fields of myocardium fail to
fuse, intermediate doses lead to a fusion of the two sides but failure to form a 
tube, and embryos exposed to lower concentrations of antagonist form a heart tube
that failed to complete all the landmark changes that characterize looping. The
myocardial phenotypes observed when exposed to the retinoic acid antagonist
resemble the myocardium from earlier stages of cardiogenesis, although precocious
expression of cardiac differentiation markers was not seen. The morphology of
individual cells within the myocardium appeared immature, closely resembling the 
shape and size of cells at earlier stages of development. However, the failures
in morphogenesis are not merely a slowing of development because, even when
allowed to develop through stage 40, the heart tubes did not close when embryos
were exposed to high levels of antagonist. Indeed, some aspects of left-right
asymmetry also remained even in hearts that never formed a tube. These results
demonstrate that components of the retinoic acid signaling pathway are necessary 
for the progression of cardiac morphogenesis in Xenopus.

PMCID: PMC3539789
PMID: 16423341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Differentiation. 2005 Dec;73(9-10):452-62.

Modulation of trophoblast stem cell and giant cell phenotypes: analyses using the
Rcho-1 cell model.

Sahgal N(1), Canham LN, Konno T, Wolfe MW, Soares MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, Division of Cancer &
Developmental Biology, Institute of Maternal-Fetal Biology, The University of
Kansas Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Boulevard, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

Trophoblast giant cells are located at the maternal-embryonic interface and have 
fundamental roles in the invasive and endocrine phenotypes of the rodent
placenta. In this report, we describe the experimental modulation of trophoblast 
stem cell and trophoblast giant cell phenotypes using the Rcho-1 trophoblast cell
model. Rcho-1 trophoblast cells can be manipulated to proliferate or
differentiate into trophoblast giant cells. Differentiated Rcho-1 trophoblast
cells are invasive and possess an endocrine phenotype, including the production
of members of the prolactin (PRL) family. Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), a known
differentiation-inducing agent, was found to possess profound effects on the in
vitro development of trophoblast cells. Exposure to DMSO, at non-toxic
concentrations, inhibited trophoblast giant cell differentiation in a
dose-dependent manner. These concentrations of DMSO did not significantly affect 
trophoblast cell proliferation or survival. Trophoblast cells exposed to DMSO
exhibited an altered morphology; they were clustered in tightly packed colonies. 
Trophoblast giant cell formation was disrupted, as was the expression of members 
of the PRL gene family. The effects of DMSO were reversible. Removal of DMSO
resulted in the formation of trophoblast giant cells and expression of the PRL
gene family. The phenotype of the DMSO-treated cells was further determined by
examining the expression of a battery of genes characteristic of trophoblast stem
cells and differentiated trophoblast cell lineages. DMSO treatment had a striking
stimulatory effect on eomesodermin expression and a reciprocal inhibitory effect 
on Hand1 expression. In summary, DMSO reversibly inhibits trophoblast
differentiation and induces a quiescent state, which mimics some but not all
aspects of the trophoblast stem cell phenotype.

PMID: 16351689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Cancer Lett. 2006 Sep 28;241(2):213-20. Epub 2005 Nov 21.

Methylation and expression analysis of 15 genes and three normally-methylated
genes in 13 Ovarian cancer cell lines.

Imura M(1), Yamashita S, Cai LY, Furuta J, Wakabayashi M, Yasugi T, Ushijima T.

Author information: 
(1)Carcinogenesis Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 1-1
Tsukiji 5-chome, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.

Aberrant methylation of CpG islands (CGIs) in promoter regions of
tumor-suppressor genes causes their silencing, and aberrant demethylation of
normally methylated CGIs in promoter regions causes aberrant expression of
cancer-testis antigens. Here, we comprehensively analyzed aberrant methylation of
15 genes and demethylation of three normally methylated genes in 13 ovarian
cancer cell lines. RASSF1A was most frequently methylated (complete methylation
in 7 and partial methylation in 4 cell lines), followed by ESR1 (5 and 2,
respectively), FLNC (4 and 4), HAND1 (4 and 2), LOX (3 and 2), HRASLS (3 and 2), 
MGMT (3 and 0), CDKN2A (3 and 0), THBD (2 and 1), hMLH1 (2 and 0), CDH1 (1 and 1)
and GSTP1 (1 and 0). hTERC and TIMP3 were only partially methylated in 7 and 2
cell lines, respectively. BRCA1 was not methylated at all. Aberrant demethylation
of MAGE-A3, -B2 and -A1 was detected in 8, 4 and 3 cell lines, respectively. Gene
expression was consistently absent in cell lines without unmethylated DNA
molecules. Aberrant methylation was frequently observed in MCAS, RMUG-L (mucinous
cell carcinomas), RTSG (poorly-differentiated carcinoma) and TYK-nu
(undifferentiated carcinoma) while infrequent in HTOA, JHOS-2, and OV-90 (serous 
cell carcinomas). Aberrant demethylation was frequently observed in OV-90,
OVK-18, and ES-2 cell lines. It was shown that aberrant methylation and
demethylation were frequently observed in ovarian cancer cell lines, and these
data will provide a basis for further epigenetic analysis in ovarian cancers.

PMID: 16303245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Dev Biol. 2005 Dec 15;288(2):448-60. Epub 2005 Nov 10.

Molecular evidence for a critical period in mural trophoblast development in
bovine blastocysts.

Degrelle SA(1), Campion E, Cabau C, Piumi F, Reinaud P, Richard C, Renard JP, Hue
I.

Author information: 
(1)UMR INRA/ENVA/CNRS Biologie du Développement et de la Reproduction, 78352
Jouy-en-Josas cedex, France.

Embryonic and extra-embryonic lineages are separated at the blastocyst stage in
the mouse at the onset of implantation but well ahead of implantation in most
mammals. To provide information on the development of the trophoblast lineage in 
late-implanting bovine embryos, we combined the use of molecular markers defining
embryonic and extra-embryonic lineages in the mouse with a transcriptomic
approach dedicated to the early steps of the elongation process, a characteristic
feature of blastocyst development in ruminants. In this study, we present
molecular evidence for differences between the cow and the mouse in the
programming of trophoblast differentiation. This different programming
encompasses: (i) the expression of epiblast specifying genes (Oct-4, Nanog) in
bovine trophoblast cells at the onset of elongation, (ii) the transcription of
proliferation markers in early elongating blastocysts, (iii) the early detection 
of trophoblast-specific transcripts related to extra-embryonic tissue's
differentiation (Hand1, Ets2, IFN-tau) and (iv) the identification of a new
transcript (c12) which displays a reciprocal pattern to that of Oct-4 and Nanog
genes in the embryonic cells and for which no equivalent has thus far been found 
in the mouse. Altogether, these results tended to show that early elongation is a
critical transition in bovine trophoblast development.

PMID: 16289134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Sep;25(18):8009-23.

PIAS1 activates the expression of smooth muscle cell differentiation marker genes
by interacting with serum response factor and class I basic helix-loop-helix
proteins.

Kawai-Kowase K(1), Kumar MS, Hoofnagle MH, Yoshida T, Owens GK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics, University of
Virginia, 415 Lane Road, MR5, Room 1220, P.O. Box 801394, Charlottesville, VA
22908, USA.

Although a critical component of vascular disease is modulation of the
differentiated state of vascular smooth muscle cells (SMC), the mechanisms
governing SMC differentiation are relatively poorly understood. We have
previously shown that E-boxes and the ubiquitously expressed class I basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins, including E2-2 and E12, are important in
regulation of the SMC differentiation marker gene, the SM alpha-actin gene. The
aim of the present study was to identify proteins that bind to class I bHLH
proteins in SMC and modulate transcriptional regulation of SMC differentiation
marker genes. Herein we report that members of the protein inhibitor of activated
STAT (PIAS) family interact with class I bHLH factors as well as serum response
factor (SRF). PIAS1 interacted with E2-2 and E12 based on yeast two-hybrid
screens, mammalian two-hybrid assays, and/or coimmunoprecipitation assays.
Overexpression of PIAS1 significantly activated the SM alpha-actin promoter and
mRNA expression, as well as SM myosin heavy chain and SM22alpha, whereas a small 
interfering RNA for PIAS1 decreased activity of these promoters, as well as
endogenous mRNA expression, and SRF binding to SM alpha-actin promoter within
intact chromatin in cultured SMC. Of significance, PIAS1 bound to SRF and
activated SM alpha-actin promoter expression in wild-type but not SRF(-/-)
embryonic stem cells. These results provide novel evidence that PIAS1 modulates
transcriptional activation of SMC marker genes through cooperative interactions
with both SRF and class I bHLH proteins.

PMCID: PMC1234309
PMID: 16135793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Biol Chem. 2005 Sep 16;280(37):32272-8. Epub 2005 Jul 25.

MEF2-dependent recruitment of the HAND1 transcription factor results in
synergistic activation of target promoters.

Morin S(1), Pozzulo G, Robitaille L, Cross J, Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cardiac Growth and Differentiation, Institut de Recherches
Cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), Quebec, Canada.

HAND proteins are tissue-restricted members of the basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor family that play critical roles in cell differentiation and 
organogenesis including placental, cardiovascular, and craniofacial development. 
Nevertheless, the molecular basis underlying the developmental action of HAND
proteins remains undefined. Within the embryo, HAND1 is first detected in the
developing heart where it becomes restricted to the atrial and left ventricular
compartments, a pattern identical to that of the Nppa gene, which encodes atrial 
natriuretic factor, the major secretory product of the heart. We hereby report
that the cardiac atrial natriuretic factor promoter is directly activated by
HAND1, making it the first known HAND1 transcriptional target. The action of
HAND1 does not require heterodimerization with class I basic helix-loop-helix
factors or DNA binding through E-box elements. Instead, HAND1 is recruited to the
promoter via physical interaction with MEF2 proteins. MEF2/HAND1 interaction
results in synergistic activation of MEF2-dependent promoters, and MEF2 binding
sites are sufficient to mediate this synergy. MEF2 binding to DNA is not enhanced
in the presence of HAND1. Instead, cooperativity likely results from
corecruitment of co-activators such as CREB-binding protein. The related HAND2
protein can also synergize with MEF2. Thus, HAND proteins act as cell-specific
developmental co-activators of the MEF2 family of transcription factors. These
findings identify a novel mechanism for HAND action in the heart and provide a
general paradigm to understand the mechanism of HAND action in organogenesis.

PMID: 16043483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Harvey Lect. 2002-2003;98:41-64.

A genetic blueprint for growth and development of the heart.

Olson EN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center at Dallas, Dallas, Texas, USA.

PMID: 16033157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Mol Reprod Dev. 2005 Sep;72(1):16-24.

Expression profiling of genes crucial for placental and preimplantation
development in bovine in vivo, in vitro, and nuclear transfer blastocysts.

Hall VJ(1), Ruddock NT, French AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Early Human Development, Monash Institute of Medical Research,
Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.

Placental abnormalities and failed implantation are characterized phenotypes that
occur in many species as a result of somatic cell cloning. This study examines a 
number of genes, critical for early placental development and reports aberrant
expression patterns in a number of cloned bovine blastocysts, thus implicating a 
role of these genes in failed implantation. Messenger RNA (mRNA) expression of
eight genes critical for early placental and preimplantation development
including Acrogranin, Cdx2, Eomes, ErbB3, ERR2, Hand1, MRJ, and Rex1 were
analyzed in single, in vivo, in vitro, and cloned bovine blastocysts (produced by
hand-made cloning (HMC) and serial hand-made cloning (SHMC)) following
complementary DNA (cDNA) amplification with a SMART cDNA synthesis kit. Aberrant 
expression of Acrogranin, Cdx2, and ERR2 was detected in a number of blastocysts 
produced by SHMC. Other genes, Eomes and Hand1, were not detectable in, in vivo
bovine blastocysts, suggesting a differential expression pattern between bovine
and murine embryos. A number of control marker genes including Oct4, IFN-tau, and
PolyA were expressed in all single blastocysts analyzed. This is the first study 
to report that failure of implantation may be due to aberrant expression of genes
in the preimplantation cloned embryo, which are crucial for the early regulation 
and differentiation of the placenta.

PMID: 15898073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Jun 17;331(4):1039-44.

Efficient gene silencing and cell differentiation using siRNA in mouse and monkey
ES cells.

Takada T(1), Nemoto K, Yamashita A, Kato M, Kondo Y, Torii R.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Animal Life Science, Shiga University of Medical Science, 
Ohtsu, Shiga 520-2192, Japan. ttakada@belle.shiga-med.ac.jp

Small interfering RNA (siRNA) has been widely used for suppressing gene
expression in various organisms. Here, we describe efficient methods to suppress 
target genes (EGFP or Oct4) using siRNA in mouse and monkey ES cells, and
differentiation. In mouse ES cells, FACS analysis revealed that EGFP expression
was suppressed in 97% of transfected cells at 48 h after transfection. In
addition, cells expressed Hand1 and Cdx2, which are the marker genes of
trophoblast lineage by the transient suppression of Oct4. In the case of monkey
ES cells, highly efficient suppression was achieved in 98% of cells at 96 h
post-transfection using the Sendai virus (hemagglutinating virus of Japan, HVJ)
envelope as a carrier of siRNA. These efficient transfection methods using
synthetic siRNA should contribute to evaluate specific gene function in ES cells 
and can be used to differentiate ES cells into desired cell lineages.

PMID: 15882982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Genesis. 2005 Jun;42(2):53-60.

Transgenic mouse lines expressing synaptopHluorin in hippocampus and cerebellar
cortex.

Araki R(1), Sakagami H, Yanagawa Y, Hikima T, Ishizuka T, Yawo H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology and Neurosciences, Tohoku University
Graduate School of Life Sciences, and CREST, JST, Sendai, Japan.

We generated six transgenic mouse lines in which synaptopHluorin (SpH), one of
green fluorescent protein-based sensors of vesicular exocytosis, was expressed
under the control of neuron-specific Thy-1.2 promoter. In situ hybridization
study revealed that SpH mRNA was expressed in a broad spectrum of brain regions
in four of them, whereas in others it was expressed in the specific regions of
the hippocampus. In one particular line, SpH immunoreactivity was specifically
observed in the mossy fiber presynaptic terminals of both hippocampus and
cerebellar cortex. The fluorescence intensity of these presynaptic terminals was 
somewhat decreased by acidic buffer superfusion and greatly increased by
vesicular neutralization of pH, indicating that the SpH molecules are mainly
distributed in the synaptic vesicles. The exocytosis-dependent fluorescence
increment was measured upon activation of a single presynaptic terminal. These
transgenic lines are expected to facilitate morphological and physiological
studies of presynaptic terminals in a variety of regions of the brain.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15880564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Development. 2005 Jan;132(1):189-201. Epub 2004 Dec 2.

The Hand1 and Hand2 transcription factors regulate expansion of the embryonic
cardiac ventricles in a gene dosage-dependent manner.

McFadden DG(1), Barbosa AC, Richardson JA, Schneider MD, Srivastava D, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, 6000 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors Hand1 and Hand2 display dynamic 
and spatially restricted expression patterns in the developing heart. Mice that
lack Hand2 die at embryonic day 10.5 from right ventricular hypoplasia and
vascular defects, whereas mice that lack Hand1 die at embryonic day 8.5 from
placental and extra-embryonic abnormalities that preclude analysis of its
potential role in later stages of heart development. To determine the cardiac
functions of Hand1, we generated mice harboring a conditional Hand1-null allele
and excised the gene by cardiac-specific expression of Cre recombinase. Embryos
homozygous for the cardiac Hand1 gene deletion displayed defects in the left
ventricle and endocardial cushions, and exhibited dysregulated ventricular gene
expression. However, these embryos survived until the perinatal period when they 
died from a spectrum of cardiac abnormalities. Creation of Hand1/2 double mutant 
mice revealed gene dose-sensitive functions of Hand transcription factors in the 
control of cardiac morphogenesis and ventricular gene expression. These findings 
demonstrate that Hand factors play pivotal and partially redundant roles in
cardiac morphogenesis, cardiomyocyte differentiation and cardiac-specific
transcription.

PMID: 15576406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Nov;24(22):9835-47.

Differential regulation of Hand1 homodimer and Hand1-E12 heterodimer activity by 
the cofactor FHL2.

Hill AA(1), Riley PR.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford St., London
WC1N 1EH, United Kingdom.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) factor Hand1 plays an essential role in cardiac
morphogenesis, and yet its precise function remains unknown. Protein-protein
interactions involving Hand1 provide a means of determining how Hand1-induced
gene expression in the developing heart might be regulated. Hand1 is known to
form either heterodimers with near-ubiquitous E-factors and other
lineage-restricted class B bHLH proteins or homodimers with itself in vitro. To
date, there have been no reported Hand1 protein interactions involving non-bHLH
proteins. Heterodimer-versus-homodimer choice is mediated by the phosphorylation 
status of Hand1; however, little is known about the in vivo function of these
dimers or, importantly, how they are regulated. In an effort to understand how
Hand1 activity in the heart might be regulated postdimerization, we have
investigated tertiary Hand1-protein interactions with non-bHLH factors. We
describe a novel interaction of Hand1 with the LIM domain protein FHL2, a known
transcriptional coactivator and corepressor expressed in the developing
cardiovascular system. FHL2 interacts with Hand1 via the bHLH domain and is able 
to repress Hand1/E12 heterodimer-induced transcription but has no effect on
Hand1/Hand1 homodimer activity. This effect of FHL2 is not mediated either at the
level of dimerization or via an effect of Hand1/E12 DNA binding. In summary, our 
data describe a novel differential regulation of Hand1 heterodimers versus
homodimers by association of the cofactor FHL2 and provide insight into the
potential for a tertiary level of control of Hand1 activity in the developing
heart.

PMCID: PMC525463
PMID: 15509787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Oncogene. 2004 Nov 11;23(53):8705-10.

Identification of 27 5' CpG islands aberrantly methylated and 13 genes silenced
in human pancreatic cancers.

Hagihara A(1), Miyamoto K, Furuta J, Hiraoka N, Wakazono K, Seki S, Fukushima S, 
Tsao MS, Sugimura T, Ushijima T.

Author information: 
(1)Carcinogenesis Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 1-1
Tsukiji 5-chome, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.

Aberrantly methylated DNA fragments were searched for in human pancreatic
cancers, using the genome scanning technique:
methylation-sensitive-representational difference analysis (MS-RDA). MS-RDA
isolated 111 DNA fragments derived from CpG islands (CGIs), and 35 of them were
from CGIs in the 5' regions of known genes. Methylation-specific PCR (MSP) of the
CGIs in seven pancreatic cancer cell lines and two pancreatic ductal epithelial
cell lines showed that 27 CGIs in the 5' regions were aberrantly methylated in at
least one of the cancer cell lines. Quantitative reverse-transcription-PCR
analysis showed that downstream genes of all the CGIs were either not expressed
or only very weakly expressed in cancer cell lines with the aberrant methylation.
In the pancreatic ductal epithelial cell lines, 18 genes were expressed at
various levels, and nine genes were not expressed at all. Treatment of a cancer
cell line with a demethylating agent, 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, restored the
expression of 13 genes, RASGRF2, ADAM23, NEF3, NKX2-8, HAND1, EGR4, PRG2, FBN2,
CDH2, TLL1, NPTX1, NTSR1 and THBD, showing their silencing by methylation of
their 5' CGIs. MSP of 24 primary pancreatic cancers showed that all these genes, 
except for THBD, were methylated in at least one cancer. Some of those were
suggested to be potentially involved in pancreatic cancer development and
progression.

PMID: 15467763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Science. 2004 Sep 10;305(5690):1619-22.

Advanced cardiac morphogenesis does not require heart tube fusion.

Li S(1), Zhou D, Lu MM, Morrisey EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104,
USA.

The bilateral cardiac mesoderm migrates from the lateral region of the embryo to 
the ventral midline, where it fuses to form the primitive heart tube. It is
generally accepted that migration and fusion are essential for subsequent stages 
of cardiac morphogenesis. We present evidence that, in Foxp4 mutant embryonic
mice, each bilateral heart-forming region is capable of developing into a highly 
differentiated four-chambered mammalian heart in the absence of midline fusion.
These data demonstrate that left-right chamber specification, cardiac looping,
septation, cardiac myocyte differentiation, and endocardial cushion formation are
preprogrammed in the precardiac mesoderm and do not require midline positional
identity or heart tube fusion.

PMID: 15361625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Biol Chem. 2004 Sep 3;279(36):37685-92. Epub 2004 Jun 28.

Paraxis is a basic helix-loop-helix protein that positively regulates
transcription through binding to specific E-box elements.

Wilson-Rawls J(1), Rhee JM, Rawls A.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA.
nrawls@imap4.asu.edu

Members of the Twist subfamily of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors
are important for the specification of mesodermal derivatives during vertebrate
embryogenesis. This subfamily includes both transcriptional activators such as
scleraxis, Hand2, and Dermo-1 and repressors such as Twist and Hand1. Paraxis is 
a member of this subfamily, and it has been shown to regulate morphogenetic
events during somitogenesis, including the transition of cells from mesenchyme to
epithelium and maintaining anterior/posterior polarity. Mice deficient in paraxis
exhibit a caudal truncation of the axial skeleton and fusion of the vertebrae.
Considering the developmental importance of paraxis, it is important for future
studies to understand the molecular basis of its activity. Here we demonstrate
that paraxis can function as a transcriptional activator when it forms a
heterodimer with E12. Paraxis is able to bind to a set of E-boxes that overlaps
with the closely related scleraxis. Paraxis expression precedes that of scleraxis
in the region of the somite fated to form the axial skeleton and tendons and is
able to direct transcription from an E-box found in the scleraxis promoter.
Further, in the absence of paraxis, Pax-1 is no longer expressed in the somites
and presomitic mesoderm. These results suggest that paraxis may regulate early
events during chondrogenesis by positively directing transcription of
sclerotome-specific genes.

PMID: 15226298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Dev Biol. 2004 Jul 15;271(2):362-71.

Trophoblast stem cells differentiate in vitro into invasive trophoblast giant
cells.

Hemberger M(1), Hughes M, Cross JC.

Author information: 
(1)Genes and Development Research Group, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Health Sciences Center, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada 
T2N 4N1. myriam.hemberger@bbsrc.ac.uk

Trophoblast cells are characterized by an invasive behavior into the surrounding 
uterine tissue. In rodents, an early peri-/endovascular type of invasion exerted 
by trophoblast giant cells can be distinguished from a late interstitial type
carried out by glycogen trophoblast cells. Analysis of the molecular mechanisms
of trophoblast invasion has been hampered, however, by the complex temporal and
spatial patterns of invasion. We utilized trophoblast stem (TS) cell lines to
study trophoblast invasion in vitro and to establish a model that facilitates
investigation of this process on the molecular level. Our results showed that
trophoblast giant cells that differentiate from TS cells in vitro are capable of 
penetrating a reconstituted basement membrane matrix. Consequently, invasion
rates were increased in various giant cell differentiation-promoting conditions. 
We also derived TS cell lines that are homozygous for a mutation of the Hand1
transcription factor. The Hand1-/- TS cells showed reduced levels of giant cell
differentiation and exhibited an approximately 50% decrease in invasion rates. In
summary, trophoblast giant cells that differentiate from TS cells in vitro
recapitulate the invasive capacity of normal trophoblast cells in vivo. The TS
cell system is a valuable tool to identify and quantitatively study regulators of
trophoblast invasion.

PMID: 15223340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Dev Biol. 2004 Jul 1;271(1):26-37.

The Hand1, Stra13 and Gcm1 transcription factors override FGF signaling to
promote terminal differentiation of trophoblast stem cells.

Hughes M(1), Dobric N, Scott IC, Su L, Starovic M, St-Pierre B, Egan SE, Kingdom 
JC, Cross JC.

Author information: 
(1)Genes and Development Research Group, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, University of Calgary, AB, Canada.

The trophoblast cell lineage is an interesting model system because it is
composed of a limited number of cell types that are spatially patterned.
Trophoblast stem (TS) cells reside within a layer called the chorion and either
remain as stem cells or differentiate into spongiotrophoblast (SpT), trophoblast 
giant (TG) cells or syncytiotrophoblast cells (SynT) of the labyrinth.
Maintenance of the TS phenotype is dependent on stimulation by FGF4, whereas
differentiation and/or maintenance of the differentiated derivatives are
dependent on key transcription factors: Mash2 for SpT, Hand1 for TG cells and
Gcm1 for SynT cells. TS cells proliferate and retain their stem cell phenotype in
culture in response to FGF4 and an additional factor(s) that can be provided by
conditioned medium from embryonic fibroblast feeder cells (CM). To understand the
functions of Hand1, Mash2 and Gcm1 at a cellular level, we tested the effects of 
their ectopic and over-expression on the ability of TS cells to either continue
to proliferate or differentiate into their alternative fates. Expression of Mash2
alone had no effects on TS cell differentiation. However, Mash2-transfected cells
continued to divide longer after withdrawal of FGF/CM. Hand1 promoted TGC
differentiation, even in the continued presence of FGF4/CM. Stra13, another bHLH 
factor gene that is expressed in TG cells, also induced TG differentiation. Gcm1 
induced a rapid arrest of TS proliferation but, in contrast to Hand1 and Stra13, 
blocked TG cell differentiation. Although Gcm1 was not sufficient to promote SynT
formation, expression of an antisense Gcm1 transcript blocked SynT
differentiation. These data suggest that Mash2 functions to promote transient
FGF4-independent amplification of trophoblast cells that are progressing towards 
the SpT and TG cell phenotype. By contrast, Hand1 and Stra13 promote cell cycle
exit and restrict cells towards the TG fate, whereas Gcm1 promotes cell cycle
exit and restriction towards the SynT fate.

PMID: 15196947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Biol Proced Online. 2004;6:78-82. Epub 2004 May 12.

Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer (FRET) as a method to calculate the
dimerization strength of basic Helix-Loop-Helix (bHLH) proteins.

Centonze VE(1), Firulli BA, Firulli AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Structural Biology University of Texas Health
Science Center at San Antonio. USA.

Post-translational modifications such as phosphorylation play a vital role in the
regulation of protein function. In our study of the basic Helix-loop-Helix (bHLH)
transcription factor HAND1, we show that HAND1 is phosphorylated during the
trophoblast giant cell differentiation on residues residing in Helix I of the
bHLH domain. Our hypothesis is that these modifications result in changes in
HAND1 dimerization affinities with other bHLH factors. To test this idea, we
employed FRET to measure the protein-protein interactions of HAND1 and HAND1
point mutants in HEK293 cells using YFP and CFP fusion proteins and laser
scanning confocal microscopy.

PMCID: PMC411166
PMID: 15188014  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


162. Mech Dev. 2004 Jun;121(6):559-72.

Ablation of the CLP-1 gene leads to down-regulation of the HAND1 gene and
abnormality of the left ventricle of the heart and fetal death.

Huang F(1), Wagner M, Siddiqui MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Center for Cardiovascular and Muscle
Research, State University of New York, Health Science Center at Brooklyn, Box 5,
450 Clarkson Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11203, USA.

We have recently reported that cardiac lineage protein-1 (CLP-1), a nuclear
protein with an acidic region that constitutes a potential protein-protein
interaction domain, regulates transcription of the cardiac myosin light chain-2v 
(MLC-2v) gene promoter in a manner consistent with its being a transcriptional
co-activator or regulator. To test the postulate that CLP-1 is a regulator of
cardiac genes we ablated the CLP-1 gene in mice. Past embryonic day (E)16.5,
CLP-1 null alleles did not show Mendelian inheritance suggesting that absence of 
CLP-1 was lethal in late fetal stages. CLP-1 (-/-) fetal hearts exhibited a
reduced left ventricular chamber with thickened myocardial walls, features
suggestive of cardiac hypertrophy. Electron microscopic analysis of E16.5 CLP-1
(-/-) ventricular myocardium showed a marked decline in cell density and altered 
nuclear and myofibril morphologies similar to that seen in animal models of
hypertrophic heart. Analysis of contractile and non-contractile protein genes
known to be re-expressed during cardiac hypertrophy showed them to have higher
expression levels in CLP-1 (-/-) hearts thereby confirming the hypertrophic
phenotype at the molecular level. Analysis of cardiac development genes showed
that expression of the HAND1 transcription factor, a gene involved in patterning 
of the heart tube and down-regulated in hypertrophic hearts, was also
significantly reduced in CLP-1 (-/-) fetal hearts. CLP-1 and HAND1 have similar
expression patterns in the developing heart ventricles. These data suggest that
CLP-1 and the HAND transcription factors may be part of a genetic program
critical to proper heart development, perturbation of which can lead to
cardiomyopathy.

Copyright 2004 Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 15172687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jun;24(11):4627-35.

Role of Hand1/eHAND in the dorso-ventral patterning and interventricular septum
formation in the embryonic heart.

Togi K(1), Kawamoto T, Yamauchi R, Yoshida Y, Kita T, Tanaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Social Service, Kyoto University Hospital, 54
Shogoin-Kawahara-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. makoto@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Molecular mechanisms for the dorso-ventral patterning and interventricular septum
formation in the embryonic heart are unknown. To investigate a role of
Hand1/eHAND in cardiac chamber formation, we generated Hand1/eHAND knock-in mice 
where Hand1/eHAND cDNA was placed under the control of the MLC2V promoter. In
Hand1/eHAND knock-in mice, the outer curvature of the right and left ventricles
expanded more markedly. Moreover, there was no interventricular groove or septum 
formation, although molecularly, Hand1/eHAND knock-in hearts had two ventricles. 
However, the morphology of the inner curvature of the ventricles, the
atrioventricular canal, and the outflow tract was not affected by Hand1/eHAND
expression. Furthermore, expression of Hand1/eHAND in the whole ventricles
altered the expression patterns of Chisel, ANF, and Hand2/dHAND but did not
affect Tbx5 expression. In contrast, the interventricular septum formed normally 
in transgenic embryos overexpressing Hand1/eHAND in the right ventricle but not
in the boundary region. These results suggested that Hand1/eHAND is involved in
expansion of the ventricular walls and that absence of Hand1/eHAND expression in 
the boundary region between the right and left ventricles may be critical in the 
proper formation of the interventricular groove and septum. Furthermore,
Hand1/eHAND is not a master regulatory gene that specifies the left ventricle
myocyte lineage but may control the dorso-ventral patterning in concert with
additional genes.

PMCID: PMC416422
PMID: 15143159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Biol Proced Online. 2004;6:16-22. Epub 2004 Mar 19.

Phosphopeptide mapping of proteins ectopically expressed in tissue culture cell
lines.

Firulli BA(1), Virshup DM, Firulli AB.

Author information: 
(1)Wells Center for Pediatric Research, James Whitcomb Riley Hospital for
Children, Departments of Pediatrics and Medical & Molecular Genetics. Indiana
University Medical School, 1044 W. Walnut, R4 402 Indianapolis, IN 46202-5225.
USA.

Post-translational modifications such as phosphorylation play a vital role in the
regulation of protein function. In our study of the basic Helix-loop-Helix (bHLH)
transcription factor HAND1, it was suspected that HAND1 was being phosphorylated 
during trophoblast giant cell differentiation and that coexpression of a
constitutively active kinase with HAND1 resulted in changes in the proteins
dimerization profile. In order to accurately document HAND1 phosphorylation and
identify the resides being modified, we employed metabolic cell labeling with
(32)P of tissue culture cells coexpressing a Flag-epitope tagged HAND1 along with
a number of active kinases and phosphatase subunits. We generated phosphopeptide 
maps of the phosphorylated HAND1 using the methods described below and linked
these modifications to changes in HAND1 biological function.

PMCID: PMC389901
PMID: 15103396  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


165. Development. 2004 May;131(9):2195-204. Epub 2004 Apr 8.

Extra-embryonic vasculature development is regulated by the transcription factor 
HAND1.

Morikawa Y(1), Cserjesi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, Louisiana State University Health
Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor HAND1 (also called eHAND) 
is expressed in numerous tissues during development including the heart, limbs,
neural crest derivatives and extra-embryonic membranes. To investigate the role
of Hand1 during development, we generated a Hand1 knockout mouse. Hand1-null mice
survived to the nine somite stage at which time they succumbed to numerous
developmental defects. One striking defect in Hand1-null embryos was the
accumulation of hematopoietic cells between the yolk sac and the amnion because
of defects in the yolk sac vasculature. In Hand1-null yolk sacs, vasculogenesis
occurs but vascular refinement was arrested. Analysis of angiogenic genes in
extra-embryonic membranes showed that most are expressed at normal levels in
Hand1-null embryos but several, including Vegf, Ang1 and ephrin B2, and gene
components of the Notch pathway are upregulated. In the absence of Hand1 the
expression of the bHLH factor Hand2 is also enhanced. Although HAND1 and HAND2
share many structural features, and Hand2 is required for vasculature development
in yolk sacs, enhanced expression of Hand2 is insufficient to compensate for the 
loss of Hand1. The most striking aspect of the vascular defect in Hand1 mutant
yolk sacs is the abnormal distribution of smooth muscle cells. During normal
angiogenesis, vascular smooth muscle precursors are recruited to the
peri-endothelial tissue before differentiation, however, in Hand1 null yolk sacs,
smooth muscle cells are not recruited but differentiate in clusters distributed
throughout the mesoderm. These data indicate that Hand1 is required for
angiogenesis and vascular smooth muscle recruitment in the yolk sac.

PMID: 15073150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Mol Cell. 2003 Nov;12(5):1225-37.

PKA, PKC, and the protein phosphatase 2A influence HAND factor function: a
mechanism for tissue-specific transcriptional regulation.

Firulli BA(1), Howard MJ, McDaid JR, McIlreavey L, Dionne KM, Centonze VE,
Cserjesi P, Virshup DM, Firulli AB.

Author information: 
(1)Wells Center for Pediatric Research, James Whitcomb Riley Hospital for
Children, 702 Barnhill Drive, Room 2666, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2003 Nov;12(5):1061-2.

The bHLH factors HAND1 and HAND2 are required for heart, vascular, neuronal,
limb, and extraembryonic development. Unlike most bHLH proteins, HAND factors
exhibit promiscuous dimerization properties. We report that
phosphorylation/dephosphorylation via PKA, PKC, and a specific heterotrimeric
protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) modulates HAND function. The PP2A targeting-subunit
B56delta specifically interacts with HAND1 and -2, but not other bHLH proteins.
PKA and PKC phosphorylate HAND proteins in vivo, and only B56delta-containing
PP2A complexes reduce levels of HAND1 phosphorylation. During RCHOI trophoblast
stem cell differentiation, B56delta expression is downregulated and HAND1
phosphorylation increases. Mutations in phosphorylated residues result in altered
HAND1 dimerization and biological function. Taken together, these results suggest
that site-specific phosphorylation regulates HAND factor functional specificity.

PMID: 14636580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Cell Sci. 2003 Dec 15;116(Pt 24):5005-13.

Cell history determines the maintenance of transcriptional differences between
left and right ventricular cardiomyocytes in the developing mouse heart.

Kelly RG(1), Lemonnier M, Zaffran S, Munk A, Buckingham ME.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS URA 2578, Department of Developmental Biology, Pasteur Institute, 25 Rue 
du Dr Roux, Paris 75015, France. rkelly@pasteur.fr

The molecular mechanisms that establish and maintain transcriptional differences 
between cardiomyocytes in the left and right ventricular chambers are unkown. We 
have previously analysed a myosin light chain 3f transgene containing an nlacZ
reporter gene, which is transcribed in left but not right ventricular
cardiomyocytes. In this report we examine the mechanisms involved in maintaining 
regionalised transgene expression. Primary cardiomyocytes prepared from left and 
right ventricular walls of transgenic mice were found to maintain transgene
expression status in culture. However, similar cultures prepared from
nontransgenic mice or rats show uniform expression after transient transfection
of Mlc3f constructs, suggesting that the mechanism responsible for differential
expression of the transgene between left and right ventricular cells does not
operate on transiently introduced molecules. These data suggest that
developmental cell history determines transgene expression status. Maintenance of
transgene expression status is regulated by a cell-autonomous mechanism that is
independent of DNA methylation, trichostatin A-sensitive histone deacetylation
and miss-expression of transcription factors that are expressed in the left or
right ventricles of the embryonic heart. Parallels between Mlc3f transgene
repression in right ventricular cardiomyocytes and polycomb-mediated silencing in
Drosophila suggest that Mlc3f regulatory sequences included on the transgene may 
contain a cellular memory module that is switched into an on or off state during 
early cardiogenesis. Epigenetic mechanisms may therefore be involved in
maintaining patterning of the mammalian myocardium.

PMID: 14625394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Development. 2003 Dec;130(24):5953-64. Epub 2003 Oct 22.

Tbx5 specifies the left/right ventricles and ventricular septum position during
cardiogenesis.

Takeuchi JK(1), Ohgi M, Koshiba-Takeuchi K, Shiratori H, Sakaki I, Ogura K,
Saijoh Y, Ogura T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and
Technology, 8916-5, Takayama, Ikoma, Nara 630-0101, Japan.

Extensive misexpression studies were carried out to explore the roles played by
Tbx5, the expression of which is excluded from the right ventricle (RV) during
cardiogenesis. When Tbx5 was misexpressed ubiquitously, ventricular septum was
not formed, resulting in a single ventricle. In such heart, left ventricle
(LV)-specific ANF gene was induced. In search of the putative RV factor(s), we
have found that chick Tbx20 is expressed in the RV, showing a complementary
fashion to Tbx5. In the Tbx5-misexpressed heart, this gene was repressed. When
misexpression was spatially partial, leaving small Tbx5-negative area in the
right ventricle, ventricular septum was shifted rightwards, resulting in a small 
RV with an enlarged LV. Focal expression induced an ectopic boundary of
Tbx5-positive and -negative regions in the right ventricle, at which an
additional septum was formed. Similar results were obtained from the transient
transgenic mice. In such hearts, expression patterns of dHAND and eHAND were
changed with definitive cardiac abnormalities. Furthermore, we report that human 
ANF promoter is synergistically activated by Tbx5, Nkx2.5 and GATA4. This
activation was abrogated by Tbx20, implicating the pivotal roles of interactions 
among these heart-specific factors. Taken together, our data indicate that Tbx5
specifies the identity of LV through tight interactions among several
heart-specific factors, and highlight the essential roles of Tbx5 in cardiac
development.

PMID: 14573514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Mech Dev. 2002 Dec;119 Suppl 1:S65-71.

A differential screen for putative targets of the bHLH transcription factor Hand1
in cardiac morphogenesis.

Smart N(1), Hill AA, Cross JC, Riley PR.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford Street, London
WC1N 1EH, UK.

The bHLH transcription factor, Hand1 has been implicated in cardiac looping in
the mouse, however its function in the developing heart remains unknown. To
investigate the mechanism(s) through which Hand1 might function, we screened for 
potential downstream target genes using representational difference analysis.
Thymosin beta4 was found to be down-regulated whereas cystatin C and alphaCA were
up-regulated in Hand1-null embryoid bodies. Whole-mount in situ hybridisation on 
wild type embryos (E8.0-E10.5) and Hand1 homozygous-mutant embryos (E8.0)
confirmed co-expression of the putative targets with Hand1 in the heart and their
aberrant expression in a Hand1-null background.

PMID: 14516662  [PubMed - in process]


170. Immunogenetics. 2003 Oct;55(7):508-14. Epub 2003 Aug 27.

Selecting peptides to optimize Th1 responses to an equine lentivirus using HLA-DR
binding motifs and defined HIV-1 Th peptides.

Fraser DG(1), Mealey RH, McGuire TC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State
University, Pullman 99164-7040, USA.

Three moderately to broadly recognized equine infectious anemia virus (EIAV)
peptides that contained helper T-lymphocyte (Th) 1 epitopes were previously
identified. Although lipopeptide immunization was only weakly immunostimulatory
in a preliminary study, as measured by T-lymphocyte proliferation responses, it
was of interest to define additional broadly recognized Th1 epitopes to include
in future immunization trials. Using broadly cross-reactive and conserved Th
epitopes known in the related human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) and binding 
motifs defined in human leukocyte antigen DR molecules as guides, this work
identified three new peptides containing Th1 epitopes recognized by 60-75% of
EIAV infected horses. The observed similarity across species of major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II binding motifs and the conservation of 
Th peptides between related viruses should allow easier targeting of Th epitope
regions in less well characterized pathogens and/or in species whose MHC class II
molecules are poorly defined.

PMID: 12942208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Gene. 2003 Jul 17;312:27-40.

A HANDful of questions: the molecular biology of the heart and neural crest
derivatives (HAND)-subclass of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors.

Firulli AB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Wells Center for Pediatric Research, James Whitcomb Riley Hospital for
Children, Indiana University School of Medicine, 702 Barnhill Drive, Room 2666,
Indianapolis, IN 46202-5225, USA. tfirulli@iupui.edu

The HAND subclass of basic Helix-loop-helix factors is comprised of two members
HAND1 and HAND2. HAND genes are present within the genomes of organisms ranging
from flies to man. Experiments employing chick embryology, tissue culture, and
gene targeting in mice show that HAND function is critical for the specification 
and/or differentiation of extraembryonic structures that include the yolk sac,
placenta, and the cells of the trophoblast lineages. HAND factors also play key
roles in cardiac, gut, sympathetic neuronal development and in the proper
development of tissues populated by HAND-expressing neural crest cells, including
regions of the developing vasculature, the limbs, the jaw, and teeth.
Surprisingly, nearly 10 years after their initial identification and
characterization, little is understood about the nature of the downstream target 
genes which HAND1 and HAND2 regulate, whether the nature of their transcriptional
regulation is positive or negative, or if they modulate genetic programs common
to these diverse tissue types or if they drive unique subsets of genes that
contribute to tissue identity. At the core of these questions is by which
mechanisms do HAND factors modulate biological activity? Do they behave like
classical class B bHLH factors or is their function more complex requiring a
rethinking of the dogma? What follows is a review of what is currently known
about HAND factors and a reflection on why elucidating their role in the
biological programs within which they participate has been so difficult.

PMID: 12909338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 2002;67:121-5.

Molecular mechanisms of ventricular hypoplasia.

Srivastava D(1), Gottlieb PD, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and Molecular Biology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390-9148, USA.

We have established the beginnings of a road map to understand how ventricular
cells become specified, differentiate, and expand into a functional cardiac
chamber (Fig. 5). The transcriptional networks described here provide clear
evidence that disruption of pathways affecting ventricular growth could be the
underlying etiology in a subset of children born with malformation of the right
or left ventricle. As we learn details of the precise mechanisms through which
the critical factors function, the challenge will lie in devising innovative
methods to augment or modify the effects of gene mutations on ventricular
development. Because most congenital heart disease likely occurs in a setting of 
heterozygous, predisposing mutations of one or more genes, modulation of activity
of critical pathways in a preventive fashion may be useful in averting disease in
genetically susceptible individuals.

PMID: 12858532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Placenta. 2003 Apr;24 Suppl A:S104-10.

Regulatory transcription factors controlling function and differentiation of
human trophoblast--a review.

Loregger T(1), Pollheimer J, Knöfler M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Vienna, Austria.

In transgenic mice, homozygous mutations of trophoblast-specific transcription
factors such as Hand1, Mash-2, I-mfa or GCM1 revealed their key regulatory roles 
in induction, maintenance or differentiation of distinct placental trophoblast
subpopulations in vivo. Descriptive studies have shown that several of these
factors are also expressed in the human placenta, suggesting that the molecular
mechanisms governing trophoblast differentiation could be similar in mice and
men. While an increasing number of putative developmental regulators are being
identified in the human placenta, little information is available regarding
whether the particular factors play an essential role in trophoblast
differentiation processes such as formation of anchoring villi, placental bed
invasion or syncytialization. However, expression of abundant
trophoblast-specific products such as hormones can be regarded as a hallmark of
differentiation, suggesting that the factors controlling their transcription
could also be involved in the developmental processes of the placenta. Indeed,
studies in different model systems revealed that the human homologues of murine
trophoblast-specific transcriptional regulators interact with the promoter
regions of typical placental genes such as aromatase P450 (CYP19), chorionic
gonadotrophin (CG) or placental lactogen (PL). Additionally, the unique
combination of more broadly distributed transcription factors of the Sp or Ap-2
protein family in a particular trophoblast cell type is required to govern mRNA
expression in a differentiation-dependent manner. Here, we will summarize our
present knowledge on these individual transcription factors that are involved in 
human trophoblast function and differentiation.

PMID: 12842421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Dev Dyn. 2003 Jun;227(2):280-90.

Intracellular calcium plays an essential role in cardiac development.

Porter GA Jr(1), Makuck RF, Rivkees SA.

Author information: 
(1)Yale Child Health Research Center and Department of Pediatrics, Division of
Cardiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut
06520-8064, USA. george.porter@yale.edu

Intracellular calcium signaling plays an essential role in cardiac physiology and
modulates cardiac gene expression. However, the role that intracellular calcium
signaling plays during cardiac development is not known. To address this issue,
we examined the effects of altered intracellular calcium levels on cardiac
morphogenesis. In acutely cultured mouse embryos, L-type calcium channel blockade
decreased resting intracellular calcium levels and inhibited calcium transients. 
Embryos cultured at embryonic day (E) 7.5-8.5 in the presence of the L-type
calcium channel blockers nifedipine and verapamil developed hearts that had a
large left ventricle, lacked a right ventricle and had a long, thin outflow
tract. If embryos were cultured at E7.5, calcium channel blockade also induced an
abnormal, anterior cardiac loop. These alterations in development were not due to
altered cardiac function, as heart rates at the end of the culture period were
not affected by calcium channel blockade and blood flow was observed. Treatment
with nifedipine altered the mRNA expression of the transcription factor Gata4,
which was absent in the developing ventricles, and the sarcomeric protein Mylpc
(myosin light chain 2V), which was decreased distal to the left ventricle and was
absent at the site of the developing right ventricle. In contrast, the expression
pattern of other cardiac transcription factor (Hand1, Hand2, Mef2c, Nkx2-5) and
cytoskeletal protein (Myhca, Tagln) mRNA did not change with calcium channel
blockade. These data demonstrate that proper intracellular calcium signaling is
essential for normal cardiac looping, gene expression, and organ development.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12761855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. FEMS Yeast Res. 2002 May;2(2):93-102.

Evidence for involvement of Saccharomyces cerevisiae protein kinase C in glucose 
induction of HXT genes and derepression of SUC2.

Brandão RL(1), Etchebehere L, Queiroz CC, Trópia MJ, Ernandes JR, Gonçalves T,
Loureiro-Dias MC, Winderickx J, Thevelein JM, Leiper FC, Carling D, Castro IM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Bioquímica Celular e Molecular, Núcleo de Pesquisas em Ciências
Biológicas, Escola de Farmácia, Universidade Federal de Ouro Preto, Campus do
Morro do Cruzeiro, Brazil. rlbrand@nupeb.ufop.br

The PKC1 gene in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae encodes protein kinase C that
is known to control a mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase cascade consisting
of Bck1, Mkk1 and Mkk2, and Mpk1. This cascade affects the cell wall integrity
but the phenotype of Pkc1 mutants suggests additional targets which have not yet 
been identified. We show that a pkc1Delta mutant, as opposed to mutants in the
MAP kinase cascade, displays two major defects in the control of carbon
metabolism. It shows a delay in the initiation of fermentation upon addition of
glucose and a defect in derepression of SUC2 gene after exhaustion of glucose
from the medium. After addition of glucose the production of both ethanol and
glycerol started very slowly. The V(max) of glucose transport dropped
considerably and Northern blot analysis showed that induction of the HXT1, HXT2
and HXT4 genes was strongly reduced. Growth of the pkc1Delta mutant was absent on
glycerol and poor on galactose and raffinose. Oxygen uptake was barely present.
Derepression of invertase activity and SUC2 transcription upon transfer of cells 
from glucose to raffinose was deficient in the pkc1Delta mutant as opposed to the
wild-type. Our results suggest an involvement of Pkc1p in the control of carbon
metabolism which is not shared by the downstream MAP kinase cascade.

PMID: 12702297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Dev Dyn. 2003 Apr;226(4):690-701.

Expression and regulation of eHAND during limb development.

Fernandez-Teran M(1), Piedra ME, Rodriguez-Rey JC, Talamillo A, Ros MA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Anatomía y Biología Celular, Universidad de Cantabria, Spain.

eHAND is a bHLH transcription factor with important functions during
embryogenesis. Here, we report that eHAND has a dynamic pattern of expression
during limb development. In chick embryos, eHAND expression is first observed in 
the ventral mesoderm of the emerging limb. Its expression is then restricted to
an anteroventral area of mesoderm at mid-level in the proximodistal axis. At
later stages, expression is observed in the autopod encompassing the ventral
tendons of the digits. In mouse embryos, only the anteroventral domain of
expression is conserved, the early ventral expression not being detectable and
the late pattern of expression differing clearly from that in the chick. A
constant feature of all areas of expression is their ventral and anterior
localization. Respecification of the anterior mesoderm as occurs secondarily to
Sonic hedgehog (SHH) or retinoic acid application to the anterior border leads to
down-regulation of eHAND expression. Accordingly, eHAND expression is not
detectable in talpid(2) mutant limbs, which are considered to be posteriorized
limbs. However, eHAND expression is little modified in oligozeugodactyly, a chick
mutant that lacks Shh signaling in the limb but retains certain anteroposterior
polarity. Interestingly, eHAND expression is also linked to the ventral identity 
of the mesoderm and is repressed by the dorsal ectoderm. It is also positively
regulated by bone morphogenetic protein signaling, which is also known to
participate in dorsoventral patterning. We suggest that eHAND expression may be
related to the anteroventral identity of the mesoderm. However, in overexpression
experiments using retroviral vectors, only a low percentage of cases (5%) showed 
phenotypic alterations, consisting of a duplication of digit 2.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12666206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Dev Biol. 2003 Mar 15;255(2):230-7.

Galphaq and Galpha11 proteins mediate endothelin-1 signaling in neural
crest-derived pharyngeal arch mesenchyme.

Ivey K(1), Tyson B, Ukidwe P, McFadden DG, Levi G, Olson EN, Srivastava D, Wilkie
TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, , Dallas, TX 75390-9104, USA.

Endothelin-A (ET(A)) is a G-protein-coupled receptor expressed in the neural
crest-derived mesenchyme of the pharyngeal arches during craniofacial
development. Targeted deletion of the ET(A) receptor or its ligand endothelin-1
(ET-1) causes cleft palate and hypoplasia of the mandible, otic cup, and tympanic
ring. Previously we showed that Galpha(q)/Galpha(11)-null mice die around E11.0, 
whereas Galpha(q)((-/-))Galpha(11)((+/-)) mice survive to birth with hypomorphic 
phenotypes similar to, but less severe than, ET(A) or ET-1-null mice. To
determine whether ET-1 signaling is transduced by Galpha(q)/Galpha(11) proteins, 
we examined the expression patterns of several ET-1 dependent and independent
transcription factors in Galpha(q)/Galpha(11)-deficient embryos. Expression of
genes encoding the ET-1-dependent transcription factors Dlx3, Dlx6, dHAND, and
eHAND was specifically downregulated in the pharyngeal arches of
Galpha(q)/Galpha(11)-deficient mice. In contrast, pharyngeal arch expression of
the homeobox gene Msx1, which is not regulated by ET-1 signaling, was maintained 
in these embryos. We conclude that the Galpha(q) and Galpha(11) proteins serve as
the intracellular mediators of ET-1 signaling in the pharyngeal arch mesenchyme.

PMID: 12648486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Gene Expr Patterns. 2002 Nov;2(1-2):61-7.

A differential screen for putative targets of the bHLH transcription factor Hand1
in cardiac morphogenesis.

Smart N(1), Hill AA, Cross JC, Riley PR.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford Street, London
WC1N 1EH, UK.

The bHLH transcription factor, Hand1 has been implicated in cardiac looping in
the mouse, however its function in the developing heart remains unknown. To
investigate the mechanism(s) through which Hand1 might function, we screened for 
potential downstream target genes using representational difference analysis.
Thymosin beta4 was found to be down-regulated whereas cystatin C and alphaCA were
up-regulated in Hand1-null embryoid bodies. Whole-mount in situ hybridisation on 
wild type embryos (E8.0-E10.5) and Hand1 homozygous-mutant embryos (E8.0)
confirmed co-expression of the putative targets with Hand1 in the heart and their
aberrant expression in a Hand1-null background.

PMID: 12617838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Placenta. 2003 Feb-Mar;24(2-3):123-30.

Genes, development and evolution of the placenta.

Cross JC(1), Baczyk D, Dobric N, Hemberger M, Hughes M, Simmons DG, Yamamoto H,
Kingdom JC.

Author information: 
(1)Genes & Development Research Group, Department of Biochemistry & Molecular
Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
jcross@ucalgary.ca

Through studies of transgenic and mutant mice, it is possible to describe
molecular pathways that control the development of all major trophoblast cell
subtypes and structures of the placenta. For example, the proliferation of
trophoblast stem cells is dependent on FGF signalling and downstream
transcription factors Cdx2, Eomes and Err2. Several bHLH transcription factors
regulate the progression from trophoblast stem cells to spongiotrophoblast and to
trophoblast giant cells (Id1/2, Mash2, Hand1, Stra13). Intercellular actions
critical for maintaining stable precursor cell populations are dependent on the
gap junction protein Cx31 and the growth factor Nodal. Differentiation towards
syncytiotrophoblast as well as the initiation of chorioallantoic (villous)
morphogenesis is regulated by the Gcm1 transcription factor, and subsequent
labyrinth development is dependent on Wnt, HGF and FGF signalling. These insights
suggest that most of the genes that evolved to regulate placental development are
either identical to ones used in other organ systems (e.g., FGF and epithelial
branching morphogenesis), were co-opted to take on new functions (e.g.,
AP-2gamma, Dlx3, Hand1), or arose via gene duplication to take on a specialized
placental function (e.g., Gcm1, Mash2). Many of the human orthologues of these
critical genes show restricted expression patterns that are consistent with a
conserved function. Such information is aiding the comparison of the human and
mouse placenta. In addition, the prospect of a conserved function clearly
suggests potential mechanisms for explaining complications of human placental
development.

PMID: 12596737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Gene. 2003 Jan 2;302(1-2):115-27.

Expression of the human Hand1 gene in trophoblastic cells is transcriptionally
regulated by activating and repressing specificity protein (Sp)-elements.

Vasicek R(1), Meinhardt G, Haidweger E, Rotheneder H, Husslein P, Knöfler M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Vienna, Währinger
Gürtel 18-20, A-1090, Vienna, Austria.

The tissue-specific basic helix-loop-helix protein Hand1 is essential for the
formation of trophoblast giant cells of the murine placenta. In humans, Hand1 is 
detectable in trophoblastic tumour cells suggesting an equivalent role in
trophoblast differentiation. To understand its mode of expression we have cloned 
and characterized the human Hand1 gene promoter. Primer extension analyses
suggest that transcription initiates 19 nucleotides downstream of the TATA
element of the proximal 5' flanking region. Expression of luciferase reporter
constructs harboring deletions of the 9.5 kb Hand1 5' flanking sequence defines a
promoter region within 274 bp upstream of the transcriptional start site.
Compared to a reporter bearing only the TATA box, the proximal promoter activates
transcription up to 30-fold. However, transcriptional activity of the region was 
observed in both Hand1-expressing and non-expressing cell lines. Sequencing,
DNAseI footprint analyses and electrophoretic mobility shift assays reveal the
presence of four GC-rich sequences, which show different affinities to the
endogenous specificity proteins (Sp), and a CCAAT box. In vitro, the Sp-elements 
mainly interact with Sp1 and Sp3 while the CCAAT element is recognized by the
alpha CAAT binding factor protein. Mutant luciferase reporters bearing single
active or inactive recognition sites demonstrate that two of the four Sp-binding 
sites (I and IV) contribute little to the overall transcription rate. The two
other Sp-cognate sequences, II and III, downregulate and activate reporter
expression 2.3- and 2.6-fold, respectively. Co-transfections of Sp1/Sp3
expression vectors and mutated reporter constructs in Sp-deficient SL2 cells
indicate that the Sp-binding site II and III indeed function as repressing and
activating enhancer sequences. In summary, the data suggest that constitutive
expression of the Hand1 gene in cultured cells is regulated by a complex
interplay of Sp-proteins interacting with activator and repressor elements.

PMID: 12527202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Gene Expr. 2002;10(5-6):279-93.

Transcripts encoding HAND genes are differentially expressed and regulated by
BMP4 and GDNF in developing avian gut.

Wu X(1), Howard MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Medical College of Ohio, Toledo, 3000 
Arlington Ave., OH 43614, USA.

Growth and transcription factors provide important developmental cues to neural
crest-derived precursors of enteric neurons. The basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factors, HAND2 and HAND1, are expressed in the gastrointestinal
tract, but neither the growth factors that induce their expression nor the cell
types that express them in the gut are known. We show that transcripts encoding
HAND2 are expressed in all segments of the developing gut while those encoding
HAND1 are confined to the small intestine and colon. Using in situ hybridization 
combined with immunostaining using cell type-specific antigens, we demonstrate
that transcripts encoding HAND2 are expressed in neurons of both the myenteric
and submucosal ganglia. Transcripts encoding HAND1 are expressed by cells in the 
epithelial lining of the small intestine and colon. The differential localization
of HAND2 and HAND1 is reflected in nonoverlapping patterns of regulation by
gut-derived factors. The expression of transcripts encoding HAND2 is increased in
neural crest-derived cells when cocultured with E4 gut, suggesting a gut-derived 
factor regulates expression of HAND genes. Exposure of gut-derived neural
crest-derived cells to BMP4 significantly increased the expression of HAND2 in
all gut segments. In the esophagus and gizzard, where HAND1 is not normally
expressed, treatment with BMP4 induced the expression of transcripts encoding
HAND1 in nonneural crest-derived cells. GDNF failed to induce consistent
expression of transcripts encoding HAND2 in neural crest cells but did support a 
modest increase in HAND2 expression in gut-derived crest cells obtained from the 
esophagus and colon. GDNF had no detectable effect on the expression of
transcripts encoding HAND1. These results suggest; 1) that HAND2 has a function
in the development of enteric neurons, and 2) that BMP and GDNF differentially
regulate HAND2 and HAND1 gene expression in the developing gastrointestinal
tract.

PMID: 12450220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Cancer Res. 2002 Nov 15;62(22):6645-50.

Identification of silencing of nine genes in human gastric cancers.

Kaneda A(1), Kaminishi M, Yanagihara K, Sugimura T, Ushijima T.

Author information: 
(1)Carcinogenesis Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo
104-0045, Japan.

Aberrant methylations in human gastric cancers were searched for by a genome
scanning technique, methylation-sensitive representational difference analysis.
Nine CpG islands (CGIs) in the 5' regions of nine genes, LOX, HRASLS,
bA305P22.2.3, FLNc (gamma-filamin/ABPL), HAND1, a homologue of RIKEN 2210016F16, 
FLJ32130, PGAR (HFARP/ANGPTL4/ARP4), and thrombomodulin, were found to be
methylated in two gastric cancer cell lines, MKN28 and MKN74, but unmethylated in
the normal sample. Their expressions were lost in the two cell lines, and the
causal roles of the methylations in gene silencing were shown by treatment with
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine. In 41 primary gastric cancers, methylations of these CGIs
in association with reduced expressions were observed at high incidences (29-41%)
for five genes, including LOX and HRASLS, which have been reported to have
tumor-suppressive activities. The other four genes were methylated at low
incidences (0-7%). By analysis of the numbers of aberrant methylations in
individual cancers, a subset of cancers with high prevalence of aberrant
methylations was identified, and all of the 11 cancers in the subset were diffuse
type. To analyze the possible involvement of decreased fidelity of maintenance
methylation in this subset of cancers, aberrant hypomethylations of three
normally methylated CGIs were examined. Cancers with high prevalence of
hypomethylations of normally methylated CGIs, however, constituted a different
subset. It is expected that these nine genes may include important genes in
gastric cancer development and would be useful to identify a distinct subset of
gastric cancers.

PMID: 12438262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Dev Genes Evol. 2002 Nov;212(10):473-85. Epub 2002 Sep 21.

The highly conserved cardiogenic bHLH factor Hand is specifically expressed in
circular visceral muscle progenitor cells and in all cell types of the dorsal
vessel during Drosophila embryogenesis.

Kölsch V(1), Paululat A.

Author information: 
(1)Universität Marburg, Fachbereich Biologie-Entwicklungsbiologie, Karl von
Frisch Strasse, 35032 Marburg, Germany.

The highly conserved basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor Hand plays a
crucial role in cardiogenesis, limb formation and other developmental processes
of vertebrates. Humans, mice and other higher vertebrates have two related genes,
dHand (also known as Hand2, Hed, Thing2) and eHand (also known as Hand1, Hxt,
Thing1), whereas fish and Drosophila have only a single hand gene. We cloned
Drosophila hand and studied the embryonic expression in detail by using various
tissue-specific markers that allowed us to analyze the identity of
hand-expressing cells. We found hand to be expressed in the entire heart,
including all cardioblasts and pericardial cells, in the progenitors of the
circular visceral muscles, the lymph gland and garland cells, and in a few cells 
in the CNS. The expression of Drosophila hand starts after the inductive activity
of the early regulators in these tissues, e.g. Tinman and Bagpipe, suggesting a
role of Hand in differentiation rather than in tissue determination. In many
aspects the expression pattern of Drosophila hand resembles the patterns of its
vertebrates orthologues, for instance in cardiac tissues. We assume that Hand
proteins might play a highly conserved role throughout evolution.

PMID: 12424518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2002 Oct;34(10):1335-44.

The basic-helix-loop-helix transcription factor HAND2 directly regulates
transcription of the atrial naturetic peptide gene.

Thattaliyath BD(1), Firulli BA, Firulli AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Mail Code-7756, The University of Texas Health
Science Center at San Antonio, 7703 Floyd Curl Drive, San Antonio, TX 78229-3900,
USA.

Comment in
    J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2002 Oct;34(10):1287-91.

The HAND basic Helix-Loop-Helix (bHLH) transcription factors are essential for
the development of heart and extra embryonic structures. Although essential for
embryonic development, the molecular pathways in which HAND factors participate
are poorly understood. In efforts to identify downstream transcriptional targets,
we have determined that HAND2 regulates the transcription of the Atrial Naturetic
Peptide (ANP) gene. Results show that ANP expression is reduced in HAND2 null
mice. Transactivation assays show significant transcriptional upregulation of ANP
by HAND2 and cotransfection experiments using HAND2 and E12 suggest that an
E-protein/HAND heterodimer is the likely trans -acting complex. The required cis 
-elements reside within a 258bp proximal region that contains three
evolutionarily conserved Ebox consensus sites. Surprisingly, mutations in these
three sites suggest HAND2 activity is DNA-binding independent. In addition, HAND2
and the homeobox factor Nkx2.5 exhibit transcriptional synergy in the regulation 
of ANP. Taken together, this data shows that HAND2 is an upstream transcriptional
regulator of ANP expression, and furthermore HAND2 can synergistically interact
with Nkx2.5, showing a functional relationship between HAND2 and Nkx2.5
supporting the genetic observation, that mice null for both HAND2 and Nkx2.5 lack
ventricle specification.

PMID: 12392994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Curr Protein Pept Sci. 2001 Sep;2(3):245-59.

Life and death in the placenta: new peptides and genes regulating human
syncytiotrophoblast and extravillous cytotrophoblast lineage formation and
renewal.

Morrish DW(1), Dakour J, Li H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Alberta, 362 Heritage Medical Research
Center, Edmonton, Alberta, T6G 2S2, Canada. dmorrish@gpu.srv.ualberta.ca

Differential techniques have revealed several novel genes and peptides involved
in trophoblast development including PL74/gdf15/MIC-1, a TGFbeta family cytokine 
that controls apoptosis and differentiation, PL48, a new serine-threonine protein
kinase, serum and glucocorticoid-induced kinase, PBK-1, a tunicamycin-responsive 
gene, a cathepsin D-like gene (DAP-1) and hypoxia- regulated genes HRF-1,2,6,8
and HIF-1alpha, HIF-1beta, and hEPAS-1. Syncytin, a cell fusion- inducing gene,
has been cloned from placenta where it regulates cell fusion. ERV-3 has also been
demonstrated to promote cell fusion. These two genes represent the first
demonstrated functions of endogenous retroviral sequences in human tissues.
Endoglin, PlGF, TGFbeta3, IGF-II, IGFBP-1, and a placental IGFBP protease have
found new roles in regulating cytotrophoblast proliferation and invasiveness. A
specific placental p105 rasGAP protein has been identified. The homeobox genes
DLX4, HB24, MSX2 and MOX2 also likely play a role in development at the
epithelial-mesenchymal boundary. Transcription factors such as TEF-5, Hand1, HEB,
HASH-2 and two genes represented by ESTs may have regulatory roles in placental
development. Evidence suggests that the placenta has an unusual two-cell system
for apoptosis regulation in which the cytotrophoblast may direct later apoptotic 
events in the syncytium, and with syncytialization possibly triggered by the
"phosphatidylserine flip". Thus, the placenta is both a rich source of new
growth-regulatory substances, and a model system for originating new paradigms of
developmental biology.

PMID: 12369935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Oct 4;297(4):870-5.

HAND1 and HAND2 are expressed in the adult-rodent heart and are modulated during 
cardiac hypertrophy.

Thattaliyath BD(1), Livi CB, Steinhelper ME, Toney GM, Firulli AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, The University of Texas Health Science Center at San
Antonio, 7703 Floyd Curl Drive, Mail Code-7756, San Antonio, TX 78229-3900, USA.

The HAND basic Helix-Loop-Helix (bHLH) transcription factors are essential for
normal cardiac and extraembryonic development. Although highly evolutionarily
conserved genes, HAND cardiac expression patterns differ across species. Mouse
expression of HAND1 and HAND2 was reported absent in the adult heart. Human HAND 
genes are expressed in the adult heart and HAND1 expression is downregulated in
cardiomyopathies. As rodent and human expression profiles are inconsistent, we
re-examined expression of HAND1 and HAND2 in adult-rodent hearts. HAND1 and HAND2
are expressed in adult-rodent hearts and HAND2 is expressed in the atria.
Induction of cardiac hypertrophy shows modulation of HAND expression,
corresponding with observations in human cardiomyopathy. The downregulation of
HAND expression observed in rodent hypertrophy and human cardiomyopathy may
reflect a permissive role allowing, cardiomyocytes to reinitiate the fetal gene
program and initiate the adaptive physiological changes that allow the heart to
compensate (hypertrophy) for the increase in afterload.

PMID: 12359233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Cutan Pathol. 2002 Jul;29(6):347-53.

Vascular endothelium express CS-1 fibronectin in allergic contact dermatitis.

Martín AP(1), Ortiz S, Cabalier ME, Frede S, Burgos E, Hliba E, Serra H.

Author information: 
(1)Inmunologia, Hospital Nacional de Clínicas, Universidad Nacional de Córdoba,
Córdoba, Argentina.

BACKGROUND: Allergic contact dermatitis (ACD) is a common human dermatosis in
which not all the mechanisms involved in its pathogenesis have been elucidated.
OBJECTIVE: To study the expression of CS-1 fibronectin, TARC and Th1-associated
chemokine receptors in biopsies from allergic patch test reactions.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Thirteen patients already diagnosed with ACD were
challenged on the back with the antigen responsible of the disease and
macroscopic responses and biopsies taken after 48 h. Skin biopsies from negative 
control challenge sites, AD and ICD were also taken. Samples were fixed, embedded
in paraffin wax and processed in order to perform histological and
immunohistochemical studies.
RESULTS: All subjects with ACD showed a positive clinical response and a
perivascular mononuclear cell infiltration at 48 h, which was not seen in the
negative controls. The majority of skin-infiltrating cells were CD4+ and CD8+ and
up to 54% or 40% of them expressed CXCR3 or CCR5, respectively. We also showed
expression of CS-1 fibronectin in inflamed endothelial cells not only in ACD but 
also in AC and ICD. In contrast TARC was only expressed in ACD and AC.
CONCLUSION: We showed for the first time that CS-1 fibronectin is expressed in
dermal vessels from allergic patch tests positive reactions, as well as irritant 
and atopic skin lesions.

PMID: 12135465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Arthritis Rheum. 2002 Jul;46(7):1894-904.

In vitro cytokine production and proliferation of T cells from patients with
anti-proteinase 3- and antimyeloperoxidase-associated vasculitis, in response to 
proteinase 3 and myeloperoxidase.

Popa ER(1), Franssen CF, Limburg PC, Huitema MG, Kallenberg CG, Tervaert JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Immunology, University Hospital Groningen, Groningen,
The Netherlands. E.Popa@med.rug.nl

OBJECTIVE: To investigate in vitro proliferative responses of CD4+ T cells and
generation of specific cytokines induced by stimulation of peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from patients with antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody 
(ANCA)-associated vasculitis with the autoantigens proteinase 3 (PR3) and
myeloperoxidase (MPO).
METHODS: PBMCs from vasculitis patients with PR3 ANCA or MPO ANCA and from
healthy controls were stimulated for 7 days with PR3, MPO, or control stimuli.
Proliferation of CD4+ T cells was assessed by flow cytometry, using the
proliferation marker Ki-67. Levels of the pro-proliferative cytokines
interleukin-2 (IL-2) and IL-6 and of the Th1 and Th2 cytokines interferon-gamma
(IFN gamma) and IL-10 in culture supernatants were determined.
RESULTS: PR3 and MPO induced proliferative responses in CD4+ T cells from
individual patients with ANCA-associated vasculitides and healthy controls in
vitro. Neither PR3 nor MPO elicited significant IL-2 production. Levels of IL-6
were highest after stimulation with PR3 but low after stimulation with MPO,
independent of study group. Stimulation with PR3, and to a lesser extent with
MPO, induced a Th2 cytokine milieu, characterized by high production of IL-6 and 
IL-10 and low production of IFN gamma in patients and controls.
CONCLUSION: PR3 and MPO promote proliferation of CD4+ T cells from patients with 
ANCA-associated vasculitides, but also cross-stimulate T cells from healthy
individuals. Strong IL-10 production elicited by PR3 in vitro may act as an
inhibitory signal for T cell proliferation and may have an important
immunoregulatory function in vivo.

PMID: 12124874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Development. 2002 Jul;129(13):3077-88.

Misexpression of dHAND induces ectopic digits in the developing limb bud in the
absence of direct DNA binding.

McFadden DG(1), McAnally J, Richardson JA, Charité J, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, 6000 Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA.

Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors control developmental
decisions in a wide range of embryonic cell types. The HLH motif mediates homo-
and heterodimerization, which juxtaposes the basic regions within the dimeric
complex to form a bipartite DNA binding domain that recognizes a DNA consensus
sequence known as an E-box. eHAND and dHAND (also known as HAND1 and HAND2) are
closely related bHLH proteins that control cardiac, craniofacial and limb
development. Within the developing limb, dHAND expression encompasses the zone of
polarizing activity in the posterior region, where it has been shown to be
necessary and sufficient to induce the expression of the morphogen sonic
hedgehog. Misexpression of dHAND in the anterior compartment of the limb bud
induces ectopic expression of sonic hedgehog, with resulting preaxial polydactyly
and mirror image duplications of posterior digits. To investigate the potential
transcriptional mechanisms involved in limb patterning by dHAND, we have
performed a structure-function analysis of the protein in cultured cells and
ectopically expressed dHAND mutant proteins in the developing limbs of transgenic
mice. We show that an N-terminal transcriptional activation domain, and the bHLH 
region, are required for E-box-dependent transcription in vitro. Remarkably,
however, digit duplication by dHAND requires neither the transcriptional
activation domain nor the basic region, but only the HLH motif. eHAND has a
similar limb patterning activity to dHAND in these misexpression experiments,
indicating a conserved function of the HLH regions of these proteins. These
findings suggest that dHAND may act via novel transcriptional mechanisms mediated
by protein-protein interactions independent of direct DNA binding.

PMID: 12070084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Recent Prog Horm Res. 2002;57:221-34.

Transcription factors underlying the development and endocrine functions of the
placenta.

Cross JC(1), Anson-Cartwright L, Scott IC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, University of Calgary Faculty 
of Medicine, Alberta, Canada. jcrooss@ucalgary.ca

The placenta has been the subject of extensive basic research efforts in two
distinct fields. The developmental biology of placenta has been studied because
it is the first organ to develop during embryogenesis and because a number of
different gene mutations in mice result in embryonic lethality due to placental
defects. The trophoblast cell lineage is relatively simple such that only two
major, terminally differentiated cell types appear: an "invasive trophoblast"
cell subtype such as extravillous cytotrophoblast cells in humans and trophoblast
giant cells in mice, and a "transport trophoblast" cell subtype that is a
syncytium (syncytiotrophoblast) in humans and mice. These two cell types also
have been the focus of endocrinologists because they are the source of major
placental hormones. Understanding the transcriptional regulation of placental
hormone genes has given insights into the control of specificity of gene
expression. Because most placental hormones are produced by very specific
trophoblast cell subtypes, the transcriptional details promise to give insights
into cell-subtype specification. The fields of developmental biology and
molecular endocrinology appear to be meeting on this common ground with the
recent discovery of key transcription factors. Specifically, the basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor Hand1 is essential for
differentiation of trophoblast giant cells in mice and also regulates the
promoter for the giant cell-specific hormone, placental lactogen I gene (Pl1). In
contrast, formation of syncytiotrophoblast cells in mice is controlled by a
distinct genetic pathway that is governed by the Gcm1 transcription factor, a
homologue of the Drosophila glial cells missing gene. Human GCM I has been shown 
to regulate the activity of the placental-specific enhancer of the aromatase gene
(CYP19), which is specifically expressed in syncytiotrophoblast. Together, these 
findings imply that some key transcription factors have the dual functions of
controlling both critical cell fate decisions in the trophoblast cell lineage and
later the transcription of cell subtype-specific genes unrelated to development.

PMID: 12017545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Biochem J. 2002 Feb 1;361(Pt 3):641-51.

Human Hand1 basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) protein: extra-embryonic expression
pattern, interaction partners and identification of its transcriptional repressor
domains.

Knöfler M(1), Meinhardt G, Bauer S, Loregger T, Vasicek R, Bloor DJ, Kimber SJ,
Husslein P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Vienna, Waehringer
Guertel 18-20, A-1090 Vienna, Austria. martin.knoefler@akh-wien.ac.at

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor, Hand1, plays an important
role in the development of the murine extra-embryonic trophoblast cell lineage.
In the present study, we have analysed the expression of Hand1 in human
extra-embryonic cell types and determined its binding specificity and
transcriptional activity upon interaction with different class A bHLH factors.
Northern blotting and in situ hybridization showed that Hand1 mRNA is
specifically expressed in amnion cells at different stages of gestation.
Accordingly, we demonstrate that the protein is exclusively produced in the
amniotic epithelium in vivo and in purified amnion cells in vitro using a novel
polyclonal Hand1 antiserum. Reverse transcriptase-PCR and immunohistochemical
staining of blastocysts revealed the production of Hand1 mRNA and polypeptide in 
the trophectodermal cell layer. In the presence of E12/E47, Hand1 stimulated the 
transcription of luciferase reporters harbouring degenerate E-boxes, suggesting
that E-proteins are potential dimerization partners in trophoblastic tumour and
amnion cells. In contrast, Hand1 diminished E12/E47-dependent transcription of
reporters containing perfect E-boxes by inhibiting the interaction of
Hand1/E-protein heterodimers with the palindromic cognate sequence. Furthermore, 
we show that Hand1 down-regulated GAL-E12-dependent reporter expression,
indicating that the protein can also act directly as a transcriptional repressor.
Mutational analyses of GAL-Hand1 suggested that two protein regions located
within its N-terminal portion mainly confer the repressing activity. In
conclusion, human Hand1 may play an important role in the differentiation of the 
amniotic membrane and the pre-implanting trophoblast. Furthermore, the data
suggest that Hand1 can act as a repressor by two independent mechanisms;
sequestration of class A bHLH factors from E-boxes and inhibition of their
transcriptional activity.

PMCID: PMC1222348
PMID: 11802795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Acta Otolaryngol. 2001 Sep;121(6):673-8.

Th1: mediator lymphocytes in experimental autoimmune labyrinthitis.

Tomiyama S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Nippon Medical School, Tama-Nagayama Hospital,
Tokyo, Japan. Tomiyama_Shuncihi/ent@nms.ac.jp

A previous study on experimental autoimmune labyrinthitis (EAL) consistently
demonstrated transient infiltration of lymphocytes only into the inner ear of
mice. To clarify the profile of lymphocytes in the initiation of EAL, the present
study investigated cell surface antigens, as well as cytokines, from Day 4 to Day
35, using immunohistochemical techniques. Many CD4+ cells mainly infiltrated the 
endolymphatic sac as early as Day 4 and gradually spread to the rest of the inner
ear. Infiltration peaked on Day 12 and persisted in most animals until Day 35,
although the number of cells gradually decreased. In contrast, very few CD8+
cells were found to have appeared in the inner ear of all animals on Day 10, and 
the number of cells rapidly decreased. Many cells positive for IFN-gamma and IL-2
were identified in the endolymphatic sac on Day 4. These results suggest that
helper T1 lymphocytes, rather than cytotoxic T lymphocytes, may play a central
role in the initiation of EAL.

PMID: 11678165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2001 Oct;33(10):1765-7.

Transcription factors and heart failure: does the stressed heart need a hand?

Pu WT, Izumo S.

Comment on
    J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2001 Sep;33(9):1607-14.

PMID: 11603918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Am J Med Genet. 2000 Winter;97(4):297-303.

Molecular determinants of left and right outflow tract obstruction.

Towbin JA(1), Belmont J.

Author information: 
(1)Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. jtowbin@bcm.tmc.edu

Congenital heart defects represent the most common group of human birth defects; 
they occur in 0.8-1% of live births and in 10% of spontaneously aborted fetuses. 
Heart defects seen in newborns typically represent specific morphogenetic defects
of individual chambers or regions of the heart, with the remaining portions of
the heart developing relatively normally. These developmental defects are
commonly compatible with the intrauterine circulation, where the pulmonary
circulation and systemic circulation work in concert, resulting in adequate
embryonic growth and development. After delivery, however, significant cardiac
symptoms develop. In many of these disorders, cyanosis is the earliest feature,
while in others, cardiovascular collapse occurs before diagnosis. In this review,
obstruction of the left and right sides of the heart are discussed. In these
disorders, ventricular hypoplasia resulting in single ventricle physiologic
characteristics is typical. The unaffected ventricle in these cases is usually
morphologically and physiologically normal. These conditions include hypoplastic 
left heart syndrome and aortic coarctation on the left side, pulmonary stenosis, 
tetralogy of Fallot, and other complex right ventricle obstructive disorders.
Many of these disorders occur in association with genetic syndromes identifiable 
by dysmorphic features. In some cases, the gene(s) has been identified or the
genetic pathway has been defined. The purpose of this review is to discuss the
molecular determinants of these obstructive disorders.

PMID: 11376441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Genes Dev. 2001 Apr 1;15(7):839-44.

Proper coronary vascular development and heart morphogenesis depend on
interaction of GATA-4 with FOG cofactors.

Crispino JD(1), Lodish MB, Thurberg BL, Litovsky SH, Collins T, Molkentin JD,
Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

GATA-family transcription factors are critical to the development of diverse
tissues. In particular, GATA-4 has been implicated in formation of the vertebrate
heart. As the mouse Gata-4 knock-out is early embryonic lethal because of a
defect in ventral morphogenesis, the in vivo function of this factor in heart
development remains unresolved. To search for a requirement for Gata4 in heart
development, we created mice harboring a single amino acid replacement in GATA-4 
that impairs its physical interaction with its presumptive cardiac cofactor
FOG-2. Gata4(ki/ki) mice die just after embryonic day (E) 12.5 exhibiting
features in common with Fog2(-/-) embryos as well as additional semilunar cardiac
valve defects and a double-outlet right ventricle. These findings establish an
intrinsic requirement for GATA-4 in heart development. We also infer that GATA-4 
function is dependent on interaction with FOG-2 and, very likely, an additional
FOG protein for distinct aspects of heart formation.

PMCID: PMC312667
PMID: 11297508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Eur J Dermatol. 2001 Mar-Apr;11(2):105-7.

Immunohistochemical detection of interferon-gamma-producing cells in
dermatophytosis.

Koga T(1), Duan H, Urabe K, Furue M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, 3-1-1, Maidashi, Higashi-ku, J-812-8582 Fukuoka, Japan.
tekoga@dermatol.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Skin lesions of dermatophytosis are thought to be a result of a T cell-dependent 
inflammatory response that is mediated by various cytokines. We examined whether 
IFN-gamma-positive cells (as expression of Th1 response) were present in the skin
lesions of dermatophytosis in situ by immunohistochemical techniques. Mixtures of
CD4-positive T cells and CD8-positive T cells were found to be present in the
dermal infiltrates of the lesions. Considerable numbers of CD1a-positive cells
were detected in the upper dermis and epidermis. A marked accumulation of
CD68-positive cells was found in the upper dermis. IFN-gamma-positive cells were 
present in the upper dermis of the lesions. The pattern of IFN-gamma staining
appeared to be intracellular in mononuclear lymphoid cells. The staining was
considered to be highly specific because it could be completely blocked by
preabsorption with recombinant IFN-gamma. Our data support the hypothesis that
the skin lesions of dermatophytosis may be associated with a Th1 response. Th1
response, which is characterized by IFN-gamma release, is thought to be involved 
in the host defense against dermatophytes and to reflect cutaneous reaction in
dermatophytosis.

PMID: 11275803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Mar;21(5):1730-6.

Cardiomyopathy in Irx4-deficient mice is preceded by abnormal ventricular gene
expression.

Bruneau BG(1), Bao ZZ, Fatkin D, Xavier-Neto J, Georgakopoulos D, Maguire CT,
Berul CI, Kass DA, Kuroski-de Bold ML, de Bold AJ, Conner DA, Rosenthal N, Cepko 
CL, Seidman CE, Seidman JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115,
USA.

To define the role of Irx4, a member of the Iroquois family of homeobox
transcription factors in mammalian heart development and function, we disrupted
the murine Irx4 gene. Cardiac morphology in Irx4-deficient mice (designated
Irx4(Delta ex2/Delta ex2)) was normal during embryogenesis and in early postnatal
life. Adult Irx4(Delta ex2/Delta ex2) mice developed a cardiomyopathy
characterized by cardiac hypertrophy and impaired contractile function. Prior to 
the development of cardiomyopathy, Irx4(Delta ex2/Delta ex2) hearts had abnormal 
ventricular gene expression: Irx4-deficient embryos exhibited reduced ventricular
expression of the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor eHand (Hand1),
increased Irx2 expression, and ventricular induction of an atrial
chamber-specific transgene. In neonatal hearts, ventricular expression of atrial 
natriuretic factor and alpha-skeletal actin was markedly increased. Several weeks
subsequent to these changes in embryonic and neonatal gene expression, increased 
expression of hypertrophic markers BNP and beta-myosin heavy chain accompanied
adult-onset cardiac hypertrophy. Cardiac expression of Irx1, Irx2, and Irx5 may
partially compensate for loss of Irx4 function. We conclude that Irx4 is not
sufficient for ventricular chamber formation but is required for the
establishment of some components of a ventricle-specific gene expression program.
In the absence of genes under the control of Irx4, ventricular function
deteriorates and cardiomyopathy ensues.

PMCID: PMC86719
PMID: 11238910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Dev Biol. 2000 Nov 1;227(1):156-68.

Early exclusion of hand1-deficient cells from distinct regions of the left
ventricular myocardium in chimeric mouse embryos.

Riley PR(1), Gertsenstein M, Dawson K, Cross JC.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental and Fetal Health, Samuel Lunenfeld Research
Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, 600 University Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, M5G
1X5.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor gene Hand1 has been implicated in
development of the heart. However, the early lethality of Hand1-null mutant mouse
embryos has precluded a precise understanding of its function. In this study, we 
have generated Hand1 homozygous mutant ES cells and performed in vitro
differentiation experiments and chimeric analysis to study the role of Hand1
function during cardiac development. Hand1-null ES cells were able to
differentiate into beating cardiomyocytes in vitro that expressed cardiac myosin 
and several cardiac-specific transcripts including Nkx2-5, alpha-cardiac actin,
and the myofilament genes myosin light chain 2a and 2v. In chimeras derived from 
Hand1-null ES cells and ROSA26 embryos, mutant cells were underrepresented in the
left caudal region of the linear heart tube at E8.0. By E9.5, after cardiac
looping, mutant cells were underrepresented in the anterior region of the outer
curvature of the left ventricular myocardium, but did contribute to other parts
of the left ventricle and to other cardiac chambers. These results imply that
Hand1 is not essential for differentiation of ventricular cardiomyocytes.
Hand1-null cells were also underrepresented in several other regions of later
embryos, including the rhombencephalic neural tube that was associated with a
deficiency of mutant cells in the neural crest cell-derived cardiac outflow tract
and first branchial arch. In summary, Hand1 has cell-autonomous functions during 
cardiac morphogenesis in both mesodermal and neural crest derivatives.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11076684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Hum Genet. 2000 Aug;107(2):165-75.

Characterization of TH1 and CTSZ, two non-imprinted genes downstream of GNAS1 in 
chromosome 20q13.

Bonthron DT(1), Hayward BE, Moran V, Strain L.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, University of Leeds, St James's University Hospital, 
UK. D.T.Bonthron@leeds.ac.uk

The clustering and coordinate regulation of many imprinted genes justifies
positional searches for imprinted genes adjacent to known ones. We recently
characterized a locus on 20q13, containing GNAS1, which has a highly complex
imprinted expression pattern. In a search for neighbouring genes, we have now
characterized a new gene, TH1, downstream of GNAS1. TH1 and GNAS1 are separated
by more than 70 kb consisting largely of interspersed repetitive DNA. TH1 is the 
homologue of a gene that, in Drosophila, lies adjacent to the DNA repair gene
mei-41. We have determined the full-length structures of human, mouse and
Drosophila TH1. Though of unknown function, TH1 is highly conserved and widely
expressed. Nonetheless, there is no similar Caenorhabditis elegans protein. We
have also determined the complete genomic structures of human and Drosophila TH1.
The Drosophila gene has five exons spanning 2.6 kb. The last three introns have
precise equivalents in the human gene, which has 15 exons spanning 14 kb and is
transcribed away from GNAS1. Using a single-nucleotide polymorphism in the 3'
untranslated region, we have demonstrated biallelic TH1 expression in human fetal
tissues, suggesting that, unlike GNAS1, TH1 is probably not imprinted.
Immediately downstream of TH1 lies CTSZ, encoding the recently described cysteine
protease, cathepsin Z. We have also elucidated the genomic structure of this
gene; it has six exons spanning 12 kb and is oriented tail-to-tail with TH1, only
70 bp separating their polyadenylation sites. A polymorphism was again identified
within the CTSZ 3' untranslated region and used to demonstrate biallelic
expression in fetal tissues.

PMID: 11030415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Dev Biol. 2000 Jul 15;223(2):266-78.

Chamber formation and morphogenesis in the developing mammalian heart.

Christoffels VM(1), Habets PE, Franco D, Campione M, de Jong F, Lamers WH, Bao
ZZ, Palmer S, Biben C, Harvey RP, Moorman AF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy & Embryology, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 1105, The Netherlands.

Erratum in
    Dev Biol 2000 Sep 1;225(1):266.

In this study we challenge the generally accepted view that cardiac chambers form
from an array of segmental primordia arranged along the anteroposterior axis of
the linear and looping heart tube. We traced the spatial pattern of expression of
genes encoding atrial natriuretic factor, sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPase, 
Chisel, Irx5, Irx4, myosin light chain 2v, and beta-myosin heavy chain and
related these to morphogenesis. Based on the patterns we propose a two-step model
for chamber formation in the embryonic heart. First, a linear heart forms, which 
is composed of "primary" myocardium that nonetheless shows polarity in phenotype 
and gene expression along its anteroposterior and dorsoventral axes. Second,
specialized ventricular chamber myocardium is specified at the ventral surface of
the linear heart tube, while distinct left and right atrial myocardium forms more
caudally on laterodorsal surfaces. The process of looping aligns these primordial
chambers such that they face the outer curvature. Myocardium of the inner
curvature, as well as that of inflow tract, atrioventricular canal, and outflow
tract, retains the molecular signature originally found in linear heart tube
myocardium. Evidence for distinct transcriptional programs which govern
compartmentalization in the forming heart is seen in the patterns of expression
of Hand1 for the dorsoventral axis, Irx4 and Tbx5 for the anteroposterior axis,
and Irx5 for the distinction between primary and chamber myocardium.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10882515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Exp Cell Res. 2000 Jun 15;257(2):320-31.

Negative regulation of selected bHLH proteins by eHAND.

Bounpheng MA(1), Morrish TA, Dodds SG, Christy BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Structural Biology, University of Texas Health
Science Center, San Antonio, Texas, 78245-3207, USA.

The bHLH protein eHAND plays an important role in the development of
extraembryonic, mesodermal, and cardiac cell lineages, presumably through
heterodimerization with other HLH proteins and DNA binding. In this study, we
have identified a novel transcriptional activity of eHAND. In transient
transfection assays, eHAND is a potent inhibitor of activation by some but not
all bHLH proteins. eHAND can prevent E-box DNA binding by these bHLH proteins.
Interestingly, eHAND can also strongly inhibit transactivation activity by a MyoD
approximately E47 tethered dimer, which suggests a distinct mechanism of action. 
eHAND also inhibits MyoD-dependent skeletal muscle cell differentiation and
expression of the muscle-specific myosin heavy chain protein. In addition, we
show that eHAND can repress activity of the natural p75LNGFR promoter, whose
expression overlaps that of eHAND and dHAND. The inhibitory activity of eHAND may
be attributed to multiple mechanisms, such as the ability to act as a
corepressor, the presence of a repression domain, and its ability to sequester E 
proteins in an inactive complex. Based upon its inhibitory effect on bHLH
proteins and cellular differentiation, we propose that eHAND may function by
several mechanisms to promote placental giant cell proliferation by negatively
regulating the activities of the bHLH protein MASH-2.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10837146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Dev Biol. 2000 Feb 1;218(1):74-88.

The morphology of heart development in Xenopus laevis.

Mohun TJ(1), Leong LM, Weninger WJ, Sparrow DB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, National Institute for Medical Research,
The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London, NW7 1AA, United Kingdom. tmohun@nimr.mrc.ac.uk

We have used serial histological sections to document heart formation in Xenopus 
laevis, from the formation of a linear heart tube to the appearance of
morphologically distinct atrial and ventricular chambers. 3D reconstruction
techniques have been used to derive accurate models from digital images,
revealing the morphological changes that accompany heart differentiation. To
demonstrate the utility of this approach in analysing cardiac gene expression, we
have reexamined the distribution of Hand1 transcripts in the linear and looped
heart tube. Our results demonstrate that prior to looping, an initial asymmetric,
left-sided pattern is replaced by more symmetrical localisation of transcripts to
the ventral portion of the myocardium. After the onset of looping, Hand1
expression is restricted to the ventral ventricular myocardium and extends along 
the entire length of the single ventricle.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10644412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Jan;20(2):530-41.

The HAND1 basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor regulates trophoblast
differentiation via multiple mechanisms.

Scott IC(1), Anson-Cartwright L, Riley P, Reda D, Cross JC.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Development and Fetal Health, Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, 
Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario Canada.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor genes Hand1 and Mash2 are 
essential for placental development in mice. Hand1 promotes differentiation of
trophoblast giant cells, whereas Mash2 is required for the maintenance of giant
cell precursors, and its overexpression prevents giant cell differentiation. We
found that Hand1 expression and Mash2 expression overlap in the ectoplacental
cone and spongiotrophoblast, layers of the placenta that contain the giant cell
precursors, indicating that the antagonistic activities of Hand1 and Mash2 must
be coordinated. MASH2 and HAND1 both heterodimerize with E factors, bHLH proteins
that are the DNA-binding partners for most class B bHLH factors and which are
also expressed in the ectoplacental cone and spongiotrophoblast. In vitro, HAND1 
could antagonize MASH2 function by competing for E-factor binding. However, the
Hand1 mutant phenotype cannot be solely explained by ectopic activity of MASH2,
as the Hand1 mutant phenotype was not altered by further mutation of Mash2.
Interestingly, expression of E-factor genes (ITF2 and ALF1) was down-regulated in
the trophoblast lineage prior to giant cell differentiation. Therefore,
suppression of MASH2 function, required to allow giant cell differentiation, may 
occur in vivo by loss of its E-factor partner due to loss of its expression
and/or competition from HAND1. In giant cells, where E-factor expression was not 
detected, HAND1 presumably associates with a different bHLH partner. This may
account for the distinct functions of HAND1 in giant cells and their precursors. 
We conclude that development of the trophoblast lineage is regulated by the
interacting functions of HAND1, MASH2, and their cofactors.

PMCID: PMC85124
PMID: 10611232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Dev Biol. 1999 Nov 1;215(1):62-77.

Expression of HAND gene products may be sufficient for the differentiation of
avian neural crest-derived cells into catecholaminergic neurons in culture.

Howard M(1), Foster DN, Cserjesi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Medical College of Ohio, Toledo, Ohio, 43614, USA.
mhoward@mco.edu

Members of the basic helix-loop-helix family of DNA binding proteins have
important roles in the development of subpopulations of neural crest-derived
neurons. We have cloned the chicken homologues of dHAND (HAND2) and eHAND
(HAND1), basic helix-loop-helix DNA binding proteins whose neuronal expression is
restricted to sympathetic and enteric neural crest-derived ganglia. Transcripts
encoding dHAND and eHAND are expressed in sympathetic ganglia beginning at
Hamburger and Hamilton stage 17-18. Antisense blockade of transcripts encoding
HAND genes in neural crest-derived cells in vitro results in a significant
reduction in neurogenesis. Differentiation of catecholaminergic neurons is also
reduced by 52% if the expression of transcripts encoding dHAND and eHAND is
reduced using antisense oligonucleotide blockade. The effect on neurogenesis and 
phenotypic expression of neural crest-derived neurons is specific; blockade of
HAND gene expression has no apparent influence on the differentiation in vitro of
neural tube-derived neurons. Use of a replication-competent avian retrovirus to
constitutively express HAND genes in neural crest-derived cells in vitro, under
nonpermissive growth conditions in medium supplemented with 2% chick embryo
extract (CEE), induced precocious catecholaminergic differentiation. Constitutive
expression of HAND gene products resulted in a significant increase in
catecholaminergic differentiation of cells grown in medium supplemented with 10% 
CEE, a permissive growth condition for catecholaminergic development. These
results suggest that the expression by neural crest cells of dHAND and eHAND may 
be both sufficient and necessary for catecholaminergic phenotypic expression.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10525350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 1999 Feb;10(1):99-107.

Seeking a regulatory roadmap for heart morphogenesis.

Harvey RP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, St. Vincent's Hospital, Darlinghurst,
Australia.

Despite descriptive studies spanning centuries, we are still lacking an
integrated concept of how molecular patterning information is developed in the
heart, and how this information guides morphogenesis. With an increasing number
of regionally-expressed cardiac genes and transgenes being identified, along with
new animal models of cardiac dysmorphogenesis and an exciting array of genetic
tools for further dissection, the need for an integrated morphogenetic concept is
acute. Models invoking a linear array of cardiac segments are difficult to
reconcile with the observation that those segments are evident only on the outer 
curvature of the heart tube. Molecular and anatomical evidence supports the view 
that chamber specification is achieved by interpretation of dorso-ventral (inner 
curvature/outer curvature), as well as anterior-posterior patterning information 
in the primary heart tube. In this essay, I examine some of the issues
influencing and perhaps confusing our view of cardiac morphogenesis and briefly
discuss regulatory genes in the context of an evolving morphogenetic model.

PMID: 10355034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Development. 1999 Jun;126(12):2589-96.

Retinoic acid is required in the mouse embryo for left-right asymmetry
determination and heart morphogenesis.

Chazaud C(1), Chambon P, Dollé P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP/Collège de France, BP 163, CU de Strasbourg, France.

Determination of the left-right position (situs) of visceral organs involves
lefty, nodal and Pitx2 genes that are specifically expressed on the left side of 
the embryo. We demonstrate that the expression of these genes is prevented by the
addition of a retinoic acid receptor pan-antagonist to cultured headfold stage
mouse embryos, whereas addition of excess retinoic acid leads to their
symmetrical expression. Interestingly, both treatments lead to randomization of
heart looping and to defects in heart anteroposterior patterning. A time course
analysis indicates that only the newly formed mesoderm at the headfold-presomite 
stage is competent for these retinoid effects. We conclude that retinoic acid,
the active derivative of vitamin A, is essential for heart situs determination
and morphogenesis.

PMID: 10331971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Biol Chem. 1999 May 14;274(20):14188-97.

Combinatorial interactions regulate cardiac expression of the murine
adenylosuccinate synthetase 1 gene.

Lewis AL(1), Xia Y, Datta SK, McMillin J, Kellems RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The mammalian heart begins contracting at the linear tube stage during
embryogenesis and continuously pumps, nonstop, throughout the entire lifetime of 
the animal. Therefore, the cardiac energy metabolizing pathways must be properly 
established and efficiently functioning. While the biochemistry of these pathways
is well defined, limited information regarding the regulation of cardiac
metabolic genes is available. Previously, we reported that 1.9 kilobase pairs of 
murine adenylosuccinate synthetase 1 gene (Adss1) 5'-flanking DNA directs high
levels of reporter expression to the adult transgenic heart. In this report, we
define the 1.9-kilobase pair fragment as a cardiac-specific enhancer that
controls correct spatiotemporal expression of a reporter similar to the
endogenous Adss1 gene. A 700-base pair fragment within this region activates a
heterologous promoter specifically in adult transgenic hearts. Proteins present
in a cardiac nuclear extract interact with potential transcription factor binding
sites of this region and these cis-acting sites play important regulatory roles
in the cardiac expression of this reporter. Finally, we report that several
different cardiac transcription factors trans-activate the 1.9HSCAT construct
through these sites and that combinations result in enhanced reporter expression.
Adss1 appears to be one of the first target genes identified for the bHLH factors
Hand1 and Hand2.

PMID: 10318837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Nat Genet. 1999 Apr;21(4):444-8.

Embryonic retinoic acid synthesis is essential for early mouse post-implantation 
development.

Niederreither K(1), Subbarayan V, Dollé P, Chambon P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP/Collège de France, Illkirch, C.U. de Strasbourg, France.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 1999 Apr;21(4):346-7.

A number of studies have suggested that the active derivative of vitamin A,
retinoic acid (RA), may be important for early development of mammalian embryos. 
Severe vitamin A deprivation in rodents results in maternal infertility,
precluding a thorough investigation of the role of RA during embryogenesis. Here 
we show that production of RA by the retinaldehyde dehydrogenase-2 (Raldh2)
enzyme is required for mouse embryo survival and early morphogenesis. Raldh2 is
an NAD-dependent aldehyde dehydrogenase with high substrate specificity for
retinaldehyde. Its pattern of expression during mouse development has suggested
that it may be responsible for embryonic RA synthesis. We generated a targeted
disruption of the mouse Raldh2 gene and found that Raldh2-/- embryos, which die
at midgestation without undergoing axial rotation (body turning), exhibit
shortening along the anterioposterior axis and do not form limb buds. Their heart
consists of a single, medial, dilated cavity. Their frontonasal region is
truncated and their otocysts are severely reduced. These defects result from a
block in embryonic RA synthesis, as shown by the lack of activity of
RA-responsive transgenes, the altered expression of an RA-target homeobox gene
and the near full rescue of the mutant phenotype by maternal RA administration.
Our data establish that RA synthesized by the post-implantation mammalian embryo 
is an essential developmental hormone whose lack leads to early embryo death.

PMID: 10192400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Trends Cardiovasc Med. 1999 Jan-Feb;9(1-2):11-8.

HAND proteins: molecular mediators of cardiac development and congenital heart
disease.

Srivastava D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas 75235-9148, USA.

Congenital heart defects are the clinical manifestation of anomalies in embryonic
cardiac development. Such defects occur in distinct regions or chambers of the
heart. A molecular framework in which to consider cardiac development and
congenital heart disease in a segmental fashion has begun to emerge. dHAND and
eHAND are two related basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors that are
expressed in a complementary fashion in the developing right and left ventricles,
respectively. They are also expressed in the neural crest-derived cardiac outflow
tract and aortic arch arteries. Targeted mutations of dHAND and eHAND in mice
have revealed novel pathways of organogenesis in mesodermal and neural crest
derivatives. dHAND mutants exhibit hypoplasia of the right ventricle, branchial
arches, and aortic arch arteries. The distinct nature of cardiac defects in dHAND
mutants provides an entry into dissecting molecular pathways governing
morphogenesis of specific components of the heart. Congenital heart disease is
considered as a defect in segmental development of the heart and the role of
dHAND and eHAND in regulating such developmental pathways in normal and abnormal 
cardiogenesis is examined.

PMID: 10189962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Development. 1999 Mar;126(6):1269-80.

The cardiac homeobox gene Csx/Nkx2.5 lies genetically upstream of multiple genes 
essential for heart development.

Tanaka M(1), Chen Z, Bartunkova S, Yamasaki N, Izumo S.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, and Department 
of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Csx/Nkx2.5 is a vertebrate homeobox gene with a sequence homology to the
Drosophila tinman, which is required for the dorsal mesoderm specification.
Recently, heterozygous mutations of this gene were found to cause human
congenital heart disease (Schott, J.-J., Benson, D. W., Basson, C. T., Pease, W.,
Silberbach, G. M., Moak, J. P., Maron, B. J., Seidman, C. E. and Seidman, J. G.
(1998) Science 281, 108-111). To investigate the functions of Csx/Nkx2.5 in
cardiac and extracardiac development in the vertebrate, we have generated and
analyzed mutant mice completely null for Csx/Nkx2.5. Homozygous null embryos
showed arrest of cardiac development after looping and poor development of blood 
vessels. Moreover, there were severe defects in vascular formation and
hematopoiesis in the mutant yolk sac. Interestingly, TUNEL staining and PCNA
staining showed neither enhanced apoptosis nor reduced cell proliferation in the 
mutant myocardium. In situ hybridization studies demonstrated that, among 20
candidate genes examined, expression of ANF, BNP, MLC2V, N-myc, MEF2C, HAND1 and 
Msx2 was disturbed in the mutant heart. Moreover, in the heart of adult chimeric 
mice generated from Csx/Nkx2.5 null ES cells, there were almost no ES
cell-derived cardiac myocytes, while there were substantial contributions of Csx 
/Nkx2.5-deficient cells in other organs. Whole-mount &bgr;-gal staining of
chimeric embryos showed that more than 20% contribution of Csx/Nkx2. 5-deficient 
cells in the heart arrested cardiac development. These results indicate that (1) 
the complete null mutation of Csx/Nkx2.5 did not abolish initial heart looping,
(2) there was no enhanced apoptosis or defective cell cycle entry in Csx/Nkx2.5
null cardiac myocytes, (3) Csx/Nkx2.5 regulates expression of several essential
transcription factors in the developing heart, (4) Csx/Nkx2.5 is required for
later differentiation of cardiac myocytes, (5) Csx/Nkx2. 5 null cells exert
dominant interfering effects on cardiac development, and (6) there were severe
defects in yolk sac angiogenesis and hematopoiesis in the Csx/Nkx2.5 null
embryos.

PMID: 10021345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Gene. 1998 Dec 11;224(1-2):77-86.

Molecular cloning of the human Hand1 gene/cDNA and its tissue-restricted
expression in cytotrophoblastic cells and heart.

Knöfler M(1), Meinhardt G, Vasicek R, Husslein P, Egarter C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Vienna, W ahringer
Gürtel 18-20, A-1090, Vienna, Austria. martin.knoefle@akh-wien.ac.at

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) factor Hand1 plays a role in the developing
chicken heart and is required for trophoblast giant cell differentiation and
cardiac looping of mouse embryonic development. Here, we report the cloning of
the human Hand1 cDNA and gene from a heart-specific cDNA library and a genomic
lambda-DNA library, respectively. We present the nucleotide sequence of a 1.75kb 
cDNA clone, encoding the presumptive 215 amino acid human Hand1 protein, and show
homology comparison of the conserved bHLH region between different species. In
vitro transcription-translation of Hand1 mRNA and analysis of protein size
suggest that the Hand1 polypeptide is (post)translationally modified. By Southern
blot analysis we demonstrate that the isolated genomic DNA clone harbours the
entire Hand1 gene and describe molecular structure and sequences of the two 799
and 938bp exons and the single 1.56kb intron. The expression pattern of the mRNA 
in different human tissues revealed that Hand1 transcripts are restricted to the 
heart, suggesting that the protein could be required for cardiac-specific gene
transcription and function in adults. Hand1 transcripts were undetectable in a
non-tumorigenic villous trophoblast cell line, immunopurified cytotrophoblasts
undergoing in vitro differentiation, and first trimester placental tissue,
suggesting that the transcription factor is not involved in the development of
villous and extravillous trophoblast cell lineages. Hand1 mRNA, however, was
abundantly expressed in cytotrophoblastic Jeg-3 and BeWo cells, suggesting that
Hand1 could be required for early trophoblast differentiation.

PMID: 9931445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. EMBO J. 1998 Nov 2;17(21):6276-88.

Requirement of the mouse I-mfa gene for placental development and skeletal
patterning.

Kraut N(1), Snider L, Chen CM, Tapscott SJ, Groudine M.

Author information: 
(1)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 1100 Fairview Ave N., A3-025, PO Box
19024, Seattle, WA 98109-1024, USA. norbert.kraut@bc.boehringer-ingelheim.com

The bHLH-repressor protein I-mfa binds to MyoD family members, inhibits their
activity, and blocks their nuclear import and binding to DNA. In situ
hybridization analysis demonstrated that mouse I-mfa was highly expressed in
extraembryonic lineages, in the sclerotome, and subsequently within mesenchymal
precursors of the axial and appendicular skeleton, before chondrogenesis occurs. 
Targeted deletion of I-mfa in a C57Bl/6 background resulted in embryonic
lethality around E10.5, associated with a placental defect and a markedly reduced
number of trophoblast giant cells. Overexpression of I-mfa in rat trophoblast
(Rcho-1) stem cells induced differentiation into trophoblast giant cells. I-mfa
interacted with the bHLH protein Mash2, a negative regulator of trophoblast giant
cell formation, and inhibited its transcriptional activity in cell culture. In
contrast, I-mfa did not interfere with the activity of the bHLH protein Hand1, a 
positive regulator of giant cell differentiation. Interestingly, I-mfa-null
embryos on a 129/Sv background had no placental defect, generally survived to
adulthood, and exhibited delayed caudal neural tube closure and skeletal
patterning defects that included fusions of ribs, vertebral bodies and abnormal
formation of spinous processes. Our results indicate that I-mfa plays an
important role in trophoblast and chondrogenic differentiation by negatively
regulating a subset of lineage-restricted bHLH proteins.

PMCID: PMC1170953
PMID: 9799236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Development. 1998 Aug;125(16):3005-14.

A signaling cascade involving endothelin-1, dHAND and msx1 regulates development 
of neural-crest-derived branchial arch mesenchyme.

Thomas T(1), Kurihara H, Yamagishi H, Kurihara Y, Yazaki Y, Olson EN, Srivastava 
D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Cardiology and Department of Molecular
Biology and Oncology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas,
Texas 75235-9148, USA. edu.

Numerous human syndromes are the result of abnormal cranial neural crest
development. One group of such defects, referred to as CATCH-22 (cardiac defects,
abnormal facies, thymic hypoplasia, cleft palate, hypocalcemia, associated with
chromosome 22 microdeletion) syndrome, exhibit craniofacial and cardiac defects
resulting from abnormal development of the third and fourth neural crest-derived 
branchial arches and branchial arch arteries. Mice harboring a null mutation of
the endothelin-1 gene (Edn1), which is expressed in the epithelial layer of the
branchial arches and encodes for the endothelin-1 (ET-1) signaling peptide, have 
a phenotype similar to CATCH-22 syndrome with aortic arch defects and
craniofacial abnormalities. Here we show that the basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor, dHAND, is expressed in the mesenchyme underlying the
branchial arch epithelium. Further, dHAND and the related gene, eHAND, are
downregulated in the branchial and aortic arches of Edn1-null embryos. In mice
homozygous null for the dHAND gene, the first and second arches are hypoplastic
secondary to programmed cell death and the third and fourth arches fail to form. 
Molecular analysis revealed that most markers of the neural-crest-derived
components of the branchial arch are expressed in dHAND-null embryos, suggesting 
normal migration of neural crest cells. However, expression of the homeobox gene,
Msx1, was undetectable in the mesenchyme of dHAND-null branchial arches but
unaffected in the limb bud, consistent with the separable regulatory elements of 
Msx1 previously described. Together, these data suggest a model in which
epithelial secretion of ET-1 stimulates mesenchymal expression of dHAND, which
regulates Msx1 expression in the growing, distal branchial arch. Complete
disruption of this molecular pathway results in growth failure of the branchial
arches from apoptosis, while partial disruption leads to defects of branchial
arch derivatives, similar to those seen in CATCH-22 syndrome.

PMID: 9671575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Mech Dev. 1998 Feb;71(1-2):151-63.

Xenopus eHAND: a marker for the developing cardiovascular system of the embryo
that is regulated by bone morphogenetic proteins.

Sparrow DB(1), Kotecha S, Towers N, Mohun TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, National Institute for Medical Research,
London, UK.

The bHLH protein eHAND is a sensitive marker for cardiovascular precursors in the
Xenopus embryo. The earliest site of expression is a broad domain within the
lateral plate mesoderm of the tailbud embryo. This domain comprises precursors
that contribute to the posterior cardinal veins in later stages. Surprisingly,
expression is profoundly asymmetric at this stage and is random with respect to
embryo side. XeHAND is also expressed in an anterior domain that encompasses the 
prospective heart region. Within the myocardium and pericardium, transcripts are 
also asymmetrically distributed, but in these tissues they are localised in a
left-sided manner. Later in development XeHAND transcripts are largely restricted
to the ventral aorta, aortic arches and venous inflow tract (sinus venosus) which
flank the heart itself, but no expression is detected in neural crest derivatives
at any stage. This demonstrates that patterns of XeHAND expression differ
markedly amongst vertebrates and that in Xenopus, XeHAND expression identifies
all of the earliest formed elements of the cardiovascular system. In animal cap
explants, expression of XeHAND (but not other markers of cardiogenic
differentiation) is strongly induced by ectopic expression of the TGFbeta family 
members, BMP-2 and BMP-4, but this can be blocked by coexpression of a dominant
negative BMP receptor. This suggests that XeHAND expression in the embryo is
regulated by the ventralising signals of bone morphogenetic proteins. High levels
of expression are also detected in explants treated with high doses of activin A 
which induces cardiac muscle differentiation. No such effect is seen with lower
doses of activin, indicating that a second pathway may regulate the XeHAND gene
during cardiogenesis.

PMID: 9507100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Dev Biol. 1998 Apr 15;196(2):228-36.

The bHLH factors, dHAND and eHAND, specify pulmonary and systemic cardiac
ventricles independent of left-right sidedness.

Thomas T(1), Yamagishi H, Overbeek PA, Olson EN, Srivastava D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas 75235-9148, USA.

dHAND and eHAND are basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors that play
critical roles in cardiac development. The HAND genes have a complementary
left-right cardiac asymmetry of expression with dHAND predominantly on the right 
side and eHAND on the left side of the looped heart tube. Here we show that
although eHAND is asymmetrically expressed along the anterior-posterior and
dorsal-ventral embryonic axes, it is symmetrically expressed along the left-right
axis at early stages of embryonic and cardiac development. After cardiac looping,
dHAND and eHAND are expressed in the right (pulmonary) and left (systemic)
ventricles, respectively. The left-right (LR) sidedness of dHAND and eHAND
expression is demonstrated to be anatomically reversed in situs inversus
(inv/inv) mouse embryos; however, dHAND expression persists in the pulmonary
ventricle and eHAND in the systemic ventricle regardless of anatomic position,
indicating chamber specificity of expression. Previously we showed that
dHAND-null mice fail to form a right-sided pulmonary ventricle. Here mice
homozygous for the dHAND and inv mutations are demonstrated to have only a
right-sided ventricle which is morphologically a left (systemic) ventricle. These
data suggest that the HAND genes are involved in development of segments of the
heart tube which give rise to specific chambers of the heart during
cardiogenesis, rather than controlling the direction of cardiac looping by
interpreting the cascade of LR embryonic signals.

PMID: 9576835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Nat Genet. 1998 Mar;18(3):271-5.

The Hand1 bHLH transcription factor is essential for placentation and cardiac
morphogenesis.

Riley P(1), Anson-Cartwright L, Cross JC.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Development and Fetal Health, Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, 
Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The placenta and cardiovascular system are the first organ systems to form during
mammalian embryogenesis. We show here that a single gene is critical for
development of both. The Hand1 gene, previously called Hxt, eHAND and Thing1,
encodes a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor that starts to be
expressed during pre-implantation development. After implantation, Hand1
expression is restricted to placental trophoblast cells and later to embryonic
cardiac and neural crest cells. We generated Hand1-null mutant mice by gene
targetting. Homozygous mutant embryos arrested by embryonic day (E) 7.5 of
gestation with defects in trophoblast giant cell differentiation. This early
mortality could be rescued by aggregation of mutant embryos with wild-type
tetraploid embryos, which contribute wild-type cells to the trophoblast, but not 
the embryo. By E10.5, however, the Hand1-null fetuses derived from tetraploid
chimaeras died due to cardiac failure. Their heart tubes showed abnormal looping 
and ventricular myocardial differentiation. Therefore, Hand1 is essential for
differentiation of both trophoblast and cardiomyocytes, which are embryologically
distinct cell lineages.

PMID: 9500551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Nat Genet. 1998 Mar;18(3):266-70.

Heart and extra-embryonic mesodermal defects in mouse embryos lacking the bHLH
transcription factor Hand1.

Firulli AB(1), McFadden DG, Lin Q, Srivastava D, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center at Dallas, 75235-9148, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors, Hand1 and Hand2 (refs
1,2), also called eHand/Hxt/Thing1 and dHand/Hed/Thing2 (refs 3,4), respectively,
are expressed in the heart and certain neural-crest derivatives during
embryogenesis. In addition, Hand1 is expressed in extraembryonic membranes,
whereas Hand2 is expressed in the deciduum. Previous studies have demonstrated
that Hand2 is required for formation of the right ventricle of the heart and the 
aortic arch arteries. We have generated a germline mutation in the mouse Hand1
gene by replacing the first coding exon with a beta-galactosidase reporter gene. 
Embryos homozygous for the Hand1 null allele died between embryonic days 8.5 and 
9.5 and exhibited yolk sac abnormalities due to a deficiency in extraembryonic
mesoderm. Heart development was also perturbed and did not progress beyond the
cardiac-looping stage. Our results demonstrate important roles for Hand1 in
extraembryonic mesodermal and heart development.

PMID: 9500550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Genes Dev. 1997 Jun 1;11(11):1357-69.

Homeodomain factor Nkx2-5 controls left/right asymmetric expression of bHLH gene 
eHand during murine heart development.

Biben C(1), Harvey RP.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Royal Melbourne
Hospital, Victoria, Australia.

One of the first morphological manifestations of left/right (L/R) asymmetry in
mammalian embryos is a pronounced rightward looping of the linear heart tube. The
direction of looping is thought to be controlled by signals from an embryonic L/R
axial system. We report here that morphological L/R asymmetry in the murine heart
first became apparent at the linear tube stage as a leftward displacement of its 
caudal aspect. Beginning at the same stage, the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
factor gene eHand was expressed in a strikingly left-dominant pattern in
myocardium, reflecting an intrinsic molecular asymmetry. In hearts of embryos
lacking the homeobox gene Nkx2-5, which do not loop, left-sided eHand expression 
was abolished. However, expression was unaffected in Sc1-/- hearts that loop
poorly because of hematopoietic insufficiency, and was right-sided in hearts of
inv/inv embryos that display situs inversus. The data predict that eHand
expression is enhanced in descendants of the left heart progenitor pool as one
response to inductive signaling from the L/R axial system, and that eHand
controls intrinsic morphogenetic pathways essential for looping. One aspect of
the intrinsic response to L/R information falls under Nkx2-5 homeobox control.

PMID: 9192865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Yeast. 1997 Mar 15;13(3):215-24.

Properties and heterologous expression of the glucose transporter GHT1 from
Schizosaccharomyces pombe.

Lichtenberg-Fraté H(1), Näschen T, Heiland S, Höfer M.

Author information: 
(1)Botanisches Institut der Universität Bonn.

Genomic DNA of the Schizosaccharomyces pombe glucose transporter, GHT1, was
obtained by complementation of the glucose transport deficient Sz. pombe strain
YGS-5. Here we describe the GHT1 gene that encodes a protein of 565 amino acids
with a corresponding molecular mass of 62.5 kDa. This eukaryotic glucose
transporter contains 12 putative transmembrane segments and is homologous to the 
HXT multigene family of S. cerevisiae with several amino acid motifs of this
sugar transporter family. It is also homologous to other sugar carriers from
human, mouse and Escherichia coli. The function of the Ght1 protein as a glucose 
transporter was proved both by homologous and heterologous expression in the Sz. 
pombe mutant YGS-5 and in the S. cerevisiae hxt mutant RE700A, respectively. Both
transformed yeast strains transported D-glucose with substrate specificity
similar to that in Sz. pombe wild-type cells. Moreover, the cells of the two
transformed yeast strains accumulated 2-deoxy-D-glucose, a non-metabolizable
D-glucose analogue, with an efficiency similar to Sz. pombe wild-type cells. The 
ability of the S. cerevisiae mutant RE700A to accumulate 2DG in an delta mu H+
dependent manner after transformation with GHT1 provides evidence that the Sz.
pombe transporter catalyses an energy-dependent uptake of glucose.

PMID: 9090050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Dev Genet. 1997;20(1):1-10.

Functional analysis of trophoblast giant cells in parthenogenetic mouse embryos.

Newman-Smith E(1), Werb Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of California, San Francisco 94143-0750,
USA.

Diploid mouse embryos containing only maternal DNA (parthenotes) fail, in part,
because the inner cell mass does not induce the trophoblast to grow. In this
study, we asked whether any of the defects in parthenotes may arise from
alterations in trophoblast function. We examined the expression of genes
important for normal trophoblast function and found several trophoblast genes
that were expressed at normal levels in the primary trophoblast cells of
parthenotes: E-cadherin, a cell adhesion molecule, was expressed normally in both
the ICM and trophectoderm of parthenogenetic blastocysts and blastocyst
outgrowths; the gene for Hxt, a basic helix-loop-helix factor that regulates
trophoblast development, was expressed in both zygotic and parthenogenetic giant 
cells; placental lactogen-1, a hormone that is normally secreted by trophoblast
giant cells, was expressed in most of both parthenogenetic and normal trophoblast
cells; and the 92 kDa matrix metalloproteinase, gelatinase B, also known as
MMP-9, was secreted at equivalent levels by both zygotic and parthenogenetic
blastocyst outgrowths. However, once the outgrowths had developed, a
subpopulation of trophoblast cells in parthenogenetic embryos had decreased DNA
replication and significantly fewer nucleoli per nucleus than did zygotic
embryos. Moreover, the parthenogenetic trophoblast cells growing out from
blastocysts had a decreased viability in culture. These data suggest that,
although parthenogenetic embryos are able to initiate primary trophoblast
differentiation, the stability and continued differentiation of trophoblast giant
cells may be abnormal. Our data support the hypothesis that the deficiency of
secondary trophoblast giant cells may contribute to the decline of
parthenogenetic embryos and suggest that the factors controlling this subset of
trophoblast are distinct from those for primary trophoblast.

PMID: 9094206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Science. 1995 Dec 22;270(5244):1995-9.

A subclass of bHLH proteins required for cardiac morphogenesis.

Srivastava D(1), Cserjesi P, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston 77030, USA.

Skeletal muscle development is controlled by a family of muscle-specific basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors. Two bHLH genes, dHAND and eHAND,
have now been isolated that are expressed in the bilateral heart primordia and
subsequently throughout the primitive tubular heart and its derivatives during
chick and mouse embryogenesis. Incubation of stage 8 chick embryos with dHAND and
eHAND antisense oligonucleotides revealed that either oligonucleotide alone had
no effect on embryonic development, whereas together they arrested development at
the looping heart tube stage. Thus, dHAND and eHAND may play redundant roles in
the regulation of the morphogenetic events of vertebrate heart development.

PMID: 8533092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Cell Immunol. 1995 Oct 1;165(1):65-70.

Synergistic effect of IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha on expression of immune molecules
and antigen presentation by Schwann cells.

Gold R(1), Toyka KV, Hartung HP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Julius-Maximilians-Universität Würzburg, Germany.

Neonatal rat Schwann cells were characterized with regard to their immune
functions in vitro. Without stimulation they displayed low levels of ICAM-1, but 
not of MHC class II gene products on their surface. Expression of both immune
molecules was upregulated by IFN-gamma. TNF-alpha acted synergistically, but had 
no effect when given alone. ICAM-1 expression reached its maximum within 24 hr,
whereas I-A plateaued only after 3 days of cytokine treatment. Increased
expression of recognition molecules on Schwann cells correlated well with
enhanced activation of CD4+ autoimmune T cell lines between Day 1 and 2. T cell
activation was blocked by adding monoclonal antibodies directed against I-A
molecules, whereas ICAM-1-specific antibodies exerted a mild costimulatory
effect. We conclude that Schwann cells may exert potent immunoregulatory
functions by expressing MHC and adhesion molecules, which may be further
upregulated by Th1-type cytokines released by immunoinflammatory T cells in the
lesion.

PMID: 7671325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Development. 1995 Aug;121(8):2513-23.

Hxt encodes a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor that regulates
trophoblast cell development.

Cross JC(1), Flannery ML, Blanar MA, Steingrimsson E, Jenkins NA, Copeland NG,
Rutter WJ, Werb Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of California, San Francisco 94143, USA.

Trophoblast cells are the first lineage to form in the mammalian conceptus and
mediate the process of implantation. We report the cloning of a basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor gene, Hxt, that is expressed in
early trophoblast and in differentiated giant cells. A separate gene, Hed,
encodes a related protein that is expressed in maternal deciduum surrounding the 
implantation site. Overexpression of Hxt in mouse blastomeres directed their
development into trophoblast cells in blastocysts. In addition, overexpression of
Hxt induced the differentiation of rat trophoblast (Rcho-1) stem cells as assayed
by changes in cell adhesion and by activation of the placental lactogen-I gene
promoter, a trophoblast giant cell-specific gene. In contrast, the negative HLH
regulator, Id-1, inhibited Rcho-1 differentiation and placental lactogen-I
transcription. These data demonstrate a role for HLH factors in regulating
trophoblast development and indicate a positive role for Hxt in promoting the
formation of trophoblast giant cells.

PMID: 7671815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Jul;15(7):3813-22.

Identification of a new family of tissue-specific basic helix-loop-helix proteins
with a two-hybrid system.

Hollenberg SM(1), Sternglanz R, Cheng PF, Weintraub H.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,
Seattle, Washington 98104, USA.

With modified two-hybrid technology, we have isolated a member of a new family of
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors. Thing1 (Th1) was identified 
in a screen of a mouse embryo cDNA library as a partner for the Drosophila E
protein daughterless. RNA in situ hybridization and reverse transcriptase-PCR
demonstrate a stage- and tissue-specific distribution for the expression of Th1. 
Although tissue specific, the expression pattern of Th1 is fairly complex. During
development, Th1 mRNA is widely expressed in extraembryonic tissues, portions of 
the heart, autonomic ganglia, the gut, and pharyngeal arches. At embryonic day
7.5 (E7.5), extraembryonic derivatives show robust Th1 expression. By E8.5,
expression in the embryonic heart becomes detectable. During the next 2 days of
development, the signal also includes gut and pharyngeal arches. Predominant
expression at E13.5 is in neural crest derivatives, especially the autonomic
nervous system and adrenal medulla. Expression of Th1 persists in the adult, in
which it is localized to the smooth muscle cells of the gut. In vitro, Th1
protein recognizes a set of DNA sites that are more degenerate than has been
determined for other bHLH factors, indicating a reduced binding specificity.
Transient transfection of NIH 3T3 cells with GAL4-Th1 fusions reveals a
repression activity mediated by the Th1 bHLH domain. In combination, these
properties define Th1 as a new bHLH protein with a unique set of properties.

PMCID: PMC230620
PMID: 7791788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


