
61. Genes Cells. 2005 Jul;10(7):717-31.

GABP, HCF-1 and YY1 are involved in Rb gene expression during myogenesis.

Deléhouzée S(1), Yoshikawa T, Sawa C, Sawada J, Ito T, Omori M, Wada T, Yamaguchi
Y, Kabe Y, Handa H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of
Technology, 4259 Nagatsuta-cho, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan.

Muscle cell differentiation, or myogenesis, is a well-characterized process and
involves the expression of specific sets of genes in an orderly manner. A
prerequisite for myogenesis is the exit from the cell cycle, which is associated 
with the up-regulation of the tumor suppressor Rb. In this study, we set to
investigate the regulatory mechanism of the Rb promoter that allows adequate
up-regulation in differentiating myoblasts. We report that Rb expression is
regulated by the transcription factors GABP, HCF-1 and YY1. Before induction of
differentiation, Rb is expressed at a low level and GABP and YY1 are both present
on the promoter. YY1, which exerts an inhibitory effect on Rb expression, is
removed from the promoter as cells advance through myogenesis and translocates
from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. On the other hand, upon induction of
differentiation, the GABP cofactor HCF-1 is recruited to and coactivates the
promoter with GABP. RNAi-mediated knock-down of HCF-1 results in inhibition of Rb
up-regulation as well as myotube formation. These results indicate that the Rb
promoter is subject to regulation by positive and negative factors and that this 
intricate activation mechanism is critical to allow the accurate Rb gene
up-regulation observed during myogenesis.

PMID: 15966902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jan 14;280(2):1369-75. Epub 2004 Nov 1.

Combinatorial transcription of herpes simplex virus and varicella zoster virus
immediate early genes is strictly determined by the cellular coactivator HCF-1.

Narayanan A(1), Nogueira ML, Ruyechan WT, Kristie TM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Viral Diseases, NIAID, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
Maryland 20892, USA.

The mammalian transcriptional coactivator host cell factor-1 (HCF-1) functions in
concert with Oct-1 and VP16 to assemble the herpes simplex virus (HSV) immediate 
early (IE) transcription enhancer core complexes that mediate the high level
transcription of these genes upon infection. Although this transcriptional model 
has been well characterized in vitro, the requirements and significance of the
components have not been addressed. Oct-1 was previously determined to be
critical but not essential for HSV IE gene expression. In contrast, RNA
interference-mediated depletion of HCF-1 resulted in abrogation of HSV IE gene
expression. The HSV IE gene enhancer domain is a model of combinatorial
transcription and consists of the core enhancer and multiple binding sites for
factors such as Sp1 and GA-binding protein. It was striking that HCF-1 was
strictly required for VP16-mediated transcriptional induction via the core
enhancer as well as for basal level transcription mediated by GA-binding protein 
and Sp1. HCF-1 was also found to be essential for the induction of varicella
zoster virus IE gene expression by ORF10, the VZV ortholog of the HSV IE
transactivator VP16, and the autostimulatory IE62 protein. The critical
dependence upon HCF-1 demonstrates that this cellular component is a key factor
for control of HSV and VZV IE gene expression by functioning as the common
element for distinct factors cooperating at the IE gene enhancers. The
requirements for this protein supports the model whereby the regulated transport 
of HCF-1 from the cytoplasm to the nucleus in sensory neurons may control IE gene
expression and reactivation of these viruses from the latent state.

PMID: 15522876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Mol Cell. 2004 Jun 18;14(6):713-25.

A switch in mitotic histone H4 lysine 20 methylation status is linked to M phase 
defects upon loss of HCF-1.

Julien E(1), Herr W.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, 1 Bungtown Road, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724, 
USA.

The abundant chromatin-associated human factor HCF-1 is a heterodimeric complex
of HCF-1N and HCF-1C subunits that are essential for two stages of the cell
cycle. The HCF-1N subunit promotes G1 phase progression, whereas the HCF-1C
subunit ensures proper cytokinesis at completion of M phase. How the HCF-1C
subunit functions is unknown. Here, we show that HCF-1C subunit depletion causes 
extensive mitotic defects, including a switch from monomethyl to dimethyl lysine 
20 of histone H4 (H4-K20) and defective chromosome alignment and segregation.
Consistent with these activities, the HCF-1C subunit can associate with chromatin
independently of the HCF-1N subunit and regulates the expression of the H4-K20
methyltransferase PR-Set7. Indeed, upregulation of PR-Set7 expression upon loss
of HCF-1 leads to improper mitotic H4-K20 methylation and cytokinesis defects.
These results establish the HCF-1C subunit as an important M phase regulator and 
suggest that H4-K20 methylation status contributes to chromosome behavior during 
mitosis and proper cytokinesis.

PMID: 15200950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jul;24(13):5639-49.

Leukemia proto-oncoprotein MLL forms a SET1-like histone methyltransferase
complex with menin to regulate Hox gene expression.

Yokoyama A(1), Wang Z, Wysocka J, Sanyal M, Aufiero DJ, Kitabayashi I, Herr W,
Cleary ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 
94305, USA.

MLL (for mixed-lineage leukemia) is a proto-oncogene that is mutated in a variety
of human leukemias. Its product, a homolog of Drosophila melanogaster trithorax, 
displays intrinsic histone methyltransferase activity and functions genetically
to maintain embryonic Hox gene expression. Here we report the biochemical
purification of MLL and demonstrate that it associates with a cohort of proteins 
shared with the yeast and human SET1 histone methyltransferase complexes,
including a homolog of Ash2, another Trx-G group protein. Two other members of
the novel MLL complex identified here are host cell factor 1 (HCF-1), a
transcriptional coregulator, and the related HCF-2, both of which specifically
interact with a conserved binding motif in the MLL(N) (p300) subunit of MLL and
provide a potential mechanism for regulating its antagonistic transcriptional
properties. Menin, a product of the MEN1 tumor suppressor gene, is also a
component of the 1-MDa MLL complex. Abrogation of menin expression phenocopies
loss of MLL and reveals a critical role for menin in the maintenance of Hox gene 
expression. Oncogenic mutant forms of MLL retain an ability to interact with
menin but not other identified complex components. These studies link the menin
tumor suppressor protein with the MLL histone methyltransferase machinery, with
implications for Hox gene expression in development and leukemia pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC480881
PMID: 15199122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Biol Chem. 2004 Aug 6;279(32):33673-83. Epub 2004 Jun 8.

A protein sequestering system reveals control of cellular programs by the
transcriptional coactivator HCF-1.

Khurana B(1), Kristie TM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Viral Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA.

The mammalian transcriptional coactivator HCF-1 is a critical component of the
multiprotein herpes simplex virus immediate early gene enhancer core complex. The
protein has also been implicated in basic cellular processes such as cell-cycle
progression, transcriptional coactivation, and mRNA processing. Functions have
been attributed to HCF-1 primarily from analyses of protein-protein interactions 
and from the cell-cycle-arrested phenotype of an HCF-1 temperature-sensitive
mutant. However, neither the mechanisms involved nor specific cellular
transcriptional targets have been identified. As the protein is essential for
cell viability and proliferation, a genetic system was developed to specifically 
sequester the nuclear factor in the cell cytoplasm in a regulated manner. This
approach exhibits no significant cell toxicity yet clearly demonstrates the
requirement of available nuclear HCF-1 for herpes simplex virus immediate early
gene expression during productive infection. Additionally, cellular
transcriptional events were identified that contribute to understanding the
functions ascribed to the protein and implicate the protein in events that impact
the regulation of critical cellular processes.

PMID: 15190068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Mol Biol. 2004 Jun 18;339(5):1049-58.

Characteristic patterns of N Oct-3 binding to a set of neuronal promoters.

Blaud M(1), Vossen C, Joseph G, Alazard R, Erard M, Nieto L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Pharmacologie et de Biologie Structurale, CNRS UPR 9062, 205,
route de Narbonne, 31077 Toulouse Cedex, France.

N Oct-3, a neurospecific POU protein, homodimerizes in a non-cooperative fashion 
on the neuronal aromatic l-amino acid decarboxylase gene promoter and generates
heterodimers with HNF-3beta. Several other neuronal gene promoters, the
corticotropin releasing hormone and the aldolase C gene promoters also contain
overlapping binding sites for N Oct-3 and HNF-3beta. We have demonstrated that N 
Oct-3 presents a non-cooperative homodimerization on these two additional targets
and can also give rise to heterodimers with HNF-3beta. Surprisingly, despite the 
high degree of conservation of the respective POU subunits, the ubiquitous POU
protein Oct-1 can only form monomers even in the presence of either N Oct-3 or
HNF-3beta on these DNA targets. Our data indicate that this difference is
correlated with the specific ability of a portion of the N Oct-3 linker to fold
as an alpha-helix, a property shared by class III POU proteins. These results
suggest that this novel binding pattern permits the heterodimerization of N Oct-3
and HNF-3beta on the neuronal promoters, which could be a key issue in the
development of the nervous system and possibly tumors of neural origin.

PMID: 15178247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 16;279(29):30287-97. Epub 2004 May 11.

TALE homeodomain proteins regulate gonadotropin-releasing hormone gene expression
independently and via interactions with Oct-1.

Rave-Harel N(1), Givens ML, Nelson SB, Duong HA, Coss D, Clark ME, Hall SB, Kamps
MP, Mellon PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine, School of Medicine, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92903, USA.

Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) is the central regulator of reproductive
function. Expression of the GnRH gene is confined to a rare population of neurons
scattered throughout the hypothalamus. Restricted expression of the rat GnRH gene
is driven by a multicomponent enhancer and an evolutionarily conserved promoter. 
Oct-1, a ubiquitous POU homeodomain transcription factor, was identified as an
essential factor regulating GnRH transcription in the GT1-7 hypothalamic neuronal
cell line. In this study, we conducted a two-hybrid interaction screen in yeast
using a GT1-7 cDNA library to search for specific Oct-1 cofactors. Using this
approach, we isolated Pbx1b, a TALE homeodomain transcription factor that
specifically associates with Oct-1. We show that heterodimers containing
Pbx/Prep1 or Pbx/Meis1 TALE homeodomain proteins bind to four functional elements
within the GnRH regulatory region, each in close proximity to an Oct-1-binding
site. Cotransfection experiments indicate that TALE proteins are essential for
GnRH promoter activity in the GT1-7 cells. Moreover, Pbx1 and Oct-1, as well as
Prep1 and Oct-1, form functional complexes that enhance GnRH gene expression.
Finally, Pbx1 is expressed in GnRH neurons in embryonic as well as mature mice,
suggesting that the associations between TALE homeodomain proteins and Oct-1
regulate neuron-specific expression of the GnRH gene in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2935805
PMID: 15138251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 May 28;318(2):361-71.

The human involucrin gene is transcriptionally repressed through a
tissue-specific silencer element recognized by Oct-2.

Azuara-Liceaga E(1), Sandoval M, Corona M, Gariglio P, López-Bayghen E.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética y Biología Molecular, Centro de Investigación y
Estudios Avanzados del I.P.N., Mexico D.F. 07000, Mexico.

Involucrin is an important marker of epithelial differentiation which expression 
is upregulated just after basal cells are pushed into the suprabasal layer in
stratified epithelia. Several transcription factors and regulatory elements had
been described as responsible for turning on the gene. However, it is evident
that in basal cell layer, additional mechanisms are involved in keeping the gene 
silent before the differentiation process starts. In this work, we located a
potential transcriptional silencer in a 52bp sequence whose integrity is
necessary for silencing the proximal enhancer promoter element (PEP) in
multiplying keratinocytes. Octamer-binding sites were noticed in this fragment
and the specific binding of Oct-2 transcription factor was detected. Oct-2
appears to be implicated in an epithelial-specific repression activity recorded
only in keratinocytes and C33-A cell line. Overexpression of Oct-2 repressed the 
involucrin promoter activity in epithelial cells and in the presence of the
silencer element.

PMID: 15120610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 9;279(28):28911-9. Epub 2004 Apr 22.

Oct-1 maintains an intermediate, stable state of HLA-DRA promoter repression in
Rb-defective cells: an Oct-1-containing repressosome that prevents NF-Y binding
to the HLA-DRA promoter.

Osborne AR(1), Zhang H, Fejer G, Palubin KM, Niesen MI, Blanck G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, University of South Florida, 
Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

The cell surface HLA-DR molecule binds foreign peptide antigen and forms an
intercellular complex with the T cell receptor in the course of the development
of an immune response against or immune tolerance to the antigen represented by
the bound peptide. The HLA-DR molecule also functions as a receptor that mediates
cell signaling pathways, including as yet poorly characterized pathway(s) leading
to apoptosis. Expression of HLA-DR mRNA and protein is ordinarily inducible by
interferon-gamma but is not inducible in tumor cells defective for the
retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein (Rb). In the case of the HLA-DRA gene,
which encodes the HLA-DR heavy chain, previous work has indicated that this loss 
of inducibility is attributable to Oct-1 binding to the HLA-DRA promoter. In this
report, we used Oct-1 antisense transformants to determine that Oct-1 represses
the interferon-gamma response of the endogenous HLA-DRA gene. This determination 
is consistent with results from a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay, indicating
that Oct-1 occupies the endogenous HLA-DRA promoter when the HLA-DRA promoter is 
inactive in Rb-defective cells but not when the promoter is converted to a
previously defined, transcriptionally competent state, induced by treatment of
the Rb-defective cells with the HDAC inhibitor, trichostatin A. In vitro
DNA-protein binding analyses indicated that Oct-1 prevents HLA-DRA promoter
activation by mediating the formation of a complex of proteins, termed DRAN (DRA 
negative), that blocks NF-Y access to the promoter.

PMID: 15105429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Virology. 2004 Apr 10;321(2):323-31.

Overexpression of octamer transcription factors 1 or 2 alone has no effect on
HIV-1 transcription in primary human CD4 T cells.

Zhang M(1), Genin A, Cron RQ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA 19104-4318, USA.

We explored the binding of octamer (Oct) transcription factors to the HIV-1 long 
terminal repeat (LTR) by gel shift assays and showed none of the previously
identified four potential Oct binding sites bound Oct-1 or Oct-2. Overexpression 
of Oct-1 or Oct-2 had no effect on HIV-1 LTR activity in transiently transfected 
primary human CD4 T cells. Next, primary human CD4 T cells were co-transfected
with a green fluorescent protein (GFP)-expression vector and an Oct-1 or Oct-2
expression plasmid. The transfected cells were stimulated for 2 days and then
infected with the NL4-3 strain of HIV-1. After 3 days of infection, there were no
differences in HIV-1 p24 supernatant levels. Apoptosis of infected or bystander
cells overexpressing Oct-1 or Oct-2 compared to control was also unaffected. Our 
studies demonstrate that Oct-1 and Oct-2 fail to bind to the HIV-1 LTR and have
no effect on HIV-1 transcription in primary human CD4 T cells.

PMID: 15051391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Apr;24(7):3036-47.

Chromatin-mediated restriction of nuclear factor 1/CTF binding in a repressed and
hormone-activated promoter in vivo.

Belikov S(1), Astrand C, Holmqvist PH, Wrange O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, The Medical Nobel Institute,
Karolinska Institutet, SE-17177 Stockholm, Sweden.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jun;24(12):5636.

Mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) promoter-driven transcription is induced by
glucocorticoid hormone via binding of the glucocorticoid receptor (GR). The MMTV 
promoter also harbors a binding site for nuclear factor 1 (NF1). NF1 and GR were 
expressed in Xenopus oocytes; this revealed GR-NF1 cooperativity both in terms of
DNA binding and chromatin remodeling but not transcription. A fraction of NF1
sites were occupied in a hormone-dependent fashion, but a significant and NF1
concentration-dependent fraction were constitutively bound. Activation of the
MMTV promoter resulted in an approximately 50-fold increase in the NF1
accessibility for its DNA site. The hormone-dependent component of NF1 binding
was dissociated by addition of a GR antagonist; however, the antagonist RU486,
which supports partial GR-DNA binding, also maintained partial NF1 binding. Hence
GR-NF1 cooperativity is independent of agonist-driven chromatin remodeling. NF1
induced the formation of a micrococcal-nuclease-resistant protein-DNA complex
containing the DNA segment from -185 to -55, the MMTV enhanceosome. Coexpression 
of NF1 and Oct1 resulted in a significant stimulation of hormone-induced MMTV
transcription and also in increased basal transcription. We propose that
hormone-independent NF1 binding may be involved in maintaining transcriptional
competence and establishment of tissue-specific gene networks.

PMCID: PMC371135
PMID: 15024090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Feb 27;32(4):e44.

Quantitative high-throughput analysis of transcription factor binding
specificities.

Linnell J(1), Mott R, Field S, Kwiatkowski DP, Ragoussis J, Udalova IA.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, 7 Roosevelt
Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK.

We present a general high-throughput approach to accurately quantify DNA-protein 
interactions, which can facilitate the identification of functional genetic
polymorphisms. The method tested here on two structurally distinct transcription 
factors (TFs), NF-kappaB and OCT-1, comprises three steps: (i) optimized
selection of DNA variants to be tested experimentally, which we show is superior 
to selecting variants at random; (ii) a quantitative protein-DNA binding assay
using microarray and surface plasmon resonance technologies; (iii) prediction of 
binding affinity for all DNA variants in the consensus space using a statistical 
model based on principal coordinates analysis. For the protein-DNA binding assay,
we identified a polyacrylamide/ester glass activation chemistry which formed
exclusive covalent bonds with 5'-amino-modified DNA duplexes and hindered
non-specific electrostatic attachment of DNA. Full accessibility of the DNA
duplexes attached to polyacrylamide-modified slides was confirmed by the high
degree of data correlation with the electromobility shift assay (correlation
coefficient 93%). This approach offers the potential for high-throughput
determination of TF binding profiles and predicting the effects of single
nucleotide polymorphisms on TF binding affinity. New DNA binding data for OCT-1
are presented.

PMCID: PMC390317
PMID: 14990752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Feb 17;101(7):2005-10. Epub 2004 Feb 4.

B cell development and immunoglobulin transcription in Oct-1-deficient mice.

Wang VE(1), Tantin D, Chen J, Sharp PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Center for Cancer Research and McGovern Institute,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA
02139-4307, USA.

The POU domain transcription factors Oct-1 and Oct-2 interact with the octamer
element, a motif conserved within Ig promoters and enhancers, and mediate
transcription from the Ig loci. Inactivation of Oct-2 by gene targeting results
in normal B cell development and Ig transcription. To study the role of Oct-1 in 
these processes, the lymphoid compartment of RAG-1(-/-) animals was reconstituted
with Oct-1-deficient fetal liver hematopoietic cells. Recipient mice develop B
cells with levels of surface Ig expression comparable with wild type, although at
slightly reduced numbers. These B cells transcribe Ig normally, respond to
antigenic stimulation, undergo class switching, and use a normal repertoire of
light chain variable segments. However, recipient mice show slight reductions in 
serum IgM and IgA. Thus, the Oct-1 protein is dispensable for B cell development 
and Ig transcription.

PMCID: PMC357042
PMID: 14762167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Feb 10;101(6):1473-8. Epub 2004 Jan 26.

Herpes simplex virus infections are arrested in Oct-1-deficient cells.

Nogueira ML(1), Wang VE, Tantin D, Sharp PA, Kristie TM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Viral Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Building 4-131, 4 Center Drive,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Expression of the herpes simplex virus (HSV) immediate early (IE) genes is
regulated by a multiprotein complex that is assembled on the TAATGARAT enhancer
core element. The complex contains the cellular POU domain protein Oct-1, the
viral transactivator VP16, and the cellular cofactor host cell factor 1. The
current model suggests that the assembly depends on recognition of the core
element by Oct-1. Here, HSV infection of Oct-1-deficient mouse embryonic
fibroblast cells demonstrates that Oct-1 is critical for IE gene expression at
low multiplicities of infection (moi). However, the protein is not essential for 
IE gene expression at high moi, indicating that VP16-mediated transcriptional
induction through other IE regulatory elements is also important. This induction 
depends, at least in part, on the GA-binding protein binding elements that are
present in each IE enhancer domain. Surprisingly, whereas the viral IE genes are 
expressed after high moi infection of Oct-1-deficient cells, the assembly of
viral replication factories is severely impaired, revealing a second critical
role for Oct-1 in HSV replication. The results have implications for both the HSV
lytic and latency-reactivation cycles.

PMCID: PMC341744
PMID: 14745036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Feb;24(3):1022-32.

Embryonic lethality, decreased erythropoiesis, and defective octamer-dependent
promoter activation in Oct-1-deficient mice.

Wang VE(1), Schmidt T, Chen J, Sharp PA, Tantin D.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts 02139-4307, USA.

Oct-1 is a sequence-specific DNA binding transcription factor that is believed to
regulate a large group of tissue-specific and ubiquitous genes. Both Oct-1 and
the related but tissue-restricted Oct-2 protein bind to a DNA sequence termed the
octamer motif (5'-ATGCAAAT-3') with equal affinity in vitro. To address the role 
of Oct-1 in vivo, an Oct-1-deficient mouse strain was generated by gene
targeting. Oct-1-deficient embryos died during gestation, frequently appeared
anemic, and suffered from a lack of Ter-119-positive erythroid precursor cells.
This defect was cell intrinsic. Fibroblasts derived from these embryos displayed 
a dramatic decrease in Oct-1 DNA binding activity and a lack of octamer-dependent
promoter activity in transient transfection assays. Interestingly, several
endogenous genes thought to be regulated by Oct-1 showed no change in expression.
When crossed to Oct-2(+/-) animals, transheterozygotes were recovered at a very
low frequency. These findings suggest a critical role for Oct-1 during
development and a stringent gene dosage effect with Oct-2 in mediating postnatal 
survival.

PMCID: PMC321444
PMID: 14729950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Gene. 2004 Feb 4;326:175-87.

Cloning, genomic organization, expression, and effect on beta-casein promoter
activity of a novel isoform of the mouse Oct-1 transcription factor.

Zhao FQ(1), Zheng Y, Dong B, Oka T.

Author information: 
(1)Lactation and Mammary Gland Biology Group, Department of Animal Science,
University of Vermont, Burlington, VT 05405, USA. Feng-Qi.Zhao@uvm.edu

The ubiquitously expressed transcription factor Oct-1, a member of the POU domain
factors, is involved in the regulation of expression of many tissue-specific and 
house-keeping genes. Multiple alternatively spliced isoforms of Oct-1 have been
identified in human and mouse cells. The expression patterns of these isoforms
and the analysis of their genomic organization and structure have suggested that 
the structural variation of Oct-1 isoforms may be important in conferring target 
and tissue specificity to its transcriptional activity. In this study, we have
cloned and sequenced a new mouse Oct-1 isoform, named mOct-1Z. This novel isoform
differs markedly at the C-terminus from the previously identified Oct-1 isoforms 
A, B, and C. It is generated by alternative splicing from the Oct-1 gene and its 
transcript exhibits a frameshift followed by an early stop codon, thus, its
predicted protein has a distinct, much shorter C-terminal tail. However, this
truncated isoform could still effectively bind to a consensus Oct-1 motif
oligonucleotide and, like Oct-1B, activated the basal promoter activity of the
mouse beta-casein gene. Oct-1Z is another ubiquitously expressed Oct-1 isoform,
its transcript being detected in all mouse tissues examined, including the
mammary gland, liver, lung, kidney, spleen, small intestine mucosa, uterus, and
ovary.

PMID: 14729276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Immunol. 2004 Jan 15;172(2):1054-64.

NF-kappa B and Oct-2 synergize to activate the human 3' Igh hs4 enhancer in B
cells.

Sepulveda MA(1), Emelyanov AV, Birshtein BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300 Morris
Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

In B cells, the Igh gene locus contains several DNase I-hypersensitive (hs) sites
with enhancer activity. These include the 3' Igh enhancers, which are located
downstream of the Calpha gene(s) in both mouse and human. In vivo experiments
have implicated murine 3' enhancers, hs3B and/or hs4, in class switching and
somatic hypermutation. We previously reported that murine hs4 was regulated by
NF-kappaB, octamer binding proteins, and Pax5 (B cell-specific activator
protein). In this study we report that human hs4 is regulated differently. EMSAs 
and Western analysis of normal B cells before and after stimulation with anti-IgM
plus anti-CD40 showed the same complex binding pattern formed by NF-kappaB,
Oct-1, and Oct-2 (but not by Pax5). A similar EMSA pattern was detected in mature
human B cell lines (BL-2, Ramos, and HS-Sultan) and in diffuse large B cell
lymphoma cell lines, although yin yang 1 protein (YY1) binding was also observed.
We have confirmed the in vivo association of these transcription factors with hs4
in B cells by chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. The diffuse large B cell
lymphoma cell lines had a distinctive slow-migrating complex containing YY1
associated with Rel-B. We have confirmed by endogenous coimmunoprecipitation an
association of YY1 with Rel-B, but not with other NF-kappaB family members.
Transient transfection assays showed robust hs4 enhancer activity in the mature B
cell lines, which was dependent on synergistic interactions between NF-kappaB and
octamer binding proteins. In addition, human hs4 enhancer activity required Oct-2
and correlated with expression of Oct coactivator from B cells (OCA-B).

PMID: 14707079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Virus Res. 2004 Jan;99(1):25-33.

Differentially expressed genes in HIV-1-infected macrophages following treatment 
with the virus-suppressive immunomodulator murabutide.

Truong MJ(1), Delsart V, Bahr GM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology of Infection and Inflammation, Pasteur
Institute in Lille, 1 Rue du Pr Calmette, BP 245, Lille Cedex 59019, France.

The synthetic immunomodulator murabutide has been found to suppress human
immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) replication, in macrophages, through a
regulated expression of cellular factors needed at different steps in the virus
replication cycle. To identify cellular genes implicated in the
murabutide-induced virus inhibition, we have carried out a differential display
analysis on HIV-1-infected macrophages that were treated, or not, with
murabutide. Sequencing of the differentially regulated cDNA bands and
verification of the reproducibility of the murabutide effects, by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction or by Northern blotting, revealed an
up-regulated expression of 21 genes and a down-regulation of seven others. The
murabutide-regulated genes encoded proteins implicated in DNA binding, regulation
of transcription, oxidative stress, metal binding, and other physiological
functions. Six of the genes corresponded to unassigned/expressed sequence tags
with yet unknown function. Among the genes which were up-regulated by murabutide 
and with established effects on inhibiting virus transcription, was the octamer
binding factor 1 (Oct-1). We demonstrate the ability of murabutide to induce
enhanced Oct-1 protein expression and DNA-binding activity in macrophages.
Furthermore, our findings suggest the potential implication of additional
transcription factors and metal-binding proteins in mediating the inhibitory
effect of murabutide on virus transcription.

PMID: 14687943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Dec;23(24):8934-45.

STAT5 and Oct-1 form a stable complex that modulates cyclin D1 expression.

Magné S(1), Caron S, Charon M, Rouyez MC, Dusanter-Fourt I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Institut Cochin, INSERM U567, CNRS UMR 8104,
Université René Descartes, 123 Boulevard Port-Royal, 75014 Paris, France.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) is activated by
numerous cytokines that control blood cell development. STAT5 was also shown to
actively participate in leukemogenesis. Among the target genes involved in cell
growth, STAT5 had been shown to activate cyclin D1 gene expression. We now show
that thrombopoietin-dependent activation of the cyclin D1 promoter depends on the
integrity of a new bipartite proximal element that specifically binds STAT5A and 
-B transcription factors. We demonstrate that the stable recruitment of STAT5 to 
this element in vitro requires the integrity of an adjacent octamer element that 
constitutively binds the ubiquitous POU homeodomain protein Oct-1. We observe
that cytokine-activated STAT5 and Oct-1 form a unique complex with the cyclin D1 
promoter sequence. We find that STAT5 interacts with Oct-1 in vivo, following
activation by different cytokines in various cellular contexts. This interaction 
involves a small motif in the carboxy-terminal region of STAT5 which, remarkably,
is similar to an Oct-1 POU-interacting motif present in two well-known partners
of Oct-1, namely, OBF-1/Bob and SNAP190. Our data offer new insights into the
transcriptional regulation of the key cell cycle regulator cyclin D1 and
emphasize the active roles of both STAT5 and Oct-1 in this process.

PMCID: PMC309603
PMID: 14645506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Eur J Cell Biol. 2003 Oct;82(10):495-504.

A C-terminal targeting signal controls differential compartmentalisation of
Caenorhabditis elegans host cell factor (HCF) to the nucleus or mitochondria.

Izeta A(1), Malcomber S, O'Rourke D, Hodgkin J, O'Hare P.

Author information: 
(1)Marie Curie Research Institute, The Chart, Oxted, Surrey, UK.

HCF-1 (host cell factor 1) is a human protein originally identified as a
component of the VP16 transcription complex. A related protein HCF-2 is also
present in humans and while at least HCF-1 appears to be required for normal cell
growth there is currently little information on the precise cellular role(s) of
these proteins. C. elegans contains a single HCF orthologue (CeHCF) which is very
closely related to human HCF-2. To contribute to an understanding of the
activities of these proteins here we analyse the subcellular localisation of the 
CeHCF protein in live transgenic worms and in mammalian cells. We constructed a
green fluorescent protein (GFP) fusion of CeHCF and studied localisation after
ectopic expression under the control of a heat shock protein promoter. The
CeHCF-GFP protein accumulated in the cell nuclei at every stage of development
and in a wide variety of cell types. Nuclear accumulation with nucleolar sparing 
was evident on the larvae and adult stages, but not earlier in development in
which the protein accumulated diffusely in the nucleoplasm. Surprisingly the same
protein accumulated in the mitochondria of a stable HeLa cell line, suggesting a 
differential localisation of CeHCF in mammalian cells. Furthermore, when
overexpressed in transient transfection the CeHCF accumulated in both nuclear and
mitochondrial compartments. We have refined the targeting determinants of CeHCF
to the last 23 amino acids at the extreme C-terminus and show that they contain
interdigitated amino acids involved in both nuclear and mitochondrial targeting. 
This novel targeting signal is sufficient to redirect HCF-2 into mitochondria. It
can also be transferred to an unrelated protein, resulting in its targeting to
both the mitochondrial and nuclear compartments.

PMID: 14629117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Cancer Res. 2003 Nov 1;63(21):7197-205.

Down-regulation of histone H2B by DNA-dependent protein kinase in response to DNA
damage through modulation of octamer transcription factor 1.

Schild-Poulter C(1), Shih A, Yarymowich NC, Haché RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Ottawa, The Ottawa Health Research
Institute, 725 Parkdale Avenue, Ottawa, Ontario K1Y 4E9, Canada.
cschild-poulter@ohri.ca

Cells respond to double-stranded DNA breaks (DSBs) by pausing cell cycle
progression to allow the repair machinery to restore genomic integrity.
DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK), comprising a large catalytic subunit
(DNA-PK(cs)) and the Ku antigen regulatory subunit (Ku70/Ku80), is activated in
response to DSBs and is required for DNA repair through the nonhomologous
end-joining pathway. Here we provide evidence that DNA-PK participates in
altering specific gene expression in response to DNA damage by modulating the
stability and transcriptional regulatory potential of the essential transcription
factor octamer transcription factor 1 (Oct-1). Histone H2B and U2 RNA, whose
expression are highly dependent on Oct-1, were strongly decreased in response to 
ionizing radiation in a DNA-PK-dependent manner, and Oct-1-dependent reporter
gene transcription was repressed. Furthermore, Oct-1 phosphorylation in response 
to ionizing radiation increased in a DNA-PK-dependent manner. Paradoxically,
down-regulation of transactivation correlated with the rapid DNA-PK-dependent
stabilization of Oct-1. Stabilization of Oct-1 was dependent on the
NH(2)-terminal region of Oct-1, which contains a transcriptional activation
domain and which was phosphorylated by DNA-PK in vitro. These results suggest a
mechanism for the regulation of Oct-1 in response to DNA damage through specific 
phosphorylation within the NH(2)-terminal transcriptional regulatory domain.

PMID: 14612514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2003 Sep-Oct;37(5):755-67.

[Oct-1 transcription factor--plasticity and polyfunctionality].

[Article in Russian]

Sytina EV(1), Pankratova EV.

Author information: 
(1)Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences,
Moscow, 119991 Russia.

The problem considered is how one transcription factor controls numerous
processes in the organism. The mechanisms determining the multiplicity of Oct-1
functions are described.

PMID: 14593912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Oncogene. 2003 Oct 30;22(49):7762-73.

p53-independent induction of Gadd45 by histone deacetylase inhibitor: coordinate 
regulation by transcription factors Oct-1 and NF-Y.

Hirose T(1), Sowa Y, Takahashi S, Saito S, Yasuda C, Shindo N, Furuichi K, Sakai 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine,
Kamigyo-ku, Kyoto 602-8566, Japan.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors cause growth arrest at the G1 and/or G2/M
phases, and induce differentiation and/or apoptosis in a wide variety of tumour
cells. The growth arrest at G1 phase by HDAC inhibitors is thought to be highly
dependent on the upregulation of p21/WAF1, but the precise mechanism by which
HDAC inhibitors cause G2/M arrest or apoptosis in tumour cells is unknown. Gadd45
causes cell cycle arrest at the G2/M phase transition and participates in
genotoxic stress-induced apoptosis. We show here that it is also induced by a
typical HDAC inhibitor, trichostatin A (TSA), through its promoter, in a
p53-independent manner. To identify the mechanism of activation of the gadd45
promoter, we performed luciferase reporter analyses and electrophoretic mobility 
shift assays. These revealed that both the Oct-1 and CCAAT sites are needed for
the full activation by TSA. We also found that the transcription factors Oct-1
and NF-Y specifically bind to each site. Thus, HDAC inhibitors can induce Gadd45 
through its promoter without the need for functional p53, and both the Oct-1 and 
NF-Y concertedly participate in TSA-induced activation of the gadd45 promoter.

PMID: 14586402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Virol. 2003 Nov;77(22):11927-32.

Oct-1 is posttranslationally modified and exhibits reduced capacity to bind
cognate sites at late times after infection with herpes simplex virus 1.

Advani SJ(1), Durand LO, Weichselbaum RR, Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)The Marjorie B. Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

In herpes simplex virus 1-infected cells, a high level of alpha gene expression
requires the transactivation of the genes by a complex containing the viral alpha
transinducing factor (alphaTIF) and two cellular proteins. The latter two, HCF-1 
and octamer binding protein Oct-1, are transcriptional factors regulated in a
cell cycle-dependent manner. alphaTIF is a protein made late in infection but
packaged with the virion to transactivate viral genes in newly infected cells. In
light of the accumulation of large amounts of alphaTIF, the absence of alpha gene
expression late in infection suggested the possibility that one or more
transcriptional factors required for alpha gene expression is modified late in
infection. Here we report that Oct-1 is posttranscriptionally modified late in
infection, that the modification is mediated by the virus but does not involve
viral protein kinases or cdc2 kinase activated by the virus late in infection,
and that the modified Oct-1 has a reduced affinity for its cognate DNA site.
These results are consistent with the hypothesis that modification of Oct-1
transcriptional factor could account at least in part for the shutoff of alpha
gene expression late in infection.

PMCID: PMC254286
PMID: 14581529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Biol Chem. 2003 Dec 19;278(51):51116-24. Epub 2003 Oct 6.

HCF-1 functions as a coactivator for the zinc finger protein Krox20.

Luciano RL(1), Wilson AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and New York University Cancer Institute, New York 
University School of Medicine, New York, New York 10016, USA.

HCF-1 is a transcriptional cofactor required for activation of herpes simplex
virus immediate-early genes by VP16 as well as less clearly defined roles in cell
proliferation, cytokinesis, and spliceosome formation. It is expressed as a large
precursor that undergoes proteolysis to yield two subunits that remain stably
associated. VP16 uses a degenerate 4-amino acid sequence, known as the
HCF-binding motif, to bind to a six-bladed beta-propeller domain at the N
terminus of HCF-1. Functional HCF-binding motifs are also found in LZIP and
Zhangfei, two cellular bZIP transcription factors of unknown function. Here we
show that the HCF-binding motif occurs in a wide spectrum of DNA-binding proteins
and transcriptional cofactors. Three well characterized examples were further
analyzed for their ability to use HCF-1 as a coactivator. Krox20, a zinc finger
transcription factor required for Schwann cell differentiation, and E2F4, a cell 
cycle regulator, showed a strong requirement for functional HCF-1 to activate
transcription. In contrast, activation by estrogen receptor-alpha did not display
HCF dependence. In Krox20, the HCF-binding motif lies within the N-terminal
activation domain and mutation of this sequence diminishes both transactivation
and association with the HCF-1 beta-propeller. The activation domain in the
C-terminal subunit of HCF-1 contributes to activation by Krox20, possibly through
recruitment of p300. These results suggest that HCF-1 is recruited by many
different classes of cellular transcription factors and is therefore likely to be
required for a variety of cellular processes including cell cycle progression and
development.

PMCID: PMC4291123
PMID: 14532282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2003 Sep 30;207(1-2):31-8.

Cloning of a protein binding to the most proximal Pit-1 binding element of
prolactin gene from human pituitary cDNA library.

Fumoto M(1), Okimura Y, Sakagami Y, Iguchi G, Kishimoto M, Takahashi Y, Kaji H,
Chihara K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology/Metabolism, Neurology and Hematology/Oncology,
Department of Clinical Molecular Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School of
Medicine, Kobe, Japan.

A human pituitary cDNA library was screened using a yeast one-hybrid system to
find a factor binding Pit-1 binding elements in the PRL gene other than Pit-1.
Beside colonies containing Pit-1 or Oct-1 cDNA, three colonies contained mPOU
cDNA, a member of the POU protein family. Immunohistochemical analysis showed
mPOU-like immunoreactivity was present in human PRL-producing pituitary tumors
but not in non-functioning pituitary tumors. Mobility shift analysis revealed
that mPOU bound to Pit-1 binding elements of the PRL gene, 1P and 3P. mPOU
activated the expression of 0.6 k PRL and 7x1P reporter genes in the presence of 
Pit-1 and cAMP, although it did not enhance Pit-1-induced expression of 7x3P
reporter gene. These findings suggest that mPOU is involved in the activation of 
the PRL gene by cAMP through 1P in the presence of Pit-1.

PMID: 12972181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Cell. 2003 Jul 25;114(2):255-66.

S phase activation of the histone H2B promoter by OCA-S, a coactivator complex
that contains GAPDH as a key component.

Zheng L(1), Roeder RG, Luo Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Rockefeller University, 
1230 York Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2003 Jul 25;114(2):150-2.

We have isolated and functionally characterized a multicomponent Oct-1
coactivator, OCA-S which is essential for S phase-dependent histone H2B
transcription. The p38 component of OCA-S binds directly to Oct-1, exhibits
potent transactivation potential, is selectively recruited to the H2B promoter in
S phase, and is essential for S phase-specific H2B transcription in vivo and in
vitro. Surprisingly, p38 represents a nuclear form of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate 
dehydrogenase, and binding to Oct-1, as well as OCA-S function, is stimulated by 
NAD(+) but inhibited by NADH. OCA-S also interacts with NPAT, a cyclin E/cdk2
substrate that is broadly involved in histone gene transcription. These studies
thus link the H2B transcriptional machinery to cell cycle regulators, and
possibly to cellular metabolic state (redox status), and set the stage for
studies of the underlying mechanisms and the basis for coordinated histone gene
expression and coupling to DNA replication.

PMID: 12887926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Cell. 2003 Jul 25;114(2):150-2.

Gene switching by metabolic enzymes--how did you get on the invitation list?

McKnight S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Comment on
    Cell. 2003 Jul 25;114(2):255-66.

Histone gene expression in mammalian cells is codependent upon the Oct-1
transcription factor and its cognate, OCA-S coactivator complex. Surprisingly,
GADPH plays an essential role in the OCA-S complex and confers redox dependence
upon the in vitro transcription of histone genes.

PMID: 12887915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Circ Res. 2003 Aug 22;93(4):e38-47. Epub 2003 Jul 24.

Regulation of the growth arrest and DNA damage-inducible gene 45 (GADD45) by
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma in vascular smooth muscle cells.

Bruemmer D(1), Yin F, Liu J, Berger JP, Sakai T, Blaschke F, Fleck E, Van Herle
AJ, Forman BM, Law RE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Hypertension and The Gonda
(Goldschmied) Diabetes Center, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles, Calif 90095, USA.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) gamma is activated by
thiazolidinediones (TZDs), widely used as insulin-sensitizing agents for the
treatment of type 2 diabetes. TZDs have been shown to induce apoptosis in a
variety of mammalian cells. In vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs),
proliferation and apoptosis may be competing processes during the formation of
restenotic and atherosclerotic lesions. The precise molecular mechanisms by which
TZDs induce apoptosis in VSMCs, however, remain unclear. In the present study, we
demonstrate that the TZDs rosiglitazone (RSG), troglitazone (TRO), and a novel
non-TZD partial PPARgamma agonist (nTZDpa) induce caspase-mediated apoptosis of
human coronary VSMCs. Induction of VSMC apoptosis correlated closely with an
upregulation of growth arrest and DNA damage-inducible gene 45 (GADD45) mRNA
expression and transcription, a well-recognized modulator of cell cycle arrest
and apoptosis. Using adenoviral-mediated overexpression of a constitutively
active PPARgamma mutant and the irreversible PPARgamma antagonist GW9662, we
provide evidence that PPARgamma ligands induce caspase-mediated apoptosis and
GADD45 expression through a receptor-dependent pathway. Deletion analysis of the 
GADD45 promoter revealed that a 153-bp region between -234 and -81 bp proximal to
the transcription start site, containing an Oct-1 element, was crucial for the
PPARgamma ligand-mediated induction of the GADD45 promoter. PPARgamma activation 
induced Oct-1 protein expression and DNA binding and stimulated activity of a
reporter plasmid driven by multiple Oct-1 elements. These findings suggest that
activation of PPARgamma can lead to apoptosis and growth arrest in VSMCs, at
least in part, by inducing Oct-1-mediated transcription of GADD45. The full text 
of this article is available online at http://www.circresaha.org.

PMID: 12881480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Aug 8;307(4):847-54.

Analysis of a repressor region in the human neuropeptide Y gene that binds Oct-1 
and Pbx-1 in GT1-7 neurons.

Mayer CM(1), Cai F, Cui H, Gillespie JM, MacMillan M, Belsham DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, Medical Sciences Building
3247A, 1 King's College Circle, Toronto, Ont., Canada M5S 1A8.

The mechanisms dictating the developmental expression of individual neuropeptides
within the hypothalamus have not yet been elucidated. In this paper we have
studied the cis-acting elements involved in the repression of neuropeptide Y
(NPY) gene expression in a gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) neuronal cell
model, GT1-7 cells. Using transient transfection of the human NPY 5(') regulatory
region into the GT1-7 neurons, we have found a repressor region located between
-867 and -1078. DNase I footprint analysis of this region revealed three specific
protein binding elements. Further analysis of the region between -942 and -922bp 
using electrophoretic mobility shift assays revealed that four different
transcription factor-DNA complexes form with GT1-7 nuclear proteins, whereas only
three complexes are detected using baby hamster kidney (BHK) cell nuclear
extract. Mutation of the consensus binding sequence abolishes all complex
formation on the -924/-922 oligonucleotide. Antibody supershift assays revealed
that Oct-1 and Pbx-1 antibodies were able to eliminate the appearance of two
specific complexes. Therefore we suggest that this region may be important for
transcriptional repression of the NPY gene in a heterologous cell model, through 
complex, coordinate protein-protein interactions.

PMID: 12878188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Gen Virol. 2003 Aug;84(Pt 8):2229-35.

Analysis of transcriptional regulatory sequences in the human endogenous
retrovirus W long terminal repeat.

Lee WJ(1), Kwun HJ, Jang KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Natural Sciences, Pusan National
University, Pusan 609-735, South Korea.

The U3 region of the human endogenous retrovirus W long terminal repeat (HERV-W
LTR) contains several putative regulatory sequences that might not only regulate 
transcription of viral genes but also influence the expression of neighbouring
cellular genes. In this study, we analysed the U3 region in detail in order to
understand the transcriptional regulatory mechanism of HERV-W. Two transcription 
factor (TF) binding sites for Oct-1 and C/EBP were important as a silencer and an
enhancer, respectively, for transcriptional regulation. Furthermore, it was
possible to divide the HERV-W LTR isolates into two groups depending on their
promoter strength, which might be determined by the integrity of the two TF
binding sites. However, neither the Oct-1 binding site nor the CAAT-box was
required for the cell type-specific activity of the HERV-W LTR. Instead, the 3'
terminus of U3 from 191 to 260, which includes a TATA box, was sufficient for
specificity, suggesting that the efficiency of assembly of basic transcription
machinery at the TATA box of HERV-W LTR might determine the cell type
specificity.

PMID: 12867655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Immunol Lett. 2003 Jul 3;88(1):15-20.

The regulation of the Oct-1 gene transcription is mediated by two promoters.

Pankratova EV(1), Sytina EV, Luchina NN, Krivega IV.

Author information: 
(1)Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences,
Vavilov str., 32, Moscow, 119991, Russia. pank@eimb.relarn.ru

The ubiquitous transcription factor Oct-1 is a member of the POU domain family of
regulatory proteins. Target genes controlled by Oct-1 include housekeeping genes,
e.g. the genes encoding histon H2B or snRNAs, as well as tissue-specific genes,
e.g. the genes encoding the light and heavy chains of immunoglobulines, some
interleukins, and others. Oct-1 pre-mRNA may be spliced in several ways,
resulting in production of several protein isoforms that may differ functionally.
The 5'-end of the Oct-1 gene contains two exons-exon 1U and exon 1L that
alternatively present in Oct-1 mRNA. We studied regulation of transcription of
the Oct-1 gene using reporter gene assays of promoter-luciferase gene-constructs.
It was shown that transcription of the Oct-1 gene is regulated by two promoters
located upstream of the exon 1U and upstream of the exon 1L. The promoter located
upstream of the exon 1U contains G/C-rich sequences and multiple Sp1 sites, while
the promoter located upstream of the exon 1L contains A/T-rich motifs and
autoregulation-related cis-elements: two octamer sites ATGCAAAT, two octamer
related sites and multiple TAAT-core sites. Exons 1U and 1L in the human OTF-1
locus encoding the Oct-1 gene are located at the distance of 108 kbp. In the
murine locus otf-1 the distance between exons 1U and 1L is 67 kbp. We suggest
that the two promoters can differ functionally.

PMID: 12853155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Genes Dev. 2003 Jul 1;17(13):1617-29.

Formation of higher-order secondary and tertiary chromatin structures by genomic 
mouse mammary tumor virus promoters.

Georgel PT(1), Fletcher TM, Hager GL, Hansen JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Health Science Center at San
Antonio, San Antonio, Texas 78229-3900, USA.

Agarose multigel electrophoresis has been used to characterize the structural
features of isolated genomic mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) promoters. The
mouse 3134 cells used for these studies contain approximately 200 stably
integrated tandem repeats of a 2.4-kb MMTV promoter fragment. Inactive, basally
active, and hormonally activated genomic promoters were liberated by restriction 
digestion of isolated nuclei, recovered in low-salt nuclear extracts, and
electrophoresed in multigels consisting of nine individual agarose running gels. 
Specific bands were detected and characterized by Southern and Western blotting. 
We find that transcriptionally inactive promoters contain TBP and high levels of 
histone H1, and are present to varying extents in both untreated and
dexamethasone (DEX)-treated 3134 cells. In contrast, the basally active promoter,
present in untreated cells, is bound to RNA Pol II, TBP, and Oct1, contains
acetylated H3 tail domains, and is depleted of histone H1. The DEX-activated
promoter possessed similar composition as the basal promoter, but also contains
stably bound Brg1. Strikingly, all forms of the MMTV promoter condense into
higher-order secondary and/or tertiary chromatin structures in vitro in the
presence of Mg2+. Thus, genomic MMTV promoter chromatin retains the ability to
form classical higher-order structures under physiological salt conditions, even 
after dissociation of H1 and binding of several transcription factors and
multiprotein complexes. These results suggest that transcriptionally active
eukaryotic promoters may function in a locally folded chromatin environment in
vivo.

PMCID: PMC196134
PMID: 12842912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Eur J Biochem. 2003 May;270(10):2274-86.

Gene transcription of fgl2 in endothelial cells is controlled by Ets-1 and Oct-1 
and requires the presence of both Sp1 and Sp3.

Liu M(1), Leibowitz JL, Clark DA, Mendicino M, Ning Q, Ding JW, D'Abreo C, Fung
L, Marsden PA, Levy GA.

Author information: 
(1)Multi Organ Transplant Program, Toronto General Hospital and The University of
Toronto, Canada.

The immune coagulant fgl2/fibroleukin has been previously shown to play a pivotal
role in the pathogenesis of murine and human fulminant hepatitis and fetal loss
syndrome. Constitutive expression of fgl2 transcripts at low levels are seen in
cytotoxic T cells, endothelial, intestinal and trophoblast cells, while specific 
factors (such as virus and cytokines) are required to induce high levels of fgl2 
expression in other cell types including monocytes/macrophages. To address the
transcriptional mechanisms that regulate constitutive expression of fgl2, murine 
genomic clones were characterized and the transcription start site was defined by
5'-RACE and primer extension. A comprehensive assessment of basal fgl2 promoter
activity in murine vascular endothelial cells defined a minimal 119 bp region
responsible for constitutive fgl2 transcription. A complex positive regulatory
domain (PRD) spanning a 39-bp sequence from -87 to -49 (relative to the
transcription start site) was identified. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay
studies in vascular endothelial cells revealed that the nucleoprotein complexes
that form on this positive regulatory domain (PRD) contain Sp1/Sp3 family
members, Oct-1, and Ets-1. Heterologous expression studies in Drosophila
Schneider cells confirmed that the constitutive expression of this gene is
controlled by Ets-1 and requires the presence both of the Sp1 and Sp3
transcription factors. The presence of this complex multicomponent PRD in the
fgl2 proximal promoter is consistent with the observation that, in vivo, fgl2
expression is tightly regulated. Moreover, viral induced fgl2 expression also
requires the presence of this PRD. These results clearly demonstrate that
multiple cis DNA elements in a clustered region work cooperatively to regulate
constitutive fgl2 expression and interact with inducible elements to regulate
viral-induced fgl2 expression in endothelial cells.

PMID: 12752447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Virol. 2003 Jun;77(11):6255-64.

Binding of CCAAT displacement protein CDP to adenovirus packaging sequences.

Erturk E(1), Ostapchuk P, Wells SI, Yang J, Gregg K, Nepveu A, Dudley JP, Hearing
P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, School of Medicine, Stony
Brook University, New York 11794, USA.

Adenovirus (Ad) type 5 DNA packaging is initiated in a polar fashion from the
left end of the genome. The packaging process is dependent upon the cis-acting
packaging domain located between nucleotides 194 and 380. Seven A/T-rich repeats 
have been identified within this domain that direct packaging. A1, A2, A5, and A6
are the most important repeats functionally and share a bipartite sequence motif.
Several lines of evidence suggest that there is a limiting trans-acting factor(s)
that plays a role in packaging. Two cellular activities that bind to minimal
packaging domains in vitro have been previously identified. These binding
activities are P complex, an uncharacterized protein(s), and chicken ovalbumin
upstream promoter transcription factor (COUP-TF). In this work, we report that a 
third cellular protein, octamer-1 protein (Oct-1), binds to minimal packaging
domains. In vitro binding analyses and in vivo packaging assays were used to
examine the relevance of these DNA binding activities to Ad DNA packaging. The
results of these experiments reveal that COUP-TF and Oct-1 binding does not play 
a functional role in Ad packaging, whereas P-complex binding directly correlates 
with packaging function. We demonstrate that P complex contains the cellular
protein CCAAT displacement protein (CDP) and that full-length CDP is found in
purified virus particles. In addition to cellular factors, previous evidence
indicates that viral factors play a role in the initiation of viral DNA
packaging. We propose that CDP, in conjunction with one or more viral proteins,
binds to the packaging sequences of Ad to initiate the encapsidation process.

PMCID: PMC154998
PMID: 12743282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. EMBO J. 2003 May 15;22(10):2360-9.

Proteolytic processing is necessary to separate and ensure proper cell growth and
cytokinesis functions of HCF-1.

Julien E(1), Herr W.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, NY 11724, USA.

HCF-1 is a highly conserved and abundant chromatin-associated host cell factor
required for transcriptional activation of herpes simplex virus immediate-early
genes by the virion protein VP16. HCF-1 exists as a heterodimeric complex of
associated N- (HCF-1(N)) and C- (HCF-1(C)) terminal subunits that result from
proteolytic processing of a precursor protein. We have used small-interfering RNA
(siRNA) to inactivate HCF-1 in an array of normal and transformed mammalian cells
to identify its cellular functions. Our results show that HCF-1 is a broadly
acting regulator of two stages of the cell cycle: exit from mitosis, where it
ensures proper cytokinesis, and passage through the G(1) phase, where it promotes
cell cycle progression. Proteolytic processing is necessary to separate and
ensure these two HCF-1 activities, which are performed by separate HCF-1
subunits: the HCF-1(N) subunit promotes passage through the G(1) phase whereas
the HCF-1(C) subunit is involved in proper exit from mitosis. These results
suggest that HCF-1 links the regulation of exit from mitosis and the G(1) phase
of cell growth, possibly to coordinate the reactivation of gene expression after 
mitosis.

PMCID: PMC156000
PMID: 12743030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jun 27;278(26):23586-93. Epub 2003 Apr 21.

Transcriptional inhibition of interleukin-8 expression in tumor necrosis
factor-tolerant cells: evidence for involvement of C/EBP beta.

Weber M(1), Sydlik C, Quirling M, Nothdurfter C, Zwergal A, Heiss P, Bell S,
Neumeier D, Ziegler-Heitbrock HW, Brand K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Pathobiochemistry, Klinikum rechts der
Isar, Technische Universität, 81675 München, Germany.

There is some evidence that the potent cytokine tumor necrosis factor (TNF) is
able to induce tolerance after repeated stimulation of cells. To investigate the 
molecular mechanisms mediating this phenomenon, the expression of interleukin-8
(IL-8), which is regulated by transcription factors NF-kappaB and C/EBPbeta, was 
monitored under TNF tolerance conditions. Pretreatment of monocytic cells for 72 
h with low TNF doses inhibited TNF-induced (restimulation with a high dose) IL-8 
promoter-dependent transcription as well as IL-8 production. Under these
conditions neither activation of NF-kappaB nor IkappaB proteolysis was affected
after TNF re-stimulation, albeit a slightly reduced IkappaB-alpha level was found
in the TNF pretreated but not re-stimulated sample. Remarkably, in tolerant cells
an increased binding of C/EBPbeta to its IL-8 promoter-specific DNA motif as well
as an elevated association of C/EBPbeta protein with p65-containing NF-kappaB
complexes was observed. Finally, overexpression of C/EBPbeta, but not p65 or
Oct-1, markedly prevented TNF-induced IL-8 promoter-dependent transcription.
Taken together, these data indicate that the expression of IL-8 is inhibited at
the transcriptional level in TNF-tolerant cells and C/EBPbeta is involved under
these conditions in mediating the negative-regulatory effects, a mechanism that
may play a role in inflammatory processes such as sepsis.

PMID: 12707271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Int Immunol. 2003 May;15(5):549-56.

Regulation of human FcepsilonRI beta chain gene expression by Oct-1.

Akizawa Y(1), Nishiyama C, Hasegawa M, Maeda K, Nakahata T, Okumura K, Ra C,
Ogawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Atopy (Allergy) Research Center, Juntendo University School of Medicine, 2-1-1
Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan.

The beta chain, a component of the high-affinity receptor for IgE (FcepsilonRI), 
plays an important role in IgE-mediated allergic reaction. The beta chain
accelerates the function of FcepsilonRI by amplification of its surface
expression and of signal transduction in effector cells such as mast cells and
basophils. Two regulatory regions, +60/+66 and +70/+76, for the human beta chain 
gene that are required for the cell-type-specific transcriptional activation were
identified by transient reporter assay. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay
demonstrated that Oct-1 binds both the regions, among which the +70/+76 Oct-1
motif was critical for the transactivation of the beta promoter responsive to
Oct-1 overexpression. Regulation of beta chain gene expression is discussed.

PMID: 12697656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jun 20;278(25):23141-50. Epub 2003 Apr 2.

Selective inhibition of class switching to IgG and IgE by recruitment of the
HoxC4 and Oct-1 homeodomain proteins and Ku70/Ku86 to newly identified ATTT
cis-elements.

Schaffer A(1), Kim EC, Wu X, Zan H, Testoni L, Salamon S, Cerutti A, Casali P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Immunology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Joan and Sanford I. Weill Medical College, Cornell University, New
York, New York 10021, USA.

Immunoglobulin (Ig) class switching is central to the maturation of the antibody 
response as IgG, IgA, and IgE are endowed with more diverse biological effector
functions than IgM. It is induced upon engagement of CD40 on B lymphocytes by
CD40L expressed by activated CD4+ T cells and exposure of B cells to T
cell-secreted cytokines including interleukin-4 and transforming growth
factor-beta. It begins with germ line IH-CH transcription and unfolds through
class switch DNA recombination (CSR). We show here that the HoxC4 and Oct-1
homeodomain proteins together with the Ku70/Ku86 heterodimer bind as a complex to
newly identified switch (S) regulatory ATTT elements (SREs) in the Igamma and
Iepsilon promoters and downstream regions to dampen basal germ line Igamma-Cgamma
and Iepsilon-Cepsilon transcriptions and repress CSR to Cgamma and Cepsilon. This
mechanism is inactive in the Calpha1/Calpha2 loci because of the lack of SREs in 
the Ialpha1/Ialpha2 promoters. Accordingly, in resting human IgM+IgD+ B cells,
HoxC4, Oct-1, and Ku70/Ku86 can be readily identified as bound to the Igamma and 
Iepsilon promoters but not the Ialpha1/Ialpha2 promoters. CD40 signaling
dissociates the HoxC4.Oct-1. Ku complex from the Igamma and Iepsilon promoter
SREs, thereby relieving the IH-CH transcriptional repression and allowing CSR to 
unfold. Dissociation of HoxC4.Oct-1. Ku from DNA is hampered by CD153 engagement,
a CD40-signaling inhibitor. Thus, these findings outline a HoxC4.Oct-1.
Ku-dependent mechanism of selective regulation of class switching to IgG and IgE 
and further suggest distinct co-evolution and shared CSR activation pathways in
the Cgamma and Cepsilon as opposed to the Calpha1/Calpha2 loci.

PMID: 12672812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Genes Dev. 2003 Apr 1;17(7):896-911.

Human Sin3 deacetylase and trithorax-related Set1/Ash2 histone H3-K4
methyltransferase are tethered together selectively by the cell-proliferation
factor HCF-1.

Wysocka J(1), Myers MP, Laherty CD, Eisenman RN, Herr W.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724, USA.

The abundant and chromatin-associated protein HCF-1 is a critical player in
mammalian cell proliferation as well as herpes simplex virus (HSV) transcription.
We show here that separate regions of HCF-1 critical for its role in cell
proliferation associate with the Sin3 histone deacetylase (HDAC) and a previously
uncharacterized human trithorax-related Set1/Ash2 histone methyltransferase
(HMT). The Set1/Ash2 HMT methylates histone H3 at Lys 4 (K4), but not if the
neighboring K9 residue is already methylated. HCF-1 tethers the Sin3 and
Set1/Ash2 transcriptional regulatory complexes together even though they are
generally associated with opposite transcriptional outcomes: repression and
activation of transcription, respectively. Nevertheless, this tethering is
context-dependent because the transcriptional activator VP16 selectively binds
HCF-1 associated with the Set1/Ash2 HMT complex in the absence of the Sin3 HDAC
complex. These results suggest that HCF-1 can broadly regulate transcription,
both positively and negatively, through selective modulation of chromatin
structure.

PMCID: PMC196026
PMID: 12670868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Genetika. 2003 Feb;39(2):280-5.

[Regulation of human oct-1 gene transcription involves two promotors].

[Article in Russian]

Zhenilo SV(1), Deev IE, Serov SM, Polianovskii OL.

Author information: 
(1)Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences,
Moscow, 119991 Russia.

Transcription initiation of human Oct-1 transcription factor-encoding gene
involves two promoters, 1U and 1L, located at a substantial distance (about 100
kb) apart. The structure of these promoters and the adjacent sequences is
different. Specifically, the 1U sequence is GC-rich, while the 1L sequence is
AT-rich. Correspondingly, more than 25 GC-rich Sp1 cis-elements were localized
within the 1U region, while in the 1L sequence nearly equal amount of
homeo-specific NTAATNN sites along with two ATGCAAAT octamers were found.
Analysis of transfection of recombinant plasmids, carrying the promoter fragments
with or without enhancer indicated that expression from the 1L promoter was
tissue-specific. In nonlymphoid HEK293 cells efficiency of transcription from the
1U promoter was several times higher than that from the 1L promoter. Another
expression pattern was observed at transfection of the same constructs into Raji 
lymphoid cells. In this case the level of transcription from the L promoter
(fragment L2) at the presence of external enhancer was higher than that from the 
fragments containing the 1U promoter. It was shown that the distal regions of 1U 
and 1L were capable of silencing activity. In Raji cells enhancer completely
overcomes the activity of U silencer, but only partly overcomes the activity of L
silencer. Our data on the interaction of two promoters with the enhancer and
silencer in different cell types point to fine tissue-specific regulation of the 
oct-1 gene expression, especially in lymphatic cells.

PMID: 12669425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Immunol Lett. 2003 Feb 3;85(3):237-41.

Human Oct-1L isoform has tissue-specific expression pattern similar to Oct-2.

Luchina NN(1), Krivega IV, Pankratova EV.

Author information: 
(1)Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences,
Vavilov Str., 32, 119991, Moscow, Russia.

POU homeodomain proteins are important regulators of ubiquitous as well as
tissue-specific transcription. Ubiquitously expressed Oct-1 and tissue-specific
Oct-2 proteins are members of the POU family and contain very similar DNA-binding
POU domains. While Oct-1 is ubiquitous, Oct-2 is predominantly expressed in B
cells, in activated T cells and in nervous system. Oct-1 is involved in
regulation of some houskeeping genes-histone H2B, snRNAs as well as in
tissue-specific regulation of immunoglobuline gene transcription and of some
other genes. Here we report that novel alternatively spliced product of the human
Oct-1 gene encode Oct-1L isoform with tissue-specific expression pattern, similar
to Oct-2. Oct-1L differ from ubiquitously expressed Oct-1A in 5'-terminal exon
(exon 1L). Analysis of nucleotide sequences from Human Genome Data Bank has
located exon 1L about 108 kbp downstream ubiquitously expressed exon 1U. Amino
terminus of Oct-1L show extensive similarity to amino terminus of Oct-2. We
suppose, that Oct-1L may has a specific role in gene expression in lymphoid
tissues and brain.

PMID: 12663137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Mol Cells. 2003 Feb 28;15(1):75-80.

Activation of the human endogenous retrovirus W long terminal repeat by herpes
simplex virus type 1 immediate early protein 1.

Lee WJ(1), Kwun HJ, Kim HS, Jang KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Natural Sciences, Pusan National
University, Busan 609-735, Korea.

The U3 region of the human endogenous retrovirus W long terminal repeat (HERV-W
LTR) contains several putative regulatory sequences that regulate the
transcription of neighboring cellular genes, as well as viral genes. We found
that the LTR-directed transcription of the HERV-W can be induced by the herpes
simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) infection. The effect was partly mediated by the
action of the HSV-1 immediate early protein 1 (IE1), and required an Oct-1
binding site that is located in the LTR. Results from the gel shift assay also
suggest that HSV-1 stimulates the LTR through enhancing the DNA binding activity 
of Oct-1. This effect might be important in understanding both the HERV-W- and
HSV-1-mediated pathogenesis, because HERVs represent an important class of
retro-transpositional mutagens, and could also provide a new regulatory element
for the nearby cellular genes.

PMID: 12661764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Mol Pharmacol. 2003 Apr;63(4):844-8.

Involvement of organic cation transporter 1 in the lactic acidosis caused by
metformin.

Wang DS(1), Kusuhara H, Kato Y, Jonker JW, Schinkel AH, Sugiyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Biguanides are a class of drugs widely used as oral antihyperglycemic agents for 
the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus, but they are associated with lactic
acidosis, a lethal side effect. We reported previously that biguanides are good
substrates of rat organic cation transporter 1 (Oct1; Slc22a1) and, using
Oct1(-/-) mice, that mouse Oct1 is responsible for the hepatic uptake of a
biguanide, metformin. In the present study, we investigated whether the liver is 
the key organ for the lactic acidosis. When mice were given metformin, the blood 
lactate concentration significantly increased in the wild-type mice, whereas only
a slight increase was observed in Oct1(-/-) mice. The plasma concentration of
metformin exhibited similar time profiles between the wild-type and Oct1(-/-)
mice, suggesting that the liver is the key organ responsible for the lactic
acidosis. Furthermore, the extent of the increase in blood lactate caused by
three different biguanides (metformin, buformin, and phenformin) was compared
with the abilities to reduce oxygen consumption in isolated rat hepatocytes. When
rats were given each of these biguanides, the lactate concentration increased
significantly. This effect was dose-dependent, and the EC(50) values of
metformin, buformin, and phenformin were 734, 119, and 4.97 microM, respectively.
All of these biguanides reduced the oxygen consumption by isolated rat
hepatocytes in a concentration-dependent manner. When the concentration required 
to reduce the oxygen consumption to 75% of the control value (from 0.40 to 0.29
micromol/min/mg protein) was compared with the EC(50) value obtained in vivo, a
clear correlation was observed among the three biguanides, suggesting that oxygen
consumption in isolated rat hepatocytes can be used as an index of the incidence 
of lactic acidosis.

PMID: 12644585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2003 Jan-Feb;37(1):139-46.

[Spliced oct-1 gene mRNA isoforms with untranslated exons and a deletion in the
region coding for the POU-specific domain].

[Article in Russian]

Deev IE(1), Zhenilo SV, Polianovskii OL.

Author information: 
(1)Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences,
Moscow, 119991 Russia.

Transcription factor Oct-1 is involved in expression regulation of housekeeping
genes, in lymphocyte differentiation, and in the immune response. Tissue-specific
oct-1 mRNA isoforms are known to be expressed in lymphoid cells. Four new mouse
isoforms were identified. Of these, two were tissue-specific (oct-1R alpha and
oct-1R beta) and contained exon 1L. The oct-1R alpha was shown to contain an
additional fragment, which corresponds to an exon located in the 3'-region of
mouse otf-1. No homolog was found in human OTF-1. The oct-1R alpha isoform proved
to lack an exon coding for a fragment of the POU domain. This deletion results in
a loss of the first helix of the domain, and the mutant protein is devoid of
affinity for octamer ATGCAAAT. Two other mRNA isoforms, oct-1d and oct-1e, were
shown to contain untranslated regions between exons 1U and 2. The regions
correspond to exons 1i and 2i located between exons 1U and 1L in the 5'-region of
the mouse oct-1 gene. Human OTF-1 was not found to contain exon 1i. On evidence
of these and published data, it was assumed that a set of oct-1 isoforms is
present in the cell, reflecting the complexity of expression regulation of oct-1 
and the multiplicity of its functions.

PMID: 12624956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Mar 14;302(3):581-6.

The embryonic Octamer factor 3/4 displays distinct DNA binding specificity from
those of other Octamer factors.

Nishimoto M(1), Miyagi S, Katayanagi T, Tomioka M, Muramatsu M, Okuda A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Saitama Medical School Research Center for 
Genomic Medicine, 1397-1 Yamane Hidaka, Saitama 350-1241, Japan.

The Oct-3/4 is a transcriptional factor expressed rather specifically in inner
cell mass and embryonic ectoderm during early embryogenesis in mammals. During
the course of characterizing the regulatory element of embryonic transcriptional 
coactivator UTF1 which is one of the downstream genes of Oct-3/4, we have found
that Oct-3/4, but not other Octamer factors, shows unique DNA binding
specificity, being able to bind to variant Octamer sequence (5'-ACTAGCAT-3')
present in UTF1 regulatory element. Here, we have determined the DNA binding
property of Oct-3/4 in a systematic manner using all possible one point mutants
of Octamer sequence as well as completely random sequences. These analyses led to
the identification of nine distinct nucleotide sequences including the one
(5'-ACTAGCAT-3') present in UTF1 regulatory element which serves rather as
specific binding site for the Oct-3/4. Moreover, we show that, at least, one of
the newly identified sequences, 5'-ATCAGCAT-3', exhibits a transcriptional
stimulating activity equivalent to that of the variant Octamer sequence present
in the UTF1 regulatory region in embryonic stem cells in a pluripotent-state
specific manner.

PMID: 12615074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Am J Pathol. 2003 Mar;162(3):861-71.

Expression of B-lymphocyte-associated transcription factors in human T-cell
neoplasms.

Marafioti T(1), Ascani S, Pulford K, Sabattini E, Piccioli M, Jones M, Zinzani
PL, Delsol G, Mason DY, Pileri SA.

Author information: 
(1)Nuffield Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, John Radcliffe Hospital, 
Oxford, United Kingdom. teresa.marafioti@ndcls.ox.ac.uk

In this study we have investigated the expression of three B-cell-associated
transcription factors in normal lymphoid tissue and in T-cell neoplasms (three
cell lines, and more than 50 biopsy samples). Nuclear OCT-1 immunoreactivity was 
seen in normal B cells, in many extrafollicular T cells, and in a heterogeneous
pattern (ranging in intensity from weak to moderate) in most T-cell neoplasms.
OCT-2 immunostaining was primarily restricted in normal lymphoid tissue to B
cells, and was absent from most T-cell neoplasms. In contrast, immunostaining for
BOB-1/OCA-B--essentially restricted to B cells in normal lymphoid tissue, with
the exception of activated T-lymphocytes--was seen in all of the T-cell lines
tested and the majority of the tumor cells in all categories of T-cell lymphoma. 
Thus labeling for each of these three B-cell-associated transcription factors can
be seen to varying degrees in T-cell neoplasms. However, the high frequency of
BOB-1 expression in T-cell neoplasms, in contrast to its absence from resting
peripheral T cells, suggests that its expression might be a prerequisite for
neoplastic transformation, and prompts a search for the transcriptional target(s)
of this factor in T cells.

PMCID: PMC1868085
PMID: 12598320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Xenobiotica. 2002 Dec;32(12):1173-83.

PCBs alter gene expression of nuclear transcription factors and other
heart-specific genes in cultures of primary cardiomyocytes: possible implications
for cardiotoxicity.

Borlak J(1), Thum T.

Author information: 
(1)Fraunhofer Institute of Toxicology and Aerosol Research, Center for Drug
Research and Medical Biotechnology, Nicolai-Fuchs-Str. 1, D-30625 Hannover,
Germany. borlak@ita.fhg.de

Erratum in
    Xenobiotica. 2003 May;33(5):571-3.

1. Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) are well-known environmental pollutants that 
bioaccumulate mainly in the fatty tissue of animals and humans. Although
contamination occurs primarily via the food chain, waste combustion leads to
airborne PCBs. From epidemiological studies, there is substantial evidence that
cardiovascular disease is linked to air pollution, but little is known about the 
underlying molecular events. 2. We investigated the effects of Aroclor 1254, a
complex mixture of >80 PCB isomers and congeners, on the expression of nuclear
transcription factors (GATA-4, Nkx-2.5, MEF-2c, OCT-1) and of downstream target
genes (atrial and brain natriuretic peptide, alpha- and beta-myosin heavy chain, 
alpha-cardiac and alpha-skeletal actin), which play an important role in cardiac 
biology. 3. We treated cultures of primary cardiomyocytes of adult rats with
Aroclor 1254 (10.0 micro M) and found significant induction of the transcription 
factor genes GATA-4 and MEF-2c and of genes regulated by these factors, i.e.
atrial natriuretic peptide, brain-type natriuretic peptide, alpha- and
beta-myosin heavy chain, and skeletal alpha actin. 4. We have shown PCBs to
modulate expression of genes coding for programmes of cellular differentiation
and stress (e.g. atrial natriuretic peptide, brain-type natriuretic peptide) and 
these alterations may be important in the increase of cardiovascular disease in
polluted areas.

PMID: 12593764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Immunol. 2003 Jan 1;170(1):508-19.

Induction of in vitro reprogramming by Toll-like receptor (TLR)2 and TLR4
agonists in murine macrophages: effects of TLR "homotolerance" versus
"heterotolerance" on NF-kappa B signaling pathway components.

Dobrovolskaia MA(1), Medvedev AE, Thomas KE, Cuesta N, Toshchakov V, Ren T, Cody 
MJ, Michalek SM, Rice NR, Vogel SN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland, Baltimore, 
MD 21201, USA.

In this study, tolerance induction by preexposure of murine macrophages to
Toll-like receptor (TLR)2 and TLR4 agonists was revisited, focusing on the major 
signaling components associated with NF-kappaB activation. Pretreatment of
macrophages with a pure TLR4 agonist (protein-free Escherichia coli (Ec) LPS) or 
with TLR2 agonists (Porphyromonas gingivalis LPS or synthetic lipoprotein
Pam3Cys) led to suppression of TNF-alpha secretion, IL-1R-associated kinase-1,
and IkappaB kinase (IKK) kinase activities, c-jun N-terminal kinase, and
extracellular signal-regulated kinase phosphorylation, and to suppression of
NF-kappaB DNA binding and transactivation upon challenge with the same agonist
(TLR4 or TLR2 "homotolerance," respectively). Despite inhibited NF-kappaB DNA
binding, increased levels of nuclear NF-kappaB were detected in
agonist-pretreated macrophages. For all the intermediate signaling elements,
heterotolerance was weaker than TLR4 or TLR2 homotolerance with the exception of 
IKK kinase activity. IKK kinase activity was unperturbed in heterotolerance.
TNF-alpha secretion was also suppressed in P. gingivalis LPS-pretreated, Ec
LPS-challenged cells, but not vice versa, while Pam3Cys and Ec LPS did not induce
a state of cross-tolerance at the level of TNF-alpha. Experiments designed to
elucidate novel mechanisms of NF-kappaB inhibition in tolerized cells revealed
the potential contribution of IkappaBepsilon and IkappaBxi inhibitory proteins
and the necessity of TLR4 engagement for induction of tolerance to Toll
receptor-IL-1R domain-containing adapter protein/MyD88-adapter-like-dependent
gene expression. Collectively, these data demonstrate that induction of
homotolerance affects a broader spectrum of signaling components than in
heterotolerance, with selective modulation of specific elements within the
NF-kappaB signaling pathway.

PMID: 12496438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. EMBO J. 2002 Dec 2;21(23):6590-602.

A novel function for human factor C1 (HCF-1), a host protein required for herpes 
simplex virus infection, in pre-mRNA splicing.

Ajuh P(1), Chusainow J, Ryder U, Lamond AI.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, The University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH,
UK.

Human factor C1 (HCF-1) is needed for the expression of herpes simplex virus 1
(HSV-1) immediate-early genes in infected mammalian cells. Here, we provide
evidence that HCF-1 is required for spliceosome assembly and splicing in
mammalian nuclear extracts. HCF-1 interacts with complexes containing splicing
snRNPs in uninfected mammalian cells and is a stable component of the spliceosome
complex. We show that a missense mutation in HCF-1 in the BHK21 hamster cell line
tsBN67, at the non-permissive temperature, inhibits the protein's interaction
with U1 and U5 splicing snRNPs, causes inefficient spliceosome assembly and
inhibits splicing. Transient expression of wild-type HCF-1 in tsBN67 cells
restores splicing at the non-permissive temperature. The inhibition of splicing
in tsBN67 cells correlates with the temperature-sensitive cell cycle arrest
phenotype, suggesting that HCF-1-dependent splicing events may be required for
cell cycle progression.

PMCID: PMC136956
PMID: 12456665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Endocrinology. 2002 Dec;143(12):4693-701.

Oct-1 is involved in the transcriptional repression of the gonadotropin-releasing
hormone receptor gene.

Cheng CK(1), Yeung CM, Hoo RL, Chow BK, Leung PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, Canada V6H 3V5.

Previous deletion analysis of the 5'-flanking region of human GnRH receptor
(GnRHR) gene has revealed a powerful negative regulatory element (NRE) located
between nucleotide -1017 and -771. In the present study, we demonstrated that
this NRE could repress the homologous promoter, irrespective of its position and 
completely abolish the activity of a heterologous thymidine kinase promoter in an
orientation-dependent manner. Progressive 3'-deletion analysis revealed that most
of the silencing activity of the NRE resided in a putative octamer regulatory
sequence (5'AAGCAAACT3'), which alone could repress the promoter activities by
69-90% in ovarian OVCAR-3, placental JEG-3, and gonadotrope-derived alphaT3-1
cells. Mutation of the AAAC residues of the octamer sequence completely removed
its silencing activity. Interestingly, conversion of the octamer sequence into
that of the rodent GnRHR promoter (5'AAGCAAAGT3') did not attenuate its silencing
effect, indicating that the repressive role of the octamer sequence is
evolutionarily conserved. EMSAs showed that common DNA-protein complexes of the
same mobility were formed with nuclear extracts from the reproductive cells and
gonadotropes, and a consensus octamer transcription factor-1 (Oct-1) binding
sequence could dose dependently inhibit the complex formation. Antibody
supershift and Southwestern blot assays confirmed that the protein binding to the
octamer sequence was the ubiquitously expressed transcription factor Oct-1.
Overexpression of Oct-1 augmented the silencing activity of the octamer sequence 
in alphaT3-1 cells. Taken together, our results clearly indicate a role of Oct-1 
in the transcriptional repression of the human GnRHR gene.

PMID: 12446597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Virol. 2002 Dec;76(23):12185-99.

Suppression of tetradecanoyl phorbol acetate-induced lytic reactivation of
Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus by K1 signal transduction.

Lee BS(1), Paulose-Murphy M, Chung YH, Connlole M, Zeichner S, Jung JU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics and Division of Tumor
Virology, New England Regional Primate Research Center, Harvard Medical School,
Southborough, Massachusetts 01772, USA.

The K1 protein of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) contains an
immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM) in its cytoplasmic region
and elicits cellular signal transduction through this motif. To investigate the
role of K1 signal transduction in KSHV replication, we expressed full-length K1
and CD8-K1 chimeras in BCBL1 cells. Unlike its strong signaling activity in
uninfected B lymphocytes, K1 did not induce intracellular calcium mobilization or
NF-AT activation at detectable levels in KSHV-infected BCBL1 cells. Instead, K1
signaling dramatically suppressed KSHV lytic reactivation induced by
tetradecanoyl phorbol acetate (TPA) stimulation, but not by ORF50 ectopic
expression. Mutational analysis showed that the cytoplasmic ITAM sequence of K1
was required for this suppression. Viral microarray and immunoblot analyses
demonstrated that K1 signaling suppressed the TPA-mediated increase in the
expression of a large subset of viral lytic genes in KSHV-infected BCBL1 cells.
Furthermore, electrophoretic mobility shift assays demonstrated that TPA-induced 
activation of AP-1, NF-kappaB, and Oct-1 activities was severely diminished in
BCBL1 cells expressing the K1 cytoplasmic domain. The reduced activities of these
transcription factors may confer the observed reduction in viral lytic gene
expression. These results demonstrate that K1-mediated signal transduction in
KSHV-infected cells is profoundly different from that in KSHV-negative cells.
Furthermore, K1 signal transduction efficiently suppresses TPA-mediated viral
reactivation in an ITAM-dependent manner, and this suppression may contribute to 
the establishment and/or maintenance of KSHV latency in vivo.

PMCID: PMC136871
PMID: 12414958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Genes Dev. 2002 Nov 1;16(21):2772-7.

Activator recruitment by the general transcription machinery: X-ray structural
analysis of the Oct-1 POU domain/human U1 octamer/SNAP190 peptide ternary
complex.

Hovde S(1), Hinkley CS, Strong K, Brooks A, Gu L, Henry RW, Geiger J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan
48823, USA.

Transcriptional activation of the human U1 snRNA genes is dependent on a
noncanonical octamer element contained within an upstream enhancer. The U1
octamer only weakly recruits the Oct-1 POU domain, although recruitment is
stimulated by a peptide containing the Oct-1-binding domain of SNAP190.
Structural analysis of the Oct-1 POU domain/U1 octamer/SNAP190 peptide complex
revealed that SNAP190 makes extensive protein contacts with the Oct-1
POU-specific domain and with the DNA phosphate backbone within the enhancer.
Although SNAP190 and OCA-B both interact with the Oct-1 POU domain through the
same Oct-1 interface, a single nucleotide within the U1 octamer ablates OCA-B
recruitment without compromising activator recruitment by SNAP190.

PMCID: PMC187474
PMID: 12414730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Blood. 2003 Feb 15;101(4):1603-10. Epub 2002 Sep 26.

LCR-regulated transgene expression levels depend on the Oct-1 site in the AT-rich
region of beta -globin intron-2.

Bharadwaj RR(1), Trainor CD, Pasceri P, Ellis J.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON,
Canada.

Human beta-globin transgenes regulated by the locus control region (LCR) express 
at all integration sites in transgenic mice. For such LCR activity at ectopic
sites, the 5'HS3 element requires the presence of the AT-rich region (ATR) in
beta-globin intron-2. Here, we examine the dependence of 5'HS3 LCR activity on
transcription factor binding sites in the ATR. In vitro DNaseI footprint analysis
and electrophoretic mobility shift assays of the ATR identified an inverted
double Gata-1 site composed of 2 noncanonical sequences (GATT and GATG) and an
Oct-1 consensus site. Mutant Oct-1, Gata-1, or double mutant sites were created
in the ATR of the BGT50 construct composed of a 5'HS3 beta/gamma-globin hybrid
transgene. Transgenes with double mutant sites expressed at all sites of
integration, but mean expression levels in transgenic mice were reduced from 64% 
per copy (BGT50) to 37% (P <.05). Mutation of the inverted double Gata-1 site had
no effect at 61% per copy expression levels. In contrast, mutation of the Oct-1
site alone reduced per-copy expression levels to 31% (P <.05). We conclude that
the ability of 5'HS3 to activate expression from all transgene integration sites 
is dependent on sequences in the ATR that are not bound at high affinity by
transcription factors. In addition, the Oct-1 site in the ATR is required for
high-level 5'HS3 beta/gamma-globin transgene expression and should be retained in
LCRbeta-globin expression cassettes designed for gene therapy.

PMID: 12393478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2002 Oct 11;1578(1-3):59-72.

Ku antigen, an origin-specific binding protein that associates with replication
proteins, is required for mammalian DNA replication.

Matheos D(1), Ruiz MT, Price GB, Zannis-Hadjopoulos M.

Author information: 
(1)McGill Cancer Centre, McGill University, 3655 Drummond Street, Promenade Sir
William Osler, Montréal, Québec, Canada H3G 1Y6.

Ors binding activity (OBA) represents a HeLa cell protein activity that binds in 
a sequence-specific manner to A3/4, a 36-bp mammalian replication origin
sequence. OBA's DNA binding domain is identical to the 80-kDa subunit of Ku
antigen. Ku antigen associates with mammalian origins of DNA replication in vivo,
with maximum binding at the G1/S phase. Addition of an A3/4 double-stranded
oligonucleotide inhibited in vitro DNA replication of p186, pors12, and pX24,
plasmids containing the monkey replication origins of ors8, ors12, and the
Chinese hamster DHFR oribeta, respectively. In contrast, in vitro SV40 DNA
replication remained unaffected. The inhibitory effect of A3/4 oligonucleotide
was fully reversed upon addition of affinity-purified Ku. Furthermore, depletion 
of Ku by inclusion of an antibody recognizing the Ku heterodimer, Ku70/Ku80,
decreased mammalian replication to basal levels. By co-immunoprecipitation
analyses, Ku was found to interact with DNA polymerases alpha, delta and epsilon,
PCNA, topoisomerase II, RF-C, RP-A, DNA-PKcs, ORC-2, and Oct-1. These
interactions were not inhibited by the presence of ethidium bromide in the
immunoprecipitation reaction, suggesting DNA-independent protein associations.
The data suggest an involvement of Ku in mammalian DNA replication as an
origin-specific-binding protein with DNA helicase activity. Ku acts at the
initiation step of replication and requires an A3/4-homologous sequence for
origin binding. The physical association of Ku with replication proteins reveals 
a possible mechanism by which Ku is recruited to mammalian origins.

PMID: 12393188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Nov;22(22):7769-79.

Oct-1 potentiates CREB-driven cyclin D1 promoter activation via a phospho-CREB-
and CREB binding protein-independent mechanism.

Boulon S(1), Dantonel JC, Binet V, Vié A, Blanchard JM, Hipskind RA, Philips A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique Moléculaire, CNRS, UMR 5535, IFR24, 34293 Montpellier
Cedex 5, France.

Cyclin D1, the regulatory subunit for mid-G(1) cyclin-dependent kinases, controls
the expression of numerous cell cycle genes. A cyclic AMP-responsive element
(CRE), located upstream of the cyclin D1 mRNA start site, integrates mitogenic
signals that target the CRE-binding factor CREB, which can recruit the
transcriptional coactivator CREB-binding protein (CBP). We describe an
alternative mechanism for CREB-driven cyclin D1 induction that involves the
ubiquitous POU domain protein Oct-1. In the breast cancer cell line MCF-7,
overexpression of Oct-1 or its POU domain strongly increases transcriptional
activation of cyclin D1 and GAL4 reporter genes that is specifically dependent
upon CREB but independent of Oct-1 DNA binding. Gel retardation and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays confirm that POU forms a complex with CREB bound to
the cyclin D1 CRE. In solution, CREB interaction with POU requires the CREB Q2
domain and, notably, occurs with CREB that is not phosphorylated on Ser 133.
Accordingly, Oct-1 also potently enhances transcriptional activation mediated by 
a Ser133Ala CREB mutant. Oct-1/CREB synergy is not diminished by the adenovirus
E1A 12S protein, a repressor of CBP coactivator function. In contrast, E1A
strongly represses CBP-enhanced transactivation by CREB phosphorylated on Ser
133. Our observation that Oct-1 potentiates CREB-dependent cyclin D1
transcriptional activity independently of Ser 133 phosphorylation and
E1A-sensitive coactivator function offers a new paradigm for the regulation of
cyclin D1 induction by proliferative signals.

PMCID: PMC134723
PMID: 12391146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2002 Sep 27;1577(3):466-70.

Cloning and characterization of the chick Oct binding factor OBF-1.

Takechi S(1), Adachi M, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Miyazaki Medical College, Kihara, Kiyotake, Japan.
stakechi@post1.miyazaki-med.ac.jp

We have cloned the chicken homolog of OBF-1, chOBF-1, which comprises 256 amino
acids, and exhibits only 65% overall identity to the human and mouse OBF-1
proteins. Amino acid sequence alignment revealed the putative Oct-binding
sequence, RPYQGVRVKEPVKELL(K/R)RKRG, which is conserved among chicken, mouse and 
human. chOBF-1 protein was demonstrated to bind chicken Oct-1 protein by the in
vitro immunoprecipitation experiment, and chOBF-1 was shown to functionally
activate the chicken immunoglobulin (Ig) light chain promoter in the NIH 3T3
cell. Taken together, these data indicate that the Ig gene transcription
machinery, including Oct-1 and OBF-1, has been highly conserved in vertebrate
evolution.

PMID: 12359338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Biol Chem. 2002 Dec 6;277(49):47022-7. Epub 2002 Sep 26.

Specific activation of human interleukin-5 depends on de novo synthesis of an
AP-1 complex.

Schwenger GT(1), Kok CC, Arthaningtyas E, Thomas MA, Sanderson CJ, Mordvinov VA.

Author information: 
(1)Western Australian Institute for Medical Research and the School of Biomedical
Sciences, Curtin University of Technology, Perth, Australia.
gretchen@cyllene.uwa.edu.au

It is clear from the biology of eosinophilia that a specific regulatory mechanism
must exist. Because interleukin-5 (IL5) is the key regulatory cytokine, it
follows that a gene-specific control of IL5 expression must exist that differs
even from closely related cytokines such as IL4. Two features of IL5 induction
make it unique compared with other cytokines; first, induction by cyclic
adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), which inhibits other T-cell-derived cytokines,
and second, sensitivity to protein synthesis inhibitors, which have no effect on 
other cytokines. This study has utilized the activation of different
transcription factors by different stimuli in a human T-cell line to study the
role of conserved lymphokine element 0 (CLE0) in the specific induction of IL5.
In unstimulated cells the ubiquitous Oct-1 binds to CLE0. Stimulation induces de 
novo synthesis of the AP-1 members JunD and Fra-2, which bind to CLE0. The amount
of IL5 produced correlates with the production of the AP-1 complex, suggesting a 
key role in IL5 expression. The formation of the AP-1 complex is essential, but
the rate-limiting step is the synthesis of AP-1, especially Fra-2. This provides 
an explanation for the sensitivity of IL5 to protein synthesis inhibitors and a
mechanism for the specific induction of IL5 compared with other cytokines.

PMID: 12354764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Oct 15;99(21):13403-8. Epub 2002 Sep 23.

An activation domain in the C-terminal subunit of HCF-1 is important for
transactivation by VP16 and LZIP.

Luciano RL(1), Wilson AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Kaplan Comprehensive Cancer Center, New York
University School of Medicine, 550 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

In herpes simplex virus, lytic replication is initiated by the viral
transactivator VP16 acting with cellular cofactors Oct-1 and HCF-1. Although this
activator complex has been studied in detail, the role of HCF-1 remains elusive. 
Here, we show that HCF-1 contains an activation domain (HCF-1(AD)) required for
maximal transactivation by VP16 and its cellular counterpart LZIP. Expression of 
the VP16 cofactor p300 augments HCF-1(AD) activity, suggesting a mechanism of
synergy. Infection of cells lacking the HCF-1(AD) leads to reduced viral
immediate-early gene expression and lowered viral titers. These findings
underscore the importance of HCF-1 to herpes simplex virus replication and VP16
transactivation.

PMCID: PMC129685
PMID: 12271126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 15;277(46):44292-9. Epub 2002 Sep 15.

Interaction of HCF-1 with a cellular nuclear export factor.

Mahajan SS(1), Little MM, Vazquez R, Wilson AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and the Kaplan Comprehensive Cancer Center, New
York University School of Medicine, New York, New York 10016, USA.

HCF-1 is a cellular protein required by VP16 to activate the herpes simplex virus
(HSV) immediate-early genes. VP16 is a component of the viral tegument and, after
release into the cell, binds to HCF-1 and translocates to the nucleus to form a
complex with the POU domain protein Oct-1 and a VP16-responsive DNA sequence.
This VP16-induced complex boosts transcription of the viral immediate-early genes
and initiates lytic replication. In uninfected cells, HCF-1 functions as a
coactivator for the cellular transcription factors LZIP and GABP and also plays
an essential role in cell proliferation. VP16 and LZIP share a tetrapeptide
HCF-binding motif recognized by the beta-propeller domain of HCF-1. Here we
describe a new cellular HCF-1 beta-propeller domain binding protein, termed HPIP,
which contains a functional HCF-binding motif and a leucine-rich nuclear export
sequence. We show that HPIP shuttles between the nucleus and cytoplasm in a
CRM1-dependent manner and that overexpression of HPIP leads to accumulation of
HCF-1 in the cytoplasm. These data suggest that HPIP regulates HCF-1 activity by 
modulating its subcellular localization. Furthermore, HPIP-mediated export may
provide the pool of cytoplasmic HCF-1 required for import of virion-derived VP16 
into the nucleus.

PMCID: PMC4291127
PMID: 12235138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Biochem Pharmacol. 2002 Sep;64(5-6):979-84.

Differential activity by DNA-induced quarternary structures of POU transcription 
factors.

Reményi A(1), Tomilin A, Schöler HR, Wilmanns M.

Author information: 
(1)EMBL, Hamburg Outstation, c/o DESY, Notkestrasse 85, D-22603 Hamburg, Germany.

Recent structural studies on transcription factors from the POU family in complex
with multiple cognate DNA enhancer elements have established a novel concept in
DNA-mediated formation of distinct conformations of transcription regulator
assemblies. Two crystal structures of the Oct-1 transcription factor in the
presence of two different DNA sites have demonstrated how its POU DNA-binding
segment is capable in forming two unrelated dimer arrangements, which is DNA
motif dependent. While one arrangement allows binding of the Oct-1 specific
coactivator OBF-1, binding of this coactivator is blocked in the second
arrangement because the binding site is involved in its own dimer assembly.
Conversely, two crystal structures of another POU transcription factor, Pit-1,
have demonstrated how the same overall assembly is maintained in the presence of 
two different DNA response elements. However, since the distance of the two Pit-1
half-binding sites on these elements differ by two base pairs, the overall
dimensions of the two complexes vary, allowing binding of a specific represssor
(N-CoR) in one conformation but not in the other. Thus, despite the occurrence of
different DNA-mediated molecular mechanisms, the net result,
conformation-dependent binding of further regulators, is equivalent. These data
introduce a concept where the DNA motif not only serves as binding site for
specific transcription factors but also regulates their function by mediating
specific transcription factor assemblies, which determine binding to
conformation-dependent coregulators.

PMID: 12213595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Mol Endocrinol. 2002 Sep;16(9):2093-100.

Episodic activation of the rat GnRH promoter: role of the homeoprotein oct-1.

Vazquez-Martinez R(1), Leclerc GM, Wierman ME, Boockfor FR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Dynamics (F.R.B.), Department of Cell Biology and
Anatomy, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29425, 
USA.

Recent reports demonstrate that the rat GnRH promoter is activated in an episodic
fashion in immortalized GnRH neurons, but little information is available on
molecular processes that contribute to this phenomenon. In this study, we
dissected the regions of the rat GnRH promoter that mediate these effects by
testing a series of 5' deletion luciferase reporter constructs on the pattern of 
photonic emissions from single, living GT1-7 GnRH neuronal cells. Deletion
analysis revealed that the region -2012/-1597 that contains the neuron-specific
enhancer (NSE) was required for the elaboration of pulses of GnRH promoter
activity. The importance of this region was supported by observations that
episodic reporter activity could be transferred to a neutral nonpulsatile
promoter (Rous sarcoma virus, RSV(180)). Immunoneutralization of Oct-1 as well as
mutation of an octamer binding site located at -1787/-1783 (AT-a site) blocked
the pulsatile GnRH promoter activity in GT1-7 neuronal cells. Taken together, our
findings indicate that episodic GnRH gene expression is a promoter-dependent
phenomenon, which is mediated by Oct-1 interaction with regulatory elements in
the NSE region.

PMID: 12198245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2002 Aug 19;1577(1):27-37.

Involvement of Oct-1 in transcriptional regulation of beta-casein gene expression
in mouse mammary gland.

Zhao FQ(1), Adachi K, Oka T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA.

Mouse beta-casein gene promoter contains a region termed block C which is crucial
for its gene transcription induced by lactogenic hormones. Nuclear extracts from 
mouse mammary glands contain at least two binding complexes (DS1 and DS2) which
specifically bind to double-stranded block C region DNA. The binding sequence of 
these complexes was identified to be 5'-AAATTAGCATGT-3' which contains a sequence
element related to the consensus octamer motif's complement ATTTGCAT. In the
present study, we demonstrate that this sequence element indeed is the binding
site for octamer-binding transcription factors (Octs) and Octs represent the
double-stranded DNA binding proteins specifically binding to the block C region. 
Formation of the specific double-stranded binding complexes can be completely
blocked by Oct binding motif oligonucleotides and anti-rOct-1 antiserum. We also 
show that Oct-1B represents at least partial, if not all, double-stranded binding
protein, DS1, in mammary nuclear extract. Oct-1B may function as a
transcriptional activator on casein gene promoter. The Oct binding activity to
beta-casein gene promoter in the mammary gland is affected under influence of
hormones both in vitro and in vivo. The DS1 binding activity can be induced by
the combination of lactogenic hormones insulin, hydrocortisone and prolactin in
organ culture of virgin mouse mammary gland. The binding activity in vivo can be 
induced by injection of progesterone or its combination with estradiol in virgin 
mice.

PMID: 12151092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Oncogene. 2002 Aug 8;21(34):5245-54.

PDCD2 is a negative regulator of HCF-1 (C1).

Scarr RB(1), Sharp PA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, Massachusetts, MA 02139-4307,
USA.

Temperature sensitive mutations in host cell factor 1 (HCF-1) arrest cells in the
middle of the G1 phase of the cycle. We have shown that the highly conserved
C-terminal WYF domain of HCF-1 protein interacts with the MYND domain of the
PDCD2 protein. This inter-action is conserved between human HCF-1 and HCF-2 and
the C. elegans HCF. Overexpression of PDCD2, which interacts with the
N-CoR/mSin3A corepressor complexes, suppresses cotransfected HCF-1
complement-ation of a temperature lesion in the endogenous HCF-1 protein.
Overexpression of domains of either PDCD2 or HCF-1, which should interfere with
interactions between these two proteins, enhances the complementation.

PMID: 12149646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Eur J Pharmacol. 2002 Jul 19;448(2-3):113-21.

3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase inhibitors increase the binding
activity and nuclear level of Oct-1 in mononuclear cells.

Ortego M(1), Hernández AG, Bustos C, Blanco-Colio LM, Hernández-Presa MA, Tuñón
J, Egido J.

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Research Laboratory, Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Avda Reyes Católicos 2, 
28040 Madrid, Spain. mortego@fjd.es

3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors (statins)
are drugs very effective to decrease low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol.
In addition, a number of studies suggest that statins have other beneficial
clinical effects beyond cholesterol lowering. We recently reported that statins
decrease nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB) binding activity in monocytes and
vascular smooth muscle cells. We now explored the effect of two different
statins, simvastatin and atorvastatin, in the activation of the octamer
transcription factor Oct-1 on the monocytic cell line THP-1. Oct-1 is a nuclear
factor that represses the transcription of proinflammatory genes such as
interleukin-8, CD11c/CD18, vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) and
platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 (PECAM-1). Low concentrations of
both statins increased Oct-1 DNA binding activity (electrophoretic mobility shift
assay) that was resolved into two specific bands. The upper one was supershifted 
by preincubation of nuclear extracts with anti-Oct-1 antibody. The lower one was 
supershifted by preincubation of nuclear extracts with an anti-Oct-2 antibody,
also partially competed with 100 mol/l excess of cold activator protein-1 (AP-1) 
and attenuated by anti-c-Jun antibody. Both statins increased Oct-1 and Oct-2
nuclear protein levels (Western blot). In contrast, neither had any effect on
PMA-differentiated cells, suggesting a distinct sensitivity between circulating
monocytes and resident tissular macrophages. In addition, statins did not
increase Oct-lipoprotein lipase binding activity that contains an Oct-1 binding
element. The mRNA expression of interleukin-8, a chemokine containing Oct sites
in its promoter, was diminished by statin pretreatment. Our results indicate that
simvastatin and atorvastatin increase the activity of the transcriptional
repressor Oct-1 in mononuclear cells, and could thus contribute to decrease the
activation of these cells. These data suggest a possible novel mechanism
supporting a certain anti-inflammatory effect of these two
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase inhibitors.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science B.V.

PMID: 12144930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Aug;22(16):5639-49.

Luman, the cellular counterpart of herpes simplex virus VP16, is processed by
regulated intramembrane proteolysis.

Raggo C(1), Rapin N, Stirling J, Gobeil P, Smith-Windsor E, O'Hare P, Misra V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, Western College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan S7N 5B4, Canada.

Luman is a human basic leucine zipper transcription factor that, like the herpes 
simplex virus transcription factor VP16, requires the host cell factor, HCF, for 
activity. Although both HCF and Luman have been implicated in cell growth, their 
biological roles have not been clearly defined. Luman conforms to a type II
membrane-associated glycoprotein with its carboxyl terminus embedded in cellular 
membranes and its amino terminus, which contains all its identified functional
domains, in the cytoplasm. Here we show that Luman is processed by regulated
intramembrane proteolysis (RIP). The site 1 protease (S1P), a Golgi
apparatus-resident enzyme responsible for catalyzing the first step in the RIP
pathway of the sterol regulatory element binding proteins (SREBPs) and ATF6, may 
also be involved in the processing of Luman. Thus, processing of Luman was highly
stimulated by brefeldin A, a compound that causes the reflux of Golgi apparatus
enzymes to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). In addition, coexpression of Luman
with S1P containing a KDEL ER retrieval signal resulted in virtually quantitative
cleavage of Luman in the absence of any treatment. Finally, Luman contains a
sequence, RQLR, immediately downstream from the transmembrane domain which bears 
similarity to the consensus S1P cleavage site identified by others. Substitution 
of arginine residues within this motif abolished S1P cleavage, providing robust
evidence that S1P is involved in Luman processing. We observed that following S1P
cleavage, the majority of the cleaved Luman was retained in cytoplasmic
membranes, indicating that an additional step or enzymes yet to be identified are
involved in complete cleavage and release to yield the product which ultimately
enters the nuclei of cells.

PMCID: PMC133973
PMID: 12138176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 2;277(31):27960-7. Epub 2002 May 23.

A dyad oct-binding sequence functions as a maintenance sequence for the
unmethylated state within the H19/Igf2-imprinted control region.

Hori N(1), Nakano H, Takeuchi T, Kato H, Hamaguchi S, Oshimura M, Sato K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, School of Life Science, Faculty of Medicine, 
Tottori University, Tottori 683-0853, Japan. horinao@grape.med.tottori-u.ac.jp

DNA methylation of an imprinted control region (ICR) directs the allele-specific 
and reciprocal expression of the mouse H19 and the insulin-like growth factor 2
(Igf2) genes, mediated by controlling enhancer access. The ICR shows enhancer
blocking activity through CTCF binding to an unmethylated sequence. The
unmethylated state of the maternal ICR is maintained throughout development after
establishment in the germ line; however, little is known of the molecular
mechanisms that regulate DNA methylation. Hence, in this study we show that a
dyad Oct-binding sequence (DOS) in the ICR mediates the demethylation of
low-density methylation but not hypermethylation and is required to maintain the 
unmethylated state against the tendency for de novo methylation within the ICR in
the embryonic carcinoma cell line P19. Furthermore, we also reveal that the
unmethylated state of at least one CTCF-binding site within the ICR is under the 
control of DOS. Our results suggest that the ICR, as a CTCF-dependent insulator, 
requires DOS as well as CTCF-binding sites and that DOS maintains the maternal
specific unmethylated state of the ICR at postimplantation stages.

PMID: 12029086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2002 Apr 25;190(1-2):39-49.

Androgen receptor interactions with Oct-1 and Brn-1 are physically and
functionally distinct.

González MI(1), Tovaglieri A, Robins DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, 4909 Buhl Bldg., University of Michigan Medical 
School, Ann Arbor 48109-0618, USA.

POU domain proteins interact positively or negatively with steroid hormone
receptors, depending on the precise array of these and other factors assembled on
target gene promoters. Octamer transcription factor 1 (Oct-1), a ubiquitous POU
factor, is implicated in androgen induction of the mouse sex-limited protein
(Slp) gene based on protein-DNA interaction studies. However, direct evidence for
a role of Oct-1 in the hormone response has been difficult to obtain. Brain 1
(Brn-1), another POU factor, is more tissue-specific, expressing in brain and
also in kidney, which is a major site of Slp synthesis. We compared the
interaction of the androgen receptor (AR) with Oct-1 and Brn-1 to reveal the more
likely candidate for regulation of Slp. In transfection, addition of either Oct-1
or Brn-1 reduced AR activation, regardless of the presence of an octamer-like
sequence in the enhancer, suggesting interference was indirect. However, when the
octamer-like element was changed to a consensus octamer site, Brn-1, but not
Oct-1, strongly enhanced androgen activation. This correlated with Brn-l's
preference for the consensus octamer sequence in DNA binding assays. Direct
interaction of AR with glutathione-S-transferase-(GST)-fused Oct-1 was
DNA-dependent, while Brn-l-AR association was not. Chimeric Brn-1 and Oct-1 POU
domains demonstrated that the DNA-dependent AR interaction relied on the origin
of the POU homeodomain. However, in the context of full-length Brn-1 and Oct-1
chimeric proteins, the POU homedomain was not sufficient to confer the distinct
behaviors of these factors in vivo, but instead revealed the importance of an
N-terminal transactivation domain in Brn-1. These results demonstrate that
functional interaction of Oct-1 and Brn-1 with AR is determined by the precise
sequence of the octamer binding site, and by differential interaction of the POU 
factors with AR and other components of the transcriptional machinery.

PMID: 11997177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 Apr 15;30(8):1767-73.

Oct-2 regulates CD36 gene expression via a consensus octamer, which excludes the 
co-activator OBF-1.

Shore P(1), Dietrich W, Corcoran LM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Manchester, 2.205, Stopford
Building, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT, UK. paul.shore@man.ac.uk

The POU domain transcription factor, Oct-2, is essential for the B cell-specific 
expression of CD36 in mouse B cells. In order to determine how Oct-2 mediates
expression of CD36 in B cells, we cloned and analysed the mouse CD36 promoter. In
contrast to the human CD36 promoter, the mouse promoter contains a consensus
octamer element of the type ATGCTAAT. This octamer element can be bound by either
Oct-1 or Oct-2 but requires the expression of Oct-2 to activate transcription in 
B cells. Mutation of the octamer element renders the CD36 promoter refractory to 
activation by Oct-2. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the CD36 octamer element
does not support recruitment of the B cell-specific co-activator OBF-1 and that
CD36 expression is unaffected in primary B cells derived from obf-1(-/-) mice. We
conclude that Oct-2 activates CD36 gene expression in mouse B cells via the
octamer element in the promoter. Our data also demonstrate that CD36 is the first
example of an Oct-2-dependent gene whose expression in B cells is independent of 
OBF-1. These findings support the notion that Oct-2 regulates gene transcription 
by both OBF-1-dependent and -independent mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC113195
PMID: 11937630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Immunol. 2002 Apr 1;168(7):3369-75.

Bob1 (OCA-B/OBF-1) differential transactivation of the B cell-specific B29 (Ig
beta) and mb-1 (Ig alpha) promoters.

Malone CS(1), Wall R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Molecular Biology Institute,
University of California School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

The B29 (Igbeta) and mb-1 (Igalpha) gene products are B cell-specific essential
components of the B cell receptor that are coexpressed at all stages of B cell
differentiation, with the exception of plasma cells, which lack mb-1 expression. 
Transcription of both genes is governed by a similar cassette of interactive
transcription factor-binding elements, including octamer motifs, in TATA-less
promoters. In this study, we show the B cell-specific B29 gene promoter is
transactivated in B and non-B cells by cotransfection with the B cell-specific
octamer cofactor gene, Bob1 (OCA-B/OBF-1). The expression of Bob1 is also
sufficient to override the silencing effects of the B29 silencer. This indicates 
that Bob1 plays a critical role in B cell-specific B29 promoter expression. In
contrast, coexpression of Bob1 had no effect on mb-1 promoter activity. Bob1
transactivation only occurs with select octamer sequences that have an adenosine 
at position 5 (ATGCAAAT). The B29 promoter conforms to this consensus octamer
motif, while the mb-1 promoter octamer motif does not. Octamer motif swapping
between B29 and mb-1 promoters renders B29 unresponsive to Bob1 transactivation
and makes mb-1 competent for Bob1 transactivation, thereby indicating that the
B29 octamer motif is solely responsible for Bob1 interaction. Additionally, the
mb-1 construct containing the B29 octamer motif is expressed in a plasmacytoma
cell line, while the wild-type mb-1 promoter is not. Bob1 transactivation of B29 
and the lack of this transactivation of mb-1 account for the differential
expression of B29 and mb-1 in terminally differentiated plasma cells.

PMID: 11907094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Mol Endocrinol. 2002 Mar;16(3):435-49.

Identification of a discrete promoter region of the human GnRH gene that is
sufficient for directing neuron-specific expression: a role for POU homeodomain
transcription factors.

Wolfe A(1), Kim HH, Tobet S, Stafford DE, Radovick S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.
awolfe@peds.bsd.uchicago.edu

The human GnRH (hGnRH) gene is expressed, and the GnRH decapeptide produced,
primarily in the GnRH neurons of the diencephalon. The molecular elements
important for the cell-specific expression and regulation of the hGnRH gene are
not well established at this time; therefore, we have used a transgenic mouse
model to isolate cis-regulatory elements important for directing gene expression 
to GnRH neurons in the hypothalamus. Gene constructs consisting of various
promoter deletion fragments of the hGnRH gene fused to the luciferase (LUC)
reporter gene have been used to create transgenic mouse lines. Cell-specific
expression, with the criterion being luciferase expression directed to GnRH
neurons of the hypothalamus, was observed when 992 bp, but not 795 bp, of the
hGnRH gene promoter were used. Tissue-specific expression was also observed when 
a deletion construct containing the region from -992 to -763 was fused to a
minimal 48-bp promoter fragment fused to LUC. These data indicate that the region
between -992 and -795 contains elements both essential and sufficient for
targeting gene expression to GnRH neurons. This promoter region was found to
contain two DNA-binding sites for the POU class of transcription factors, each of
which specifically interacted with the POU homeodomain proteins Brn-2 and Oct-1. 
Functional studies demonstrated that Brn-2 increased promoter activity of the
human and mouse GnRH genes.

PMID: 11875100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Mar 5;99(5):3270-5. Epub 2002 Feb 19.

Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 dependence of stress-induced transcription factors 
and associated gene expression in glia.

Ha HC(1), Hester LD, Snyder SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1, EC ), a nuclear enzyme activated by DNA
strand breaks, physiologically participates in DNA repair. Excessive activation
of PARP-1 by cellular insults depletes its substrate beta-nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide and ATP, leading to cell death. PARP-1-deficient (PARP-1-/-) mice
are protected from several forms of inflammation. In the present study, we
demonstrate in PARP-1-/- glial cells a loss of several stress-activated
transcription factors as well as decreased expression of genes for cytokines and 
cellular adhesion molecules. We also show that augmented expression of some of
these genes is independent of PARP-1 catalytic activity. These findings indicate 
that PARP-1 plays a pivotal role in the initial inflammatory response by
modulating transcription of inflammation-linked genes.

PMCID: PMC122508
PMID: 11854472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. EMBO J. 2002 Feb 15;21(4):725-35.

Recruitment of the priming protein pTP and DNA binding occur by overlapping Oct-1
POU homeodomain surfaces.

de Jong RN(1), Mysiak ME, Meijer LA, van der Linden M, van der Vliet PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Universiteitsweg 100, 3584 CG Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The human transcription factor Oct-1 can stimulate transcription from a variety
of promoters by interacting with the coactivators OBF-1/OCA-B/BOB-1, SNAP190 and 
VP16. These proteins contact Oct-1 regions different from the DNA binding
surface. Oct-1 also stimulates the DNA replication of adenovirus through its DNA 
binding site in the origin. The Oct-1 POU homeodomain (POUhd) binds the
adenovirus precursor terminal protein pTP, which serves as the protein primer of 
DNA replication and recruits pTP to the origin. To map the interaction with pTP
at the POUhd surface, we screened a library of randomly mutated POU domains and
identified mutations that interfered with pTP interaction and DNA replication
stimulation. These mutants clustered at a surface different from those recognized
by OBF-1, SNAP190 and VP16. Unexpectedly, the pTP binding region largely
overlapped with the DNA binding surface of POUhd. In agreement with this, pTP
binding and DNA binding were mutually exclusive. We propose a model to reconcile 
pTP recruitment and DNA binding by Oct-1.

PMCID: PMC125863
PMID: 11847120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Genes Immun. 2001 Dec;2(8):464-8.

Octamer proteins inhibit IL-4 gene transcription in normal human CD4 T cells.

Cron RQ(1), Zhou B, Brunvand MW, Lewis DB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
PA 19104-4318, USA. rqcron@mail.med.upenn.edu

The balance of Th1 (eg, interleukin-2 (IL-2)) and Th2 (eg, IL-4) cytokines
produced by CD4 T cells markedly influences the outcome of the adaptive immune
response. Although octamer transcription factor proteins increase IL-2
transcription in T cells, their role in IL-4 gene transcription remains
controversial. We have previously shown and now confirm that the proximal octamer
binding site of the human IL-4 promoter, which separates the two most proximal
NFAT binding sites, is bound prior to, but not after, activation in vivo. Since
these two NFAT sites are essential for optimal IL-4 promoter activity, this
suggested that prior engagement by octamer proteins might prevent adjacent NFAT
binding and inhibit IL-4 gene transcription. In support of this hypothesis, here 
we show that NFAT proteins are unable to bind to a combined octamer/NFAT site
unless the octamer proteins are competed away. Moreover, activity of an IL-4
reporter gene mutated in the proximal octamer binding site is increased compared 
to the wild-type promoter in human peripheral blood CD4 T cells. In addition,
over-expression of either Oct-1 or Oct-2 decreased wild-type IL-4 promoter
activity, while increasing IL-2 promoter activity. No decrease in promoter
activity was seen when Oct-1 or Oct-2 was over-expressed with the octamer-mutant 
IL-4 reporter gene. Thus, octamer proteins are candidates to promote a Th1 rather
than Th2 pattern of cytokine gene expression by activated CD4 T cells.

PMID: 11781715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 8;277(10):8061-7. Epub 2002 Jan 3.

BRCA1 regulates GADD45 through its interactions with the OCT-1 and CAAT motifs.

Fan W(1), Jin S, Tong T, Zhao H, Fan F, Antinore MJ, Rajasekaran B, Wu M, Zhan Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Cancer Institute, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

BRCA1, a breast and ovarian cancer susceptibility gene, has been implicated in
gene regulation. Previous studies demonstrate that BRCA1 induces GADD45, a
p53-regulated and stress-inducible gene that plays an important role in cellular 
response to DNA damage. However, the mechanism(s) by which BRCA1 regulates GADD45
remains unclear. In this report, we have shown that BRCA1 activation of the
GADD45 promoter is mediated through the OCT-1 and CAAT motifs located at the
GADD45 promoter region. Site-directed mutations of both OCT-1 and CAAT motifs
abrogate induction of the GADD45 promoter by BRCA1. Both OCT-1 and CAAT motifs
are able to confer BRCA1 inducibility in a non-related minimal promoter. Physical
associations of BRCA1 protein with transcription factors Oct-1 and NF-YA, which
directly bind to the OCT-1 and CAAT motifs, are established by
biotin-streptavidin pull-down and coimmunoprecipitation assays. Such protein
interactions are required for interaction of BRCA1 with the GADD45 promoter
because either immunodepletion of Oct-1 and NF-YA proteins or mutations in the
OCT-1 and CAAT motifs disrupt BRCA1 binding to the GADD45 promoter. These
findings indicate that BRCA1 can up-regulate its targeted genes through
protein-protein interactions and provide a novel mechanism by which BRCA1
participates in transcriptional regulation.

PMID: 11777930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Oncogene. 2001 Nov 1;20(50):7375-85.

The specific activation of gadd45 following UVB radiation requires the POU family
gene product N-oct3 in human melanoma cells.

Lefort K(1), Rouault JP, Tondereau L, Magaud JP, Doré JF.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U453, Centre Léon Bérard, 28 rue Laënnec, 69373 LYON cedex 08, France.

Here we report the specific regulation of gadd45 expression in human melanoma
cell lines following UVB radiation. This solar wavelength is likely to be
involved in melanoma aetiology. We have previously shown that gadd45 expression
is strongly enhanced in a p53-independent manner following UVB irradiation,
unlike the other p53 target genes studied. Furthermore, gadd45 is specifically
activated in melanocytes since its induction in response to UVB, is not observed 
in other skin cells such as keratinocytes or fibroblasts. To investigate this
particular regulation of gadd45, we analysed the UVB-induced response of
different gadd45 promoter regions. Thus, a minimal promoter region of 50 bp
length, responsible for gadd45 activation in melanoma cell lines following UVB
irradiation, was determined. In electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs), we
showed that this region (-106/-56) of the gadd45 promoter which contains two
identical octamers, binds the POU family gene products oct-1 and N-oct3. Given
the specific expression pattern of N-oct3 in melanocyte, we invalidated the
expression of this transcription factor in melanoma cells: such an abrogation of 
N-oct3 protein expression in melanoma cells impeded gadd45 UVB-response. Thus the
response of melanocyte to UVB may use an original and previously undescribed
pathway.

PMID: 11704867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Dec;21(23):7883-91.

Repression of Ets-2-induced transactivation of the tau interferon promoter by
Oct-4.

Ezashi T(1), Ghosh D, Roberts RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences and Biochemistry, University of Missouri,
Columbia, Missouri 65211, USA.

Oct-4 is a POU family transcription factor associated with potentially totipotent
cells. Genes expressed in the trophectoderm but not in embryos prior to
blastocyst formation may be targets for silencing by Oct-4. Here, we have tested 
this hypothesis with the tau interferon genes (IFNT genes), which are expressed
exclusively in the trophectoderm of bovine embryos. IFNT promoters contain an
Ets-2 enhancer, located at -79 to -70, and are up-regulated about 20-fold by the 
overexpression of Ets-2 in human JAr choriocarcinoma cells, which are permissive 
for IFNT expression. This enhancement was reversed in a dose-dependent manner by 
coexpression of Oct-4 but not either Oct-1 or Oct-2. When cells were transfected 
with truncated bovine IFNT promoters designed to eliminate potential octamer
sites sequentially, luciferase reporter expression from each construct was still 
silenced by Oct-4. Full repression required both the N-terminal and POU domains
of Oct-4, but neither domain used alone was an effective silencer. Oct-4 and
Ets-2 formed a complex in vitro in the absence of DNA through binding of the POU 
domain of Oct-4 to a site located between the "pointed" and DNA binding domains
of Ets-2. The two transcription factors were also coimmunoprecipitated after
being expressed together in JAr cells. Oct-4, therefore, silences IFNT promoters 
by quenching Ets-2 transactivation. The POU domain most probably binds to Ets-2
directly, while the N-terminal domain inhibits transcription. These findings
provide further evidence that the developmental switch to the trophectoderm is
accompanied by the loss of Oct-4 silencing of key genes.

PMCID: PMC99954
PMID: 11689681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Mol Genet Genomics. 2001 Oct;266(2):239-45.

Tissue-specific isoforms of the ubiquitous transcription factor Oct-1.

Pankratova EV(1), Deyev IE, Zhenilo SV, Polanovsky OL.

Author information: 
(1)Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences,
Moscow.

The ubiquitously expressed transcription factor Oct-1 is a member of the POU
protein family. It is involved in the activation of snRNA promoters and some mRNA
promoters (e.g., promoters and enhancers of genes for histone H2B and
immunoglobulins). In this work we have cloned and sequenced a new Oct-1 isoform, 
named Oct-1L. Both Oct-1L mRNA and Oct-1R mRNA (cloned earlier) are expressed in 
lymphocytes, but not in any other cell line tested. This is the first report of
tissue-specific Oct-1 gene expression. Both these forms differ from the
ubiquitously expressed Oct-1 isoforms in the N-termini. They are probably
generated by alternative splicing and/or alternative initiation of transcription.
The latter is confirmed by the localization of transcription start points
upstream of exons 1L (lymphocyte-specific) and IU (ubiquitously expressed). We
assume that tissue-specific expression of Oct-1L and Oct-1R in lymphocytes and
their structural differences from the ubiquitously expressed Oct-1 isoforms may
be related to B and T cell differentiation and/or expression of the
immunoglobulin genes.

PMID: 11683265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Virus Res. 2001 Dec 4;81(1-2):1-16.

Cellular and early viral factors in the interaction of adenovirus type 12 with
hamster cells: the abortive response.

Hösel M(1), Schröer J, Webb D, Jaroshevskaja E, Doerfler W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, Weyertal 121, D-50931, Koeln,
Germany.

The interaction of human adenovirus type 12 (Ad12) with Syrian hamster cells is
remarkable in that there is a block of viral DNA replication and late gene
transcription. We have screened several cellular factors known to play a role in 
adenovirus replication for their possible contributions to the interactions of
Ad12 in the abortive BHK21 hamster cell system. (1) Western blot analyses of
total protein extracts from Ad12- or Ad2-infected BHK21 cells do not reveal a
significant difference in the accumulation of NFIII protein at different times
after infection. Transcriptional levels of the NFIII gene in BHK21 cells are not 
altered upon the abortive infection with Ad12 or the productive infection with
Ad2. The amount of NFIII protein is markedly reduced in nuclear extracts from
BHK21 cells as compared with extracts from C131 hamster cells or human HeLa
cells. A presumptive defect in NFIII transport to the nuclei rather than overall 
reduced NFIII gene transcription might explain the low abundance of NFIII in the 
nuclei of uninfected or Ad12-infected BHK21 cells. The productive infection of
BHK21 or C131 cells with Ad2 leads to an increase in the NFIII concentration in
the nuclei of infected cells, late after infection to a decrease; (2) NFI levels 
in the nuclei of mock-infected or Ad2- or Ad12-infected BHK21 cells are
comparable with those in HeLa or in C131 cells. Thus, deficiencies in NFI may not
play a role in the abortive system; (3) The absence of morphological alterations 
in PML protein domains from globular to track-like structures in the nuclei of
Ad12-infected hamster cells correlates with the inability of Ad12 DNA to
replicate in BHK21 cells. In BHK21 cells, the E4-ORF3 of Ad12 DNA is only weakly 
transcribed and only small amounts of the gene product are synthesized. In
Ad12-infected C131 cells, which allow the replication of Ad12 DNA, the E4-ORF3 of
Ad12 DNA is expressed, and track-like PML protein structures are observed.
Transfection of the 12-E4-ORF3-EGFP construct leads to the expression of both the
green fluorescent protein (GFP) and of the 12-E4-ORF3 gene product in 20-30% of
the transfected BHK21 cells and elicits the morphological reorganization of the
PML protein structures in the successfully transfected BHK21 cells. Similar
results are obtained upon transfection of the 2-E4-ORF3 construct. Untransfected 
cells or cells transfected with the empty pIRES2-pEGFP vector carry the globular 
PML protein phenotype; (4) The expression of the 12-E4-ORF3-EGFP and/or of the
NFIII-EGFP constructs upon transfection following Ad12-infection of BHK21 cells
fails to promote Ad12 DNA replication. Hence, the formation of track-like PML
protein structures in BHK21 cells by itself is not a sufficient precondition for 
Ad12 DNA replication in this abortive system. The data demonstrate that the
expression of NFI, NFIII, and/or the conversion of the PML domains do not suffice
to elicit Ad12 DNA replication in the abortive hamster cell system.

PMID: 11682120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2001 Sep-Oct;35(5):816-23.

[Subforms of transcription factor Oct-1 synthesized in lymphocytes].

[Article in Russian]

Pankratova EV, Deev IE, Zhenilo SV, Anfalova TV, Polianovskii OL.

Transcription factor Oct-1 is ubiquitous, participating in expression of the cell
housekeeping genes as well as in differentiation of lymphocytes and activation of
transcription of immunoglobulin genes in B cells. A new tissue-specific form of
Oct-1 (Oct-1L) was found in lymphoid cells of bone marrow, lymph nodes, spleen,
thymus, as well as in the cell lines of B and T lymphocytes at different stages
of differentiation. This isoform was not found in embryonal and nonlymphoid
tissues and cell lines. The complete structure of the oct-1L mRNA was determined,
which generally corresponds to the structure of mouse Oct-1b. The difference
between oct-1L and isoforms oct-a, b, and c functioning in all cells is
replacement of the long first 5'-terminal exon (the 1U exon) encoding 21 amino
acid residues with a short one encoding 10 amino acids in the isoforms Oct-1L and
Oct-1R. Interestingly, attempts to find mature oct-1 mRNA simultaneously
containing the 1L and 1U exons were unsuccessful. The parallel synthesis of
"ubiquitous" isoforms Oct-1a, b, and c as well as tissue-specific Oct-1L and
Oct-1R in lymphocytes and their precursors may be due either to a high demand of 
these cells for Oct-1 or to selective participation of different Oct-1 isoforms
in regulation of the housekeeping genes and genes involved in the B and T cell
differentiation and synthesis of imminoglobulins.

PMID: 11605534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2001 Oct;21(10):1585-91.

Increased transcription of IL-8 in endothelial cells is differentially regulated 
by TNF-alpha and oxidized phospholipids.

Yeh M(1), Leitinger N, de Martin R, Onai N, Matsushima K, Vora DK, Berliner JA,
Reddy ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Division of Cardiology, University of California, Los
Angeles, USA.

Oxidized 1-palmitoyl-2-arachidonoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphorylcholine (Ox-PAPC)
upregulates a spectrum of inflammatory cytokines and adhesion molecules different
from those induced by classic inflammatory mediators such as tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) or lipopolysaccharide. Interestingly, Ox-PAPC also
induces the expression of a set of proteins similar to those induced by TNF-alpha
or lipopolysaccharide, which include the chemokines monocyte chemotactic
protein-1 (MCP-1) and interleukin (IL)-8. To elucidate the molecular mechanisms
of Ox-PAPC-induced gene expression and to determine whether Ox-PAPC and other
inflammatory mediators such as TNF-alpha utilize common signaling pathways, we
examined the transcriptional regulation of IL-8 by Ox-PAPC and TNF-alpha in human
aortic endothelial cells. Both Ox-PAPC and TNF-alpha induced the expression of
IL-8 mRNA in a dose-dependent fashion; however, the kinetics of IL-8 mRNA
accumulation between the 2 ligands differed. Ox-PAPC-induced IL-8 mRNA was seen
as early as 30 minutes, peaked between 4 and 8 hours, and decreased substantially
by 24 hours. In contrast, TNF-alpha-induced IL-8 mRNA synthesis was elevated at
30 minutes, peaked at 2 hours, and reached basal/undetectable levels by 6 hours. 
Actinomycin D experiments suggested that both Ox-PAPC and TNF-alpha regulate the 
expression of IL-8 at the transcriptional level. Furthermore, the half-life of
IL-8 mRNA for both ligands was similar (<30 minutes), suggesting that mRNA
stability was not responsible for the differences in the kinetics of IL-8
accumulation between the 2 ligands. Transient transfection studies with reporter 
constructs containing 1.48 kb of the IL-8 promoter identified an Ox-PAPC-specific
response region between -133 and -1481 bp of the IL-8 promoter. In contrast,
TNF-alpha activation of the IL-8 promoter was mediated almost entirely through
the nuclear factor-kappaB and activation protein-1 response elements present
between -70 and -133 bp of the IL-8 promoter. Thus, although Ox-PAPC and
TNF-alpha both induced IL-8 synthesis, our data suggest that the 2 ligands
utilize different mechanisms in the regulation of IL-8 transcription.

PMID: 11597930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Cancer Lett. 2001 Oct 30;172(2):165-70.

Modification of octamer binding transcriptional factor is related to H2B histone 
gene repression during dimethyl sulfoxide-dependent differentiation of HL-60
cells.

Lee MS(1), Son MY, Park JI, Park C, Lee YC, Son CB, Kim YS, Paik SG, Yoon WH,
Park SK, Hwang BD, Lim K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food & Nutrition, Chungnam National University, 305-764,
Daejeon, South Korea.

Transcriptional regulation of H2B histone gene during dimethyl sulfoxide
(DMSO)-dependent differentiation of HL-60 cells has been investigated using DNase
I footprinting and DNA mobility shift assay. The level of histone H2B mRNA showed
a slight decline at 2 days and hardly detectable at 4 days after DMSO treatment. 
H2B histone mRNA was repressed in proportion to the concentration of DMSO. In
DNase I footprinting analysis, one nuclear factor (octamer binding transcription 
factor, OTF) bound at -42 bp (octamer motif, ATTTGCAT) in undifferentiated HL-60 
cells. The binding pattern of OTF was unchanged during DMSO-dependent
differentiation. One protein complex (OTF) was detected by DNA mobility shift
assay in undifferentiated HL-60 cells. The mobility of OTF was partially retarded
during DMSO-dependent differentiation and the retardant OTF was not newly
synthesized protein. These results suggest that the posttranslational
modification of OTF may be responsible for the repression of H2B histone gene
during DMSO-dependent differentiation of HL-60 cells.

PMID: 11566492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Immunol. 2001 Sep 15;167(6):3257-65.

HS1,2 enhancer regulation of germline epsilon and gamma2b promoters in murine B
lymphocytes: evidence for specific promoter-enhancer interactions.

Laurencikiene J(1), Deveikaite V, Severinson E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden. Jurga.Laurencikiene@cmb.ki.se

During an immune response, activated B cells develop into high rate Ig-secreting 
plasma cells. They also switch from production of IgM to IgG, IgA, or IgE. This
process requires a DNA recombination event, which is regulated at the
transcriptional level by the production of isotype-specific, sterile germline
(GL) transcripts. Induction of these transcripts is controlled by GL promoters
and, possibly, by IgH 3' enhancers. We investigated the interaction of the GL
epsilon and gamma2b promoters with the HS1,2 enhancer using transiently
transfected mouse primary B cells and cell lines. The constructs used for the
transfections contained a GL promoter upstream and HS1,2 downstream of a
luciferase reporter gene. Both GL epsilon and gamma2b promoters synergized
strongly with the HS1,2 enhancer in activated primary B cells, a mature B cell
line, and a plasma cell line. We show that the major activity of HS1,2 in
activated primary B cells occurs within a 310-bp fragment that includes
NF-kappaB, OCT, and NF of activated B cells (Ets/AP-1) sites. By mutating the
consensus sequences for various transcription factors, we have determined which
sites in HS1,2 are important for synergy with the GL epsilon and gamma2b
promoters. Our findings indicate that different sites in HS1,2 might selectively 
interact with the GL epsilon and gamma2b promoters. We also provide evidence that
B cell-specific activator protein is not an absolute suppressor of HS1,2
activity.

PMID: 11544313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Oct;21(19):6495-506.

Histone deacetylase activity represses gamma interferon-inducible HLA-DR gene
expression following the establishment of a DNase I-hypersensitive chromatin
conformation.

Osborne A(1), Zhang H, Yang WM, Seto E, Blanck G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, H. Lee 
Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, University of South Florida, Tampa,
Florida 33612, USA.

Expression of the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein (Rb) is required for
gamma interferon (IFN-gamma)-inducible major histocompatibility complex class II 
gene expression and transcriptionally productive HLA-DRA promoter occupancy in
several human tumor cell lines. Treatment of these Rb-defective tumor cell lines 
with histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors rescued IFN-gamma-inducible HLA-DRA
and -DRB mRNA and cell surface protein expression, demonstrating repression of
these genes by endogenous cellular HDAC activity. Additionally, Rb-defective,
transcriptionally incompetent tumor cells retained the HLA-DRA promoter DNase
I-hypersensitive site. Thus, HDAC-mediated repression of the HLA-DRA promoter
occurs following the establishment of an apparent nucleosome-free promoter region
and before transcriptionally productive occupancy of the promoter by the required
transactivators. Repression of HLA-DRA promoter activation by HDAC activity
likely involves a YY1 binding element located in the first exon of the HLA-DRA
gene. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments localized YY1 to the HLA-DRA gene
in Rb-defective tumor cells. Additionally, mutation of the YY1 binding site
prevented repression of the promoter by HDAC1 and partially prevented activation 
of the promoter by trichostatin A. Mutation of the octamer element also
significantly reduced the ability of HDAC1 to confer repression of inducible
HLA-DRA promoter activation. Treatment of Rb-defective tumor cells with HDAC
inhibitors greatly reduced the DNA binding activity of Oct-1, a repressor of
inducible HLA-DRA promoter activation. These findings represent the first
evidence that HDAC activity can repress IFN-gamma-inducible HLA class II gene
expression and also demonstrate that HDAC activity can contribute to promoter
repression following the establishment of a DNase I-hypersensitive chromatin
conformation.

PMCID: PMC99796
PMID: 11533238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Exp Cell Res. 2001 Sep 10;269(1):64-72.

Involvement of the MAP kinase pathways in induction of GADD45 following UV
radiation.

Tong T(1), Fan W, Zhao H, Jin S, Fan F, Blanck P, Alomo I, Rajasekaran B, Liu Y, 
Holbrook NJ, Zhan Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

The p53-regulated stress-inducible gene GADD45 has been shown to participate in
cellular response to DNA damage, including cell cycle checkpoint, apoptosis, and 
DNA repair. However, the regulation of GADD45 expression is complex and may
involve both p53-dependent and -independent pathways. Recent findings have
demonstrated that the p53-independent induction of GADD45 is mainly regulated by 
the transcription factors Oct-1 and NF-YA, which directly bind to their consensus
motifs located at the GADD45 promoter region. Here, we report that
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases are involved in the induction of the
GADD45 promoter after DNA damage. Inhibition of JNK1 and ERK kinase activities
either by expression of the dominant negative mutant JNK1 or by treatment with a 
selective chemical inhibitor of ERK (PD098059) substantially abrogates the UV
induction of the GADD45 promoter. In contrast, a p38 kinase inhibitor (SB203580) 
has little effect on GADD45 induction by UV. In addition, the GADD45 promoter is 
strongly activated following expression of JNK1; Raf-1, which is an upstream
activator of the ERK pathway; or MEK1, an upstream activator of both the ERK and 
the JNK pathways. Activation of the GADD45 promoter by MAP kinases does not
require normal p53 function. Interestingly, the MAP kinase-regulatory effect
appears to be mediated via OCT-1 and CAAT motifs since disruption of these sites 
abrogates activation of the GADD45 promoter by MAP kinases. Therefore, these
findings indicate that the MAP kinase pathways are involved in the regulation of 
the p53-independent induction of the GADD45 promoter, probably via interaction
with transcription factors that directly bind to OCT-1 and CAAT motifs.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11525640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Mol Cell. 2001 Mar;7(3):539-49.

A positioned nucleosome on the human U6 promoter allows recruitment of SNAPc by
the Oct-1 POU domain.

Zhao X(1), Pendergrast PS, Hernandez N.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Cold Spring Harbor, New York 11724, USA.

The human snRNA promoters contain a proximal sequence element (PSE) required for 
basal transcription and a distal sequence element (DSE) required for activated
transcription. The PSE recruits the multisubunit factor SNAPc, whereas the DSE
recruits Oct-1. Oct-1 and SNAPc bind cooperatively to DNA when their respective
binding sites are moved into proximity through a mechanism that involves a
defined protein-protein contact. Here, we show that on the natural U6 promoter,
cooperative binding of Oct-1 and SNAPc is mediated by a positioned nucleosome
that resides between the DSE and the PSE. This cooperative binding requires the
same protein-protein contact as cooperative binding to closely spaced sites on
naked DNA and mediates transcription activation.

PMID: 11463379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Virol. 2001 Aug;75(15):6894-900.

Octamer-binding sequence is a key element for the autoregulation of Kaposi's
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus ORF50/Lyta gene expression.

Sakakibara S(1), Ueda K, Chen J, Okuno T, Yamanishi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Osaka University Medical School, Suita, Osaka
565-0871, Japan.

The expression of the Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) open reading
frame 50 (ORF50) protein, Lyta (lytic transactivator), marks the switch from
latent KSHV infection to the lytic phase. ORF50/Lyta upregulates several target
KSHV genes, such as K8 (K-bZip), K9 (vIRF1), and ORF57, finally leading to the
production of mature viruses. The auto-upregulation of ORF50/Lyta is thought to
be an important mechanism for efficient lytic viral replication. In this study,
we focused on this autoregulation and identified the promoter element required
for it. An electrophoretic mobility shift assay indicated that the
octamer-binding protein 1 (Oct-1) bound to this element. Mutations in the
octamer-binding motif resulted in refractoriness of the ORF50/Lyta promoter to
transactivation by ORF50/Lyta, and Oct-1 expression enhanced this
transactivation. These results suggest that the autoregulation of ORF50/Lyta is
mediated by Oct-1.

PMCID: PMC114417
PMID: 11435569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Cell Growth Differ. 2001 Jun;12(6):327-35.

Varying functions of specific major histocompatibility class II transactivator
promoter III and IV elements in melanoma cell lines.

Goodwin BL(1), Xi H, Tejiram R, Eason DD, Ghosh N, Wright KL, Nagarajan U, Boss
JM, Blanck G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine and
Immunology Program, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute,
University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida 33612, USA.

Melanoma cells commonly express MHC class II molecules constitutively. This is a 
rare, or possibly unique, phenotype for a nonprofessional antigen-presenting
cell, where MHC class II expression ordinarily occurs only after IFN-gamma
treatment. Despite the fact that constitutive expression of MHC class II on
melanoma cells has been observed for decades and that the regulation of the MHC
class II genes is well understood for many different cell types, there is no data
regarding the basis for constitutive MHC class II expression in melanoma cells.
Here we report that MHC class II expression in melanoma cells can be traced to
constitutive expression of the class II transactivator protein (CIITA), which
mediates both IFN-gamma-inducible and -constitutive MHC class II expression in
all other cell types. In addition, we determined that constitutive CIITA
expression is the result of the activation of both the B cell-specific CIITA
promoter III and the IFN-gamma-inducible CIITA promoter IV, the latter of which
previously has never been known to function as a constitutive promoter in any
cell type. The recently described B cell-related ARE-1 activity is important for 
promoter III activation in the melanoma cells. Constitutive promoter IV
activation involves the IFN regulatory factor element (IRF-E), which binds
members of the IRF family of proteins, although the major, IFN-gamma inducible
member of this family, IRF-1, is not constitutively expressed in these cells. In 
cells with constitutively active promoter IV, the promoter IV IRF-E is most
likely activated by IRF-2. The relevance of these results to the pathway of
melanoma development is discussed.

PMID: 11432807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Oncogene. 2001 May 10;20(21):2683-90.

Transcription factors Oct-1 and NF-YA regulate the p53-independent induction of
the GADD45 following DNA damage.

Jin S(1), Fan F, Fan W, Zhao H, Tong T, Blanck P, Alomo I, Rajasekaran B, Zhan Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Cancer Institute, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, PA 15213, USA.

The p53-regulated GADD45 gene is one of the important players in cellular
response to DNA damage, and probably involved in the control of cell cycle
checkpoint, apoptosis and DNA repair. There are both the p53-dependent and
-independent pathways that regulate GADD45 induction. Following ionizing
radiation, induction of the GADD45 gene is regulated by p53 through the
p53-binding motif located in the third intron of the GADD45 gene. In contrast,
GADD45 induction by methyl methanesulfonate (MMS), UV radiation (UV), and medium 
starvation is independent of p53 status although p53 may contribute to these
responses. However, the regulatory elements that control the p53-independent
induction of GADD45 remain uncertain. In this report, we have performed detailed 
analyses to characterize the responsive components that are required for the
induction of the GADD45 promoter. We have found that the region between -107 and 
-62 of the GADD45 promoter is crucial for the induction. Sequence analysis
indicates that there are two OCT-1 sites and one CAAT box located in this region.
Site-directed mutations of both OCT-1 and CAAT motifs substantially abrogate the 
induction of the GADD45 promoter by DNA damage. In addition, both Oct-1 protein
(binding to OCT-1 site) and NF-YA protein (binding to CAAT box) are induced after
cell exposure to DNA damaging agents. Moreover, the Electrophoretic Mobility
Shift Assay (EMSA) has demonstrated the direct bindings of Oct-1 and NF-YA
proteins to their consensus sequences in the GADD45 promoter. Therefore, these
results have presented the novel observation that transcription factors Oct-1 and
NF-YA participate in the cellular response to DNA damage and are involved in the 
regulation of stress-inducible genes.

PMID: 11420680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Jun;86(6):2838-44.

The POU homeodomain protein Oct-1 binds Cis-regulatory element essential for the 
human GnRH upstream promoter activity in JEG-3 cells.

Dong KW(1), Zheng HM, Wen ZY, Chen ZG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Jones Institute for Reproductive
Medicine, Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, Virginia 23507, USA.
DONGKW@EVMS.EDU

In previous studies, we have localized four specific nuclear protein-binding
elements in the human GnRH upstream promoter. To test whether these four elements
are reproductive tissue specific, we placed the four elements upstream to a
thymidine kinase (TK) promoter/luciferase reporter gene, and transfected the
constructs into human placental choriocarcinoma (JEG-3) cells. The 272-bp
fragment (-994 to -723) containing the four elements can drive heterologous TK
promoter expression in JEG-3 cells about 15 times more than that of basal TK
promoter activity. Deletion of element 4 (E4, -987/-968) significantly decreased 
(4-fold) the luciferase activity. Further deletion of the other elements (E3
individual, -960/-940 or E3 and E2 in combination, -919/-896) only slightly
decreased the luciferase activity. In contrast, deletion of element 1 (E1,
-876/-851) caused a 2-fold loss of luciferase activity and elimination of E2 and 
E3 only lost less than 2-fold of the luciferase activity. Study performed with 5'
end deletion of this region confirmed these observations. Furthermore, E4
DNA-protein complex can be supershifted by Oct-1 antibody, indicating that Oct-1 
binds to E4. These results clearly demonstrated that all four elements are
required to confer tissue-specific expression of the hGnRH gene in JEG-3 cells.
However, the E4 is the most important for the tissue-specific expression of the
hGnRH gene in JEG-3 cells. Oct-1 factor binds with E4 element and may be involved
in the mediation of the human GnRH upstream promoter activity.

PMID: 11397896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Biochemistry. 2001 Jun 5;40(22):6580-8.

Expression of the Oct-1 transcription factor and characterization of its
interactions with the Bob1 coactivator.

Lee L(1), Stollar E, Chang J, Grossmann JG, O'Brien R, Ladbury J, Carpenter B,
Roberts S, Luisi B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Cambridge University, 80 Tennis Court Road,
Cambridge CB2 1GA, UK.

Erratum in
    Biochemistry 2001 Jul 27;40(28):8430.

The Oct-1 transcription factor regulates a variety of tissue-specific and general
housekeeping genes by recruiting specialized coactivators of transcription. It
acts synergistically with the B-cell-specific coactivator Bob1 (OCA-B, OBF-1) to 
stimulate transcription of immunoglobulin genes. To analyze Oct-1's interactions 
with Bob1 and other regulatory proteins, we have overexpressed and purified
different functional domains of the recombinant proteins. A version of Oct-1 that
encompasses the amino-terminal activation region and the POU DNA-binding domain
was extensively characterized (OctDeltaC1; comprising residues 1-445). Using an
in vitro transcription assay, we demonstrate that this fragment is sufficient and
necessary to stimulate transcription from an immunoglobulin promoter with Bob1.
It also coactivates from the herpes simplex virus ICPO promoter element in the
presence of VP16. Using a range of spectroscopic and biophysical techniques, we
demonstrate that the activation domains of Oct-1 and Bob1 have little globular
structure and that they do not physically interact. Thus, their functional
synergy is likely to arise by the co-recruitment of common factors as part of a
larger regulatory assembly. We propose a hypothesis to explain why the activation
domains of these and other transcription factors of metazoans have little if any 
intrinsic structure.

PMID: 11380252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Genes Immun. 2001 Apr;2(2):105-9.

Allele-specific binding of the ubiquitous transcription factor OCT-1 to the
functional single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) sites in the tumor necrosis
factor-alpha gene (TNFA) promoter.

Hohjoh H(1), Tokunaga K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Graduate School of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Japan. hohjohh@m.u-tokyo.ac.jp

The tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNFA) is characterized by several single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in its promoter region. Interestingly some of
these SNPs appear to influence TNFA expression and susceptibility to various
human diseases, but the molecular mechanisms by which such possibly functional
SNPs modulate TNFA expression are poorly understood. In this study we show
allele-specific binding of the ubiquitous transcription factor OCT-1 to the SNP
sites at positions -863 and -857 in the promoter, which appear to affect TNFA
expression: the protein was associated with variant allele possessing either
-863A or -857T, but rarely with the common allele (-863C and -857C). The evidence
presented here, therefore, suggests the possibility that OCT-1 could contribute
to the modulation of TNFA expression by means of its allele-specific binding
manner.

PMID: 11393654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Eur J Immunol. 2001 Jun;31(6):1696-705.

A conserved sequence block in the murine and human T cell receptor Jalpha loci
interacts with developmentally regulated nucleoprotein complexes in vitro and
associates with GATA-3 and octamer-binding factors in vivo.

Chen ML(1), Kuo CL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemical Sciences, College of Science, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.

A highly conserved sequence block (CSB) located in the mouse and human T cell
receptor (TCR) Jalpha loci is recognized by tissue-specific factors and
up-regulates TCR alpha enhancer activity. In this study, the properties of
CSB-interacting factors were further explored to decipher the function of this
cis-acting element. Thymocytes corresponding to different developmental stages
were found capable of forming differential CSB-nucleoprotein complexes.
Pronounced changes in the CSB-complex-forming activity were observed during the
transition from double-negative to double-positive thymocytes. Furthermore, we
showed that transcription factors Oct-1, Oct-2 and GATA-3 interacted with CSB
both in vitro, as evidenced by electrophoretic mobility shift assays, and in
vivo, as demonstrated by chromatin immunoprecipitation assays in mouse thymus.
Importantly, we also demonstrated that GATA-3 associated in vivo with TCR alpha
enhancer, the activity of which is known to be required in regulating chromatin
accessibility to the V(D)J recombinase. Thus, CSB may temporally regulate local
chromatin structure and help to spread TCR alpha enhancer activity over the
entire 70-kb Jalpha locus by forming developmentally regulated CSB-nucleoprotein 
complexes and by interacting with other cis-regulatory element-nucleoprotein
complexes present within the TCR alpha / delta locus.

PMID: 11385613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 3;276(31):28933-8. Epub 2001 May 30.

Inhibition of LZIP-mediated transcription through direct interaction with a novel
host cell factor-like protein.

Zhou HJ(1), Wong CM, Chen JH, Qiang BQ, Yuan JG, Jin DY.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100005, China.

Host cell factor 1 (HCF-1) is a cellular transcriptional coactivator which
coordinates the assembly of enhancer complex through direct interactions with
viral and cellular trans-activators such as VP16, Oct-1, LZIP, and GA-binding
protein. These interactions are mediated by the beta-propeller domain comprising 
the first 380 residues of HCF-1 with six kelch repeats. Here we describe the
identification and characterization of a novel HCF-like kelch repeat protein,
designated HCLP-1. HCLP-1 is a ubiquitously expressed nuclear protein which is
composed almost entirely of a six-bladed beta-propeller. HCLP-1 selectively
interacts with LZIP but not with VP16. The physical interaction between HCLP-1
and LZIP leads to the repression of the LZIP-dependent transcription. The
HCLP-1-binding domain of LZIP maps to residues 109-315, which contain the bZIP
DNA-binding motif. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay demonstrates that HCLP-1 
indeed interferes with the binding of LZIP to its DNA target. Thus, HCLP-1 serves
a transcriptional co-repressor function mediated through its inhibitory
interaction with the LZIP transcription factor. Our findings suggest a new
mechanism for transcriptional regulation by HCF-like proteins.

PMID: 11384994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 10;276(32):30542-51. Epub 2001 May 24.

The core promoter of human thioredoxin reductase 1: cloning, transcriptional
activity, and Oct-1, Sp1, and Sp3 binding reveal a housekeeping-type promoter for
the AU-rich element-regulated gene.

Rundlöf AK(1), Carlsten M, Arnér ES.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Nobel Institute for Biochemistry, Department of Medical Biochemistry
and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, SE-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

The selenoprotein thioredoxin reductase 1 (TrxR1) carries many vital antioxidant 
and redox regulatory functions. Its mRNA levels are known to be
post-transcriptionally modulated via AUUUA motifs (AU-rich elements (AREs)), but 
the promoter yet remains unknown. Here we have cloned and determined the sequence
of a 0.8-kilobase pair human genomic fragment containing the proximal promoter
for TrxR1, which has transcriptional activity in several different cell types.
The core promoter (-115 to +167) had an increased GC content and lacked TATA or
CCAAT boxes. It contained a POU motif binding the Oct-1 transcription factor and 
two sites binding Sp1 and Sp3, which were identified with electrophoretic
mobility shift assays using crude nuclear extracts of A549 cells. The TrxR1
promoter fulfills the typical criteria of a housekeeping gene. To our knowledge
this is the first housekeeping-type promoter characterized for a gene with
post-transcriptional regulation via ARE motifs generally possessed by transiently
expressed proto-oncogenes, nuclear transcription factors, or cytokines and
influencing mRNA stability in response to diverse exogenous factors. Expression
of TrxR1 as an ARE-regulated housekeeping gene agrees with a role for the enzyme 
to maintain a balance between intracellular signaling via reactive oxygen species
and protection of cells from excessive oxidative damage.

PMID: 11375392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Jun 1;284(1):211-8.

VIP gene transcription is regulated by far upstream enhancer and repressor
elements.

Liu D(1), Krajniak K, Chun D, Sena M, Casillas R, Lelièvre V, Nguyen T, Bravo D, 
Colburn S, Waschek JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Mental Retardation Research Center, University of
California at Los Angeles, 760 Westwood Plaza, Room 68-225 NPI, Los Angeles,
California, 90024-1759

SK-N-SH human neuroblastoma subclones differ widely in basal and second messenger
induction of the gene encoding the neuropeptide vasoactive intestinal peptide
(VIP). These differences were recapitulated by a chimeric gene which consisted of
5.2 kb of the human VIP gene 5' flanking sequence fused to a reporter. Subsequent
gene deletion experiments revealed several regulatory regions on the gene,
including a 645-bp sequence located approximately 4.0 upstream from the
transcription start site. Here we examined this upstream region in detail.
Inhibitory sequences were found to be present on each end of the 645-bp fragment.
When removed, basal transcription increased more than 50-fold. Subsequent
deletion/mutation analysis showed that the 213-bp fragment contained at least two
enhancer elements. One of these was localized to an AT-rich 42-bp sequence shown 
by others to bind Oct proteins in neuroblastoma cells, while the other
corresponded to a composite AP-1/ets element. In addition to these enhancers, a
28-bp sequence on the 213-bp fragment with no apparent homology to known
silencers inhibited transcription. The studies provide molecular details of a
complex regulatory region on the VIP gene that is likely to be used to finely
tune the level of gene transcription in vivo.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11374892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Gen Virol. 2001 Jun;82(Pt 6):1473-80.

Cellular transcription factors that interact with p6 promoter elements of
parvovirus B19.

Raab U(1), Bauer B, Gigler A, Beckenlehner K, Wolf H, Modrow S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Medizinische Mikrobiologie und Hygiene, Universität Regensburg,
Franz-Josef-Strauss-Allee 11, D-93053 Regensburg, Germany.

All transcripts of the human parvovirus B19 identified so far are regulated by a 
single promoter at map unit 6 of the viral genome, the so-called p6 promoter.
This promoter is active in a wide variety of different cells. In order to
identify cellular transcription factors involved in regulating promoter activity,
we performed gel-retardation and supershift assays using the parts of the p6
promoter sequence shown previously to be protected in footprint experiments.
Thereby, binding was demonstrated of the Oct-1 protein to an octamer motif within
the p6 promoter and of the transcription factor Sp1 to three GC boxes. A specific
preferential interaction of the factor Sp3 with one of these boxes was observed, 
indicating that the ratio Sp1:Sp3 may be involved in the regulation of promoter
activity. Consensus sites for the regulatory protein YY1 are located close to the
GC boxes and the octamer motif, to which this factor binds efficiently.

PMID: 11369893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Biochemistry. 2001 May 15;40(19):5786-94.

Developmental and cell-cycle regulation of Caenorhabditis elegans HCF
phosphorylation.

Wysocka J(1), Liu Y, Kobayashi R, Herr W.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York 11724, USA.

HCF-1 is a mammalian protein required for cell proliferation. It is also involved
in transcriptional activation of herpes-simplex-virus immediate-early gene
transcription in association with the viral transactivator VP16. HCF-1 and a
related protein called HCF-2 possess a homologue in Caenorhabditis elegans that
can associate with and activate VP16. Here, we demonstrate developmental
regulation of C. elegans HCF (CeHCF) phosphorylation: a hyperphosphorylated form 
of CeHCF is present in embryos, whereas a hypophosphorylated form is present in
L1 larvae. The phosphorylation patterns of endogenous CeHCF in worms and
ectopically synthesized CeHCF in mammalian cells are remarkably similar,
suggesting that the way CeHCF can be recognized by kinases is conserved in
animals. Phosphorylation-site mapping of endogenous CeHCF, however, revealed that
phosphorylation occurs at four clustered sites in the region of the protein that 
is not highly conserved among HCF proteins and is not required for VP16-induced
complex formation. Indeed, phosphorylation of either CeHCF or human HCF-1 appears
to be dispensable for association with VP16. All four CeHCF phosphorylation sites
match the consensus recognition site for the cell-cycle kinases CDC2 and CDK2.
Consistent with this similarity and with the developmental phosphorylation of
CeHCF in C. elegans embryos, CeHCF phosphorylation is cell-cycle-regulated in
mammalian cells.

PMID: 11341844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Jun;21(11):3820-9.

Loss of HCF-1-chromatin association precedes temperature-induced growth arrest of
tsBN67 cells.

Wysocka J(1), Reilly PT, Herr W.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York 11724, USA.

Human HCF-1 is a large, highly conserved, and abundant nuclear protein that plays
an important but unknown role in cell proliferation. It also plays a role in
activation of herpes simplex virus immediate-early gene transcription by the
viral regulatory protein VP16. A single proline-to-serine substitution in the
HCF-1 VP16 interaction domain causes a temperature-induced arrest of cell
proliferation in hamster tsBN67 cells and prevents transcriptional activation by 
VP16. We show here that HCF-1 is naturally bound to chromatin in uninfected cells
through its VP16 interaction domain. HCF-1 is chromatin bound in tsBN67 cells at 
permissive temperature but dissociates from chromatin before tsBN67 cells stop
proliferating at the nonpermissive temperature, suggesting that loss of HCF-1
chromatin association is the primary cause of the temperature-induced tsBN67 cell
proliferation arrest. We propose that the role of HCF-1 in cell proliferation is 
to regulate gene transcription by associating with a multiplicity of DNA-bound
transcription factors through its VP16 interaction domain.

PMCID: PMC87041
PMID: 11340173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J Biol Chem. 2001 May 4;276(18):14752-8. Epub 2001 Feb 6.

Pou homeodomain protein OCT1 is implicated in the expression of the
caudal-related homeobox gene Cdx-2.

Jin T(1), Li H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Toronto General Research Institute,
University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario M5G 2M1, Canada.
tianru.jin@utoront.ca

The caudal homeobox gene Cdx-2 is a transcriptional activator for approximately a
dozen genes specifically expressed in pancreatic islets and intestinal cells. It 
is also involved in preventing the development of colorectal tumors. Studies
using "knockout" approaches demonstrated that Cdx-2 is haplo-insufficient in
certain tissues including the intestines but not the pancreatic islets. The
mechanisms, especially transcription factors, which regulate Cdx-2 expression,
are virtually unknown. We found previously that Cdx-2 expression could be
autoregulated in a cell type-specific manner. In this study, we located an
octamer (OCT) binding site within the mouse Cdx-2 gene promoter. This site,
designated as Cdx-2(P)OCT, is involved in the expression of the Cdx-2 promoter.
Both pancreatic and intestinal cell lines were found to express a number of POU
(OCT binding) homeodomain proteins examined by electrophoretic mobility shift
assay. However, it appears that Cdx-2(P)OCT interacts only with OCT1 in the
nuclear extracts of the intestinal cell lines examined, although it interacts
with OCT1 and at least two other POU proteins that are to be identified in the
pancreatic InR1-G9 cell nuclear extract. Co-transfecting OCT1 cDNA but not five
other POU gene cDNAs activates the Cdx-2 promoter in the pancreatic InR1-G9 and
the intestinal Caco-2 cell lines. In contrast, Cdx-2(P)OCT cannot act as an
enhancer element if it is fused to a thymidine kinase promoter. Furthermore,
Cdx-2(P)OCT-thymidine kinase fusion promoters cannot be activated by OCT1
co-transfection. Cell type-specific expression, cell type-specific binding
affinity of POU proteins to the cis-element Cdx-2(P)OCT, and the DNA
content-dependent activation of Cdx-2 promoter via Cdx-2(P)OCT by OCT1 suggest
that POU proteins play important and complicated roles in modulating Cdx-2
expression in cell type-specific manners.

PMID: 11278400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Infect Immun. 2001 Apr;69(4):2470-6.

Down-regulation of interleukin-8 secretion from Mycobacterium
tuberculosis-infected monocytes by interleukin-4 and -10 but not by
interleukin-13.

Ameixa C(1), Friedland JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Imperial College of Science, Technology and
Medicine, Hammersmith Campus, London, United Kingdom.

Interleukin-8 (IL-8), a CXC chemokine, has a central role in leukocyte
recruitment to areas of granuloma formation in tuberculosis. In the present
studies, we investigated the effect of the T(H)2-derived cytokines IL-4, IL-10,
and IL-13 on Mycobacterium tuberculosis-induced IL-8 secretion from purified
human monocytes. Our results demonstrate that IL-4 and IL-10 have a
down-regulatory effect on IL-8 secretion and that this effect is dose dependent. 
IL-10 has a greater effect than IL-4 on secretion, and autologous IL-10 secreted 
from M. tuberculosis-infected monocytes also down-regulates IL-8 secretion. The
down-regulatory effect is partly a result of reduced IL-8 mRNA accumulation
analyzed by reverse transcription-PCR. When combined, 1 microM IL-4 and IL-10 had
an additive effect in decreasing IL-8 secretion and transcription; there was no
synergy of action. IL-13 did not have any significant effect on IL-8 gene
expression or secretion. The inhibitory effect of IL-10 but not of IL-4 is
associated with decreased nuclear binding of the key activating transcription
factor NF-kappaB. We show for the first time that M. tuberculosis causes
up-regulation of nuclear binding of Oct-1 detected by electromobility gel shift
assay. However, neither AP-1 nor Oct-1 nuclear binding was altered by IL-4 or
IL-10. In summary, this study demonstrates that type 2 responses have an
important role in the regulation of M. tuberculosis-induced IL-8 expression but
that the mechanisms by which the different cytokines act are distinct.

PMCID: PMC98181
PMID: 11254609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2001 Jan-Feb;35(1):34-41.

[Tissue-specific splicing of 5'-exons of the Oct-1 transcription factor gene].

[Article in Russian]

Pankratova EV, Deev IE, Polianovskii OL.

It has been shown that pro-mRNA of transcription factor Oct-1 undergoes the
tissue-specific splicing. The Oct-1L subform is synthesized in mouse lymphoid
myeloma cells NS/0 of the B series and is not found in other somatic and
embryonal cells. Initiation sites of oct-1R mRNA transcription are at positions
-159 and -307 from the AUG codon of the oct-1R exon. In both cases, no TATA box
was found in the region preceding these sites (25-30 bp). A different form of
oct-1 mRNA (oct-1U) was also found in NS/0 cells, which is probably synthesized
in all cell lines. This subform differs from oct-1R, in particular, by the
structure of the 5T-terminal exon, which is the result of alternative splicing.

PMID: 11234381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Cancer Res. 2001 Feb 1;61(3):1187-95.

Involvement of the Oct-1 regulatory element of the gadd45 promoter in the
p53-independent response to ultraviolet irradiation.

Takahashi S(1), Saito S, Ohtani N, Sakai T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine,
Japan. senyet@basic.kpu-m.ac.jp

The gadd45 gene, a growth arrest and DNA damage (gadd)-induced gene, is
transcriptionally activated by UV irradiation through two distinct pathways. One 
requires the sequence-specific binding of the p53 tumor suppressor protein to a
responsive element within the third intron of the gadd45 gene, and the other is
p53-independent activation of the gadd45 promoter region, although the
UV-response element that mediates this has yet to be defined. To investigate the 
sequences involved in induction of gadd45 by UV irradiation in a p53-independent 
pathway, we performed mutation analyses of the human gadd45 promoter fused to the
luciferase reporter gene in cell lines in which p53 was inactivated. We found
that the UV-responsive element was involved in the Oct-1 binding site at -99 bp
relative to the transcription start site. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays
showed that Oct-1, a transcription factor, bound this element on the gadd45 gene,
although the intensity and mobility pattern of the retarded bands were not
altered by UV irradiation. These results suggest that the Oct-1 regulatory
element might be one of the essential elements involved in the activation of the 
gadd45 promoter by UV irradiation in a p53-independent pathway.

PMID: 11221850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Mol Biol. 2000 Oct 6;302(5):1023-39.

The virtuoso of versatility: POU proteins that flex to fit.

Phillips K(1), Luisi B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
katheryn@cryst.bioc.cam.ac.uk

During the evolution of eukaryotes, a new structural motif arose by the fusion of
genes encoding two different types of DNA-binding domain. The family of
transcription factors which contain this domain, the POU proteins, have come to
play essential roles not only in the development of highly specialised tissues,
such as complex neuronal systems, but also in more general cellular housekeeping.
Members of the POU family recognise defined DNA sequences, and a well-studied
subset have specificity for a motif known as the octamer element which is found
in the promoter region of a variety of genes. The structurally bipartite POU
domain has intrinsic conformational flexibility and this feature appears to
confer functional diversity to this class of transcription factors. The POU
domain for which we have the most structural data is from Oct-1, which binds an
eight base-pair target and variants of this octamer site. The two-part
DNA-binding domain partially encircles the DNA, with the sub-domains able to
assume a variety of conformations, dependent on the DNA element. Crystallographic
and biochemical studies have shown that the binary complex provides distinct
platforms for the recruitment of specific regulators to control transcription.
The conformability of the POU domain in moulding to DNA elements and
co-regulators provides a mechanism for combinatorial assembly as well as
allosteric molecular recognition. We review here the structure and function of
the diverse POU proteins and discuss the role of the proteins' plasticity in
recognition and transcriptional regulation.

PMID: 11183772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Neuropeptides. 2000 Dec;34(6):348-54.

A role for Octamer binding protein motifs in the regulation of the proximal
preprotachykinin-A promoter.

Fiskerstrand CE(1), Newey P, McGregor GP, Gerrard L, Millan F, Quinn JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathology, University of Edinburgh, EH9 1QH.

We have recently developed cell line models that express the endogenous rat
preprotachykinin-A (rPPT) gene and support reporter gene expression directed by
the rPPT promoter. These are the neuronal derived cell line NF2C and the
pancreatic cell lines RINm5F and a derivative RIN-1027-B2. Reporter gene activity
in these cell lines is similar to that observed in primary cultures of rat dorsal
root ganglion neurons. Analysis of reporter gene expression supported by various 
fragments of the rPPT promoter demonstrated that although -865 to +92 supported
expression, addition of fragments between +92 and +500 led to repression of
expression. Two previously defined octamer binding motifs, present both 5' and 3'
of the major transcriptional start site, have been postulated to be potential
enhancers of rPPT activity and we have now used these cell lines to determine the
role of these regions in the rPPT promoter. Site specific mutagenesis of these
elements has shown not only that both sites are potential enhancers of gene
expression but also that the 3' element binds multiple factors, of which at least
one has repressor function. Binding of this repressor protein over or adjacent to
the 3' octamer binding protein site leads to the observed repression of promoter 
activity in the -865 to +500 construct relative to the to -865 to +92 the
fragment.

PMID: 11162291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Cell. 2000 Dec 8;103(6):853-64.

Synergism with the coactivator OBF-1 (OCA-B, BOB-1) is mediated by a specific POU
dimer configuration.

Tomilin A(1), Reményi A, Lins K, Bak H, Leidel S, Vriend G, Wilmanns M, Schöler
HR.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Animal Transgenesis and Germ Cells Research New Bolton Center
School of Veterinary Medicine Department of Animal Biology University of
Pennsylvania 19348, Kennett Square, PA, USA.

POU domain proteins contain a bipartite DNA binding domain divided by a flexible 
linker that enables them to adopt various monomer configurations on DNA. The
versatility of POU protein operation is additionally conferred at the
dimerization level. The POU dimer formed on the PORE (ATTTGAAATGCAAAT) can
recruit the transcriptional coactivator OBF-1, whereas POU dimers formed on the
consensus MORE (ATGCATATGCAT) or on MOREs from immunoglobulin heavy chain
promoters (AT[G/A][C/A]ATATGCAA) fail to interact. An interaction with OBF-1 is
precluded since the same Oct-1 residues that form the MORE dimerization interface
are also used for OBF-1/Oct-1 interactions on the PORE. Our findings provide a
paradigm of how specific POU dimer assemblies can differentially recruit a
coregulatory activity with distinct transcriptional readouts.

PMID: 11136971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Biochem. 2001 Jan;129(1):77-86.

Octamer binding protein-1 is involved in inhibition of inducible nitric oxide
synthase expression by exogenous nitric oxide in murine liver cells.

Lee BS(1), Kim YM, Kang HS, Kim HM, Pyun KH, Choi I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Yusong, Taejon 305-333, Korea.

Nitric oxide (NO) has diverse effects on immune responses and hepatic functions. 
In BNL CL.2 cells, the murine embryonic liver cells, inducible nitric oxide
synthase (iNOS) mRNA expression appeared after 3 h of treatment with IFN-gamma
and LPS. Interestingly, mRNA and protein expression of iNOS was down-regulated by
sodium nitroprusside (SNP) and diethylamine dinitric oxide in a time- and
dose-dependent manner, but not by H2O2. TNF-alpha gene expression was also
dramatically reduced by SNP, but IL-6 gene expression was inhibited much less.
IFN-gamma and LPS-induced chloramphenicol acetyltransferase activity of iNOS
promoter constructs was inhibited by SNP. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay
showed that SNP inhibited IFN-gamma plus LPS-induced Oct-1 binding activity, and 
the inhibition was reversed by DTT. Mutation in the Oct-1 site completely
abolished iNOS promoter activity. In addition, supershift assay and Southwestern 
analysis demonstrated that the Oct-1 binding activity was inhibited by SNP. Taken
together, these results indicate that NO suppresses IFN-gamma plus LPS-induced
iNOS expression, and that Oct-1 is an important element in this process.

PMID: 11134960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Oncogene. 2000 Nov 23;19(50):5801-9.

Transcriptional regulation of the human osteopontin promoter: functional analysis
and DNA-protein interactions.

Wang D(1), Yamamoto S, Hijiya N, Benveniste EN, Gladson CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Alabama at Birmingham, 35294, USA.

Synthesis of cell attachment proteins and cytokines, such as osteopontin (OPN),
can promote tumor cell remodeling of the extracellular matrix into an environment
that promotes tumor cell attachment and migration. We investigated the
transcriptional regulation of OPN in the U-251MG and U-87MG human malignant
astrocytoma cell lines. Deletion and mutagenesis analyses of the OPN promoter
region identified a proximal promoter element (-24 to -94 relative to the
transcription initiation site) that is essential for maintaining high levels of
OPN expression in the tumor cells. This element, designated RE-1, consists of two
cis-acting elements, RE-1a (-55 to -86) and RE-1b (-22 to -45), which act
synergistically to regulate the activity of the OPN promoter. Gel shift assays
using nuclear extracts of U-251MG cells demonstrated that RE-1a contains binding 
sites for transcription factors Sp1, the glucocorticoid receptor, and the
E-box-binding factors, whereas RE-1b contains a binding site for the octamer
motif-binding protein (OCT-1/OCT-2). Inclusion of antibodies directed toward Myc 
and OCT-1 in the gel shift assays indicated that Myc and OCT-1 participate in
forming DNA-protein complexes on the RE-1a and RE-1b elements, respectively. Our 
results identify two previously unrecognized elements in the OPN promoter that
act synergistically to promote upregulation of OPN synthesis by tumor cells but
are regulated by different transcription factors.

PMID: 11126367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Cancer Res. 2000 Nov 15;60(22):6276-80.

Activation of the transcription factor Oct-1 in response to DNA damage.

Zhao H(1), Jin S, Fan F, Fan W, Tong T, Zhan Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, University of
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

Mammalian cells exhibit complex cellular responses to genotoxic stress, including
cell cycle checkpoint, DNA repair, and apoptosis. Inactivation of these important
biological events will result in genomic instability and cell transformation. It 
has been demonstrated that gene activation is a critical initial step during the 
cellular response to DNA damage. A number of investigations have shown that
transcription factors are involved in the regulation of stress-inducible genes.
These transcription factors include p53, c-Myc, and AP-1 (c-fos and c-jun).
However, the role for the octamer-binding transcription factor Oct-1 in the DNA
damage-activated response is unknown. In this report, we have presented the novel
observation that the transcription factor Oct-1 is induced after cells are
exposed to multiple DNA-damaging agents and therapeutic agents, including UV
radiation, methylmethane sulfonate, ionizing radiation, etoposide, cisplatin, and
camptothecin. The induction of the Oct-1 protein is mediated through a
posttranscriptional mechanism and does not require the normal cellular function
of the tumor suppressor p53, indicating that the Oct-1 protein, as a
transcription factor, may play a role in p53-independent gene activation. In
addition to increased protein level, the activity of Oct-1 DNA binding to its
specific consensus sequence is also enhanced by DNA damage. Therefore, these
results have implicated that the transcription factor Oct-1 might participate in 
cellular response to DNA damage, particularly in p53-independent gene activation.

PMID: 11103783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Nov 11;278(1):134-9.

Genomic organization, chromosomal localization, and the complete 22 kb DNA
sequence of the human GCMa/GCM1, a placenta-specific transcription factor gene.

Yamada K(1), Ogawa H, Tamiya G, Ikeno M, Morita M, Asakawa S, Shimizu N, Okazaki 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Comprehensive Medical Science, Fujita Health University, School 
of Medicine, Toyoake, Aichi, Japan. kyamada@fujita-hu.ac.jp

The genomic sequence of the human GCMa/GCM1 gene, a mammalian homologue of
Drosophila melanogaster GCM, was determined. Drosophila GCM is a neural
transcription factor that regulates glial cell fate. The mammalian homolog
however, is a placenta-specific transcription factor that is necessary for
placental development. The 22 kb DNA sequence spanning the GCMa gene contains six
exons and five introns, encoding a 2.8 kb cDNA. Overall genomic organization is
similar for the human and mouse. Several potential binding sites for
transcription factors like GATA, Oct-1, and bHLH proteins were found in the
5'-flanking region of the human gene. A DNA motif for GCM protein binding exists 
in the 5'-flanking region that is highly homologous with that of the mouse gene. 
The location of this gene was mapped to chromosome 6 using fluorescence in situ
hybridization.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11071865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Immunol. 2000 Nov 15;165(10):5646-55.

Reconstitution of T cell-specific transcription directed by composite NFAT/Oct
elements.

Bert AG(1), Burrows J, Hawwari A, Vadas MA, Cockerill PN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Immunology, Hanson Centre For Cancer Research, Institute for
Medical and Veterinary Science, Adelaide, Australia.

The complex nature of most promoters and enhancers makes it difficult to identify
key determinants of tissue-specific gene expression. Furthermore, most
tissue-specific genes are regulated by transcription factors that have expression
profiles more widespread than the genes they control. NFAT is an example of a
widely expressed transcription factor that contributes to several distinct
patterns of cytokine gene expression within the immune system and where its role 
in directing specificity remains undefined. To investigate distinct combinatorial
mechanisms employed by NFAT to regulate tissue-specific transcription, we
examined a composite NFAT/AP-1 element from the widely active GM-CSF enhancer and
a composite NFAT/Oct element from the T cell-specific IL-3 enhancer. The
NFAT/AP-1 element was active in the numerous cell types that express NFAT, but
NFAT/Oct enhancer activity was T cell specific even though Oct-1 is ubiquitous.
Conversion of the single Oct site in the IL-3 enhancer to an AP-1 enabled
activation outside of the T cell lineage. By reconstituting the activities of
both the IL-3 enhancer and its NFAT/Oct element in a variety of cell types, we
demonstrated that their T cell-specific activation required the lymphoid
cofactors NIP45 and OCA-B in addition to NFAT and Oct family proteins.
Furthermore, the Oct family protein Brn-2, which cannot recruit OCA-B, repressed 
NFAT/Oct enhancer activity. Significantly, the two patterns of combinatorial
regulation identified in this study mirror the cell-type specificities of the
cytokine genes that they govern. We have thus established that simple composite
transcription factor binding sites can indeed establish highly specific patterns 
of gene expression.

PMID: 11067921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Arthritis Rheum. 2000 Oct;43(10):2169-77.

The mechanism of taurine chloramine inhibition of cytokine (interleukin-6,
interleukin-8) production by rheumatoid arthritis fibroblast-like synoviocytes.

Kontny E(1), Szczepanska K, Kowalczewski J, Kurowska M, Janicka I, Marcinkiewicz 
J, Maslinski W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Rheumatology, Warsaw, Poland.

OBJECTIVE: Taurine chloramine (Tau-Cl) has been shown to inhibit the production
of proinflammatory cytokines (interleukin-6 [IL-6] and IL-8) by fibroblast-like
synoviocytes (FLS) isolated from rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients. The present 
study was conducted to elucidate the mechanism of inhibitory action exerted by
Tau-Cl.
METHODS: The effects of Tau-Cl on 1) the transcription of genes coding for IL-6
and IL-8, and 2) the activity of nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) and activator 
protein 1 (AP-1) transcription factors, which are crucial for the transcription
of these cytokine genes, were investigated in FLS isolated from the synovial
tissue of RA patients. FLS were cultured in vitro for 3-6 passages and stimulated
with recombinant human IL-1beta (1 ng/ml) in the presence of either Tau or
Tau-Cl, which were added simultaneously with the stimulus at concentrations of
250 microM or 500 microM. The relative expression of IL-6 and IL-8 messenger RNA 
(mRNA) was evaluated after 4 hours of stimulation, using competitive reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. The DNA binding activity of NF-kappaB
and AP-1 was examined 30 minutes and 2 hours after cell stimulation,
respectively, using electromobility gel shift assay.
RESULTS: IL-1beta triggered a significant rise in the activity of transcription
factors NF-kappaB and AP-1, followed by an elevation of cytokine IL-6 and IL-8
mRNA expression. Tau-Cl, but not Tau, reduced IL-1beta-triggered cytokine mRNA
expression, exerting stronger inhibitory activity on the levels of IL-6 than on
those of IL-8. Importantly, Tau-Cl also diminished the activity of NF-kappaB and,
to a lesser extent, that of AP-1 transcription factor. Neither IL-1beta nor
Tau-Cl affected the activity of octamer transcription factor 1.
CONCLUSION: Tau-Cl inhibition of IL-6 and IL-8 synthesis in FLS from RA patients 
results from the ability of this compound to diminish the activity of the major
transcriptional regulators (NF-kappaB and AP-1), which subsequently reduces the
transcription of these cytokine genes.

PMID: 11037876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Mol Immunol. 2000 Apr;37(6):321-8.

An essential octamer motif in the mb-1 (Igalpha) promoter.

Malone CS(1), Patrone L, Wall R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and The Molecular Biology Institute,
School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles 90095, USA.

The mb-1 (Igalpha) gene is B cell-specific and expressed throughout B cell
maturation. In combination with B29 (Igbeta) and surface immunoglobulin mb-1
comprises the B cell receptor complex (BCR). The murine mb-1 promoter has been
characterized to depend on the trans-acting transcription factors; Sp1, ets,
lkaros, and EBF for full promoter activity. These trans-acting factors are also
involved in the regulation of mb-1's closely related heterodimeric partner, B29. 
However, octamer transcription factors 1 and 2 (Oct-1 and Oct-2) are also
necessary for full B29 promoter activity while they are not known to be required 
for mb-1 promoter activity. Here, we show that the octamer transcription factors 
bind a degenerate octamer consensus sequence within the mb-1 promoter. Like B29, 
the mb-1 octamer-binding, motif interacted with both ubiquitously expressed Oct-1
and the B cell-specific Oct-2 transcription factors. Furthermore, the interaction
of Oct-1 and Oct-2 contributed to the regulation of the mb-1 promoter as
site-directed mutations within the octamer motif substantially reduced its
activity. These data confirm that octamer factor interactions and function
contribute to the full transcriptional activity of the mb-1 promoter.

PMID: 11000405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Biol Chem. 2000 Dec 22;275(51):40511-6.

Transcriptional activation of the human hematopoietic prostaglandin D synthase
gene in megakaryoblastic cells. Roles of the oct-1 element in the 5'-flanking
region and the AP-2 element in the untranslated exon 1.

Fujimori K(1), Kanaoka Y, Sakaguchi Y, Urade Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Behavioral Biology and the Core Research for
Evolutional Science and Technology, Japan Science and Technology Corporation,
Osaka Bioscience Institute, 6-2-4 Furuedai, Suita, Osaka 565-0874, Japan.

The human hematopoietic prostaglandin D synthase (H-PGDS) gene is highly
expressed in human megakaryoblastic cells, in which phorbol ester induces its
expression. We characterized the promoter activity of the 5'-flanking region and 
the untranslated exon 1 (-1044 to +290) of the human H-PGDS gene in human
megakaryoblastic Dami cells. Transient expression analysis using the luciferase
reporter gene revealed that the 5'-flanking region and the untranslated exon 1
were sufficient for efficient expression of the H-PGDS gene in Dami cells, but
not in monocytic U937 cells. Deletion and site-directed mutagenesis of the Oct-1 
element in the 5'-flanking region decreased the promoter activity by
approximately 30% compared with that of the entire region from -1044 to +290. An 
electrophoretic mobility shift assay demonstrated that Oct-1 specifically bound
to the promoter region. Interestingly, even only untranslated exon 1 (+1 to +290)
showed approximately 60% of the promoter activity of the entire region from -1044
to +290. Site-directed mutagenesis of the AP-2 element within the untranslated
exon 1 abolished the basal promoter activity as well as its phorbol
ester-mediated up-regulation. In AP-2-deficient HepG2 cells, the H-PGDS promoter 
activity was enhanced by coexpression with AP-2alpha. These findings indicate
that the Oct-1 element in the 5'-flanking region acts as a positive cis-acting
element and that the AP-2 element in the untranslated exon 1 is crucial for both 
basal and phorbol ester-mediated up-regulation of human H-PGDS gene expression in
megakaryoblastic Dami cells.

PMID: 10998423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Sep 26;97(20):10757-62.

N-terminal transcriptional activation domain of LZIP comprises two LxxLL motifs
and the host cell factor-1 binding motif.

Luciano RL(1), Wilson AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Kaplan Comprehensive Cancer Center, New York
University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Host Cell Factor-1 (HCF-1, C1) was first identified as a cellular target for the 
herpes simplex virus transcriptional activator VP16. Association between HCF and 
VP16 leads to the assembly of a multiprotein enhancer complex that stimulates
viral immediate-early gene transcription. HCF-1 is expressed in all cells and is 
required for progression through G(1) phase of the cell cycle. In addition to
VP16, HCF-1 associates with a cellular bZIP protein known as LZIP (or Luman).
Both LZIP and VP16 contain a four-amino acid HCF-binding motif, recognized by the
N-terminal beta-propeller domain of HCF-1. Herein, we show that the N-terminal 92
amino acids of LZIP contain a potent transcriptional activation domain composed
of three elements: the HCF-binding motif and two LxxLL motifs. LxxLL motifs are
found in a number of transcriptional coactivators and mediate protein-protein
interactions, notably recognition of the nuclear hormone receptors. LZIP is an
example of a sequence-specific DNA-binding protein that uses LxxLL motifs within 
its activation domain to stimulate transcription. The LxxLL motifs are not
required for association with the HCF-1 beta-propeller and instead interact with 
other regions in HCF-1 or recruit additional cofactors.

PMCID: PMC27096
PMID: 10984507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Mol Cell Biochem. 2000 Jul;210(1-2):131-42.

A set of proteins interacting with transcription factor Sp1 identified in a
two-hybrid screening.

Gunther M(1), Laithier M, Brison O.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Oncologique, UMR 1599 CNRS, Institut Gustave Roussy, 
France.

The two-hybrid system was used to isolate cDNA clones encoding polypeptides that 
interact with the N-terminal region (activation domains A, B and C) of the Sp1
transcription factor. Among the 65 collected clones, 43 contained cDNA fragments 
with open reading frames. They corresponded to 13 genes encoding proteins of
known function and to 15 genes, the proteins of which have no known function. Six
overlapping cDNA clones corresponded to the Hsc70 protein. Host cell factor
(HCF-1) and the KIAA0461 gene (encoding a putative Zn-finger protein of unknown
function) were both identified through the isolation of three overlapping cDNA
clones. Two cDNA fragments encoding the same region of the SREBP-2 transcription 
factor were independently selected and two overlapping cDNA clones corresponded
to the splicing factor SF3A120. Two different cDNA clones encoded the N- and
C-terminal region of the Oct-1 transcription factor. Transcription factors Elf-1 
and TIEG, as well as HSph2, the putative human homologue of a murine polyhomeotic
gene, were each represented by a single clone. Noticeably, for the four
identified transcription factors, the DNA-binding domain was excluded from the
selected polypeptides. In vitro binding of the selected polypeptides to the Sp1
protein was demonstrated for the four transcription factors and for the SF3A120, 
Hsc70, HCF-1, HSph2 and pKIAA0461(245) proteins. Four other cDNA clones encoding 
polypeptides of unknown function were tested in the in vitro binding assay. All
four polypeptides were found to interact with Sp1 in this assay.

PMID: 10976766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Eur J Biochem. 2000 Sep;267(17):5427-37.

Oct-1 specifically binds the UEF4 site of the human AP1-regulated urokinase
enhancer.

Palazzolo M(1), Berthelsen J, De Cesare D, Blasi F.

Author information: 
(1)Università Vita-Salute S. Raffaele, Department of Molecular Pathology and
Medicine, Molecular Genetics Unit, DIBIT, Milan, Italy.

The inducible urokinase enhancer contains three essential elements: a combined
PEA3/AP1 and a downstream AP1 site, separated by a 74-bp DNA region called COM
(cooperation mediator), that is required for the synergism between the three
sites. The 5' half of COM (uCOM) forms four retarded complexes with HeLa or HepG2
nuclear proteins (UEF1-4). We now demonstrate that the UEF4 complex is the
transcription factor Oct-1. Because of functional redundancy of the UEF sites,
single mutations in UEF4 have no phenotype; we have changed UEF4 from a low to a 
high affinity binding site for Oct-1. In vitro, this mutation increases the DNA
binding of Oct-1 and disturbs the binding of the Prep-Pbx complexes to the nearby
UEF3 site. In vivo, this mutation reduces the basal transcriptional activity of
the urokinase enhancer, while not affecting its phorbol ester inducibility. This 
is in keeping with the effect of the deletions of the COM region, which result in
an increase in the basal level and, as a consequence, in the loss of
4beta-phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate inducibility. Oct-1 therefore is not
involved in the inducibility of the urokinase enhancer but only in determining
its basal activity level.

PMID: 10951201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 Jul 15;28(14):2736-40.

Human gamma-globin gene promoter element regulates human beta-globin gene
developmental specificity.

Ryan TM(1), Sun CW, Ren J, Townes TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, School of Medicine and
Dentistry, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

The persistence of fetal hemoglobin in many patients with deletion type beta
thalassemias and the expression patterns of human globin genes in transgenic mice
suggest that gamma- to beta-globin gene switching results primarily from
competition of gamma- and beta-globin genes for interaction with the beta-globin 
locus control region (LCR). To define regulatory sequences that are essential for
the competitive advantage of the gamma gene at early developmental stages, stable
transgenic mouse lines were produced with LCR gamma-beta constructs containing
deletions of gamma 5'-flanking DNA. All constructs contained the full 22 kb LCR, 
a 4.1 kb beta-globin gene and a gamma-globin gene with 1348, 383, 202, 130, 72 or
52 bp of 5'-flanking sequence. Primer extension analysis of yolk sac, fetal liver
and blood RNA from these lines demonstrated that a region between -202 and -130
of the human gamma-globin gene promoter was required to suppress beta-globin gene
expression at early developmental stages. Four transcription factor binding sites
within this region [GATA(p), Oct1, GATA(d) and CACCC] were mutated independently 
in LCR gamma-beta constructs and transgenic mouse lines were produced. Only the
gamma CACCC box mutation resulted in high levels of beta-globin gene expression
in early embryos. These results demonstrate that the CACCC box of the human
gamma-globin gene plays a critical role in human beta-globin gene developmental
specificity. The data also suggest that gamma CACCC box binding factors mediate
LCR-gamma interactions which normally enhance gamma-globin and suppress
beta-globin gene expression in fetal erythroid cells.

PMCID: PMC102642
PMID: 10908330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 Jul 15;28(14):2726-35.

Discrete promoter elements affect specific properties of RNA polymerase II
transcription complexes.

Steinke JW(1), Kopytek SJ, Peterson DO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A&M University, 2128 TAMU,
College Station, TX 77843-2128, USA.

The frequency of transcription initiation at specific RNA polymerase II promoters
is, in many cases, related to the ability of the promoter to recruit the
transcription machinery to a specific site. However, there may also be functional
differences in the properties of assembled transcription complexes that are
promoter-specific or regulator-dependent and affect their activity. Transcription
complexes formed on variants of the adenovirus major late (AdML) promoter were
found to differ in several ways. Mutations in the initiator element increased the
sarkosyl sensitivity of the rate of elongation and decreased the rate of early
steps in initiation as revealed by a sarkosyl challenge assay that exploited the 
resistance of RNA synthesis to high concentrations of sarkosyl after formation of
one or two phospho-diester bonds. Similar, but clearly distinct, effects were
also observed after deletion of the binding site for upstream stimulatory factor 
from the AdML promoter. In contrast, deletion of binding sites for nuclear factor
1 and Oct-1, as well as mutations in the recognition sequence for initiation site
binding protein, were without apparent effect on transcription complexes on
templates containing the mouse mammary tumor virus promoter.

PMCID: PMC102648
PMID: 10908329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Anim Genet. 2000 Jun;31(3):240-1.

Physical assignment of markers, SJ017, SJ042, and SJ065 to swine chromosome X.

Sugai N(1), Sawazaki T, Itoh T, Mikawa S, Wada Y, Yasue H.

Author information: 
(1)Second Research Division, STAFF Institute, Ibaraki, Japan.

PMID: 10895328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 Jun 15;28(12):2446-54.

Zhangfei: a second cellular protein interacts with herpes simplex virus accessory
factor HCF in a manner similar to Luman and VP16.

Lu R(1), Misra V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, Western College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Saskatchewan, 52 Campus Drive, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan S7N 5B4,
Canada.

Host cell factor (HCF, C1, VCAF or CFF) is a cellular protein that is required
for transcription activation of herpes simplex virus (HSV) immediate-early (IE)
genes by the virion protein VP16. The biological function of HCF remains unclear.
Recently we identified a cellular transcription activator, Luman. As with VP16,
the transactivation function of Luman is also regulated by HCF. Here we report a 
second human protein, Zhangfei (ZF) that interacts with HCF in a fashion similar 
to Luman and VP16. Although ZF shares no significant sequence homology with
Luman, the two proteins have some structural similarities. These include: a basic
domain-leucine zipper (bZIP) region, an acidic activation domain and a consensus 
HCF-binding motif. Unlike Luman, or most other bZIP proteins, ZF by itself did
not appear to bind consensus bZIP-binding sites. It was also unable to activate
promoters containing these response elements. Although in transient expression
assays ectopically expressed ZF was unable to block transactivation by VP16 of a 
HSV IE promoter, ZF could prevent the expression of several HSV proteins in cells
infected with the virus. The ability of ZF to block the synthesis of the HSV IE
protein ICP0 relied on its binding to HCF, since a mutant of ZF that was unable
to bind HCF was also unable to prevent viral IE protein expression.

PMCID: PMC102720
PMID: 10871379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Exp Gerontol. 2000 May;35(3):291-8.

In vitro aging research in Japan.

Tsuji T(1), Miyazaki M, Sakaguchi M, Namba M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology,
Okayama University Medical School, Shikata-cho 2-5-1, 700-8558, Okayama, Japan.

PMID: 10832050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Glycobiology. 2000 Jun;10(6):623-8.

Transcriptional regulation of human beta-galactoside alpha2, 6-sialyltransferase 
(hST6Gal I) gene during differentiation of the HL-60 cell line.

Taniguchi A(1), Hasegawa Y, Higai K, Matsumoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Toho
University, Chiba, Japan.

We have previously shown that the expression of beta-galactoside
alpha2,6-sialyltransferase (hST6Gal I) mRNA decreases during HL-60
differentiation induced with dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and that transcriptional
regulation depends on the P3 promoter that exists 5'-upstream of exon Y (A.
Taniguchi et al., FEBS Lett.,441, 191-194, 1998). The regulation of hST6Gal I may
be important for the expression of sialyl-Le(x)in HL-60 cells. In the present
report, we studied the transcriptional regulation of hST6Gal I gene during
DMSO-induced differentiation of HL-60 cells. To elucidate the molecular basis of 
hST6Gal I gene expression, the genomic region containing the P3 promoter of
hST6Gal I was isolated and functionally characterized. Using a luciferase assay, 
we identified a functional DNA portion that confers an enhancer, located at
nucleotide number (nt) -317 to -174 within the P3 promoter of hST6Gal I genomic
DNA. This element contains two sequences similar to Sp1 (GC-box) and one sequence
similar to Oct-1 recognition motifs (octamer sequence). Site-directed mutagenesis
of Sp1 and Oct-1 sites showed that two Sp1 motifs and one Oct-1 motif are
essential for transcriptional activity in HL-60 cells. Enhancer activity is
suppressed during HL-60 cell differentiation induced with DMSO. These results
suggest that GC-box and octamer sequence may play a critical role in the
transcriptional regulation of the hST6Gal I gene during HL-60 cell
differentiation.

PMID: 10814704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Biol Chem. 2000 May 19;275(20):15295-304.

Complex interactions between epidermal POU domain and activator protein 1
transcription factors regulate the expression of the profilaggrin gene in normal 
human epidermal keratinocytes.

Jang SI(1), Karaman-Jurukovska N, Morasso MI, Steinert PM, Markova NG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Skin Biology, NIAMS, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA.

The human profilaggrin gene is expressed in the granular layer during the late
stages of the epidermal differentiation. The proximal promoter region of the gene
confers high levels of keratinocyte-specific transcription via interactions with 
c-Jun/c-Fos heterodimers. Here we provide evidence for another level of
complexity in the regulation of the profilaggrin promoter activity. The POU
domain proteins Oct1, Skn1a/i, and Oct6, which are abundantly expressed in the
epidermal cells, act to both stimulate and repress transcription in a general and
a cell type-specific mode. While binding to specific recognition elements within 
the promoter region, they exert their effects by either stimulating or
antagonizing the c-Jun-dependent activity of the promoter. The response of the
promoter to forced expression of the POU domain proteins reflects the effect of
these transcription factors on the endogenous profilaggrin mRNA synthesis and
suggests that the latter requires a fine balance in the amounts and the
activities of the individual activator protein 1 and POU domain proteins.

PMID: 10809764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Mol Pharmacol. 2000 May;57(5):940-7.

Octamer transcription factor-1 enhances hepatic nuclear factor-1alpha-mediated
activation of the human UDP glucuronosyltransferase 2B7 promoter.

Ishii Y(1), Hansen AJ, Mackenzie PI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Flinders Medical Centre, Bedford Park,
South Australia, Australia.

The human UDP glucuronosyltransferase, UGT2B7, is expressed in the liver and
gastrointestinal tract, where it catalyzes the glucuronidation of steroids and
bile acids. In this study, the UGT2B7 gene was isolated and its proximal promoter
was analyzed. The UGT2B7 gene consists of 6 exons and extends over 16 kilobases
(kb). It does not contain a canonical TATA box but has a region (-2 to -40)
adjacent to the transcription start site that binds nuclear proteins. This region
contains a consensus hepatic nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF1alpha)-binding site and
an overlapping AT-rich segment. Varying lengths of the UGT2B7 gene promoter, with
and without these sites, were fused to the firefly luciferase reporter gene and
transfected into HepG2 cells. UGT2B7 promoter activity with the HNF1/AT-rich
element was stimulated by cotransfection with HNF1alpha. Additional activation
was observed when HNF1alpha and octamer transcription factor-1 (Oct-1) were
cotransfected simultaneously. However, Oct-1 alone did not stimulate promoter
activity and did not bind to the promoter in the absence of HNF1alpha. Deletion
of the HNF1/AT-rich region, or mutations in this region, abolished UGT2B7 gene
promoter activity and prevented HNF1alpha-mediated increases in promoter
activity. The presence of HNF1alpha and octamer transcription factor-1 (Oct-1) in
the protein complex that bound to the HNF1/AT-rich region was demonstrated by gel
shift analyses with antibodies specific to HNF1alpha and Oct-1 protein. These
results strongly suggest that the liver-enriched factor HNF1alpha binds to, and
activates, the UGT2B7 gene promoter and that the ubiquitous transcription factor,
Oct-1, enhances this activation by directly interacting with HNF1alpha. This
interaction between HNF1alpha and Oct-1 may fine-tune UGT2B7 expression.

PMID: 10779377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 May;20(10):3568-75.

A novel 50-kilodalton fragment of host cell factor 1 (C1) in G(0) cells.

Scarr RB(1), Smith MR, Beddall M, Sharp PA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research and Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

Host cell factor 1 (HCF-1; also called C1) is a 230-kDa protein which is cleaved 
posttranslationally into separate but associated N- and C-terminal polypeptides. 
These polypeptides are components of the C1 complex, along with Oct-1 and the
viral protein VP16. The C1 complex is formed when herpes simplex virus (HSV)
infects a cell and is responsible for transcription of the HSV immediate-early
genes. A temperature-sensitive mutation in the N-terminal kelch domain of HCF-1
reversibly arrests cells in a G(0)-like state when grown at the nonpermissive
temperature, and the same domain interacts with VP16 in the formation of the C1
complex. The form of HCF-1 in primary G(0) cells was investigated by using
peripheral blood mononucleocytes and serum-arrested human primary fibroblasts. A 
novel 50-kDa N-terminal fragment of HCF-1 encompassing the kelch domain was
identified in the cytoplasm of these cells. This fragment arises by proteolysis
of the full-length HCF-1 protein and is able to associate with VP16.

PMCID: PMC85649
PMID: 10779346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Apr;20(8):2774-82.

Conservation of glutamine-rich transactivation function between yeast and humans.

Escher D(1), Bodmer-Glavas M, Barberis A, Schaffner W.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, Universität Zürich, CH-8057 Zürich,
Switzerland.

Several eukaryotic transcription factors such as Sp1 or Oct1 contain
glutamine-rich domains that mediate transcriptional activation. In human cells,
promoter-proximally bound glutamine-rich activation domains activate
transcription poorly in the absence of acidic type activators bound at distal
enhancers, but synergistically stimulate transcription with these remote
activators. Glutamine-rich activation domains were previously reported to also
function in the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe but not in the budding
yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, suggesting that budding yeast lacks this pathway 
of transcriptional activation. The strong interaction of an Sp1 glutamine-rich
domain with the general transcription factor TAF(II)110 (TAF(II)130), and the
absence of any obvious TAF(II)110 homologue in the budding yeast genome, seemed
to confirm this notion. We reinvestigated the phenomenon by reconstituting in the
budding yeast an enhancer-promoter architecture that is prevalent in higher
eukaryotes but less common in yeast. Under these conditions, we observed that
glutamine-rich activation domains derived from both mammalian and yeast
transcription factors activated only poorly on their own but strongly synergized 
with acidic activators bound at the remote enhancer position. The level of
activation by the glutamine-rich activation domains of Sp1 and Oct1 in
combination with a remote enhancer was similar in yeast and human cells. We also 
found that mutations in a glutamine-rich domain had similar phenotypes in budding
yeast and human cells. Our results show that glutamine-rich activation domains
behave very similarly in yeast and mammals and that their activity in budding
yeast does not depend on the presence of a TAF(II)110 homologue.

PMCID: PMC85493
PMID: 10733580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Gene. 2000 Jan 25;242(1-2):219-28.

Activation of human gamma-globin gene expression via triplex-forming
oligonucleotide (TFO)-directed mutations in the gamma-globin gene 5' flanking
region.

Xu XS(1), Glazer PM, Wang G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural and Cellular, University of South Alabama College of 
Medicine, Mobile 36688, USA.

Human beta-globin disorders, such as sickle cell anemia and beta-thalassemia, are
relatively common genetic diseases cause by mutations in the beta-globin gene.
Increasing gamma-globin gene expression has been found to greatly reduce the
disease symptom. However, the gamma-globin gene is developmentally regulated and 
normally expressed at high levels only during the fetal stage of human
development. We have explored the possibility of activating the gamma-globin gene
expression by triplex-forming oligonucleotide (TFO)-directed targeted
mutagenesis. Using a psoralen-conjugated TFO designed to bind to a site
overlapping with an Oct-1 binding site at the -280 region of the gamma-globin
gene, targeted mutagenesis of the Oct-1 binding site has been achieved by
transfecting the in-vitro-formed plasmid-oligo complex into human normal
fibroblast (NF) cells. The mutation frequency at the target site was estimated to
be 20% by direct DNA sequencing analysis. In-vitro protein binding assays
indicated that these mutations reduced Oct-1 binding to the target site. In-vivo 
gene expression assays demonstrated activation of gamma-globin gene expression
from these mutations in mouse erythroleukemia (MEL) cells. The levels of the
gamma-globin gene expression increased by as much as fourfold in mutants with
single base changes. These results suggest that the -280 region of the
Agamma-globin gene negatively regulates the gamma-globin gene expression, and
mutations at the Oct-1 binding site can lead to activation of the gamma-globin
gene and generate the hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin (HPFH)
condition. This study may provide a novel approach for gene therapy of sickle
cell disease. The data may also have implications in gene therapy for other
diseases including genetic diseases and cancers by introducing mutations into
transcription factor binding sites to alter the levels of target gene expression.

PMID: 10721715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Toxicol Lett. 2000 Apr 3;114(1-3):215-24.

Suppression of IL-2 and IL-4 gene expression by nodularin through the reduced
NF-AT binding activity.

Yea SS(1), Kim HM, Jeon YJ, Oh HM, Jeong HG, Yang KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology, Yusung-Gu, Taejon, South Korea.

Nodularin is a cyclic peptide produced by cyanobacteria. In the present study,
the inhibitory effect of nodularin on T lymphocyte functions was demonstrated.
Direct addition of nodularin to B6C3F1 mouse splenocyte cultures produced a
concentration-dependent inhibition of the lymphoproliferative response to
concanavalin A stimulation. Nodularin inhibited PMA plus ionomycin (Io)-induced
IL-2 mRNA expression in murine splenocytes and thymocytes as determined by
quantitative/competitive RT-PCR. To further characterize the mechanism for the
transcriptional regulation of IL-2, the binding activity of transcription
factors, NF-AT, AP-1, NF-kappaB, and Oct, was evaluated by electrophoretic
mobility shift assays in mouse splenocytes. Nodularin reduced the NF-AT binding
activity in PMA/Io-induced splenocytes, but no significant effect was observed on
AP-1, NF-kappaB, or Oct binding activity. Nodularin also inhibited IL-4 mRNA
expression in PMA/Io-stimulated murine splenocytes. These results suggest that T 
lymphocyte is a possible cellular target of nodularin, and the inhibitory effect 
of nodularin on T-cell specific transcription factor NF-AT induces T-cell
dysfunction, which leads to a diminution in IL-2 and IL-4 gene transcription.

PMID: 10713487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. EMBO J. 2000 Feb 15;19(4):683-90.

The novel coactivator C1 (HCF) coordinates multiprotein enhancer formation and
mediates transcription activation by GABP.

Vogel JL(1), Kristie TM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Viral Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Building 4, Room 
133, 4 Center Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Transcription of the herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) immediate early (IE) genes is
determined by multiprotein enhancer complexes. The core enhancer assembly
requires the interactions of the POU-homeodomain protein Oct-1, the viral
transactivator alphaTIF and the cellular factor C1 (HCF). In this context, the C1
factor interacts with each protein to assemble the stable enhancer complex. In
addition, the IE enhancer cores contain adjacent binding sites for other cellular
transcription factors such as Sp1 and GA-binding protein (GABP). In this study, a
direct interaction of the C1 factor with GABP is demonstrated, defining the C1
factor as the critical coordinator of the enhancer complex assembly. In addition,
mutations that reduce the GABP transactivation potential also impair the C1-GABP 
interaction, indicating that the C1 factor functions as a novel coactivator of
GABP-mediated transcription. The interaction and coordinated assembly of the
enhancer proteins by the C1 factor may be critical for the regulation of the HSV 
lytic-latent cycle.

PMCID: PMC305606
PMID: 10675337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Mol Endocrinol. 2000 Feb;14(2):212-28.

Transcription factors Oct-1 and C/EBPbeta (CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-beta)
are involved in the glutamate/nitric oxide/cyclic-guanosine
5'-monophosphate-mediated repression of mediated repression of
gonadotropin-releasing hormone gene expression.

Belsham DD(1), Mellon PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine, The Center for Molecular Genetics,
University of Califonia, La Jolla 92093, USA. d.belsham@utoronto.ca

The physiological actions of nitric oxide (NO) as a signaling molecule in
endothelial and brain cells and as a toxic molecule used by activated immune
cells have been the focus of a wide range of studies. Nevertheless, the
downstream effector molecules of this important neuromodulator are not well
understood. We have previously demonstrated that expression of the gene for the
reproductive neuropeptide, GnRH, is repressed by the glutamate/NO/cyclic GMP
(cGMP) signal transduction pathway through cGMP-dependent protein kinase in the
hypothalamic GnRH-secreting neuronal cell line GT1-7. This repression localized
within a previously characterized 300-bp neuron-specific enhancer. Here, we find 
that mutation of either of two adjacent elements within the enhancer eliminates
repression by this pathway. An AT-rich sequence located at -1695 has homology to 
the octamer motif known to bind POU-homeodomain proteins, while the adjacent
element at -1676 has homology to the C/EBP (CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein)
protein family consensus sequence. Antibody supershift assays reveal that one of 
the proteins bound at the -1695 sequence is Oct-1, and one of the proteins bound 
to the element at -1676 is C/EBPbeta. These two proteins can bind simultaneously 
to the adjacent -1695 and -1676 binding sites in vitro. In nuclear extracts of
GT1-7 cells treated with an NO donor, the intensity of the Oct-1 complex is
increased. However, although Western blot analysis indicates that neither Oct-1
nor C/EBPbeta protein levels are increased, the relative binding affinity of
Oct-1 is increased. Dephosphorylation of the nuclear extracts decreases binding
of the Oct-1 complex to the -1695 site only in NO donor-treated extracts. Thus,
we conclude that Oct-1 and C/EBPbeta are both downstream transcriptional
regulators involved in the repression of GnRH gene expression by the
glutamate/NO/ cGMP signal transduction pathway.

PMID: 10674395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Biol Chem. 2000 Feb 11;275(6):4525-31.

Binding of octamer factors to a novel 3'-positive regulatory element in the mouse
interleukin-5 gene.

Salerno MS(1), Mordvinov VA, Sanderson CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology Group, School of Biomedical Sciences, Curtin University
of Technology, Perth 6000, Australia.

The development of eosinophilia is regulated by interleukin (IL)-5. The
biological specificity of eosinophilia suggests a tight and independent
regulation of IL-5 expression. A number of regulatory regions in the 5'-end of
the IL-5 gene have been described; many of them are involved in the regulation of
other genes, and it is not clear how the specific expression of IL-5 is
regulated. In this study, we report the finding of a novel 3'-regulatory element.
Data base analysis of a 2-kilobase fragment of the 3'-end of the mouse IL-5 gene 
revealed the presence of a 40-base pair-long repetitive sequence that consists of
four direct repeats of ATGAATGA distributed in a symmetrical manner. This
sequence, named mouse downstream regulatory element-1 (mDRE1), was shown to be
protected in DNase I footprinting assays in vitro. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays using specific antibodies identified the transcription factors Oct-1 and
Oct-2 as responsible for the formation of the specific complexes with mDRE1 and
nuclear extracts from both EL4 and primary T-cells. Competition electrophoretic
mobility shift assays with oligonucleotides containing different numbers of
ATGAATGA repeats showed that Oct-1 and Oct-2 bind to different motifs in the
mDRE1 sequence. Deletion of mDRE1 from a 9.5-kilobase IL-5 gene construct
significantly decreased the expression of the luciferase reporter gene,
suggesting that it plays a positive role in the expression of the IL-5 gene.

PMID: 10660628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 Feb 1;28(3):678-86.

Association of a protein phosphatase 1 activity with the human factor C1 (HCF)
complex.

Ajuh PM(1), Browne GJ, Hawkes NA, Cohen PT, Roberts SG, Lamond AI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The University of Dundee, MSI/WTB Complex, Dow
Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK.

We have screened a human cDNA expression library with a digoxygenin-labelled
protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) probe to identify novel PP1 interacting proteins.
Eleven cDNA clones were isolated, which included genes encoding two previously
characterised and six novel PP1 binding proteins. Three of the cDNAs encoded a
protein called host cell factor (HCF), which is an essential component of the
cellular complex required for the transcription of the herpes simplex virus (HSV)
immediate-early (IE) genes. We demonstrate that HCF and PP1 exist as a complex in
nuclear extracts and that this complex is distinct from the form of HCF that
associates with HSV VP16. The data suggest novel roles for HCF and PP1, which may
be relevant to their functions in transcription and cell cycle progression.

PMCID: PMC102561
PMID: 10637318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Feb;20(3):919-28.

Mutations in host cell factor 1 separate its role in cell proliferation from
recruitment of VP16 and LZIP.

Mahajan SS(1), Wilson AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Kaplan Comprehensive Cancer Center, New York
University School of Medicine, New York, New York 10016, USA.

Host cell factor 1 (HCF-1) is a nuclear protein required for progression through 
G(1) phase of the cell cycle and, via its association with VP16, transcriptional 
activation of the herpes simplex virus immediate-early genes. Both functions
require a six-bladed beta-propeller domain encoded by residues 1 to 380 of HCF-1 
as well as an additional amino-terminal region. The beta-propeller domain is well
conserved in HCF homologues, consistent with a critical cellular function. To
date, the only known cellular target of the beta-propeller is a bZIP
transcription factor known as LZIP or Luman. Whether the interaction between
HCF-1 and LZIP is required for cell proliferation remains to be determined. In
this study, we used directed mutations to show that all six blades of the HCF-1
beta-propeller contribute to VP16-induced complex assembly, association with
LZIP, and cell cycle progression. Although LZIP and VP16 share a common
tetrapeptide HCF-binding motif, our results reveal profound differences in their 
interaction with HCF-1. Importantly, with several of the mutants we observe a
poor correlation between the ability to associate with LZIP and promote cell
proliferation in the context of the full HCF-1 amino terminus, arguing that the
HCF-1 beta-propeller domain must target other cellular transcription factors in
order to contribute to G(1) progression.

PMCID: PMC85209
PMID: 10629049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. J Virol. 2000 Jan;74(2):934-43.

Potential role for luman, the cellular homologue of herpes simplex virus VP16
(alpha gene trans-inducing factor), in herpesvirus latency.

Lu R(1), Misra V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, Western College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan S7N 5B4, Canada.

The cascade of herpes simplex virus (HSV) gene expression that results in viral
replication begins with the activation of viral immediate-early (IE) genes by the
virion-associated protein VP16. VP16 on its own is inefficient at associating
with complexes formed on IE gene promoters and depends upon the cellular factor
HCF for its activity. In this respect VP16 mimics the host basic leucine zipper
(bZIP) protein Luman, which also requires HCF for activating transcription. Our
objective is to explore interactions between Luman and HCF and to determine if
they play a role in the biology of herpesviruses. In this report we show that in 
cultured cells ectopically expressed Luman was retained in the cytoplasm, where
it colocalized with Calnexin, a protein normally associated with the endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER). Retention of Luman in the ER depends on a hydrophobic segment of 
the protein that probably serves as a transmembrane domain. Deletion of this
domain changed the intracellular location of Luman so that most of the mutant
protein was in the nucleus of cells. While HCF was present in the nucleus of most
cells, in cells expressing Luman it was retained in the cytoplasm where the two
proteins colocalized. This cytoplasmic association of Luman and HCF could also be
demonstrated in neurons in trigeminal ganglia removed from cattle soon after
death. Cells in tissue culture that expressed Luman, but not a mutant form of the
protein that fails to bind HCF, were resistant to a productive infection with HSV
type 1 (HSV-1). We hypothesize that similar Luman-HCF interactions in sensory
neurons in trigeminal ganglia result in the suppression of viral replication and 
the establishment of latency. Interestingly, Luman could activate the promoters
of IE110 and LAT, two genes that are critical for reactivation of HSV-1 from
latency. This suggests a role for Luman in the reactivation process as well.

PMCID: PMC111614
PMID: 10623756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Blood. 2000 Jan 1;95(1):277-85.

Differential expression of Rel/NF-kappaB and octamer factors is a hallmark of the
generation and maturation of dendritic cells.

Neumann M(1), Fries H, Scheicher C, Keikavoussi P, Kolb-Mäurer A, Bröcker E,
Serfling E, Kämpgen E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Department of Molecular Pathology, University of
Würzburg, 97080 Würzburg, Germany.

A key feature of maturation of dendritic cells is the down-regulation of
antigen-processing and up-regulation of immunostimulatory capacities. To study
the differential expression of transcription factors in this process, we
investigated the nuclear translocation and DNA binding of Rel/NF-kappaB and
octamer factors during in vitro generation and maturation of dendritic cells
compared with macrophage development. RelB was the only factor strongly
up-regulated during the generation of both immature dendritic cells and
macrophages. Cytokine-induced maturation of dendritic cells resulted in an
increase in nuclear RelB, p50, p52, and especially c-Rel, whereas
cytokine-treated macrophages responded poorly. This up-regulation of NF-kappaB
factors did not correlate with lower levels of cytosolic NF-kappaB inhibitors,
the IkappaBs. One IkappaB, Bcl-3, was strongly expressed only in mature dendritic
cells. Furthermore, generation and maturation of dendritic cells led to a
continuous down-regulation of the octamer factor Oct-2, whereas monocytes and
macrophages displayed high Oct-2 levels. A similar pattern of maturation-induced 
changes in transcription factor levels was found in cultured murine epidermal
Langerhans cells, suggesting a general physiological significance of these
findings. Finally, this pattern of differential activation of Rel and octamer
factors appears to be suitable in determining the maturation stage of dendritic
cells generated by treatment with different cytokine combinations in vitro.
(Blood. 2000;95:277-285)

PMID: 10607713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Eur J Immunol. 2000 Jan;30(1):174-84.

Interaction and functional interference of C/EBPbeta with octamer factors in
immunoglobulin gene transcription.

Hatada EN(1), Chen-Kiang S, Scheidereit C.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine Berlin, Germany.

The ubiquitous transcription factor C/EBPbeta functions as an activator or
inhibitor depending on the ratios of three isoforms translated from in-frame AUG.
We have identified C/EBP binding sites in both light and heavy chain
immunoglobulin (Ig) promoters. Of the two C/EBP sites present in the light chain 
promoter, the upstream site is essential for promoter function. Mutation of this 
element drastically decreases promoter activity, despite the presence of an
intact octamer element. Both light and heavy chain promoters were activated or
inhibited by C/EBPbeta isoforms in transfected cells according to the
transactivation ability of these isoforms. Endogenous IgM mRNA and protein were
repressed by the inhibitory form, C/EBPbeta-3, indicating a general role of
C/EBPbeta in the regulation of Ig genes. We show that C/EBPbeta-3 forms ternary
complexes with Oct-1 and Oct-2 on heavy and light chain promoters, and also
interacts with both octamer-binding proteins in the absence of DNA. This suggests
that interference of Oct-1/Oct-2 function by C/EBPbeta-3 may account for the
observed repression. Inhibition by C/EBPbeta-3 occurs not only through a C/EBP
site, but also through the octamer element, as shown by co-transfection
experiments with heterologous promoter constructs. Thus, C/EBPbeta regulates Ig
promoter transcription by modulating octamer factor activity.

PMID: 10602039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Cell Biol Int. 1999;23(2):97-103.

UVC-induced cell death of IL-2-dependent human lymphocytes.

Radziszewska E(1), Piwocka K, Skierski J, Sikora E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry, Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology,
Warsaw, Poland.

We compared the in vitro propensity of human IL-2-dependent lymphocytes (young
proliferating and senescent non-proliferating), and resting peripheral blood
lymphocytes (PBLs) to undergo UVC-induced apoptosis. The activities of AP-1
(activator protein-1), CRE (cAMP response element) and OCT-1 (octamer-1)
transcription factors in all lymphocytes were also assessed. At 24 h after UVC
treatment, half of young proliferating T lymphocytes and about a quarter of PBLs 
and senescent non-proliferating cells were apoptotic, as shown by flow cytometry.
However, only in young lymphocytes were both typical DNA 'ladder' and Bcl-2
downregulation evident. The AP-1 transcription factor was activated by UVC in
IL-2-dependent young and senescent, but not resting lymphocytes. Taken together, 
the data show different propensities of resting, proliferating and senescent
human lymphocytes to undergo UVC-induced apoptosis and AP-1 activation.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10561118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Mol Cell Biochem. 1999 Sep;199(1-2):209-15.

Ionizing radiation stimulates octamer factor DNA binding activity in human
carcinoma cells.

Meighan-Mantha RL(1), Riegel AT, Suy S, Harris V, Wang FH, Lozano C, Whiteside
TL, Kasid U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Lombardi Cancer Center, Georgetown University
Medical Center, Washington, DC, USA.

In mammalian cells, the octamer motif (ATGCAAAT) binding proteins, Oct-1 and
Oct-2, play an important role in the transcriptional transactivation of several
ubiquitously expressed genes as well as cell-specifically expressed genes. To
date, a role of the octamer binding proteins in damage-stimulated response is not
known. In this report, we demonstrate that DNA-binding activity of Oct-1, as
demonstrated by the electrophoretic mobility shift assay, is significantly
induced in a dose-dependent manner upon treatment of human head and neck squamous
carcinoma cells (PCI-04A) with ionizing radiation (5 Gy: 5-fold; 15 Gy: 11-fold).
By comparison, activities of other transcription factors were modestly increased 
(15 Gy: AP-1, 2.5-fold; NF-kappaB, 2.6-fold; SP-1, 5-fold). Radiation stimulation
of Oct-1 activity was also noted in two other human cancer cell lines, albeit to 
a lesser extent (MDA-MB231 breast carcinoma cells and PC-3 prostate carcinoma
cells (5 Gy: approximately 2-fold). These data represent the first report of the 
activation of an octamer factor DNA binding activity in response to environmental
cues and suggest a novel role of Oct-1 in the radiation signaling cascade in
these cancer cells.

PMID: 10544969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Genes Dev. 1999 Oct 15;13(20):2650-7.

Crystal structure of an OCA-B peptide bound to an Oct-1 POU domain/octamer DNA
complex: specific recognition of a protein-DNA interface.

Chasman D(1), Cepek K, Sharp PA, Pabo CO.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts 02139, USA.

We have determined the crystal structure, at 3.2 A, of a ternary complex
containing an OCA-B peptide, the Oct-1 POU domain, and an octamer DNA site. The
OCA-B peptide binds in the major groove near the center of the octamer site, and 
its polypeptide backbone forms a pair of hydrogen bonds with the adenine base at 
position 5 of the octamer DNA. Numerous protein-protein contacts between the
OCA-B peptide and the POU domain are also involved in the ternary complex. In
particular, the hydrophobic surface from a short alpha-helix of OCA-B helps to
stabilize the complex by binding to a hydrophobic pocket on the POU-specific
domain. The structure of this ternary complex is consistent with previous
biochemical studies and shows how peptide-DNA and peptide-protein contacts from
OCA-B provide structural and functional specificity in the regulation of
immunoglobulin transcription.

PMCID: PMC317104
PMID: 10541551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Eur J Biochem. 1999 Oct 1;265(1):300-7.

The activity of the human interleukin-5 conserved lymphokine element 0 is
regulated by octamer factors in human cells.

Thomas MA(1), Mordvinov VA, Sanderson CJ.

Author information: 
(1)TVWT Institute for Child Health Research, West Perth, Australia.

Interleukin-5 (IL-5) controls the development of eosinophilia and contributes to 
a number of disease states including asthma. Expression of IL-5 is inducible
under tight transcriptional regulation. This requires the contribution of several
promoter elements; however, the conserved lymphokine element 0 (CLE0) in
particular, is essential for expression of IL-5. In this study, we report the
nuclear factors which regulate human IL-5 CLE0 activity in the human cell line
PER-117. Using specific antibodies, we identified the transcriptional factors
Oct-1 and Oct-2 binding to the 5' region of the CLE0 element. The involvement of 
Oct factors with CLE0 has not been reported previously in any of the lymphokines.
In addition, the CLE0 element also appeared to complex with the transcriptional
activator AP-1, consisting of the family members Jun D and Fra-2. We observed the
binding of Oct-1 to be constitutive in comparison to Oct-2 and AP-1, both of
which were induced in response to cell activation by PMA/A23187. Although the
interaction of all three factors with CLE0 was closely linked and overlapping,
residues critical to their binding were identified. We demonstrate, using
site-directed mutagenesis and cotransfection experiments, that the CLE0 element
is indispensable for IL-5 promoter activity and that Octamer factors contribute
to the positive regulation of the hIL-5 gene.

PMID: 10491186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Nucleic Acids Res. 1999 Oct 1;27(19):3881-90.

Presetting of chromatin structure and transcription factor binding poise the
human GADD45 gene for rapid transcriptional up-regulation.

Graunke DM(1), Fornace AJ Jr, Pieper RO.

Author information: 
(1)DNA Damage and Repair, Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Louisiana State 
University, 6400 Perkins Road, Room C2058-7, Baton Rouge, LA 70808, USA.

GADD45 has been suggested to coordinate cell cycle regulation with the repair of 
DNA damage following ionizing radiation (IR). Although the GADD45 gene is
transcriptionally up-regulated in response to IR, alterations in in vivo
transcription factor (TF) binding or chromatin structure associated with
up-regulation have not been defined. To understand how chromatin structure might 
influence TF binding and GADD45 up-regulation, key regulatory regions of the gene
were identified by in vivo DNase I hypersensitivity (HS) analysis. Chromatin
structure and in vivo TF binding in these regions were subsequently monitored in 
both non-irradiated and irradiated human ML-1 cells. In non-irradiated cells
expressing basal levels of GADD45, the gene exhibited a highly organized
chromatin structure with distinctly positioned nucleosomes. Also identified in
non-irradiated cells were DNA-protein interactions at octamer binding motifs and 
a CCAAT box in the promoter and at consensus binding sites for AP-1 and p53
within intron 3. Upon irradiation and a subsequent 15-fold increase in GADD45
mRNA levels, neither the chromatin structure nor the pattern of TF binding in key
regulatory regions was altered. These results suggest that the GADD45 gene is
poised for up-regulation and can be rapidly induced independent of gross changes 
in chromatin structure or TF binding.

PMCID: PMC148652
PMID: 10481028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. J Biol Chem. 1999 Sep 17;274(38):26713-9.

Selective binding of steroid hormone receptors to octamer transcription factors
determines transcriptional synergism at the mouse mammary tumor virus promoter.

Préfontaine GG(1), Walther R, Giffin W, Lemieux ME, Pope L, Haché RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Biochemistry, University of Ottawa, Loeb Institute for
Medical Research, Ottawa Civic Hospital, Ottawa K1Y 4E9, Ontario, Canada.

Transcriptional synergism between glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and octamer
transcription factors 1 and 2 (Oct-1 and Oct-2) in the induction of mouse mammary
tumor virus (MMTV) transcription has been proposed to be mediated through
directed recruitment of the octamer factors to their binding sites in the viral
long terminal repeat. This recruitment correlates with direct binding between the
GR DNA binding domain and the POU domain of the octamer factors. In present
study, in vitro experiments identified several nuclear hormone receptors to have 
the potential to bind to the POU domains of Oct-1 and Oct-2 through their DNA
binding domains, suggesting that POU domain binding may be a property shared by
many nuclear hormone receptors. However, physiologically relevant binding to the 
POU domain appeared to be a property restricted to only a few nuclear receptors
as only GR, progesterone receptor (PR), and androgen receptor (AR), were found to
interact physically and functionally with Oct-1 and Oct-2 in transfected cells.
Thus GR, PR, and AR efficiently promoted the recruitment of Oct-2 to adjacent
octamer motifs in the cell, whereas mineralocorticoid receptor (MR), estrogen
receptor alpha, and retinoid X receptor failed to facilitate octamer factor DNA
binding. For MMTV, although GR and MR both induced transcription efficiently,
mutation of the promoter proximal octamer motifs strongly decreased GR-induced
transcription without affecting the total level of reporter gene activity in
response to MR. These results suggest that the configuration of the hormone
response element within the MMTV long terminal repeat may promote a dependence
for the glucocorticoid response upon the recruitment of octamer transcription
factors to their response elements within the viral promoter.

PMID: 10480874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Mech Dev. 1999 Jun;84(1-2):55-67.

An octamer-binding site is crucial for the activity of an enhancer active at the 
embryonic met-/mesencephalic junction.

Mihailescu D(1), Küry P, Monard D.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute, Basel, Switzerland.

An enhancer sequence found in the Protease Nexin-1 (PN-1) gene was shown to drive
lacZ expression specifically at the met-/mesencephalic junction in transgenic
mouse embryos. A functional study of this enhancer has been performed to better
understand the mechanisms regulating isthmic gene expression. An octamer-binding 
site for POU domain factors was found to be crucial for the activity of the
enhancer in vivo. Comparative expression studies of POU domain factors,
electrophoretic mobility shift assays and transient transfection experiments,
strongly suggest that Brn-1/-2 regulate the enhancer activity in vivo. In
addition, in vitro experiments indicated that FGF-8 was required for the
maintenance of the enhancer activity, but not for the synthesis of Bn-1/-2. The
data represents the first functional evidence for a role of POU factors in the
regulation of met-/mesencephalic gene expression. It also implies that at least
two regulatory pathways, namely the FGF-8 signaling and the octamer-binding site 
pathway, synergistically interact to control the PN-1 enhancer activity in vivo.

PMID: 10473120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Biol Chem. 1999 Aug 27;274(35):25113-20.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 relieves chromatin-mediated repression of the
alpha-fetoprotein gene.

Crowe AJ(1), Sang L, Li KK, Lee KC, Spear BT, Barton MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 45267-0524, USA.

The alpha-fetoprotein gene (AFP) is tightly regulated at the tissue-specific
level, with expression confined to endoderm-derived cells. We have reconstituted 
AFP transcription on chromatin-assembled DNA templates in vitro. Our studies show
that chromatin assembly is essential for hepatic-specific expression of the AFP
gene. While nucleosome-free AFP DNA is robustly transcribed in vitro by both
cervical (HeLa) and hepatocellular (HepG2) carcinoma extracts, the general
transcription factors and transactivators present in HeLa extract cannot relieve 
chromatin-mediated repression of AFP. In contrast, preincubation with either
HepG2 extract or HeLa extract supplemented with recombinant hepatocyte nuclear
factor 3 alpha (HNF3alpha), a hepatic-enriched factor expressed very early during
liver development, is sufficient to confer transcriptional activation on a
chromatin-repressed AFP template. Transient transfection studies illustrate that 
HNF3alpha can activate AFP expression in a non-liver cellular environment,
confirming a pivotal role for HNF3alpha in establishing hepatic-specific gene
expression. Restriction enzyme accessibility assays reveal that HNF3alpha
promotes the assembly of an open chromatin structure at the AFP promoter.
Combined, these functional and structural data suggest that chromatin assembly
establishes a barrier to block inappropriate expression of AFP in non-hepatic
tissues and that tissue-specific factors, such as HNF3alpha, are required to
alleviate the chromatin-mediated repression.

PMID: 10455192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Biol Chem. 1999 Aug 27;274(35):25042-50.

Maximization of selenocysteine tRNA and U6 small nuclear RNA transcriptional
activation achieved by flexible utilization of a Staf zinc finger.

Schaub M(1), Myslinski E, Krol A, Carbon P.

Author information: 
(1)"Structure des Macromolécules Biologiques et Mécanismes de Reconnaissance,"
UPR 9002 du CNRS, Institut de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, 15 rue René
Descartes, 67084 Strasbourg Cedex, France.

Transcriptional activators Staf and Oct-1 play critical roles in the activation
of small nuclear RNA (snRNA) and snRNA-type gene transcription. Recently, we
established that Staf binding to the human U6 snRNA (hU6) and Xenopus
selenocysteine tRNA (xtRNA(Sec)) genes requires different sets of the seven C2-H2
zinc fingers. In this work, using a combination of oocyte microinjection,
electrophoretic mobility shift assays, and missing nucleoside experiments with
wild-type and mutant promoters, we demonstrate that the hU6 gene requires zinc
fingers 2-7 for Staf binding and Oct-1 for maximal transcriptional activity. In
contrast, the xtRNA(Sec) gene needs the binding of the seven Staf zinc fingers,
but not Oct-1, for optimal transcriptional capacity. Mutation in the binding site
for Staf zinc finger 1 in the tRNA(Sec) promoter reduced both Staf binding and
transcriptional activity. Conversely, introduction of a zinc finger 1 binding
site in the hU6 promoter increased Staf binding but interfered with the
simultaneous Staf and Oct-1 binding, thus reducing transcriptional activity.
Collectively, these results show that the differential utilization of Staf zinc
finger 1 represents a new, critical determinant of the transcriptional activation
mechanism for the Xenopus tRNA(Sec) and human U6 snRNA genes.

PMID: 10455183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Hum Mol Genet. 1999 Sep;8(9):1785-9.

A molecular analysis of the yemenite deaf-blind hypopigmentation syndrome: SOX10 
dysfunction causes different neurocristopathies.

Bondurand N(1), Kuhlbrodt K, Pingault V, Enderich J, Sajus M, Tommerup N, Warburg
M, Hennekam RC, Read AP, Wegner M, Goossens M.

Author information: 
(1)Génétique Moléculaire et Physiopathologie, INSERM U468 et Laboratoire de
Biochimie et Génétique Moléculaire, AP-HP, Hôpital Henri Mondor, 94010 Créteil
Cedex, France.

The Yemenite deaf-blind hypopigmentation syndrome was first observed in a
Yemenite sister and brother showing cutaneous hypopigmented and hyperpigmented
spots and patches, microcornea, coloboma and severe hearing loss. A second case, 
observed in a girl with similar skin symptoms and hearing loss but without
microcornea or coloboma, was reported as a mild form of this syndrome. Here we
show that a SOX10 missense mutation is responsible for the mild form, resulting
in a loss of DNA binding of this transcription factor. In contrast, no SOX10
alteration could be found in the other, severe case of the Yemenite deaf-blind
hypopigmentation syndrome. Based on genetic, clinical, molecular and functional
data, we suggest that these two cases represent two different syndromes.
Moreover, as mutations of the SOX10 transcription factor were previously
described in Waardenburg-Hirschsprung disease, these results show that SOX10
mutations cause various types of neurocristopathy.

PMID: 10441344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Cell Growth Differ. 1999 Jul;10(7):457-65.

Retinoblastoma protein expression leads to reduced Oct-1 DNA binding activity and
enhances interleukin-8 expression.

Zhang H(1), Shepherd AT, Eason DD, Wei S, Diaz JI, Djeu JY, Wu GD, Blanck G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, College of Medicine,
University of South Florida, Tampa 33612, USA.

Tumor cell lines with a defective retinoblastoma gene are unable to transcribe
the HLA class II genes in response to IFN-gamma treatment, and reconstitution of 
functional Rb rescues IFN-gamma-induced class II gene expression. However, the
molecular mechanism of Rb rescue of the class II genes is unknown. We have
examined the effect of Rb expression on the activation of the promoter for
HLA-DRA, the prototype class II gene. Oct-1, a POU domain transcription factor,
was identified as a repressor of HLA-DRA promoter activity in the Rb-defective
cells. Rb expression led to phosphorylation of Oct-1, thus relieving its
repressive effect. Oct-1 has also been shown to repress interleukin 8 promoter
activity. Consistent with reduced levels of Oct-1 DNA binding activity in the
Rb-transformed cell lines, interleukin 8 expression is higher in these cell
lines.

PMID: 10437913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Gene. 1999 Aug 5;236(1):1-12.

Mechanism of DNA replication in eukaryotic cells: cellular host factors
stimulating adenovirus DNA replication.

de Jong RN(1), van der Vliet PC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Physiological Chemistry and Centre for Biomedical Genetics,
Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Replication of adenovirus (Ad) DNA depends on interactions between three viral
and three cellular proteins. Human transcription factors NFI and Oct-1 recruit
the Ad DNA polymerase to the origin of DNA replication as a complex with the Ad
protein primer pTP. High affinity and specificity DNA binding to recognition
sites in this origin by the transcription factors stimulate and stabilize
pre-initiation complex formation to compensate for the low binding specificity of
the pTP/pol complex. In this review, we discuss the properties of NFI and Oct-1
and the mechanism by which they enhance initiation of DNA replication. We propose
a model that describes the dynamics of initiation and elongation as well as the
assembly and disassembly of the pre-initiation complex.

PMID: 10433960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jul 16;274(29):20376-83.

Octamer-dependent in vivo expression of the endothelial cell-specific TIE2 gene.

Fadel BM(1), Boutet SC, Quertermous T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Falk Cardiovascular Research Center,
Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305-5406, USA.

The TIE2 gene, also known as TEK, encodes a tyrosine kinase receptor that is
required for the normal development of the vascular system during embryogenesis. 
TIE2 is specifically expressed in endothelial cells; however, the transcriptional
mechanisms that regulate this highly restricted pattern of expression remain
unknown. Here we demonstrate that a consensus octamer element located in the
5'-flanking region of TIE2 is required for normal expression in embryonic
endothelial cells. Transgenic embryos carrying a TIE2/LacZ construct spanning 2.1
kilobases of upstream regulatory sequences exhibit expression of the reporter
transgene specifically in endothelial cells. Site-directed mutagenesis of a
consensus octamer element located in this region results in the loss of enhancer 
activity and significantly impairs the endothelial expression of the reporter
transgene. Consistent with the in vivo data, in vitro DNA-protein binding studies
show that the consensus octamer element displays an endothelial cell-specific
pattern of binding, suggesting an interaction with a protein complex consisting
of Oct1 and an endothelial cell-restricted cofactor. These data identify a novel 
role for the octamer element as an essential regulator of TIE2 expression, define
the first known transcriptional pathway that mediates the expression of a
developmental endothelial cell gene, and provide insights into the
transcriptional mechanisms that regulate development of the vasculature during
embryogenesis.

PMID: 10400661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Vision Res. 1999 Jul;39(15):2511-8.

Differential DNA binding activities of the transcription factors AP-1 and Oct-1
during light-induced apoptosis of photoreceptors.

Hafezi F(1), Marti A, Grimm C, Wenzel A, Remé CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland.
hafezi@opht.unizh.ch

The activity of transcription factors like AP-1 and Oct-1 is critical for the
regulation of gene expression. Whereas Oct-1 mainly regulates the expression of
housekeeping genes, AP-1 is often involved in cellular responses to external
stimuli and plays an essential role in the regulation of light-induced apoptosis 
of mouse retinal photoreceptors. In this study, we investigated AP-1 and Oct-1
DNA binding activity and AP-1 complex composition in the mouse retina during
light-induced photoreceptor apoptosis. AP-1 DNA binding activity was low in
dark-adapted animals but was transiently elevated within 12 h after exposure of
mice to apoptosis-inducing levels of white fluorescent light. Maximal AP-1
activity was found 6 h after light-exposure. Antibody interference analysis at 6 
h after damaging light exposure and under normal light conditions revealed that
the major fraction of AP-1 consists of c-Fos/JunD heterodimers in both
situations. In contrast to AP-1, Oct-1 DNA binding activity was maximal in
dark-adapted animals and was reduced during photoreceptor apoptosis. Transient
induction of AP-1 (c-Fos/JunD) and inactivation of Oct-1 may be crucial events
for light-mediated apoptosis of retinal photoreceptors.

PMID: 10396620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 1998;63:599-607.

The herpes simplex virus VP16-induced complex: mechanisms of combinatorial
transcriptional regulation.

Herr W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, New York 11724, USA.

PMID: 10384325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 1998;63:201-18.

Role of general and gene-specific cofactors in the regulation of eukaryotic
transcription.

Roeder RG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Rockefeller University, New 
York, New York 10021, USA.

PMID: 10384284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jul 2;274(27):19103-8.

Functional interaction between Oct-1 and retinoid X receptor.

Kakizawa T(1), Miyamoto T, Ichikawa K, Kaneko A, Suzuki S, Hara M, Nagasawa T,
Takeda T, Mori Ji, Kumagai M, Hashizume K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics, Endocrinology, and Metabolism, Shinshu University
School of Medicine, Matsumoto 390-8621, Japan.

The retinoid X receptor (RXR) is a member of the nuclear hormone receptor
superfamily and heterodimerizes with a variety of other family members such as
the thyroid hormone receptor (TR),1 retinoic acid receptor, vitamin D receptor,
and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor. Therefore, RXR is supposed to
play a key role in a ligand-dependent regulation of gene transcription by nuclear
receptors. In this study, we have identified the octamer-binding transcription
factor-1 (Oct-1) as a novel interaction factor of RXR. In vitro pull-down assays 
using RXR deletion mutants showed that the interaction surfaces were located in
the region encompassing the DNA binding domain (C domain) and the hinge domain (D
domain) of RXR. We also showed that RXR interacted with the POU homeodomain but
not with the POU-specific domain of Oct-1. Gel shift analysis revealed that Oct-1
reduced the binding of TR/RXR heterodimers to the thyroid hormone response
element (TRE). In transient transfection assays using COS1 cells, Oct-1 repressed
the T3-dependent transcriptional activity of TR/RXR heterodimers, consistent with
in vitro DNA binding data; however, transcriptional activation by Gal4-TR(LBD)
(LBD, ligand binding domain), which lacks its own DNA binding domain but retains 
responsiveness to T3, was not influenced by Oct-1. These results suggest that
Oct-1 functionally interacts with RXR and negatively regulates the nuclear
receptor signaling pathway by altering the DNA binding ability of the receptors.

PMID: 10383413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Nat Genet. 1999 Jun;22(2):145-50.

A polymorphism that affects OCT-1 binding to the TNF promoter region is
associated with severe malaria.

Knight JC(1), Udalova I, Hill AV, Greenwood BM, Peshu N, Marsh K, Kwiatkowski D.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Infectious Diseases Group, Institute of Molecular Medicine, Oxford, 
UK. julian.knight@paediatrics.ox.ac.uk

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 1999 Jun;22(2):120-1.

Genetic variation in cytokine promoter regions is postulated to influence
susceptibility to infection, but the molecular mechanisms by which such
polymorphisms might affect gene regulation are unknown. Through systematic DNA
footprinting of the TNF (encoding tumour necrosis factor, TNF) promoter region,
we have identified a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) that causes the
helix-turn-helix transcription factor OCT-1 to bind to a novel region of complex 
protein-DNA interactions and alters gene expression in human monocytes. The
OCT-1-binding genotype, found in approximately 5% of Africans, is associated with
fourfold increased susceptibility to cerebral malaria in large case-control
studies of West African and East African populations, after correction for other 
known TNF polymorphisms and linked HLA alleles.

PMID: 10369255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Nat Genet. 1999 Jun;22(2):120-1.

Creating deaths from malaria.

Wahlgren M.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 1999 Jun;22(2):145-50.

PMID: 10369245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1999 Jun;103(6):1125-35.

Binding of YY1 and Oct1 to a novel element that downregulates expression of IL-5 
in human T cells.

Mordvinov VA(1), Schwenger GT, Fournier R, De Boer ML, Peroni SE, Singh AD,
Karlen S, Holland JW, Sanderson CJ.

Author information: 
(1)TVW Telethon Institute for Child Health Research, Perth, Australia.

BACKGROUND: IL-5 controls development of eosinophilia and has been shown to be
involved in the pathogenesis of allergic diseases. In both atopic and nonatopic
asthma, elevated IL-5 has been detected in peripheral blood and the airways. IL-5
is produced mainly by activated T cells, and its expression is regulated at the
transcriptional level.
OBJECTIVE: This study focuses on the functional analysis of the human IL-5
(hIL-5) promoter and characterization of cis -regulatory elements and
transcription factors involved in the suppression of IL-5 transcription in T
cells.
METHODS: Methods used in this study include DNase I footprint assays,
electrophoretic mobility shift assays, and functional analysis by mammalian cell 
transfection involving deletion analysis and site-directed mutagenesis.
RESULTS: We identified 5 protein binding regions (BRs) located within the
proximal hIL-5 promoter. Functional analysis indicates that the BRs are involved 
in control of hIL-5 promoter activity. Two of these regions, BR3 and BR4 located 
at positions -102 to -73, have not previously been described as regulators of
IL-5 expression in T cells. We show that the BR3 sequence contains a novel
negative regulatory element located at positions -90 to -79 of the hIL-5
promoter, which binds Oct1, octamer-like, and YY1 nuclear factors. Substitution
mutations, which abolished binding of these proteins to the BR3 sequence,
significantly increased hIL-5 promoter activity in activated T cells.
CONCLUSION: We suggest that Oct1, YY1, and octamer-like factors binding to the
-90/-79 sequence within the proximal IL-5 promoter are involved in suppression of
IL-5 transcription in T cells.

PMID: 10359895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jun 4;274(23):16437-43.

Analysis of functional domains of the host cell factor involved in VP16 complex
formation.

Hughes TA(1), La Boissière S, O'Hare P.

Author information: 
(1)Marie Curie Research Institute, The Chart, Oxted, Surrey, RH8 0TL, United
Kingdom.

We present biochemical analyses of the regions of the host cell factor (HCF)
involved in VP16 complex formation and in the association between the N- and
C-terminal domains of HCF itself. We show that the kelch repeat region of HCF
(residues 1-380) is sufficient for VP16 complex formation, but that residues
C-terminal to the repeats (positions 381-450) interfere with this activity.
However, these latter residues are required for the interaction between the N-
and C-terminal regions of HCF. The extreme C-terminal region of HCF,
corresponding to an area of strong conservation with a Caenorhabditis elegans
homologue, is sufficient for interaction with the N-terminal region. These
results are discussed with respect to possible differences in the roles of HCF in
VP16 activity versus its normal cellular function.

PMID: 10347205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Poult Sci. 1999 Apr;78(4):574-8.

Tissue expression patterns of chicken octamer-binding proteins.

Heltemes LM(1), Tuggle CK, Lamont SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Program of Immunobiology, Iowa State University, Ames 50011, USA.

The octamer motif is important in transcriptional regulation of genes of the
immune system in many species, including the chicken. Little is known, however,
regarding octamer-binding protein expression in chicken tissues. We examined
octamer-binding protein expression patterns in multiple chicken tissues (ovary,
cerebrum, liver, lung, kidney, spleen, thymus, and bursa of Fabricius) plus two
lymphocyte cell lines. Every tissue and cell line had multiple octamer-binding
proteins. Seven distinct protein-DNA complexes were identified. Our results
demonstrate that multiple octamer-binding proteins, exhibiting differential
tissue expression, exist in a wide variety of tissues of the chicken.

PMID: 10230912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Virol. 1999 May;73(5):3930-40.

Herpes simplex virus transactivator VP16 discriminates between HCF-1 and a novel 
family member, HCF-2.

Johnson KM(1), Mahajan SS, Wilson AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Kaplan Comprehensive Cancer Center, New York
University Medical Center, New York, New York 10016, USA.

Herpes simplex virus infection is initiated by VP16, a viral transcription factor
that activates the viral immediate-early (IE) genes. VP16 does not recognize the 
IE gene promoters directly but instead forms a multiprotein complex with Oct-1
and HCF-1, a ubiquitous nuclear protein required for progression through the G1
phase of the cell cycle. The functional significance of recruiting HCF-1 to the
VP16-induced complex is not understood. Here we describe the identification of a 
second HCF-like protein, designated HCF-2. HCF-2 is smaller than HCF-1 but shares
three regions of strong amino acid sequence homology, including the
beta-propeller domain required for association with VP16. HCF-2 is expressed in
many tissues, especially the testis, and shows a more dynamic pattern of
subcellular localization than HCF-1. Although HCF-2 associates with VP16 and can 
support complex assembly with Oct-1 and DNA, it is significantly less efficient
than HCF-1. A similar preference is shown by LZIP, a cellular counterpart of
VP16. Analysis of chimeric proteins showed that differences between the fifth and
sixth kelch repeats of the beta-propeller domains from HCF-1 and HCF-2 dictate
this selectivity. These results reveal an unexpected level of specificity in the 
recruitment of HCF-1 to the VP16-induced complex, paralleling the preferential
selection of Oct-1 rather than the closely related POU domain protein Oct-2.
Implications for regulation of the viral life cycle are discussed.

PMCID: PMC104171
PMID: 10196288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Mol Cells. 1999 Feb 28;9(1):99-109.

Octamer motif is required for the NF-kappaB-mediated induction of the inducible
nitric oxide synthase gene expression in RAW 264.7 macrophages.

Kim YM(1), Ko CB, Park YP, Kim YJ, Paik SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Chungnam National University, Taejon, Korea.

The promoter of the mouse inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) has a putative
octamer motif (ATGCAAAA) which exists 24 bp upstream from the TATA box and is
mismatched at a single residue from the consensus octamer motif. To examine
whether this site is involved in iNOS expression, we constructed various
deletions and site-directed mutants of the iNOS promoter linked to the
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) reporter gene, transfected the constructs
into RAW 264.7 macrophages, and stimulated the cells with interferon-gamma
(IFN-gamma) and/or lipopolysaccharide (LPS). CAT activity was not induced by LPS 
in constructs containing only the octamer motif (-71 to +82), but was induced
with constructs containing the octamer motif and the upstream sequences of the
NF-kappaB site (-91 to +82). However, a site-directed mutation of the octamer
motif in the context of the -91 to +82 promoter construct or an extended promoter
construct (-1542 to +82) abolished IFN-gamma and/or LPS-induced CAT activity.
Similar results were obtained from site-directed mutants at either the NF-kappaB 
site or both the NF-kappaB site and octamer motif in these two constructs. In
addition, we demonstrated that the conversion of the iNOS octamer motif into a
consensus sequence increased CAT activity. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay
(EMSA) performed with the NF-kappaB site or the octamer motif-containing
oligonucleotide probe revealed that NF-kappaB binding was induced by LPS
treatment, while the Oct-1 binding was constitutive. Competition assays performed
with octamer-related oligonucleotide competitors derived from the
immunoglobulin-kappaB or SV40 promoter confirmed the identity of the iNOS
promoter sequence as being a Oct-1 binding site. EMSA carried out using a probe
containing both the NF-kappaB site and the octamer motif identified two
LPS-induced complexes. Competition assays with each NF-kappaB site or octamer
motif competitor revealed that NF-kappaB and Oct-1 were present in these two
complexes. These data suggest that, besides the NF-kappaB site, the octamer motif
is essential for the maximal expression of the iNOS gene in murine macrophages,
and the direct interaction of Oct-1 and NF-kappaB is important for the regulation
of this gene.

PMID: 10102579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Adv Exp Med Biol. 1998;449:39-53.

POU domain factors in neural development.

Schonemann MD(1), Ryan AK, Erkman L, McEvilly RJ, Bermingham J, Rosenfeld MG.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department and School of Medicine, University
of California, San Diego 92093-0648, USA.

Transcription factors serve critical roles in the progressive development of
general body plan, organ commitment, and finally, specific cell types. Comparison
of the biological roles of a series of individual members within a family permits
some generalizations to be made regarding the developmental events that are
likely to be regulated by a particular class of transcription factors. Here, we
evidence that the developmental functions of the family of transcription factors 
characterized by the POU DNA binding motif exerts roles in mammalian development.
The POU domain family of transcription factors was defined following the
observation that the products of three mammalian genes, Pit-1, Oct-1, and Oct-2, 
and the protein encoded by the C. elegans gene unc-86, shared a region of
homology, known as the POU domain. The POU domain is a bipartite DNA binding
domain, consisting of two highly conserved regions, tethered by a variable
linker. The approximately 75 amino acid N-terminal region was called the
POU-specific domain and the C-terminal 60 amino acid region, the POU-homeodomain.
High-affinity site-specific DNA binding by POU domain transcription factors
requires both the POU-specific and the POU-homeodomain. Resolution of the crystal
structures of Oct-1 and Pit-1 POU domains bound to DNA as a monomer and
homodimer, respectively, confirmed several of the in vitro findings regarding
interactions of this bipartite DNA binding domain with DNA and has provided
important information regarding the flexibility and versatility of POU domain
proteins. Overall the crystal structure of a monomer of the Oct-1 POU domain
bound to the octamer element was similar to that predicted by the NMR solution
structures of the POU-specific domain and the POU-homeodomain in isolation, with 
the POU-specific domain consists of four alpha helices, with the second and third
helices forming a structure similar to the helix-turn-helix motif of the lambda
and 434 repressors; several of the DNA base contacts are also conserved. A
homodimer of the Pit-1 POU domain was crystallized bound to a Pit-1 dimer DNA
element that is closely related to a site in the proximal promoter of the
prolactin gene. The structure of the Pit-1 POU domain on DNA is very similar to
that of Oct-1, and the Pit-1 POU-homeodomain/DNA structure is strikingly similar 
to that of other homeodomains, including the Oct-1 POU-homeodomain. The DNA
contacts made by the Pit-1 POU-specific domain are also similar to those of Oct-1
and conserved with many made by the prokaryotic repressors. In the Oct-1 crystal,
the POU-specific domain recognizes a GCAT half-site, while the corresponding
sequence recognized by the Pit-1 POU-specific domain, GTAT, is on the opposing
strand. As a result, the orientation of the Pit-1 POU-specific domain relative to
the POU-homeodomain is flipped, as compared to the Oct-1 crystal structure,
indicating the remarkable flexibility of the POU-specific domain in adapting to
variations in sequence within the site. Also in contrast to the Oct-1 monomer
structure is the observation that the POU-specific and POU-homeodomain of each
Pit-1 molecule make major groove contacts on the same face of the DNA, consistent
with the constraints imposed by its 15 amino acid linker. As a result, the Pit-1 
POU domain homodimer essentially surrounds its DNA binding site. In the Pit-1 POU
domain homodimer the dimerization interface is formed between the C-terminal end 
of helix 3 of the POU-homeodomain of one Pit-1 molecule and the N-terminus of
helix 1 and the loop between helices 3 and 4 of the POU-specific domain of the
other Pit-1 molecule. In contrast to other homeodomain crystal structures, the
C-terminus of helix 3 in the Pit-1 POU-homeo-domain has an extended structure.
(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED)

PMID: 10026784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999 Feb 16;1444(2):295-8.

Expression of novel alternatively spliced isoforms of the oct-1 transcription
factor.

Riss J(1), Laskov R.

Author information: 
(1)The Hubert Humphrey Center for Experimental Medicine and Cancer Research, The 
Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

Analysis of the alternatively spliced isoforms of the human and mouse oct-1
genes, combined with their exon-intron structure, show a high level of
evolutionary conservation between these two species. The differential expression 
of several oct-1 isoforms was examined by reverse transcription-polymerase chain 
reaction performed on the 3' region of the murine oct-1 cDNA. Variations in the
relative levels and patterns of expression of the isoforms were found among
different tissues. Three novel isoforms originating from the 3'-distal region of 
oct-1, were isolated and sequenced: Two were derived from testis, and one from
myeloma cells. Splicing out of different exons as revealed in the structure of
these isoforms results in reading frameshifts that presumably lead to the
expression of shortened Oct-1 proteins, with distinct C-terminal tails.
Altogether, six out of the eight known murine oct-1 isoforms may have distinct
C-termini, implying that these multiple tails have different functional roles in 
cellular differentiation and physiology.

PMID: 10023087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Feb 16;96(4):1229-33.

Nuclear localization of the C1 factor (host cell factor) in sensory neurons
correlates with reactivation of herpes simplex virus from latency.

Kristie TM(1), Vogel JL, Sears AE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Viral Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Building 4-133,
9000, Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Thomas_Kristie@nih.gov

After a primary infection, herpes simplex virus is maintained in a latent state
in neurons of sensory ganglia until complex stimuli reactivate viral lytic
replication. Although the mechanisms governing reactivation from the latent state
remain unknown, the regulated expression of the viral immediate early genes
represents a critical point in this process. These genes are controlled by
transcription enhancer complexes whose assembly requires and is coordinated by
the cellular C1 factor (host cell factor). In contrast to other tissues, the C1
factor is not detected in the nuclei of sensory neurons. Experimental conditions 
that induce the reactivation of herpes simplex virus in mouse model systems
result in rapid nuclear localization of the protein, indicating that the C1
factor is sequestered in these cells until reactivation signals induce a
redistribution of the protein. The regulated localization suggests that C1 is a
critical switch determinant of the viral lytic-latent cycle.

PMCID: PMC15445
PMID: 9990006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Biol Chem. 1999 Feb 19;274(8):4646-54.

Cloning and functional characterization of the 5'-flanking region of the human
monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 receptor (CCR2) gene. Essential role of
5'-untranslated region in tissue-specific expression.

Yamamoto K(1), Takeshima H, Hamada K, Nakao M, Kino T, Nishi T, Kochi M, Kuratsu 
J, Yoshimura T, Ushio Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Kumamoto University School of Medicine, Kumamoto
860-8556, Japan.

The human monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 receptor designated hCCR2 is an
essential co-receptor in cell entry by the human immunodeficiency virus as well
as a receptor for monocyte chemoattractant protein-1, a member of the family of
C-C chemokines that mediate monocyte chemotaxis. To elucidate the molecular
mechanisms underlying the transcriptional regulation of hCCR2, we cloned and
sequenced the hCCR2 gene; it was approximately 8 kilobase pairs in length and
consisted of three exons divided by two introns. In the 5'-flanking region, there
were the typical mammalian promoter consensus elements, a CAAT box and a TATA
box, resulting in a single transcription initiation site. In addition, we found
clustered tissue-specific cis-regulatory elements such as GATA consensus
sequences, Oct-1 binding sequences, and CAAT/enhancer-binding protein binding
sequences. Luciferase assays with various promoter deletions and gel mobility
shift assays indicated that three cis-regulatory elements located within the
region from -89 to +118 are required for basal activity in THP-1 cells. One
element is an octamer sequence 36-base pair upstream from the TATA box; it binds 
mainly to Oct-1 and is capable of increasing transcriptional activity. The other 
two elements, which are tandem recognition sites of the CAAT/enhancer-binding
protein family, are located in the 5'-untranslated region and account for the
transcriptional activation as well as the tissue specificity of hCCR2.

PMID: 9988701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Immunol. 1999 Feb 15;162(4):2095-102.

Immunosuppressive leflunomide metabolite (A77 1726) blocks TNF-dependent nuclear 
factor-kappa B activation and gene expression.

Manna SK(1), Aggarwal BB.

Author information: 
(1)Cytokine Research Laboratory, Department of Molecular Oncology, University of 
Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston 77030, USA.

Leflunomide is a novel immunosuppressive and antiinflammatory agent currently
being tested for treatment of autoimmune diseases and transplant rejection.
NF-kappa B is a transcription factor activated in response to a wide variety of
inflammatory stimuli, including TNF, but whether leflunomide blocks NF-kappa B
activation is not known. In the present report we demonstrate that treatment of a
human T cell line (Jurkat) with leflunomide blocks TNF-mediated NF-kappa B
activation in a dose- and time-dependent manner, with maximum inhibition at 5-10 
microM. Inhibition was not restricted to TNF-induced activation, because
leflunomide also inhibited NF-kappa B activation induced by other inflammatory
agents, including phorbol ester, LPS, H2O2, okadaic acid, and ceramide.
Leflunomide blocked the degradation of I kappa B alpha and subsequent nuclear
translocation of the p65 subunit, steps essential for NF-kappa B activation. This
correlated with inhibition of dual specificity-mitogen-activated protein kinase
kinase as well as an Src protein tyrosine kinase, p56lck, by leflunomide.
Reducing agents did not reverse the effect of leflunomide. Leflunomide also
suppressed the TNF-activated NF-kappa B-dependent reporter gene expression. Our
results thus indicate that leflunomide is a potent inhibitor of NF-kappa B
activation induced by a wide variety of inflammatory stimuli, and this provides
the molecular basis for its anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive effects.

PMID: 9973483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Mol Endocrinol. 1999 Feb;13(2):228-38.

Reconstitution of the protein kinase A response of the rat prolactin promoter:
differential effects of distinct Pit-1 isoforms and functional interaction with
Oct-1.

Diamond SE(1), Chiono M, Gutierrez-Hartmann A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Colorado Cancer Center, University of Colorado Health 
Sciences Center, Denver 80262, USA.

PRL gene transcription is primarily regulated by dopamine, which lowers cAMP
levels and inhibits protein kinase A (PKA) activity. Current data indicate that
the cAMP/PKA response maps to the most proximal Pit-1/Pit-1beta binding site
footprint I (FP I) on the rat PRL (rPRL) promoter. Pit-1, a POU-homeo domain
transcription factor, is specifically expressed in the anterior pituitary and is 
required both for the normal development of anterior pituitary cell types,
somatotrophs, lactotrophs, and thyrotrophs, and for the expression of their
hormones: GH, PRL, and TSHbeta. Pit-1 has been shown to functionally interact,
via FP I, with several transcription factors, including Oct-1, a ubiquitous
homeobox protein, and thyrotroph embryonic factor, which is found in lactotrophs,
to activate basal rPRL promoter activity. Pit-1beta/GHF-2, a distinct splice
isoform of Pit-1, acts to inhibit Ras-activated transcription from the rPRL
promoter, which is mediated by a functional interaction between Pit-1 and Ets-1
at the most distal Pit-1 binding site (FP IV). In this manuscript we show 1) that
the Pit-1beta isoform not only fails to block PKA activation, but is, in fact, a 
superior mediator of the PKA response; 2) that the PKA response requires intact
POU-specific and POU-homeo domains of Pit-1; and 3) that Oct-1, but not
thyrotroph embryonic factor, functions as a Pit-1-interacting factor to mediate
an optimal PKA response.

PMID: 9973253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jan 22;274(4):2372-8.

The glucocorticoid receptor is tethered to DNA-bound Oct-1 at the mouse
gonadotropin-releasing hormone distal negative glucocorticoid response element.

Chandran UR(1), Warren BS, Baumann CT, Hager GL, DeFranco DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania 15260, USA.

An element required for glucocorticoid repression of mouse gonadotropin-releasing
hormone (GnRH) gene transcription, the distal negative glucocorticoid response
element (nGRE), is not bound directly by glucocorticoid receptors (GRs) but is
recognized by Oct-1 present in GT1-7 cell nuclear extracts or by Oct-1 purified
from HeLa cells. Furthermore, purified full-length GRs interact directly with
purified Oct-1 bound to the distal nGRE. Increasing the extent of distal nGRE
match to an Oct-1 consensus site not only increases the affinity of Oct-1
binding, but also alters the conformation of DNA-bound Oct-1 and the pattern of
protein DNA complexes formed in vitro with GT1-7 cell nuclear extracts. In
addition, the interaction of purified GR with DNA-bound Oct-1 is altered when
Oct-1 is bound to the consensus Oct-1 site. Mutation of the distal nGRE to a
consensus Oct-1 site is also associated with reduced glucocorticoid repression in
transfected GT1-7 cells. Furthermore, repression of GnRH gene transcription by
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate, which utilizes sequences that overlap with 
the nGRE, is reversed by this distal nGRE mutation leading to activation of GnRH 
gene transcription. Thus, changes in the assembly of multi-protein complexes at
the distal nGRE can influence the regulation of GnRH gene transcription.

PMID: 9891005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. EMBO J. 1999 Jan 15;18(2):480-9.

HCF-dependent nuclear import of VP16.

La Boissière S(1), Hughes T, O'Hare P.

Author information: 
(1)Marie Curie Research Institute, The Chart, Oxted, Surrey RH8 OTL, UK.

Transactivation by VP16 requires the formation of a multicomponent complex, the
TAATGAAAT recognition factor complex (TRF.C), that contains in addition to VP16, 
two cellular proteins, Oct-1 and HCF. HCF binds directly to VP16 and this
promotes subsequent interaction of the VP16-HCF complex with the POU DNA-binding 
domain of Oct-1 and selective assembly onto target sites. Here we demonstrate a
novel role of HCF in the intracellular compartmentalization of VP16. We show that
while VP16 does not contain a consensus nuclear localization signal (NLS) and is 
largely cytoplasmic, co-expression with HCF resulted in VP16 nuclear
accumulation. A candidate NLS within the C-terminus of HCF was identified and
insertion of this motif into green fluorescent protein (GFP) promoted nuclear
accumulation. Conversely, removal of this signal from HCF (HCFDeltaNLS) resulted 
in its cytoplasmic accumulation. Co-expression of HCFDeltaNLS with wild-type (wt)
VP16, or of wt HCF with VP16 mutants lacking HCF-binding activity failed to
promote the nuclear enrichment of VP16. These results indicate that in addition
to its role in stabilizing TRF.C, HCF acts as a nuclear import factor for VP16.

PMCID: PMC1171141
PMID: 9889203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jan;19(1):909-15.

Selected elements of herpes simplex virus accessory factor HCF are highly
conserved in Caenorhabditis elegans.

Liu Y(1), Hengartner MO, Herr W.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York 11724, USA.

HCF is a mammalian nuclear protein that undergoes proteolytic processing and is
required for cell proliferation. During productive herpes simplex virus (HSV)
infection, the viral transactivator VP16 associates with HCF to initiate HSV gene
transcription. Here, we show that the worm Caenorhabditis elegans possesses a
functional homolog of mammalian HCF that can associate with and activate the
viral protein VP16. The pattern of sequence conservation, however, is uneven.
Sequences required for mammalian HCF processing are not present in C. elegans
HCF. Furthermore, not all elements of mammalian HCF that are required for
promoting cell proliferation are conserved. Nevertheless, unexpectedly, C.
elegans HCF can promote mammalian cell proliferation because a region of HCF that
is conserved can promote mammalian cell proliferation better than its human
counterpart. These results suggest that HCF possesses a highly conserved role in 
metazoan cell proliferation which is targeted by VP16 to regulate HSV infection. 
The precise mechanisms, however, by which HCF functions in mammals and worms
appear to differ.

PMCID: PMC83948
PMID: 9858614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Genes Dev. 1998 Nov 15;12(22):3528-40.

The Oct-1 POU domain activates snRNA gene transcription by contacting a region in
the SNAPc largest subunit that bears sequence similarities to the Oct-1
coactivator OBF-1.

Ford E(1), Strubin M, Hernandez N.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York 11724 USA.

The RNA polymerases II and III snRNA gene promoters contain an octamer sequence
as part of the enhancer and a proximal sequence element (PSE) as part of the core
promoter. The octamer and the PSE bind the POU domain activator Oct-1 and the
basal transcription factor SNAPc, respectively. Oct-1, but not Oct-1 with a
single E7R mutation within the POU domain, binds cooperatively with SNAPc and, in
effect, recruits SNAPc to the PSE. Here, we show that SNAPc recruitment is
mediated by an interaction between the Oct-1 POU domain and a small region of the
largest subunit of SNAPc, SNAP190. This SNAP190 region is strikingly similar to a
region in the B-cell-specific Oct-1 coactivator, OBF-1, that is required for
interaction with octamer-bound Oct-1 POU domain. The Oct-1 POU domain-SNAP190
interaction is a direct protein-protein contact as determined by the isolation of
a switched specificity SNAP190 mutant that interacts with Oct-1 POU E7R but not
with wild-type Oct-1 POU. We also show that this direct protein-protein contact
results in activation of transcription. Thus, we have identified an activation
target of a human activator, Oct-1, within its cognate basal transcription
complex.

PMCID: PMC317248
PMID: 9832505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. J Leukoc Biol. 1998 Nov;64(5):681-91.

High mobility group I/Y protein functions as a specific cofactor for Oct-2A:
mapping of interaction domains.

Abdulkadir SA(1), Casolaro V, Tai AK, Thanos D, Ono SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, The Schepens Eye Research Institute &
Committee on Immunology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114,
USA.

The octamer motif (ATTTGCAT) present in several eukaryotic promoters and
enhancers is now known to influence the transcription of several genes by
interacting with members of a broad family of homeodomain proteins. The promoter 
of the human class II MHC gene HLA-DRA contains a conserved octamer element that 
can bind (among other proteins) the transcription factor Oct-2A and the high
mobility group proteins (HMG) I/Y. We have previously determined that HMG I(Y)
and Oct-2A cooperatively activate HLA-DRA gene expression, most likely due to the
ability of HMG I(Y) to selectively recruit Oct-2A to the octamer motif. In this
report, we present results of our investigations of the mechanisms of cooperative
transactivation of HLA-DRA transcription by Oct-2A and HMG I(Y). We show that
both the amino- and the carboxy-terminal domains of Oct-2A are required for
HLA-DRA transactivation. Experiments using domain-swap chimeras of the Oct-1 and 
Oct-2A polypeptides indicate that cooperative activation of the DRA gene by HMG
I(Y) and Oct-2A requires the carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) of Oct-2A. However,
HMG I(Y) physically interacts with the conserved POU domains of both Oct-1 and
Oct-2A. We therefore postulate that the nature of the CTD attached to the POU
homeodomain influences the outcome of interaction with HMG I(Y). These studies
support the view that HMG I(Y) is an important cofactor for HLA-DRA gene
activation by Oct-2A and provide insights into its mechanism of action.

PMID: 9823775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Anticancer Drugs. 1998 Sep;9(8):703-14.

Acquisition of cellular resistance to 9-nitro-camptothecin correlates with
suppression of transcription factor NF-kappa B activation and potentiation of
cytotoxicity by tumor necrosis factor in human histiocytic lymphoma U-937 cells.

Singh S(1), Raju U, Mendoza J, Pantazis P, Aggarwal BB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston 77030, USA.

Resistance of tumor cells to chemotherapeutic agents is a major problem in cancer
therapy. Continuous exposure of human histiocytic lymphoma U-937 cells to
9-nitro-camptothecin (9NC), an inhibitor of the nuclear DNA topoisomerase I,
induces resistance to this drug. Because of the involvement of the nuclear factor
NF-kappa B in the expression of several growth regulatory genes, we examined the 
activation of this transcription factor in 9NC-resistant U-937 cells. We found
that resistance to increasing concentrations of 9NC correlated with resistance to
tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-dependent activation of NF-kappa B. However, the
constitutive synthesis of NF-kappa B proteins remained unaffected. Cellular
resistance was not unique to TNF, as other activators of NF-kappa B, including
interleukin-1, phorbol ester and hydrogen peroxide, also had no effect. There was
no difference between 9NC-sensitive and -resistant cells in the activation of
NF-kappa B by okadaic acid. Other transcription factors, including AP-1 and
Oct-1, were not affected in the resistant cells. When examined for the inhibitory
subunit of NF-kappa B (I kappa B alpha), resistant cells showed a faster rate of 
resynthesis than the control. Interestingly, although 9NC resistance correlated
with resistance to TNF-dependent NF-kappa B activation, TNF-dependent
cytotoxicity in these cells was enhanced by several hundred fold despite a
significant decrease in the number of TNF receptors. In conclusion, our results
suggest that NF-kappa B activation may play a role in tumor cell killing by 9NC
but not by TNF.

PMID: 9823429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Ann Rheum Dis. 1998 Aug;57(8):487-94.

Involvement of simultaneous multiple transcription factor expression, including
cAMP responsive element binding protein and OCT-1, for synovial cell outgrowth in
patients with rheumatoid arthritis.

Wakisaka S(1), Suzuki N, Takeno M, Takeba Y, Nagafuchi H, Saito N, Hashimoto H,
Tomita T, Ochi T, Sakane T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Medicine, St Marianna University School of
Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To elucidate possible roles of several transcription factors in the
pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA), the transcription factor expression in
RA synovial tissue and their contribution to RA synovial cell functions were
studied.
METHODS: Single cell suspension of dissociated synovial tissue was cultured to
induce in vitro tissue outgrowth of RA synovial cells. Transcription factors were
immunohistochemically identified in RA synovial tissue obtained by joint surgery 
and in the in vitro tissue outgrowth, and confirmed by western blotting and gel
shift assays.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemical examination of RA synovial tissue revealed
simultaneous expression of various transcription factors (NF-kappa B, c-Jun (a
component of AP-1), cAMP responsive element binding protein (CREB), and OCT-1).
The same set of transcription factors was expressed in the in vitro tissue
outgrowth of RA patients. The early passage RA synovial cells were treated with
interleukin 1 beta (IL1 beta) and confirmed translocation of transcription
factors into the nucleus by western blotting, and their DNA binding activity by
gel shift assays.
CONCLUSION: This study emphasises the importance of the simultaneous expression
of several transcription factors for the hyperactivity of RA synovial cells that 
leads to tissue outgrowth.

PMCID: PMC1752716
PMID: 9797555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Biol Chem. 1998 Oct 2;273(40):26069-77.

Functional map of a placenta-specific enhancer of the human leukemia inhibitory
factor receptor gene.

Wang Z(1), Melmed S.

Author information: 
(1)Cedars-Sinai Research Institute, UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles,
California 90048, USA.

We recently reported a placenta-specific enhancer in the human leukemia
inhibitory factor receptor (LIFR) gene and now show detailed characterization of 
the 226-base pair enhancer (-4625/-4400 nucleotides). Four of twenty-two mutants 
in linker analysis showed reduced promoter activities to 45, 30, 10, and 10%,
respectively. Specific binding of region A (-4617/-4602) with nuclear extract was
competed by a known Oct-1 oligo and supershifted by Oct-1 antibody. Specific
binding of region B (-4549/-4535) was competed by a GATA oligo, but could not be 
supershifted by four GATA antibodies. Nevertheless, mutagenesis showed that
critical bases in region B were identical to the GATA core motif, indicating that
region B may bind to a novel GATA family transcription factor. The other two
adjacent regions designated as region C (-4464/-4445) showed no known consensus
binding sites, and their specific placental JEG-3 nuclear extract binding was not
evident in nonplacental nuclear extracts and was not competed by a trophoblast
specific element (TSE), indicating that region C is a novel placenta-specific
element (PSE, CATTTCCTGAACTAGTTTTT). Footprinting localized the binding boundary 
of PSE-binding protein (PSEB), and three Gs were found to be important for
specific PSE binding. UV cross-linking showed that PSEB had a molecular mass of
approximately 160 kDa, substituting the PSE with two previously reported placenta
elements TSE or chorionic somatomammotropin enhancer factor 1 (CSEF-1) motifs
resulted in markedly different promoter activities, indicating that PSEB is
indeed different from TSE binding protein or CSEF-1. These results are the first 
demonstration that a novel PSE is the major element for placenta-specific
enhancer activity in human LIFR gene.

PMID: 9748286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. J Biol Chem. 1998 Sep 4;273(36):23567-74.

Glucocorticoids repress transcription from a negative glucocorticoid response
element recognized by two homeodomain-containing proteins, Pbx and Oct-1.

Subramaniam N(1), Cairns W, Okret S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, Huddinge University
Hospital, F60 Novum, S-141 86 Huddinge, Sweden.

Several studies have established that the prolactin (PRL) gene is expressed not
only in lactotrophs and somatotrophs of the anterior pituitary but, albeit to a
lesser extent, in non-pituitary cells like human thymocytes, decidualized
endometrium, mammary glands during lactation, and some human non-pituitary cell
lines. Despite the requirement in the pituitary for the pituitary-specific
transcription factor Pit-1/GHF-1 for PRL expression, the expression in
non-pituitary cells occurs in the absence of Pit-1/GHF-1 and can be repressed by 
glucocorticoids. This prompted us to investigate the transcription factors in
non-pituitary cells which are involved in controlling expression and
glucocorticoid repression of a previously characterized negative glucocorticoid
response element from the bovine prolactin gene (PRL3 nGRE). Here we have
demonstrated that non-pituitary cells (COS-7 and mouse hepatoma Hepa1c1c7 cells) 
conferred increased expression via the PRL3 nGRE mainly because of the binding of
the ubiquitously expressed POU-homeodomain-containing octamer transcription
factor-1 (Oct-1) to an AT-rich sequence present in the PRL3 sequence. However,
full transcriptional activity required the binding of a second ubiquitously
expressed homeodomain-containing protein, Pbx, previously shown to bind
cooperatively with several homeotic selector proteins. The Pbx binding site in
the PRL3 nGRE, located just upstream of the Oct-1 binding site, showed a strong
sequence similarity with known Pbx binding sites and bound Pbx with an affinity
similar to that of other established Pbx target sequences. Interestingly, both
Oct-1 and Pbx binding to the PRL3 nGRE were found to be required for
glucocorticoid repression. Addition of in vitro translated glucocorticoid
receptor DNA binding domain to the nuclear extract prevented Oct-1 and Pbx from
binding to the PRL element. The involvement of the homeobox protein Pbx in
glucocorticoid repression via an nGRE identifies a new role for this protein.

PMID: 9722596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Mol Endocrinol. 1998 Aug;12(8):1215-27.

Transcription factor AP1 is involved in basal and okadaic acid-stimulated
activity of the human PRL promoter.

Caccavelli L(1), Manfroid I, Martial JA, Muller M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'immunopathologie, INSERM U430 Hopital Broussais, Paris, France.

The tumor promoter, okadaic acid (OA), an inhibitor of protein phosphatases,
stimulates the activity of the human PRL (hPRL) proximal promoter. We analyzed in
detail the effects of OA on transcription factor binding to elements P1 and P2 of
this promoter, sequences known to contain at least one Pit-1 binding site each.
OA treatment induces binding of an AP1-related transcription factor to the P1
site. This effect is specific, as protein binding to the P2 site is not altered
by the treatment. Specific antibodies were used to confirm that the OA-induced
complex is related to AP1 and to show that it contains JunD and c-fos, but not
Pit-1. The increase in AP1 binding to P1 and to a canonical AP1 site correlates
to an increase in cellular JunD and c-fos content. Transient transfection
experiments showed that both AP1 and Pit-1 are involved in the regulation of
basal and OA-stimulated promoter activity. Our results demonstrate that a member 
of the AP1 family, containing JunD and c-fos, can bind to the proximal element P1
within the hPRL promoter. In addition, they show that AP1 is involved in both
basal and OA-stimulated expression of the hPRL gene.

PMID: 9717847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Sep;18(9):4986-93.

The small GTP-binding protein Rho potentiates AP-1 transcription in T cells.

Chang JH(1), Pratt JC, Sawasdikosol S, Kapeller R, Burakoff SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, and Department
of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The Rho family of small GTP-binding proteins is involved in the regulation of
cytoskeletal structure, gene transcription, specific cell fate development, and
transformation. We demonstrate in this report that overexpression of an activated
form of Rho enhances AP-1 activity in Jurkat T cells in the presence of phorbol
myristate acetate (PMA), but activated Rho (V14Rho) has little or no effect on
NFAT, Oct-1, and NF-kappaB enhancer element activities under similar conditions. 
Overexpression of a V14Rho construct incapable of membrane localization (CAAX
deleted) abolishes PMA-induced AP-1 transcriptional activation. The effect of Rho
on AP-1 is independent of the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway, as a
dominant-negative MEK and a MEK inhibitor (PD98059) did not affect Rho-induced
AP-1 activity. V14Rho binds strongly to protein kinase Calpha (PKCalpha) in vivo;
however, deletion of the CAAX site on V14Rho severely diminished this
association. Evidence for a role for PKCalpha as an effector of Rho was obtained 
by the observation that coexpression of the N-terminal domain of PKCalpha blocked
the effects of activated Rho plus PMA on AP-1 transcriptional activity. These
data suggest that Rho potentiates AP-1 transcription during T-cell activation.

PMCID: PMC109083
PMID: 9710582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. J Biol Chem. 1998 Aug 21;273(34):21856-66.

Tissue-specific and androgen-repressible regulation of the rat
dehydroepiandrosterone sulfotransferase gene promoter.

Song CS(1), Jung MH, Kim SC, Hassan T, Roy AK, Chatterjee B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Structural Biology, The University of Texas Health 
Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas 78284-7762, USA.

Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfotransferase (Std) catalyzes sulfonation of androgenic
steroids and certain aromatic procarcinogens. In rats, this enzyme is selectively
expressed in the liver, and its expression is strongly repressed by androgens.
DNase I footprinting and electrophoretic mobility shift analyses revealed two
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF1), three CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP),
and one consensus palindromic thyroid hormone response elements within the first 
215 base pairs (bp) of the promoter sequence of rat Std. This promoter is
normally inactive in fibroblast-derived NIH 3T3 cells. However, overexpression of
HNF1 and C/EBP resulted in synergistic activation of the Std promoter in this
cell type, indicating essential roles of these two trans-regulators in
liver-selective expression of the rat Std gene. On the other hand, point
mutations at any one of five cis elements proximal to the -215 bp region markedly
reduced reporter gene expression, suggesting that all of these sites are
important for overall promoter function. Androgenic repression of the Std gene in
rat liver can be recapitulated in androgen receptor (AR)-negative HepG2 hepatoma 
cells after cotransfection with an AR expression plasmid. Functional assay of a
nested set of 5'-deleted promoters mapped the negative androgen response region
between positions -235 and -310. Antibody supershift and oligonucleotide
competition identified three OCT-1 and two C/EBP elements between bp -231 and
-292. An additional OCT-1 site was found to overlap with a C/EBP element at the
-262/-252 position. Mutational inactivation of any one of five cis elements
within the -231/-292 region abolished negative androgen response. However, none
of these cis elements showed DNase I protection by recombinant AR in footprinting
assay, suggesting the absence of a direct AR-DNA interaction. Thus, these studies
on rat Std promoter function indicate that (i) HNF1 and C/EBP are responsible for
liver specificity of the rat Std gene; (ii) androgenic repression of the gene
requires the presence of all of the OCT-1 and C/EBP elements between positions
-231 and -292; and (iii) AR may exert its negative regulatory effect indirectly
through transcriptional interference of OCT-1 and C/EBP rather than through a
direct DNA-AR interaction.

PMID: 9705324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Blood. 1998 Aug 15;92(4):1247-58.

Oct-1 is involved in the transcriptional repression of the von willebrand factor 
gene promoter.

Schwachtgen JL(1), Remacle JE, Janel N, Brys R, Huylebroeck D, Meyer D,
Kerbiriou-Nabias D.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U143, Unité de Recherches sur l'Hémostase et la Thrombose, Hôpital de
Bicêtre, Bicêtre, France.

The negative regulation of transcription of the human von Willebrand factor (vWF)
gene was investigated in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and HeLa
cells. A fragment spanning -89 to +244 nucleotides (nt), containing the first
exon, is active in HUVECs only but not in HeLa cells. The activity of this
promoter is sharply reduced by mutagenesis of the GATA binding site at +221.
Extension of the upstream sequences from nt -89 to -142 and to -496 results in
progressive reduction of the activity of the -89 to +244 promoter identifying a
negative regulatory element between nt -142 and -89. A factor present in nuclear 
extracts from endothelial and nonendothelial cells binds to an AT-rich sequence
located between nt -133 and -125. Mutagenesis of the AT-rich sequence interferes 
with nuclear protein binding and restores the activity of the -142 to +244
fragment to the level of the -89 to +244 promoter. Binding of the nuclear protein
to the vWF AT-rich sequence in mobility shift assays is inhibited by competition 
with a consensus Oct-1 binding site and with a silencer octamer-like sequence
from the vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) promoter. Subsequent
supershift experiments identified Oct-1 as the transcription factor that binds to
vWF and VCAM-1 silencer elements. These results indicate that Oct-1 acts as a
transcriptional repressor of promoters of genes expressed in endothelial cells.

Copyright 1998 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 9694713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Immunol. 1998 Aug 1;161(3):1380-9.

Th2-specific protein/DNA interactions at the proximal nuclear factor-AT site
contribute to the functional activity of the human IL-4 promoter.

Li-Weber M(1), Salgame P, Hu C, Davydov IV, Laur O, Klevenz S, Krammer PH.

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Immunology Program, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg.
m.li-weber@dkfz-heidelberg.de

IL-4 is a pleiotropic immunoregulatory cytokine secreted by activated Th2, but
not Th1, cells. The proximal IL-4 promoter contains MARE, C/EBP, P0,
octamer-like, P1, and activating protein-1 elements. The half c-Maf binding site 
(MARE), P0, and P1 sites were previously shown to be involved in Th2-specific
transcriptional activity. Except the MARE and P1 site, the molecular basis for
Th2 specificity of the P0 site has not been analyzed. Here, we provide the first 
detailed analysis of the P0 binding factors and show that in Th2, but not in Th1,
cells, NF-AT and proteins of the activating protein-1 family are involved in
cooperative binding to the P0 and the adjacent octamer-like site. In the mouse
Th2 D10 cells, Oct-1/Oct-2 are also found to participate in formation of the
P0-binding complexes. Mutation, deletion, and methylation interference analysis
demonstrate that both the P0 and the octamer-like sequence are required for
inducible binding. Furthermore, we provide the first report of the functional
relevance of each site in the human IL-4 promoter by mutagenesis/transfection
analysis and demonstrate that the octamer-like, P0 and P1 sites are important for
the biologic function of the IL-4 promoter. The MARE site, although it was shown 
to be critical for the function of the murine IL-4 promoter, does not appear
essential for human IL-4 promoter activity in Jurkat T cells. These findings
suggest that besides c-Maf, another Th2-specific factor(s) may be involved in
tissue-specific expression of the IL-4 gene.

PMID: 9686601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. J Virol. 1998 Aug;72(8):6608-13.

In vivo effects of mutations in woodchuck hepatitis virus enhancer II.

Wei Y(1), Tennant B, Ganem D.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Microbiology and Medicine, University of California, San
Francisco, California 94143, USA.

Woodchuck hepatitis virus (WHV) enhancer II (EnII) is located upstream of the
major pregenomic RNA promoter and is thought to play an important role in the
insertional activation of the N-myc2 gene during WHV hepatocarcinogenesis. WHV
EnII is recognized by at least three host transcription factors: HNF-1, HNF-4,
and Oct-1. Here, the roles of these EnII-binding factors in viral transcription
and replication have been further examined. In HepG2 cells transiently
transfected with a chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) gene whose expression 
is dependent upon EnII, mutations in either the HNF-1 or the HNF-4 site strongly 
reduced CAT activity, while ablation of the Oct-1 site decreased CAT expression
only twofold. Mutations in more than one site completely abolished reporter
expression. These same mutations were also tested in an overlength WHV genome for
their impact on viral replication and gene expression. In transfected HepG2
cells, lesions in the HNF-1 site inactivated pregenomic RNA expression and viral 
reverse transcription, with only minimal effects on the expression of other viral
mRNAs. By contrast, Oct-1 site lesions had no effect on either viral RNA
synthesis or DNA replication, and HNF-4 site lesions produced a modest reduction 
of pregenomic RNA but had no impact on viral DNA synthesis. Testing of the
mutants in susceptible woodchucks revealed that, as expected, viruses with
lesions in the HNF-1 site were nearly noninfectious, while mutants with lesions
at the Oct-1 site were fully replication competent. HNF-4 site mutants were
replication competent but may display reduced levels of replication in the intact
animal host. We conclude that (i) EnII is primarily devoted to the regulation of 
pregenomic RNA in WHV, (ii) HNF-1 is essential for EnII function in vivo, and
(iii) HNF-4 plays a demonstrable but adjunctive role in EnII function.

PMCID: PMC109844
PMID: 9658106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Virol. 1998 Aug;72(8):6291-7.

The herpesvirus transactivator VP16 mimics a human basic domain leucine zipper
protein, luman, in its interaction with HCF.

Lu R(1), Yang P, Padmakumar S, Misra V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, Western College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan S7N 5B4.

In human cells infected with herpes simplex virus (HSV), viral gene expression is
initiated by the virion protein VP16. VP16 does not bind DNA directly but forms a
multiprotein complex on the viral immediate-early gene promoters with two
cellular proteins: the POU domain protein Oct-1 and host cell factor (HCF; also
called C1, VCAF, and CFF). Despite its apparent role in stabilizing the
VP16-induced transcription complex, the natural biological role of HCF is
unclear. Only recently HCF has been implicated in control of the cell cycle. To
determine the role of HCF in cells and answer why HSV has evolved an
HCF-dependent mechanism for the initiation of the lytic cycle, we identified the 
first human ligand for HCF (R. Lu et al., Mol. Cell. Biol. 17:5117-5126, 1997).
This protein, Luman, is a member of the CREB/ATF family of transcription factors 
that can activate transcription from promoters containing cyclic AMP response
elements (CRE). Here we provide evidence that Luman and VP16 share two important 
structural features: an acidic activation domain and a common mechanism for
binding HCF. We found that Luman, its homolog in Drosophila, dCREB-A (also known 
as BBF-2), and VP16 bind to HCF by a motif, (D/E)HXY(S/A), present in all three
proteins. In addition, a mutation (P134S) in HCF that prevents VP16 binding also 
abolishes its binding to Luman and dCREB-A. We also show that while interaction
with HCF is not required for the ability of Luman to activate transcription when 
tethered to the GAL4 promoter, it appears to be essential for Luman to activate
transcription through CRE sites. These data suggest that the HCF-Luman
interaction may represent a conserved mechanism for transcriptional regulation in
metazoans, and HSV mimics this interaction with HCF to monitor the physiological 
state of the host cell.

PMCID: PMC109766
PMID: 9658067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Jun;18(6):3416-30.

Recruitment of octamer transcription factors to DNA by glucocorticoid receptor.

Préfontaine GG(1), Lemieux ME, Giffin W, Schild-Poulter C, Pope L, LaCasse E,
Walker P, Haché RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Ottawa Civic Hospital Loeb Research Institute,
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1Y 4E9.

Glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and octamer transcription factors 1 and 2 (Oct-1/2) 
interact synergistically to activate the transcription of mouse mammary tumor
virus and many cellular genes. Synergism correlates with cooperative DNA binding 
of the two factors in vitro. To examine the molecular basis for these cooperative
interactions, we have studied the consequences of protein-protein binding between
GR and Oct-1/2. We have determined that GR binds in solution to the octamer
factor POU domain. Binding is mediated through an interface in the GR DNA binding
domain that includes amino acids C500 and L501. In transfected mammalian cells, a
transcriptionally inert wild-type but not an L501P GR peptide potentiated
transcriptional activation by Oct-2 100-fold above the level that could be
attained in the cell by expressing Oct-2 alone. Transcriptional activation
correlated closely with a striking increase in the occupancy of octamer motifs
adjacent to glucocorticoid response elements (GREs) on transiently transfected
DNAs. Intriguingly, GR-Oct-1/2 binding was interrupted by the binding of GR to a 
GRE. We propose a model for transcriptional cooperativity in which GR-Oct-1/2
binding promotes an increase in the local concentration of octamer factors over
glucocorticoid-responsive regulatory regions. These results reveal
transcriptional cooperativity through a direct protein interaction between two
sequence-specific transcription factors that is mediated in a way that is
expected to restrict transcriptional effects to regulatory regions with DNA
binding sites for both factors.

PMCID: PMC108923
PMID: 9584182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jun 12;273(24):15217-26.

MEF-2 and Oct-1 bind to two homologous promoter sequence elements and participate
in the expression of a skeletal muscle-specific gene.

Lakich MM(1), Diagana TT, North DL, Whalen RG.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Biochimie, Département de Biologie Moléculaire, Institut Pasteur, 28 
rue du Dr. Roux, 75724 Paris Cedex 15, France. melissa-lakich@rp.rorer.com

The murine adult IIB myosin heavy chain (IIB MyHC) gene is expressed only in
certain skeletal muscle fibers. Within the proximal promoter are two A + T-rich
motifs, mAT1 and mAT2, which greatly enhance muscle-specific transcription;
myogenic cells contain proteins that bind to these sequences. MEF-2 binds to both
mAT1 and mAT2; a mutation abolishing its binding to mAT1 greatly diminishes the
activity of the promoter. Both mAT motifs also form complexes with a protein
requiring a target sequence typical of POU domain proteins, which migrate in
electrophoretic mobility shift assays to the same position as a complex
containing purified Oct-1 and which are supershifted by an antibody specific to
Oct-1; this protein is therefore probably Oct-1. Footprinting experiments
demonstrate that mAT1 is preferentially occupied by MEF-2 and mAT2 by Oct-1 and
that these two proteins appear to bind cooperatively to their respective sites.
Although the two mAT motifs have sequences that are very similar, they
nonetheless exhibit distinct behaviors and perform differently in the activation 
of the promoter. The contribution of the IIB MyHC gene to specification of the
myogenic phenotype is thus at least in part regulated by MEF-2 and Oct-1.

PMID: 9614136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Semin Immunol. 1998 Apr;10(2):155-63.

Lymphoid-specific transcription mediated by the conserved octamer site: who is
doing what?

Matthias P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute, Basel, Switzerland.

The conserved octamer site found in the promoters of Immunoglobulin (Ig) genes
has been identified early on as a key element for B cell-specific Ig promoter
activity and has also been associated with expression of other B cell-specific
genes. Several transcription factors--ubiquitous or cell-restricted--interact
specifically with the octamer motif in B cells: Oct-1 and Oct-2 are POU domain
transcription factors that bind directly to the octamer site and thereby can
recruit the coactivator OBF-1 to the promoters of various genes. Yet, in spite of
intense work, the precise role played by each of these factors for transcription 
activation through the octamer motif is unclear. In particular, genetic
inactivation in mice of the lymphoid cell-specific transcription factor Oct-2 or 
of the B cell-specific coactivator OBF-1 led to surprising findings that are
being discussed.

PMID: 9618761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. J Mol Biol. 1998 May 15;278(4):725-39.

The mouse mammary tumour virus promoter positioned on a tetramer of histones H3
and H4 binds nuclear factor 1 and OTF1.

Spangenberg C(1), Eisfeld K, Stünkel W, Luger K, Flaus A, Richmond TJ, Truss M,
Beato M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforshung, Philipps-Universität,
Marburg, Germany.

Modulation of eukaryotic gene expression is influenced by the organization of
regulatory DNA-elements in chromatin. The mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV)
promoter exhibits regularly positioned nucleosomes that reduce the accessibility 
of the binding sites for sequence-specific transcription factors, in particular
nuclear factor (NF1). Hormonal induction of the MMTV promoter is accompanied by
remodeling of the nucleosomal structure, but the biochemical nature of these
structural changes is unknown. Using recombinant histones, we have now assembled 
the MMTV promoter in particles containing either an octamer of the histones H3,
H4, H2A and H2B or a tetramer of histones H3 and H4, and have compared the two
particles in terms of structure, positioning, and exclusion of transcription
factors. Using site-directed hydroxy radicals to map histone locations, two main 
nucleosome positions are found with dyads at position -107 and at -127. The same 
two main positions are found for particles containing only the H3/H4 tetramer,
showing that the absence of H2A/H2B dimers does not alter positioning. The
rotational orientation of the DNA double helix in both types of particles is
essentially identical. However, the ends of the nucleosomal DNA as well as its
central region are more accessible to cleavage reagents in the tetramer particle 
than in the octamer particle. In agreement with these structural features, the
transcription factors NF1 and OTF1 were able to bind to their cognate sites on
the tetramer particle, while they could not gain access to the same sites on the 
surface of the octamer particle. The DNase I digestion pattern of octamers
treated with partially purified SWI/SNF complex from HeLa cells in the presence
of ATP is indistinguishable from that of tetramer particles, suggesting that the 
SWI/SNF complex promotes ATP-dependent remodeling of the octamer particle but not
of tetramer particles. These results are compatible with a hormone-induced
removal of histone H2A/H2B during MMTV induction.

PMID: 9614938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. FEBS Lett. 1998 Apr 10;426(1):81-5.

Oct-1 promoter region contains octamer sites and TAAT motifs recognized by Oct
proteins.

Pankratova EV(1), Polanovsky OL.

Author information: 
(1)Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences,
Moscow. pank@genome.eimb.rssi.ru

Erratum in
    FEBS Lett 1998 Aug 21;433(3):335. Polanovasky OL [corrected to Polanovsky OL].

The 5'-upstream region (1.3 kb) of the gene encoding the POU domain transcription
factor Oct-1 was cloned and sequenced. CAT reporter gene analysis of this region 
has detected a functionally active promoter. This region contains 24 TAAT-core
sites, arranged in five clusters (four to six sites in one cluster); two octamer 
sites (ATGCAAAT) are located in the first and second clusters; in the second one 
the CCAAT-box adjacent to the octamer overlaps with the TAAT-core site. As shown 
by gel retardation assay, Oct-1, Oct-2, and some unknown proteins from myeloma
cell line NS/0 interact with the TAAT-core sites of these clusters. The results
suggest autoregulation of Oct-1 gene expression that may also be controlled by
other POU proteins, homeodomain proteins and CCAAT trans-action factors.

PMID: 9598983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Med Chem. 1998 Apr 23;41(9):1371-81.

Anti-HIV agents that selectively target retroviral nucleocapsid protein zinc
fingers without affecting cellular zinc finger proteins.

Huang M(1), Maynard A, Turpin JA, Graham L, Janini GM, Covell DG, Rice WG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Antiviral Drug Mechanisms, National Cancer Institute-Frederick
Cancer Research and Development Center, SAIC Frederick, Frederick, Maryland
21702-1201, USA.

Agents that target the two highly conserved Zn fingers of the human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) nucleocapsid p7 (NCp7) protein are under development
as antivirals. These agents covalently modify Zn-coordinating cysteine thiolates 
of the fingers, causing Zn ejection, loss of native protein structure and nucleic
acid binding capacity, and disruption of virus replication. Concentrations of
three antiviral agents that promoted in vitro Zn ejection from NCp7 and inhibited
HIV replication did not impact the functions of cellular Zn finger proteins,
including poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase and the Sp1 and GATA-1 transcription
factors, nor did the compounds inhibit HeLa nuclear extract mediated
transcription. Selectivity of interactions of these agents with NCp7 was
supported by molecular modeling analysis which (1) identified a common
saddle-shaped nucleophilic region on the surfaces of both NCp7 Zn fingers, (2)
indicated a strong correspondence between computationally docked positions for
the agents tested and overlap of frontier orbitals within the nucleophilic loci
of the NCp7 Zn fingers, and (3) revealed selective steric exclusion of the agents
from the core of the GATA-1 Zn finger. Further modeling analysis suggests that
the thiolate of Cys49 in the carboxy-terminal finger is the site most susceptible
to electrophilic attack. These data provide the first experimental evidence and
rationale for antiviral agents that selectively target retroviral nucleocapsid
protein Zn fingers.

PMID: 9554870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Mol Pharmacol. 1998 Apr;53(4):676-83.

Suppression of interleukin-2 by the putative endogenous cannabinoid
2-arachidonyl-glycerol is mediated through down-regulation of the nuclear factor 
of activated T cells.

Ouyang Y(1), Hwang SG, Han SH, Kaminski NE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Michigan State University, East
Lansing 48824, USA.

2-Arachidonyl-glycerol (2-Ara-Gl) recently was identified as a putative
endogenous ligand for cannabinoid receptor types CB1 and CB2 by competitive
binding. More recent immune function assays demonstrated that 2-Ara-Gl possessed 
immunomodulatory activity. Because several plant-derived cannabinoids inhibit
interleukin-2 (IL-2) expression, 2-Ara-Gl was investigated for its ability to
modulate this cytokine. The direct addition of 2-Ara-Gl to mouse splenocyte
cultures suppressed phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate plus ionomycin-induced IL-2
secretion and steady state mRNA expression in a dose-dependent manner. 2-Ara-Gl
also produced a marked inhibition of IL-2 promotor activity as determined by
transient transfection of EL4.IL-2 cells with a pIL-2-CAT construct. 2-Ara-Gl at 
5, 10, 20, and 50 microM suppressed phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate plus
ionomycin-induced IL-2 promotor activity by 18%, 28%, 39%, and 54%, respectively.
To further characterize the mechanism for the transcriptional regulation of IL-2 
by 2-Ara-Gl, the DNA-binding activity of transcription factors, nuclear factor of
activated T cells (NF-AT), nuclear factor for immunoglobulin kappa chain in B
cells (NF-kappa B/Rel), activator protein-1(AP-1), octamer, and cAMP-response
element binding protein was evaluated by electrophoretic mobility shift assay in 
mouse splenocytes. In addition, a reporter gene expression system for p(NF-kappa 
B)3-CAT, p(NF-AT)3-CAT, and p(AP-1)3-CAT was used in transiently transfected
EL4.IL-2 cells to determine the effect of 2-Ara-Gl on promoter activity for each 
of the specific transcription factors. 2-Ara-Gl reduced both the NF-AT-binding
and promoter activity in a dose-dependent manner and, to a lesser degree,
NF-kappa B/Rel-binding and promoter activity. No significant effect was observed 
on octamer- and cAMP-response element-binding activity. AP-1 DNA-binding activity
was not inhibited by 2-Ara-Gl, but a modest inhibition of promoter activity was
observed.

PMID: 9547358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Neuropeptides. 1998 Feb;32(1):79-85.

A role for the octamer-binding protein in preprotachykinin-A gene expression.

Mendelson SC(1), Fiskerstrand CE, Quinn JP.

Author information: 
(1)University of Edinburgh, UK.

A rat Preprotachykinin-A promoter fragment has been previously identified which
supports reporter gene activity in primary cultures of adult dorsal root ganglion
neurons. That study demonstrated that two promoter domains which exhibit enhancer
activity in these neurons are bound by the same classes of transcription factors.
Further, the two domains exhibit similarities with respect to the relationship of
bound transcription factors within each domain. This suggests that these domains 
may function in an identical manner or may act synergistically to regulate gene
expression. These domains contain recognition motifs for at least three classes
of transcription factors: octamer-binding proteins, Sp1-related proteins and an
as yet unidentified but distinct factor. The definition of an octamer-binding
protein site within these domains is of interest, as this class of factor has
recently been suggested as mediating the effect of nerve growth factor in sensory
neurons. Nerve growth factor is a well-characterized regulator of
preprotachykinin-A gene expression. Definition of these sites within the promoter
allows for the design of rational experiments to address the mechanism of
transcriptional regulation of the rat preprotachykinin-A gene.

PMID: 9571649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. EMBO J. 1998 Mar 16;17(6):1768-78.

Regional and temporal specialization in the nucleus: a transcriptionally-active
nuclear domain rich in PTF, Oct1 and PIKA antigens associates with specific
chromosomes early in the cell cycle.

Pombo A(1), Cuello P, Schul W, Yoon JB, Roeder RG, Cook PR, Murphy S.

Author information: 
(1)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, 
Oxford OX1 3RE, UK.

PTF (PSE-binding transcription factor) activates transcription of snRNA and
related genes. We investigated its distribution in HeLa nuclei by
immunofluorescence, and found it spread throughout the nucleoplasm in small foci.
In some cells, PTF is also concentrated in one, or very few, discrete regions
(diameter approximately 1.3 micron) that appear during G1 phase and disappear in 
S phase. Oct1, a transcription factor that interacts with PTF, is also enriched
in these domains; RNA polymerase II, TBP and Sp1 are also present. Each domain
typically contains 2 or 3 transcription 'factories' where Br-UTP is incorporated 
into nascent transcripts. Accordingly, we have christened this region the
Oct1/PTF/transcription (OPT) domain. It colocalizes with some, but not all, PIKA 
domains. It is distinct from other nuclear domains, including coiled bodies,
gemini bodies, PML bodies and the perinucleolar compartment. A small region on
chromosome 6 (band 6p21) containing only approximately 30 Mbp DNA, and
chromosomes 6 and 7, associate with the domain significantly more than other
chromosomes. The domains may act like nucleoli to bring particular genes on
specific chromosomes together to a region where the appropriate transcription and
processing factors are concentrated, thereby facilitating the expression of those
genes.

PMCID: PMC1170524
PMID: 9501098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Brain Res Dev Brain Res. 1998 Mar 12;106(1-2):1-12.

POU domain genes are differentially expressed in the early stages after lineage
commitment of the PNS-derived stem cell line, RT4-AC.

Donahue LM(1), Reinhart AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University Health
Sciences Center, Lubbock 79430, USA. cbblmd@wpoffice.net.ttuhsc.edu

RT4 is a family of cell lines derived from a rat peripheral neurotumor and
consists of a multipotential stem cell which spontaneously gives rise to a glial 
derivative and two neuronal derivatives. To begin to understand the role(s) of
transcription factors in neural differentiation, we examined the expression of
ten transcription factor genes (MASH1, REST/NRSF, Oct-1, Oct-2, Tst-1/SCIP,
Brn-1, Brn-2, Brn-3.0, Brn-4, Brn-5) in the RT4 cell lines. We report here that
all of the RT4 cells express REST/NRSF, Oct-1 and Brn-5, but do not express
MASH1, Brn-3.0 or Brn-4. Furthermore, Brn-2 and Tst-1/SCIP expression was
restricted to the RT4 stem cell line and glial derivative, while Oct-2 was
expressed predominantly by the RT4 stem cell line and neuronal derivatives. We
propose that the lack of expression of MASH1 (which is expressed relatively early
in autonomic neuron differentiation) and Brn-3.0 (which is expressed early in
sensory neuron differentiation), in combination with the presence of REST/NRSF (a
repressor of neuronal gene expression), in all of the RT4 cell lines, establishes
the RT4 system as a unique model for examining very early events in neuronal
versus glial cell fate determination.

PMID: 9554933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Mol Endocrinol. 1998 Apr;12(4):469-81.

Oct-1 binds promoter elements required for transcription of the GnRH gene.

Eraly SA(1), Nelson SB, Huang KM, Mellon PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine, The Center for Molecular Genetic
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla 92037-0674, USA.

The GnRH gene is exclusively expressed in a discrete population of neurons in the
hypothalamus. The promoter-proximal 173 bp of the rat GnRH gene are highly
conserved through evolution and are bound by multiple nuclear proteins found in
the neuronal cell line, GT1-7, a model for the GnRH-expressing hypothalamic
neuron. To explore the protein-DNA interactions that occur within this promoter
and the role of these interactions in targeting GnRH gene expression, we have
mutagenized individual binding sites in this region. Deoxyribonuclease I
protection experiments reveal that footprint 2, a 51-bp sequence that confers a
20-fold induction of the GnRH gene, is comprised of at least three independent
protein-binding sites. Transfections of the GnRH promoter-reporter plasmid
containing a series of block mutations of footprint 2 into GT1-7 neurons indicate
that each of the three putative component sites contributes to transcriptional
activity. Mutations in footprint 4 also decrease GnRH gene expression. Footprint 
4 and the promoter-proximal site in footprint 2 contain octamer-like motifs, an
element that is also present in the neuron-specific enhancer of the rat GnRH gene
located approximately 1.6 kb upstream of the promoter. Previous studies in our
laboratory have demonstrated that two enhancer octamer sites are bound by the
POU-homeodomain transcription factor Oct-1 in GT1-7 cells. We now show that Oct-1
binds the octamer motifs within footprints 2 and 4. Thus, Oct-1 plays a critical 
role in the regulation of GnRH transcription, binding functional elements in both
the distal enhancer and the promoter-proximal conserved region.

PMID: 9544983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Cell Mol Life Sci. 1998 Feb;54(2):129-38.

EGF-induced programmed cell death of human mammary carcinoma MDA-MB-468 cells is 
preceded by activation AP-1.

Schaerli P(1), Jaggi R.

Author information: 
(1)Department for Clinical Research, University of Bern, Switzerland.

MDA-MB-468 is a human mammary adenocarcinoma cell line that overexpresses the
epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor and undergoes programmed cell death
(apoptosis) in response to EGF treatment. Programmed cell death was shown to be
greatly enhanced when cells were growth-arrested prior to EGF treatment.
Apoptosis was characterized by an initial rounding up and detachment of the cells
from their substrate starting about 12 h after EGF treatment, followed by
chromatin condensation, nuclear fragmentation and oligonucleosomal fragmentation 
of the DNA at about 24 to 48 h. Cell death was dependent on de novo protein
synthesis. We found a rapid induction of c-fos, c-jun and junB at the mRNA level 
after about 30 min of EGF treatment and a more delayed upregulation of fosB and
fra-1. The junD gene was expressed in the absence of EGF, and it was moderately
induced within 30 min of growth factor addition. The increase of the different
fos and jun mRNAs were paralleled by an increase of activator protein-1 (AP-1)
DNA binding activity. A characterization of the AP-1 complex revealed similar
levels of several Fos and Jun proteins. Based on the kinetics of AP-1
accumulation and cell death, it seems likely that AP-1 contributes to the
apoptotic cell death of EGF receptor-overexpressing MDA-MB-486 cells.

PMID: 9539953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. FEBS Lett. 1998 Mar 6;424(1-2):27-32.

Interaction of Oct-1 and automodification domain of poly(ADP-ribose) synthetase.

Nie J(1), Sakamoto S, Song D, Qu Z, Ota K, Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Medical Research Center, Kochi Medical
School, Japan.

We isolated several clones from a matchmaker two-hybrid system human lymphocyte
cDNA library using an automodification domain of poly(ADP-ribose) synthetase
(PARS) as a probe. A DNA sequence (approximately 1 kbp) of the clone was
identical to part of the Oct-1 DNA sequence. We then constructed either a
His-tagged or GST fusion protein of the inserted cDNA from the clone and the
fusion protein was shown to interact with PARS by far-Western blot analysis and
co-precipitation with affinity resin. Furthermore, the His-tagged Oct-1/POU-homeo
fusion protein interacted weakly with the octamer motif of the DRa promoter and
the addition of PARS fusion protein greatly increased the DNA binding activity.
These results suggest that PARS interacts with Oct-1 and stabilizes the binding
of Oct-1 to the octamer motif.

PMID: 9537509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Mol Pharmacol. 1998 Mar;53(3):459-66.

Dexamethasone regulation of the rat 3alpha-hydroxysteroid/dihydrodiol
dehydrogenase gene.

Hou YT(1), Lin HK, Penning TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6084, USA.

Rat liver 3alpha-hydroxysteroid/dihydrodiol dehydrogenase (3alpha-HSD/DD), a
member of the aldo-keto reductase superfamily, inactivates circulating steroid
hormones and may contribute to the carcinogenicity of polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAHs) by oxidizing trans-dihydrodiols to reactive o-quinones with
the concomitant generation of reactive oxygen species. The 3alpha-HSD/DD gene has
been cloned, and its 5'-flanking region contains a negative response element
(NRE; -797 to -498 bp) that may repress constitutive expression by binding to Oct
transcription factors. Upstream from the NRE are three distal imperfect
glucocorticoid response elements (GRE1, GRE2, and GRE3); in addition, a proximal 
imperfect GRE (GRE4) is adjacent to an Oct binding site in the NRE. When rat
hepatocytes were cultured on Matrigel and exposed to dexamethasone (Dex), steady 
state levels of 3alpha-HSD/DD mRNA were increased 4-fold in a dose-dependent
manner, yielding an EC50 value of 10 nM. Time to maximal response was 24 hr, and 
the effect was blocked with the anti-glucocorticoid RU486. Measurement of the
half-life of 3alpha-HSD/DD mRNA, with and without Dex treatment, indicated that
the increase in steady state mRNA levels was not due to increased mRNA stability.
By contrast, nuclear run-off experiments using nuclei obtained from
Dex-stimulated hepatocytes indicated that Dex increased transcription of the rat 
3alpha-HSD/DD gene. Tandem repeats of the imperfect GRE1, GRE2, GRE3, and GRE4
were inserted into thymidine kinase-chloramphenicol acetyl-transferase vectors
and cotransfected with the human glucocorticoid receptor into human hepatoma
cells. On treatment with Dex, maximal trans-activation of the chloramphenicol
acetyl-transferase reporter gene activity was mediated via the proximal GRE
(GRE4). These data imply that GRE4 is a functional cis-element and that binding
of the occupied glucocorticoid receptor to this element increases 3alpha-HSD/DD
gene transcription. A model is proposed for the positive and negative regulation 
of the rat 3alpha-HSD/DD gene by the glucocorticoid receptor and Oct
transcription factors, respectively.

PMID: 9495812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Cell Biochem. 1998 Mar 1;68(3):309-27.

Oct-1 enhances the in vitro replication of a mammalian autonomously replicating
DNA sequence.

Matheos DD(1), Ruiz MT, Price GB, Zannis-Hadjopoulos M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

A 186-base pair fragment of ors8, a mammalian autonomously replicating DNA
sequence isolated by extrusion of nascent monkey DNA in early S phase, has
previously been identified as the minimal sequence required for replication
function in vitro and in vivo. This 186-base pair fragment contains, among other 
sequence characteristics, an imperfect consensus binding site for the ubiquitous 
transcription factor Oct-1. We have investigated the role of Oct-1 protein in the
in vitro replication of this mammalian origin. Depletion of the endogenous Oct-1 
protein, by inclusion of an oligonucleotide comprising the Oct-1 binding
site,inhibited the in vitro replication of p186 to approximately 15-20% of the
control, whereas a mutated Oct-1 and a nonspecific oligonucleotide had no effect.
Furthermore, immunodepletion of the Oct-1 protein from the HeLa cell extracts by 
addition of an anti-POU antibody to the in vitro replication reactioninhibited
p186 replication to 25% of control levels. This inhibition of replication could
be partially reversed to 50-65% of control levels, a two- to threefold increase, 
upon the addition of exogenous Oct-1 POU domain protein. Site-directed
mutagenesis of the octamer binding site in p186 resulted in a mutant clone,
p186-MutOct, which abolished Oct-1 binding but was still able to replicate as
efficiently as the wild-type p186. The results suggest that Oct-1 protein is an
enhancing component in the in vitro replication of p186 but that its effect on
replication is not caused through direct binding to the octamer motif.

PMID: 9518258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Science. 1998 Mar 6;279(5356):1504-13.

Crystal structures of human topoisomerase I in covalent and noncovalent complexes
with DNA.

Redinbo MR(1), Stewart L, Kuhn P, Champoux JJ, Hol WG.

Author information: 
(1)Biomolecular Structure Center and Department of Biological Structure, Box
357742, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 1998 Mar 6;279(5356):1490-1.

Topoisomerases I promote the relaxation of DNA superhelical tension by
introducing a transient single-stranded break in duplex DNA and are vital for the
processes of replication, transcription, and recombination. The crystal
structures at 2.1 and 2.5 angstrom resolution of reconstituted human
topoisomerase I comprising the core and carboxyl-terminal domains in covalent and
noncovalent complexes with 22-base pair DNA duplexes reveal an enzyme that
"clamps" around essentially B-form DNA. The core domain and the first eight
residues of the carboxyl-terminal domain of the enzyme, including the active-site
nucleophile tyrosine-723, share significant structural similarity with the
bacteriophage family of DNA integrases. A binding mode for the anticancer drug
camptothecin is proposed on the basis of chemical and biochemical information
combined with these three-dimensional structures of topoisomerase I-DNA
complexes.

PMID: 9488644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Mol Immunol. 1997 Oct;34(14):979-86.

Oct proteins are qualitative rather than quantitative regulators of kappa
transcription.

Liberg D(1), Sigvardsson M, Leanderson T.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Group, CMB, Lund University, Sweden. david.liberg@immuno.lu.se

The 3' flanking sequence of kappa promoter octamers was found to contain either a
conserved A or G residue which increased the affinity of the octamer core motif
for Octl and Oct2A. By transient transfections it was shown that decreasing the
affinity of an octamer for Oct binding was crippling the transcription unit when 
the octamer was used in a minimal promoter, while it had only marginal effects
when it was analysed in the context of an intact kappa promoter. As the octamer
in a kappa promoter was replaced by a TAATGARAT motif with equal affinity for Oct
protein binding the latter could still participate in synergistic transcriptional
stimulation. Thus, the synergistic interactions involved in kappa promoter
transcriptional stimulation are dependent on the presence of Oct proteins but not
on the octamer DNA motif per se. Since the transcriptional coactivator OCA-B
cannot interact with Oct protein bound to the TAATGARAT motif, the role of OCA-B 
in these interactions seems to be limited.

PMID: 9488048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Genes Dev. 1997 Dec 1;11(23):3122-7.

Viral mimicry: common mode of association with HCF by VP16 and the cellular
protein LZIP.

Freiman RN(1), Herr W.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York 11724, USA.

Upon infection of human cells, the herpes simplex virus protein VP16 associates
with the endogenous cell-proliferation factor HCF. VP16 can also associate with
HCFs from invertebrates, suggesting that VP16 mimics a cellular protein whose
interaction with HCF has been conserved. Here, we show that VP16 mimics the human
basic leucine-zipper protein LZIP, which, through association with HCF, may
control cell-cycle progression. VP16 and LZIP share a tetrapeptide
motif-D/EHXY-used to associate with human HCF. The LZIP-related Drosophila
protein BBF-2/dCREB-A contains this HCF-binding motif, indicating that the
LZIP-HCF interaction has been conserved during metazoan evolution.

PMCID: PMC316754
PMID: 9389645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. EMBO J. 1997 Dec 1;16(23):7105-17.

Using altered specificity Oct-1 and Oct-2 mutants to analyze the regulation of
immunoglobulin gene transcription.

Shah PC(1), Bertolino E, Singh H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Oct-1 and Oct-2 represent the prototypical example of related transcription
factors with identical DNA recognition properties. They bind functionally
critical octamer elements found in diverse regulatory sequences. It has not been 
possible to determine directly if these factors are functionally redundant or
selective when interacting with different regulatory sequences in the appropriate
cell type. An equivalent pair of altered DNA-binding specificity mutants of Oct-1
and Oct-2 are used to examine their function from varied regulatory contexts in B
cells. These factors function as redundant activators of immunoglobulin (Ig) gene
promoters (Vkappa and VH) and a histone H2B promoter. The structural basis of
redundancy resides in the highly conserved DNA-binding POU domain, because this
domain of either protein can activate transcription from both Ig and H2B
promoters. We find that the nature of a distal enhancer dictates the relative
potency of Oct-1 versus Oct-2 bound to a promoter. Oct-1 preferentially
stimulates transcription from a VH or Vkappa promoter in combination with
enhancers from the IgH or Igkappa locus, respectively. In this context, the more 
potent action of Oct-1 is dependent on a region external to the POU domain. These
results suggest that Oct-1 may be the critical regulator of Ig gene transcription
during B cell development and provide an explanation for selective Ig isotype
expression defects in Oct-2 and OCA-B null mice.

PMCID: PMC1170312
PMID: 9384588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Immunobiology. 1997 Dec;198(1-3):291-8.

Expression of transcription factor genes after influenza A virus infection.

Bussfeld D(1), Bacher M, Moritz A, Gemsa D, Sprenger H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, Philipps-University Marburg, Marburg, Germany.

Infection of human monocytes with influenza A virus induces a broad range of
proinflammatory cytokines and mononuclear cell attracting chemokines before the
infected cells undergo apoptosis. The underlying mechanisms by which the
corresponding genes are transcriptionally initiated after virus infection are
still poorly understood. Activation of NF-kappa B seems to play an important role
in the regulation of many proinflammatory cytokine genes, but cannot be the only 
mechanism, since several cytokine genes lack respective binding sites in their
promoter regions. Therefore, we additionally investigated other transcription
factors of possible importance such as CREB, CTF, OTF-1, and OTF-2. To explore
long-term regulatory mechanisms, we investigated the induction of transcription
factors on the gene expression level which may be important to substitute for
metabolized transcription factor proteins after their activation. We identified a
cell-type-specific differential response: CREB, CTF, OTF-1, OFT-2, and NF-kappa B
genes were strongly induced 1 to 4 hours after influenza A virus infection in the
monocytic cell line Mono Mac 6, while in freshly prepared human monocytes no
significant changes were detected. In infected monocytes, which die by apoptosis,
the expression of CREB, CTF, and OTF-2 was rather suppressed 8 hours after
infection. In conclusion, the long-term regulation of transcription factor gene
expression in non-proliferating cells seems to be of minor importance after
influenza infection since in apoptosisprone cells an immediate availability of
transcription factor proteins is required.

PMID: 9442400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Immunobiology. 1997 Dec;198(1-3):236-48.

Temporal control of IgH gene expression in developing B cells by the 3' locus
control region.

Pettersson S(1), Arulampalam V, Neurath M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, Karolinska Institute, Huddinge, Sweden.
sven.pettersson@cbt.ki.se

The suggested roles of the downstream 3' regions acting as a Locus Control Region
(LCR), have allowed comparisons to be made between the regulation of the IgH
locus with other model systems whose gene expression is governed by LCR activity.
Here we summarize the importance of the IgH 3'LCR and its putative functional
role in IgH gene expression and compare it with the 5'LCR regulatory region of
the human beta-globin locus.

PMID: 9442395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1997 Nov 28;1362(1):67-76.

Mutation in an alpha1-antitrypsin enhancer results in an interleukin-6 deficient 
acute-phase response due to loss of cooperativity between transcription factors.

Morgan K(1), Scobie G, Marsters P, Kalsheker NA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Chemistry, School of Clinical and Laboratory Sciences,
University Hospital, Nottingham, UK.

We previously reported that a mutation in a 3' enhancer region of the
alpha1-antitrypsin (AAT) gene is associated with chronic obstructive airways
disease (COAD). During the acute-phase response the plasma concentration of AAT
increases approximately 3-fold and this effect is mediated primarily by
interleukin-6 (IL-6). We demonstrate, by transfection of Hep G2 cells, that the
AAT gene contains at least two enhancers, one at the 5' end of the gene which is 
dominant under basal conditions, and another at the 3' end of the gene which
exhibits weak basal activity. However, both enhancers must be present to modulate
the IL-6-induced response which is diminished as a consequence of the 3' enhancer
mutation. These results suggest that the 3' enhancer modulates the IL-6 response 
through an interaction with the 5' enhancer. The mutation occurs at a DNA binding
site for the ubiquitous transcription factor octamer-1 (Oct-1) and results in a
loss of cooperativity between Oct-1 and the tissue-specific transcription factor,
NF-IL6 (C/EBPbeta), a member of the C/EBP family of transcription factors. NF-IL6
is a key transcription factor for a major pathway through which IL-6 mediates its
effects. These observations provide a novel mechanism for a diminished
IL-6-induced response.

PMID: 9434101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Virology. 1997 Dec 8;239(1):176-85.

Cleavage of transcriptional activator Oct-1 by poliovirus encoded protease 3Cpro.

Yalamanchili P(1), Weidman K, Dasgupta A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, UCLA School of Medicine 90095-1747,
USA.

In HeLa cells, RNA polymerase II mediated transcription is severely inhibited by 
poliovirus infection. Both basal and activated transcription are affected to
bring about a complete shutoff of host cell transcription. We demonstrate here
that the octamer binding transcription factor, Oct-1, is cleaved in HeLa cells
infected with poliovirus. Incubation of Oct-1 with the purified, recombinant
3Cpro results in the generation of the cleaved Oct-1 product seen in virus
infected cells. Poliovirus infection leads to the formation of altered Oct-1 DNA 
complexes that can also be generated by incubation of Oct-1 with purified 3Cpro. 
We also show that Oct-1 cleaved by 3Cpro loses its ability to inhibit
transcriptional activation by the SV40 B enhancer. These results suggest that
cleavage of Oct-1 in poliovirus infected cells leads to the loss of its activity.

PMID: 9426457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Pathol. 1997 Nov;183(3):305-10.

Correlation of MIB-1 antigen expression with transcription factors Skn-1, Oct-1, 
AP-2, and HPV type in cervical intraepithelial neoplasia.

Hietala KA(1), Kosma VM, Syrjänen KJ, Syrjänen SM, Kellokoski JK.

Author information: 
(1)University of Kuopio, Department of Clinical Pathology and Forensic Medicine, 
Finland.

Recently, interest in transcription factor coding genes has emerged in many human
diseases. Transcription factors, responding both to extracellular and to
intracellular signals, exercise an important regulatory control over the
proliferation and differentiation of cells. During the development of CIN
(cervical intraepithelial neoplasia) lesions, normal regulation of the cell cycle
seems to be disturbed. Transcription factors have been shown in vitro to be
intimately involved in the expression of HPV (human papillomavirus) early genes, 
which affect the development of cervical precancer lesions. To test the relevance
of in vitro findings in clinical samples, the expression of transcription factors
Skn-1, Oct-1, and AP-2 was analysed in 31 normal cervical epithelial samples and 
in 55 CIN lesions. The results were correlated with the HPV status and cell
proliferation activity of the squamous epithelium as measured by MIB-1 antibody. 
MIB-1 staining is an applicable marker of CIN, correlating strongly with the CIN 
grade (P < 0.001). The presence of HPV DNA did not accelerate the cell
proliferation rate or change significantly the immunoreactivity of Skn-1, Oct-1, 
or AP-2 antibodies. The staining patterns of these transcription factors were
significantly influenced only by the CIN grade. Transcription factors generally
showed weaker expression in the dysplastic samples, although the nuclear staining
of AP-2 increased markedly (P = 0.046) in the superficial layer of the CIN III
samples. These findings suggest that changes in the expression of transcription
factors may be important in studying the proliferative activity of CIN lesions.

PMID: 9422986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Jan;18(1):368-77.

The large subunit of basal transcription factor SNAPc is a Myb domain protein
that interacts with Oct-1.

Wong MW(1), Henry RW, Ma B, Kobayashi R, Klages N, Matthias P, Strubin M,
Hernandez N.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, New York
11724, USA.

The human RNA polymerase II and III snRNA promoters have similar enhancers, the
distal sequence elements (DSEs), and similar basal promoter elements, the
proximal sequence elements (PSEs). The DSE, which contains an octamer motif,
binds broadly expressed activator Oct-1. The PSE binds a multiprotein complex
referred to as SNAPc or PTF. On DNAs containing both an octamer site and a PSE,
Oct-1 and SNAPc bind cooperatively. SNAPc consists of at least four stably
associated subunits, SNAP43, SNAP45, SNAP50, and SNAP190. None of the three small
subunits, which have all been cloned, can bind to the PSE on their own. Here we
report the isolation of cDNAs corresponding to the largest subunit of SNAPc,
SNAP190. SNAP190 contains an unusual Myb DNA binding domain consisting of four
complete repeats (Ra to Rd) and a half repeat (Rh). A truncated protein
consisting of the last two SNAP190 Myb repeats, Rc and Rd, can bind to the PSE,
suggesting that the SNAP190 Myb domain contributes to recognition of the PSE by
the SNAP complex. SNAP190 is required for snRNA gene transcription by both RNA
polymerases II and III and interacts with SNAP45. In addition, SNAP190 interacts 
with Oct-1. Together, these results suggest that the largest subunit of the SNAP 
complex is involved in direct recognition of the PSE and is a target for the
Oct-1 activator. They also provide an example of a basal transcription factor
containing a Myb DNA binding domain.

PMCID: PMC121507
PMID: 9418884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Dec;17(12):7295-305.

OCA-B is a functional analog of VP16 but targets a separate surface of the Oct-1 
POU domain.

Babb R(1), Cleary MA, Herr W.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, New York 11724, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol 1998 Apr;18(4):2430.

OCA-B is a B-cell-specific coregulator of the broadly expressed POU domain
transcription factor Oct-1. OCA-B associates with the Oct-1 POU domain, a
bipartite DNA-binding structure containing a POU-specific (POU[S]) domain joined 
by a flexible linker to a POU homeodomain (POU[H]). Here, we show that OCA-B
alters the activity of Oct-1 in two ways. It provides a transcriptional
activation domain which, unlike Oct-1, activates an mRNA-type promoter
effectively, and it stabilizes Oct-1 on the Oct-1-responsive octamer sequence
ATGCAAAT. These properties of OCA-B parallel those displayed by the herpes
simplex virus Oct-1 coregulator VP16. OCA-B, however, interacts with a different 
surface of the DNA-bound Oct-1 POU domain, interacting with both the POU(S) and
POU(H) domains and the center of the ATGCAAAT octamer sequence. The OCA-B and
VP16 interactions with the Oct-1 POU domain are sufficiently different to permit 
OCA-B and VP16 to bind the Oct-1 POU domain simultaneously. These results
emphasize the structural versatility of the Oct-1 POU domain in its interaction
with coregulators.

PMCID: PMC232586
PMID: 9372961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Dec;17(12):7108-18.

Concerted activity of host cell factor subregions in promoting stable VP16
complex assembly and preventing interference by the acidic activation domain.

LaBoissière S(1), Walker S, O'Hare P.

Author information: 
(1)Marie Curie Research Institute, The Chart, Oxted, Surrey, England.

In contrast to our understanding of the roles of Oct-1 and VP16 in VP16-mediated 
transcriptional activation, virtually nothing is known of the role of the second 
cellular component, termed host cell factor (HCF), or of its structure-function
relationships. We show that the majority of the internal region of HCF, including
the repeats involved in HCF cleavage, is dispensable for complex assembly with
VP16 and Oct-1. The N-terminal domain of HCF (HCF.N) had only weak VP16 binding
and complex promoting activity, while the C-terminal region (HCF.C) had no
intrinsic activity. However, the C-terminal region strongly enhanced complex
formation and reduced dissociation kinetics when linked to the N-terminal domain 
(HCF.NC). The potent activity of the HCF.NC fusion in complex assembly was
recapitulated in vivo in yeast and mammalian cells. Moreover, HCF.N could promote
increased complex formation when the acidic activation domain of VP16 was
deleted. Restoration of the activation domain strongly inhibited complex
formation with HCF.N, but the addition of the C-terminal domain of HCF restored
strong stable complex formation with intact VP16. The results indicate that this 
C-terminal domain is critically required to alter the presentation of the acidic 
domain of VP16. Additional results are consistent with the interpretation that
this alteration in acidic domain presentation for complex assembly also
facilitates the activation function in VP16. The sequence of an HCF homolog from 
Caenorhabditis elegans shows it to be a natural HCF.NC construct, reinforcing the
conclusions from our functional analysis.

PMCID: PMC232567
PMID: 9372942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Mol Biol Cell. 1997 Dec;8(12):2407-19.

Dissociation of Oct-1 from the nuclear peripheral structure induces the cellular 
aging-associated collagenase gene expression.

Imai S(1), Nishibayashi S, Takao K, Tomifuji M, Fujino T, Hasegawa M, Takano T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Keio University School of Medicine, Shinjuku-ku,
Tokyo-160, Japan.

The cellular aging-associated transcriptional repressor that we previously named 
as Orpheus was identical to Oct-1, a member of the POU domain family. Oct-1
represses the collagenase gene, one of the cellular aging-associated genes, by
interacting with an AT-rich cis-element in the upstream of the gene in
preimmortalized cells at earlier population-doubling levels and in immortalized
cells. In these stages of cells, considerable fractions of the Oct-1 protein were
prominently localized in the nuclear periphery and colocalized with lamin B.
During the cellular aging process, however, this subspecies of Oct-1 disappeared 
from the nuclear periphery. The cells lacking the nuclear peripheral Oct-1
protein exhibited strong collagenase expression and carried typical senescent
morphologies. Concomitantly, the binding activity and the amount of nuclear Oct-1
protein were reduced in the aging process and resumed after immortalization.
However, the whole cellular amounts of Oct-1 protein were not significantly
changed during either process. Thus, the cellular aging-associated genes
including the collagenase gene seemed to be derepressed by the dissociation of
Oct-1 protein from the nuclear peripheral structure. Oct-1 may form a
transcriptional repressive apparatus by anchoring nuclear matrix attachment
regions onto the nuclear lamina in the nuclear periphery.

PMCID: PMC25716
PMID: 9398664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Mol Endocrinol. 1997 Oct;11(11):1651-8.

Silencing of the gene for the alpha-subunit of human chorionic gonadotropin by
the embryonic transcription factor Oct-3/4.

Liu L(1), Leaman D, Villalta M, Roberts RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia 65211,
USA.

CG is required for maintenance of the corpus luteum during pregnancy in higher
primates. As CG is a heterodimeric molecule, some form of coordinated control
must be maintained over the transcription of its two subunit genes. We recently
found that expression of human CG beta-subunit (hCGbeta) in JAr human
choriocarcinoma cells was almost completely silenced by the embryonic
transcription factor Oct-3/4, which bound to a unique ACAATAATCA octameric
sequence in the hCGbeta gene promoter. Here we report that Oct-3/4 is also a
potent inhibitor of hCG alpha-subunit (hCGalpha) expression in JAr cells. Oct-3/4
reduced human GH reporter expression from the -170 hCGalpha promoter in either
the presence or absence of cAMP by about 70% in transient cotransfection assays, 
but had no effect on expression from either the -148 hCGalpha or the -99 hCGalpha
promoter. Unexpectedly, no Oct-3/ 4-binding site was identified within the -170
to -148 region of the hCGalpha promoter, although one was found around position
-115 by both methylation interference footprinting and electrophoretic mobility
shift assays. Site-directed mutagenesis of this binding site destroyed the
affinity of the promoter for Oct-3/4, but did not affect repression of the
promoter. Therefore, inhibition of hCGalpha gene transcription by Oct-3/4 appears
not to involve direct binding of this factor to the site responsible for
silencing. When stably transfected into JAr cells, Oct-3/4 reduced the amounts of
both endogenous hCGalpha mRNA and protein by 70-80%. Oct-3/4 is therefore capable
of silencing both hCGalpha and hCGbeta gene expression. We suggest that as the
trophoblast begins to form, reduction of Oct-3/4 expression permits the
coordinated onset of transcription from the hCGalpha and hCGbeta genes.

PMID: 9328347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Blood. 1997 Oct 15;90(8):3142-53.

Human T-cell leukemia virus type I Tax transactivates the promoter of human
prointerleukin-1beta gene through association with two transcription factors,
nuclear factor-interleukin-6 and Spi-1.

Tsukada J(1), Misago M, Serino Y, Ogawa R, Murakami S, Nakanishi M, Tonai S,
Kominato Y, Morimoto I, Auron PE, Eto S.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine and the School of
Health Sciences, University of Occupational and Environmental Health, Kitakyushu,
Japan.

The human T-cell leukemia virus type I (HTLV-I), which infects a wide variety of 
mammalian cells including monocytes and macrophages, encodes a transactivating
protein designated as Tax. We now report that Tax induces the human
prointerleukin-1beta (IL1B) gene promoter in monocytic cells. In our transient
transfection assays using human THP-1 monocytic cells, a chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase (CAT) construct containing the IL1B promoter sequence between
positions -131 and +12 showed an approximately 90-fold increase in activity
following cotransfection of a Tax expression vector. Moreover, Tax synergized
with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) to induce the IL1B promoter activity. Analyses of
specific nucleotide substitutions further indicated that the Tax-induced
transcriptional activation requires two transcription factor binding motifs
within the IL1B promoter; one is a binding site for nuclear factor (NF)-IL6
(CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta, C/EBP beta), which belongs to the basic
region-leucine zipper (bZIP) family and the other for Spi-1 (PU.1), which is an
Ets family protein found principally in monocytes, macrophages, and B
lymphocytes. In electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) using in vivo THP-1 
nuclear extracts, Tax expression in THP-1 monocytic cells significantly increased
binding of the two factors to their target IL1B promoter sequences. However, in
contrast to NF-IL6 and Spi-1, DNA binding activity of Oct-1, an ubiquitously
expressed octamer-binding protein was not affected by Tax. Additional EMSA using 
in vitro translated proteins also showed that recombinant Tax enhances DNA
binding of both of recombinant NF-IL6 and Spi-1 proteins. These data were
supported by our glutathione S-transferase (GST)-pull-down data, which indicated 
that Tax physically interacts with the two proteins. Based on the results
obtained from the present study, we conclude that the IL1B promoter is a
Tax-responsive sequence as a result of ability of Tax to induce binding of NF-IL6
and Spi-1 to the IL1B promoter sequence through protein-protein interaction.

PMID: 9376596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. J Biol Chem. 1997 Oct 17;272(42):26749-55.

The mouse homologue of the human transcription factor C1 (host cell factor).
Conservation of forms and function.

Kristie TM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Viral Diseases, NIAID, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
Maryland 20892, USA. thomas_kristie@nih.gov

The assembly of the herpes simplex virus (HSV) alpha/IE gene enhancer complex is 
determined by the interactions of the Oct-1 POU domain protein, the viral
alphaTIF (alpha-trans-induction factor, VP16, ICP25, VMW65), and the C1 factor
(host cell factor, HCF). A unique transcription factor, C1 consists of a family
of polypeptides derived from a common precursor by site-specific proteolytic
processing. To analyze the role of this factor in the determination of HSV
lytic-latent infection, cDNAs and genomic DNAs encoding the mouse homologue have 
been isolated. This factor is nearly identical to the human protein, contains
multiple consensus proteolytic processing sites, and functions efficiently in the
assembly of a specific HSV enhancer complex. Interestingly, the differential
expression of the C1 factors in both human and mouse tissues may be important for
the determination of HSV tissue tropism in these two organisms.

PMID: 9334261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Oct;17(10):6139-46.

VP16 targets an amino-terminal domain of HCF involved in cell cycle progression.

Wilson AC(1), Freiman RN, Goto H, Nishimoto T, Herr W.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, New York 11724, USA.

The herpes simplex virus (HSV) regulatory protein VP16 activates HSV
immediate-early gene transcription through formation of a multiprotein-DNA
complex on viral promoters that includes the preexisting nuclear proteins HCF and
Oct-1. The HCF protein is a complex of amino- and carboxy-terminal polypeptides
derived from a large (approximately 2,000-amino-acid) precursor by proteolytic
processing. Here we show that a 361-residue amino-terminal region of HCF is
sufficient to bind VP16, stabilize VP16-induced complex assembly with Oct-1 and
DNA, and activate transcription in vivo. This VP16 interaction region contains
six kelch-like repeats, a degenerate repeat motif that is likely to fold as a
distinctive beta-propeller structure. The third HCF kelch repeat includes a
proline residue (P134) that is mutated to serine in hamster tsBN67 cells,
resulting in a temperature-sensitive defect in cell proliferation. This missense 
mutation also prevents direct association between HCF and VP16, suggesting that
VP16 mimics a cellular factor required for cell proliferation. Rescue of the
tsBN67 cell proliferation defect by HCF, however, requires both the VP16
interaction domain and an adjacent basic region, indicating that HCF utilizes
multiple regions to promote cell cycle progression.

PMCID: PMC232464
PMID: 9315674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Sep;17(9):5117-26.

Luman, a new member of the CREB/ATF family, binds to herpes simplex virus
VP16-associated host cellular factor.

Lu R(1), Yang P, O'Hare P, Misra V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, Western College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Canada.

The human host cell factor (HCF) is expressed in a variety of adult and fetal
tissues, and its gene is conserved in animals as diverse as mammals and insects. 
However, its only known function is to stabilize the herpes simplex virus virion 
transactivator VP16 in a complex with the cellular POU domain protein Oct-1 and
cis-acting regulatory elements in promoters of immediate-early viral genes. To
identify a cellular function for HCF, we used the yeast two-hybrid system to
identify a cellular ligand for HCF. This protein, Luman, appears to be a cyclic
AMP response element (CRE)-binding protein/activating transcription factor 1
protein of the basic leucine zipper superfamily. It binds CREs in vitro and
activates CRE-containing promoters when transfected into COS7 cells. This
activation of transcription was synergistically enhanced by the presence of
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein elements and inhibited by AP-1 elements in the
promoter. In addition to a basic DNA binding domain, Luman possesses an unusually
long leucine zipper and an acidic amino-terminal activation domain. These
features in Luman are also present in what appear to be homologs in the mouse,
Drosophila melanogaster, and Caenorhabditis elegans. Luman and VP16 appear to
have similar mechanisms for binding HCF, as in vitro each competitively inhibited
the binding of the other to HCF. In transfected cells, however, while VP16
strongly inhibited the ability of GAL-Luman to activate transcription from a GAL4
upstream activation sequence-containing promoter, Luman was unable to inhibit the
activity of GAL-VP16. Luman appears to be a ubiquitous transcription factor, and 
its mRNA was detected in all human adult and fetal tissues examined. The possible
role of HCF in regulating the function of this ubiquitous transcription factor is
discussed.

PMCID: PMC232362
PMID: 9271389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Aug 5;94(16):8450-5.

Structural flexibility in transcription complex formation revealed by protein-DNA
photocrosslinking.

Cleary MA(1), Pendergrast PS, Herr W.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724, USA.

The Oct-1 POU domain binds diverse DNA-sequence elements and forms a higher-order
regulatory complex with the herpes simplex virus coregulator VP16. The POU domain
contains two separate DNA-binding domains joined by a flexible linker. By
protein-DNA photocrosslinking we show that the relative positioning of the two
POU DNA-binding domains on DNA varies depending on the nature of the DNA target. 
On a single VP16-responsive element, the POU domain adopts multiple
conformations. To determine the structure of the Oct-1 POU domain in a
multiprotein complex with VP16, we allowed VP16 to interact with previously
crosslinked POU-domain-DNA complexes and found that VP16 can associate with
multiple POU-domain conformations. These results reveal the dynamic potential of 
a DNA-binding domain in directing transcriptional regulatory complex formation.

PMCID: PMC22952
PMID: 9237997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Immunol. 1997 Aug 1;159(3):1247-54.

Family-specific differences in transcription efficiency of Ig heavy chain
promoters.

Buchanan KL(1), Smith EA, Dou S, Corcoran LM, Webb CF.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology and Cancer Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research
Foundation, Oklahoma City 73104, USA.

Murine Ig variable region heavy chain genes (V(H)) are grouped into families
based on coding sequence homology. We observed that the accompanying promoter
sequences were also conserved in a family-specific manner. Remarkably, no one has
directly compared the transcription efficiencies of V(H) genes from different
families. Using an in vitro transcription system, we found that transcription
efficiencies of different V(H) promoters differed by as much as 70-fold. These
differences could be attributed to variation in the octamer-heptamer and TATA
sequences, as well as to the presence or absence of initiator elements. The J558 
family promoter exhibited the highest level of transcription and specifically
interacted with an Oct-1 dimer not bound by other V(H) promoters. These data
suggest that differential transcription and regulation of V(H) promoters could
occur in vivo. The increased transcription efficiency of the J558 promoter
relative to other V(H) promoters also presents a possible explanation for the
abundance of J558 sterile transcripts observed before V(H)DJ(H) rearrangement.

PMID: 9233620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Science. 1997 Jul 11;277(5323):193-4.

The transcriptional paradox: octamer factors and B and T cells.

Graef IA(1), Crabtree GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford Medical School, Stanford, CA
94305, USA.

Comment on
    Science. 1997 Jul 11;277(5323):221-5.

PMID: 9235633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Science. 1997 Jul 11;277(5323):221-5.

Inducible expression and phosphorylation of coactivator BOB.1/OBF.1 in T cells.

Zwilling S(1), Dieckmann A, Pfisterer P, Angel P, Wirth T.

Author information: 
(1)MSZ, Institut für Medizinische Strahlenkunde und Zellforschung, Universität
Würzburg, Versbacher Strasse 5, 97078 Würzburg, Germany.

Comment in
    Science. 1997 Jul 11;277(5323):193-4.

BOB.1/OBF.1 is a transcriptional coactivator that is constitutively expressed in 
B cells and interacts with the Oct1 and Oct2 transcription factors. Upon
activation of Jurkat T cells and primary murine thymocytes with phorbol esters
and ionomycin, BOB.1/OBF.1 expression and transactivation function were induced. 
BOB.1/OBF.1 was phosphorylated at Ser184 both in vivo and in vitro, and this
modification was required for inducible activation. Mutation of Ser184 also
diminished transactivation function in B cells, suggesting that the activating
phosphorylation that is inducible in T cells is constitutively present in B
cells. Thus, BOB.1/OBF.1 is a transcriptional coactivator that is critically
regulated by posttranslational modifications to mediate cell type-specific gene
expression.

PMID: 9211847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Jul;17(7):3937-46.

Interdigitated residues within a small region of VP16 interact with Oct-1, HCF,
and DNA.

Lai JS(1), Herr W.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, New York 11724, USA.

Upon infection, the herpes simplex virus (HSV) activator of immediate-early (IE) 
gene transcription VP16 forms a multiprotein-DNA complex with two cellular
proteins, Oct-1 and HCF. First, VP16 associates with HCF independently of DNA,
and this association stimulates subsequent association with Oct-1 on the DNA
target of VP16 activation, the TAATGARAT motif found in HSV IE promoters. We have
analyzed the involvement of VP16 residues lying near the carboxy-terminal
transcriptional activation domain of VP16 in associating with HCF, Oct-1, and
DNA. To assay VP16 association with HCF, we developed an electrophoretic mobility
retardation assay in which HCF is used to retard the mobility of a hybrid
VP16-GAL4 DNA-binding domain fusion protein bound to a GAL4 DNA-binding site.
Analysis of an extensive set of individual and combined alanine substitutions
over a 61-amino-acid region of VP16 shows that, even within a region as small as 
13 amino acids, there are separate residues involved in association with either
HCF, DNA, or Oct-1 bound to DNA; indeed, of two immediately adjacent amino acids 
in VP16, one is important for DNA binding and the other is important for HCF
binding. These results suggest that a small region in VP16 is important for
linking in close juxtaposition the four components of the VP16-induced complex
and support the hypothesis that the structure of the Oct-1-VP16 interaction in
this complex is similar to that formed by the yeast transcriptional regulatory
proteins MATa1 and MAT alpha2. We propose that HCF stabilizes this Oct-1-VP16
interaction.

PMCID: PMC232246
PMID: 9199328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jun 20;272(25):16048-55.

Characterization of a trimeric complex containing Oct-1, SNAPc, and DNA.

Ford E(1), Hernandez N.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York 11724, USA.

The human small nuclear (sn) RNA promoters contain a proximal sequence element
(PSE), which recruits the basal transcription factor SNAPc, and a distal sequence
element characterized by an octamer sequence, which recruits the POU domain
transcription factor Oct-1. The Oct-1 POU domain and SNAPc bind cooperatively to 
probes containing a PSE and an octamer sequence, and this effect contributes to
efficient transcription in vitro. In vivo, however, Oct-1 regions outside of the 
POU domain can activate snRNA gene transcription. Here, we have examined whether 
the role of these regions is to contribute to cooperative binding with SNAPc. We 
find that they indeed improve cooperative binding, but most of the effect is
nevertheless mediated by just the POU domain. This suggests that Oct-1 activates 
transcription of snRNA genes in at least two steps, recruitment of SNAPc mediated
primarily by the POU domain, and a later step mediated by regions outside of the 
POU domain. We also show that a PSE-binding complex observed in nuclear extracts 
consists of Oct-1 and SNAPc. Although Oct-1 cannot bind effectively to the PSE
probe on its own, in the complex it contacts DNA. Thus, in a nuclear extract,
SNAPc can recruit Oct-1 to a probe to which Oct-1 cannot bind on its own.

PMID: 9188510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jun 20;272(25):15905-13.

Characterization of Skn-1a/i POU domain factors and linkage to papillomavirus
gene expression.

Andersen B(1), Hariri A, Pittelkow MR, Rosenfeld MG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, School and Department of Medicine,
University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, California 92037-0648, USA.

Tissue-restricted POU domain transcription factors, which bind octamer or
octamer-like gene sequences, play roles in cellular differentiation and the
development of several organs. We have previously identified a POU domain gene,
Skn-1a/i, expressed primarily in epidermis, that encodes at least two products
through alternative splicing. One of these, Skn-1a, acts as a transcriptional
activator, and the other, Skn-1i, contains an inhibitory domain in the NH2
terminus, which prevents DNA-binding in vitro and transcriptional activation in
vivo. We now demonstrate that when Skn-1i is expressed in eukaryotic cells it can
bind to an octamer site, suggesting that in vivo cellular factors modulate the
activity of the inhibitory domain to permit DNA-binding. Yet the inhibitory
domain does not allow transactivation by Skn-1i or by a heterologous
transactivator containing this domain in cis. Furthermore, we demonstrate that
Skn-1a, Tst-1, and Oct-1 are the major octamer-binding proteins in epidermis.
Since Skn-1a is primarily expressed in suprabasal cells of the epidermis, we have
tested its possible role in the regulation of epidermal papillomaviruses. In
transient transfection assays, Skn-1a and Tst-1 can activate the long control
region of the epidermis-specific human papillomavirus 1A (HPV-1A). Consistent
with these in vivo transcription data, in vitro DNA binding studies identify
three octamer-like sites, which are capable of binding Skn-1a, in the HPV-1A long
control region. Mutations of all three octamer-like sites prevent transactivation
by Skn-1a in transient transfection assays. Taken together, these results provide
evidence that Skn-1a and Tst-1 may provide a molecular link between HPV gene
expression and epidermal differentiation.

PMID: 9188490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Nucleic Acids Res. 1997 Jun 1;25(11):2068-76.

Differential in vivo activation of the class II and class III snRNA genes by the 
POU-specific domain of Oct-1.

Murphy S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Pathology Unit, Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, South Parks
Road, Oxford, OX1 3RE, UK. smurphy@worf.molbiol.ox.ac.uk

Many snRNA genes contain binding sites for the ubiquitous transcription factor
Oct-1. In vitro studies have shown that this factor potentiates binding of an
essential transcription factor (PTF) to the proximal sequence element (PSE) of
snRNA genes, and activates transcription. Using Gal4 fusion proteins, I show here
that the POU-specific region of the DNA-binding domain of Oct-1 is sufficient
both to potentiate PTF binding in vitro and to transactivate pol II- and pol
III-dependent snRNA genes in vivo . A single amino acid change in this domain
abrogates both activation and interaction with PTF. The N- and C-terminal regions
of Oct-1 also activate transcription of both classes of snRNA genes. Wild-type
levels of Pol II-dependent U2 expression require all activation domains, whereas 
efficient activation of the pol III-dependent 7SK and U6 genes is effected by the
POU-specific domain alone. These results indicate that contacts between PTF and
amino acids in the POU-specific domain of Oct-1 are critical for efficient
transactivation of snRNA genes in vivo. The POU-specific domain of Oct-2A also
activates these genes, but the N- and C-terminal domains are relatively inactive.

PMCID: PMC146712
PMID: 9153304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. FEBS Lett. 1997 May 26;408(3):255-60.

Transcriptional regulation of the human replacement histone gene H3.3B.

Witt O(1), Albig W, Doenecke D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut fur Biochemie und Molekulare Zellbiologie, Universität Göttingen,
Germany.

In contrast to the cell-cycle-dependent histone genes, replacement histone genes 
are transcribed independently of DNA replication and their expression is
upregulated during differentiation. We have investigated the transcriptional
regulation of the recently characterized human replacement histone gene H3.3B.
Using reporter gene assays of promoter-luciferase gene-constructs, we show that
promoter activity largely depends on an intact Oct and CRE/TRE element within the
proximal 145 bp of the promoter. DNase I footprinting revealed binding of
proteins to a 40-bp region covering these two elements. Band shift experiments
identified binding proteins as Oct-1 and factors of the CREB/ATF and AP-1 family,
respectively. The unexpected transcriptional regulation of this replacement
histone gene is discussed.

PMID: 9188772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. EMBO J. 1997 May 1;16(9):2420-30.

A single serine residue at position 375 of VP16 is critical for complex assembly 
with Oct-1 and HCF and is a target of phosphorylation by casein kinase II.

O'Reilly D(1), Hanscombe O, O'Hare P.

Author information: 
(1)Marie Curie Research Institute, The Chart, Oxted, Surrey, UK.

We show that VP16 is phosphorylated by cellular kinases in vivo and in vitro and 
map the major sites of phosphorylation to be on serines towards the C-terminus,
downstream of position 370 in both cases. Deletion of the acidic activation
domain had no effect on phosphorylation, refining the sites to between position
370 and 411. Within VP16, the C-terminal boundary for complex formation with
Oct-1 and HCF lies at position 388, and between 370 and 388 lies one serine, at
position 375. This is a consensus casein kinase II (CKII) site and, using
purified wild-type and mutant proteins, we show that it is the main CKII site in 
the body of the N-terminal complex-forming region. This site is also
phosphorylated in nuclear extracts. Although other sites, mainly Ser411, are also
phosphorylated by nuclear kinase(s), the single substitution of Ser375 to alanine
abolishes CKII phosphorylation in vitro and virtually eliminates complex
formation. This serine lies in a surface-exposed region of VP16 and, although
complex formation is disrupted, other activities of the mutant are unaffected.
Ser375 is also required in vivo where substitution to alanine abolishes
transactivation, while replacement with threonine restores normal levels of
activity.

PMCID: PMC1169842
PMID: 9171355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. J Virol. 1997 May;71(5):3886-94.

Protein interactions in the herpes simplex virus type 1 VP16-induced complex:
VP16 peptide inhibition and mutational analysis of host cell factor requirements.

Simmen KA(1), Newell A, Robinson M, Mills JS, Canning G, Handa R, Parkes K,
Borkakoti N, Jupp R.

Author information: 
(1)Roche Research Centre, Welwyn Garden City, England.

The herpes simplex virus VP16 protein functions as a potent transcriptional
activator and targets DNA sites with the consensus TAATGARAT present in all the
viral immediate-early gene promoters. To do so, VP16 directs assembly of a
multiprotein complex involving two cellular proteins, host cell factor (HCF) and 
the Oct-1 DNA-binding transcription factor. To investigate the importance of
specific protein-protein interactions to formation of this VP16-induced complex
(VIC), we used oligopeptides to prevent VIC assembly. Linear and cyclic peptides 
corresponding to a region of VP16 previously implicated in complex formation were
potent inhibitors of VIC assembly. To further characterize the protein
interactions involved, we cloned a human cDNA encoding the minimal VP16
interaction domain of HCF, containing amino acids 1 to 380 [HCF (1-380)]. The
REHAYS-based peptides active in preventing VIC assembly were found to
specifically block binding of VP16 to HCF (1-380), without affecting VP16-Oct-1
binding. The inhibitory activity of these VP16 peptides was strictly sequence
specific for the EHAY residues. Site-directed mutagenesis of the HCF (1-380)
domain revealed residues E102 and K105 to be critical determinants in support of 
VIC formation. Alteration of a single residue in HCF, K105, was shown to
virtually abolish complex assembly. Interestingly however, none of the HCF
mutants that were impaired in their ability to support complex formation
exhibited defects in direct VP16 binding, supporting loss of function at a higher
order in complex assembly.

PMCID: PMC191540
PMID: 9094665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Gene. 1997 Apr 1;188(2):253-60.

Characterization of constitutive and inducible transcription factors binding to
the P2 NF-AT site in the human interleukin-4 promoter.

Li-Weber M(1), Salgame P, Hu C, Krammer PH.

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Immunology Program, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg.
m.li-weber@dkfz-heidelberg.de

Interleukin-4 (IL-4) is a pleiotropic immunomodulatory cytokine secreted by T
helper 2 cells. The IL-4 promoter contains multiple sites with DNA sequences
homologous to the IL-2 NF-AT binding site. One of these sites--the P2
site--located between -173 and -150 was previously found to be flanked by two
octamer-like motifs. NF-ATp/c and octamer proteins were suggested to bind to this
region and to cooperatively activate the promoter activity (Chuvpilo et al.,
1993). To precisely analyze the P2-binding factors we used antibodies against
NF-ATp, NF-ATc, Fos, Jun, Oct-1 and Oct-2 in EMSA. We show here that nuclear
extracts from T-cells form two P2-binding complexes--a PMA/ionomycin-inducible
and a constitutive one. The PMA/ionomycin-inducible complex contains NF-ATp/c,
Fos and Jun. No octamer binding factors could be detected in either of the two
complexes. Analysis of the precise DNA contact points of the two complexes showed
that both complexes are formed in the center of the NF-AT consensus site. No DNA 
contact points could be detected in the octamer-like motif site. Furthermore,
purified recombinant POU domains of Oct-1 and Oct-2 failed to bind to the P2
site, suggesting that this site is not an independent octamer-binding site.
Therefore, the DNA sequence at -173 to -150 of the IL-4 promoter is a binding
site for NF-ATp/c and AP-1. Octamer proteins are unlikely to cooperate with
NF-ATp/c at this site.

PMID: 9133600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Genes Dev. 1997 Mar 15;11(6):726-37.

A single-point mutation in HCF causes temperature-sensitive cell-cycle arrest and
disrupts VP16 function.

Goto H(1), Motomura S, Wilson AC, Freiman RN, Nakabeppu Y, Fukushima K, Fujishima
M, Herr W, Nishimoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyushu
University, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, Japan.

The temperature-sensitive BHK21 hamster cell line tsBN67 ceases to proliferate at
the nonpermissive temperature after a lag of one to a few cell divisions, and the
arrested cells display a gene expression pattern similar to that of serum-starved
cells. The temperature-sensitive phenotype is reversible and results from a
single missense mutation--proline to serine at position 134--in HCF, a cellular
protein that, together with the viral protein VP16, activates transcription of
herpes simplex virus (HSV) immediate-early genes. The tsBN67 HCF mutation also
prevents VP16 activation of transcription at the nonpermissive temperature. The
finding that the same point mutation in HCF disrupts both VP16 function and the
cell cycle suggests that HCF plays a role in cell-cycle progression in addition
to VP16-dependent transcription.

PMID: 9087427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Biochem J. 1997 Feb 15;322 ( Pt 1):155-8.

The octamer-binding proteins Oct-1 and Oct-2 repress the HIV long terminal repeat
promoter and its transactivation by Tat.

Liu YZ(1), Latchman DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, University College London Medical School,
U.K.

Although the HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR) contains four potential binding
sites for the octamer-binding protein, Oct-1, which is known to interact with the
HIV-1 Tat protein, the effect of the Oct-1 factor on HIV LTR-driven gene
expression has not previously been reported. We show here that both Oct-1, and to
a lesser extent the related Oct-2 protein, can repress both the basal activity of
the HIV-1 LTR and its transactivation by Tat. These effects are still observed
with an HIV LTR construct containing only a single octamer-binding site located
between the TATA box and the transcriptional start site. The stronger inhibitory 
effect of Oct-1 on both these promoters is dependent upon its C-terminal region
which cannot be effectively replaced by the equivalent region of Oct-2. These
effects are discussed in terms of the regulation of HIV LTR activity in different
cell types and in response to T-cell activation.

PMCID: PMC1218171
PMID: 9078256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Virus Res. 1997 Feb;47(2):155-66.

Identification of cis-regulatory elements in the upstream regulatory region of
human papillomavirus type 59.

Rho J(1), Lee S, de Villiers EM, Choe J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology, Taejon, South Korea.

Human papillomavirus type 59 (HPV-59) was cloned from a vulvar intraepithelial
neoplasia and the complete nucleotide sequence was determined. This virus is
closely related to HPV-18 and -39 (60% homology in nucleotide sequence) and is
grouped with the genital HPV types. In the present paper, we demonstrate that the
HPV-59 E2 transactivator represses its E6 promoter-mediated transcription. We
have also analyzed cis-regulatory elements in the upstream regulatory region
(URR) of HPV-59 using chloramphenicol acetyl transferase assays as well as
electrophoresis mobility shift assays (EMSA). The results allow for a subdivision
of the HPV-59 URR into three regions of activity: distal (nt 7149-7493), central 
(nt 7493-7742), and proximal (nt 7742-7748). In particular, the 250 bp (nt
7493-7742) of the central region plays an important role as a constitutive
enhancer element for the maximal transcription of the E6 promoter. Our results
suggest that the transcription factors AP1, Oct1, SP1 and unidentified factors
bind to the HPV-59 E6 promoter region, whereas NF1, GRE and TFIID fail to bind
despite the presence of putative binding sites in the DNA sequence.

PMID: 9085547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Immunity. 1997 Feb;6(2):175-85.

A T cell-specific enhancer in the interleukin-3 locus is activated cooperatively 
by Oct and NFAT elements within a DNase I-hypersensitive site.

Duncliffe KN(1), Bert AG, Vadas MA, Cockerill PN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Immunology, Hanson Centre For Cancer Research, Institute for
Medical and Veterinary Science, Adelaide, Australia.

Interleukin-3 (IL-3) is a cytokine that is expressed primarily in activated T
cells. Here we identified an inducible T cell-specific enhancer 14 kb upstream of
the IL-3 gene that responded to activation of T cell receptor signaling pathways.
The IL-3 enhancer spanned an inducible cyclosporin A-sensitive DNase
I-hypersensitive site found only in T cells. Four NFAT-like elements exist within
the enhancer. The two most active NFAT-like elements were located at the center
of the DNase I-hypersensitive site. One of these NFAT-like elements encompassed
overlapping Oct- and NFATp/c-binding sites, which functioned in a highly
synergistic manner. We suggest that the T cell-specific expression of the IL-3
gene is partly controlled through the enhancer by cooperation between Oct and
NFAT family proteins.

PMID: 9047239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. FEBS Lett. 1997 Jan 27;402(1):85-90.

Sesquiterpene lactone containing Mexican Indian medicinal plants and pure
sesquiterpene lactones as potent inhibitors of transcription factor NF-kappaB.

Bork PM(1), Schmitz ML, Kuhnt M, Escher C, Heinrich M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutical Biology, Albert-Ludwigs University, Freiburg,
Germany.

The potential inhibitory effect of 54 Mexican Indian medicinal plants on the
activation of transcription factor NF-kappaB was studied. Band-shift experiments 
identified the ethanolic leaf extracts of Artemisia ludoviciana ssp. mexicana,
Calea zacatechichi, and Polymnia maculata (all rich in sesquiterpene lactones) as
inhibitors of NF-kappaB down to a concentration of 25 microg/ml. The
sesquiterpene lactones isohelenin and parthenolide prevented NF-kappaB activation
completely as low as 5 microM. Treatment of HeLa cells with leaf extract of A.
ludoviciana ssp. mexicana, isohelenin and parthenolide prevented the induction of
transcription on the IL-6 promoter. These experiments identify the eudesmanolide 
and germacranolide type of sesquiterpene lactones as potent non-antioxidant
inhibitors of NF-kappaB. All plants active in the NF-kappaB assay also showed a
delay in the onset of capillary reactions of the allantois membrane in a
physiological model for anti-inflammatory activity - the HET-CAM assay.

PMID: 9013864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jan 24;272(4):2396-403.

Oct-1 and CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) bind to overlapping elements
within the interleukin-8 promoter. The role of Oct-1 as a transcriptional
repressor.

Wu GD(1), Lai EJ, Huang N, Wen X.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6144, USA.

Interleukin-8 (IL-8), a potent neutrophil chemoattractant, can be expressed at
high levels by many different cell types after immune stimulation. In contrast,
expression of IL-8 in these same cells is virtually absent in the unstimulated
state, demonstrating the tight regulation of the IL-8 gene. Although much is
known about how this gene is transcriptionally activated after immune
stimulation, little is known about the regulation of the IL-8 promoter in the
absence of immune activation. In this study we examine how the IL-8 promoter is
transcriptionally regulated in the uninduced state and how these mechanisms are
altered in response to immune stimulation by IL-1beta. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assay and transfection studies show that the IL-8 promoter is
transcriptionally regulated by both positive and negative elements. Although the 
nuclear factor-kappaB (NFkappaB) element regulates only inducible activity of the
IL-8 promoter in response to stimulation with IL-1beta, the AP-1 and
CCAAT/Enhancer-binding Protein (C/EBP) elements influence both basal and
inducible activities. In contrast to these three positive regulatory elements,
the binding of the ubiquitously expressed POU-homeodomain transcription factor,
Oct-1, strongly represses transcriptional activity of the IL-8 promoter by
binding independently to an element overlapping that of C/EBP.

PMID: 8999951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Genes Dev. 1997 Jan 15;11(2):198-212.

Structure of Pit-1 POU domain bound to DNA as a dimer: unexpected arrangement and
flexibility.

Jacobson EM(1), Li P, Leon-del-Rio A, Rosenfeld MG, Aggarwal AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia University, New 
York, New York 10032, USA.

Pit-1, a member of the POU domain family of transcription factors, characterized 
by a bipartite DNA-binding domain, serves critical developmental functions based 
on binding to diverse DNA elements in its target genes. Here we report a high
resolution X-ray analysis of the Pit-1 POU domain bound to a DNA element as a
homodimer. This analysis reveals that Pit-1 subdomains bind to perpendicular
faces of the DNA, rather than opposite faces of the DNA as in Oct-1. This is
accomplished by different spacing and orientation of the POU-specific domain.
Contrary to previous predictions, the dimerization interface involves the
carboxyl terminus of the DNA recognition helix of the homeodomain, which in an
extended conformation interacts with specific residues at the amino terminus of
helix alpha1 and in the loop between helices alpha3 and alpha4 of the
POU-specific domain of the symmetry related monomer. These features suggest the
molecular basis of disease-causing mutations in Pit-1 and provide potential basis
for the flexible allostery between protein domains and DNA sites in the
activation of target genes.

PMID: 9009203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. DNA Cell Biol. 1997 Jan;16(1):45-57.

Involvement of an octamer-like sequence within a crucial region of the
androgen-dependent Slp enhancer.

Scarlett CO(1), Scheller A, Thompson E, Robins DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan Medical School, Medical
Science II 4708, Ann Arbor 48109-0618, USA.

Androgen dependence of the mouse sex-limited protein (Slp) gene is conferred by
an enhancer encompassing a consensus hormone response element (HRE) and sites for
several nonreceptor factors. The footprint IV (FPIV) region of the enhancer plays
a key role in hormone- and tissue-specific response, both in vitro and in vivo.
We characterized FPIV-binding factors by methylation interference analysis and UV
cross-linking of several complexes evident in gel mobility-shift assays. The
footprinting analysis revealed that distinct base contacts within the multiple
nuclear protein-DNA complexes occurred primarily within a sequence similar to an 
octamer transcription factor (Oct-1) binding site. With additional data on
approximate molecular weights from UV cross-linking, several plausible candidates
were tested for their DNA binding and functional activity at FPIV. Oct-like
protein binding in gel-shift assays with several cell and tissue extracts was
evident using specific competitors and antibodies, but was lower in affinity for 
FPIV than for an Oct-1 consensus site. Site-directed mutation of the FPIV
sequence to a consensus Oct-1 element within the Slp enhancer context increased
Oct-1 binding in vitro, but greatly reduced hormonal induction in vivo. This
suggested that Oct-1 is not directly involved in response, or alternatively, that
Oct-1 bound to the lower-affinity site interacts with neighboring factors
significantly differently than Oct-1 bound to a consensus sequence. A sequence
overlapping the Oct-like element that was similar to a hepatic nuclear factor-4
(HNF-4) site showed no ability to bind HNF-4 in vitro, nor the related orphan
receptor, chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter factor (COUP-TF). Intriguingly,
however, expression of COUP-TF in transfection had a dramatic inhibitory effect
on response of the androgen-specific enhancer (C' delta9), but did not affect
other enhancer configurations that can also be induced by glucocorticoid (C
'delta2). This underscores that, despite extensive sequence identity of C' delta9
and C' delta2, components of the androgen-specific transcription complex differ
significantly from that of one that is more generally steroid responsive.

PMID: 9022044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Eur J Immunol. 1997 Jan;27(1):222-6.

Overexpression of mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase reversed cAMP
inhibition of NF-kappaB in T cells.

Ho HY(1), Lee HH, Lai MZ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

cAMP inhibits T cell activation by acting as an antagonist for selective kinases 
and transcriptional factors. We have recently demonstrated that cAMP inhibited
c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) but left the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase
cascade almost unaffected in T lymphocytes. In accordance with recent reports, we
also observed a selective suppression of nuclear factor NF-kappaB activation by
cAMP. The possible link between the JNK cascade and NF-kappaB activation was
demonstrated by the fact that the active form of MAP kinase kinase kinase
(deltaMEKK), a constitutive activator of JNK, induced NF-kappaB but not AP-1,
Oct, and NF-AT in T cells. In contrast, the induction of MAP kinase kinase
(MEK)-MAP kinase did not stimulate NF-kappaB activity. The specific activation of
NF-kappaB by a single MEKK-JNK cascade was thus unusual, given that the
activation of other transcriptional elements in T cells requires at least two
signal pathways. This was further confirmed by the fact that cAMP inhibition of
NF-kappaB activation was reversed by overexpression of deltaMEKK.

PMID: 9022022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. J Biol Chem. 1996 Dec 13;271(50):32349-58.

AP-1 and Oct-1 transcription factors down-regulate the expression of the human
PIT1/GHF1 gene.

Delhase M(1), Castrillo JL, de la Hoya M, Rajas F, Hooghe-Peters EL.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacology Department, Medical School, Free University of Brussels (VUB),
Laarbeeklaan 103, B-1090 Brussels, Belgium. mdelhase@ucsd.edu

The pituitary-specific transcription factor Pit-1/GHF-1 is a member of the POU
domain family of regulatory proteins. It is involved in the commitment and
expansion of the somatotropic cell lineage and activates the transcription of a
set of anterior pituitary genes. We have cloned the human PIT1/GHF1 gene and
characterized the regulatory mechanisms controlling its promoter activation and
regulation. A minimal promoter region (-102 to +15) contains the cis-acting
elements that confer to the human PIT1/GHF1 gene a high basal transcriptional
activity, the tissue-specific expression, and the autoregulation by Pit-1/GHF-1
protein. The upstream promoter region contains a multiplicity of Pit-1/GHF-1
binding sites that do not show any synergistic interaction with the minimal
promoter. The transcriptional activity is negatively regulated by Oct-1 and
mediated by an octamer-binding site (OTF). In addition, we have also identified a
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate-responsive element, which overlaps with a
Pit-1/GHF-1 binding site. A mutually exclusive binding of the activator protein-1
(AP-1) and Pit-1/GHF-1 has been observed on this composite site, and AP-1 was
shown to down-regulate PIT1/GHF1 transcription.

PMID: 8943298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Biol Chem. 1996 Dec 13;271(50):31964-72.

The proximal regulatory element of the interferon-gamma promoter mediates
selective expression in T cells.

Penix LA(1), Sweetser MT, Weaver WM, Hoeffler JP, Kerppola TK, Wilson CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520-8064, USA. cbwilson@u.washington.edu

Interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) is produced by natural killer cells and certain
subsets of T cells, but the basis for its selective expression is unknown. Within
the region between -108 and -40 base pairs of the IFN-gamma promoter are two
conserved and essential regulatory elements, which confer activation-specific
expression in T cells. This report describes studies indicating that the most
proximal of these two regulatory elements is an important determinant of its
restricted expression. The proximal element is a composite site that binds
members of the CREB/ATF, AP-1, and octamer families of transcription factors. Jun
is essential for activation-induced transcription and binds preferably as a
heterodimer with ATF-2. In contrast, CREB appears to dampen transcription from
this element. The CpG dinucleotide in this element is selectively methylated in
Th2 T cells and other cells that do not express IFN-gamma, and methylation
markedly reduces transcription factor binding. As a target for DNA methylation
and for binding of transcription factors that mediate or impede transcription,
this element appears to play a central role in controlling IFN-gamma expression.

PMID: 8943243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Int Immunol. 1996 Dec;8(12):1971-82.

Decreased production of IL-2 and IFN-gamma by stimulated splenocytes from mice
bearing plasma cell tumors is associated with alteration of DNA-binding factors.

Ruzek MC(1), O'Brien DP, Mathur A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis 55455, USA.

We have previously demonstrated that polyclonally stimulated splenocytes as well 
as enriched T cells from mice bearing plasma cell tumors (PCT) show decreased
production of the Th1-associated cytokines, IL-2 and IFN-gamma. This observed
loss of IL-2 and IFN-gamma production could be attributed to possible alterations
in various factors required for T cell activation and cytokine production. We
find that B7 co-stimulatory molecules and IL-2R are up-regulated normally on
splenocytes from PCT mice. Concanavalin A (Con A) stimulation of splenocytes from
PCT mice in the presence of immobilized anti-CD28 antibody does not enhance
proliferation. Exogenous rIL-2 addition to cultures of splenocytes from PCT mice 
also does not enhance proliferative responses or cytokine production.
Furthermore, we do not observe inhibition of normal splenocyte proliferation and 
IL-2 production in the presence of splenocytes from PCT mice, suggesting that the
appearance of suppressor cells cannot account for the decreased responses by
splenocytes from PCT mice. Also, IL-2 mRNA levels are decreased in stimulated
splenocytes from PCT mice, suggesting that there may be an alteration of
transcription factors required for activation of IL-2. Therefore, we have
evaluated the DNA-binding activity of transcription factors involved in
activation of IL-2 and IFN-gamma gene transcription. We find that binding
activities of AP-1, Oct-1 and Oct-2 transcription factors in stimulated
splenocytes from PCT mice are similar to normal splenocytes. However, the binding
activities of NF-kappa B complexes and factors that bind to the proximal
conserved element in the IFN-gamma promoter are dramatically altered in
splenocytes from PCT mice. These results suggest that PCT induce changes in
certain transcription factors that are important for anti-tumor responses,
including T cell proliferative responses and Th1-associated cytokine production.

PMID: 8982782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 Dec 1;24(23):4805-11.

Octamer independent activation of transcription from the kappa immunoglobulin
germline promoter.

Prabhu A(1), O'Brien DP, Weisner GL, Fulton R, Van Ness B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis 55455, USA.

Previous analyses of immunoglobulin V region promoters has led to the discovery
of a common octamer motif which is functionally important in the tissue-specific 
and developmentally regulated transcriptional activation of immunoglobulin genes.
The germline promoters (Ko) located upstream of the J region gene segments of the
kappa locus also contain an octamer motif (containing a single base pair mutation
and referred to as the variant octamer) which has been shown previously to bind
Oct-1 and Oct-2 transcription factors in vitro. To further elucidate the role of 
this variant octamer motif in the regulation of germline transcription from the
unrearranged kappa locus, we have quantitated the relative binding affinity of
Oct-1 and Oct-2 for the variant octamer motif and determined the functional role 
of this octamer motif in transcriptional activation. We find that, although the
variant octamer motif binds Oct-1 and Oct-2 in vitro with 5-fold lower affinity
than the consensus octamer motif, mutation of the variant octamer motif to either
a consensus octamer or non-octamer motif has no effect on transcriptional
activation from the germline promoter. We also find significant differences in
activation of germline and V region promoters by kappa enhancers. Our results
suggest that the germline promoters and V region promoters differ in their
dependence on octamer for activation and respond differently to enhancer
activation. These findings have important implications in regulation of germline 
transcription as well as concomitant activation of the V-J recombination of the
kappa light chain locus.

PMCID: PMC146306
PMID: 8972869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. J Neurosci Res. 1996 Dec 1;46(5):630-40.

Oct-6 (SCIP/Tst-1) is expressed in Schwann cell precursors, embryonic Schwann
cells, and postnatal myelinating Schwann cells: comparison with Oct-1, Krox-20,
and Pax-3.

Blanchard AD(1), Sinanan A, Parmantier E, Zwart R, Broos L, Meijer D, Meier C,
Jessen KR, Mirsky R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, University College London,
England.

The POU domain transcription factor Oct-6 (SCIP/Tst-1) is likely to control
important stages of Schwann cell development, including the initiation of
myelination around birth. Here, we use immunocytochemical and reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction techniques to examine Oct-6 earlier in
nerve development, to test the idea that Oct-6 has an additional role in Schwann 
cell precursors or early embryonic Schwann cells, a possibility raised by
previous studies on transgenic mice. Consistent with this, we find low but
unambiguous levels of Oct-6 mRNA and protein in Schwann cell precursors of mouse 
and rat (nerves from 12- and 14-day-old embryos, respectively), with expression
levels gradually increasing during early Schwann cell development and towards
birth. Unexpectedly, Oct-6 immunoreactivity is clearly present in nuclei of most 
myelinating cells at least as late as postnatal day 12. Furthermore, many
nonmyelinating Schwann cells express Oct-6 in adult life. A comparison of Oct-6
mRNA with other Schwann cell transcription factors-namely, Oct-1, Krox-20, and
Pax-3-reveals that each factor exhibits strong developmental regulation and a
unique expression pattern in embryonic nerves. Therefore, they are likely to play
distinct regulatory roles in early development of the Schwann cell lineage.

PMID: 8951674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Biochem J. 1996 Nov 1;319 ( Pt 3):669-74.

Oct-1 interacts with conserved motifs in the human thyroid transcription factor 1
gene minimal promoter.

Bingle CD(1), Gowan S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, St. Bartholomew's School of Medicine and Dentistry, 
U.K.

The homeodomain containing thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) is a lung- and 
thyroid-enriched protein implicated in the regulation of a number of pulmonary
specific genes. Within the lung TTF-1 is expressed within the epithelial cells.
Although the molecular mechanisms that govern this tight cell-type-specific
distribution are unclear, transient transfection studies have suggested that
tissue specificity is conferred in part by regions of the proximal promoter.
Further studies have shown that two functionally important regions (BS1 and BS2) 
are sites for activation of the TTF-1 gene by the homeodomain protein HoxB3,
raising the possibility that Hox proteins might function in the regulation of
TTF-1 in vivo. The different cellular distributions of the two proteins within
the lung suggest, however, that proteins distinct from HoxB3 might be the
mediators of expression through these sites. In the present study we have used
gel-mobility-shift experiments to show that in a pulmonary adenocarcinoma cell
line (NCI-H441) that expresses TTF-1, the same single protein binds to both of
these sites. The binding of this protein is competed for specifically by the
addition of oligonucleotides containing a range of octamer-binding sites but not 
by a variety of non-related binding sites. Using specific antiserum we have
identified this protein as being the ubiquitously expressed POU-domain protein
Oct-1. Reverse transcriptase-PCR performed with degenerated primers suggests that
Oct-1 is the major POU-domain-containing protein expressed in H441 cells. These
results suggest that BS1 and BS2 are functional octamer sites and might therefore
be implicated in the basal rather than the tissue-restricted expression of the
TTF-1 gene.

PMCID: PMC1217841
PMID: 8920965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. J Virol. 1996 Nov;70(11):8003-9.

Insufficient levels of NFIII and its low affinity for the origin of adenovirus
type 12 (Ad12) DNA replication contribute to the abortive infection of BHK21
hamster cells by Ad12.

Schiedner G(1), Doerfler W.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Genetik, Universität zu Köln, Cologne, Germany.

Human adenovirus type 12 (Ad12) induces undifferentiated sarcomas in neonate
Syrian hamsters and hence presents a suitable model for studies of the molecular 
mechanism of viral oncogenesis. Since we submit that an understanding of the
early steps in the interaction between Ad12 and hamster cells might shed light on
the initiation of malignant transformation, the abortive infection of BHK21
hamster cells with Ad12 has been investigated in detail. Ad12 replication in
these cells is blocked in early stages, while Ad2 can replicate to moderate
titers. Early Ad12 genes are expressed in BHK21 hamster cells, but there is a
total block in Ad12 DNA replication and late gene transcription. The
Ad5-transformed hamster cell line BHK297-C131, with the left terminus of Ad5 DNA 
chromosomally integrated and constitutively expressed, allows limited levels of
Ad12 DNA replication and late transcription, probably through Ad5 E1 functions,
but not the translation of late Ad12 gene products. We have now investigated the 
capacities of binding of nuclear proteins NFI and NFIII from permissive human KB 
cells, nonpermissive hamster BHK21 cells, and complementing BHK297-C131 cells to 
the origin of replication (ori) of Ad2 or Ad12 DNA. The electrophoretic mobility 
shift assay has been used to assess these binding reactions. The data support the
notions that NFIII of BHK21 cells has a lower affinity for the ori of Ad12 DNA
than for the ori of Ad2 DNA and that the levels of NFIII in BHK21 cells are
markedly reduced compared with the levels in the permissive human KB cells or the
complementing BHK297-C131 hamster cells. These deficiencies are contributing
factors for the abortive infection of BHK21 hamster cells with Ad12. The lack of 
sufficient levels of NFIII in BHK21 cells is also consistent with the decreased
replication capacity of Ad2 in hamster compared with human cell lines.

PMCID: PMC190873
PMID: 8892924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. J Neurochem. 1996 Oct;67(4):1352-9.

Identification of an octamer-1 transcription factor binding site in the promoter 
of the mouse mu-opioid receptor gene.

Liang Y(1), Carr LG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis 46202-5121, USA.

In a previous study we showed that a region from -182 to +10 bp in the mouse
mu-opioid receptor (MOR) promoter exhibited strong promoter activity. To identify
protein-DNA interactions in this fragment, gel shift and DNase I footprint
analyses were performed using nuclear extracts from mouse brain and the human
neuroblastoma cell line, SK-N-SH. Two regions, nucleotide (nt) -121 to -100 and
nt -42 to -22, were identified as being specific protein binding sites. The
protein-DNA interaction in the nt -42 to -22 region was characterized in detail
in this study. Methylation interference analysis of this region showed that
nuclear protein from SK-N-SH cells contracted nucleotides within the sequence
ATG-CAAAT, which is a binding motif for octamer trans-acting factors. An
octamer-1 (Oct-1)-specific antibody super-shifted the protein-DNA complex in a
gel shift assay. A UV cross-linking experiment showed that a nuclear protein,
whose molecular weight is similar to that of the Oct-1 factor, bound to the
octamer element in the nt -42 to -22 region. Mutagenesis of four base pairs
within the octamer cis-acting element eliminated the specific protein binding in 
vitro. When the MOR-luciferase reporter construct (-182 to +10 bp) with the same 
four base pairs mutated was transiently transfected into SK-N-SH cells, a 200%
increase in transcriptional activity was observed. Collectively, these data
suggest that Oct-1 is binding to the octamer motif in the MOR gene and negatively
modulating MOR gene expression.

PMID: 8858915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Cell Immunol. 1996 Sep 15;172(2):229-34.

Prostaglandin E2 inhibits the interleukin-2 promoter activity through
down-regulation of the Oct-dependent transcription of the octamer motif.

Felli MP(1), Moschella C, Farina AR, Alesse E, Screpanti I, Teti D, Frati L,
Gulino A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of L'Aquila, Italy.

Prostaglandins, mainly those of the E series (PGE), are modulators of immune
responses. Indeed PGE2 inhibits T cell activation and the transcription of the
interleukin-2 (IL-2) gene, the major T cell growth factor. We observed that PGE2 
inhibits IL-2 promoter transcription activity by interfering with signals
activating the (-96 to -66 bp) octamer motif. This motif binds Oct-1 and Oct-2 as
well as the phorbol ester and calcium ionophore-inducible jun and fos AP-1
factors. The PGE2-dependent down-modulation is observed in the presence of either
the endogenous transacting factor Oct-1 or the exogenously expressed Oct-2. PGE2 
does not regulate octamer function by influencing the jun and fos mRNA or Oct-1
protein levels or their DNA-binding abilities. Functional dissection of the
octamer motif, through mutations of either the AP-1 or the octamer sites,
revealed that the AP-1 site is dispensable for PGE2-dependent inhibition which
instead may occur through the interference with the Oct-mediated transactivation 
of the octamer element. Our data suggest that the Oct-octamer interaction is a
novel target of the PGE2-induced down-regulation of the IL-2 promoter.

PMID: 8964085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Eur J Immunol. 1996 Sep;26(9):2006-11.

Abnormality of Oct-1 DNA binding in T cells from Sjögren's syndrome patients.

Flescher E(1), Vela-Roch N, Ogawa N, Nakabayashi T, Escalante A, Anaya JM, Dang
H, Talal N.

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas Health Science Center, Audie L. Murphy Memorial Veterans
Hospital, San Antonio, USA. flescher@charlotte.med.nyu.edu

Primary Sjögren's syndrome (SS) is an autoimmune rheumatic disease characterized 
by T cell hypoactivity. To understand the diminished T cell response to
activation signals, we measured nucleoprotein DNA-binding activities regulating
gene expression during T cell activation using the electrophoretic mobility shift
assay. Peripheral blood lymphocytes from 9/19 SS patients were found to be
defective in their ability to bind an october sequence (Oct-1). This
Oct-1-binding phenotype remained stable in culture for up to 3 days prior to
activation. This abnormality was not seen in resting T cells nor T cells from
patients with systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis (RA), or SS
accompanied by RA. The SS Oct-1 DNA-binding abnormality correlated significantly 
with an inability of cells to exit the Gzero/G1 cell cycle phase when stimulated 
in vitro. Importantly, nucleoprotein extracts showing decreased DNA-binding
activity had normal amounts of Oct-1 proteins as determined by
immunoprecipitation, implying a functional defect in the Oct-1 protein. Moreover,
defective DNA binding was corrected by treatment with acid phosphatase.

PMID: 8814238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. J Biol Chem. 1996 Aug 23;271(34):20412-20.

Glucocorticoid repression of the mouse gonadotropin-releasing hormone gene is
mediated by promoter elements that are recognized by heteromeric complexes
containing glucocorticoid receptor.

Chandran UR(1), Attardi B, Friedman R, Zheng Zw, Roberts JL, DeFranco DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania 15260, USA.

We have identified two regions of the mouse gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)
promoter, one between -237 and -201 (distal element) and the other between -184
and -150 (proximal element), which are required for glucocorticoid repression in 
transiently transfected GT1-7 cells. These sequences show no similarity to known 
positive or negative glucocorticoid response elements (nGREs) and do not function
when placed upstream of heterologous viral promoters. The glucocorticoid receptor
(GR) does not bind directly to the distal or proximal promoter elements but may
participate in glucocorticoid repression of GnRH gene transcription by virtue of 
its association within multiprotein complexes at these nGREs. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assays with GT1-7 nuclear extract demonstrate the presence of
GR-containing protein complexes on GnRH nGREs. One protein that co-occupies the
distal nGRE in vitro along with GR is the POU domain transcription factor Oct-1. 
Thus, the tethering of GR to the GnRH distal nGRE, by virtue of a direct or
indirect association with DNA-bound Oct-1, could play a role in hormone-dependent
transcriptional repression of the GnRH gene. In contrast, Oct-1 does not appear
to be a component of the GR-containing protein complex that is bound to the
proximal nGRE.

PMID: 8702778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Genes Dev. 1996 Aug 15;10(16):2079-88.

Sequence-specific DNA binding of the B-cell-specific coactivator OCA-B.

Cepek KL(1), Chasman DI, Sharp PA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge
02139, USA.

B-cell-specific transcription of immunoglobulin genes is mediated by the
interaction of a POU domain containing transcription factor Oct-1 or Oct-2, with 
the B-cell-specific coactivator OCA-B (Bob-1, OBF-1) and a prototype octamer
element. We find that OCA-B binds DNA directly in the major groove between the
two subdomains of the POU domain, requiring both an A at the fifth position of
the octamer element and contact with the POU domain. An amino-terminal fragment
of OCA-B binds the octamer site in the absence of a POU domain with the same
sequence specificity. Coactivator OCA-B may undergo a POU-dependent
conformational change that exposes its amino terminus, allowing it to recognize
specific DNA sequences in the major groove within the binding site for Oct-1 or
Oct-2. The recognition of both the POU domain and the octamer sequence by OCA-B
provides a mechanism for differential regulation of octamer sites containing
genes by the ubiquitous factor Oct-1.

PMID: 8769650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Aug;16(8):4366-77.

A soluble transcription factor, Oct-1, is also found in the insoluble nuclear
matrix and possesses silencing activity in its alanine-rich domain.

Kim MK(1), Lesoon-Wood LA, Weintraub BD, Chung JH.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology Branch, National Institute of Diabetes
and Degestive and Kidney Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Expression of the human thyrotropin beta (hTSHbeta) gene is restricted to
thyrotrophs, at least in part, by silencing. Using transient-transfection assays,
we have localized a silencer element to a region between -128 and -480 bp
upstream of the transcription initiation site. The silencing activity was
overcome in a thyrotroph-specific manner by an unknown enhancer located in the
sequences at -approximately 10000 to -1200 bp. The ubiquitous POU homeodomain
protein Oct-1 recognized the A/T-rich silencer element at multiple sites in gel
mobility shift assays and in vitro footprinting analyses. The silencing activity 
of Oct-1 was localized in its C-terminal alanine-rich domain, suggesting that
Oct-1 plays a role in silencing of the hTSHbeta promoter. Further, a significant 
fraction of Oct-1 was shown to be associated with the nuclear matrix, and the
hTSHbeta silencer region was tethered to a nuclear matrix of human cells in vivo,
suggesting a possible role of the Oct-1-hTSHbeta silencer region interaction in
chromatin organization.

PMCID: PMC231435
PMID: 8754837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Cell Immunol. 1996 Jul 10;171(1):95-101.

Prostaglandin E2 inhibits the nuclear transcription of the human interleukin 2,
but not the Il-4, gene in human T cells by targeting transcription factors AP-1
and NF-AT.

Paliogianni F(1), Boumpas DT.

Author information: 
(1)Kidney Disease Section, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and
Kidney Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1268, USA.

Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) release from activated macrophages and/or stimulation of 
T cells is associated with cAMP formation and activation of protein kinase A
(PKA). cAMP inhibits Th1- but not Th2-cytokine production and may influence the
nature of the immune response to a given antigen. Using DNA transfection and
electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA), we have examined the mechanisms for
the transcriptional regulation of human IL-2 and IL-4 genes by PGE2. Stimulation 
of Jurkat cells with ionomycin and PMA in the presence of PGE2 inhibited the
IL-2- but not the IL-4-promoter activity. In EMSAs, nuclear extracts from primary
human T cells stimulated with ionomycin and phorbol esters in the presence of
PGE2 demonstrated decreased binding at the AP-1 and NF-AT sites of the human IL-2
promoter; binding to the OCT-1 and NF-kappa B sites was not affected. These
results suggest that cAMP regulates IL-2 production in human T cells by a
transcriptional mechanism which involves discrete transactivating pathways for
IL-2-promoter activation.

PMID: 8660843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J Virol. 1996 Jul;70(7):4714-23.

Cellular factors controlling the activity of woodchuck hepatitis virus enhancer
II.

Ueda K(1), Wei Y, Ganem D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Howard Medical Institute,
University of California Medical Center, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.

Woodchuck hepatitis virus (WHV) efficiently induces hepatocellular carcinoma in
chronically infected hosts. A key step in hepatocarcinogenesis by WHV is
insertional activation of the cellular N-myc gene by integrated viral DNA. WHV
enhancer II (En II) is the major cis-acting element involved in this activation. 
Here we characterize this viral enhancer element and define the cellular factors 
involved in its activity. WHV En II activity is strongly liver specific and maps 
to an 88-nucleotide DNA segment (nucleotides 1772 to 1859) located 5' to the
pregenomic RNA start site. Genetic analyses and electrophoretic mobility shift
assays indicate that the enhancer contains three subregions important to its
activity. The core elements of the enhancer are recognition sites for the
liver-enriched factors HNF1 and HNF4; together, these signals account for the
bulk of En II activity as well as its strong liver specificity. Multimerization
of either recognition site produced strong activity even in the absence of other 
En II sequences. 5' to these elements is a binding site for the ubiquitous Oct-1 
transcription factor, which further augments enhancer activity ca. twofold.

PMCID: PMC190408
PMID: 8676498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jun 28;271(26):15743-52.

Octamer binding factors and their coactivator can activate the murine PU.1
(spi-1) promoter.

Chen H(1), Zhang P, Radomska HS, Hetherington CJ, Zhang DE, Tenen DG.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology/Oncology Division, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

PU.1 (spi-1), a member of the Ets transcription factor family, is predominantly
expressed in myeloid and B cells, activates many B cell and myeloid genes, and is
critical for development of both of these lineages. Our previous studies (Chen,
H. M., Ray-Gallet, D., Zhang, P., Hetherington, C. J., Gonzalez, D. A., Zhang,
D.-E., Moreau-Gachelin, F., and Tenen, D. G. (1995) Oncogene 11, 1549-1560)
demonstrate that the PU.1 promoter directs cell type-specific reporter gene
expression in myeloid cell lines, and that PU.1 activates its own promoter in an 
autoregulatory loop. Here we show that the murine PU.1 promoter is also
specifically and highly functional in B cell lines as well. Oct-1 and Oct-2 can
bind specifically to a site at base pair -55 in vitro, and this site is
specifically protected in B cells in vivo. We also demonstrate that two other
sites contribute to promoter activity in B cells; an Sp1 binding site adjacent to
the octamer site, and the PU.1 autoregulatory site. Finally, we show that the B
cell coactivator OBF-1/Bob1/OCA-B is only expressed in B cells and not in myeloid
cells, and that OBF-1/Bob1/OCA-B can transactivate the PU.1 promoter in HeLa and 
myeloid cells. This B cell restricted coactivator may be responsible for the B
cell specific expression of PU.1 mediated by the octamer site.

PMID: 8663022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Genomics. 1996 Jun 15;34(3):323-7.

Characterization and fine localization of two new genes in Xq28 using the genomic
sequence/EST database screening approach.

Faranda S(1), Frattini A, Zucchi I, Patrosso C, Milanesi L, Montagna C, Vezzoni
P.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Tecnologie Biomediche Avanzate, Consiglio Nazionale delle
Ricerche, via Ampère 56, Milan, 20131, Italy.

Two new genes were identified and mapped by searching the EST databases with
genomic sequences obtained from putative CpG islands of the rodent-human hybrid
X3000. Previous mapping of these CpG islands in the proximity of the host cell
factor (HCFC1) and GdX genes automatically localized these two new genes to Xq28 
in the interval between the L1 cell adhesion molecule (L1CAM) and the
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) loci. Both genes are relatively short,
contain an ORF of 261 and 105 amino acids, respectively, and are ubiquitously
expressed. Combining sequencing of selected CpG islands, derived from hybrids
containing small portions of the human genome, with an EST database search is an 
easy method of identifying and mapping new genes to specific regions of the
genome.

PMID: 8786131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. EMBO J. 1996 Jun 3;15(11):2781-90.

The B cell coactivator Bob1 shows DNA sequence-dependent complex formation with
Oct-1/Oct-2 factors, leading to differential promoter activation.

Gstaiger M(1), Georgiev O, van Leeuwen H, van der Vliet P, Schaffner W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology II, University of Zürich, Switzerland.

We have shown previously that both octamer binding transcription factors, namely 
the ubiquitous Oct-1 and the B cell-specific Oct-2A protein, can be enhanced in
transcriptional activity by their association with the B cell-specific
coactivator protein Bob1, also called OBF-1 or OCA-B. Here we study the
structural requirements for ternary complex formation of DNA-Oct-Bob1 and
coactivation function of Bob1. In analogy to DNA-bound transcription factors,
Bob1 has a modular structure that includes an interaction domain (amino acids
1-65) and a C-terminal domain (amino acids 65-256), both important for
transcriptional activation. A mutational analysis has resolved a region of seven 
amino acids (amino acids 26-32) in the N-terminus of Bob1 that are important for 
contacting the DNA binding POU domain of Oct-1 or Oct-2. In contrast to the viral
coactivator VP16 (vmw65), which interacts with Oct-1 via the POU homeosubdomain, 
Bob1 association with Oct factors requires residues located in the POU-specific
subdomain. Because the same residues are also involved in DNA recognition, we
surmised that this association would affect the DNA binding specificity of the
Oct-Bob1 complex compared with free Oct factors. While Oct-1 or Oct-2 bind to a
large variety of octamer sequences, Bob1 ternary complex formation is indeed
highly selective and occurs only in a subset of these sequences, leading to the
differential coactivation of octamer-containing promoters. The results uncover a 
new level in selectivity that furthers our understanding in the regulation of
cell type-specific gene expression.

PMCID: PMC450214
PMID: 8654375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Mol Reprod Dev. 1996 Jun;44(2):146-52.

Effects of oxidation and reduction on the binding of transcription factors to
cis-regulatory elements located in the FGF-4 gene.

Lickteig K(1), Lamb K, Brigman K, Rizzino A.

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha 68198-6805, USA.

Previous studies have shown that the addition of reducing agents to the culture
medium of embryonic cell lines stimulates their growth. Moreover, recent studies 
have shown that the redox state of several transcription factors affects their
binding to DNA. In light of these findings, we employed gel mobility shift
analysis to examine the effects of oxidation and reduction on the ability of
transcription factors to bind cis-regulatory elements located in the FGF-4 gene, 
which is expressed during early mammalian development. In this study, we
demonstrate that both the oxidizing agent diamide and the alkylating agent
N-ethylmaleimide inhibit the ability of Oct-1, Oct-3, Sp1, and several
Sp1-related nuclear proteins to bind important cis-regulatory elements located in
the FGF-4 gene. We also demonstrate that not all transcription factors are
affected by oxidation. Specifically, we show that the binding of the
transcription factor NF-YA, which binds to a critical CCAAT box, and the binding 
of a high mobility group (HMG) protein(s), which binds to a critical HMG motif,
are not affected by diamide or N-ethylmaleimide. Taken together, our findings and
those of others support the hypothesis that the redox state of the cell can
regulate gene transcription and, thus, can influence important physiological
processes.

PMID: 9115711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Mol Immunol. 1996 Jun;33(9):787-96.

Ku is a general inhibitor of DNA-protein complex formation and transcription.

Ono M(1), Tucker PW, Capra JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas 75235, USA.

Ku is a ubiquitous and abundant DNA binding protein. Recently, it has been shown 
that Ku plays a crucial role in double stranded-DNA (dsDNA) break repair such as 
occurs during the V(D)J recombination of Ig genes. Ku has also been found to
provide DNA binding activity to the catalytic domain of DNA-PK which is known to 
phosphorylate several transcription factors, suggesting that Ku is a
multifunctional protein that participates as a component of several functional
DNA-protein complexes. Here, we examined the interaction of Ku with several DNA
binding proteins. Firstly, the DNA binding interaction between Ku and
well-characterized transcription factors (OTF-1, Sp-1, AP-1) was analysed by
EMSA. Although sequence non-specific, Ku was strongly competitive with these
sequence specific transcription factors on compatible DNA elements, displacing
them because of its high affinity association with DNA ends. Secondly, to
determine whether this competitive effect was functionally relevant, we tested Ku
in an in vitro transcription system with the adenovirus major late promoter. We
found that Ku inhibited transcription from linear, but not from circular template
DNA. These results suggest that Ku inhibits transcription when it is able to bind
to template DNA and that the inhibition is the result of Ku displacing specific
transcription factors from DNA.

PMID: 8811074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 Jun 1;24(11):2112-8.

Transcriptional activation by Oct-3: evidence for a specific role of the
POU-specific domain in mediating functional interaction with Oct-1.

Vigano MA(1), Staudt LM.

Author information: 
(1)DIBIT-Istituto Scientifico H.S. Raffaele, Milano, Italy.

Oct-3, a member of the POU family of transcription factors, is expressed in
pluripotent cells of early mammalian embryos and in undifferentiated embryonal
carcinoma cell lines. Using a variety of Oct-3 mutants, we have identified two
different domains of Oct-3 which activate transcription in transfected mammalian 
cells. One of these domains, located in the C-terminal part of the protein, plays
a major role in transcriptional activation when Oct-3 is bound to its cognate
site, the octamer motif. An Oct-3 mutant containing a single amino acid
substitution in the POU homeodomain is unable to bind the octamer target in
vitro, yet is still able to activate transcription in an octamer-dependent
manner. We provide evidence that transactivation by this mutant involves
protein-protein interactions with the ubiquitous octamer binding factor Oct-1.
This interaction requires the POU-specific domain of Oct-3 and allows recruitment
of Oct-3 to the target promoter even in the absence of Oct-3 DNA binding.

PMCID: PMC145896
PMID: 8668543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 Jun 1;24(11):1981-6.

The transcription factors Sp1 and Oct-1 interact physically to regulate human U2 
snRNA gene expression.

Ström AC(1), Forsberg M, Lillhager P, Westin G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Uppsala University, Biomedical Centre,
Uppsala, Sweden.

The expression of human small nuclear U2 RNA genes is controlled by the proximal 
sequence element (PSE), which determines the start site of transcription, and a
distal sequence element (DSE). The DSE contains an octamer element and three Sp1 
binding sites. The octamer, like the PSE, is essential for U2 transcription. The 
Sp1 sites contribute to full promoter activity by distance-dependent cooperative 
interactions with the transcription factors Sp1 and Oct-1. Here we show that
purified recombinant Sp1 and Oct-1 bind cooperatively to the DSE and that they
physically interact in vitro. Furthermore, we show that Sp1 and Oct-1 interact in
vivo using a yeast two-hybrid system. The domain of Sp1 which interacts with
Oct-1 is confined to the region necessary for transcriptional stimulation of U2
RNA transcription. This region contains the glutamine-rich activation domain B
and a serine/threonine-rich part. The results demonstrate that Sp1, in addition
to binding to a number of other factors, also interacts directly with
transcription factor Oct-1.

PMCID: PMC145891
PMID: 8668525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Jun;16(6):2967-76.

Differential control of transcription by homologous homeodomain coregulators.

Huang CC(1), Herr W.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, New York 11724, USA.

The human herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) transactivator VP16 and its homolog
from bovine herpes-virus 1 (BHV-1) can each recruit the human homeodomain protein
Oct-1 into a transcriptional regulatory complex. Here, we show that these two
Oct-1 coregulators possess similar, if not identical, homeodomain recognition
properties but possess different virus-specific cis-regulatory specificities: the
HSV-1 VP-16 protein activates transcription from the HSV-1 VP16 response element,
and the BHV-1 VP16 protein activates transcription from the BHV-1 VP16 response
element. A distinct 3-bp segment, the D segment, lying 3' of the canonical
TAATGARAT motif (where R is a purine) in the VP16 response element is responsible
for the differential cis element recognition and transcriptional activation by
these two homeodomain coregulators. These results demonstrate how a single
homeodomain protein can direct differential transcriptional regulation by
selective association with homologous homeodomain coregulators.

PMCID: PMC231291
PMID: 8649408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Genomics. 1996 May 15;34(1):85-91.

The complete sequence of the host cell factor 1 (HCFC1) gene and its promoter: a 
role for YY1 transcription factor in the regulation of its expression.

Zoppè M(1), Frattini A, Faranda S, Vezzoni P.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Tecnologie Biomediche Avanzate (ITBA), Consiglio Nazionale delle
Ricerche, Milan, 20131, Italy.

We report here the complete sequence of the Host Cell Factor (HCFC1) gene,
including two kilobases of the 5'-flanking region and 5.9 kb of the first intron.
The upstream and 5'-untranslated regions contain several putative transcriptional
factor binding sites and a 17-nt-long repeated element (SiSa element) present in 
six regularly spaced copies, of which five are perfectly identical, while the
sixth has a transition substitution (CT for TC) at nucleotides 13 and 14. Four
copies are contained in the flanking region, the fifth is at the beginning of the
mRNA (position +9), and the sixth is at position 195 of the mRNA. This 17-bp
element contains at its 5' side an octamer sequence known to bind the Yin/Yang 1 
(YY1) transcription factor; another YY1 binding octamer is present at the end of 
the first intron. The promoter also contains several Sp1 binding sites, some of
which are located very close to SiSa elements. We demonstrate that YY1 binds to
the 5' half of the SiSa element, whose 3' region binds in gel shift experiments
an additional, as yet unidentified nuclear factor. Therefore the YY1 binding site
in HCFC1 overlaps the site of a second factor, as has been described in several
YY1-site-containing promoters. This suggests that HCFC1 expression might be
regulated by the reciprocal interaction of several transcription factors.

PMID: 8661027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 May 15;24(10):1913-20.

Gene structure and characterization of the murine homologue of the B
cell-specific transcriptional coactivator OBF-1.

Schubart DB(1), Sauter P, Massa S, Friedl EM, Schwarzenbach H, Matthias P.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute, Basel, Switzerland.

Erratum in
    Nucleic Acids Res 1996 Jun 15;24(12):2462.

The B cell-specific activity of immunoglobulin (Ig) gene promoters is to a large 
extent mediated by the conserved octamer motif ATTTGCAT. This requires the DNA
binding octamer factors Oct-1 and/or Oct-2, as well as an additional B
cell-restricted non-DNA binding cofactor. We recently cloned such a coactivator
specific for Oct-1 or Oct-2 from human B cells and called it OBF-1. Here we
report the isolation and characterization of the murine homologue. Full-length
cDNA clones as well as genomic clones were isolated and the gene structure was
determined. The deduced protein sequence shows that the mouse protein has an
identical length, is likewise proline rich and shows 89% overall identity to the 
human protein. The OBF-1 gene is expressed in a very highly B cell-specific
manner and is transcribed in cells representative of all stages of B cell
differentiation, including the earliest ones. We show that OBF-1 interacts in the
absence of DNA with the POU domain of Oct-1 or Oct-2 and also with the general
transcription factors TBP and TFIIB. Furthermore, we demonstrate that although
OBF-1 efficiently activates promoter octamer sites, it does not activate enhancer
octamer sites.

PMCID: PMC145881
PMID: 8657574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Biochem J. 1996 May 1;315 ( Pt 3):889-93.

Oct-1 [corrected] and Oct-2 DNA-binding site specificity is regulated in vitro by
different kinases.

Grenfell SJ(1), Latchman DS, Thomas NS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, University College London Medical School, U.K.

Erratum in
    Biochem J 1996 Aug 1;317(Pt 3):959.

The transcription factors Oct-1 and Oct-2 bind differentially to three octamer
binding sequences corresponding to the octamer binding site from the H2B promoter
[ATGCTAATAA], a simple TAATGARAT motif, found in herpes simplex virus IE4/5 genes
[GCGGTAATGAGAT], and a perfect consensus overlapping octamer/TAATGARAT motif
[ATGCTAATGAGAT]. By comparing the effects of protein kinase A, protein kinase C
and casein kinase 2 in vitro on the binding of Oct-1 and Oct-2 to the three
motifs, we show that the actions of these kinases regulate Oct-1 and Oct-2 DNA
binding independently of each other in a binding-site-specific manner. Inhibition
of cellular phosphatases also regulate Oct-1 and Oct-2 DNA binding in a
binding-site-specific manner. Both kinase and phosphatase activity are important 
for regulating the DNA binding activity of Oct-1 and Oct-2 because, in the
presence of phosphatase inhibitors, protein kinase A attenuates the binding of
both Oct-1 and Oct-2 to the octamer binding site but enhances binding when
phosphatase inhibitors are omitted. Thus the DNA specificity of Oct-1 and Oct-2
can be regulated in vitro by the action of different kinases.

PMCID: PMC1217290
PMID: 8645173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 May;16(5):1955-65.

The Oct-1 POU-specific domain can stimulate small nuclear RNA gene transcription 
by stabilizing the basal transcription complex SNAPc.

Mittal V(1), Cleary MA, Herr W, Hernandez N.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, State University of New York at Stony Brook, 
New York 11794, USA.

The RNA polymerase II and III human small nuclear RNA promoters have a common
basal element, the proximal sequence element, which binds the TATA box-binding
protein-containing complex SNAPc. They also contain an enhancer characterized by 
a highly conserved octamer sequence, which constitutes a binding site for the
broadly expressed POU domain transcription factor Oct-1. The POU domain is a
bipartite DNA-binding domain consisting of a POU-homeo (POUH) domain and a
POU-specific (POUs) domain joined by a flexible linker. Here, we show that the
Oct-1 POU domain but not the related Pit-1 POU domain can facilitate the binding 
of SNAPc to the proximal sequence element, and activate transcription. The effect
is probably mediated by protein-protein contacts, and 1 of 30 amino acid
differences between the Oct-1 and Pit-1 POUs domains is the key determinant for
the differential interaction with SNAPc and the ability to activate
transcription. These results show that a function that is the hallmark of
activation domains, namely, recruitment of a basal transcription complex
resulting in activation of transcription, can be performed by a DNA-binding
domain. In this case, subtle changes between activator DNA-binding domains, as
subtle as a single amino acid difference, can profoundly affect interaction with 
the basal transcription machinery.

PMCID: PMC231183
PMID: 8628262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Apr 30;93(9):4392-7.

Concerted repression of an immunoglobulin heavy-chain enhancer, 3' alpha
E(hs1,2).

Singh M(1), Birshtein BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY
10461, USA.

The transcription factor, B-cell-specific activator protein (BSAP), represses the
murine immunoglobulin heavy-chain 3' enhancer 3' alpha E(hs1,2) in B cells.
Analysis of various 3'alpha E deletional constructs indicates that sequences
flanking a and b BSAP-binding sites are essential for appropriate regulation of
the enhancer. An octamer motif 5' of the a site and a specific G-rich motif 3' of
the b site were identified by competition in electrophoretic mobility-shift
assays and methylation-interference foot-printing analysis. Site-directed
mutagenesis of either the octamer or G-rich sites resulted in the complete
release of repression of 3' alpha E(hs1,2), implicating these two motifs in the
repression of this enhancer in B cells. However, when both BSAP-binding sites
were mutated, the octamer and G-rich motifs functioned as activators. Moreover,
in plasma cells, when BSAP is not expressed, 3' alpha E(hs1,2) is active, and its
activity depends on the presence of the other two factors. These results suggest 
that in B cells, 3' alpha E (hs1,2) is down-regulated by the concerted actions of
BSAP, octamer, and G-rich DNA-binding proteins. Supporting this notion of
concerted repression, a physical interaction between BSAP and octamer-binding
proteins was demonstrated using glutathione S-transferase fusion proteins. Thus, 
concerted repression of 3' alpha E (hs1,2) in B cells provides a sensitive
mechanism by which this enhancer, either individually or as part of a
locus-controlling region, is highly responsive to any of several participating
factors.

PMCID: PMC39548
PMID: 8633077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. J Immunol. 1996 Apr 15;156(8):2828-39.

Regulation of 3' IgH enhancers by a common set of factors, including kappa
B-binding proteins.

Michaelson JS(1), Singh M, Snapper CM, Sha WC, Baltimore D, Birshtein BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY
10461, USA.

Targeted disruption of the p50 subunit of NF-kappa B resulted in isotype class
switch defects resembling those observed in mice in which the downstream IgH
enhancer 3'alpha E(hs1,2) was deleted. We postulated that kappa B binding
proteins may regulate class switching by interacting with 3'alpha E(hs1,2) or
with other IgH 3' enhancers with which 3'alpha E(hs1,2) synergizes. kappa B
binding sites were identified in 3'alpha E(hs1,2) and 3' alpha-hs4, the distal 3'
IgH enhancer. A kappa B binding site within 3'alpha E(hs1,2) contributes to at
least half the activity of the enhancer in plasma cells, while the same kappa B
binding site participates in the complex repression of the enhancer in B cells.
In the case of 3'alpha-hs4, a kappa B binding complex activates the enhancer in
pre-B, B cells and plasma cells. Additional binding sites within 3'alpha-hs4 for 
factors known to regulate 3'alpha E(hs1,2), including Oct-1 and BSAP, were
identified, and their contribution to 3'alpha-hs4 regulation during B cell
development was assessed. Oct-1 positively regulates the enhancer in pre-B and B 
cells, while BSAP is a repressor in pre-B cells and an activator at the B cell
stage. These studies identify kappa B binding proteins as key modulators of
3'alpha E(hs1,2) and 3'alpha-hs4, and suggest coregulation of the two enhancers
by a common set of factors.

PMID: 8609402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Genomics. 1996 Mar 1;32(2):277-80.

The chromosome localization and the HCF repeats of the human host cell factor
gene (HCFC1) are conserved in the mouse homologue.

Frattini A(1), Chatterjee A, Faranda S, Sacco MG, Villa A, Herman GE, Vezzoni P.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Tecnologie Biomediche Avanzate, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche,
Milan, Italy. frattini@itba.mi.cnr.it

The gene encoding the human host cell factor (HCFC1) has recently been cloned and
mapped to Xq28. HCFC1 codes for a family of related polypeptides that apparently 
arise from posttranslational processing. Six extremely conserved 19-amino-acid
(aa)long motifs, unique to HCFC1 and located in the middle of the protein, could 
play a role in this processing or could be instrumental to the physiological role
of the protein. Aternatively, these repeats could have arisen from recent
duplications and may not have any specific function. To resolve this issue, we
cloned the homologous region from the mouse HCFC1 gene and demonstrated that the 
19-aa motifs are extremely conserved in sequence, number, and genomic
organization, while the "linker" region between the third and fourth repeat is
not. This suggests an important function for these repeats. In addition, by
RT-PCR analysis of human RNA and comparison to the human genomic sequence, an
alternative transcript including a 44-aa in-frame insertion, deriving from the 3'
end of intron 18, was found. The significance of this alternative transcript is
unknown, since it was not detectable in the mouse. The mouse HCFC1 gene maps to a
region syntenic to Xq28, and, as in human, is in close proximity to the
Renin-binding protein gene, in a 100-kb region also including the Licam and
Vasopressin receptor type 2 genes.

PMID: 8833156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Biol Chem Hoppe Seyler. 1996 Feb;377(2):139-45.

Cloning and characterization of the murine B-cell specific transcriptional
coactivator Bob1.

Knoepfel L(1), Georgiev O, Nielsen P, Schaffner W.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie II der Universität Zürich, Switzerland.

From a murine B-cell cDNA-library we have cloned a cDNA encoding the murine
B-cell specific coactivator mBob1. The protein is the murine homologue to the
recently described human coactivator Bob1 (hBob1), also referred to as OBF-1 or
OCA-B. We have also characterized the genomic mBob1 clone. Analysis of its
intron-exon structure has allowed identification of a C-terminal splice variant. 
mBob1 is B-cell restricted, and is found in all B-cell lines representing
different stages of B-cell differentiation. mBob1 interacts with the octamer
transcription factors Oct-1 and Oct-2 and stimulates transcription mediated by
these factors.

PMID: 8868069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 1996 Feb;28(2):217-27.

Nuclear transcription factor Oct-1 binds to the 5'-upstream region of CYP1A1 and 
negatively regulates its expression.

Bhat R(1), Weaver JA, Sterling KM, Bresnick E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Massachusetts Medical Center,
Worcester 01655, USA.

The cytochrome P450-dependent monooxygenases, which represent an extended
superfamily, catalyze the biotransformation of many endogenous and exogenous
substances. One of these hemoproteins, cytochrome P4501A1, is most closely
associated with the bioactivation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons such as
benzo[a]pyrene, which may play a role in environmental carcinogenesis. A negative
regulatory element (NRE) has been localized in the 5'-upstream region of the
cytochrome P4501A1 gene (CYP1A1) at -843 to -746 base pairs from the site of
transcription. The purpose of this research was to define any interactions of
trans-acting proteins with this cis element. Rat liver nuclei were used as the
source of trans-acting proteins and a biotinylated NRE-bearing fragment (-782 to 
-843 bp) from a plasmid which contained the CYP1A1 was prepared by the polymerase
chain reaction technique. Gel mobility shift assays were used to demonstrate
interactions between this NRE fragment and nuclear proteins. The specific binding
to an octamer-containing motif in the 5'-upstream region of CYP1A1 was
demonstrated; this was used as a step in the partial purification from rat liver 
of the transcription factor, Oct-1. Conventional chromatographic procedures and
DNA recognition site affinity chromatography were also used. HepG2 human hepatoma
cells were transfected with both pMCoLUC+ which contains the luciferase gene as a
reporter gene driven by the CYP1A1 promoter (including the NRE), and an Oct-1
expression vector. Luciferase activity/mg protein in the doubly-transfected cells
was significantly lower than in cells containing only pMCoLUC+. A nuclear
transcription factor Oct-1 interacts with a portion of the NRE of the rat CYP1A1,
suppressing the expression of this gene. These findings may help to explain the
low level of basal expression of CYP1A1 in mammalian systems.

PMID: 8729008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Mol Pharmacol. 1996 Feb;49(2):329-37.

Oct-1 transcription factor is a negative regulator of rat CYP1A1 expression via
an octamer sequence in its negative regulatory element.

Sterling K(1), Bresnick E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Toxicology, University of
Massachusetts Medical Center, Worcester 01655, USA.

The rat CYP1A1 negative regulatory element (NRE) contains AP-1 and Oct-1 motifs
at -808 to -788 bp. The CYP1A1 sequence from -813 to -779 bp and an identical
sequence bearing a point mutation in the octamer motif were synthesized. Gel
mobility shift assays showed the formation of two complexes with the wild-type
CYP1A1 sequence and nuclear extracts from H4IIE and HepG2 hepatoma cells and from
rat liver. The formation of the major complex was significantly reduced with the 
mutant octamer-containing oligomer and was specifically competed by an Oct-1
oligodeoxyribonucleotide. The addition of Oct-1 antibody caused a supershift of
the major complex. The presence of the wild-type sequence, but not the mutant
octamer sequence, caused a 3-fold decrease in SV40 enhancerless promoter activity
in transfected HepG2 cells. Co-transfection of an Oct-1 expression vector with
rat CYP1A1 NRE octamer-containing, promoter/reporter gene constructs specifically
further decreased promoter activity of the wild-type octamer-containing
constructs in HepG2 cells. The results indicate that Oct-1 binds to the rat
CYP1A1 promoter NRE and is a negative regulator of rat CYP1A1 expression.

PMID: 8632766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1996 Jan 17;218(2):518-23.

Superinduction of NF-kappa B by actinomycin D and cycloheximide in epithelial
cells.

Newton R(1), Adcock IM, Barnes PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Medicine, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial
College, London, UK.

Epithelial cells are actively involved in inflammation and play a role in
inflammatory diseases such as asthma. Numerous proinflammatory genes, expressed
in the airway epithelium, are regulated by the transcription factor NF-kappa B.
We show that the proinflammatory cytokines, IL-1 beta and TNF alpha, as well as a
protein kinase C activator cause NF-kappa B activation in A549 epithelial cells. 
This observation is consistent with a major role for NF-kappa B in inflammation. 
We also demonstrate that IL-1 beta costimulation with a protein synthesis
inhibitor, cycloheximide, or a transcription blocker, actinomycin D, results in
superinduction of NF-kappa B but not the transcription factors Oct 1, AP-1, and
Sp-1. We speculate that this may be due to lack of de novo synthesis of the
NF-kappa B inhibitor, I kappa B alpha, and suggest that this phenomena may help
explain the widely observed effect of mRNA superinduction of primary response
genes in response to translational blockers.

PMID: 8561789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Dev Genet. 1996;19(2):108-18.

POU homeodomain genes and myogenesis.

Dominov JA(1), Miller JB.

Author information: 
(1)Neuromuscular Laboratory, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown 02129,
USA.

We show that members of the POU homeodomain family are among the transcription
factors expressed in developing mouse skeletal muscle. From a cDNA library
prepared from fetal muscle mRNA, we cloned a cDNA identical to that of Brn-4, a
POU class II gene previously cloned from neural tissues. In limb muscle, we found
that Brn-4 mRNA expression was highest at embryonic days 15-18, declined-after
birth, and was undetectable in adults. The mRNAs of two additional POU genes, Emb
(POU class VI) and Oct-1 (POU class II), were also expressed in developing muscle
and, unlike Brn-4, continued to be expressed in postnatal and adult muscles. In
skeletal muscle, expression of Brn-4 is myogenin-dependent, because muscles from 
myogenin-deficient fetuses contained much less Brn-4 mRNA than muscles from
myogenin-expressing littermates. In contrast, expression of Emb was the same in
the presence or absence of myogenin. The distinct pattern of Brn-4 mRNA
expression and its dependence on a myogenic regulatory factor suggest that Brn-4 
is part of the network of interacting transcription factors that control
muscle-specific gene expression during mammalian myogenesis.

PMID: 8900043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Eur J Haematol. 1996 Jan-Feb;56(1-2):62-7.

3'-Azido-3'-deoxythymidine inhibits erythroid-specific transcription factors in
human erythroid K562 leukemia cells.

Bridges EG(1), Trentesaux C, Lahlil R, Spiga MG, Jeannesson P, Sommadossi JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Center for AIDS Research and the
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, USA.

The present study examines genetic mechanism(s) possibly involved in the observed
3'-azido-3'-deoxythymidine (AZT)-induced inhibition of globin gene transcription 
by evaluating the direct phenotypic erythroid effects of AZT on
erythroid-specific transcription factors which regulate globin gene promoters. In
vitro binding of GATA-1 or NFE-2 to its consensus sequence was decreased in the
presence of AZT reaching a maximum inhibition as early as 24 h after AZT
treatment. Nuclear extracts from butyric acid-induced K562 cells treated with an 
IC50 concentration of AZT exhibited a decrease in GATA-1 and NFE-2 binding by
approximately 30% and 35%. In contrast, 2',3'-dideoxycytidine which inhibits cell
growth without affecting hemoglobin synthesis, had no effect on binding of GATA-1
and NFE-2 factors. Northern blot analysis revealed a 25% decrease by AZT in
GATA-1 mRNA steady-state levels at 24 h and this inhibitory effect was maintained
until 72 h after drug addition. A similar decrease in NFE-2 mRNA steady-state
levels was observed at 72 h after AZT treatment. This study suggests that AZT
inhibition of erythroid differentiation is subsequent to a decrease of nuclear
factors gene expression which affect their DNA binding.

PMID: 8599995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. J Clin Invest. 1996 Jan 1;97(1):258-62.

Human diabetes associated with defects in nuclear regulatory proteins for the
insulin receptor gene.

Brunetti A(1), Brunetti L, Foti D, Accili D, Goldfine ID.

Author information: 
(1)Cattedra di Endocrinologia, Università degil Studi di Reggio Calabria, Facoltà
di Medicina e Chirurgia, Catanzaro, Italy.

The control of gene transcription is mediated by sequence-specific DNA-binding
proteins (trans-acting factors) that bind to upstream regulatory elements (cis
elements). We have previously identified two DNA-binding proteins that
specifically interact with two unique AT-rich sequences of the 5' regulatory
region of the insulin receptor gene which have in vivo promoter activity. Herein 
we have investigated the expression of these DNA-binding proteins in cells from
two unrelated patients with insulin resistance and non-insulin-dependent diabetes
mellitus. In these patients, the insulin receptor gene was normal. In
EBV-transformed lymphoblasts from both patients, insulin receptor mRNA levels and
insulin receptor expression were decreased. The expression of nuclear-binding
proteins for the 5' regulatory region of the insulin receptor gene was markedly
reduced, and this defect paralleled the decrease in insulin receptor protein
expression. These studies indicate that DNA-binding proteins to the regulatory
region of the insulin receptor gene are important for expression of the insulin
receptor. Further, they suggest that in affected individuals, defects in the
expression of these proteins may cause decreased insulin receptor expression and 
insulin resistance.

PMCID: PMC507088
PMID: 8550844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Virol. 1996 Jan;70(1):332-40.

The human papillomavirus type 16 E7 protein complements adenovirus type 5 E1A
amino-terminus-dependent transactivation of adenovirus type 5 early genes and
increases ATF and Oct-1 DNA binding activity.

Wong HK(1), Ziff EB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Kaplan Cancer
Center, New York University School of Medicine, New York 10016, USA.

We have previously shown that conserved region 1 (CR1) of the adenovirus type 5
(Ad5) E1A protein synergizes with CR3 in the transactivation of Ad5 early genes
(H.K. Wong and E. B. Ziff, J. Virol. 68:4910-4920, 1994). CR1 lies within the E1A
amino terminus and binds host regulatory proteins such as the RB protein, p107,
p130, and p300. Since simian virus 40 (SV40) large T antigen and human
papillomavirus type 16 (HPV16) E7 protein also bind host regulatory factors, we
investigated whether these viral proteins can complement E1A mutants which are
defective in early gene activation. We show that the HPV16 E7 protein but not
SV40 T antigen can complement mutations in the Ad5 E1A CR1 in the transactivation
of viral early promoters. The inability of SV40 T antigen to complement suggests 
that RB binding on its own is not sufficient for early promoter transactivation
by the E1A amino terminus. Nuclear runoff assays show that complementation by
HPV16 E7 restores the ability of the E1A mutants to stimulate early gene
expression at the level of transcription. Furthermore, nuclear extracts from the 
E7-transformed cells show increased binding activity of ATF and Oct-1, factors
that can recognize the elements of Ad5 early genes, consistent with gene
activation by E1A and E7 at the transcriptional level.

PMCID: PMC189822
PMID: 8523545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Biol Chem. 1995 Dec 15;270(50):29870-80.

Functional characterization of the murine homolog of the B cell-specific
coactivator BOB.1/OBF.1.

Pfisterer P(1), Zwilling S, Hess J, Wirth T.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie Heidelberg (ZMBH), Federal Republic of
Germany.

B cell-specific transcriptional promoter activity mediated by the octamer motif
requires the Oct1 or Oct2 protein and additional B cell-restricted cofactors. One
such cofactor, BOB.1/OBF.1, was recently isolated from human B cells. Here, we
describe the isolation and detailed characterization of the murine homolog.
Full-length cDNAs and genomic clones were isolated, and the gene structure was
determined. Comparison of the deduced amino acids shows 88% sequence identity
between mouse and human BOB.1/OBF.1. The NH2-terminal 126 amino acids of
BOB.1/OBF.1 are both essential and sufficient for interaction with the POU
domains of either Oct1 or Oct2. This protein-protein interaction does not require
the simultaneous binding of Oct proteins to DNA, and high resolution footprinting
of the Oct-DNA interaction reveals that binding of BOB.1/OBF.1 to Oct1 or Oct2
does not alter the interaction with DNA. BOB.1/OBF.1 can efficiently activate
octamer-dependent promoters in fibroblasts; however, it fails to stimulate
octamer-dependent enhancer activity. Fusion of subdomains of BOB.1/OBF.1 with the
GAL4 DNA binding domain reveals that both NH2- and COOH-terminal domains of
BOB.1/OBF.1 contribute to full transactivation function, the COOH-terminal domain
is more efficient in this transactivation assay. Consistent with the failure of
full-length BOB.1/OBF.1 to stimulate octamer-dependent enhancer elements in non B
cells, the GAL4 fusions likewise only stimulate from a promoter-proximal
position.

PMID: 8530384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Mol Immunol. 1995 Dec;32(17-18):1429-42.

Real-time analysis of Oct protein-octamer interaction and transcription complex
assembly.

Malmborg AC(1), Johansson K, Sigvardsson M, Borrebaeck CA, Leanderson T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunotechnology, Lund University, Sweden.

Specific interactions between the protein-binding sequence of the immunoglobulin 
transcription regulatory element, the octamer, and Oct proteins have been
investigated using a biosensor based on surface plasmon resonance. By analysis of
in vitro translated Oct1 and Oct2A with a consensus octamer probe, it was shown
that the affinity constant, association rate constant and dissociation rate
constant of Oct1 were higher than for Oct2A. The biggest difference was in the
association rate constants, but this difference was reduced when an octamer motif
containing a point mutation was used as a probe. Elements in the octamer flanking
sequence could increase the on-rate of Oct proteins to a mutated octamer while
not decreasing the off-rate. Oct-octamer interaction in whole nuclear extracts
could be detected readily in the biosensor and adapter interactions with template
bound proteins were revealed. Thus, biosensor analysis represent a fast and
convenient alternative approach to study specific protein-DNA and protein-protein
interactions in analysis of transcriptional regulation.

PMID: 8643112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Biol Chem. 1995 Nov 17;270(46):27823-8.

Oct-1 protein promotes functional transcription complex assembly on the mouse
mammary tumor virus promoter.

Kim MH(1), Peterson DO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A & M University, College
Station 77843-2128, USA.

The ubiquitous transcription factor Oct-1 stimulates basal transcription from the
mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) promoter by binding to octamer-related sequences
present in the proviral long terminal repeat. The mechanism of transcriptional
activation by Oct-1 was investigated using in vitro transcription assays with a
HeLa cell nuclear extract depleted of endogenous Oct-1. Oct-1-mediated
transcriptional activation could be reconstituted by addition of bacterially
expressed recombinant Oct-1 protein. The stimulatory effect of Oct-1 was observed
only when the protein was present during formation of transcription preinitiation
complexes and not when added to fully assembled complexes. Furthermore, assembled
MMTV preinitiation complexes were resistant to inhibition by a competitor
oligonucleotide containing MMTV octamer-related elements that could eliminate
Oct-1-mediated stimulation when present during the assembly process. The time
course of transcription complex assembly revealed that Oct-1 increases the number
of templates on which functional transcription complexes form. Finally,
experiments designed to exploit the sensitivity of discrete steps in
transcription complex assembly to the anionic detergent Sarkosyl demonstrated
that Oct-1 must be present during formation of an early intermediate in the
assembly process.

PMID: 7499253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. J Mol Biol. 1995 Nov 10;253(5):677-90.

Functional redundancy of promoter elements ensures efficient transcription of the
human 7SK gene in vivo.

Boyd DC(1), Turner PC, Watkins NJ, Gerster T, Murphy S.

Author information: 
(1)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, Oxford, UK.

Deletion and mutation studies of the human 7SK gene transfected into HeLa cells
have identified three functional regions of the promoter corresponding to the
TATA box at -25, the proximal sequence element (PSE) between -49 and -65 and the 
distal sequence element (DSE) between -243 and -210. These elements show sequence
homology to equivalent regions in other snRNA genes and are functionally
analogous. Unlike the DSEs of many snRNA genes however, the 7SK DSE does not
contain a consensus binding site for the transcription factor Oct-1 but rather,
contains two non-consensus Oct-1 binding sites that can function independently of
one another to enhance transcription. Unusually, the 7SK PSE can retain function 
even after extensive mutation and removal of the conserved TGACC of the PSE has
little effect in the context of the whole promoter. However, the same mutation
abolishes transcription in the absence of the DSE suggesting that protein/protein
interactions between DSE and PSE binding factors can compensate for a mutant PSE.
Mutation of the 7SK TATA box allows snRNA type transcription by RNA polymerase II
to occur and this is enhanced by the DSE, indicating that both the DSE and the
PSE can also function with pol II. In addition, mutation of the TATA box does not
abolish pol III dependent transcription, suggesting that other sequence elements 
may also play a role in the determination of polymerase specificity. Although the
human 7SK gene is transcribed efficiently in Xenopus oocytes, analysis of the 7SK
wild-type gene and mutants in Xenopus oocytes gives significantly different
results from the analysis in HeLa cells indicating that the recognition of
functional elements is not the same in the two systems.

PMID: 7473743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. J Immunol. 1995 Nov 1;155(9):4270-7.

Differential transcription efficiency of two Ig VH promoters in vitro.

Buchanan KL(1), Hodgetts SI, Byrnes J, Webb CF.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology and Cancer Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research
Foundation, Oklahoma City 73104, USA.

Each Ig variable region gene segment is transcribed from its own unique promoter.
While all of these promoters share common consensus elements that contribute to
the B cell-specific expression of these genes, the DNA sequence of each promoter 
is distinct. In this study, we have directly compared the transcription
efficiencies of two murine heavy chain (VH) promoters in a murine B cell in vitro
transcription system. We found that the promoters differed in both transcription 
efficiency and the ability to bind specific protein complexes. While some of the 
transcription differences may be attributed to differences in basal promoter
elements, the spacing between the octamer and the heptamer consensus elements was
found to be important. Others have reported a direct correlation between
transcription efficiency and the probability that individual variable region gene
segments will rearrange. Our studies may be of direct importance to those
interested in identifying B cell-specific transcription factors and may
ultimately help to explain differences in the expression of some VH gene
segments.

PMID: 7594585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Nov;15(11):6169-77.

The POU homeodomain transcription factor Oct-1 is essential for activity of the
gonadotropin-releasing hormone neuron-specific enhancer.

Clark ME(1), Mellon PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla 92093-0674, USA.

The mechanisms of specification of gene expression in a complex tissue such as
the brain remain poorly understood. To provide a model system for the study of
gene regulation in a specific subpopulation of differentiated neurons, we have
derived cell lines from tumors created in transgenic mice by targeting simian
virus 40 T antigen expression by using the regulatory regions of the gene for
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), a decapeptide released from specialized
neurons in the hypothalamus. Transfections into the cultured GnRH-secreting
hypothalamic neuronal cell line GT1 have identified a neuron-specific enhancer,
1.5 kb upstream of the GnRH gene, which binds multiple GT1 nuclear proteins. In
particular, one AT-rich protein-binding region, AT-a, is critical for enhancer
activity. In this study, we used electrophoretic mobility shift assays to detect 
a GT1 nuclear protein complex that binds the AT-a region. Close inspection of the
AT-a bottom-strand sequence revealed homology to the octamer motif, a sequence
known to bind members of the POU homeodomain transcription factor family.
Although we demonstrate expression of a number of POU homeodomain genes in GT1
cells, a supershift assay with Oct-1 antibody demonstrates that Oct-1 is the
protein binding the enhancer. Finally, specific mutations in the AT-a region that
affected Oct-1 binding were correlated with decreased transcription. Thus, Oct-1 
binds to the GnRH enhancer in vitro, and this binding is critical to the
transcriptional activity of this neuron-specific enhancer in GT1 cells.

PMCID: PMC230868
PMID: 7565769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Genes Dev. 1995 Oct 15;9(20):2445-58.

The HCF repeat is an unusual proteolytic cleavage signal.

Wilson AC(1), Peterson MG, Herr W.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, New York 11724, USA.

The herpes simplex virus VP16-associated protein HCF is a nuclear host-cell
factor that exists as a family of polypeptides encoded by a single gene. The
mature HCF polypeptides are amino- and carboxy-terminal fragments of a large
approximately 300-kD precursor protein that arise through cleavage at one or more
centrally located sites. The sites of cleavage are the HCF repeats, highly
conserved 26-amino-acid sequences repeated six times in the HCF precursor
protein. The HCF repeat alone is sufficient to induce cleavage of a heterologous 
protein, and cleavage occurs at a defined site--PPCE/THET--within the HCF repeat.
Alanine-scan mutagenesis was used to identify a large 18-amino-acid segment of
the HCF repeat that is important to induce cleavage of a heterologous protein.
Even though HCF is cleaved, the majority of amino- and carboxy-terminal cleavage 
products remain tightly, albeit noncovalently, associated. Modulation of this
noncovalent association may provide a mechanism for regulating HCF activity. For 
example, the cleaved products of an alternative mRNA splicing variant of HCF do
not remain associated.

PMID: 7590226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Nucleic Acids Res. 1995 Sep 25;23(18):3792-3.

Biotinylated probes in the electrophoretic mobility shift assay to examine
specific dsDNA, ssDNA or RNA-protein interactions.

Ludwig LB(1), Hughes BJ, Schwartz SA.

Author information: 
(1)Allergy/Immunology Division, Buffalo General Hospital, New York, NY 14203,
USA.

PMCID: PMC307283
PMID: 7479014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Oncogene. 1995 Sep 21;11(6):1095-106.

Lymphoid- and myeloid-specific activity of the PU.1 promoter is determined by the
combinatorial action of octamer and ets transcription factors.

Kistler B(1), Pfisterer P, Wirth T.

Author information: 
(1)ZMBH, Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie Heidelberg, Germany.

The putative oncogene PU.1/Spi-1 is a member of the ets-family of transcription
factors normally expressed in a subset of hematopoietic cell types. Here we have 
characterized the role of the PU.1 promoter region for the cell-type specific
expression. The proximal 120 bp are sufficient to mediate a high level of
activity specifically in B cells and macrophages. Three important motifs could be
identified within this region. Two of them, an ets binding site (EBS) and a
variant octamer motif were most important for cell-type-specific promoter
activity in B cells and macrophages. An additional Sp1 motif stimulates basal
activity of this promoter element. The relative contribution to overall activity 
of octamer motif and EBS differs in B cells and macrophages. In B cells, both
octamer motif and EBS combine to mediate high level activity, whereas in
macrophages the EBS predominantly confers promoter activity. Both the Oct1 and
Oct2 transcription factors, presumably in combination with a B-cell-restricted
coactivator, are responsible for the activity of the variant octamer motif in B
cells. Interestingly, the PU.1 transcription factor can functionally interact
with the EBS in its own promoter, suggesting a positive feedback regulation.

PMID: 7566969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Mamm Genome. 1995 Sep;6(9):673-6.

Cloning and mapping of porcine OTF1 extends a synteny group conserved on SSC 4
and HSA 1.

Tuggle CK(1), Schmitz CB, Wang L, Rothschild MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Iowa State University, Ames 50011-3150, USA.

PMID: 8535082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Cell Immunol. 1995 Sep;164(2):170-5.

Transcriptional control of IL-2 and IL-4 in T cells of young and old mice.

Albright JW(1), Zúñiga-Pflücker JC, Albright JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, George Washington University School
of Medicine, Washington, DC 20037, USA.

CD4+ T cells of aged compared to young subjects are defective in their responses 
to antigens and soluble mitogens. We asked whether or not there is a defect in
the translocation of transcription factors (TF) in CD4+ T cells of aged mice.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays of three TF that regulate IL-2 gene
expression, viz., Oct1/2, NF kappa B, and AP-1, in nuclear extracts of cells
stimulated with immobilized anti-CD3 epsilon revealed no significant difference
between cells of young and old mice. The nuclear levels of all three TF were
lower in cells of both young and aged mice that were stimulated with Con A and
lower in aged than in young. Similar assays of consensus sequences 1 and 2 (CS1
and CS2) TF involved in IL-4 gene transcription in cells of the Th2 subset
revealed significant translocation of CS1 following stimulation of both young and
aged cells with anti-CD3, more in cells of young than in those of aged mice. In
contrast, the most evident effect of Con A stimulation was the accumulation of
CS2 in nuclei of cells of aged mice. Apparently, there is no detrimental effect
of senescence on the basic mechanisms of translocation of TF. The differences
between stimulation with immobilized anti-CD3 epsilon and Con A can be explained 
by the relative abundance of memory-like CD4+ T cells which accumulate with age
(and are defective in Ca2+ mobilization and signaling) and by the poor ability of
memory-like cells in the aged to respond to CD28 costimulation.

PMID: 7656324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Eur J Biochem. 1995 Sep 1;232(2):627-32.

A silencer and an adjacent positive element interact to modulate the activity of 
the human insulin promoter.

Clark AR(1), Wilson ME, Leibiger I, Scott V, Docherty K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Aberdeen, UK.

A negative regulatory element (NRE) is located between positions -279 and -261
relative to the transcription start site of the human insulin gene. The NRE
contains at least three distinct overlapping binding sites for several nuclear
proteins. These proteins may be distinguished by their interaction with mutant
variants of the NRE. Mutagenesis of two of these protein-binding sites within an 
insulin gene fragment containing sequences from position -361 to position +112
attenuated the negative activity of the NRE, confirming the importance of these
sites in the function of the NRE. When placed in isolation upstream of the
herpes-simplex-virus thymidine-kinase promoter, the NRE exhibited stimulatory
activity in non-beta (BHK) and beta (HIT) cells. The positive activity within the
NRE was mapped to a sequence that resembled the binding site for the ubiquitous
factor Oct-1. These results indicated that the negative activity of the NRE was
dependent on its interaction with other regulatory sites within the insulin gene.
Thus, the NRE exhibited negative activity in transfected HIT cells when placed
upstream of an insulin gene fragment (positions -261 to +112). However, its
activity was modulated in a positive manner by inclusion of additional sequences 
from position -279 to -341. This region contains the CT3 box that binds the
homeodomain protein IUF1 (insulin upstream factor 1). The NRE resembled a
silencer, being at least partly independent of precise location and orientation, 
and being able to operate upon a variety of promoters. The role of the NRE is
unclear, although it may be involved in restricting expression of the insulin
gene to cells of the islets of Langerhans.

PMID: 7556216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. J Biol Chem. 1995 Aug 18;270(33):19613-23.

Interaction of Oct-1 with TFIIB. Implications for a novel response elicited
through the proximal octamer site of the lipoprotein lipase promoter.

Nakshatri H(1), Nakshatri P, Currie RA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Regulation, Picower Institute for Medical Research,
Manhasset, New York 11030, USA.

The ubiquitous human POU domain protein, Oct-1, and the related B-cell protein,
Oct-2, regulate transcription from a variety of eukaryotic genes by binding to a 
common cis-acting octamer element, 5'-ATTTGCAT-3'. The binding of Oct-1 and Oct-2
to the functionally important lipoprotein lipase (LPL) promoter octamer site was 
stimulated by the general transcription factor, TFIIB. Comparative analysis of
the LPL, histone H2B (H2B), and herpes simplex virus ICPO gene promoter octamer
sites revealed that nucleotide sequences within and flanking the octamer sequence
determined the degree of TFIIB-mediated stimulation of Oct-1 DNA binding. TFIIB
was found to decrease the rate of dissociation of Oct-1 from the LPL octamer
site, whereas it increased the rate of association, as well as decreased the rate
of dissociation, of Oct-1 from the H2B octamer site. A monoclonal antibody
against TFIIB immunoprecipitated a ternary complex containing TFIIB, Oct-1, and
the LPL and H2B octamer binding sites. TFIIB did not alter the DNase I footprints
generated by Oct-1 on the LPL and H2B promoters. However, Oct-1 on the
TATA-binding protein and TFIIB from footprinting the perfect TATA box sequence
located 5' of the LPL, NF-Y binding site. In transfection experiments,
transcription from the reporters containing the LPL octamer, and either the SV40 
or the yeast transcription factor GAL4-dependent enhancers, initiated at a
precise position within the octamer sequence. Transcription from reporters
containing the H2B octamer and the SV40 enhancer initiated at several positions
within and flanking the octamer site, whereas transcription initiated at a
precise position within the octamer from reporters with both the H2B octamer and 
the GAL4-dependent enhancer. These results suggest that octamers and their
flanking sequences play an important role in positioning the site of
transcription initiation, and that this could be a function of the interaction of
Oct-1 with TFIIB.

PMID: 7642649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1995 Aug 15;213(2):616-24.

Reduced level of octamer binding transcription factor (Oct-1) is correlated with 
H2B histone gene repression during differentiation of HL-60 cells by all-trans
retinoic acid.

Kim KY(1), Kweon KR, Lee MS, Kwak ST, Kim KE, Hwang BD, Lim K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Chungnam National University, Daejeon, Korea.

To gain insight on the role of transacting factors in the regulatory mechanism of
H2B histone gene expression during the differentiation of HL-60 cells by
all-trans retinoic acid (retinoic acid), the binding pattern of the nuclear
proteins to various elements in the human H2B histone upstream region has been
investigated with DNase I footprinting and DNA mobility shift assay. The level of
H2B histone mRNA was markedly reduced at 48 hr in retinoic acid-treated HL-60
cells. The H2B histone mRNA was repressed in proportion to the concentration of
retinoic acid. In DNase I footprinting analysis, a nuclear factor (octamer
binding transcription factor, Oct-1) bound at -42 bp (ATTTGCAT) both before and
after retinoic-acid-induced differentiation of HL-60 cells. One DNA-protein
complex was formed by DNA mobility shift assay, and the level of Oct-1 decreased 
during retinoic-acid-induced differentiation. In the cycloheximide-treated HL-60 
cells, the level of Oct-1 also reduced. These results suggest that the
transcriptional repression of H2B histone gene during retinoic-acid-induced
differentiation in HL-60 cells may be mediated by reduced level of Oct-1.

PMID: 7646519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Aug;15(8):4115-24.

Cloning, functional characterization, and mechanism of action of the
B-cell-specific transcriptional coactivator OCA-B.

Luo Y(1), Roeder RG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Rockefeller University, New 
York, New York 10021, USA.

Biochemical purification and cognate cDNA cloning studies have revealed that the 
previously described transcriptional coactivator OCA-B consists of a 34- or
35-kDa polypeptide with sequence relationships to known coactivators that
function by protein-protein interactions. Studies with a recombinant protein have
proved that a single OCA-B polypeptide is the main determinant for
B-cell-specific activation of immunoglobulin (Ig) promoters and provided
additional insights into its mechanism of action. Recombinant OCA-B can function 
equally well with Oct-1 or Oct-2 on an Ig promoter, but while corresponding POU
domains are sufficient for OCA-B interaction, and for octamer-mediated
transcription of a histone H2B promoter, an additional Oct-1 or Oct-2 activation 
domain(s) is necessary for functional synergy with OCA-B. Further studies
additional Oct-1 or Oct-2 activation domain(s) is necessary for functional
synergy with OCA-B. Further studies show that Ig promoter activation by Oct-1 and
OCA-B requires still other general (USA-derived) cofactors and also provide
indirect evidence that distinct Oct-interacting cofactors regulate H2B
transcription.

PMCID: PMC230650
PMID: 7623806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. J Virol. 1995 Aug;69(8):4717-26.

Stimulation of basal transcription from the mouse mammary tumor virus promoter by
Oct proteins.

Kim MH(1), Peterson DO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College
Station 77843-2128, USA.

The steroid hormone-inducible promoter of mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV)
contains three overlapping sequences related to the consensus octamer motif
ATGCAAAT. Basal promoter activity in the absence of hormone induction from a
template in which all three octamer elements were mutated was decreased by two-to
threefold in in vitro transcription assays. Oct-1 protein purified from HeLa cell
nuclear extracts, as well as recombinant Oct-1 expressed in bacteria, recognized 
MMTV octamer-related sequences, as shown by DNase I footprinting. Furthermore,
rabbit polyclonal antiserum directed against recombinant Oct-1 completely
inhibited the formation of specific complexes between MMTV octamer-related
sequences and proteins present in nuclear extracts of HeLa cells, indicating that
Oct-1 is the major protein in HeLa nuclear extracts that recognizes
octamer-related sequences in the MMTV promoter. In addition, depletion of Oct-1
from the nuclear extract by using Oct-1-specific antiserum or a sequence-specific
DNA affinity resin decreased in vitro transcription from the wild-type MMTV
promoter to a level identical to that obtained from a promoter in which all three
octamer-related sequences were mutated. Addition of purified HeLa Oct-1 or
recombinant Oct-1 to the depleted extract selectively increased transcription
from the wild-type relative to the mutated promoter, demonstrating that Oct-1
transcription factor stimulates basal transcription from the MMTV promoter. A
similar effect was observed when purified recombinant Oct-2 was added to the
Oct-1-depleted extract, suggesting that Oct-2 may play an important role in MMTV 
transcription in B cells.

PMCID: PMC189278
PMID: 7609037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. J Immunol. 1995 Aug 1;155(3):1132-40.

Costimulation of human CD4+ T cells with LFA-3 and B7 induce distinct effects on 
AP-1 and NF-kappa B transcription factors.

Parra E(1), Varga M, Sigvardsson M, Hedlund G, Kalland T, Leanderson T, Sjögren
HO, Dohlsten M.

Author information: 
(1)Wallenberg Laboratory, Department of Tumor Immunology, University of Lund,
Sweden.

We have earlier shown that stimulation of human CD4+ T cells with SEA presented
on Chinese hamster ovary (CHO)-DR transfectants coexpressing either B7 or LFA-3
resulted in distinct cytokine profiles. We now demonstrate that B7, but not
LFA-3, strongly costimulated IL-2 transcription and mRNA expression in CD4+ T
cells. Maximal increase in IL-2 transcription was recorded with CHO-DR/B7/LFA-3, 
suggesting a cooperative effect of B7 and LFA-3 at the transcriptional level.
Gel-shift analysis demonstrated that stimulation of CD4+ T cells with CHO-DR and 
staphylococcal enterotoxin A was sufficient to induce significant amounts of
NF-kappa B binding proteins, whereas induction of AP-1 binding proteins required 
costimulation. LFA-3 induced moderate levels of AP-1, but did not influence the
levels of NF-kappa B, while B7 costimulation strongly induced both AP-1 and
substantially enhanced NF-kappa B binding proteins. The CHO-DR/B7/LFA-3 triple
transfectant induced a further increase in AP-1 and NF-kappa B binding proteins
compared with the double transfectants. The level of Oct-1 binding proteins
remained similar in all samples. Super-shift analysis revealed that the NF-kappa 
B complex of costimulated CD4+ T cells contained large amounts of p50,
substantial amounts of p65, and marginal levels of c-Rel proteins. The AP-1
binding proteins contained c-Jun, Jun-D, and Fra-1, but marginal amounts of Jun-B
and c-Fos. Our results indicate distinct effects of B7 and LFA-3 costimulation on
the activity of AP-1 and NF-kappa B. These may partly account for the
differential effects of B7 and LFA-3 costimulation on IL-2 expression.

PMID: 7543515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. J Virol. 1995 Jul;69(7):4006-11.

The enhancer in the long control region of human papillomavirus type 16 is
up-regulated by PEF-1 and down-regulated by Oct-1.

Sibbet GJ(1), Cuthill S, Campo MS.

Author information: 
(1)Beatson Institute for Cancer Research, CRC Beatson Laboratories, Glasgow,
Scotland.

The minimal enhancer in the long control region of human papillomavirus type 16
regulates cell type and constitutive expression from the promoter P97. This
region contains at least four DNase I footprints (fp4e, fp5e, fp6e, and fp7e). We
have shown that fp5e is crucial to enhancer function and have described an
apparently novel factor (PEF-1) binding fp5e (S. Cuthill, G. J. Sibbet, and M. S.
Campo, Mol. Carcinog. 8:9-104, 1993). Further analyses reveal that Oct-1 or an
Oct-related factor binds fp5e at a site overlapping that of PEF-1. The binding of
Oct-1 to fp5e has been demonstrated by electrophoretic mobility shift assays, by 
oligonucleotide competition studies, and by using an Oct-1-specific anti-POU
serum. The location of the Oct-1 site has been confirmed by a panel of mutants
across fp5e. Mutations that block PEF-1 binding to fp5e also block
enhancer/promoter activity of the long control region, whereas mutations that
block Oct-1 binding significantly increase enhancer/promoter activity. Thus,
although both PEF-1 and Oct-1 interact with fp5e, they appear to regulate human
papillomavirus expression in opposite ways.

PMCID: PMC189133
PMID: 7769658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. J Biomol NMR. 1995 Jul;6(1):23-32.

Solution structure of the Oct-1 POU homeodomain determined by NMR and restrained 
molecular dynamics.

Cox M(1), van Tilborg PJ, de Laat W, Boelens R, van Leeuwen HC, van der Vliet PC,
Kaptein R.

Author information: 
(1)Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research, Utrecht University, The Netherlands.

The POU homeodomain (POUhd), a divergent member of the well-studied class of
homeodomain proteins, is the C-terminal part of the bipartite POU domain, the
conserved DNA-binding domain of the POU proteins. In this paper we present the
solution structure of POUhd of the human Oct-1 transcription factor. This
fragment was overexpressed in Escherichia coli and studied by two- and
three-dimensional homo- and heteronuclear NMR techniques, resulting in virtually 
complete 1H and 15N resonance assignments for residues 2-60. Using distance and
dihedral constraints derived from the NMR data, 50 distance geometry structures
were calculated, which were refined by means of restrained molecular dynamics.
From this set a total of 31 refined structures were selected, having low
constraint energy and few constraint violations. The ensemble of 31 structures
displays a root-mean-square deviation of the coordinates of 0.59 A with respect
to the average structure, calculated over the backbone atoms of residues 6 to 54.
The fold of POUhd is very similar to that of the canonical homeodomains.
Interestingly, the recognition helix of the free POUhd ends at residue 53, while 
in the cocrystal structure of the intact POU domain with the DNA octamer motif
[Klemm, J.D., Rould, M.A., Aurora, R., Herr, W. and Pabo, C.O. (1994) Cell, 77,
21-32] this helix in the POUhd subdomain is extended as far as residue 60.

PMID: 7663141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Gene. 1995 Jun 9;158(2):231-5.

Murine collagen intron-binding factor I (CIBF-I) is the same protein as
transcription factor Oct-1.

Pogulis RJ(1), Geddes TJ, Freytag SO.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Research Program, Case Western Reserve University, Henry
Ford Health Sciences Center, Detroit, MI 48202, USA.

The recognition sequence (CIB) of collagen intron-binding factor I (CIBF-I)
loosely resembles the consensus octamer-binding motif (OCT). In the present study
we investigate whether CIBF-I is actually the OCT-binding protein, Oct-1.
Electrophoretic mobility-shift assays (EMSA) demonstrate that a consensus OCT
motif effectively competes for CIBF-I binding. CIBF-I and Oct-1 complexes display
similar EMSA characteristics, and both factors are detected in nuclear extracts
of five different cell types. In addition, pre-incubation of nuclear extracts
with antiserum directed against the POU domain of Oct-1 inhibits CIBF-I complex
formation. Finally, DNA transfection experiments demonstrate that a single copy
of the CIB site is sufficient to stimulate transcription from the SV40 early
promoter in NIH 3T3 cells. These results suggest that CIBF-I is the ubiquitously 
distributed OCT-binding protein, Oct-1, and represent the first report that an
octamer-binding protein contributes to the transcriptional activity of a
collagen-encoding gene.

PMID: 7607547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Virology. 1995 May 10;209(1):19-28.

Transcriptional activation by DNA-binding derivatives of HSV-1 VP16 that lack the
carboxyl-terminal acidic activation domain.

Popova B(1), Bilan P, Xiao P, Faught M, Capone JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

The herpes simplex virus transactivator VP16 directs the assembly of a
multicomponent protein-DNA complex with cellular components Oct-1 and VCAF-1,
contributing a potent carboxyl-terminal acidic activation domain that is
essential for activation of gene expression in mammalian cells. We show here that
VP16, devoid of this acidic activation domain, functions as a strong
transcriptional activator in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae when appended
onto a heterologous GAL4 DNA binding domain, as determined by measuring
activation of a resident GAL1:lacZ reporter gene. Deletion analysis indicated
that sequences contained within the amino-terminal 369 amino acids of VP16 were
necessary for transactivation by truncated VP16. Activation by truncated VP16 in 
yeast was comparable to that observed with a hybrid protein consisting of the
GAL4 DNA binding domain linked to the VP16 acidic activation domain. Similar
GAL4-VP16 hybrid proteins were only marginally active in mammalian cells.
Sequence requirements for transactivation by truncated VP16 can be demarcated
from domains of VP16 that are required for interaction with VCAF-1 and for
protein-DNA complex formation with Oct-1. Our findings indicate that VP16
contains additional sequences upstream of the acidic activation domain that may
play a direct role in transactivation.

PMID: 7747469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 May 9;92(10):4462-6.

A mutation in the promoter of the lipoprotein lipase (LPL) gene in a patient with
familial combined hyperlipidemia and low LPL activity.

Yang WS(1), Nevin DN, Peng R, Brunzell JD, Deeb SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle 98195, USA.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996 Jan 9;93(1):524.

We have identified a naturally occurring mutation in the promoter of the
lipoprotein lipase (LPL) gene. One of 20 patients with familial combined
hyperlipidemia (FCHL) and reduced levels of postheparin plasma LPL activity was
found to be a heterozygote carrier of this mutation. The mutation, a T-->C
substitution at nt -39, occurred in the binding site of the transcription factor 
Oct-1. As a result, the transcriptional activity of the mutant promoter was < 15%
of wild type, as determined by transfection studies in the human macrophage-like 
cell line THP-1. This decrease in promoter activity was observed in
undifferentiated as well as in phorbol ester-differentiated THP-1 cells.
Furthermore, the inductive effect of elevating the levels of intracellular cAMP
was equally reduced. This mutation was not present among 20 FCHL patients with
normal plasma LPL levels nor has it been reported among individuals with familial
LPL deficiency. Thus, heterozygosity for LPL promoter mutations may be one of
several factors that contribute to the etiology of FCHL.

PMCID: PMC41964
PMID: 7753827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Immunol. 1995 May 1;154(9):4546-56.

A novel octamer regulatory element in the VH11 leader exon of B-1 cells.

Goodglick L(1), Felsher DW, Neshat MS, Braun J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, University of California Los Angeles School of Medicine, USA.

B-1 cells (CD5 B cells) represent an initial fetal wave of B cell lymphopoiesis. 
B-1 cells have fundamental properties that are unique from conventional B cells, 
including a restricted Ab repertoire. We investigated the mechanism for the
overrepresentation of one such Ig H chain variable-region gene, VH11, by murine
B-1 cells. We postulated that a cis-regulatory element contributed to the use of 
VH11. We observed that the DNA encoding the leader peptide of VH11 was atypically
A/T rich and thus was a candidate for nuclear protein binding. By electrophoretic
mobility shift analysis, we found that the VH11 leader DNA specifically bound to 
three protein complexes present in the nucleus of the B-1 cell line AJ9. Of these
bands, one was ubiquitous for all cells examined (lymphoid and nonlymphoid);
another band was present only in B cells, and the third band was specific for B-1
cells that expressed VH11 or VH12. In addition to its binding properties, the
VH11 leader sequence also displayed modest tissue-specific enhancer activity. By 
DNA footprint analysis, all three protein complexes were found to bind to an
octamer motif embedded within the VH11 leader DNA. To identify the
octamer-binding proteins, a panel of octamer-specific Abs was used. We found that
the ubiquitous band was Oct-1, and the B cell-specific band was Oct-2. The B-1
cell-specific nuclear binding protein was neither Oct-1 nor Oct-2, but may be a
novel POU domain protein. We hypothesize that the VH11 leader octamer site may
target this gene for preferential rearrangement and/or expression and therefore
would be a contributing factor in the increased use of this gene by B-1 cells.

PMID: 7722308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. EMBO J. 1995 Apr 18;14(8):1737-51.

Hormone induces binding of receptors and transcription factors to a rearranged
nucleosome on the MMTV promoter in vivo.

Truss M(1), Bartsch J, Schelbert A, Haché RJ, Beato M.

Author information: 
(1)IMT, Marburg, Germany.

Hormonal induction of the mouse mammary tumour virus (MMTV) promoter is mediated 
by interactions between hormone receptors and other transcription factors bound
to a complex array of sites. Previous results suggested that access to these
sites is modulated by their precise organization into a positioned regulatory
nucleosome. Using genomic footprinting, we show that MMTV promoter DNA is
rotationally phased in intact cells containing either episomal or chromosomally
integrated proviral fragments. Prior to induction there is no evidence for
factors bound to the promoter. Following progesterone induction of cells with
high levels of receptor, genomic footprinting detects simultaneous protection
over the binding sites for hormone receptors, NF-I and the octamer binding
proteins. Glucocorticoid or progestin induction leads to a characteristic
chromatin remodelling that is independent of ongoing transcription. The centre of
the regulatory nucleosome becomes more accessible to DNase I and restriction
enzymes, but the limits of the nucleosome are unchanged and the 145 bp core
region remains protected against micrococcal nuclease digestion. Thus, the
nucleosome covering the MMTV promoter is neither removed nor shifted upon hormone
induction, and all relevant transcription factors bind to the surface of the
rearranged nucleosome. Since these factors cannot bind simultaneously to free
DNA, maintainance of the nucleosome may be required for binding of factors to
contiguous sites.

PMCID: PMC398267
PMID: 7737125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1995 Apr 4;1261(2):201-9.

Cloning, sequencing and expression of two isoforms of the murine oct-1
transcription factor.

Jaffe J(1), Hochberg M, Riss J, Hasin T, Reich L, Laskov R.

Author information: 
(1)Hubert Humphrey Center for Experimental Medicine and Cancer Research, Hebrew
University-Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem, Israel.

Oct-1 is a ubiquitously expressed regulatory gene of the POU domain family. The
Oct-1 protein binds to the octamer motif present in the control regions of a
variety of genes such as the immunoglobulins, histone H2B and snRNAs. To learn
about Oct-1 and its possible role in B-cell maturation, we have used oct-2 cDNA
to screen a murine pre-B cell, cDNA library. Two cDNA clones were identical in
their POU-homeo box DNA binding domain, but differed in their 3'-region. Whereas 
one clone (oct-1a) was very similar to its human oct-1 homologue, the other
(oct-1b), contained an additional 72 bp sequence (designated E1) at the serine
threonine rich coding region (position 1485 of the human oct-1), and a deletion
of another 72 bp sequence (designated E2) downstream (position 1920). These
changes preserve the protein reading frame. DNA blot analysis indicates that
murine oct-1 is a single copy gene and that the two oct-1 isoforms oct-1 is
expressed as a large approximately 10 kb transcript in all the cell are generated
by alternative RNA splicing. RNA blots showed that oct-1 is expressed as a large 
approximately 10 kb transcript in all the cell lines tested. PCR analysis of the 
E1 and E2 72 bp regions, indicated the presence of a third isoform containing
both E1 and E2 (Oct-1c). Oct-1a and Oct-1b were present in all cell types
examined, but the level of expression was lower in liver and spleen as compared
to testis, thymus and kidney. The ratio of Oct-1b to Oct-1a ranged between 0.2 to
0.5, for all tissues examined except for testis which expressed higher amounts of
oct-1b and/or oct-1c. Our findings thus show that the pattern of expression of
the oct-1 gene is more complex than hitherto thought.

PMID: 7711063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Gene. 1995 Apr 3;155(2):237-9.

The human genes encoding renin-binding protein and host cell factor are closely
linked in Xq28 and transcribed in the same direction.

Faranda S(1), Frattini A, Vezzoni P.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Tecnologie Biomediche Avanzate, Consiglio Nazionale delle
Ricerche, Milan, Italy.

The Xq28 chromosomal band represents a C+G-rich region onto which several genes
have been mapped. In most cases, the exact relationship between the mapped genes 
has not yet been established, and neither the regulatory nor the spacer regions
between the various transcription units have been defined. In the region around
the L1CAM gene (encoding L1 cell adhesion molecule), the transcription units
appear, from preliminary analyses, to be quite compact. By sequencing the region 
at the 3' end of the recently found host cell factor 1-encoding gene (HCFC1), we 
report that the renin-binding protein-encoding gene (RBP) major transcription
start point lies 2763 bp downstream from the 3' end of HCFC1 and that both are
transcribed in the same direction from the telomere to the centromere.

PMID: 7721097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Clin Invest. 1995 Apr;95(4):1684-9.

Tumor necrosis factor-alpha eliminates binding of NF-Y and an octamer-binding
protein to the lipoprotein lipase promoter in 3T3-L1 adipocytes.

Morin CL(1), Schlaepfer IR, Eckel RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Diabetes, University of Colorado 
Health Sciences Center, Denver 80262, USA.

TNF alpha has been shown to reduce lipoprotein lipase (LPL) activity in adipose
tissue. Regulation of LPL by TNF alpha occurs at the level of LPL gene
transcription and posttranscriptionally. To elucidate further the transcriptional
mechanism of TNF alpha inhibition of LPL gene transcription, transfection
analysis was used to locate the site(s) of the LPL promoter that imparts the TNF 
alpha response. Transient transfections using LPL promoter deletions fused to
luciferase in differentiated 3T3-L1 cells with and without TNF alpha treatment
indicated that a DNA region downstream of -180 bp confers the TNF alpha effect.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays using two 32P-labeled LPL probes spanning
the region between -180 and +44 bp revealed the loss of several LPL DNA-protein
interactions after TNF alpha treatment, including the binding of NF-Y to the
CCAAT box and a protein to the octamer consensus sequence. Protein binding to the
OCT-1 consensus sequence is unaffected until after 4 h of TNF alpha treatment. In
addition, the amount of mRNA for OCT-1 is not altered with TNF alpha treatment.
These results indicate that TNF alpha regulates at least two DNA-binding proteins
on the proximal promoter, thereby inhibiting LPL gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC295679
PMID: 7706477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Mol Endocrinol. 1995 Apr;9(4):413-23.

In vivo footprinting of an androgen-dependent enhancer reveals an accessory
element integral to hormonal response.

Scarlett CO(1), Robins DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor
48109-0618, USA.

A hormonally responsive enhancer that is specifically activated by androgens
resides 2 kilobases upstream of the transcription start site of the mouse
sex-limited protein (Slp) gene. We have previously shown that strong androgen
induction in transfection requires a consensus hormone response element as well
as several nonreceptor factor binding sites within this complex enhancer. To
determine which accessory elements are required for androgen-dependent
transcription, we have examined binding of nuclear proteins to the enhancer both 
in vitro and in vivo. In vitro footprinting assays demonstrated that multiple
factors present in mouse liver and kidney nuclear extracts bound the enhancer,
with tissue-specific but not sex-dependent differences in pattern. In contrast,
examination of DNA sites occupied in liver chromatin identified a footprint
(FPIV) that is well protected in males but sensitive to DNase I in females. FPIV 
was occupied in males in other sites of Slp expression, such as kidney, but not
in tissues lacking expression, such as lung. FPIV protection was induced in
females treated with androgen, abrogated in castrated males, and absent in
immature mice, implying hormonal and developmental regulation of FPIV binding.
Protection of the hormone response element, in contrast to FPIV, was not obvious 
but was discerned by analysis of densitometry data. Together with results from in
vivo protein-DNA interactions determined for other steroid-dependent enhancers,
this suggests that in some cases receptor may permit transcriptional activation
by altering chromatin structure to allow access to other factors, which may not
necessitate tight binding of receptor itself. This further emphasizes the crucial
role of the nonreceptor factors in hormone response. The ubiquitous transcription
factor Oct-1 forms complexes with an octamer motif present within FPIV by gel
shift analysis with liver and kidney extracts, making Oct-1 an intriguing
candidate for partnership in androgen regulation.

PMID: 7659085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. EMBO J. 1995 Mar 15;14(6):1198-208.

High mobility group protein 2 functionally interacts with the POU domains of
octamer transcription factors.

Zwilling S(1), König H, Wirth T.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie Heidelberg, Germany.

The octamer transcription factors Oct1 and Oct2 are involved in the
transcriptional regulation of both lymphoid-specific and ubiquitously expressed
genes. Their activity depends critically on their interaction with distinct
cellular cofactors. Therefore, we have isolated cDNAs encoding proteins that
physically interact with Oct2. Here we describe the analysis of one such clone,
representing the murine homologue of high mobility group (HMG) protein 2. We have
mapped the interaction domains for both proteins and have shown that HMG2 and
Oct2 interact via their HMG domains and POU homeodomains, respectively. This
interaction is not restricted to Oct2, as other members of the octamer
transcription factor family like Oct1 and Oct6 also interact with HMG2. The
interaction with HMG2 results in a marked increase in the sequence-specific DNA
binding activity of the Oct proteins. Interestingly, the HMG2 protein is not
present in the protein-DNA complex detected by an electrophoretic mobility shift 
assay. The Oct and HMG2 proteins also interact in vivo. A chimeric protein, in
which the strong transactivation domain of VP16 was fused directly to the HMG
domains of HMG2, stimulated the activity of an octamer-dependent reporter
construct upon cotransfection. Furthermore, the expression of antisense RNA for
HMG2 specifically reduces octamer-dependent transcription. These results suggest 
that one of the functions of HMG2 is to support the octamer transcription factors
in their role as transcriptional activators.

PMCID: PMC398197
PMID: 7720710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Biol Chem. 1995 Mar 3;270(9):4387-94.

The cellular C1 factor of the herpes simplex virus enhancer complex is a family
of polypeptides.

Kristie TM(1), Pomerantz JL, Twomey TC, Parent SA, Sharp PA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Viral Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892.

The alpha/immediate early genes of herpes simplex virus are regulated by the
specific assembly of a multiprotein enhancer complex containing the Oct-1 POU
domain protein, the viral alpha-transinduction factor alpha TIF, (VP16, ICP25),
and the C1 cellular factor. The C1 factor from mammalian cells is a heterogeneous
but related set of polypeptides that interact directly with the
alpha-transinduction factor to form a heteromeric protein complex. The isolation 
of cDNAs encoding the polypeptides of the C1 factor suggests that these proteins 
are proteolytic products of a novel precursor. The sequence of the amino termini 
of these polypeptide products indicate that the proteins are generated by
site-specific cleavages within a reiterated 20-amino acid sequence. Although the 
C1 factor appears to be ubiquitously expressed, it is localized to subnuclear
structures in specific cell types.

PMID: 7876203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Virology. 1995 Feb 20;207(1):77-88.

Oct-1 activates the epithelial-specific enhancer of human papillomavirus type 16 
via a synergistic interaction with NFI at a conserved composite regulatory
element.

O'Connor M(1), Bernard HU.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Papillomavirus Biology, National University of Singapore, Kent 
Ridge.

A highly conserved composite regulatory element in the epithelial-specific
enhancer of human papillomaviruses (HPVs) consists of an octamer motif separated 
by exactly 2 bp from a nonpalindromic NFI site. Point mutations within this
composite element, created to prevent the binding of Oct-1 or NFI, result in up
to 10- to 12-fold decrease in enhancer activity. A mutation preventing the
binding of both proteins does not, however, result in any further decrease in
activity suggesting a cooperative interaction between these two factors.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays provide evidence that the simultaneous
binding of both factors to the composite element is indeed required for efficient
activation. Furthermore, evidence demonstrating the inability of Oct-1 by itself 
to elicit a transcriptional response from this enhancer position suggests that
Oct-1 does not activate transcription directly, but rather may play a crucial
role in the viral enhancer by tethering NF1 to the composite element. This
finding represents both a potentially important mechanism by which HPV gene
expression can be regulated and an interesting model for the study of
transcriptional cooperativity.

PMID: 7871754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Virology. 1995 Feb 20;207(1):107-16.

Positive and negative regulation at the herpes simplex virus ICP4 and ICP0
TAATGARAT motifs.

Douville P(1), Hagmann M, Georgiev O, Schaffner W.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie II, Universität Zürich, Switzerland.

The control of the ICP0 and ICP4 immediate early genes of herpes simplex virus
(HSV) can critically determine the course of viral lytic or latent infections.
Their promoters contain so-called TAATGARAT motifs that are activated via a
multiprotein complex which includes cellular proteins Oct-1 and HCF and the viral
activator (VP16 (= Vmw65, alpha TIF). Relative to the ICP4 promoter TAATGAGAT
sequence, the ICP0 promoter motif has a 5' extension that includes a full octamer
sequence (ATGCTAATGATAT). It seemed possible that this overlapping octamer site
might render the ICP0 promoter element more active by allowing tighter binding of
the Oct-1/VP16 complex or more vulnerable to repression by other Oct proteins.
Our experiments favor the former possibility. On the one hand, the extended ICP0 
site shows stronger binding of the Oct-1/VP16 complex compared to the ICP4 site. 
Moreover, transcription of a reporter gene with multiple ICP0 sites is strongly
activated by VP16 in transfected cells. On the other hand, the ICP0 site is
largely refractory toward repression by a different Oct factor (N-Oct2 = Brn1)
which competes with Oct-1/VP16 for the site. In marked contrast, multiple copies 
of the conventional TAATGAGAT motif of ICP4 are poorly activated by VP16, and
transcription from this site can be completely repressed by N-Oct2. However,
inclusion of the neighboring CGGAAR motifs from the ICP4 promoter, which bind
factors GABP alpha and beta, results in a strong synergistic activation. This
activity, like that of the complete ICP4 promoter, becomes refractory to
repression by competing N-Oct2. Thus the standard TAATGARAT motif of ICP4 is by
itself less active and more vulnerable to repression than the extended ICP0
motif, and its activation depends upon synergism with neighboring DNA sites and
their cognate factors. This difference between the two types of TAATGARAT motifs 
may allow for a more complex transcriptional regulation by factor combinations.

PMID: 7871718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Cell. 1995 Feb 10;80(3):497-506.

OBF-1, a novel B cell-specific coactivator that stimulates immunoglobulin
promoter activity through association with octamer-binding proteins.

Strubin M(1), Newell JW, Matthias P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Microbiology, University Medical Centre, Geneva,
Switzerland.

Recent biochemical and genetic studies indicate that in addition to the
octamer-binding proteins Oct-1 and Oct-2, other B cell components are required
for lymphoid-restricted, octamer site-mediated immunoglobulin gene promoter
activity. Using a genetic screen in yeast, we have isolated B cell-derived cDNAs 
encoding Oct-binding factor 1 (OBF-1), a novel protein that specifically
associates with Oct-1 and Oct-2. Biochemical studies demonstrate that OBF-1 has
no intrinsic DNA-binding activity and recognizes the POU domains of Oct-1 and
Oct-2, but not those of Oct-4 and Oct-6. The OBF-1 mRNA is expressed in a highly 
cell-specific manner, being most abundant in B cells and essentially absent in
most of the other cells or tissues tested. Furthermore, expression of OBF-1 in
HeLa cells selectively stimulates the activity of a natural immunoglobulin
promoter in an octamer site-dependent manner. Thus, OBF-1 has all the properties 
expected for a B cell-specific transcriptional coactivator protein.

PMID: 7859290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. J Cell Biochem. 1995 Feb;57(2):280-9.

Deletion analysis of minimal sequence requirements for autonomous replication of 
ors8, a monkey early-replicating DNA sequence.

Todd A(1), Landry S, Pearson CE, Khoury V, Zannis-Hadjopoulos M.

Author information: 
(1)McGill Cancer Centre, Department of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada.

Erratum in
    J Cell Biochem 1995 Apr;57(4):724.

We have generated a panel of deletion mutants of ors8 (483 bp), a mammalian
autonomously replicating DNA sequence, previously isolated by extrusion of
nascent monkey (CV-1) DNA from replication bubbles active at the onset of S
phase. The deletion mutants were tested for replication function by the DpnI
resistance assay, in vivo, after transfection into HeLa cells, and in vitro. An
internal fragment of 186-bp that is required for autonomous replication function 
of ors8 was identified. This fragment, when subcloned into pBR322 and similarly
tested, was capable of autonomous replication in vivo and in vitro. The 186-bp
fragment contains several repeated sequence motifs, such as the ATTA and ATTTAT
motifs, occurring three and five times, respectively, the sequences TAGG and
TAGA, occurring three and seven times, respectively, two 5'-ATT-3' repeats, a
44-bp imperfect inverted repeat (IR) sequence, and an imperfect consensus binding
element for the transcription factor Oct-1. A measurable sequence-directed DNA
curvature was also detected, coinciding with the AT-rich regions of the 186-bp
fragment.

PMID: 7759565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. J Cell Biol. 1995 Feb;128(4):467-83.

Cell size regulation, a mechanism that controls cellular RNA accumulation:
consequences on regulation of the ubiquitous transcription factors Oct1 and NF-Y 
and the liver-enriched transcription factor DBP.

Schmidt EE(1), Schibler U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Geneva, Sciences II,
Switzerland.

Cell sizes can differ vastly between cell types in individual metazoan organisms.
In rat liver, spleen, and thymus, differences in average cell size roughly
reflect differences in RNA:DNA ratios. For example, hepatocytes were found to
have a cytoplasmic:nuclear volume ratio and an RNA:DNA ratio which were 34- and
21-fold higher, respectively, than those in thymocytes. RNA synthesis per
DNA-equivalent in the hepatocytes was 25-fold greater than that in thymocytes,
suggesting that differences in overall transcriptional activity, not differences 
in overall RNA stability, were primarily responsible for determining cellular
RNA:DNA ratios. The mechanisms determining the capacity of large cells to
synthesize and accumulate more ubiquitous cytoplasmic macromolecules, such as
ribosomes, than smaller cells is entitled "cell size regulation." Cell size
regulation may have important consequences on the tissue distribution of
transcription factors. Thus, in liver, lung, kidney, spleen, and brain, cellular 
levels of the mRNA encoding the leucine zipper protein DBP correlate closely to
cellular RNA:DNA ratios. Our results suggest that DBP mRNA levels, like rRNA
levels, are transcriptionally determined. Thus the dbp gene, like the ribosomal
genes, may be subject to cell size regulation. As a consequence, nuclei from
liver, a tissue with a very large average cell size, accumulated higher levels of
DBP protein than nuclei from small-celled tissues, such as spleen or lung. In
contrast to DBP, the ubiquitous transcription factors Oct1 and NF-Y escaped cell 
size control. Nuclei from most tissues contained similar amounts of these factors
irrespective of cell size. Likewise, tissues with large or small average cell
sizes contained similar levels of the mRNAs encoding Oct1 or NF-Ya, one of the
subunits of the heteromeric CCAAT-binding factor NF-Y, per DNA-equivalent.
Interestingly, mRNA encoding NF-Yb, another subunit of NF-Y, was subject to cell 
size regulation. Our results suggest that NF-Yb protein escapes cell size
regulation at a posttranslational level.

PMCID: PMC2199888
PMID: 7532171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Nature. 1995 Jan 26;373(6512):360-2.

A B-cell coactivator of octamer-binding transcription factors.

Gstaiger M(1), Knoepfel L, Georgiev O, Schaffner W, Hovens CM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie II der Universität Zürich, Switzerland.

The octamer motif (ATGCAAAT) paradoxically plays a central role in mediating the 
activity of both B-cell specific and ubiquitous promoters. It has been widely
assumed that the predominantly lymphoid-restricted octamer-binding factor Oct-2
mediates tissue-specific promoter activity, whereas the ubiquitously expressed
Oct-1 mediates general promoter activity, but this view has been challenged. Here
we use a modified yeast one-hybrid assay to isolate a B-cell factor, Bob1, which 
associates with either Oct-2 or Oct-1. In transfection experiments, this factor
boosts Oct-1-mediated promoter activity and to a lesser extent, that of Oct-2.
This coactivation is strictly dependent on the specific interaction with Oct-1 or
Oct-2 because deletion of the octamer motif abolishes coactivation. We conclude
that Bob1 could represent a new tissue-specific transcriptional coactivator which
may convert a ubiquitously expressed transcription factor to a cell-type-specific
activator.

PMID: 7779176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Genomics. 1995 Jan 20;25(2):462-8.

The gene encoding the VP16-accessory protein HCF (HCFC1) resides in human Xq28
and is highly expressed in fetal tissues and the adult kidney.

Wilson AC(1), Parrish JE, Massa HF, Nelson DL, Trask BJ, Herr W.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, New York 11724, USA.

After herpes simplex virus (HSV) infection, the viral regulatory protein VP16
activates transcription of the HSV immediate-early promoters by directing complex
formation with two cellular proteins, the POU-homeodomain transcription factor
Oct-1 and the host cell factor HCF. The function of HCF in uninfected cells is
unknown. Here we show by fluorescence in situ hybridization and somatic cell
hybrid analysis that the gene encoding human HCF, HCFC1, maps to the q28 region
of the X chromosome. Yeast artificial chromosome and cosmid mapping localizes the
HCFC1 gene within 100 kb distal of the renal vasopressin type-2 receptor (V2R)
gene and adjacent to the renin-binding protein gene (RENBP). The HCFC1 gene is
apparently unique. HCF transcripts and protein are most abundant in fetal and
placental tissues and cell lines, suggesting a role in cell proliferation. In
adults, HCF protein is abundant in the kidney, but not in the brain, a site of
latent HSV infection and where HCF levels may influence progression of HSV
infection.

PMID: 7789979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. J Biol Chem. 1995 Jan 13;270(2):898-907.

Involvement of the Ets family factor PU.1 in the activation of immunoglobulin
promoters.

Schwarzenbach H(1), Newell JW, Matthias P.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute, Basel, Switzerland.

The B cell-specific expression of immunoglobulin (Ig) genes is controlled by the 
concerted action of variable (V) region promoters and intronic or 3' enhancers,
all of which are active in a lymphoid-specific manner. A crucial highly conserved
element of the V region promoters is the octamer site -ATTTGCAT-, which can be
bound by ubiquitous (Oct-1) as well as B cell-specific (Oct-2) factors. Another
less conserved element found in many Ig promoters is pyrimidine-rich and has been
shown to be functionally important, in particular for those Ig promoters that
have only an imperfect octamer site. In this study we have analyzed the factors
binding specifically to the pyrimidine-rich motif of the V kappa 19 promoter, a
light chain gene promoter with an imperfect octamer site. Using nuclear extracts 
prepared from B cells, we detected two sets of specific complexes in
electrophoretic mobility shift experiments. One complex appears to be ubiquitous 
but enriched in lymphoid cells and represents the binding of a potentially novel 
factor with an apparent molecular mass of approximately 50 kDa. The other complex
was found only with extracts from pre-B or B cells as well as from a macrophage
cell line and appears to be caused by the binding of PU.1, a factor of the Ets
family. We show that on this Ig promoter Oct factors (Oct-1 or Oct-2) and PU.1
can bind concomitantly but without synergism. By transfection experiments in
non-B cells we demonstrate that PU.1 is indeed able to activate this promoter in 
concert with Oct-2. Furthermore, we show that PU.1 can bind with varying
affinities to the pyrimidine-rich elements of several other Ig promoters. These
data suggest a more general role for PU.1 or other members of the Ets family in
the activation of Ig promoters.

PMID: 7822329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Adv Neuroimmunol. 1995;5(3):327-34.

Subversion of intracellular signal transduction by herpes simplex virus type 1.

Halford WP(1), Carr DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, LSU Medical Center, New Orleans 70112-1393, USA.

PMID: 8748076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. J Virol. 1995 Jan;69(1):575-8.

Transcription factor Oct1 binds to the AT-rich segment of the simian virus 40
replication origin.

Kilwinski J(1), Baack M, Heiland S, Knippers R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, Universität Konstanz, Federal Republic of Germany.

A cellular protein that binds to the AT-rich late segment of the simian virus 40 
(SV40) origin of replication has been identified as transcription factor Oct1.
This conclusion is based on the following observations: the late origin binding
protein has a molecular mass of about 100 kDa, like factor Oct1, and shares other
biochemical properties with Oct1; its binding to the origin is inhibited by
antibodies directed against the POU domain of factor Oct1; the isolated POU
domain of Oct1 specifically binds to the SV40 late origin region. Thus, the SV40 
genome contains binding sites for transcription factor Oct1 in the origin of
replication in addition to the previously characterized octamer sites in the
viral promoter enhancer. Oct1, bound to the viral origin, negatively affects the 
DNA unwinding reaction catalyzed by the viral replication initiator T antigen,
suggesting that Oct1 may have a role in the regulation of viral replication.

PMCID: PMC188613
PMID: 7983758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1995;68(3-4):231-2.

The human OTF1 locus which overlaps the CD3Z gene is located at 1q22-->q23.

Sturm RA(1), Eyre HJ, Baker E, Sutherland GR.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Queensland,
Brisbane, Australia.

The human OTF1 locus encoding the Oct-1 protein has previously been mapped to
chromosome 1 cen-->q32 by analysis of somatic cell hybrids. We report here the
regional localization of OTF1 to 1q22-->q23 by fluorescence in situ
hybridization. The physical linkage of the CD3Z gene to the OTF1 transcription
unit also refines the location of the CD3Z locus to 1q22-->q23.

PMID: 7842742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1994 Dec 30;205(3):1998-2007.

The C-terminus of the B cell activator Oct-2 functions as an activation domain in
yeast.

Mead J(1), Elliston K, Mark DF, Ludmerer SW.

Author information: 
(1)Merck Research Laboratories, Rahway, NJ 07065.

Oct-1 and Oct-2 are human transcriptional activators that bind to the same DNA
element but activate distinct sets of genes. We expressed these factors in S.
cerevisiae and observed greater than 5-fold stimulation of a lacZ reporter gene
only with Oct-2. Transfer of the Oct-2 C-terminal domain onto either Oct-1
(Oct1.2) or a nonactivating DNA-binding domain from GAL4 created activators
capable of greater than 15 and 10-fold stimulation of activity, respectively.
Thus, the C-terminus of Oct-2 is sufficient to confer activation potential to
nonactive DNA-binding fragments in yeast.

PMID: 7811293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. EMBO J. 1994 Dec 15;13(24):5967-76.

Transformation by homeobox genes can be mediated by selective transcriptional
repression.

Qin XF(1), Luo Y, Suh H, Wayne J, Misulovin Z, Roeder RG, Nussenzweig MC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Rockfeller University.

Altered transcription is a recurrent theme in the field of cancer biology. But
despite the central role of transcription in transformation, little is known
about the mechanism by which dominant nuclear oncogenes induce malignancies.
Homeobox family proteins are prominent examples of transcriptional regulators
which control development and can function as oncogenes. Here we explore the
molecular basis for transformation by this class of regulators using Oct-2 and
Oct-1. We show that the DNA binding POU domains of these proteins are selective
and sequence-specific transcriptional repressors that produce malignant lymphomas
when they are expressed in T cells of transgenic mice. Mutagenesis experiments
identified a specific set of promoters, those containing octamer regulatory
elements, as the targets for transformation by selective inhibition of gene
expression.

PMCID: PMC395572
PMID: 7813434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Cell. 1994 Dec 2;79(5):841-52.

Site-specific conformational alteration of the Oct-1 POU domain-DNA complex as
the basis for differential recognition by Vmw65 (VP16).

Walker S(1), Hayes S, O'Hare P.

Author information: 
(1)Marie Curie Research Institute, Oxted, Surrey, England.

We show that the presence of a regulatory cis-acting element that flanks the core
octamer site and dictates selectivity in the response to Vmw65 (VP16), while
dispensable for POU binding per se, induces a conformational alteration in the
nature of the POU domain in the DNA complex. A single substitution in the
flanking signal distorts the POU complex and without affecting overall POU
binding prevents Vmw65 interaction. Alternatively, substitution of a residue in
the homeodomain predicted to contact the GARAT region prevents its recognition
even on a wild-type motif, causing a reversion to the DNA binding pattern seen on
a cellular motif and at the same time inefficient recognition by Vmw65. The
results indicate that Vmw65 recognizes a particular POU domain conformation
induced by the presence of the flanking GARAT region.

PMID: 8001121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Dec;14(12):7758-69.

Interaction between a novel F9-specific factor and octamer-binding proteins is
required for cell-type-restricted activity of the fibroblast growth factor 4
enhancer.

Dailey L(1), Yuan H, Basilico C.

Author information: 
(1)Rockefeller University, New York, New York 10021.

Understanding how diverse transcription patterns are achieved through common
factor binding elements is a fundamental question that underlies much of
developmental and cellular biology. One example is provided by the fibroblast
growth factor 4 (FGF-4) gene, whose expression is restricted to specific
embryonic tissues during development and to undifferentiated embryonal carcinoma 
cells in tissue culture. Analysis of the cis- and trans-acting elements required 
for the activity of the previously identified FGF-4 enhancer in F9 embryonal
carcinoma cells showed that enhancer function depends on sequences that bind Sp1 
and ubiquitous as well as F9-specific octamer-binding proteins. However,
sequences immediately upstream of the octamer motif, which conform to a binding
site for the high-mobility group (HMG) domain factor family, were also critical
to enhancer function. We have identified a novel F9-specific factor, Fx, which
specifically recognizes this motif. Fx formed complexes with either Oct-1 or
Oct-3 in a template-dependent manner. The ability of different enhancer variants 
to form the Oct-Fx complexes correlated with enhancer activity, indicating that
these complexes play an essential role in transcriptional activation of the FGF-4
gene. Thus, while FGF-4 enhancer function is octamer site dependent, its
developmentally restricted activity is determined by the interaction of
octamer-binding proteins with the tissue-specific factor Fx.

PMCID: PMC359316
PMID: 7969117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Mol Endocrinol. 1994 Dec;8(12):1593-604.

Transcriptional synergism between the vitamin D3 receptor and other nonreceptor
transcription factors.

Liu M(1), Freedman LP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Cornell University Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, New York, New York 10021.

Small changes in the concentrations and/or combinations of trans-acting factors
can result in profound alterations in gene expression. Synergistic interaction
between different classes of transcription factors bound to distinct sites within
a promoter/enhancer region is one mechanism by which this can occur. Reflecting
this, hormone response elements, DNA recognition sites for steroid/nuclear
receptors, are often found in promoter regions organized as multiple copies or
are clustered among binding sites for other trans-acting factors. To
systematically examine the potential interactions between one such receptor, the 
vitamin D3 receptor (VDR), and other nonreceptor transcription factors, we
constructed a series of reporter plasmids containing one copy of the osteopontin 
(Spp1) vitamin D response element (VDRE), consisting of two direct repeats spaced
by 3 base pairs, and one binding site for the transcription factors SP1, NF-1,
Oct-1, or AP-1. We also generated reporters either under the control of two
copies of Spp1 VDRE, or a distinct VDRE from the human osteocalcin gene promoter.
The various reporters were used to transiently transfect HeLa or CV-1 cells in
the presence and absence of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3. Our results show that VDR
transactivates 12-20 times more strongly from two Spp1-VDREs than from one,
indicating that VDR synergizes with itself. VDR also synergizes with the other
nonreceptor factors, since we observe a 6- to 12-fold degree of synergistic
induction after ligand addition, depending on the particular factor. The
functional basis for the transcriptional synergism appears to be at the level of 
cooperative DNA binding, at least for VDR alone and VDR-Oct-1, as demonstrated in
vitro by gel mobility shift assays using purified factors. Consistent with this, 
we show that the minimal requirement for transcriptional synergism in vivo by VDR
is its DNA-binding domain.

PMID: 7708050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 1994 Oct;51(1-2):21-32.

Two independent pathways for transcription from the MMTV promoter.

Möws CC(1), Preiss T, Slater EP, Cao X, Verrijzer CP, van Der Vliet PC, Beato M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung (IMT), Phillips Universität,
Marburg, Germany.

The influence of progesterone receptor (PR) and glucocorticoid receptor (GR) on
transcription from the mouse mammary tumour virus (MMTV) promoter was analyzed
using cell-free transcription of DNA templates with a G-free cassette.
Preincubation of the templates with either PR or GR stimulates the rate of
transcription initiation 10-50 fold, whereas the recombinant DNA binding domain
of GR is inactive. Mutations that inactivate the nuclear factor I (NFI) binding
site, or NFI depletion of the nuclear extract, decrease basal transcription
without influencing receptor-dependent induction. Recombinant NFI, but not its
DNA-binding domain, restores efficient basal transcription of the depleted
extract. Recombinant OTF1 or OTF2, but not the POU domain of OTF1, enhance MMTV
transcription independently of NF1. In agreement with this finding, NFI and OTF1 
do not cooperate, but rather compete for binding to the wild type MMTV promoter, 
though they have the potential to bind simultaneously to properly oriented sites.
Our results imply the existence of two independent pathways for MMTV
transcription: one initiated by NFI and the other dependent on octamer
transcription factors. Only the second pathway is stimulated by steroid hormone
receptors in vitro.

PMID: 7947347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1994 Sep 30;203(3):1795-802.

The octamer motif present in the Rex-1 promoter binds Oct-1 and Oct-3 expressed
by EC cells and ES cells.

Rosfjord E(1), Rizzino A.

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha 68198-6805.

Rex-1 is a zinc finger-containing gene that is expressed in embryonal carcinoma
(EC) cells and embryonic stem (ES) cells. Upon differentiation with retinoic acid
(RA), transcription of the Rex-1 gene decreases rapidly. Analysis of the
5'-flanking region of the Rex-1 gene identified a consensus motif for the octamer
family of transcription factors that stimulates expression from the Rex-1
promoter. In this report, we utilized gel mobility shift analysis to examine the 
binding of transcription factors to the Rex-1 octamer motif. F9 EC cells, D3 ES
cells, and human NT2/D1 EC cells each from at least two prominent DNA/protein
complexes with the octamer motif. Supershift analysis identifies Oct-1 and Oct-3 
in these complexes. When F9 EC cells are induced to differentiate by treatment
with RA for 48 h, there is a complete loss of the DNA/protein complex containing 
Oct-3. In contrast, the other DNA/protein complexes, including the DNA/protein
complex containing Oct-1, can still be detected. These results provide support
for a role of Oct-3 in the transcription of the Rex-1 gene.

PMID: 7945330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Genomics. 1994 Sep 1;23(1):30-5.

Genomic organization of the human VP16 accessory protein, a housekeeping gene
(HCFC1) mapping to Xq28.

Frattini A(1), Faranda S, Redolfi E, Zucchi I, Villa A, Patrosso MC, Strina D,
Susani L, Vezzoni P.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Tecnologie Biomediche Avanzate, Consiglio Nazionale delle
Ricerche, Milan, Italy.

The region between DXS52 and Factor VIII gene in the human Xq28 chromosomal band 
contains a G+C-rich isochore to which many genes have been mapped. We report here
the isolation and characterization of a transcript mapping about 50 kb telomeric 
from the vasopressin type 2 receptor gene in a 180-kb YACs/cosmid contig
containing the L1CAM gene at its centromeric end. The determined transcribed
sequence from a human fetal brain library is identical to that of the recently
identified accessory protein HCFC1 (host cell factor, also called C1) that
activates herpes simplex virus VP16 (alpha TIF) transactivator protein for
association with the octamer motif-binding protein Oct-1 (Cell 74: 115, 1993).
The gene is expressed in a ubiquitous pattern and a larger transcript of
approximately 10 kb is present in all the tissues tested, while an alternatively 
spliced RNA of approximately 8.0 kb is present in muscle and heart tissues.
Genomic sequencing allowed us to determine that the sequenced transcript is
assembled from 26 exons spread over a relatively small genomic region of
approximately 24 kb. This alllowed us to determine that a previously reported
cDNA clone arises from the splicing out of an internal portion of exon 8 which
does not change the reading frame. All together these results raise the
possibility that alternative mRNA processing could partly contribute to the
diversity of the polypeptide HCFC1 family in a subset of tissues.

PMID: 7829097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Mol Biol (Mosk). 1994 Jul-Aug;28(4):865-74.

[Segments initiating replication of the dihydrofolate reductase domain and the
DNA fragment DARC146 interact with the same nuclear proteins].

[Article in Russian]

Timchenko NA, Luniak VV, Luniak AN.

Comparison analysis was made of the putative replication origin DARC146 and the
origin determined in the DNFR domain of CHO cells. We failed to observe extensive
homology between these two sequences. However, several short (8-10 bp) areas of
homology were identified. Some of them are binding sites for nuclear proteins. As
shown by GM and competition experiments, both origins contain high-affinity
binding sites for the transcription-replication factor Oct-1 and for two unknown 
nuclear factors. The two unknown nuclear factors bound to TCTCTTA and CACTTAG
nucleotides. The binding sites for these proteins are located at a short distance
from each other. This fact suggests interaction between these polypeptides.
Measurement of DNA-binding activity of Oct-1 during the cell cycle of
proliferating hepatocyte demonstrated that the binding activity of Oct-1 protein 
increased before initiation of DNA synthesis. The results of this report suggest 
that Oct-1 and two other nuclear proteins participate in the regulation of
mammalian DNA replication. The results published early indicated the presence of 
an unusual DNA structure (bent DNA) in both origins under study. We suggest that 
these common elements of the origins regulate their activation.

PMID: 7990815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1994 May 16;200(3):1307-12.

Identification of novel single-stranded DNA binding proteins recognizing octamer 
motif.

Ogawa N(1), Ariga H, Iguchi-Ariga SM.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.

We have previously identified the region containing transcriptional enhancer in
mouse immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH) gene as an initiation region of DNA
replication. The octamer sequence therein has been found to be essential for
initiation of DNA replication as well as for transcription. Octamer-binding
protein family, including Oct (OTF)-1, 2A, and 2B, bound to the element in
double-stranded form. Here we identified in various cells novel proteins which
bound to the upper strand of the octamer sequence in the IgH gene. Three proteins
of 35, 60, and 125 KDa recognized the sequences. The proteins, which were not
recognized by an anti-Oct-1 antibody, may be involved in regulation of the
initiation of DNA replication in the IgH gene.

PMID: 8185580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 May 11;22(9):1655-62.

The POU domains of the Oct1 and Oct2 transcription factors mediate specific
interaction with TBP.

Zwilling S(1), Annweiler A, Wirth T.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie Heidelberg, Germany.

We had previously shown that the ubiquitous Oct1 and the lymphoid-specific Oct2
transcription factors stimulate transcription at the level of stable
preinitiation complex formation. We have therefore investigated whether the
octamer binding proteins might physically interact with TBP, the TATA box binding
protein component of the TFIID factor. By using several different experimental
systems we show that TBP efficiently associates with Oct1 and Oct2. The
interaction is direct and does not depend on the presence of DNA or additional
proteins. N- and C-terminal deletions of the different proteins were used to
localize the domains involved in the interaction. We show that the POU
homeodomain of Oct2 and the evolutionarily conserved C-terminal core domain of
TBP are both required and sufficient for the interaction. The Oct1 POU domain,
which is highly homologous to the Oct2 POU domain, likewise mediates interaction 
with TBP. The interaction can also be observed in vivo, as TBP can be
co-precipitated with Oct2 from co-transfected Cos1 cells and TBP
co-immunoprecipitates with the endogenous Oct1 from HeLa cells. Co-transfection
of human TBP and Oct2 expression vectors into B cells resulted in a synergistic
activation of an octamer motif containing promoter.

PMCID: PMC308045
PMID: 8202368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. EMBO J. 1994 Apr 1;13(7):1654-63.

Differential transactivation potential of Oct1 and Oct2 is determined by
additional B cell-specific activities.

Pfisterer P(1), Annweiler A, Ullmer C, Corcoran LM, Wirth T.

Author information: 
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Royal Melbourne Hospital,
Victoria, Australia.

Cell type-specific transcriptional regulation is generally believed to be
mediated by sequence-specific transcription factors that are specifically present
in the corresponding cells. The interaction of the lymphoid-specific Oct2
transcription factor has been thought to be responsible for the B cell-specific
activity of octamer-containing promoter and enhancer elements. Here we show that 
physiological concentrations of Oct2 do not suffice to generate octamer-dependent
promoter activity in non-B cell lines. Furthermore, we have tested the activity
of octamer-dependent promoter and enhancer elements in B cell lines that lack the
endogenous Oct2 protein. Our results demonstrate that in these Oct2-deficient B
cells the ubiquitous endogenous Oct1 protein is able to stimulate
octamer-containing promoters to a level comparable with that of normal
Oct2-positive B cells. However, reporter constructs bearing the octamer motif in 
a distal enhancer position are not stimulated by the Oct1 protein, but do require
the presence of Oct2. The B cell-specific octamer-dependent promoter activity
mediated by Oct1 correlates with the presence of a novel B cell-specific
octamer-binding complex containing the Oct1 protein. From these results we
conclude that B cells contain two different activities: one that interacts with
both Oct1 and Oct2 and mediates promoter proximal activity of the octamer motif
and a second that specifically interacts with Oct2 to confer function from a
remote enhancer position.

PMCID: PMC394996
PMID: 8157005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Oncogene. 1994 Apr;9(4):1213-23.

Protein kinase A and AP-1 (c-Fos/JunD) are induced during apoptosis of mouse
mammary epithelial cells.

Marti A(1), Jehn B, Costello E, Keon N, Ke G, Martin F, Jaggi R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Clinical and Experimental Research, University of Bern,
Switzerland.

At weaning the mammary gland undergoes a reductive remodelling process
(involution) which is associated with the cessation of milk protein gene
expression and programmed cell death of milk-producing epithelial cells. Elevated
nuclear protein kinase A (PKA) activity was observed from one day post-lactation,
paralleled by increased c-fos, junB, junD and to a lesser extent c-jun mRNA
levels. AP-1 DNA binding activity was transiently induced and the AP-1 complex
was shown to consist principally of cFos/JunD. Oct-1 DNA binding activity and
Oct-1 protein were gradually lost from the gland over the first 4 days of
involution, whereas Oct-1 mRNA levels remained unchanged. Comparing nuclear
extracts from normal mammary glands with nuclear extracts from glands which had
been cleared of all epithelial cells 3 weeks after birth, revealed that PKA
activation, AP-1 induction and Oct-1 inactivation all are dependent on the
presence of the epithelial compartment. The increased Fos/Jun expression and the 
inactivation of Oct-1 may be consequences of the increased PKA activity. A
similar induction of AP-1 (cFos/JunD) was also observed in the involuting rat
ventral prostate pointing to a possible role for AP-1 in programmed cell death.

PMID: 8134124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. EMBO J. 1994 Mar 1;13(5):1157-65.

Targeted disruption of the CD3 eta locus causes high lethality in mice:
modulation of Oct-1 transcription on the opposite strand.

Ohno H(1), Goto S, Taki S, Shirasawa T, Nakano H, Miyatake S, Aoe T, Ishida Y,
Maeda H, Shirai T, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, Chiba University School of Medicine, Japan.

CD3 zeta and eta chains are components of the T cell antigen receptor (TCR)
complex and are transcribed from a common gene by alternative splicing. TCR
complexes containing the zeta eta dimer have been thought to mediate different
functions than complexes containing the zeta 2 dimer. To analyze the role of eta 
in the development and function of T cells, we generated eta-deficient mice
without affecting zeta by gene targeting in embryonic stem cells. Homozygous
mutant embryos developed normally. Unexpectedly, however, these mice exhibited
high mortality soon after birth for unknown reason(s). Analysis of surviving
homozygous animals revealed that the development and function of T cells were
normal in the absence of the eta chain. Recently, the zeta/eta locus was reported
to encode a transcription factor, Oct-1, on the opposite DNA strand. Our
targeting strategy resulted in modulation of Oct-1 transcription--reduction of
the authentic Oct-1 mRNA and induction of aberrant transcripts. Although
differences in tissue distribution and DNA binding capacity of Oct-1 between
wild-type and eta-deficient mice were not evident from in situ hybridization and 
gel shift analysis, the high mortality in the eta-deficient strain may well be
due to the disturbance of Oct-1 transcription by the mutation in the zeta/eta
locus. Such possible complexities have to be taken into account in the
interpretation of gene targeting experiments.

PMCID: PMC394925
PMID: 8131747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. J Immunol. 1994 Feb 15;152(4):1812-20.

Coordinate regulation of multiple human lymphokine genes by Oct-1 and potentially
novel 45 and 43 kDa polypeptides.

Kaushansky K(1), Shoemaker SG, O'Rork CA, McCarty JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle.

The hematologic response to inflammation is critically dependent on the release
of a family of glycoproteins termed CSFs. Central to this process is the
coordinated T lymphocyte production of three of these proteins, granulocyte
macrophage-CSF (GM-CSF), IL-3, and IL-5. In the course of our studies of the
transcriptional regulation of IL-3 expression we noted that the same or similar
proteins that bound to the downstream-activating region of the human IL-3 gene
were also captured using DNA probes derived from sequences present in the GM-CSF 
and IL-5 genes. In this study, DNA-protein cross-linking techniques and reporter 
gene analyses were used to define the nuclear proteins that mediate
transcriptional enhancement of these genes at one cis-acting site. These studies 
establish that Oct-1, a member of the POU family of transcription factors, binds 
to regions of the GM-CSF, IL-3, and IL-5 promoters and contributes to basal T
cell gene transcription. In addition, although the c-jun proto-oncogene product
was detected in stimulated human T cells, two additional T cell-specific proteins
(45 and 43 kDa) bind to the GM-CSF, IL-3, and IL-5 promoters and are functionally
and immunologically distinct from c-jun or OAP40 (jun-D). These proteins
contribute to transcriptional enhancement of the IL-3 and GM-CSF genes in
stimulated T cells. Together, these data suggest that the coordinate regulation
of several lymphokine genes is based on responses to shared proteins. These
studies further our understanding of the networks of transcriptionally active
proteins responsible for the host response to inflammatory stimuli.

PMID: 8120390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. EMBO J. 1994 Feb 15;13(4):784-97.

Targeted disruption within the CD3 zeta/eta/phi/Oct-1 locus in mouse.

Koyasu S(1), Hussey RE, Clayton LK, Lerner A, Pedersen R, Delany-Heiken P, Chau
F, Reinherz EL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunobiology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA.

To elucidate the role of the CD3 eta subunit of the T cell receptor (TCR) in
thymic development, a CD3 eta -/- mouse was generated by gene targeting.
Insertion of a neomycin resistance gene into exon 9 of the CD3 zeta/eta/phi locus
disrupted expression of CD3 eta and CD3 phi without affecting the expression of
CD3 zeta. Little difference was observed between wild type and CD3 eta -/- mice
with regard to cellularity or subset composition in thymus and peripheral
lymphoid organs. Furthermore, neither alloproliferative responses nor cytotoxic T
lymphocyte generation and effector function was affected by the mutation. The
effect of the CD3 eta -/- mutation on thymic selection was examined by crossing
the CD3 eta knockout animals with anti-HY TCR transgenic animals: the absence of 
the CD3 eta subunit altered neither positive nor negative selection. Thus, CD3
eta is not required for thymic selection. Of note, the birth rate of the CD3 eta 
-/- animals was significantly lower than that of wild type or heterozygous
animals (P = 0.041-0.002). This unexpected result is probably the consequence of 
an alteration in mRNA expression of the Oct-1 nuclear transcription factor in CD3
eta -/- animals. The CD3 zeta/eta/phi locus partially overlaps the gene encoding 
Oct-1 whose transcription is dysregulated by the CD3 eta -/- mutation. Our
results clearly underscore the value of characterizing all products of a genetic 
locus disrupted by gene targeting.

PMCID: PMC394877
PMID: 8112294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Arch Dermatol. 1994 Feb;130(2):210-5.

Transcriptional control and cell type specificity of HPV gene expression.

Bernard HU(1), Apt D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Papillomavirus Biology, National University of Singapore.

BACKGROUND: Papillomaviruses are of great medical interest as they are causally
associated with benign and malignant neoplasia of mucosal and cutaneous
epithelia. The viral genome can be viewed as a control unit that releases signals
in form of transforming proteins in infected epithelial cells. These proteins
create a molecular environment favorable for papillomavirus biology and an
expanded cell population for multiplication of the virus. On the other side, the 
genome receives signals through cellular transcription factors.
OBSERVATIONS: Cellular transcription factors help the virus to identify the
epithelial target cell, and they provide information about mitotic and
physiologic signals to the epithelium and its differentiation state. Present
research concentrates on the question how these distinct functions are brought
about by factors that are ubiquitous rather than cell-type specific, such as
NFI/CTF, TEF-1, AP-1, oct-1, and the progesterone receptor. Papillomaviruses have
the additional capability to generate positive and negative feedback loops of
gene expression through the virally encoded E2 proteins, a necessary tool to
achieve long-term persistence.
CONCLUSIONS: An intricate interplay between cellular and viral transcription
factors is a prerequisite for epithelial specificity, physiologic responses, and 
persistence of papillomavirus infections.

PMID: 8304760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Immunogenetics. 1994;39(3):161-7.

Upmodulation by estrogen of HLA class I expression in breast tumor cell lines.

Rodríguez F(1), Perán F, Garrido F, Ruiz-Cabello F.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Análisis Clínicos e Inmunología, Hospital Virgen de las Nieves,
Universidad de Granada, Spain.

The expression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I antigens was
studied in five breast carcinoma cell lines before and after treatment with
17-beta estradiol. Increased HLA class I antigen expression correlated with the
presence of estrogen receptors. The modulation of expression appeared to be
mediated by transcriptional mechanisms, as revealed by class I mRNA levels. To
elucidate the basis of MHC class I upregulation, we examined transcriptional
factor binding activity to the class I regulatory element (CRE). Our results
showed that 17-beta estradiol induced increases in factor binding activity to the
CRE II probe, and decreases to the CRE I probe. In addition, our results
suggested that factors that bind the CRE I region may modulate the binding of CRE
II. Binding to CRE II was significantly increased in extracts pretreated with a
competitor that contained the CRE I sequence, and that bound NF-kB/kBF1. In
addition, induction of NF-kB binding activity by the tumor necrosis factor was
accompanied by a decrease in nuclear factors that bind to the CRE II region.

PMID: 8276464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1994;65(4):272-5.

Identification of a marsupial OTF1 gene: cross-species STS analysis and in situ
cross-hybridization to Macropus eugenii chromosomes 3/4 and 5.

Sturm RA(1), Francis DI, Cassady JL, Graves JA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Queensland,
Brisbane.

The ability of the human octamer-binding transcription factor 1 (gene symbol:
OTF1) sequence tagged site (STS) marker to identify cross-species gene homologues
has been assessed using the marsupial Macropus eugenii genome. Two regions of
sequence homology with human OTF1 have been located on M. eugenii chromosomes 3/4
and 5 by in situ hybridization. These regions are likely to represent
cross-reaction with the homologues of human OTF1 and closely related OTF2 genes.

PMID: 8258303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Cell Mol Biol Res. 1994;40(7-8):643-52.

In vivo binding of proteins to stably integrated MMTV DNA in murine cell lines:
occupancy of NFI and OTF1 binding sites in the absence and presence of
glucocorticoids.

Härtig E(1), Cato AC.

Author information: 
(1)Kernforschungszentrum Karlsruhe, Institute of Genetics, Germany.

Activation of expression at the mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) promoter is
thought to be controlled by nucleosome positioning. On stably integrated MMTV
DNA, the long terminal repeat (LTR) region is organized in a phased array of
nucleosomes which allegedly occludes transcription factors such as NFI from
binding. NFI only binds to the promoter region when the ordered nucleosome
structure is apparently disrupted by activated steroid hormone receptors in
hormone induced transcription. In certain cell lines, binding sites for the
transcription factors NFI and OTF1 are however required for hormone-independent
expression of MMTV. We have used stably transfected mouse NIH3T3 and GR cells
that exhibit detectable MMTV expression in the absence of hormone for in vivo
determination of proteins binding to the MMTV promoter. Here, we present in vivo 
dimethyl sulfate footprinting data that show that the NFI and OTF binding sites
are permanently occupied in vivo in these cells. The contacting guanine residues 
identified in vivo were demonstrated in in vitro methylation interference assays 
to correspond to binding by NFI and OTF1. These results demonstrate a novel
feature of transcription factor occupancy at the MMTV LTR promoter.

PMID: 7787882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Dec 11;21(24):5570-6.

Specific transcriptional activation in vitro by the herpes simplex virus protein 
VP16.

Arnosti DN(1), Preston CM, Hagmann M, Schaffner W, Hope RG, Laughlan G, Luisi BF.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie II, Universitat Zürich, Switzerland.

The herpes simplex virus protein VP16 interacts with cellular factors, including 
the protein Oct-1, to activate viral immediate early (IE) gene transcription. We 
have reproduced this effect by addition of purified, full-length VP16 and the
DNA-binding 'POU' domain of Oct-1 (Oct-1/POU) to a HeLa cell in vitro
transcription system. Stimulation of transcription was dependent on the
IE-specific element, TAATGARAT. In agreement with earlier observations from
electrophoretic mobility shift assays, activation was not observed when
Oct-2/POU, the DNA-binding domain from the Oct-2 protein, was substituted for
Oct-1/POU. Single round transcription assays revealed that, together, VP16 and
Oct-1/POU facilitate the assembly of pre-initiation complexes at target gene
promoters.

PMCID: PMC310517
PMID: 8284200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Oncogene. 1993 Dec;8(12):3375-83.

PEA3, Oct 1 and Oct 2 positively regulate the human ETS1 promoter.

Chen JH(1), Wright CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pediatrics, University of Texas M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston 77030.

The promoter of the human ETS1 gene contains binding site motifs for
transcription factors Sp1, Ap1, Ap2, ETS, PEA3 and Oct. It has been shown
previously that Ap1, Ap2, and ETS are positive regulators for the transcription
of the ETS1 gene and that the ETS1 gene is autoregulated. In addition, two
regions on the ETS1 promoter that contain negative regulatory sequences have also
been identified. In this study, GST/PEA3 and GST/ets1 fusion proteins were used
in gel mobility assays to analyse the interaction between these transcription
factors with the binding motifs of PEA3 and ETS in the ETS1 promoter. Promoter
constructs in which the binding site motifs are mutated were used to examine the 
effect of mutation on the activities of transcription factors PEA3, ets1 and Oct.
Reporter plasmids containing different deletion mutants of the ETS1 promoter were
used to examine the effect of different transcription factors (PEA3, Oct 1 and
Oct 2) upon the expression of the ETS1 gene. The results of these studies
indicate that PEA3 is a strong positive regulator of the ETS1 promoter and that
other transcription factors increase the activity of the ETS1 promoter in an
additive rather than synergistic fashion.

PMID: 8247540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. J Biol Chem. 1993 Nov 25;268(33):25026-32.

Enhanced activation of the human histone H2B promoter by an Oct-1 variant
generated by alternative splicing.

Das G(1), Herr W.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, New York 11724.

POU homeodomain proteins are important regulators of ubiquitous as well as
tissue-specific transcription. These factors include the broadly expressed
octamer motif-binding protein Oct-1 and the related cell-specifically expressed
protein Oct-2. These two proteins differ in the types of octamer motif-containing
promoters they preferentially activate; Oct-1 can activate RNA polymerase II
transcription from a small nuclear RNA promoter better than Oct-2, which can
better activate an mRNA-type promoter. We describe a variant Oct-1-encoding cDNA 
resulting from two separate alternate splices of the human oct-1 primary
transcript; these alternate splices were present in all cell lines tested. This
cDNA encodes an amino-terminally and carboxyl-terminally truncated form of Oct-1,
called Oct-1B, which retains the DNA-binding POU domain and acquires a unique
12-amino acid carboxyl-terminal extension. In a transient expression assay,
Oct-1B displayed an enhanced ability compared to the larger form of Oct-1 (called
Oct-1A in this report) to activate the human histone H2B promoter, an mRNA-type
promoter where a natural octamer motif is involved in cell cycle dependent
transcription. Thus, the ability of Oct-1 related proteins to activate a natural 
regulatory target can be influenced by alternative splicing.

PMID: 8227066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Gene. 1993 Nov 15;133(2):163-9.

Epoc-1: a POU-domain gene expressed in murine epidermal basal cells and thymic
stromal cells.

Yukawa K(1), Yasui T, Yamamoto A, Shiku H, Kishimoto T, Kikutani H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Osaka University, Japan.

POU-domain transcription factors are known as developmental regulators which
control organ development and cell phenotypes. In order to clarify the roles of
POU-domain transcription factors in cell differentiation, we cloned a novel POU
family gene, Epoc-1, from a murine thymus cDNA library. The amino acid (aa)
sequence of the POU-specific domain of Epoc-1 is almost identical to those of
Oct-1 and Oct-2. However, within the POU-homeodomain, 13 out of 60 aa differ
between Epoc-1 and Oct-2. Recombinant Epoc-1 products were found to bind
specifically to the octamer sequence. Epoc-1 was found to be expressed in skin,
thymus, stomach and testis. In situ hybridization experiments and RNase
protection assays indicated that Epoc-1 is expressed in the epidermal basal cells
of the skin, which contain stem cells unipotent for keratinocyte differentiation 
and in thymic stromal elements. These results suggest that Epoc-1 might be one of
the developmental regulators which controls epidermal development and thymic
organogenesis.

PMID: 8224904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Nov 1;90(21):10260-4.

Differential expression of four members of the POU family of proteins in
activated and phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate-treated Jurkat T cells.

Bhargava AK(1), Li Z, Weissman SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, School of Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT
06536-0812.

The POU family of proteins binds specifically to octamer DNA motifs present in
the promoters of several genes and regulates their expression. We identified the 
presence of four members of the POU family of proteins, Oct-1, Oct-2, Oct-T1, and
Oct-T2, in the human T-cell line Jurkat. To obtain insight into the physiological
role played by these proteins in T cells, we studied the time course of
expression of these genes in resting, activated, and phorbol 12-myristate
13-acetate (PMA)-treated cells. The expression of the gene encoding Oct-1 (now
assigned the name OTF1 for octamer-binding transcription factor 1) remained
unchanged and the levels of Oct-T2 mRNA decreased with increasing time of
incubation to undetectable amounts in all three states of T-cell growth. The
levels of Oct-2 mRNA and protein were increased in activated cells, were
increased to a lesser extent in the PMA-treated cells, and were undetectable in
resting cells. The levels of the Oct-T1 transcripts increased dramatically in
PMA-treated cells but not in resting or activated cells. Sequence analysis of the
Oct-T1 cDNA showed an open reading frame coding for a POU domain-containing
protein of 42.7 kDa. Transient transfection of the gene encoding Oct-T1 decreased
the activity of the interleukin 2 gene promoter in activated Jurkat cells.
Further, there is evidence for an additional octamer-binding protein, Oct-T3, in 
Jurkat T cells.

PMCID: PMC47754
PMID: 8234287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Eur J Biochem. 1993 Nov 1;217(3):799-811.

Broad binding-site specificity and affinity properties of octamer 1 and brain
octamer-binding proteins.

Bendall AJ(1), Sturm RA, Danoy PA, Molloy PL.

Author information: 
(1)Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation, Division of
Biomolecular Engineering, Sydney Laboratory, North Ryde, New South Wales,
Australia.

The ubiquitous Pit-1-Oct-1-Unc-1 (POU)-domain protein octamer 1 (Oct-1) has been 
observed to bind specifically to a number of degenerate and dissimilar sequences.
We have used antibodies directed against a C-terminal Oct-1 peptide to
immunoselect binding sequences for HeLa cell Oct-1 from random-sequence
oligonucleotides and we describe the isolation of binding sequences of
considerable heterogeneity. Although our consensus alignment indicated a 9-bp
TATGCAAAT motif with AT-rich flanking sequences, this binding motif is not
immediately obvious in the population of sequences and no clone actually
contained this sequence. Screening these Oct-1-binding sequences with a mouse
whole-brain extract demonstrated that the neuronal octamer-binding proteins
exhibit similar but distinct DNA sequence specificities. Unlike the reported
selection of binding sequences for other transcription factors, the dependence of
Oct-1-binding affinity upon sequence did not correspond tightly to the degree of 
conservation at particular positions of the consensus sequence. Our results
suggest that either base-specific hydrogen bonding is not the only major
determinant of binding affinity and specificity, or that Oct-1 binding to some
sequences is mechanistically different from its binding to an octamer. These
results exemplify the potential to overlook binding sites for some factors by
searching gene sequences with a consensus nucleotide sequence.

PMID: 8223636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. J Immunol. 1993 Sep 15;151(6):3152-62.

CD3 zeta/eta/theta locus is colinear with and transcribed antisense to the gene
encoding the transcription factor Oct-1.

Lerner A(1), D'Adamio L, Diener AC, Clayton LK, Reinherz EL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115.

CD3 zeta and eta are signal-transducing components of the TCR and are derived
from alternative splicing of transcripts from a single genetic locus that also
encodes CD30 theta. We have isolated two murine cDNA clones that appear to result
from antisense transcription through CD3 theta-specific exon 10 and CD3
eta-specific exon 9. The sequence of these clones shows no open reading frame.
Northern analysis with single stranded probes confirms the existence of a
ubiquitously expressed > 12-kb polyadenylated mRNA antisense to CD3 eta. A
"genomic walk," which extended 32 kb distal to murine CD3 eta exon 9, provided
genomic DNA containing a more 5' portion of the antisense transcript. This probe 
identified two murine thymic cDNA with 91% sequence homology to the human
transcription factor Oct-1. Five exons of murine Oct-1 map in an antisense
orientation to the CD3 zeta/eta/theta locus on the cloned genomic sequences. The 
murine Oct-1 cDNA and exon 9 of CD3 eta hybridize to the same > 12-kb mRNA.
Similarly, human Oct-1 and previously characterized human genomic sequences
homologous to murine CD3 eta exon 9 each hybridize to the same > 15-kb human
mRNA. Thus, the CD3 zeta/eta/theta and Oct-1 gene loci are partially overlapping 
and transcribed in opposite directions. The potential functional implications of 
these findings are discussed.

PMID: 8376772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Carcinogenesis. 1993 Sep;14(9):1963-7.

Differential inhibition of the DNA binding of transcription factors NF kappa B
and OTF-1 by nitrogen mustard and quinacrine mustard: transcriptional
implications.

Fabbri S(1), Prontera C, Broggini M, D'Incalci M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Chemotherapy, Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario
Negri, Milan, Italy.

Nitrogen mustard (HN2) and quinacrine mustard (QM) both inhibited the binding of 
NF kappa B to the GC-rich consensus sequence in the HIV long terminal repeat
(LTR), as assessed by gel-shift assays. QM also inhibited the binding of OTF-1 to
the AT-rich octamer present in the H2B promoter whereas HN2 was inactive.
Inhibition of the binding of transcription factors was due to the drug
interaction with DNA, since it also occurred when transcription factors were
added to DNA after removal of free drug. In Jurkat cells transfected with pI3CAT,
where the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) gene is under the control of
the HIV LTR, both HN2 and QM inhibited CAT gene expression. However, in Jurkat
cells transfected with plasmid -147, where the CAT gene is under the control of
the H2B promoter, QM inhibited CAT expression but HN2 did not. These results were
obtained at concentrations of HN2 or QM that inhibited total DNA and RNA
synthesis to a similar extent. The present results suggest that the more
selective pharmacological activity of HN2 (HN2 is an active antineoplastic agent 
whereas QM is inactive and very toxic) might be related to its preferential
functional inhibition of GC-rich consensus sequence, possibly important in the
regulation of genes involved in the malignant proliferation and behavior of some 
tumors.

PMID: 8403225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Mol Biol (Mosk). 1993 Sep-Oct;27(5):1023-31.

[Proteins, interacting with the promotor of the immunoglobulin kappa gene].

[Article in Russian]

Kaznadzei DV, Luchina NN, Stepchenko AG, Polianovskii OL.

Two octanucleotide binding protein factors (mOct-1 and mOct-2A) are detected in
nuclear extracts of lymphoid NS/0 cell line. These proteins, corresponding to
human Oct-1 and Oct-2A nuclear factors, were purified by ion exchange and
heparin-agarose chromatography. With retardation assay technique it was shown
that mOct-2A factor at all steps of purification contains tightly bound protein, 
dissociating in the presence of a nonspecific native DNA. This
octa-protein-associated factor (OAF) has low affinity to DNA and is not able to
bind specifically the promoter of kappa-gene. However it interacts with DNA
together with mOct-2A in highly specific manner but does not form complexes with 
mOct-1 and mOct-2B factors. Since OAF can be attached specifically only to
mOct-2A (which play an essential role in initiation of kappa-gene transcription) 
this attachment may be considered as necessary for its recognition as a specific 
transcription factor. The ability of OAF like alpha TIF factor (specifically
interacting with Oct-1) to discriminate between the Oct proteins, recognizing the
same cis-acting oct-elements, shows how the non-DNA-binding transcription factors
can influence differentially the transcription by two proteins binding to the
same DNA sequences.

PMID: 8246925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Aug 25;21(17):4031-7.

Erythropoietin triggers a burst of GATA-1 in normal human erythroid cells
differentiating in tissue culture.

Dalyot N(1), Fibach E, Ronchi A, Rachmilewitz EA, Ottolenghi S, Oppenheim A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Hadassah University Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel.

GATA-1 is a central transcription-activator of erythroid differentiation. In the 
present work we have studied the kinetics of its expression and activity during
development of normal human erythroid progenitors, grown in primary cultures. In 
response to the addition of erythropoietin (Epo), the cells undergo proliferation
and differentiation in a synchronized fashion. This recently developed
experimental system allows biochemical dissection of erythroid differentiation in
a physiological meaningful environment. No DNA-binding activity of GATA-1 could
be detected before the addition of Epo, although a very low level of mRNA was
observed. Following Epo addition there was a sharp parallel rise in both mRNA and
DNA-binding activity, consistent with positive autoregulation of the GATA-1 gene.
After reaching a peak on day 7-9, both mRNA and protein activity decreased. The
binding activity of the ubiquitous factor SP1 showed a biphasic pattern; its
second peak usually coincided with the GATA-1 peak, suggesting that SP1 also
plays a specific role in erythroid maturation. The highest activity of GATA-1 per
erythroid cell was found on day 6-8, immediately preceding the major rise in
globin gene mRNA and in the number of hemoglobinized cells. The results imply
that a high level of GATA-1 activity is necessary for globin gene expression and 
erythroid maturation, suggesting that a requirement for a threshold concentration
of GATA-1 is part of the mechanism that determines the final steps of erythroid
maturation.

PMCID: PMC309995
PMID: 8371977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Biochemistry. 1993 Aug 24;32(33):8397-402.

Nuclear matrix association of multiple sequence-specific DNA binding activities
related to SP-1, ATF, CCAAT, C/EBP, OCT-1, and AP-1.

van Wijnen AJ(1), Bidwell JP, Fey EG, Penman S, Lian JB, Stein JL, Stein GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical Center,
Worcester 01655.

The association of DNA binding proteins with the nuclear matrix may be related to
a functional role of this subcellular structure in chromatin organization and
gene regulation. In this study, nuclear matrix preparations from human HeLa S3
cervical carcinoma and rat ROS 17/2.8 osteosarcoma cells were assayed for the
presence of DNA binding activities using consensus binding sequences of
well-characterized transcription factors as probes. Competition analysis shows
that each probe interacts with different nuclear matrix proteins in a
sequence-specific manner and that DNA binding activities related to or identical 
with SP-1, ATF, CCAAT, C/EBP, OCT-1, and AP-1 are present in the nuclear matrix
fraction of different cell types. Comparison of the relative abundance of these
transcription factor binding activities in nuclear matrix and nonmatrix nuclear
fractions suggests that the distribution between these two fractions is cell type
specific, cell growth dependent, or independent of these biological parameters.
These results are consistent with the postulated role of the nuclear matrix in
transcriptional regulation of gene expression.

PMID: 8357791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Aug;13(8):4670-8.

Functional characterization of elements in a human U6 small nuclear RNA gene
distal control region.

Danzeiser DA(1), Urso O, Kunkel GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College
Station 77843-2128.

The promoters of vertebrate U6 small nuclear RNA genes contain a distal control
region whose presence results in at least an eightfold level of transcriptional
activation in vivo. Previous transfection experiments have demonstrated that most
of the distal control region of a human U6 gene resides in a restriction fragment
located from -244 to -149 relative to the transcriptional start site. Three
octamer-related motifs that bind recombinant Oct-1 transcription factor in vitro 
exist in this segment of DNA. However, transfection of human 293 cells with
various plasmid templates in which these Oct-1 binding sites had been disrupted
individually or in combination showed that only the consensus octamer motif
located between positions -221 to -214 was functional. Even so, the consensus
octamer motif mutant template was expressed at only a moderately reduced level
relative to the wild-type promoter. When another octamer-related sequence located
nearby, one that did not bind Oct-1 in vitro, was disrupted along with the
perfect octamer site, expression was reduced fivefold in transfected cells. A
factor that binds this functional, nonconsensus octamer site (NONOCT) was
detected in crude cellular extracts. However, the NONOCT sequence was not
essential for activation, since its disruption caused only a 40% reduction in U6 
gene expression, and mutagenesis to convert the NONOCT sequence to a consensus
octamer motif restored wild-type expression. Furthermore, in vitro transcription 
of a human U6 proximal promoter joined to a single copy of the octamer motif was 
stimulated by the addition of recombinant Oct-1 protein.

PMCID: PMC360093
PMID: 8336708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. J Biol Chem. 1993 Jul 25;268(21):15965-73.

Regulation of the calcitonin/calcitonin gene-related peptide gene by
cell-specific synergy between helix-loop-helix and octamer-binding transcription 
factors.

Tverberg LA(1), Russo AF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Iowa, Iowa City 52242.

The calcitonin/calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) gene is transcribed in
thyroid C-cells and a subset of neurons. We have localized sequences required for
cell-specific enhancement of calcitonin/CGRP transcription in rat thyroid C-cell 
lines. An 18-base pair element approximately 1 kilobase pair upstream of the
transcriptional start site stimulated expression of a luciferase reporter gene
50-fold in 44-2C C-cells. There was less than 2-fold stimulation in HeLa and
Rat-1 cells, which do not express the endogenous calcitonin/CGRP gene. The
enhancer contains potential binding sites for helix-loop-helix (HLH) and octamer 
transcription factors based on sequence homologies. The functional significance
of these sites was shown by point mutations in the HLH and octamer motifs and by 
separation of the two motifs, all of which decreased enhancer activity greater
than 10-fold. The involvement of HLH proteins was further shown by co-expression 
of the mammalian achaete-scute homologue-1 HLH protein, which activated the
enhancer severalfold in HeLa cells. Electrophoretic mobility shift analyses
revealed several DNA-protein complexes containing HLH and octamer-binding
proteins. One octamer-binding complex (OB1) most likely contains the ubiquitous
Oct-1 protein, whereas a second complex (OB2) was cell-specific. In contrast to
OB1, OB2 had lower affinity for a consensus octamer motif, and its DNA binding
was not affected by addition of antiserum that recognizes Oct-1 and Oct-2
proteins. In addition, we observed a large complex that appears to contain both
an HLH protein and OB2. These results demonstrate that calcitonin/CGRP enhancer
activity is controlled by a cell-specific synergistic activation involving HLH
and octamer-binding factors.

PMID: 8340417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Cell. 1993 Jul 16;74(1):115-25.

The VP16 accessory protein HCF is a family of polypeptides processed from a large
precursor protein.

Wilson AC(1), LaMarco K, Peterson MG, Herr W.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, New York 11724.

Upon lytic infection of permissive cells, the herpes simplex virus (HSV)
transactivator protein VP16 associates with an accessory protein termed host cell
factor (HCF). Binding to HCF activates VP16 for association with the octamer
motif-binding protein Oct-1, to form a multiprotein-DNA complex responsible for
activating transcription of the HSV immediate early genes. We show that HCF
comprises a series of related polypeptides that range from 110 to 300 kd, all of 
which are encoded by a single gene. Although there is no obvious sequence
similarity between HCF and other known proteins, HCF contains eight repeats of a 
new 26 amino acid motif. cDNAs encoding HCF predict a large open reading frame of
2035 codons. When expressed in human cells, this large open reading frame encodes
both the 300 kd and smaller HCF polypeptides, indicating that the smaller
polypeptides arise by processing of the 300 kd protein.

PMID: 8392914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. J Virol. 1993 Jul;67(7):3931-9.

The NFIII/OCT-1 binding site stimulates adenovirus DNA replication in vivo and is
functionally redundant with adjacent sequences.

Hatfield L(1), Hearing P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, State University of New York, Stony Brook
11794-7621.

The inverted terminal repeat (ITR) of adenovirus type 5 (Ad5) is 103 bp in length
and contains the origin of DNA replication. Cellular transcription factors
NFI/CTF and NFIII/OCT-1 bind to sites within the ITR and participate in the
initiation of viral DNA replication in vitro. The ITR also contains multiple
copies of two conserved sequence motifs that bind the cellular transcription
factors SP1 and ATF. We have analyzed a series of viruses that carry deletions at
the left terminus of Ad5. A virus carrying a deletion of the NFIII/OCT-1, SP1,
and ATF sites within the ITR (mutant dl309-44/107) was wild type for virus
growth. However, the deletion of these elements in addition to sequences
immediately flanking the ITR (mutant dl309-44/195) resulted in a virus that grew 
poorly. The analysis of growth parameters of these and other mutants demonstrate 
that the NFIII/OCT-1 and adjacent SP1 sites augment the accumulation of viral DNA
following infection. The function of these elements was most evident in
coinfections with a wild-type virus, suggesting that these sites enhance the
ability of a limiting trans-acting factor(s), that stimulates viral DNA
replication, to interact with the ITR. The results of these analyses indicate
functional redundancy between different transcription elements at the left
terminus of the Ad5 genome and demonstrate that the NFIII/OCT-1 site and adjacent
SP1 site, previously thought to be nonessential for adenovirus growth, play a
role in viral DNA replication in vivo.

PMCID: PMC237760
PMID: 8510211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Jul;13(7):3860-71.

The lung-specific CC10 gene is regulated by transcription factors from the AP-1, 
octamer, and hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 families.

Sawaya PL(1), Stripp BR, Whitsett JA, Luse DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of
Cincinnati, Ohio 45267-0524.

We have shown that a large fragment (-2339 to +57) from the rat CC10 gene
directed lung-specific expression of a reporter construct in transgenic animals. 
Upon transfection, a smaller fragment (-165 to +57) supported reporter gene
expression exclusively in the Clara cell-like NCI-H441 cell line, suggesting that
a Clara cell-specific transcriptional element resided on this fragment (B. R.
Stripp, P. L. Sawaya, D. S. Luse, K. A. Wikenheiser, S. E. Wert, J. A. Huffman,
D. L. Lattier, G. Singh, S. L. Katyal, and J. A. Whitsett, J. Biol. Chem.
267:14703-14712, 1992). The interactions of nuclear proteins with a particular
segment of the CC10 promoter which extends from 79 to 128 bp upstream of the CC10
transcription initiation site (CC10 region I) have now been studied. This
sequence can stimulate both in vitro transcription in H441 nuclear extract and
transient expression of reporter constructs in H441 cells. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assays using extracts from H441, HeLa, rat liver, and fetal sheep 
lung cells were used to demonstrate that members of the AP-1, octamer, and HNF-3 
families bind to CC10 region I. Transcription factors from H441 cells which are
capable of binding to CC10 region I are either absent in HeLa, rat liver, and
fetal sheep lung extracts or enriched in H441 extracts relative to extracts from 
non-Clara cells.

PMCID: PMC359916
PMID: 8321193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Cancer Res. 1993 May 15;53(10 Suppl):2399-409.

Concerted control of multiple histone promoter factors during cell density
inhibition of proliferation in osteosarcoma cells: reciprocal regulation of cell 
cycle-controlled and bone-related genes.

van den Ent FM(1), van Wijnen AJ, Last TJ, Bortell R, Stein JL, Lian JB, Stein
GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical Center,
Worcester 01655.

Cell density-induced growth inhibition of osteosarcoma cells (ROS 17/2.8) results
in the shutdown of proliferation-specific histone H4 and H2B genes and the
concomitant up-regulation of several osteoblast-related genes. In several
respects, this reciprocal regulatory relationship is analogous to the
proliferation/differentiation transition stage during development of the bone
cell phenotype in normal diploid osteoblasts. Here, we comprehensively analyzed
the promoter binding activities interfacing with key regulatory elements in the
cell cycle-dependent histone and bone-specific osteocalcin genes. Similarly, we
examined factors interacting with a series of general transcription regulatory
elements that are present in a broad spectrum of promoters. The results show that
histone promoter binding activities HiNF-D, HiNF-P/H4TF-2, H4UA-1, and OCT-1, as 
well as AP-1 activity, are proliferation dependent. These factors decline
coordinately during the cessation of proliferation in both ROS 17/2.8 bone tumor 
cells and normal diploid osteoblasts. Collective down-regulation of these
trans-activating factors occurs in both cell types within the physiological
context of constitutive regulation of ubiquitous transcription factors (Sp1, ATF,
and CCAAT binding proteins). In addition, during growth inhibition of ROS 17/2.8 
cells we observe a complex series of modifications in protein/DNA interactions of
the osteocalcin gene. These modifications include both increased and decreased
representation of promoter factor complexes occurring at steroid hormone response
elements as well as tissue-specific basal promoter sequences. These results
demonstrate cell growth regulation of the promoter factors binding to the
proliferation-specific histone and tissue-specific osteocalcin genes during the
cessation of proliferation.

PMID: 8485727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Genomics. 1993 May;16(2):333-41.

Chromosomal structure and expression of the human OTF1 locus encoding the Oct-1
protein.

Sturm RA(1), Cassady JL, Das G, Romo A, Evans GA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Queensland,
Australia.

The genomic structure of the POU domain containing oct-1 gene (OTF1 locus) coding
region has been determined using human DNA recombinant bacteriophage and a yeast 
artificial chromosome clone. The gene is encoded by 16 exons spanning over 150
kb, and the Oct-1 protein reading frame has been extended to 766 amino acids. The
exonic structure has been compared to the mouse Oct-2 protein and reveals a
conservation of exon-intron boundaries as well as protein sequence similarity. To
provide insight into Oct-1 control of transcriptional regulation during the
cell-cycle the expression of the oct-1 gene was examined during cellular DNA
replication and shows that the steady-state level of the oct-1 mRNA is not
S-phase regulated.

PMID: 8314572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Apr;13(4):2515-23.

Convergent regulation of NF-IL6 and Oct-1 synthesis by interleukin-6 and retinoic
acid signaling in embryonal carcinoma cells.

Hsu W(1), Chen-Kiang S.

Author information: 
(1)Brookdale Center for Molecular Biology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New
York, New York 10029.

The nuclear signaling by the pleiotropic cytokine interleukin-6 (IL-6) has been
investigated in human embryonal carcinoma cells and T cells. We show that Oct-1, 
a ubiquitously expressed octamer-binding protein known to be regulated
posttranslationally, can also be regulated at the levels of mRNA and protein
synthesis by IL-6 and by retinoic acid (RA) in human embryonal carcinoma cells.
NF-IL6, an IL-6-inducible transcription factor of the C/EBP family, can confer
this regulation and is itself regulated by both signals. The abundance and the
molar ratios of the three forms of NF-IL6, corresponding to peptides initiated in
frame from different AUGs of the same NF-IL6 mRNA species, are regulated by IL-6 
and by RA. These results suggest that the two signal transduction pathways
overlap in human embryonal carcinoma cells and that Oct-1 may be downstream of
NF-IL6 in the shared regulatory cascade. Enhanced Oct-1 synthesis correlates with
one of the functions of Oct-1, i.e., stimulation of adenovirus DNA replication.
This provides an example of a possible functional consequence of IL-6 and RA
signaling that is mediated by NF-IL6 and Oct-1 regulation.

PMCID: PMC359577
PMID: 8455626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. J Biol Chem. 1993 Mar 25;268(9):6525-34.

Purification of the cellular C1 factor required for the stable recognition of the
Oct-1 homeodomain by the herpes simplex virus alpha-trans-induction factor
(VP16).

Kristie TM(1), Sharp PA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge
02139.

The assembly of specific multiprotein complexes on the herpes simplex virus
alpha/IE (immediate early) enhancer elements requires the interactions of the
Oct-1 POU homeodomain, the viral alpha TIF (alpha-trans-induction factor) (VP16),
and at least one additional cellular factor, the C1 factor. The C1 factor
interacts directly with alpha TIF, likely forming an intermediate protein complex
that recognizes the Oct-1 homeodomain-DNA complex. The biochemical purification
of the mammalian C1 factor suggests that it is composed of multiple subunits of
related, but heterogeneous, polypeptides. The interaction of a subset of these
polypeptides with alpha TIF is stimulated by post-translational modifications of 
the C1 proteins, suggesting that this factor may be a critical target for the
regulation of the herpes simplex virus alpha/IE transcription.

PMID: 8454622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. J Biol Chem. 1993 Mar 15;268(8):5949-56.

Cell type- and stage-specific expression of the CD20/B1 antigen correlates with
the activity of a diverged octamer DNA motif present in its promoter.

Thévenin C(1), Lucas BP, Kozlow EJ, Kehrl JH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunoregulation, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

The CD20(B1) gene encodes a B cell-specific protein involved in the regulation of
human B cell proliferation and differentiation. Studies with 5' deletion CD20
promoter-CAT constructs have previously revealed two regions of the promoter
between bases -186 and -280 and between bases -280 and -454 which contained
positive regulatory elements. In this study we identified a sequence element
present in the most proximal region located between bases -214 and -201,
TTCTTCTAATTAA, which is important in the high constitutive expression of CD20 in 
mature B cells and the induction of CD20 in pre-B cells. This sequence element
was referred to as the BAT box and its deletion significantly reduced the
activity of a CD20 promoter-CAT construct in B cells. Mobility shift assays with 
various mutant probes and B cell nuclear extracts demonstrated that the core
sequence TAAT was essential for binding to this site. Cross competition
experiments with an octamer sequence from the Ig heavy chain promoter, the BAT
box, and a TA-rich sequence present in the CD21 promoter revealed that all three 
sequences bound the same nuclear proteins suggesting that the BAT box binding
proteins were Oct-1 and Oct-2. Southwestern blotting and UV cross-linking studies
confirmed that the BAT box binding proteins were Oct-1 and Oct-2. The affinity of
the BAT box binding proteins for the BAT box was approximately 25-fold less than 
for the octamer sequence and the BAT box binding proteins dissociated from the
BAT box 10-fold more rapidly than from the octamer sequence. Despite this lower
affinity, a trimer of the BAT box sequence was as efficiently transactivated by
an Oct-2 expression vector as was a trimer of the octamer sequence in HeLa cells.
The BAT box and Oct-2 were also implicated in the induction of CD20 in the pre-B 
cell line, PB-697, via phorbol esters. The induction of CD20 mRNA was temporally 
associated with induction of Oct-2 mRNA and a BAT box-deleted CD20-CAT construct,
in contrast to the wild type, was poorly induced by phorbol esters. Together
these results suggest that the BAT box binding proteins are important in the B
cell specific expression of CD20 and perhaps CD21.

PMID: 7680653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Feb 25;21(4):1019-23.

The octamer binding site in the HPV16 regulatory region produces opposite effects
on gene expression in cervical and non-cervical cells.

Morris PJ(1), Dent CL, Ring CJ, Latchman DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University College London School of Medicine, UK.

The upstream regulatory region (URR) of the tumorigenic human papillomaviruses
HPV 16 and 18 contains an octamer binding site which is located adjacent to a
binding site for the ubiquitous transcription factor NFI. The octamer site binds 
both the constitutively expressed transcription factor Oct-1 and a novel cervical
octamer binding protein. In contrast the URR of the non-tumorigenic viruses HPV6 
and HPV11 lacks the octamer binding site although the adjacent NFI site is
conserved. Inactivation of the octamer binding site results in a higher level of 
gene expression in cells which contain only Oct-1 and a lower level in cells
containing the cervical octamer binding protein indicating that that whilst Oct-1
binding reduces promoter activity, the cervical protein increases it. In
agreement with this, over-expression of Oct-1 reduces the level of gene activity 
directed by this region of the HPV 16/18 URR and inhibits its activation by NFI
whilst having no effect on the corresponding region of the HPV 6/11 URR. The
significance of these effects is discussed in terms of the cervical-specific
activity of the HPV16/18 URR and its role in HPV-mediated transformation.

PMCID: PMC309238
PMID: 8383834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Blood. 1993 Feb 15;81(4):928-34.

Interleukin-3 expression by activated T cells involves an inducible,
T-cell-specific factor and an octamer binding protein.

Davies K(1), TePas EC, Nathan DG, Mathey-Prevot B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115.

Interleukin-3 (IL-3) is exclusively expressed by activated T and natural killer
cells, a function that is tightly controlled both in a lineage-specific and in a 
stimulation-dependent manner. We have investigated the protein binding
characteristics and functional importance of the ACT-1-activating region of the
IL-3 promoter. This region binds an inducible, T-cell-specific factor over its 5'
end, a site that is necessary for the expression of IL-3 in the absence of other 
upstream elements. Over its 3' end, it binds a factor that is ubiquitously and
constitutively expressed. This factor is Oct-1 or an immunologically related
octamer-binding protein, and it plays a role in coordinating the activity of
several regulatory elements. These characteristics make the ACT-1 site analogous 
to the activating ARRE-1 site in the IL-2 promoter. Furthermore, and despite a
lack of sequence homology, the promoters of IL-3 and IL-2 share an organizational
pattern of regulatory elements that is likely to be important for the
T-cell-specific expression of these genes.

PMID: 8428000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. J Biol Chem. 1993 Feb 5;268(4):2525-34.

Analysis of transcriptional stimulation by recombinant Oct proteins in a
cell-free system.

Annweiler A(1), Zwilling S, Hipskind RA, Wirth T.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

The transactivation potential of several isoforms of the lymphoid-specific
transcription factor Oct2 has been analyzed using in vitro transcription. Oct2
can stimulate transcription in B-cell nuclear extracts and in HeLa nuclear
extracts depleted of the ubiquitous factor Oct1 by wheat germ lectin affinity
chromatography. Activity is observed from both natural and synthetic promoters
containing single or multiple copies of the octamer motif ATGCAAAT.
Multimerization of this motif does not result in a synergistic transcriptional
stimulation, but rather leads to a linear increase in activity. To analyze the
various Oct2 isoforms, they were overexpressed in HeLa cells using recombinant
vaccinia virus. Although all the isoforms bind similarly to the octamer sequence,
they show clear differences in their ability to transactivate transcription. This
ranges from a 2-fold stimulation for Oct2.3 to the almost 20-fold effect of the
most potent variant Oct2.5. In general the relative activity of the isoforms in
vitro reflects that observed in vivo in cotransfection experiments. Interestingly
the ubiquitous factor Oct1 is also an efficient activator of transcription in
vitro, but only from promoters with multiple octamer motifs. Sarkosyl inhibition 
studies suggest that both Oct1 and Oct2 function in vitro by stabilizing
preinitiation complexes without affecting the reinitiation rate of RNA polymerase
II.

PMID: 8428930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Jan 25;21(2):245-52.

Mouse Oct-1 contains a composite homeodomain of human Oct-1 and Oct-2.

Suzuki N(1), Peter W, Ciesiolka T, Gruss P, Schöler HR.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Department of Molecular Cell
Biology, Göttingen, Germany.

Members of the Oct family of transcription factors specifically interact with the
octamer motif, ATGC-AAAT, a regulatory element important for tissue- and
cell-specific transcription as well as for the expression of housekeeping genes. 
Except for Oct-1, all Oct factors are expressed in a temporally and spatially
restricted mode during murine development and their number varies in a given cell
type. Despite its ubiquitous expression pattern Oct-1 may play a role in murine
development. As a first step towards elucidating the role of Oct-1 we report the 
complementary DNA cloning of the mouse Oct-1 gene. Two large transcripts of 5 and
14 kb are derived from a single gene. The expression patterns of three splicing
products of Oct-1 are similar in a number of cells and tissues. In the POU region
murine Oct-1 differs in four amino acids from the human homologue and these
differences are restricted to helices 1 and 2. Interestingly, two of the four
variant amino acids are identical to those in human and mouse Oct-2 and thus the 
murine Oct-1 homeodomain is intermediary in sequence between human Oct-1 and
Oct-2. These two amino acids together with a third one have been shown to be
relevant for the interaction between human Oct-1 and herpes simplex virus
transactivator VP16. Nevertheless, VP16 interacts albeit weakly with murine
Oct-1. We speculate that the differences in the human and mouse Oct-1
homeodomains reflect host-specific differences in protein-protein interactions.

PMCID: PMC309099
PMID: 8441632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1993 Jan 23;1171(3):307-10.

The POU-domain protein Oct-1 is widely expressed in adult rat organs.

Kambe F(1), Tsukahara S, Kato T, Seo H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Nagoya University, Japan.

The cDNA encoding a rat Oct-1 POU-domain was cloned by the reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction method and subsequently Oct-1 mRNA
expression was investigated. Our results show that the POU-domain of Oct-1 has
been highly conserved during vertebrate evolution and that Oct-1 mRNA is widely
expressed in various organs of adult rat.

PMID: 8424955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. J Biol Chem. 1993 Jan 15;268(2):1272-8.

An unusual cellular factor potentiates protein-DNA complex assembly between Oct-1
and Vmw65.

Werstuck GH(1), Capone JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

The herpes simplex virus trans-activator Vmw65 interacts with the cellular
factors Oct-1 and VCAF-1 to generate a multicomponent DNA binding complex that
specifically recognizes conserved enhancer elements found upstream of the viral
immediate-early genes, resulting in potent stimulation of their transcription. We
have identified a HeLa cell factor, distinct from Oct-1 or VCAF-1, which
significantly enhances the stability or formation of Vmw65-dependent complexes,
as judged by mobility shift analysis using either nuclear extracts or bacterially
expressed Oct-1 and Vmw65. This factor, designated SF (stimulatory factor), was
partially purified from HeLa cell postnuclear extracts and has an apparent
molecular weight of 1500-3000, based on ultrafiltration and size-exclusion
chromatography. SF was shown to be resistant to inactivation by heat treatment,
protease, nuclease, and phospholipase digestions, and extraction with organic
solvents. Pretreatment of SF with beta-glucuronidase did not affect its ability
to stimulate Vmw65-dependent complex formation but did reduce the electrophoretic
mobility of the resulting complex. These data indicate that SF is probably a
component of the Vmw65-induced complex and may be composed, at least partially,
of carbohydrate.

PMID: 8380410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Genes Dev. 1993 Jan;7(1):72-83.

Differential positive control by Oct-1 and Oct-2: activation of a
transcriptionally silent motif through Oct-1 and VP16 corecruitment.

Cleary MA(1), Stern S, Tanaka M, Herr W.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, New York 11724.

Transcriptional regulation by the ubiquitous human POU homeo domain protein Oct-1
and the related B-cell protein Oct-2 is a model for understanding how proteins
that recognize the same regulatory site elicit different programs of gene
transcription. Here, we describe a mechanism for differential promoter activation
whereby only Oct-1, through selective corecruitment with the herpesvirus
trans-activator VP16, acquires the ability to stimulate transcription from a
TAATGARAT-containing site that responds to neither Oct-1 nor Oct-2 alone. To
measure differential in vivo activation by human Oct-1 and Oct-2 in response to
VP16, we have developed a transient assay in murine NIH-3T3 cells. Surprisingly, 
murine Oct-1 associates with VP16 much less effectively than its human
counterpart, most likely because the murine Oct-1 homeo domain differs at four
positions from the human Oct-1 homeo domain. The murine cell transient assay
shows directly that human Oct-1, but not human Oct-2, can respond to VP16 in
vivo. The Oct-1 DNA-binding POU domain is sufficient and the Oct-1 homeo domain
is critical for this response, because an Oct-1 POU domain containing the Oct-2
homeo domain fails to respond to the VP16-induced positive control of
transcription. Thus, by selective homeo domain interaction and corecruitment to
an otherwise silent regulatory element, VP16 expands the repertoire of sites
responsive to Oct-1 without affecting the activity of its close relative Oct-2.

PMID: 8422989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Cell Mol Biol Res. 1993;39(5):463-82.

The 17 kDa HBx protein encoded by hepatitis B virus interacts with the activation
domains of Oct-1, and functions as a coactivator in the activation and repression
of a human U6 promoter.

Antunovic J(1), Lemieux N, Cromlish JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

The hepatitis B virus 17 kDa x gene product expressed in bacteria transactivates 
a human U6 promoter three- to eightfold in an ATP-independent manner in HeLa cell
NTP-depleted extracts containing preassembled transcription preinitiation
complexes. However, if added prior to assembly, HBx squelches the promoter. Both 
the HBx dependent "squelching" of U6 transcription observed in transient
transfection analysis, and the transactivation observed in vitro is dependent on 
the presence of an upstream octamer element. HBx is incorporated via
protein-protein interactions into DNA complexes containing the activation domains
of Oct-1, and into a stable U6 preinitiation complex. This is consistent with a
role as a coactivator interacting with the basal transcription machinery. We
propose that the HBx dependent transactivation and repression of U6 transcription
occurs by changes in the transcription factor limiting initiation, and propose
that HBx may have a dual role in the regulation of transcription in vivo.

PMID: 8173591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 1993;58:167-78.

Combinatorial control of transcription: the herpes simplex virus VP16-induced
complex.

Wilson AC(1), Cleary MA, Lai JS, LaMarco K, Peterson MG, Herr W.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, New York 11724.

PMID: 7956027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1992 Nov 1;298(2):630-9.

Characterization of a high affinity octamer transcription factor binding site in 
the human lipoprotein lipase promoter.

Currie RA(1), Eckel RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver 
80262.

A high affinity octamer transcription factor (OTF-1) binding site has been
identified and characterized at position--46 base pairs (bp) in the proximal
human lipoprotein lipase (LPL) promoter. The affinity of the LPL OTF-1 binding
site was approximately 15-fold greater than a consensus octamer sequence,
ATTTGCAT, present at position--66 bp in the mouse Vk T1 promoter, and
approximately 5-fold greater than the OTF-1 site present at position--49 bp in
the human histone H2B promoter. Diethylpyrocarbonate interference assays have
identified both 5' and 3' adenine nucleotides, which flank the core LPL ATTTGCAT 
sequence and interfere with OTF-1 binding when chemically modified. Introduction 
of mutations in either 5' or 3' flanking AT-rich sequences lowered the affinity
of OTF-1 binding below the level observed with the wild-type LPL octamer
oligomer. A double mutation in both flanking AT regions, however, greatly reduced
the affinity of this site to levels similar to that observed with the mouse Vk T1
OTF site. An additional nuclear transcription factor, NF-Y, has been shown to
bind to a functional CCAAT box motif located at -65 bp in the LPL promoter using 
specific alpha-NF-Y antisera. The observation of high affinity OTF-1 and NF-Y
binding sites in a region of the proximal LPL promoter which is necessary for
high levels of LPL transcription suggests that these sites with their associated 
proteins play important functional roles in the transcriptional activation of the
LPL promoter during adipocyte differentiation.

PMID: 1416992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Genes Dev. 1992 Nov;6(11):2058-65.

A single amino acid exchange transfers VP16-induced positive control from the
Oct-1 to the Oct-2 homeo domain.

Lai JS(1), Cleary MA, Herr W.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, New York 11724.

Erratum in
    Genes Dev 1992 Dec;6(12B):2663.

The selective association of the herpesvirus trans-activator VP16 with the human 
Oct-1 homeo domain is a model for differential positive transcriptional control
by homeo domains. VP16 discriminates between the closely related homeo domains of
Oct-1 and Oct-2 by distinguishing among their seven amino-acid differences; these
differences lie on the surface that is thought to be accessible when the homeo
domain is bound to DNA. Only two of these seven differences are recognized by
VP16, one in each of the first two alpha-helices of the tri-alpha-helical homeo
domain. The major determinant for selective association with VP16 in vitro and
VP16-induced positive control in vivo is a single glutamic acid residue at
position 22 in the first alpha-helix of the Oct-1 homeo domain, but the acidic
properties of this residue are not critical for association with VP16 in vitro or
in vivo, because it can be replaced by glutamine with little or no deleterious
effect. Mere replacement of the single corresponding alanine residue in the Oct-2
homeo domain with the key glutamic acid residue is sufficient to confer on the
Oct-2 homeo domain the ability to associate with VP16 in vitro and respond to
VP16-induced positive control in vivo. Thus, the specificity of homeo domain
positive control can be conferred by a single amino acid difference.

PMID: 1358756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Cell. 1992 Oct 16;71(2):231-41.

A novel B cell-derived coactivator potentiates the activation of immunoglobulin
promoters by octamer-binding transcription factors.

Luo Y(1), Fujii H, Gerster T, Roeder RG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Moelcular Biology, Rockefeller University, New 
York, New York 10021.

A novel B cell-restricted activity, required for high levels of
octamer/Oct-dependent transcription from an immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH)
promoter, was detected in an in vitro system consisting of HeLa cell-derived
extracts complemented with fractionated B cell nuclear proteins. The factor
responsible for this activity was designated Oct coactivator from B cells
(OCA-B). OCA-B stimulates the transcription from an IgH promoter in conjunction
with either Oct-1 or Oct-2 but shows no significant effect on the
octamer/Oct-dependent transcription of the ubiquitously expressed histone H2B
promoter and the transcription of USF- and Sp1-regulated promoters. Taken
together, our results suggest that OCA-B is a tissue-, promoter-, and
factor-specific coactivator and that OCA-B may be a major determinant for B
cell-specific activation of immunoglobulin promoters. In light of the evidence
showing physical and functional interactions between Oct factors and OCA-B, we
propose a mechanism of action for OCA-B and discuss the implications of OCA-B for
the transcriptional regulation of other tissue-specific promoters.

PMID: 1423591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Anal Biochem. 1992 Oct;206(1):189-94.

Determination of transcription factor isoelectric point by two-dimensional native
isoelectric focusing and electrophoretic mobility shift analysis.

Bush E(1), Currie RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver 
80262.

A rapid, sensitive, and inexpensive assay is described for the determination of
isoelectric points of native transcription factors derived from cell nuclei. This
assay depends on a transcription factors' ability to bind DNA with high
specificity and obviates the need for specific antisera or additional detection
methods in identifying a particular protein following isoelectric focusing. This 
method has been applied to two ubiquitous proteins, the octamer transcription
factor, Oct-1, and the multisubunit CCAAT box factor, NF-Y. Isoelectric points
have been determined under native conditions using conventional isoelectric
focusing in the first dimension, followed by binding to a specific
oligonucleotide DNA probe, and separation of specific DNA/protein complexes from 
unbound DNA in the second dimension using native polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis. Oct-1 from HeLa cell nuclei was shown to have a pI of 9.6, while
NF-Y was shown to have a pI of 4.5. This method is applicable to any
transcription factor which binds DNA specifically and may be used to identify
changes in surface charge characteristics which occur as a result of alternative 
splicing events and/or following transcription factor post-translational
modification(s).

PMID: 1456433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992 Aug 15;89(16):7601-5.

In vivo footprint analysis of the HLA-DRA gene promoter: cell-specific
interaction at the octamer site and up-regulation of X box binding by interferon 
gamma.

Wright KL(1), Ting JP.

Author information: 
(1)University of North Carolina Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, Chapel
Hill.

Analysis of the major histocompatibility complex class II gene promoter DRA has
previously identified at least five cis-acting regions required for maximal
expression. We have examined the DRA promoter for protein-DNA interactions in the
intact cell, which may mediate transcriptional activation. Using in vivo genomic 
footprinting we identified interactions in B-cell lines at the octamer site and
the Y, X1, and X2 boxes. Class II antigen expressing T-cell lines maintained
contacts identical to B-cell lines, while class II-negative T-cell lines
exhibited no interactions. In lymphoid cell lines, the octamer site is occupied
and required for maximal expression. This is most likely due to the presence of
the lymphoid-specific OTF-2 factor. In contrast, the class II-positive
nonlymphoid glioblastoma cell line does not exhibit interactions at the octamer
site despite the presence of the ubiquitous OTF-1 factor and an open binding
site. Thus, the DRA promoter discriminates against OTF-1 activation at the level 
of DNA binding in the glioblastoma line. Interferon gamma induces class II
expression in this glioblastoma cell line and, in parallel, up-regulates X1 and
X2 box protein-DNA interactions, while all other interactions remain unchanged.
These results suggest that interferon gamma functions on a poised promoter by
altering weak, nonproductive interactions at the X boxes to strong interactions. 
These findings provide direct in vivo evidence to strongly suggest that the
modulation of X1 and X2 interactions is an important constituent of the
interferon gamma induction pathway.

PMCID: PMC49758
PMID: 1502171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Nature. 1992 Aug 13;358(6387):597-9.

Candidate proto-oncogene bcl-3 encodes a subunit-specific inhibitor of
transcription factor NF-kappa B.

Wulczyn FG(1), Naumann M, Scheidereit C.

Author information: 
(1)Otto Warburg Laboratorium, Max Planck Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Berlin,
Germany.

The NF-kappa B subunits p50 and p65 and the product of the rel proto-oncogene are
members of a growing class of transcription factors with a unique DNA-binding and
dimerization domain. Nuclear transfer of each of these factors is controlled by
cytoplasmic inhibitors, and regulated by specific stimuli. The inhibitors I kappa
B-alpha and -beta and pp40 recognize either p65 or the c-rel protein. We show
here that the proto-oncogene bcl-3, believed to be involved in certain human
B-cell leukaemias, encodes a protein that functions as an I kappa B-like molecule
for native NF-kappa B but is specific for the p50 subunit. The ankyrin repeat
domain of the bcl-3 product is shown to mediate complex formation with NF-kappa B
dimers by contracting the conserved dimerization domain of NF-kappa B.

PMID: 1501714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Biochem Soc Trans. 1992 Aug;20(3):627-31.

POU family transcription factors in sensory neurons.

Latchman DS(1), Dent CL, Lillycrop KA, Wood JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University College and Middlesex School of
Medicine, London, U.K.

PMID: 1426602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Jul;12(7):3247-61.

Oct-1 and Oct-2 potentiate functional interactions of a transcription factor with
the proximal sequence element of small nuclear RNA genes.

Murphy S(1), Yoon JB, Gerster T, Roeder RG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Rockefeller University, New 
York, New York 10021.

The promoters of both RNA polymerase II- and RNA polymerase III-transcribed small
nuclear RNA (snRNA) genes contain an essential and highly conserved proximal
sequence element (PSE) approximately 55 bp upstream from the transcription start 
site. In addition, the upstream enhancers of all snRNA genes contain binding
sites for octamer-binding transcription factors (Octs), and functional studies
have indicated that the PSE and octamer elements work cooperatively. The present 
study has identified and characterized a novel transcription factor (designated
PTF) which specifically binds to the PSE sequence of both RNA polymerase II- and 
RNA polymerase III-transcribed snRNA genes. PTF binding is markedly potentiated
by Oct binding to an adjacent octamer site. This potentiation is effected by
Oct-1, Oct-2, or the conserved POU domain of these factors. In agreement with
these results and despite the independent binding of Octs to the promoter, PTF
and Oct-1 enhance transcription from the 7SK promoter in an interdependent
manner. Moreover, the POU domain of Oct-1 is sufficient for significant in vitro 
activity in the presence of PTF. These results suggest that essential activation 
domains reside in PTF and that the potentiation of PTF binding by Octs plays a
key role in the function of octamer-containing snRNA gene enhancers.

PMCID: PMC364539
PMID: 1535687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. J Immunol. 1992 Jun 1;148(11):3610-7.

Identification of sites for distinct DNA binding proteins including Oct-1 and
Oct-2 in the Cr2 gene.

Christensen SM(1), Martin BK, Tan SS, Weis JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City
84132.

The murine Cr2 gene produces two distinct products in a variety of murine cell
types. Both of these transcripts appear to initiate from the same position within
the gene but vary from one another via an alternative splicing event within the
coding exons. An analysis of those gene sequences that might control the cell
specific expression of the Cr2 gene has identified a region of Cr2 5' of the
transcription start site that is conserved in both the murine Cr2 and human CR2
genes. When this region was examined using the gel shift assay with nuclear
extracts from cells expressing Cr2 (B cells) and those that do not (T cells and
fibroblasts), at least four distinct proteins were identified that bound to at
least three distinct sites. The DNA sequence recognized by two of these proteins 
is the octamer sequence recognized by a family of transcriptional regulators
including the B cell specific Oct-2 protein. During an acute bacterial infection,
the levels of Oct-2 and Cr2 mRNA are both depressed. This suggests that the Oct-2
protein directly controls the transcriptional activity of the Cr2 gene and that
during such an infection, the levels of Ag receptors on B cells (Ig and
complement receptors) are diminished.

PMID: 1534100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Nucleic Acids Res. 1992 Mar 25;20(6):1419.

The nucleotide sequence of mouse OCT-1 cDNA.

Stepchenko AG(1).

Author information: 
(1)V.A. Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences,
Moscow.

PMCID: PMC312192
PMID: 1561098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Feb;12(2):542-51.

The Oct-1 POU domain mediates interactions between Oct-1 and other POU proteins.

Verrijzer CP(1), van Oosterhout JA, van der Vliet PC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Physiological Chemistry, University of Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

The POU domain is the conserved DNA binding domain of a family of gene regulatory
proteins. It consists of a POU-specific domain and a POU homeodomain, connected
by a variable linker region. Oct-1 is a ubiquitously expressed POU domain
transcription factor. It binds to the canonical octamer sequence (ATGCAAAT) as a 
monomer. Here we show by chemical cross-linking and protein affinity
chromatography that the Oct-1 POU domain monomers can interact in solution. This 
association requires both the POU homeodomain and the POU-specific domain. The
interaction is transient in solution and can be stabilized by binding to the
heptamer-octamer sequence in the immunoglobulin heavy-chain promoter. This
correlates with cooperative DNA binding to this site. POU proteins from different
subclasses, including Oct-1, Oct-2A, Oct-6, and a chimeric Oct-1 protein
containing the Pit-1 POU domain, can bind cooperatively to a double binding site 
and form a heteromeric complex.

PMCID: PMC364225
PMID: 1346336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Intervirology. 1992;34(2):74-85.

A sequence-specific DNA-binding protein recognising a GA-rich element cooperates 
with Oct-1 at the herpes simplex virus type 1 IE3 promoter.

Bailey AC(1), Thompson R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, University of Glasgow, UK.

Herpes simplex virus immediate early (IE) gene transcription is regulated via the
upstream TAATGARAT motif and involves the recruitment of the ubiquitous
octamer-binding protein Oct-1 and a component of the virion Vmw65 into a
multiprotein complex termed the immediate early complex (IEC). An upstream
GA-rich element (GA-RE) has been postulated to mediate a response to Vmw65
independent of TAATGARAT. We have studied IEC formation in gel shift assays using
DNA fragments containing these sequence elements from the HSV-1 IE gene 3
promoter in different combinations. The results show that a factor which
footprints to the GA-RE cooperates with Oct-1 to increase IEC levels on a
TAATGARAT motif located 5 bp 5' to the GA-RE. The factor alone is unable to
promote IEC formation. We were unable to demonstrate any effect of this factor on
a TAATGARAT motif located 16 bp from the GA-RE, suggesting that this effect is
not universal for all TAATGARAT motifs.

PMID: 1338062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Gene. 1991 Dec 30;109(2):297-301.

Transcription factor requirements for U2 snRNA-encoding gene activation in B
lymphoid cells.

Janson L(1), Pettersson U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Uppsala University, Sweden.

Transcription of a human U2 small nuclear RNA(snRNA)-encoding gene in HeLa cells 
requires a distal enhancer element, which is composed of one octamer motif (Oct) 
and three Sp 1-binding sites. To study the transcription factor requirement in
B-cells, different U2 enhancer constructions were transfected into the lymphoid
cell line, BJA-B. The results showed that the activation of U2 snRNA
transcription in B-cells also requires an enhancer comprising both the Oct and at
least one Sp 1-binding site. Deletion of all the Sp 1-binding sites from the
enhancer reduces transcription by 80-90% in HeLa, as well as in BJA-B cells,
whereas the removal of the octamer-binding site reduces transcription to levels
below detection in both cell types. Enhancers containing a single Oct have,
nevertheless, the capacity to partially activate U2 snRNA transcription in both
HeLa cells, in which only OTF-1 is expressed, and in BJA-B cells in which OTF-2
is the predominantly expressed octamer-binding factor. The most likely
interpretation of our results is that both the ubiquitous transcription factor,
OTF-1, and the B-cell-specific transcription factor, OTF-2, can activate U2 snRNA
transcription. The results also revealed a similar functional cooperation between
the transcription factors which bind to the Oct and the adjacent Sp 1-binding
site in BJA-B cells, as has been observed in HeLa cells, since a template which
contains a weak binding site for OTFs expresses wild-type levels of U2 snRNA in
both cell types when the weak octamer-binding site is combined with a Sp
1-binding site.

PMID: 1765275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Dec 25;19(24):6963.

An STS in the human oct-1 gene located on chromosome 1.

Sturm RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Queensland,
Australia.

PMCID: PMC329346
PMID: 1762932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Science. 1991 Dec 20;254(5039):1814-6.

Mitotic phosphorylation of the Oct-1 homeodomain and regulation of Oct-1 DNA
binding activity.

Segil N(1), Roberts SB, Heintz N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Rockefeller 
University, New York, NY 10021.

Oct-1 is a transcription factor involved in the cell cycle regulation of histone 
H2B gene transcription and in the transcription of other cellular housekeeping
genes. Oct-1 is hyperphosphorylated as cells enter mitosis, and mitosis-specific 
phosphorylation is reversed as cells exit mitosis. A mitosis-specific
phosphorylation site in the homeodomain of Oct-1 was phosphorylated in vitro by
protein kinase A. Phosphorylation of this site correlated with inhibition of
Oct-1 DNA binding activity in vivo and in vitro. The inhibition of Oct-1 DNA
binding during mitosis suggests a mechanism by which the general inhibition of
transcription during mitosis might occur.

PMID: 1684878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Mol Cell Biol. 1991 Dec;11(12):5825-31.

Histone gene transcription factor binding in extracts of normal human cells.

La Bella F(1), Heintz N.

Author information: 
(1)Rockefeller University, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, New York, New York
10021-6399.

Transcriptional regulation of mammalian histone genes during S phase is achieved 
through activation of specific factors which interact with subtype-specific
histone gene promoter sequences. It has previously been shown that in HeLa cells 
this induction is not mediated by obligatory changes in the DNA binding activity 
of histone gene transcription factors as cells progress through the cell cycle.
Recently, it has been reported that the DNA binding properties of a putative
histone gene transcription factor may be quite different in normal and
transformed cells (J. Holthuis, T. A. Owen, A. J. van Wijnen, K. L. Wright, A.
Ramsey-Ewing, M. B. Kennedy, R. Carter, S. C. Cosenza, K. J. Soprano, J. B. Lian,
J. L. Stein, and G. S. Stein, Science 247:1454-1457, 1990). To determine whether 
the properties of well-characterized histone gene transcription factors are
altered in transformed versus normal cells, we have examined the DNA binding
activity of human histone transcription factors during the WI38 (a primary line
of normal human fetal lung fibroblasts) cell cycle. The results demonstrate that 
the properties of Oct1, H4TF1, and H4TF2 are similar in WI38 and HeLa cells and
that their DNA binding activities are constitutive during interphase of both
normal and transformed cell lines. Although it remains possible that these
factors are directly or indirectly perturbed as a result of cellular
transformation, it appears unlikely that transformation results in gross changes 
in DNA binding activity as cells progress toward division.

PMCID: PMC361727
PMID: 1944265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. J Biol Chem. 1991 Nov 5;266(31):20888-92.

Interferon-alpha treatment of Daudi cells down-regulates the octamer binding
transcription/DNA replication factors Oct-1 and Oct-2.

Dent CL(1), Lillycrop KA, Bybee A, Latchman DS, Thomas NS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University College and Middlesex School of
Medicine, London, United Kingdom.

Treatment of Daudi cells with alpha-interferon (alpha-IFN) results in a
considerable decrease in the levels of the octamer-binding DNA
replication/transcription factors Oct-1 and Oct-2 and specifically inhibits gene 
expression by octamer-containing promoters. The inhibitory effect on
octamer-binding proteins also occurs after culturing cells with phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate but it does not occur following alpha-IFN treatment of an
alpha-IFN-resistant variant of the Daudi cell line or of HeLa cells. We discuss
the potential role of the decreased levels of octamer-binding proteins in the
inhibition of cell proliferation.

PMID: 1939139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Oct 25;19(20):5725-30.

A novel nuclear inhibitor I-92 regulates DNA binding activity of octamer binding 
protein p92 during the cell cycle.

Weitz J(1), Kopun M, Stoehr M, Napierski I, Royer HD.

Author information: 
(1)Angewandte Tumorvirologie, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Heidelberg, FRG.

Nuclear DNA binding protein p92 is a sequence specific octamer binding protein
with identical molecular weight as the ubiquitous octamer binding protein Oct-1. 
It binds to octamer related sequences from the enhancer of human papillomavirus
type 18. The activity and intracellular distribution of p92 is regulated by
extracellular signals. In serum starved Hela-fibroblast hybrid cells p92 is
localized to the cytosol. Serum stimulation leads to nuclear import of p92. In
fractions of asynchronously growing cells, which were separated according to cell
cycle phases into G1, S, and G2 populations by centrifugal elutriation, p92 DNA
binding is confined to S phase. In binding site blots however, p92 DNA binding
activity is also present in G1 and G2. In G1 and G2 DNA binding activity of p92
is masked by a novel nuclear inhibitor I-92. The cyclic association of p92 with
its inhibitor I-92 provides a new mechanism of regulating S phase dependent
activity of a sequence specific DNA binding protein.

PMCID: PMC328982
PMID: 1945850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Science. 1991 Oct 25;254(5031):558-62.

Activation of early gene expression in T lymphocytes by Oct-1 and an inducible
protein, OAP40.

Ullman KS(1), Flanagan WM, Edwards CA, Crabtree GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University, CA 94305.

After antigenic stimulation of T lymphocytes, genes essential for proliferation
and immune function, such as the interleukin-2 (IL-2) gene, are transcriptionally
activated. In both transient transfections and T lymphocyte-specific in vitro
transcription, the homeodomain-containing protein Oct-1 participated in the
inducible regulation of transcription of the IL-2 gene. Oct-1 functioned in this 
context with a 40-kilodalton protein called Oct-1-associated protein (OAP40). In 
addition to interacting specifically with DNA, OAP40 reduced the rate of
dissociation of Oct-1 from its cognate DNA-binding site, suggesting that a direct
interaction exists between Oct-1 and OAP40.

PMID: 1683003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Cell Growth Differ. 1991 Oct;2(10):519-24.

A melanoma octamer binding protein is responsive to differentiating agents.

Sturm RA(1), Bisshop F, Takahashi H, Parsons PG.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Queensland,
Australia.

Analysis of human melanocytes and melanoma cell lines for proteins interacting
with the octamer control sequence (ATGCAAAT) has revealed two distinct melanoma
octamer binding proteins, Oct-M1 and Oct-M2. The latter was restricted to cell
lines derived from tumor metastases. The level of Oct-M1 activity in a pigmented 
melanoma line was enhanced in comparison to the general octamer binding protein
Oct-1 when cells were cultured in the presence of the depigmenting agent
dithiothreitol and conversely was reduced by the differentiating and pigment
inducing agents butyric acid and dimethyl sulfoxide.

PMID: 1751407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Cell Growth Differ. 1991 Oct;2(10):503-10.

A developmentally regulated octamer-binding activity in embryonal carcinoma cells
which represses beta-interferon expression.

Haggarty A(1), Camato R, Paterno G, Cohen L, Hiscott J, Skup D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut du Cancer de Montréal, Quebec, Canada.

We have previously described ECIF-1, a DNA-binding factor present in nuclear
extracts of murine embryonal carcinoma cells which specifically recognizes a
region within the human beta-interferon promoter. We show that the promoter
region located between -112 and -93 is sufficient for this binding activity,
which is not due to binding of interferon-regulatory factor 1 or 2. By mutational
analysis of the ECIF-1 site, it was determined that the central nucleotides which
are critical for binding contain an octameric motif: ATTTACAT. The binding
activity of ECIF-1 with its cognate site within the beta-interferon promoter
decreases upon differentiation concurrently with the onset of interferon
inducibility. Furthermore, by using an in vitro transcription assay with deleted 
promoter elements of the beta-interferon gene, we show that undifferentiated P19 
nuclear extracts contain a repressing activity which depends on the presence of
the ECIF-1 site. This repression is not observed using nuclear extracts from
differentiated P19 cells. Comparison of the binding activity of this octamer site
with others previously shown to be active in embryonal carcinoma cells reveals
similarities and differences in the spectrum of proteins binding there.

PMID: 1661132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. J Virol. 1991 Oct;65(10):5613-8.

Repression of the human papillomavirus type 18 enhancer by the cellular
transcription factor Oct-1.

Hoppe-Seyler F(1), Butz K, zur Hausen H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Virusforschung, Deutsches Krebforschungszentrum, Heidelberg,
Germany.

The role of cellular factors involved in the transcriptional regulation of the
cancer-associated human papillomavirus type 18 (HPV18) is yet poorly understood. 
The presence of an Oct-1-binding site within the HPV18 upstream regulatory region
led us to investigate the influence of Oct-1 on viral transcription.
Cotransfection of Oct-1 expression plasmids together with luciferase reporter
constructs containing HPV18 regulatory sequences indicated that Oct-1 can
transcriptionally repress the HPV18 upstream regulatory region. In contrast,
heterologous control regions were not affected by Oct-1. HPV18 cis elements that 
can be repressed by Oct-1 mapped to a 135-bp subregion of the viral constitutive 
enhancer. Analysis of an Oct-1 mutant defective in DNA binding suggested that
HPV18 down-modulation does not require direct binding of Oct-1 to DNA. These
results make Oct-1 a candidate factor involved in the intracellular surveillance 
of HPV18 transcription and support the notion of a host cell mechanism that can
specifically repress HPV E6-E7 transforming gene expression.

PMCID: PMC249079
PMID: 1654457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Immunology. 1991 Sep;74(1):37-43.

Differentiation of human B-cell malignant lymphomas is independent of the octamer
lymphoid specific binding factor (Oct-2).

Kossakowska AE(1), Urbanski SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Calgary and Foothills Hospital,
Alberta, Canada.

We have shown previously that the presence and action of immunoglobulin gene
promoter specific trans-acting factors correlates with the stages of
'differentiation' of human lymphoid neoplasms. The regulatory sequence described 
by us was located upstream of the octamer motif which is known to bind lymphoid
specific trans-acting factor Oct-2. In the present study we attempted to
establish if the Oct-2 factor was present in fresh human tissue of B-cell origin 
and if the levels of Oct-2 also correlated with the stages of human lymphoid
differentiation. We applied DNA mobility shift assay using the same cases which
we utilized in our previous work. We compared the levels of Oct-2 with the levels
of ubiquitous octamer binding factor Oct-1. Oct-2 was present in all lymphoid
cells of B-cell origin (from fresh surgical specimens and in long-term tissue
cultured cells) with the exception of a pre-B-cell line NALM-6. The relative
abundance of Oct-2 varied, however, and the ratio of Oct-2 to Oct-1 was variable 
in different types of B cells. This phenomenon did not correlate with the stages 
of differentiation of human lymphoid neoplasms. There was also no correlation
between the expression of Oct-2 and levels of immunoglobulin-specific messenger
RNAs. These findings indicate that the control of, immunoglobulin expression in
relation to the differentiation of human B-cell neoplasms requires factors other 
than Oct-2.

PMCID: PMC1384668
PMID: 1937571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Science. 1991 Aug 30;253(5023):1022-6.

Differential phosphorylation of the transcription factor Oct1 during the cell
cycle.

Roberts SB(1), Segil N, Heintz N.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Rockefeller 
University, New York, NY 10021.

Orderly progression through the somatic cell division cycle is accompanied by
phase-specific transcription of a variety of different genes. During S phase,
transcription of mammalian histone H2B genes requires a specific promoter element
and its cognate transcription factor Oct1 (OTF1). A possible mechanism for
regulating histone H2B transcription during the cell cycle is direct modulation
of Oct1 activity by phase-specific posttranslational modifications. Analysis of
Oct1 during progression through the cell cycle revealed a complex temporal
program of phosphorylation. A p34cdc2-related protein kinase that is active
during mitosis may be responsible for one mitotic phosphorylation of Oct1.
However, the temporally controlled appearance of Oct1 phosphopeptides suggests
the involvement of multiple kinases and phosphatases. These results support the
idea that cell cycle-regulated transcription factors may be direct substrates for
phase-specific regulatory enzymes.

PMID: 1887216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Aug 25;19(16):4531-5.

The constitutively expressed octamer binding protein OTF-1 and a novel octamer
binding protein expressed specifically in cervical cells bind to an
octamer-related sequence in the human papillomavirus 16 enhancer.

Dent CL(1), McIndoe GA, Latchman DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University College and Middlesex School of
Medicine, London, UK.

A novel octamer binding protein expressed specifically in cervical cells but not 
in other cell types has been identified. This protein differs in size and
sequence specificity from the constitutively expressed octamer binding protein
OTF-1. In particular it binds with higher affinity to a sequence in the human
papillomavirus 16 (HPV) upstream regulatory region which has a seven out of eight
base pair match compared to the consensus octamer motif. This is the first
example of a tissue specific protein which has been observed to bind to the
papillomavirus enhancer. The possible role of this protein in producing the
observed tissue specific activity of the enhancer and in cervical carcinogenesis 
induced by HPV is discussed.

PMCID: PMC328645
PMID: 1653419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Biochem J. 1991 Aug 1;277 ( Pt 3):719-22.

Differential expression of the mouse U1a and U1b SnRNA genes is not dependent on 
sequence differences in the octamer motif.

Lea I(1), Moore HD, Latchman DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University College and Middlesex School of
Medicine, London, U.K.

The mouse U1b SnRNA gene is expressed in only a limited range of cell types,
whereas the U1a SnRNA gene is expressed in all cells. These two genes differ in
the sequence of the octamer motif, which plays a critical role in SnRNA gene
regulation. We show that the U1b octamer binds the octamer-binding protein Oct-1 
with higher affinity than does the U1a octamer in both U1b-expressing and
-non-expressing cell lines and tissues. Moreover, the U1b octamer can direct a
higher level of gene expression than the U1a octamer when linked to a
heterologous promoter and introduced into a non-U1b-expressing cell line. Hence
the tissue-specific expression of the U1b gene is not determined by the failure
of its octamer motif to bind Oct-1 or the weak affinity of this binding.

PMCID: PMC1151303
PMID: 1872807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. EMBO J. 1991 Aug;10(8):2291-6.

Both Oct-1 and Oct-2A contain domains which can activate the ubiquitously
expressed U2 snRNA genes.

Yang J(1), Müller-Immerglück MM, Seipel K, Janson L, Westin G, Schaffner W,
Pettersson U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Uppsala University, Sweden.

The U2 snRNA genes, which are transcribed by RNA polymerase II at high levels in 
all tissues examined, require both a distal and a proximal sequence element for
efficient expression. The distal sequence element which has many properties in
common with transcriptional enhancers contains, in addition to Sp1 binding sites,
an octamer binding site which mediates activation through interactions with the
ubiquitous transcription factor Oct-1. In the present study we have attempted to 
answer the question whether Oct-1 contains a unique activating domain which is
required for activation of snRNA genes or whether ubiquitously expressed and
lymphoid specific octamer binding factors both have the capacity to activate
snRNA transcription. Our results show that in the presence of Oct-1,
overexpression of Oct-2A in HeLa or COS1 cells neither inhibits nor stimulates
transcription of U2 constructions which contain octamer binding sites with or
without an adjacent Sp1 binding site. Moreover, an Oct-2A--GAL4 fusion protein in
which the DNA binding domain of Oct-2A was substituted for by the one of the
yeast transcription activator GAL4 activates transcription of a human U2 snRNA
gene in which the octamer binding site was replaced by a GAL4 binding site. From 
the results it is concluded that both Oct-1 and Oct-2A contain domains which can 
activate the ubiquitously expressed U2 snRNA genes.

PMCID: PMC452919
PMID: 1829677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. J Virol. 1991 Aug;65(8):4142-52.

Induction of cellular transcription factors in trigeminal ganglia of mice by
corneal scarification, herpes simplex virus type 1 infection, and explantation of
trigeminal ganglia.

Valyi-Nagy T(1), Deshmane S, Dillner A, Fraser NW.

Author information: 
(1)Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-4268.

In a mouse model for herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) latency in which the
virus was inoculated via the eye after corneal scarification, HSV-1 replicated in
corneal epithelial cells and infected the nerve cell endings. HSV-1 reached the
trigeminal ganglia by fast axonal transport between 2 and 10 days postinfection
(p.i.) and established a latent infection in neuronal cells or replicated and
spread to nonneuronal cells. By using in situ hybridization, we showed that
cellular transcription factors are stimulated by HSV-1 infection in trigeminal
ganglia. This stimulation is biphasic, peaking at 1 and 3 to 4 days p.i. The
first peak involves c-jun and oct-1 expression in neurons, and the second
involves c-jun, c-fos, and oct-1 expression in neurons and nonneuronal cells.
Corneal scarification, alone or followed by infection with UV-inactivated HSV-1, 
induced monophasic c-jun and oct-1 expression in some neurons of the trigeminal
ganglia, with a peak at 1 day p.i. Corneal infection without prior scarification 
induced c-jun, c-fos, and oct-1 expression in some neuronal and nonneuronal cells
of the trigeminal ganglia 2 to 9 days p.i. Explanation of ganglia from latently
infected animals resulted in reactivation of the latent virus. Independently of
the presence of latent HSV-1 in explanted ganglia, expression of c-fos, c-jun,
and oct-1 was induced first in nonneuronal cells, peaking 6 to 10 h
postexplantation, and then in neuronal cells, with a peak at 24 h after
explantation when expression of viral replicative genes was first detectable.
Since ocular HSV-1 infection, corneal scarification, and explantation of
trigeminal ganglia all resulted in induction of expression of cellular
transcription factors in ganglia, these factors may play a critical role in the
permissiveness of cells for HSV-1 replication during acute infection, latency,
and reactivation.

PMCID: PMC248848
PMID: 1649322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Jul 11;19(13):3744.

Cloning and sequencing of the rat Oct-1 POU box.

Lillycrop KA(1), Latchman DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University College and Middlesex School of
Medicine, London, UK.

PMCID: PMC328409
PMID: 1677182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Genomics. 1991 Jun;10(2):313-26.

Chromosomal location of the octamer transcription factors, Otf-1, Otf-2, and
Otf-3, defines multiple Otf-3-related sequences dispersed in the mouse genome.

Siracusa LD(1), Rosner MH, Vigano MA, Gilbert DJ, Staudt LM, Copeland NG, Jenkins
NA.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian Genetics Laboratory, NCI-Frederick Cancer Research and Development
Center, Maryland 21702.

Chromosomal locations have been assigned for the octamer transcription factor,
Otf, gene family (previously named the octamer-binding protein, Oct, gene family)
using an interspecific backcross of [(C57BL/6J x Mus spretus)F1 x C57BL/6J] mice 
and the BXH recombinant inbred strains. Molecular probes for Otf-1 and Otf-2
recognized single loci on mouse chromosomes 1 and 7, respectively, whereas probes
for Otf-3 recognized a minimum of eight independently segregating loci
(designated Otf-3a through Otf-3h). Members of the Otf-3 family mapped to mouse
chromosomes 1, 2, 3, 6, 14, 17, and the X chromosome, indicating that the Otf
family has become widely dispersed during evolution. Several Otf loci mapped near
developmental mutations, raising the possibility that these mutations result from
defects in Otf family members.

PMID: 1676977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Virology. 1991 May;182(1):239-49.

Multiple sets of adjacent mu E1 and oct-1 binding sites upstream of the
pseudorabies virus immediate-early gene promoter.

Kozmík Z(1), Arnold L, Paces V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Genetics, Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences, Prague.

Binding of cellular proteins to specific motifs in the promoter region of the
immediate-early gene of pseudorabies virus was studied. The region was dissected 
into several portions that were used with HeLa cell nuclear proteins in mobility 
shift assays, DNase I footprinting, and a methylation interference assay. Close
to the transcription start site (nucleotide + 1) are a TATA-box (-26 to -29), an 
Sp 1-binding motif (GGGGCGGGC) (-45 to -54), a CCAAT motif (-66 to -70), and,
further upstream, an NF-microE1-binding site (AAGATGGC) (-161 to -168). Binding
of a protein to the Sp1 site was demonstrated. Competition experiments show that 
the CCAAT motif might bind the NF-microE1 factor, rather than any of the known
CCAAT-specific factors. Four domains were identified further upstream
(nucleotides -200 to -500) from this promoter, each of which contained closely
associated motifs where cellular transcription factors NF-microE1 and oct-1 could
bind. These domains comprise what we call the upstream element. The orientation
of the four NF-microE1 motifs in the upstream element is opposite to the
orientation of the two NF-microE1 motifs located closer to the transcription
start site. Transient expression of reporter genes was used to study the activity
of the upstream element after transfection into 3T3 and HeLa cells. The upstream 
element was necessary for efficient expression of the pseudorabies virus
immediate-early gene and increased somewhat the efficiency of the herpes simplex 
virus thymidine kinase promoter.

PMID: 1850904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Biochemistry. 1991 Mar 19;30(11):2961-7.

Transcription factor OTF-1 interacts with two distinct DNA elements in the A
gamma-globin gene promoter.

Ponce E(1), Lloyd JA, Pierani A, Roeder RG, Lingrel JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Biochemistry, and Microbiology, University
of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Ohio 45267-0524.

A DNA region (site II) in the promoter of the human A gamma-globin gene (-182 to 
-168) is involved in transcriptional regulation. At least two nuclear proteins
bind to this region: the erythroid-specific factor NF-E1/GF-1 and another factor 
present in many cell lines. In the present study, we demonstrate that the
ubiquitous factor binding to site II has immunological identity with the octamer 
transcription factor OTF-1, which has been implicated in the regulation of
expression of genes such as histone H2b and small nuclear RNA. In addition, we
show that OTF-1 binds to site I (-291 to -267), a purine-rich region upstream of 
site II. Interestingly, OTF-1 binds to sites I and II with equal affinity. This
was unexpected since the 14 bp site I binding site AAGAATAAATTAGA (-291 to -278),
determined by methylation interference, does not show obvious similarities to the
canonical octamer binding site for OTF-1 in site II (ATGCAAAT). Interaction of
OTF-1 with functionally active binding sites in the gamma-globin promoter
suggests that this factor has a role in gamma-globin transcription.

PMID: 2007132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Mol Cell Biol. 1991 Mar;11(3):1353-9.

The ubiquitous transcription factor Oct-1 and the liver-specific factor HNF-1 are
both required to activate transcription of a hepatitis B virus promoter.

Zhou DX(1), Yen TS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California School of Medicine, San
Francisco 94143-0506.

The liver-specific transcription factor HNF-1 activates transcription of several 
mammalian hepatocyte-specific genes. The hepatitis B virus preS1 promoter shows
hepatocyte specificity, which has been ascribed to binding of HNF-1 to a cognate 
DNA sequence upstream of the TATA box. We show here that there is an adjacent
site that binds the ubiquitous transcription factor Oct-1. Both the Oct-1 and
HNF-1 sites are necessary for liver-specific transcription of the preS1 promoter,
but neither site alone activates transcription. The Oct-1 site is also necessary 
for activation of the preS1 promoter in HeLa cells, expressing transfected HNF-1.
Our results show that while Oct-1 is not restricted to hepatocytes, it
nevertheless can play a critical role in the expression of a liver-specific gene.

PMCID: PMC369406
PMID: 1996097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Feb 25;19(4):815-21.

Xenopus laevis Oct-1 does not bind to certain histone H2B gene promoter octamer
motifs for which a novel octamer-binding factor has high affinity.

Smith DP(1), Old RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK.

Oct-1 and a second, previously unidentified octamer-binding protein (Oct-R) have 
been identified in extracts of Xenopus laevis oocytes and embryos. Oct-1 does not
bind to the octamer motif associated with certain Xenopus laevis histone H2B gene
promoters, whereas Oct-R binds well to this motif, but only in the sequence
context of the H2B gene promoter.

PMCID: PMC333716
PMID: 2017364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Cell. 1991 Feb 8;64(3):565-72.

Ubiquitous transcription factor OTF-1 mediates induction of the MMTV promoter
through synergistic interaction with hormone receptors.

Brüggemeier U(1), Kalff M, Franke S, Scheidereit C, Beato M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung, Marburg, Federal Republic
Germany.

Steroid hormones induce transcription from the mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV)
promoter by complex mechanisms requiring binding of the hormone receptors to the 
hormone responsive element (HRE) of the long terminal repeat region. Here we show
that the MMTV promoter contains two degenerated octamer motifs immediately
upstream of the TATA box that together bind OTF-1 (Oct-1, NFIII) with an affinity
similar to the octamer consensus. In transfection experiments, mutation of these 
octamer motifs interferes with the hormonal response of the MMTV promoter. In
vitro, these mutations do not influence basal transcription but completely
abolish the stimulatory effect of purified progesterone receptor. Progesterone
receptor and glucocorticoid receptor bound to the HRE facilitate binding of OTF-1
to the two octamer motifs. Thus, OTF-1 is a natural mediator of hormonal
induction of the MMTV promoter and acts through cooperation with the hormone
receptors for binding to DNA.

PMID: 1846780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Int Immunol. 1991 Feb;3(2):109-16.

Nuclear protein binding to octamer motifs in the immunoglobulin gamma 1 switch
region.

Schultz CL(1), Elenich LA, Dunnick WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor 48109-0620.

Initiation of the immunoglobulin heavy chain switch DNA rearrangement event is
thought to involve conversion of the target switch region DNA to an accessible
state. Accessibility is likely to be mediated by the binding of regulatory
proteins to sequences in or near switch regions. A DNase hypersensitivity assay
was used to recognize possible regions of protein binding in the gamma 1 switch
region of the B cell hybridoma 470.25. A strong DNase hypersensitive site was
identified 5' of the tandemly repeated S gamma 1 sequences. Data from other
laboratories suggest that this hypersensitive site is associated with switch
recombination to gamma 1. However, the 470.25 cell does hypersensitive sites
within the repetitive portion of the gamma 1 switch region was also identified. A
gel retardation assay for protein--DNA interaction revealed a sequence present in
several copies in the gamma 1 switch region that specifically binds nuclear
proteins. This binding sequence, SG1BS, contains the octanucleotide sequence
ATGCAAAA, a 7/8 match to the transcriptional enhancer octamer motif found in
immunoglobulin promoters and the heavy chain enhancer. Binding competition
studies of SG1BS demonstrate that both the octamer and flanking sequences are
critical for binding. By size- and tissue-distribution, the factors that bind
SG1BS are not distinguishable from the previously identified octamer-binding
factors OTF-1 and OTF-2. The ability of proteins to bind the S gamma 1 octamer
motif is increased 2.3-fold upon IL-4 induction of lipopolysaccharide-stimulated 
B cells.

PMID: 2025612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 1991;56:285-92.

Cell-cycle-regulated phosphorylation of the transcription factor Oct-1.

Segil N(1), Roberts SB, Heintz N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Rockefeller University, New York, New York.

PMID: 1819493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Nucleic Acids Res. 1990 Dec 11;18(23):6871-80.

Characterization of a cellular factor which interacts functionally with Oct-1 in 
the assembly of a multicomponent transcription complex.

Katan M(1), Haigh A, Verrijzer CP, van der Vliet PC, O'Hare P.

Author information: 
(1)Marie Curie Research Institute, The Chart, Oxted, Surrey, UK.

Induction of transcription of the immediate-early (IE) genes of herpes simplex
virus involves the assembly of a DNA-binding complex containing the viral protein
Vmw65 and the cellular transcription factor Oct-1. We show that Oct-1 is not
sufficient for complex formation and that another cellular factor(s) which is
absolutely required for complex formation can be separated from Oct-1 under
native conditions. We have purified this factor by approximately 100-fold using
DNA-cellulose, ion-exchange and size-exclusion chromatographies. The assay used
throughout the purification procedure follows the ability of the cellular factor 
to form a complex when added to purified Oct-1, Vmw65 and an IE specific DNA
probe. The complex forming factor (CFF) had a sedimentation coefficient of about 
4.4 S (i.e. molecular mass of about 70K, under non-denaturing conditions) and the
polypeptide profile of highly purified CFF demonstrated two major species with
molecular masses of 80K and 70K. Unequivocal association of either of these two
species with CFF activity could not presently be demonstrated due to the
sensitivity of CFF to denaturation. CFF, when tested on its own or in the
presence of Vmw65, did not bind to the IE-specific consensus motif. We have also 
used deletion mutants of Oct-1 to show that the POU domain of this protein was
sufficient for CFF-dependent complex formation with Vmw65. Deletions of the POU
specific region of Oct-1 significantly reduced the complex forming ability,
although detectable levels of complex were reconstituted using Vmw65, CFF and
just the homeodomain of Oct-1.

PMCID: PMC332744
PMID: 2175881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Mol Cell Biol. 1990 Dec;10(12):6204-15.

Activation of octamer-containing promoters by either octamer-binding
transcription factor 1 (OTF-1) or OTF-2 and requirement of an additional
B-cell-specific component for optimal transcription of immunoglobulin promoters.

Pierani A(1), Heguy A, Fujii H, Roeder RG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Rockefeller University, New 
York, New York 10021.

Several distinct octamer-binding transcription factors (OTFs) interact with the
sequence ATTTGCAT (the octamer motif), which acts as a transcription regulatory
element for a variety of differentially controlled genes. The ubiquitous OTF-1
plays a role in expression of the cell cycle-regulated histone H2b gene as well
as several other genes, while the tissue-specific OTF-2 has been implicated in
the tissue-specific expression of immunoglobulin genes. In an attempt to
understand the apparent transcriptional selectivity of these factors, we have
investigated the physical and functional characteristics of OTF-1 purified from
HeLa cells and both OTF-1 and OTF-2 purified from B cells. High-resolution
footprinting and mobility shift-competition assays indicated that these factors
were virtually indistinguishable in binding affinities and DNA-protein contacts
on either the H2b or an immunoglobulin light-chain (kappa) promoter. In addition,
each of the purified factors showed an equivalent intrinsic capacity to activate 
transcription from either immunoglobulin promoters (kappa and heavy chain) or the
H2b promoter in OTF-depleted HeLa and B-cell extracts. However, with OTF-depleted
HeLa extracts, neither factor could restore immunoglobulin gene transcription to 
the relatively high level observed in unfractionated B-cell extracts. Restoration
of full immunoglobulin gene activity appears to require an additional B-cell
regulatory component which interacts with the OTFs. The additional B-cell factor 
could act either by facilitating interaction of OTF activation domains with
components of the general transcriptional machinery or by contributing a novel
activation domain.

PMCID: PMC362895
PMID: 2123291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Science. 1990 Nov 16;250(4983):997-1000.

Regulation of gene expression with double-stranded phosphorothioate
oligonucleotides.

Bielinska A(1), Shivdasani RA, Zhang LQ, Nabel GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Internal Medicine, University
of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor 48109-0650.

Alteration of gene transcription by inhibition of specific transcriptional
regulatory proteins is necessary for determining how these factors participate in
cellular differentiation. The functions of these proteins can be antagonized by
several methods, each with specific limitations. Inhibition of sequence-specific 
DNA-binding proteins was achieved with double-stranded (ds) phosphorothioate
oligonucleotides that contained octamer or kappa B consensus sequences. The
phosphorothioate oligonucleotides specifically bound either octamer transcription
factor or nuclear factor (NF)-kappa B. The modified oligonucleotides accumulated 
in cells more effectively than standard ds oligonucleotides and modulated gene
expression in a specific manner. Octamer-dependent activation of a reporter
plasmid or NF-kappa B-dependent activation of the human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) enhancer was inhibited when the appropriate phosphorothioate
oligonucleotide was added to a transiently transfected B cell line. Addition of
phosphorothioate oligonucleotides that contained the octamer consensus to Jurkat 
T leukemia cells inhibited interleukin-2 (IL-2) secretion to a degree similar to 
that observed with a mutated octamer site in the IL-2 enhancer. The ds
phosphorothioate oligonucleotides probably compete for binding of specific
transcription factors and may provide anti-viral, immunosuppressive, or other
therapeutic effects.

PMID: 2237444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Genes Dev. 1990 Nov;4(11):1964-74.

The oct-1 homeo domain contacts only part of the octamer sequence and full oct-1 
DNA-binding activity requires the POU-specific domain.

Verrijzer CP(1), Kal AJ, van der Vliet PC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Physiological Chemistry, University of Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

The ubiquitous octamer-binding protein oct-1 contains a POU domain required for
DNA binding, which can be subdivided into a POU-specific domain and a POU homeo
domain. We have overproduced the POU domain and the POU homeo domain in a
vaccinia expression system, purified both polypeptides to near homogeneity, and
compared their DNA-binding properties. In contrast to the POU domain, the homeo
domain protects only part of the octamer sequence in the Ad2 origin against
breakdown by DNase I or hydroxyl radicals. Analysis of purine contacts by DMS and
DEPC interference assays shows that the Ad2 octamer can be divided into two
regions: one that is recognized both by the POU domain and the homeo domain in an
identical fashion, and one that is only recognized by the POU domain. This
suggests that the POU-specific domain is responsible for the additional contacts 
located at one side of the octamer. In agreement with this, mutating the first 3 
nucleotides (ATG) of the octamer affected binding by the POU domain but not by
the homeo domain. The apparent binding affinities to different octamer sites were
compared. The homeo domain binds 600-fold less efficiently to the canonical
octamer sequence (ATGCAAAT) than the POU domain. The difference is only sevenfold
for the Ad2 octamer, whereas both Kd values are almost identical for the HSV ICP4
TAATGARAT motif. Both the POU and homeo domains recognize target sequences for
mammalian homeo box proteins. We conclude that the octamer can act as a bipartite
recognition sequence for oct-1 and that the POU-specific domain contributes to
the binding affinity, as well as to the specificity, by providing additional
contacts.

PMID: 1980478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Nucleic Acids Res. 1990 Sep 25;18(18):5495-503.

Astrocytes and glioblastoma cells express novel octamer-DNA binding proteins
distinct from the ubiquitous Oct-1 and B cell type Oct-2 proteins.

Schreiber E(1), Harshman K, Kemler I, Malipiero U, Schaffner W, Fontana A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie II, Universität Zürich, Switzerland.

The 'octamer' sequence, ATGCAAAT or its complement ATTTGCAT, is a key element for
the transcriptional regulation of immunoglobulin genes in B-lymphocytes as well
as a number of housekeeping genes in all cell types. In lymphocytes, the
octamer-binding protein Oct-2A and variants thereof are thought to contribute to 
the B-cell specific gene expression, while the ubiquitous protein Oct-1 seems to 
control general octamer site-dependent transcription. Various other genes, for
example interleukin-1 and MHC class II genes, contain an octamer sequence in the 
promoter and are expressed in cells of both the immune and nervous systems. This 
prompted us to analyze the octamer-binding proteins in the latter cells. Using
the electrophoretic mobility shift assay, at least six novel octamer binding
proteins were detected in nuclear extracts of cultured mouse astrocytes. These
proteins are differentially expressed in human glioblastoma and neuroblastoma
cell lines. The nervous system-derived (N-Oct) proteins bound to the octamer DNA 
sequence in a manner which is indistinguishable from the Oct-1 and Oct-2A
proteins. The relationship of the N-Oct proteins to Oct-1 and Oct-2A was analyzed
by proteolytic clipping bandshift assays and by their reactivity towards antisera
raised against recombinant Oct-1 and Oct-2A proteins. On the basis of these
assays, all N-Oct-factors were found to be distinct from the ubiquitous Oct-1 and
the lymphoid-specific Oct-2A proteins. In melanoma cells that contain the N-Oct-3
factor, a transfected lymphocyte-specific promoter was neither activated nor was 
it repressed upon contransfection with an Oct-2A expression vector. We therefore 
speculate that N-Oct-3 and other N-Oct factors have a specific role in gene
expression in cells of the nervous system.

PMCID: PMC332229
PMID: 2216722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Tissue Antigens. 1990 Sep;36(3):108-15.

Functional analysis of cis-linked regulatory sequences in the HLA DRA promoter by
transcription in vitro.

Hume CR(1), Lee JS.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, New York.

Two consensus sequences, called X and Y boxes, capable of binding nuclear
proteins and regulating expression in B cells have been defined within the
immediate upstream region of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II
promoters. Unlike other class II promoters, the HLA-DR alpha (DRA) promoter also 
contains one element identical to the "octamer" motif of immunoglobulin variable 
region promoters that is responsible for B cell-specific transcription. This
"octamer" in the context of DRA appears capable of binding both the ubiquitous
(OTF-1) and lymphoid-specific (OTF-2) "octamer" binding proteins, but at least
one other distinct "octamer" complex was found. In order to characterize the
function of cis-acting elements, we have developed an in vitro system in which a 
DRA promoter construct is transcribed more efficiently in extracts from B cells
than in extracts from class II-negative HeLa cells. 5' deletion constructs which 
lacked the Y box, but retained the "octamer" motif and TATA box were completely
inactive, and internal deletion of the Y box reduced transcription by 95%. Using 
supercoiled, but not linear templates, we observed differences in transcription
efficiencies from templates lacking or disrupting the X consensus element that
reflect effects of random replacement of X box sequences in transient expression 
assays. Demonstration of the complete dependence on the Y box in this system
suggests that, despite its demonstrated importance in the DRA promoter, the DRA
"octamer" does not utilize OTF-2 in a manner analogous to immunoglobulin
promoters in B cells.

PMID: 2278044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Mol Cell Biol. 1990 Sep;10(9):4974-7.

A cellular factor binds to the herpes simplex virus type 1 transactivator Vmw65
and is required for Vmw65-dependent protein-DNA complex assembly with Oct-1.

Xiao P(1), Capone JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

The herpes simplex virus transactivator Vmw65 assembles into a multicomponent
protein-DNA complex along with the octamer binding protein Oct-1. Using affinity 
chromatography on columns conjugated with purified Vmw65 fusion protein expressed
in Escherichia coli, we demonstrate that a cellular factor, distinct from Oct-1, 
binds to Vmw65 in the absence of target DNA and is necessary for Vmw65-mediated
complex assembly with Oct-1.

PMCID: PMC361125
PMID: 2167442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. EMBO J. 1990 Jun;9(6):1883-8.

The DNA binding domain (POU domain) of transcription factor oct-1 suffices for
stimulation of DNA replication.

Verrijzer CP(1), Kal AJ, Van der Vliet PC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Physiological Chemistry, University of Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

Oct-1, also referred to as NFIII, OTF-1, OBP100 or NF-A1, is a ubiquitous
sequence-specific DNA binding protein that activates transcription and adenovirus
DNA replication. The protein contains a conserved DNA binding domain (POU domain)
present in several transcription factors. We have overproduced oct-1, the related
oct-2 and several oct-1 deletion mutants in a vaccinia expression system to
identify the domains important for activation of DNA replication in vitro. Both
oct-1 and oct-2 stimulate adenovirus DNA replication in an octamer-dependent
manner. From deletion studies it appears that the 160 amino acid long POU domain 
suffices for stimulation. This domain consists of two subdomains, a POU-specific 
and a homeo domain. Deletion of the POU-specific domain revealed that the homeo
domain has an intrinsic, but weak DNA binding activity and surprisingly, inhibits
DNA replication. As the POU domain does not coincide with the transcription
activation domain, these results indicate that, although oct-1 functions both in 
DNA replication and transcription, the mechanisms underlying these processes are 
probably distinct.

PMCID: PMC551894
PMID: 2347308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1990 Jun;87(12):4732-6.

Cooperative interactions between transcription factors Sp1 and OTF-1.

Janson L(1), Pettersson U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Uppsala University, Sweden.

We have examined whether the functional synergism between transcription factors
Sp1 and OTF-1 involves cooperativity in binding. To demonstrate cooperativity,
synthetic enhancers were constructed in which Sp1-binding sites were combined
with various OTF-1-binding sites that differed in their binding affinities. The
ability of these constructions to activate transcription from the human U2 small 
nuclear RNA promoter was measured. The results showed that an Sp1-binding site
stimulated transcription 2-fold when combined with a high-affinity binding site
for OTF-1. When combined with a low-affinity OTF-1-binding site, in contrast, a
20-fold stimulation of transcription was observed. The stimulatory effect of Sp1 
was moreover influenced by the distance between the Sp1- and OTF-1-binding sites 
and the functional cooperation was mirrored by the cooperative formation of
OTF-1- and Sp1-specific protein-DNA complexes in vitro. We conclude from these
results that the functional cooperation between OTF-1 and Sp1 involves physical
interactions between the two transcription factors resulting in cooperative
binding. The results thus reveal a mechanism by which Sp1 can modulate
transcription.

PMCID: PMC54191
PMID: 2191301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Nucleic Acids Res. 1990 Apr 25;18(8):1977-82.

Protein-DNA interactions upstream from the human A gamma globin gene.

O'Neill D(1), Kaysen J, Donovan-Peluso M, Castle M, Bank A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032.

We have used DNAase I footprinting and the gel mobility shift assay to study
proteins which bind to promoter elements located between -140 and -382 upstream
of the human A gamma globin gene. Footprints are found with both erythroid and
nonerythroid nuclear extracts at three sites: from -294 to -264, -242 to -227,
and -189 to -172 from the transcription initiation site. An erythroid-specific
footprint is identified from -194 to -189. We demonstrate that two known
transcription factors, the ubiquitous octamer-binding protein OTF-1 and the
erythroid regulatory factor NFE-1, bind to the -194 to -172 region and that their
footprints overlap. Binding of OTF-1 to this region is reduced by a mutation at
-175 associated with a form of non-deletion hereditary persistence of fetal
hemoglobin. We conclude that OTF-1 may compete with NFE-1 for the -175 binding
site, possibly functioning as a repressor of gamma globin transcription.

PMCID: PMC330671
PMID: 2336386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Genomics. 1990 Apr;6(4):666-72.

The gene for the ubiquitous octamer-binding protein Oct-1 is on human chromosome 
1, region cen-q32, and near Ly-22 and Ltw-4 on mouse chromosome 1.

Hsieh CL(1), Sturm R, Herr W, Francke U.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford, California.

Oct-1 is a sequence-specific transcription and DNA replication factor that
recognizes the octameric sequence ATGCAAAT. This protein shares an extended
region of sequence similarity, called the POU domain, with the lymphoid-specific 
transcription factor Oct-2, the pituitary-specific transcription factor Pit-1,
and the Caenorhabditis elegans cell lineage gene product unc-86. Two subdomains, 
POU-related homeobox and POU-specific box, lie within the POU domain. Unlike
other POU or homeodomain proteins, Oct-1 is ubiquitously expressed. A ubiquitous 
95- to 100-kDa protein that has the same DNA-binding properties and is variously 
referred to as OTF-1, NFIII, or OBP100 is probably identical to Oct-1. The human 
gene was mapped by Southern blot analyses of human x rodent hybrid cell lines to 
chromosome 1, region cen-q32. In Chinese hamster x mouse hybrid cell lines the
mouse locus was also mapped to chromosome 1. With the BXD (from progenitor
strains C57BL/6J and DBA/2J) set of recombinant inbred strains of mice, the
murine gene was localized on the linkage map of mouse chromosome 1. There were no
recombinants among 26 strains with Ly-22 and 1 recombinant among 24 strains with 
Ltw-4. The gene symbol is OTF1 for humans and Oct-1 for mouse.

PMID: 2341156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. FASEB J. 1990 Mar;4(5):1444-9.

Octamer transcription factors and the cell type-specificity of immunoglobulin
gene expression.

Kemler I(1), Schaffner W.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie II, Universität Zürch, Switzerland.

Antibodies are produced exclusively in B lymphocytes. The expression of the
antibody-encoding genes, the immunoglobulin (Ig) genes, is also restricted to B
cells. The octamer sequence ATGCAAAT is present in the promoter and the enhancer 
of Ig genes, and plays an important role in its tissue-specific expression. This 
sequence motif is a binding site for nuclear proteins, the so-called octamer
transcription factors (Oct or OTF factors). The Oct-1 protein is present in all
cell types analyzed so far, whereas Oct-2A and Oct-2B are found mainly in B
lymphocytes. All three proteins show the same sequence specificity and binding
affinity. It appears that the B cell-specific expression of Ig genes is mediated 
at least in part by cell type-specific Oct factors, and that there are both
quantitative and qualitative differences between Oct-1 and Oct-2 factors.
Recently, a number of other octamer factor variants were identified. Many of
these may be created by alternative splicing of a primary transcript of one Oct
factor gene and may serve a specific function in the fine tuning of gene
expression.

PMID: 2407588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Cell. 1990 Feb 9;60(3):375-86.

Differential transcriptional activation by Oct-1 and Oct-2: interdependent
activation domains induce Oct-2 phosphorylation.

Tanaka M(1), Herr W.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, New York 11724.

The ubiquitous Oct-1 and lymphoid Oct-2 POU homeodomain transcription factors
bind to the same DNA sequence but differ in their activation potential. Oct-2 is 
a positive, negative, or neutral regulator of beta-globin transcription depending
on the position and sequence of multimerized binding sites. To activate
transcription, Oct-2 relies on two interdependent nonacidic domains, an
N-terminal glutamine-rich region and a C-terminal serine-, threonine-, and
proline-rich region. Oct-1 also contains a functional glutamine-rich region but
fails to activate beta-globin transcription in our assay because the Oct-1
C-terminus is inactive, indicating that differential activation by Oct-1 and
Oct-2 is determined by the combination of multiple activation domains. Oct-2
displays a unique phosphorylation pattern that is absent from molecules lacking
one or the other activation domain, suggesting the activation domains have a role
in inducing protein phosphorylation.

PMID: 2302733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1990 Feb;87(3):1099-103.

Characterization of chicken octamer-binding proteins demonstrates that POU
domain-containing homeobox transcription factors have been highly conserved
during vertebrate evolution.

Petryniak B(1), Staudt LM, Postema CE, McCormack WT, Thompson CB.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann
Arbor 48109.

The DNA sequence motif ATTTGCAT (octamer) or its inverse complement has been
identified as an evolutionarily conserved element in the promoter region of
immunoglobulin genes. Two major DNA-binding proteins that bind in a
sequence-specific manner to the octamer DNA sequence have been identified in
mammalian species--a ubiquitously expressed protein (Oct-1) and a
lymphoid-specific protein (Oct-2). During characterization of the promoter region
of the chicken immunoglobulin light chain gene, we identified two homologous
octamer-binding proteins in chicken B cells. When the cloning of the human gene
for Oct-2 revealed it to be a member of a distinct family of homeobox genes, we
sought to determine if the human Oct-2 cDNA could be used to identify homologous 
chicken homeobox genes. Using a human Oct-2 homeobox-specific DNA probe, we were 
able to identify 6-10 homeobox-containing genes in the chicken genome,
demonstrating that the Oct-2-related subfamily of homeobox genes exists in avian 
species. Low-stringency screening of a chicken embryonic cDNA library allowed us 
to clone one of these genes. DNA sequence analysis revealed it to be the chicken 
homologue of the human Oct-1 gene. The predicted protein sequence of the chicken 
Oct-1 gene demonstrated that the gene for Oct-1 has been highly conserved during 
vertebrate evolution with an overall 96% amino acid sequence identity between the
chicken and human proteins. The previously described POU domain (termed POU for
its presence in the Pit-1, Oct-1/Oct-2, and Unc-86 genes) and homeobox domain are
100% conserved between the two protein products. Together, our data show that the
POU-containing subfamily of homeobox genes have been highly conserved during
vertebrate evolution, apparently as a result of selection for their DNA-binding
and transcriptional regulatory properties.

PMCID: PMC53418
PMID: 1967834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. J Virol. 1989 Jun;63(6):2798-812.

Overlapping octamer and TAATGARAT motifs in the VF65-response elements in herpes 
simplex virus immediate-early promoters represent independent binding sites for
cellular nuclear factor III.

apRhys CM(1), Ciufo DM, O'Neill EA, Kelly TJ, Hayward GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology & Molecular Sciences, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205.

Expression of the immediate-early (IE) genes of herpes simplex virus (HSV) is
specifically stimulated by a 65-kilodalton virion transcription factor (VF65 or
VP16) that is introduced as a component of infecting virions. In both the
IE175(ICP4) and IE110(ICP0) promoters, this activation requires an upstream
cis-acting target response element that contains a single TAATGARAT consensus
element. Furthermore, many HSV IE TAATGARAT elements overlap with ATGCTAAT
octamer motifs that are similar to the OTF-1-binding sites found in both
immunoglobulin and histone H2b genes and to the nuclear factor III
(NFIII)-binding site within the adenovirus type 2 origin of DNA replication.
Purified HeLa cell NFIII protein proved to form specific DNA-protein complexes
with several upstream regions from both the IE110 and IE175 promoters, and this
interaction was subject to efficient competition with an adenovirus type 2 DNA
fragment containing an intact NFIII-binding site. Surprisingly, the NFIII protein
bound to synthetic oligonucleotides containing only the TAATGARAT consensus
elements as well as to those containing the ATGCTAAT octamer sequence, although
the former exhibited lower affinity and gave complexes with slightly different
electrophoretic mobility. The ATGCTAAT oligonucleotide also competed more
efficiently than the TAATGARAT sequence itself for binding to a TAATGARAT probe, 
indicating that the same protein species binds to both sites. The
oligonucleotides also formed novel supershifted complexes with lysed virion
proteins, but only in the presence of a crude nuclear extract and not with
affinity-purified NFIII alone. We conclude that the cellular NFIII protein can
recognize both the ATGCTAAT and TAATGARAT elements independently but that only
the interaction with TAATGARAT represents an intermediate step in the
transcriptional stimulation of IE genes by the HSV virion factor.

PMCID: PMC250783
PMID: 2542590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. J Biol Chem. 1989 May 25;264(15):8892-9.

Cloning and sequence analysis of a rat liver cDNA encoding acyl-peptide
hydrolase.

Kobayashi K(1), Lin LW, Yeadon JE, Klickstein LB, Smith JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital.

Acyl-peptide hydrolase catalyzes the removal of an N alpha-acetylated amino acid 
residue from an N alpha-acetylated peptide. Two overlapping degenerate
oligonucleotide probes based on the sequence of a CNBr tryptic peptide, derived
from purified rat acyl-peptide hydrolase, were synthesized and used to screen a
rat liver lambda gt11 cDNA library. A 2.5-kilobase cDNA was cloned and sequenced.
This clone contained 2364 base pairs of rat acyl-peptide hydrolase sequence but
lacked a translational initiation codon. Using a 220-base pair probe derived from
near the 5'-end of this almost full-length cDNA to rescreen the library,
full-length clones were isolated, which contained an in-frame ATG codon at
nucleotides 6-8 and encoded the NH2-terminal sequence, Met-Glu-Arg-Gln.... The
DNA sequence encoded a protein of 732 amino acid residues, 40% of which were
confirmed by protein sequence data from 19 CNBr or CNBr tryptic peptides. The
isolated enzyme is NH2-terminally blocked (Kobayashi, K., and Smith, J. A. (1987)
J. Biol. Chem. 262, 11435-11445), and based on the NH2-terminal protein sequence 
deduced from the DNA sequence and the sequence of the most NH2-terminal CNBr
peptide, it is likely that the NH2-terminal residue is an acetylated methionine
residue, since such residues are frequently juxtaposed to glutamyl residues
(Persson, B., Flinta, C., von Heijne, G., and Jornvall, H. (1985) Eur. J.
Biochem. 152, 523-527). The RNA blot analysis revealed a single message of 2.7
kilobases in various rat tissues examined. Although this enzyme is known to be
inhibited by diisopropyl fluorophosphate and acetylalanine chloromethyl ketone
(Kobayashi, K., and Smith, J. A. (1987) J. Biol. Chem. 262, 11435-11445), no
strong similarity in protein sequence has been found with other serine proteases.
This result suggests that acyl-peptide hydrolase may be a unique serine protease.

PMID: 2722805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Mol Cell Biol. 1989 Feb;9(2):747-56.

Octamer transcription factors 1 and 2 each bind to two different functional
elements in the immunoglobulin heavy-chain promoter.

Poellinger L(1), Roeder RG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Rockefeller University, New 
York, New York 10021.

Immunoglobulin heavy-chain genes contain two conserved sequence elements 5' to
the site of transcription initiation: the octamer ATGCAAAT and the heptamer
CTCATGA. Both of these elements are required for normal cell-specific promoter
function. The present study demonstrates that both the ubiquitous and
lymphoid-cell-specific octamer transcription factors (OTF-1 and OTF-2,
respectively) interact specifically with each of the two conserved sequence
elements, forming either homo- or heterodimeric complexes. This was surprising,
since the heptamer and octamer sequence motifs bear no obvious similarity to each
other. Binding of either factor to the octamer element occurred independently.
However, OTF interaction with the heptamer sequence appeared to require the
presence of an intact octamer motif and occurred with a spacing of either 2 or 14
base pairs between the two elements, suggesting coordinate binding resulting from
protein-protein interactions. The degeneracy in sequences recognized by the OTFs 
may be important in widening the range over which gene expression can be
modulated and in establishing cell type specificity.

PMCID: PMC362652
PMID: 2710122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. J Mol Biol. 1989 Jan 20;205(2):387-96.

Nuclear factor I can functionally replace transcription factor Sp1 in a U2 small 
nuclear RNA gene enhancer.

Janson L(1), Weller P, Pettersson U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Uppsala University, Biomedical Center, Sweden.

Polymerase II transcription of a human gene for the small nuclear RNA U2 is
dependent on two different promoter elements: a TATA-equivalent proximal sequence
element and a distal enhancer element, which has been shown to contain Sp1- and
octamer-binding sites. We have investigated the functional interplay between
these transcription factor-binding sites of the enhancer, following transfection 
of U2 maxigene constructions into HeLa cells. There is a functional non-additive 
co-operation between the octamer-binding factor and Sp1, which is not dependent
on the evolutionally conserved steric arrangement of these binding sites. We
demonstrate that the conserved Sp1-binding site of the U2 enhancer can be fully
substituted by a nuclear factor I (NFI) binding site, and that the
octamer-binding factor functions in stimulating transcription in conjunction with
either Sp1 or NFI. Since the octamer-binding factor is most probably the same
protein as nuclear factor III (NFIII), the results imply that the NFI/NFIII
complex, involved in adenovirus DNA replication, also can function as an
efficient activator of transcription.

PMID: 2926813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Genes Dev. 1988 Dec;2(12A):1582-99.

The ubiquitous octamer-binding protein Oct-1 contains a POU domain with a homeo
box subdomain.

Sturm RA(1), Das G, Herr W.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, New York 11724.

The octamer motif ATGCAAAT is recognized indistinguishably by two mammalian
transcription factors: one that is expressed ubiquitously and referred to here as
Oct-1, and another, Oct-2, that is expressed in lymphoid cells. We report the
cDNA cloning of the human oct-1 gene, which encodes Oct-1, by screening lambda
gt11 recombinant phage in situ for octamer motif-specific DNA binding. One lambda
gt11 recombinant expressed a beta-galactosidase-octamer-binding fusion protein
with a DNA-binding specificity indistinguishable from human HeLa cell Oct-1
protein. As expected for a ubiquitously expressed protein, Oct-1 mRNA is
expressed in all five human and two mouse cell lines tested. Polyclonal rabbit
antiserum raised against the beta-galactosidase fusion protein shows that the
DNA-binding domains of Oct-1 and Oct-2 proteins are related antigenically.
Deletion analysis of the 743-amino-acid-long oct-1 open reading frame shows that 
the DNA-binding activity lies within a central highly charged domain of 160 amino
acids. Comparison of the Oct-1 and Oct-2 sequences reveals that this domain is
nearly identical between the two proteins. Highly similar domains are also
present in the pituitary-specific transcription factor Pit-1 and the
Caenorhabditis elegans unc-86 cell lineage gene product (see Herr et al. 1988).
Within this shared POU (Pit-1, Oct-1 and Oct-2, unc-86) domain (pronounced 'pow')
lie two subdomains: a POU-related homeo box and a POU-specific box. The Oct-1
protein is unique among the POU-related proteins and other homeo box proteins
because it is expressed ubiquitously.

PMID: 2905684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Genes Dev. 1988 Nov;2(11):1400-13.

OBP100 binds remarkably degenerate octamer motifs through specific interactions
with flanking sequences.

Baumruker T(1), Sturm R, Herr W.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, New York 11724.

We have used the 100-kD HeLa cell octamer-binding protein OBP100 as a model to
study flexible DNA sequence recognition by promoter-binding proteins. OBP100
binds to the conserved octamer motif ATGCAAAT found in numerous promoters and
additionally to two degenerate octamer motifs (sites I and II) within the SV40
enhancer region. We show here that OBP100 binds the herpes simplex virus
immediate early promoter TAATGARAT (R = purine) motif itself, extending the
flexibility of OBP100 sequence recognition to sequences that bear very little
resemblance (four matches over a 14-bp region). Nevertheless, a progression of
OBP100-binding sites can be established that links the sequences of these two
apparently unrelated binding sites by incremental steps. Mutational and chemical 
modification interference analyses of a degenerate octamer binding site (SV40
site II) show that specific sequences, which are not normally conserved but flank
the degenerate octamer motif, can compensate for the degeneracy in the octamer
core sequence. Thus, different regions of the binding site sequence (core or
flanking) can diverge separately but not independently of one another. These
results suggest that flexible DNA sequence recognition arises because there are
few obligatory contact sites for OBP100 binding, but, rather, specific binding
reflects the sum of many independent interactions.

PMID: 2850260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Science. 1988 Sep 2;241(4870):1210-3.

Transcription factor OTF-1 is functionally identical to the DNA replication
factor NF-III.

O'Neill EA(1), Fletcher C, Burrow CR, Heintz N, Roeder RG, Kelly TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Johns Hopkins University School 
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205.

Octamer transcription factor-1 (OTF-1) and nuclear factor III (NF-III) are
sequence-specific DNA binding proteins that activate transcription and DNA
replication, respectively. It is shown here that OTF-1 is physically and
biologically indistinguishable from NF-III. This conclusion is based on the
following observations. First, the two proteins have identical mobilities by
SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Second, OTF-1 binds to the adenovirus
origin of DNA replication at the same site and with the same affinity as NF-III. 
Third, OTF-1 can substitute for NF-III in activating the initiation of adenovirus
DNA replication in vitro. Fourth, the ability of OTF-1 to stimulate viral DNA
replication is dependent on the presence of an intact NF-III binding site within 
the origin of replication. Fifth, NF-III can substitute for OTF-1 in activating
in vitro transcription from the human histone H2b promoter. These data suggest
the possibility that NF-III/OTF-1 is a protein that functions in both cellular
DNA replication and transcription.

PMID: 3413485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. J Virol. 1988 Sep;62(9):3092-102.

Interaction between the octamer-binding protein nuclear factor III and the
adenovirus origin of DNA replication.

Pruijn GJ(1), van Miltenburg RT, Claessens JA, van der Vliet PC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Physiological Chemistry, State University of Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

Nuclear factor III (NFIII) is a HeLa sequence-specific DNA-binding protein that
stimulates initiation of adenovirus DNA replication in vitro and may be involved 
in regulation of transcription of several cellular and viral genes. We have
studied the interaction between NFIII and the binding site in the adenovirus type
2 (Ad2) origin in detail by methidiumpropyl-EDTA.iron(II) and hydroxyl radical
footprinting and by alkylation interference experiments. Our results indicate
that (i) the core of the recognition sequence is 5'-TATGATAAT-3'; (ii) both major
and minor groove base contacts are detected, and all base pairs in the core are
involved in binding; (iii) many backbone contacts are observed divided into a
large domain coinciding with the core and a small domain; (iv) contact points are
not confined to one side of the DNA helix in contrast to the nuclear factor I
(NFI)-binding site; (v) the binding site overlaps the NFI-binding site for at
least one nucleotide. A number of Ad2 mutants as well as related binding sites in
the origins of other adenovirus serotypes were systematically compared for
binding with NFIII. The results are in good agreement with the contact point
studies and show that at least one AT base pair is commonly required by NFI and
NFIII for optimal binding. The strongest binding site, which contains the
octamer/decanucleotide motif (ATGCAAAT[NA]), was found in the Ad4 origin, which
lacks an NFI-binding site. Stimulation of in vitro DNA replication of Ad2, Ad4,
and Ad12 by NFIII showed that the maximal level of stimulation is dependent on
the affinity of NFIII for the origin.

PMCID: PMC253425
PMID: 2841465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. EMBO J. 1987 Dec 1;6(12):3771-8.

Promoter and enhancer elements containing a conserved sequence motif are
recognized by nuclear factor III, a protein stimulating adenovirus DNA
replication.

Pruijn GJ(1), van Driel W, van Miltenburg RT, van der Vliet PC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Physiological Chemistry, State University of Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

Nuclear factor III (NFIII) is a protein from HeLa cells that stimulates the
initiation of adenovirus type 2 (Ad2) DNA replication by binding to a specific
nucleotide sequence in the origin, adjacent to the nuclear factor I recognition
site. DNA sequences sharing a high degree of homology to the NFIII binding site
in Ad2 were found in a number of transcription regulatory elements, all
containing the octanucleotide sequence ATGCAAAT. We have analysed the interaction
between NFIII and the octamer-containing sequences in a histone H2B promoter,
immunoglobulin light and heavy chain promoters, an immunoglobulin heavy chain
enhancer, a U2 snRNA enhancer and the SV40 enhancer as well as Ad4. All sequences
were recognized by NFIII as indicated by gel retardation assays, DNase I
footprinting and methylation protection experiments. A comparison of the relative
binding affinities using competition assays indicated that mutations in the
octanucleotide sequence reduced the binding affinity considerably. Small but
significant differences in affinity were also observed depending on the sequences
bordering the conserved octanucleotide. The methylation protection patterns
indicate that both major and minor groove contacts are involved in NFIII binding.
The data suggest that NFIII could function both in adenovirus DNA replication and
in the transcriptional control of several groups of genes sharing the
octanucleotide sequence.

PMCID: PMC553848
PMID: 3428274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Nature. 1986 Aug 14-20;322(6080):656-9.

Nuclear factor III, a novel sequence-specific DNA-binding protein from HeLa cells
stimulating adenovirus DNA replication.

Pruijn GJ, van Driel W, van der Vliet PC.

Dissection and reconstitution of the adenovirus DNA replication machinery has led
to the discovery of two HeLa nuclear proteins which are required in conjunction
with three viral proteins. One of these, nuclear factor I (NF-I), recognizes an
internal region of the origin between nucleotides 25 and 40 and by binding to one
side of the helix stimulates the initiation reaction up to 30-fold. NFI-binding
sites have been observed upstream of several cellular genes, such as chicken
lysozyme, human IgM and human c-myc, and coincide in most cases with DNase I
hypersensitive regions. Here we report the identification of a novel DNA-binding 
protein from HeLa nuclei, designated NF-III, that recognizes a sequence in the
adenovirus origin very close to the NFI-binding site, between nucleotides 36 and 
54. This sequence includes the partially conserved nucleotides TATGATAATGAG.
NF-III stimulates DNA replication four- to sixfold by increasing the initiation
efficiency. Potential cellular binding sites include promoter elements of the
histone H2B gene, the human interferon beta gene, the human and mouse
immunoglobulin VK and VH genes and the mammal/chicken/Xenopus laevis U1 and U2
small nuclear RNA genes. Furthermore, a subset of the herpes simplex virus
immediate early promoter specific TAATGARAT elements is homologous with the
adenovirus 2 (Ad-2) NFIII-binding site.

PMID: 3748145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


