
61. Pharmacol Res. 2016 Jan;103:328-39. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2015.11.024. Epub 2015
Dec 3.

Pharmacological modulation of HDAC1 and HDAC6 in vivo in a zebrafish model:
Therapeutic implications for Parkinson's disease.

Pinho BR(1), Reis SD(1), Guedes-Dias P(1), Leitão-Rocha A(1), Quintas C(1),
Valentão P(2), Andrade PB(2), Santos MM(3), Oliveira JM(4).

Author information: 
(1)REQUIMTE/LAQV, Department of Drug Sciences, Pharmacology Lab, Faculty of
Pharmacy, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal. (2)REQUIMTE/LAQV, Department of
Chemistry, Pharmacognosy Lab, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Porto, Porto,
Portugal. (3)CIMAR/CIIMAR, Interdisciplinary Centre of Marine and Environmental
Research, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal; FCUP, Department of Biology,
Faculty of Sciences, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal. (4)REQUIMTE/LAQV,
Department of Drug Sciences, Pharmacology Lab, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of
Porto, Porto, Portugal. Electronic address: jorgemao@ff.up.pt.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are key epigenetic enzymes and emerging drug targets
in cancer and neurodegeneration. Pan-HDAC inhibitors provided neuroprotection in 
Parkinson's Disease (PD) models, however, the HDAC isoforms with highest
neuroprotective potential remain unknown. Zebrafish larvae (powerful
pharmacological testing tools bridging cellular and in vivo studies) have thus
far been used in PD modelling with limited phenotypic characterization. Here we
characterize the behavioural and metabolic phenotypes of a zebrafish PD model
induced with MPP(+), assess the feasibility of targeting zebrafish HDAC1 and
HDAC6 isoforms, and test the in vivo effects of their selective inhibitors MS-275
and tubastatin A, respectively. MPP(+) induced a concentration-dependent decrease
in metabolic activity and sensorimotor reflexes, and induced locomotor
impairments rescuable by the dopaminergic agonist apomorphine. Zebrafish HDAC1
and HDAC6 isoforms show high sequence identity with mammalian homologues at the
deacetylase active sites, and pharmacological inhibition increased acetylation of
their respective histone and tubulin targets. MS-275 and tubastatin rescued the
MPP(+)-induced decrease in diencephalic tyrosine hydroxylase immunofluorescence
and in whole-larvae metabolic activity, without modifying mitochondrial complex
activity or biogenesis. MS-275 or tubastatin alone modulated spontaneous
locomotion. When combined with MPP(+), however, neither MS-275 nor tubastatin
rescued locomotor impairments, although tubastatin did ameliorate the head-reflex
impairment. This study demonstrates the feasibility of pharmacologically
targeting the zebrafish HDAC1 and HDAC6 isoforms, and indicates that their
inhibition can rescue cellular metabolism in a PD model. Absence of improvement
in locomotion, however, suggests that monotherapy with either HDAC1 or HDAC6
inhibitors is unlikely to provide strong benefits in PD. This study highlights
parameters dependent on the integrity of zebrafish neuronal circuits as a
valuable complement to cell-based studies. Also, the demonstrated feasibility of 
pharmacologically targeting HDAC1 and HDAC6 in this organism paves the way for
future studies investigating HDAC inhibitors in other diseases modelled in
zebrafish.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26657418  [PubMed - in process]


62. J Biol Chem. 2016 Feb 19;291(8):4004-18. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.679332. Epub 2015 
Dec 10.

Transcriptional Regulation of JARID1B/KDM5B Histone Demethylase by Ikaros,
Histone Deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), and Casein Kinase 2 (CK2) in B-cell Acute
Lymphoblastic Leukemia.

Wang H(1), Song C(2), Ding Y(2), Pan X(2), Ge Z(2), Tan BH(2), Gowda C(2),
Sachdev M(2), Muthusami S(2), Ouyang H(3), Lai L(3), Francis OL(4), Morris CL(4),
Abdel-Azim H(5), Dorsam G(6), Xiang M(7), Payne KJ(4), Dovat S(8).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pathology, Xinxiang Medical University, Xinxiang
453003, Henan, China, Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, Hershey,
Pennsylvania 17033. (2)Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine,
Hershey, Pennsylvania 17033. (3)From the Department of Pathology, Xinxiang
Medical University, Xinxiang 453003, Henan, China. (4)Loma Linda University, Loma
Linda, California 92350. (5)the Division of Hematology, Oncology, and Blood and
Marrow Transplantation, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, University of Southern
California Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90027. (6)North
Dakota State University, Fargo, North Dakota 58108, and. (7)the College of
Pharmacy, South-Central University for Nationalities, Wuhan 430074, China.
(8)Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania
17033, sdovat@hmc.psu.edu.

Impaired function of the Ikaros (IKZF1) protein is associated with the
development of high-risk B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL).
The mechanisms of Ikaros tumor suppressor activity in leukemia are unknown.
Ikaros binds to the upstream regulatory elements of its target genes and
regulates their transcription via chromatin remodeling. Here, we report that
Ikaros represses transcription of the histone H3K4 demethylase, JARID1B (KDM5B). 
Transcriptional repression of JARID1B is associated with increased global levels 
of H3K4 trimethylation. Ikaros-mediated repression of JARID1B is dependent on the
activity of the histone deacetylase, HDAC1, which binds to the upstream
regulatory element of JARID1B in complex with Ikaros. In leukemia, JARID1B is
overexpressed, and its inhibition results in cellular growth arrest.
Ikaros-mediated repression of JARID1B in leukemia is impaired by pro-oncogenic
casein kinase 2 (CK2). Inhibition of CK2 results in increased binding of the
Ikaros-HDAC1 complex to the promoter of JARID1B, with increased formation of
trimethylated histone H3 lysine 27 and decreased histone H3 Lys-9 acetylation. In
cases of high-risk B-ALL that carry deletion of one Ikaros (IKZF1) allele,
targeted inhibition of CK2 restores Ikaros binding to the JARID1B promoter and
repression of JARID1B. In summary, the presented data suggest a mechanism through
which Ikaros and HDAC1 regulate the epigenetic signature in leukemia: via
regulation of JARID1B transcription. The presented data identify JARID1B as a
novel therapeutic target in B-ALL and provide a rationale for the use of CK2
inhibitors in the treatment of high-risk B-ALL.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4759178 [Available on 2017-02-19]
PMID: 26655717  [PubMed - in process]


63. J Med Chem. 2016 Feb 25;59(4):1545-55. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.5b01493. Epub
2015 Dec 22.

Synthesis and Biological Investigation of Oxazole Hydroxamates as Highly
Selective Histone Deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) Inhibitors.

Senger J(1), Melesina J(2), Marek M(3), Romier C(3), Oehme I(4), Witt O(4), Sippl
W(2), Jung M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg ,
Albertstraße 25, 79104 Freiburg, Germany. (2)Institute of Pharmacy,
Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg , Wolfgang-Langenbeck-Straße 4, 06120
Halle (Saale), Germany. (3)Département de Biologie Structurale Intégrative,
Institut de Génétique et Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC), Université
de Strasbourg (UDS), CNRS, INSERM, 1 Rue Laurent Fries, 67404 Illkirch Cedex,
France. (4)Clinical Cooperation Unit Pediatric Oncology, German Cancer Research
Centre (DKFZ) , Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) catalyzes the removal of an acetyl group from
lysine residues of several non-histone proteins. Here we report the preparation
of thiazole-, oxazole-, and oxadiazole-containing biarylhydroxamic acids by a
short synthetic procedure. We identified them as selective HDAC6 inhibitors by
investigating the inhibition of recombinant HDAC enzymes and the protein
acetylation in cells by Western blotting (tubulin vs histone acetylation). The
most active compounds exhibited nanomolar potency and high selectivity for HDAC6.
For example, an oxazole hydroxamate inhibits HDAC6 with an IC50 of 59 nM and has 
a selectivity index of >200 against HDAC1 and HDAC8. This is the first report
showing that the nature of a heterocycle directly connected to a zinc binding
group (ZBG) can be used to modulate subtype selectivity and potency for HDAC6
inhibitors to such an extent. We rationalize the high potency and selectivity of 
the oxazoles by molecular modeling and docking.

PMID: 26653328  [PubMed - in process]


64. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2015 Dec 14. doi: 10.1071/RD15350. [Epub ahead of print]

In vitro maturation affects chromosome segregation, spindle morphology and
acetylation of lysine 16 on histone H4 in horse oocytes.

Franciosi F, Goudet G, Tessaro I, Papillier P, Dalbies-Tran R, Reigner F, Deleuze
S, Douet C, Miclea I, Lodde V, Luciano AM.

Implantation failure and genetic developmental disabilities in mammals are caused
by errors in chromosome segregation originating mainly in the oocyte during
meiosis I. Some conditions, like maternal ageing or in vitro maturation (IVM),
increase the incidence of oocyte aneuploidy. Here oocytes from adult mares were
used to investigate oocyte maturation in a monovulatory species. Experiments were
conducted to compare: (1) the incidence of aneuploidy, (2) the morphology of the 
spindle, (3) the acetylation of lysine 16 on histone H4 (H4K16) and (4) the
relative amount of histone acetyltransferase 1 (HAT1), K(lysine)
acetyltransferase 8 (KAT8, also known as MYST1), histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1)
and NAD-dependent protein deacetylase sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) mRNA in metaphase II
stage oocytes that were in vitro matured or collected from peri-ovulatory
follicles. The frequency of aneuploidy and anomalies in spindle morphology was
increased following IVM, along with a decrease in H4K16 acetylation that was in
agreement with our previous observations. However, differences in the amount of
the transcripts investigated were not detected. These results suggest that the
degradation of transcripts encoding for histone deacetylases and
acetyltransferases is not involved in the changes of H4K16 acetylation observed
following IVM, while translational or post-translational mechanisms might have a 
role. Our study also suggests that epigenetic instabilities introduced by IVM may
affect the oocyte and embryo genetic stability.

PMID: 26651296  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


65. ACS Chem Biol. 2016 Feb 19;11(2):363-74. doi: 10.1021/acschembio.5b00640. Epub
2015 Dec 7.

An Isochemogenic Set of Inhibitors To Define the Therapeutic Potential of Histone
Deacetylases in ß-Cell Protection.

Wagner FF(1), Lundh M(2,)(3), Kaya T(1), McCarren P(2), Zhang YL(1),
Chattopadhyay S(2), Gale JP(1), Galbo T(4), Fisher SL(5), Meier BC(2), Vetere
A(2), Richardson S(6), Morgan NG(6), Christensen DP(3), Gilbert TJ(2), Hooker
JM(1,)(7), Leroy M(1), Walpita D(2), Mandrup-Poulsen T(3,)(8), Wagner BK(2),
Holson EB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT , 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, United States. (2)Center for the Science of
Therapeutics, Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT , Cambridge, Massachusetts
02142, United States. (3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of
Copenhagen , Copenhagen 1165, Denmark. (4)Department of Internal Medicine, Yale
University , New Haven, Connecticut 06520, United States. (5)SL Fisher
Consulting, LLC , PO Box 3052, Framingham, Massachusetts 01701, United States.
(6)University of Exeter Medical School , RD&E Hospital, Wonford EX2 5DW, U.K.
(7)Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Department of Radiology, Harvard Medical School , Charlestown,
Massachusetts 02129, United States. (8)Department of Molecular Medicine and
Surgery, Karolinska Institutet , Stockholm 171 77, Sweden.

Modulation of histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity has been implicated as a
potential therapeutic strategy for multiple diseases. However, it has been
difficult to dissect the role of individual HDACs due to a lack of selective
small-molecule inhibitors. Here, we report the synthesis of a series of highly
potent and isoform-selective class I HDAC inhibitors, rationally designed by
exploiting minimal structural changes to the clinically experienced HDAC
inhibitor CI-994. We used this toolkit of isochemogenic or chemically matched
inhibitors to probe the role of class I HDACs in ß-cell pathobiology and
demonstrate for the first time that selective inhibition of an individual HDAC
isoform retains beneficial biological activity and mitigates mechanism-based
toxicities. The highly selective HDAC3 inhibitor BRD3308 suppressed pancreatic
ß-cell apoptosis induced by inflammatory cytokines, as expected, or now
glucolipotoxic stress, and increased functional insulin release. In addition,
BRD3308 had no effect on human megakaryocyte differentiation, while inhibitors of
HDAC1 and 2 were toxic. Our findings demonstrate that the selective inhibition of
HDAC3 represents a potential path forward as a therapy to protect pancreatic
ß-cells from inflammatory cytokines and nutrient overload in diabetes.

PMID: 26640968  [PubMed - in process]


66. Leukemia. 2015 Dec 7. doi: 10.1038/leu.2015.331. [Epub ahead of print]

Epigenetic regulation of gene expression by Ikaros, HDAC1 and Casein Kinase II in
leukemia.

Song C(1), Pan X(1), Ge Z(1,)(2), Gowda C(1), Ding Y(1), Li H(1), Li Z(1,)(3),
Yochum G(4), Muschen M(5), Li Q(6), Payne KJ(7), Dovat S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Pennsylvania State University Medical College,
Hershey, PA, USA. (2)Department of Hematology, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Nanjing Medical University, Jiangsu Province Hospital, Nanjing, China. (3)Jilin
Province Animal Embryo Engineering Key Laboratory, College of Animal Science and 
Veterinary Medicine, Jilin University, Changchun, China. (4)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State University Medical
College, Hershey, PA, USA. (5)University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA. (6)Department of Statistics, Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, State College, PA, USA. (7)Department of Pathology and Human
Anatomy and Center for Health Disparities and Molecular Medicine, Loma Linda
University, Loma Linda, CA, USA.

PMID: 26639180  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


67. Nat Commun. 2015 Dec 3;6:10091. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10091.

Target engagement and drug residence time can be observed in living cells with
BRET.

Robers MB(1), Dart ML(1), Woodroofe CC(2), Zimprich CA(1), Kirkland TA(2),
Machleidt T(1), Kupcho KR(1), Levin S(2), Hartnett JR(1), Zimmerman K(1), Niles
AL(1), Ohana RF(1), Daniels DL(1), Slater M(1), Wood MG(1), Cong M(1), Cheng
YQ(3), Wood KV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Promega Corporation, 2800 Woods Hollow Road, Fitchburg, Wisconsin 53711, USA. 
(2)Promega Biosciences Incorporated, 277 Granada Drive, San Luis Obispo,
California 93401, USA. (3)UNT System College of Pharmacy, Department of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of North Texas Health Science Center, Fort
Worth, Texas, USA.

The therapeutic action of drugs is predicated on their physical engagement with
cellular targets. Here we describe a broadly applicable method using
bioluminescence resonance energy transfer (BRET) to reveal the binding
characteristics of a drug with selected targets within intact cells.
Cell-permeable fluorescent tracers are used in a competitive binding format to
quantify drug engagement with the target proteins fused to Nanoluc luciferase.
The approach enabled us to profile isozyme-specific engagement and binding
kinetics for a panel of histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors. Our analysis was
directed particularly to the clinically approved prodrug FK228
(Istodax/Romidepsin) because of its unique and largely unexplained mechanism of
sustained intracellular action. Analysis of the binding kinetics by BRET revealed
remarkably long intracellular residence times for FK228 at HDAC1, explaining the 
protracted intracellular behaviour of this prodrug. Our results demonstrate a
novel application of BRET for assessing target engagement within the complex
milieu of the intracellular environment.

PMCID: PMC4686764
PMID: 26631872  [PubMed - in process]


68. J Neurosci. 2015 Dec 2;35(48):15875-93. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0882-15.2015.

Olig1 Acetylation and Nuclear Export Mediate Oligodendrocyte Development.

Dai J(1), Bercury KK(1), Jin W(2), Macklin WB(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Colorado School of
Medicine, Aurora, Colorado 80045. (2)Institute of Bio-Nano-Science and
Engineering, Department of Instrument Science and Engineering, School of
Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, and School of Life Sciences
and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China.
(3)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Colorado School of
Medicine, Aurora, Colorado 80045, Wendy.Macklin@ucdenver.edu.

The oligodendrocyte transcription factor Olig1 is critical for both
oligodendrocyte development and remyelination in mice. Nuclear to cytoplasmic
translocation of Olig1 protein occurs during brain development and in multiple
sclerosis, but the detailed molecular mechanism of this translocation remains
elusive. Here, we report that Olig1 acetylation and deacetylation drive its
active translocation between the nucleus and the cytoplasm in both mouse and rat 
oligodendrocytes. We identified three functional nuclear export sequences (NES)
localized in the basic helix-loop-helix domain and one specific acetylation site 
at Lys 150 (human Olig1) in NES1. Olig1 acetylation and deacetylation are
regulated by the acetyltransferase CREB-binding protein and the histone
deacetylases HDAC1, HDAC3, and HDAC10. Acetylation of Olig1 decreased its
chromatin association, increased its interaction with inhibitor of DNA binding 2 
and facilitated its retention in the cytoplasm of mature oligodendrocytes. These 
studies establish that acetylation of Olig1 regulates its chromatin dissociation 
and subsequent translocation to the cytoplasm and is required for its function in
oligodendrocyte maturation.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/3515875-19$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4666914 [Available on 2016-06-02]
PMID: 26631469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Burn Care Res. 2015 Dec 1. [Epub ahead of print]

Remote Burn Injury Increases Pulmonary Histone Deacetylase 1 and Reduces Histone 
Acetylation.

Curtis BJ(1), Shults JA, Ramirez L, Kovacs EJ.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Surgery, Burn and Shock Trauma Research Institute,
Loyola University Chicago, Stritch School of Medicine, Maywood, Illinois.

Dermal burn injury causes profound physiological derangements. Respiratory
failure is a primary cause of morbidity and mortality after burn injury, in part,
because of excessive and prolonged release of local and systemic proinflammatory 
mediators. Clinical and preclinical evidence suggests histone deacetylases
(HDACs) are key mediators of inflammatory responses. The study objective was to
explore the effects of dermal burn injury on pulmonary HDAC activity, identify
specific lung HDAC(s) altered by burn, and characterize histone lysine
acetylation status. Mice were subjected to a 15% TBSA scald burn or a sham injury
and killed 24 hours later. Whole lungs were harvested, or alveolar macrophages
were isolated from bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. HDAC specific activity assays
were performed, Western blots were run to analyze HDACs1, 2, 3, 4, and 10 or
histone lysine acetylation levels, and HDAC1 and phosphorylated-HDAC1 levels and 
localization were examined by immunofluorescence. Burned mice had higher HDAC
specific activity and increased HDAC1 levels compared with controls, but levels
of other HDACs were comparable between groups. Burn injury increased levels of
HDAC1 and phosphorylated-HDAC1 in bronchioles and alveolar sacs and was
associated with global and specific diminished levels of histone H3 and histone
H4 lysine acetylation. Our analyses reveal that pulmonary inflammation after burn
injury may be modulated by epigenetic mechanisms involving HDACs because HDAC
activity, HDAC1 expression and activity, and downstream histone acetylation were 
all altered after burn. Future studies will explore the role of HDAC inhibitors
in reversing inflammatory defects and may ultimately lead to new treatment
interventions for burn patients.

PMID: 26629657  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


70. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 2;5:17651. doi: 10.1038/srep17651.

Specific immunotherapy in combination with Clostridium butyricum inhibits
allergic inflammation in the mouse intestine.

Shi Y(1), Xu LZ(2), Peng K(1), Wu W(1), Wu R(1), Liu ZQ(2,)(3), Yang G(2,)(3),
Geng XR(2,)(3), Liu J(4), Liu ZG(2), Liu Z(1), Yang PC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, the Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital of Tongji
University, Shanghai 200072, China. (2)ENT Institute of Shenzhen University
School of Medicine, Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Allergy &Immunology, Shenzhen,
518060, China. (3)Longgang Central Hospital, Shenzhen 518116, China. (4)Shenzhen 
Women &Children Healthcare Center, Shenzhen, China.

The current therapy on allergic inflammation is unsatisfactory. Probiotics
improve the immunity in the body. This study aims to test a hypothesis that
administration with Clostridium butyricum (C. butyricum) enforces the effect of
specific immunotherapy (SIT) on intestinal allergic inflammation. In this study, 
an ovalbumin (OVA) specific allergic inflammation mouse model was created. The
mice were treated with SIT or/and C. butyricum. The results showed that the
intestinal allergic inflammation was only moderately alleviated by SIT, which was
significantly enforced by a combination with C. butyricum; treating with C.
butyricum alone did not show much inhibitory efficacy. The increase in the
frequency of the interleukin (IL)-10-producing OVA-specific B cell (OVAsBC) was
observed in mice in parallel to the inhibitory effect on the intestinal allergic 
inflammation. The in vitro treatment of the OVAsBCs with OVA increased the
histone deacetylase-1 (HDAC1) phosphorylation, modulated the transcription of the
Bcl6 gene, and triggered the OVAsBCs to differentiate to the IgE-producing plasma
cells. Exposure to both OVA and butyrate sodium in the culture increased the
expression of IL-10 in OVAsBCs. In conclusion, administration with C. butyricum
enforces the inhibitory effect of SIT on allergic inflammation in the mouse
intestine.

PMCID: PMC4667269
PMID: 26627845  [PubMed - in process]


71. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 12;7(2):1796-807. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6427.

Non-epigenetic function of HDAC8 in regulating breast cancer stem cells by
maintaining Notch1 protein stability.

Chao MW(1,)(2), Chu PC(1,)(3), Chuang HC(1), Shen FH(3), Chou CC(1), Hsu EC(1),
Himmel LE(1,)(4), Huang HL(2), Tu HJ(2), Kulp SK(1), Teng CM(2), Chen CS(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medicinal Chemistry, College of Pharmacy and Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, Columbus, Ohio, USA. (2)Institute of Pharmacology, College of Medicine,
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Institute of Biological Chemistry,
Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, College
of Veterinary Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.

Here, we report a novel non-epigenetic function of histone deacetylase (HDAC) 8
in activating cancer stem cell (CSC)-like properties in breast cancer cells by
enhancing the stability of Notch1 protein. The pan-HDAC inhibitors AR-42 and
SAHA, and the class I HDAC inhibitor depsipeptide, suppressed mammosphere
formation and other CSC markers by reducing Notch1 expression in MDA-MB-231 and
SUM-159 cells. Interrogation of individual class I isoforms (HDAC1-3 and 8) using
si/shRNA-mediated knockdown, ectopic expression and/or pharmacological inhibition
revealed HDAC8 to be the primary mediator of this drug effect. This suppression
of Notch1 in response to HDAC8 inhibition was abrogated by the proteasome
inhibitor MG132 and siRNA-induced silencing of Fbwx7, indicating Notch1
suppression occurred through proteasomal degradation. However,
co-immunoprecipitation analysis indicated that HDAC8 did not form complexes with 
Notch1 and HDAC inhibition had no effect on Notch1 acetylation. In a xenograft
tumor model, the tumorigenicity of breast cancer cells was decreased by HDAC8
knockdown. These findings suggest the therapeutic potential of HDAC8 inhibition
to suppress Notch1 signaling in breast cancer.

PMID: 26625202  [PubMed - in process]


72. Genes Cancer. 2015 Sep;6(9-10):408-21.

A novel MeCP2 acetylation site regulates interaction with ATRX and HDAC1.

Pandey S(1), Simmons GE Jr(2), Malyarchuk S(3), Calhoun TN(3), Pruitt K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Immunology and Molecular Microbiology, Texas Tech University Health Sciences
Center, Lubbock, TX, USA. (2)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA. (3)Molecular and Cellular
Physiology, Shreveport, LA, USA ; LSU Health Sciences Center School of Medicine, 
Shreveport, LA, USA.

Methyl-CpG-binding protein-2 (MeCP2) regulates gene expression by recruiting
SWI/SNF DNA helicase/ATPase (ATRX) and Histone Deacetylase-1 (HDAC1) to
methylated gene regions and modulates heterochromatin association by interacting 
with Heterochromatin protein-1. As MeCP2 contributes to tumor suppressor gene
silencing and its mutation causes Rett Syndrome, we investigated how novel
post-translational-modification contributes to its function. Herein we report
that upon pharmacological inhibition of SIRT1 in RKO colon and MCF-7 breast
cancer cells, endogenous MeCP2 is acetylated at sites critical for binding to DNA
and transcriptional regulators. We created an acetylation mimetic mutation in
MeCP2 and found it to possess decreased binding to ATRX and HDAC1. Conditions
inducing MeCP2 acetylation do not alter its promoter occupancy at a subset of
target genes analyzed, but do cause decreased binding to ATRX and HDAC1. We also 
report here that a specific inhibitor of SIRT1, IV, can be used to selectively
decrease H3K27me3 repressive marks on a subset of repressed target gene promoters
analyzed. Lastly, we show that RKO cells over-expressing MeCP2 mutant show
reduced proliferation compared to those over-expressing MeCP2-wildtype. Our study
demonstrates the importance of acetylated lysine residues and suggests their key 
role in regulating MeCP2 function and its ability to bind transcriptional
regulators.

PMCID: PMC4633168
PMID: 26622943  [PubMed]


73. Nat Commun. 2015 Dec 1;6:10045. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10045.

MicroRNA miR124 is required for the expression of homeostatic synaptic
plasticity.

Hou Q(1), Ruan H(2), Gilbert J(1), Wang G(1), Ma Q(2), Yao WD(2), Man HY(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Boston University, 5 Cummington Mall, Boston,
Massachusetts 02215, USA. (2)Division of Neuroscience, New England Primate
Research Center, Harvard Medical School, Southborough, Massachusetts 01772, USA. 
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Boston University, 5
Cummington Mall, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Homeostatic synaptic plasticity is a compensatory response to alterations in
neuronal activity. Chronic deprivation of neuronal activity results in an
increase in synaptic AMPA receptors (AMPARs) and postsynaptic currents. The
biogenesis of GluA2-lacking, calcium-permeable AMPARs (CP-AMPARs) plays a crucial
role in the homeostatic response; however, the mechanisms leading to CP-AMPAR
formation remain unclear. Here we show that the microRNA, miR124, is required for
the generation of CP-AMPARs and homeostatic plasticity. miR124 suppresses GluA2
expression via targeting its 3'-UTR, leading to the formation of CP-AMPARs.
Blockade of miR124 function abolishes the homeostatic response, whereas miR124
overexpression leads to earlier induction of homeostatic plasticity. miR124
transcription is controlled by an inhibitory transcription factor EVI1, acting by
association with the deacetylase HDAC1. Our data support a cellular cascade in
which inactivity relieves EVI1/HDAC-mediated inhibition of miR124 gene
transcription, resulting in enhanced miR124 expression, formation of CP-AMPARs
and subsequent induction of homeostatic synaptic plasticity.

PMCID: PMC4686673
PMID: 26620774  [PubMed - in process]


74. ACS Med Chem Lett. 2015 Oct 5;6(11):1156-61. doi: 10.1021/acsmedchemlett.5b00303.
eCollection 2015.

Thiol-Based Potent and Selective HDAC6 Inhibitors Promote Tubulin Acetylation and
T-Regulatory Cell Suppressive Function.

Segretti MC(1), Vallerini GP(1), Brochier C(2), Langley B(2), Wang L(3), Hancock 
WW(3), Kozikowski AP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry & Pharmacognosy, University of Illinois at
Chicago , Chicago, Illinois 60612, United States. (2)Burke-Cornell Medical
Research Institute , White Plains, New York 10605, United States ; Department of 
Neurology and Neuroscience, Weill Medical College of Cornell University , New
York, New York 10065, United States. (3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Division of Transplant Immunology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia 
and University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, United States.

Several new mercaptoacetamides were synthesized and studied as HDAC6 inhibitors. 
One compound, 2b, bearing an aminoquinoline cap group, was found to show 1.3 nM
potency at HDAC6, with >3000-fold selectivity over HDAC1. 2b also showed
excellent efficacy at increasing tubulin acetylation in rat primary cortical
cultures, inducing a 10-fold increase in acetylated tubulin at 1 µM. To assess
possible therapeutic effects, compounds were assayed for their ability to
increase T-regulatory (Treg) suppressive function. Some but not all of the
compounds increased Treg function, and thereby decreased conventional T cell
activation and proliferation in vitro.

PMCID: PMC4645251 [Available on 2016-11-12]
PMID: 26617971  [PubMed]


75. Bosn J Basic Med Sci. 2015 Oct 25;15(4):1-6. doi: 10.17305/bjbms.2015.783.

Tumor suppressor maspin as a modulator of host immune response to cancer.

Dzinic SH(1), Bernardo MM, Oliveira DS, Wahba M, Sakr W, Sheng S.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Pathology, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, 
Michigan. sdzinic@med.wayne.edu.

Despite the promising clinical outcome, the primary challenge of the curative
cancer immunotherapy is to overcome the dichotomy of the immune response:
tumor-evoked immunostimulatory versus tumor-induced immunosuppressive. The goal
needs to be two-fold, to re-establish sustainable antitumor-cancer immunity and
to eliminate immunosuppression. The successful elimination of cancer cells by
immunosurveillance requires the antigenic presentation of the tumor cells or
tumor-associated antigens and the expression of immunostimulatory cytokines and
chemokines by cancer and immune cells. Tumors are heterogeneous and as such, some
of the tumor cells are thought to have stem cell characteristics that enable them
to suppress or desensitize the host immunity due to acquired epigenetic changes. 
A central mechanism underlying tumor epigenetic instability is the increased
histone deacetylase (HDAC)-mediated repression of HDAC-target genes regulating
homeostasis and differentiation. It was noted that pharmacological HDAC
inhibitors are not effective in eliminating tumor cells partly because they may
induce immunosuppression. We have shown that epithelial-specific tumor suppressor
maspin, an ovalbumin-like non-inhibitory serine protease inhibitor, reprograms
tumor cells toward better differentiated phenotypes by inhibiting HDAC1.
Recently, we uncovered a novel function of maspin in directing host immunity
towards tumor elimination. In this review, we discuss the maspin and maspin/HDAC1
interplay in tumor biology and immunology. We propose that maspin based therapies
may eradicate cancer.

PMCID: PMC4690435
PMID: 26614844  [PubMed - in process]


76. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2016 Jan 8;469(2):319-25. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.11.048. Epub 2015 Nov 19.

Upregulation of lncRNA MEG3 promotes hepatic insulin resistance via increasing
FoxO1 expression.

Zhu X(1), Wu YB(2), Zhou J(3), Kang DM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gerontology, Affiliated Anhui Provincial Hospital, Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, 230001, China. Electronic address: flyzhu2003@126.com.
(2)Department of Neurology, Affiliated Anhui Provincial Hospital, Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, 230001, China. (3)Department of Gerontology, Affiliated Anhui 
Provincial Hospital, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230001, China.
(4)Department of Gerontology, Affiliated Anhui Provincial Hospital, Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, 230001, China. Electronic address: kangdongmei2006@sina.com.

BACKGROUND: Hepatic insulin resistance is a major characteristic of type 2
diabetes mellitus. LncRNA MEG3 has been shown to correlate to hepatic glucose
production; however, the underlying mechanism remains unclear. This study aims to
investigate the role of MEG3 in hepatic insulin resistance.
METHODS: High-fat diet mice, ob/ob mice and mice primary hepatocytes were used in
this study. Expression of MEG3, FoxO1, G6pc and Pepck were determined by
real-time PCR. FoxO1, G6pc, Pepck, HDAC1 and HDAC3 protein levels were analyzed
by western blotting. Hepatic gluconeogenesis, glycogen accumulation, triglyceride
and glycogen contents were measured by corresponding assay or kit, and body
weight was monitored after an overnight fast.
RESULTS: Gene expression of MEG3 was upregulated in high-fat diet and ob/ob mice 
and increased by palmitate, oleate or linoleate. MEG3 overexpression
significantly increased FoxO1, G6pc, Pepck mRNA expressions and hepatic
gluconeogenesis and suppressed insulin-stimulated glycogen synthesis in primary
hepatocytes, whereas palmitate-induced increase of FoxO1, G6pc and Pepck protein 
expressions could be reversed by MEG3 interference. In addition, high fat
enhanced expression of lncRNA MEG3 in hepatocytes through histone acetylation.
Furthermore, MEG3 interference could reverse the up-regulation of triglyceride as
well as impaired glucose tolerance and down-regulation of glucogen content in
high-fat diet mice or ob/ob mice.
CONCLUSION: Upregulation of lncRNA MEG3 enhances hepatic insulin resistance via
increasing foxO1expression, suggesting that MEG3 may be a potential target and
therapeutic strategy for diabetes.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26603935  [PubMed - in process]


77. ACS Chem Neurosci. 2016 Feb 17;7(2):240-58. doi: 10.1021/acschemneuro.5b00286.
Epub 2015 Dec 7.

Bicyclic-Capped Histone Deacetylase 6 Inhibitors with Improved Activity in a
Model of Axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease.

Shen S(1), Benoy V(2), Bergman JA(1), Kalin JH(1), Frojuello M(1), Vistoli G(3), 
Haeck W(2), Van Den Bosch L(2), Kozikowski AP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Drug Discovery Program, University of Illinois at Chicago , 833 S. Wood St.,
Chicago, Illinois 60612, United States. (2)Laboratory of Neurobiology, Vesalius
Research Center (VIB) and Leuven Research Institute for Neuroscience and Disease 
(LIND), KU Leuven , O&N4 Herestraat 49, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium. (3)Dipartimento
di Scienze Farmaceutiche, Università degli Studi di Milano , Via Mangiagalli 25, 
20133 Milano, Italy.

Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease is a disorder of the peripheral nervous system 
where progressive degeneration of motor and sensory nerves leads to motor
problems and sensory loss and for which no pharmacological treatment is
available. Recently, it has been shown in a model for the axonal form of CMT that
histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) can serve as a target for the development of a
pharmacological therapy. Therefore, we aimed at developing new selective and
activity-specific HDAC6 inhibitors with improved biochemical properties. By
utilizing a bicyclic cap as the structural scaffold from which to build upon, we 
developed several analogues that showed improved potency compared to tubastatin A
while maintaining excellent selectivity compared to HDAC1. Further screening in
N2a cells examining both the acetylation of a-tubulin and histones narrowed down 
the library of compounds to three potent and selective HDAC6 inhibitors. In
mutant HSPB1-expressing DRG neurons, serving as an in vitro model for CMT2, these
inhibitors were able to restore the mitochondrial axonal transport deficits.
Combining structure-based development of HDAC6 inhibitors, screening in N2a cells
and in a neuronal model for CMT2F, and preliminary ADMET and pharmacokinetic
profiles, resulted in the selection of compound 23d that possesses improved
biochemical, functional, and druglike properties compared to tubastatin A.

PMCID: PMC4775085
PMID: 26599234  [PubMed - in process]


78. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Nov 23;36(3):462-74. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00639-15.

Essential Nonredundant Function of the Catalytic Activity of Histone Deacetylase 
2 in Mouse Development.

Hagelkruys A(1), Mattes K(1), Moos V(1), Rennmayr M(1), Ringbauer M(1), Sawicka
A(1), Seiser C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter, Vienna, Austria. (2)Department of Medical
Biochemistry, Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna
Biocenter, Vienna, Austria christian.seiser@univie.ac.at.

The class I histone deacetylases (HDACs) HDAC1 and HDAC2 play partially redundant
roles in the regulation of gene expression and mouse development. As part of
multisubunit corepressor complexes, these two deacetylases exhibit both enzymatic
and nonenzymatic functions. To examine the impact of the catalytic activities of 
HDAC1 and HDAC2, we generated knock-in mice expressing catalytically inactive
isoforms, which are still incorporated into the HDAC1/HDAC2 corepressor
complexes. Surprisingly, heterozygous mice expressing catalytically inactive
HDAC2 die within a few hours after birth, while heterozygous HDAC1 mutant mice
are indistinguishable from wild-type littermates. Heterozygous HDAC2 mutant mice 
show an unaltered composition but reduced associated deacetylase activity of
corepressor complexes and exhibit a more severe phenotype than HDAC2-null mice.
They display changes in brain architecture accompanied by premature expression of
the key regulator protein kinase C delta. Our study reveals a dominant negative
effect of catalytically inactive HDAC2 on specific corepressor complexes
resulting in histone hyperacetylation, transcriptional derepression, and,
ultimately, perinatal lethality.

Copyright © 2016 Hagelkruys et al.

PMCID: PMC4719423
PMID: 26598605  [PubMed - in process]


79. J Biol Chem. 2016 Jan 8;291(2):826-36. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.674234. Epub 2015
Nov 23.

Runx1 Phosphorylation by Src Increases Trans-activation via Augmented Stability, 
Reduced Histone Deacetylase (HDAC) Binding, and Increased DNA Affinity, and
Activated Runx1 Favors Granulopoiesis.

Leong WY(1), Guo H(1), Ma O(1), Huang H(2), Cantor AB(2), Friedman AD(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Pediatric Oncology, The Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, Maryland 21231 and. (2)the Department of Pediatric
Hematology-Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital and Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115. (3)From the Division of
Pediatric Oncology, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21231 and
afriedm2@jhmi.edu.

Src phosphorylates Runx1 on one central and four C-terminal tyrosines. We find
that activated Src synergizes with Runx1 to activate a Runx1 luciferase reporter.
Mutation of the four Runx1 C-terminal tyrosines to aspartate or glutamate to
mimic phosphorylation increases trans-activation of the reporter in 293T cells
and allows induction of Cebpa or Pu.1 mRNAs in 32Dcl3 myeloid cells, whereas
mutation of these residues to phenylalanine to prevent phosphorylation obviates
these effects. Three mechanisms contribute to increased Runx1 activity upon
tyrosine modification as follows: increased stability, reduced histone
deacetylase (HDAC) interaction, and increased DNA binding. Mutation of the five
modified Runx1 tyrosines to aspartate markedly reduced co-immunoprecipitation
with HDAC1 and HDAC3, markedly increased stability in cycloheximide or in the
presence of co-expressed Cdh1, an E3 ubiquitin ligase coactivator, with reduced
ubiquitination, and allowed DNA-binding in gel shift assay similar to wild-type
Runx1. In contrast, mutation of these residues to phenylalanine modestly
increased HDAC interaction, modestly reduced stability, and markedly reduced DNA 
binding in gel shift assays and as assessed by chromatin immunoprecipitation with
the -14-kb Pu.1 or +37-kb Cebpa enhancers after stable expression in 32Dcl3
cells. Affinity for CBFß, the Runx1 DNA-binding partner, was not affected by
these tyrosine modifications, and in vitro translated CBFß markedly increased DNA
affinity of both the translated phenylalanine and aspartate Runx1 variants.
Finally, further supporting a positive role for Runx1 tyrosine phosphorylation
during granulopoiesis, mutation of the five Src-modified residues to aspartate
but not phenylalanine allows Runx1 to increase Cebpa and granulocyte colony
formation by Runx1-deleted murine marrow.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4705401 [Available on 2017-01-08]
PMID: 26598521  [PubMed - in process]


80. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 12;7(2):1323-40. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6361.

Synergistic cytotoxic effects of bortezomib and CK2 inhibitor CX-4945 in acute
lymphoblastic leukemia: turning off the prosurvival ER chaperone BIP/Grp78 and
turning on the pro-apoptotic NF-<U+03BA>B.

Buontempo F(1), Orsini E(1), Lonetti A(2), Cappellini A(3), Chiarini F(4,)(5),
Evangelisti C(4,)(5), Evangelisti C(1), Melchionda F(2), Pession A(2), Bertaina
A(6), Locatelli F(6), Bertacchini J(7), Neri LM(8), McCubrey JA(9), Martelli
AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences, University of Bologna,
Bologna, Italy. (2)Pediatric Oncology and Hematology Unit "Lalla Seràgnoli", S.
Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy. (3)Department of
Human Social and Health Sciences, Campus Folcara, University of Cassino, Cassino,
Italy. (4)Muscoloskeletal Cell Biology Laboratory, IOR, Bologna, Italy.
(5)Institute of Molecular Genetics, National Research Council-Rizzoli Orthopedic 
Institute, Bologna, Italy. (6)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology,
IRCCS Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Rome, Italy. (7)Department of Surgery,
Medicine, Odontostomatology and Morphological Sciences, University of Modena,
Modena, Italy. (8)Department of Morphology, Surgery and Experimental Medicine,
University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy. (9)Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, School of Medicine, East Carolina University, Greenville, NC, USA.

The proteasome inhibitor bortezomib is a new targeted treatment option for
refractory or relapsed acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) patients. However, a
limited efficacy of bortezomib alone has been reported. A terminal pro-apoptotic 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress/unfolded protein response (UPR) is one of the
several mechanisms of bortezomib-induced apoptosis. Recently, it has been
documented that UPR disruption could be considered a selective anti-leukemia
therapy. CX-4945, a potent casein kinase (CK) 2 inhibitor, has been found to
induce apoptotic cell death in T-ALL preclinical models, via perturbation of
ER/UPR pathway. In this study, we analyzed in T- and B-ALL preclinical settings, 
the molecular mechanisms of synergistic apoptotic effects observed after
bortezomib/CX-4945 combined treatment. We demonstrated that, adding CX-4945 after
bortezomib treatment, prevented leukemic cells from engaging a functional UPR in 
order to buffer the bortezomib-mediated proteotoxic stress in ER lumen. We
documented that the combined treatment decreased pro-survival ER chaperon
BIP/Grp78 expression, via reduction of chaperoning activity of Hsp90.
Bortezomib/CX-4945 treatment inhibited NF-<U+03BA>B signaling in T-ALL cell lines and
primary cells from T-ALL patients, but, intriguingly, in B-ALL cells the drug
combination activated NF-<U+03BA>B p65 pro-apoptotic functions. In fact in B-cells, the 
combined treatment induced p65-HDAC1 association with consequent repression of
the anti-apoptotic target genes, Bcl-xL and XIAP. Exposure to NEMO (IKK<U+03B3>)-binding
domain inhibitor peptide reduced the cytotoxic effects of bortezomib/CX-4945
treatment. Overall, our findings demonstrated that CK2 inhibition could be useful
in combination with bortezomib as a novel therapeutic strategy in both T- and
B-ALL.

PMID: 26593250  [PubMed - in process]


81. ChemMedChem. 2016 Jan;11(1):81-92. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.201500456. Epub 2015 Nov 23.

Identification of HDAC6-Selective Inhibitors of Low Cancer Cell Cytotoxicity.

Gaisina IN(1,)(2), Tueckmantel W(2), Ugolkov A(3), Shen S(1), Hoffen J(3),
Dubrovskyi O(3,)(4), Mazar A(3,)(4), Schoon RA(5), Billadeau D(5), Kozikowski
AP(6).

Author information: 
(1)Drug Discovery Program, Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacognosy,
College of Pharmacy, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, 60612, USA. 
(2)Psychogenics Inc., Tarrytown, NY, 10591, USA. (3)Center for Developmental
Therapeutics, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL,
60208, USA. (4)Department of Pharmacology, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, 60208, USA. (5)Department of Immunology
and Division of Oncology Research, College of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, 13-42
Guggenheim, Rochester, MN, 55905, USA. (6)Drug Discovery Program, Department of
Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacognosy, College of Pharmacy, University of
Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, 60612, USA. kozikowa@uic.edu.

The histone deacetylases (HDACs) occur in 11 different isoforms, and these
enzymes regulate the activity of a large number of proteins involved in cancer
initiation and progression. The discovery of isoform-selective HDAC inhibitors
(HDACIs) is desirable, as it is likely that such compounds would avoid some of
the undesirable side effects found with the first-generation inhibitors. A series
of HDACIs previously reported by us were found to display some selectivity for
HDAC6 and to induce cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis in pancreatic cancer cells.
In the present work, we show that structural modification of these
isoxazole-based inhibitors leads to high potency and selectivity for HDAC6 over
HDAC1-3 and HDAC10, while unexpectedly abolishing their ability to block cell
growth. Three inhibitors with lower HDAC6 selectivity inhibit the growth of cell 
lines BxPC3 and L3.6pl, and they only induce apoptosis in L3.6pl cells. We
conclude that HDAC6 inhibition alone is insufficient for disruption of cell
growth, and that some degree of class 1 HDAC inhibition is required. Moreover,
the highly selective HDAC6Is reported herein that are weakly cytotoxic may find
use in cancer immune system reactivation.

© 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26592932  [PubMed - in process]


82. Acta Otolaryngol. 2016 Feb;136(2):172-6. doi: 10.3109/00016489.2015.1101781. Epub
2015 Nov 20.

A correlation analysis between HDAC1 over-expression and clinical features of
laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma.

Zhao R(1), Chen K(1), Cao J(1), Yu H(1), Tian L(1), Liu M(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery , The Second
Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University , Harbin , PR China.

CONCLUSION: HDAC1 may be a prognostic biomarker for LSCC malignant potency and a 
potent factor resulting in decreased sensitivity of LSCC in radiotherapy.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to evaluate the correlation between histone 
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) over-expression and clinical features in laryngeal squamous
cell carcinoma (LSCC).
METHODS: This study assessed the HDAC1 expressions in 90 formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded LSCC samples, 30 adjacent non-neoplastic tissues, and 30
laryngeal polyp tissues by immunohistochemistry (IHC). In addition, another 40
LSCC samples were collected that were divided into two groups after 3-month
radiotherapy: the high radio-sensitive group (HRS) and low radio-sensitive group 
(LRS). Overall survival curves of all the LSCC patients were constructed by
Kaplan-Meier method and long-rank test.
RESULTS: All ninety samples were positively immunostained for HDAC1. The
expression of HDAC1 was up-regulated and significantly associated with T
classification, lymph node metastases, tumor location and clinical stage. HDAC1
was mainly labeled in the epithelial cells of laryngeal polyp tissues and
adjacent non-neoplastic tissues. In addition, the expression of HDAC1 was
significantly higher in LRS than that in HRS. The positive rates for stage III-IV
tumor were significantly higher than those for stage II. LSCC patients with HDAC1
over-expression and LRS presented a shorter 5-year overall survival rate.

PMID: 26588579  [PubMed - in process]


83. Cell Rep. 2015 Nov 24;13(8):1552-60. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.10.031. Epub 2015
Nov 12.

A DNMT3A2-HDAC2 Complex Is Essential for Genomic Imprinting and Genome Integrity 
in Mouse Oocytes.

Ma P(1), de Waal E(2), Weaver JR(2), Bartolomei MS(2), Schultz RM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104,
USA. (2)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania,
Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (3)Department of
Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Electronic
address: rschultz@sas.upenn.edu.

Maternal genomic imprints are established during oogenesis. Histone deacetylases 
(HDACs) 1 and 2 are required for oocyte development in mouse, but their role in
genomic imprinting is unknown. We find that Hdac1:Hdac2(-/-) double-mutant
growing oocytes exhibit global DNA hypomethylation and fail to establish
imprinting marks for Igf2r, Peg3, and Srnpn. Global hypomethylation correlates
with increased retrotransposon expression and double-strand DNA breaks.
Nuclear-associated DNMT3A2 is reduced in double-mutant oocytes, and injecting
these oocytes with Hdac2 partially restores DNMT3A2 nuclear staining. DNMT3A2
co-immunoprecipitates with HDAC2 in mouse embryonic stem cells. Partial loss of
nuclear DNMT3A2 and HDAC2 occurs in Sin3a(-/-) oocytes, which exhibit decreased
DNA methylation of imprinting control regions for Igf2r and Srnpn, but not Peg3. 
These results suggest seminal roles of HDAC1/2 in establishing maternal genomic
imprints and maintaining genomic integrity in oocytes mediated in part through a 
SIN3A complex that interacts with DNMT3A2.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4662907
PMID: 26586441  [PubMed - in process]


84. Cancer Res Treat. 2015 Nov 17. doi: 10.4143/crt.2015.206. [Epub ahead of print]

Isotype-Specific Inhibition of Histone Deacetylases: Identification of Optimal
Targets for Radiosensitization.

Kim JH(1,)(2), Moon SH(1), No M(3), Kim JJ(1,)(3), Choi EJ(3), Cho BJ(3), Kim
JS(1,)(3), Kim IH(1,)(4,)(2), Kim IA(1,)(4,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (2)Institute of Radiation Medicine, Medical Research
Center, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea. (3)Medical Science Research
Institute, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, Korea. (4)Cancer
Research Institute, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Purpose: Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors radiosensitize tumor cells. To
elucidate mechanisms underlying radiosensitization by HDAC inhibition,
understanding of differential contributions of HDAC isotypes is needed. The aim
of this study was to investigate involvement of known HDAC isotypes in modulation
of cellular radiosensitivity.
Materials and Methods: Because pharmacologic HDAC inhibitors lack
isotype-specificity, RNA interference against 11 HDAC isotypes was used to
inhibit HDAC in an isotype-specific manner. Radiation cell survival was evaluated
using a clonogenic assay in SQ20B cells transfected with small interfering RNA
specifically targeting HDAC isotypes. Immunocytochemistry was performed for
detection of <U+03B3>H2AX foci. Protein expression was measured using Western blotting.
Results: Among 11 HDAC isotypes tested, specific inhibition of 7 isotypes (HDAC1,
HDAC3, HDAC4, HDAC6, HDAC7, HDAC10, and HDAC11) enhanced radiation lethality in
SQ20B cells. Radiosensitization by inhibition of these HDAC isotypes was
accompanied by delay of DNA double strand break repair. Radiosensitivity of SQ20B
cells was not altered by selective inhibition of the remaining 4 isotypes (HDAC2,
HDAC5, HDAC8, and HDAC9). Inhibition of HDAC isotypes resulted in downregulation 
of various proteins involved in pro-survival and DNA damage repair pathways.
Conclusion: s Isotype-specificity exists in HDAC inhibition-induced
radiosensitization. Different HDAC isotypes are differentially involved in
modulation of cellular radiosensitivity.

PMID: 26582395  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


85. J Cell Biochem. 2015 Nov 13. doi: 10.1002/jcb.25433. [Epub ahead of print]

BET Protein BRDT Complexes with HDAC1, PRMT5 and TRIM28 and Functions in
Transcriptional Repression During Spermatogenesis.

Wang L(1), Wolgemuth DJ(1,)(2,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics & Development, Columbia University Medical Center, New 
York, NY, 10032. (2)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Columbia University
Medical Center, New York, NY, 10032. (3)Institute of Human Nutrition, Columbia
University Medical Center, New York, NY, 10032. (4)Herbert Irving Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY, 10032.

The expression of BRDT, a member of the BET sub-family of double
bromodomain-containing proteins, is restricted to the male germ line,
specifically to pachytene-diplotene spermatocytes and early spermatids. We
previously showed that loss of the first bromodomain of BRDT by targeted
mutagenesis (Brdt(<U+0394>BD1) ) resulted in sterility and abnormalities in
spermiogenesis, but little is known about BRDT's function at the molecular level.
As part of studies designed to identify BRDT-interacting proteins we stably
introduced a FLAG-tagged BRDT cDNA into 293T cells, which do not normally express
BRDT. Affinity-purification of FLAG-tagged BRDT complexes indicated that BRDT has
novel interactions with the histone deacetylase HDAC1, the arginine-specific
histone methyltransferase 5 PRMT5, and the Tripartite motif-containing 28 protein
TRIM28. Immunofluorescent microscopy revealed that BRDT co-localized with each of
these proteins in round spermatids and co-immunoprecipitation of testicular
extracts showed that these proteins interact with BRDT. Furthermore, they bind
the promoter of H1t, a putative target of BRDT-containing complexes. This binding
of H1t was lost in mice expressing the Brdt(<U+0394>BD1) mutant protein and
concomitantly, H1t expression was elevated in round spermatids. Our study reveals
a role for BRDT-containing complexes in the repression of gene expression in vivo
that correlates with dramatic effects on chromatin remodeling and the progression
of spermiogenesis. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26565999  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


86. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 5;7(1):386-401. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6299.

MDA-9/Syntenin-Slug transcriptional complex promote epithelial-mesenchymal
transition and invasion/metastasis in lung adenocarcinoma.

Wang LK(1), Pan SH(2,)(3), Chang YL(4), Hung PF(1), Kao SH(5), Wang WL(6), Lin
CW(7), Yang SC(7), Liang CH(8), Wu CT(4), Hsiao TH(9), Hong TM(10,)(11), Yang
PC(1,)(12,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan. (2)Graduate Institute of Medical Genomics and
Proteomics, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Doctoral Degree Program of Translational Medicine, College of Medicine,
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Department of Pathology and
Graduate Institute of Pathology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan. (5)Research Center for Tumor Medical Science, China Medical
University, Taichung, Taiwan. (6)Department of Otolaryngology, Kaohsiung Chang
Gung Memorial Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (7)Institute of Biomedical Sciences,
Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. (8)Division of Isotope application, Institute of
Nuclear Energy Research, Taoyuan, Taiwan. (9)Department of Medical Research,
Taichung Veterans General Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. (10)Institute of Basic
Medical Sciences, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan. (11)Institute
of Clinical Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan. (12)NTU
Center of Genomic Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan.

Melanoma differentiation-associated gene-9 (MDA-9)/Syntenin is a novel
therapeutic target because it plays critical roles in cancer progression and
exosome biogenesis. Here we show that Slug, a key
epithelial-mesenchymal-transition (EMT) regulator, is a MDA-9/Syntenin downstream
target. Mitogen EGF stimulation increases Slug expression and MDA-9/Syntenin
nuclear translocation. MDA-9/Syntenin uses its PDZ1 domain to bind with Slug, and
this interaction further leads to HDAC1 recruitment, up-regulation of Slug
transcriptional repressor activity, enhanced Slug-mediated EMT, and promotion of 
cancer invasion and metastasis. The PDZ domains and nuclear localization of
MDA-9/Syntenin are both required for promoting Slug-mediated cancer invasion.
Clinically, patients with high MDA-9/Syntenin and high Slug expressions were
associated with poor overall survival compared to those with low expression in
lung adenocarcinomas. Our findings provide evidence that MDA-9/Syntenin acts as a
pivotal adaptor of Slug and it transcriptionally enhances Slug-mediated EMT to
promote cancer invasion and metastasis.

PMID: 26561205  [PubMed - in process]


87. Sci Rep. 2015 Nov 9;5:16355. doi: 10.1038/srep16355.

Reciprocal regulation of ROR<U+03B3>t acetylation and function by p300 and HDAC1.

Wu Q(1,)(2), Nie J(3), Gao Y(3), Xu P(4), Sun Q(5), Yang J(3), Han L(6), Chen
Z(3), Wang X(6), Lv L(6), Tsun A(3), Shen J(1,)(5), Li B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui, 230032,
China. (2)Department of Public Health, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui,
230032, China. (3)Key Laboratory of Molecular Virology &Immunology, Unit of
Molecular Immunology, Institute Pasteur of Shanghai, Shanghai Institutes for
Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, 200031, China.
(4)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui
Medical University, Hefei, Anhui, 230032, China. (5)Department of Microbiology
and Parasitology, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui, 230032, China.
(6)Division of Rheumatology, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 200040,
China.

T helper 17 (Th17) cells not only play critical roles in protecting against
bacterial and fungal infections but are also involved in the pathogenesis of
autoimmune diseases. The retinoic acid-related orphan receptor (ROR<U+03B3>t) is a key
transcription factor involved in Th17 cell differentiation through direct
transcriptional activation of interleukin 17(A) (IL-17). How ROR<U+03B3>t itself is
regulated remains unclear. Here, we report that p300, which has histone
acetyltransferase (HAT) activity, interacts with and acetylates ROR<U+03B3>t at its K81 
residue. Knockdown of p300 downregulates ROR<U+03B3>t protein and ROR<U+03B3>t-mediated gene
expression in Th17 cells. In addition, p300 can promote ROR<U+03B3>t-mediated
transcriptional activation. Interestingly, the histone deacetylase (HDAC) HDAC1
can also interact with ROR<U+03B3>t and reduce its acetylation level. In summary, our
data reveal previously unappreciated posttranslational regulation of ROR<U+03B3>t,
uncovering the underlying mechanism by which the histone acetyltransferase p300
and the histone deacetylase HDAC1 reciprocally regulate the ROR<U+03B3>t-mediated
transcriptional activation of IL-17.

PMID: 26549310  [PubMed - in process]


88. Oncogene. 2015 Nov 9. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.428. [Epub ahead of print]

Hepatitis C virus core protein interacts with Snail and histone deacetylases to
promote the metastasis of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Nie D(1), Shan X(1), Nie L(1), Duan Y(1), Chen Z(1), Yang Y(1), Li Z(1), Tian
L(1), Gao Q(1), Shan Y(1), Tang N(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Second Affiliated Hospital and the Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology of 
Infectious Diseases designated by the Chinese Ministry of Education, Chongqing
Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China.

Downregulation of E-cadherin by the transcriptional repressor Snail is associated
with acquisition of metastatic potential. Although hepatitis C virus (HCV) core
protein has been implicated in hepatocarcinogenesis, it is unclear whether Snail 
is involved in HCV core-induced dysregulation of E-cadherin. Herein, we
investigated the mechanism by which HCV core induces E-cadherin repression and
the role of Snail in HCV core-mediated invasiveness and metastasis. We found that
HCV infection, especially HCV core expression, effectively induced the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in hepatoma cells by repressing
E-cadherin. HCV core interacted with Snail and enhanced its binding to the E-box 
in the promoter region of E-cadherin, leading to decreased E-cadherin promoter
activity. We found that HCV core, Snail, and the histone deacetylases HDAC1/HDAC2
formed a co-repressor complex at the E-cadherin promoter. Moreover, HCV core was 
shown to stabilize Snail through activation of the PI3K/Akt/GSK3ß pathway.
Silencing Snail expression restored E-cadherin expression and inhibited HCV
core-promoted tumor growth and distant lung metastasis in vivo. Collectively,
these results demonstrated that HCV core induced EMT by interacting with the
transcriptional repressor complex Snail/HDACs at the E-cadherin promoter, which
led to E-cadherin repression and increased invasiveness of hepatoma cells. These 
findings increase understanding of factors regulating metastasis in hepatoma and 
may ultimately lead to the development of novel treatment strategies for
HCV-associated hepatocellular carcinoma.Oncogene advance online publication, 9
November 2015; doi:10.1038/onc.2015.428.

PMID: 26549030  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


89. Neurobiol Aging. 2016 Jan;37:103-16. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2015.10.001.
Epub 2015 Oct 9.

A novel histone deacetylase 1 and 2 isoform-specific inhibitor alleviates
experimental Parkinson's disease.

Choong CJ(1), Sasaki T(1), Hayakawa H(1), Yasuda T(2), Baba K(1), Hirata Y(3),
Uesato S(3), Mochizuki H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University, Osaka,
Japan. (2)Department of Human Genetics, National Center for Child Health and
Development, Tokyo, Japan. (3)Department of Life Science and Biotechnology,
Faculty of Chemistry, Materials and Bioengineering, Kansai University, Osaka,
Japan. (4)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University,
Osaka, Japan. Electronic address: hmochizuki@neurol.med.osaka-u.ac.jp.

With increased histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity and histone hypoacetylation
being implicated in neurodegeneration, HDAC inhibitors have been reported to have
considerable therapeutic potential. Yet, existing inhibitors lack specificity and
may show substantial adverse effect. In this study, we identified a novel HDAC1/2
isoform-specific inhibitor, K560, with protective effects against
1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP(+))- and/or
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)-induced neuronal death in
both in vitro and in vivo Parkinson's disease model. K560 attenuated cell death
induced by MPP(+) in differentiated SH-SY5Y cells through the sustained
expression of an antiapoptotic protein, X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis (XIAP).
Inhibition of XIAP expression by locked nucleic acid antisense oligonucleotides
abolished the protective effect of K560. Inactivation of mitogen-activated
protein kinase cascades, reduced p53 phosphorylation, and down-regulation of
p53-upregulated modulator of apoptosis on K560 treatment were also observed.
Furthermore, pre- and post-oral administration of K560 to mice prevented
MPTP-induced loss of dopaminergic neurons in substantia nigra, suggesting that
selective inhibition of HDAC1 and HDAC2 by K560 may pave the way to new
strategies for Parkinson's disease treatment.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26545632  [PubMed - in process]


90. Cell Death Dis. 2015 Nov 5;6:e1964. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2015.313.

Transcriptional repression of cancer stem cell marker CD133 by tumor suppressor
p53.

Park EK(1), Lee JC(2), Park JW(1), Bang SY(1), Yi SA(1), Kim BK(1), Park JH(1),
Kwon SH(3), You JS(4), Nam SW(5), Cho EJ(1), Han JW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Research Center for
Epigenome Regulation, School of Pharmacy, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon,
Republic of Korea. (2)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Stanford
University School of Medicine, 265 Campus Drive, Room G1120B, Stanford, CA, USA. 
(3)College of Pharmacy, Yonsei Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Yonsei
University, Incheon, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of Biochemistry, School of 
Medicine, Konkuk University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (5)Department of
Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Republic
of Korea.

Novel therapeutic strategies are needed to overcome cancer recurrence,
metastasis, and resistance to chemo- and radiotherapy. Cancer stem cells (CSCs)
are major contributors to the malignant transformation of cells due to their
capacity for self-renewal. Although various CSC markers have been identified in
several types of tumors, they are primarily used as cancer-prediction markers and
for the isolation of CSC populations. CD133, one of the best-characterized CSC
markers in distinct solid tumor types, was shown to be correlated with CSC
tumor-initiating capacity; however, the regulation of CD133 expression and its
function in cancer are poorly understood. Here, we show that CD133 expression is 
negatively regulated by direct binding of the p53 tumor suppressor protein to a
noncanonical p53-binding sequence in the CD133 promoter. Binding of p53 recruits 
Histone Deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) to the CD133 promoter and subsequently suppresses
CD133 expression by reducing histone H3 acetylation. Furthermore, CD133 depletion
suppresses tumor cell proliferation, colony formation, and the expression of core
stemness transcription factors including NANOG, octamer-binding transcription
factor 4 (OCT4), SOX2, and c-MYC. Critically, the anti-proliferative effects of
p53 are antagonized by rescue of CD133 expression in a p53 overexpressing cell
line, indicating that the tumor suppressive activity of p53 might be mediated by 
CD133 suppression. Taken together, our results suggest that p53-mediated
transcriptional regulation of CD133 is a key underlying mechanism for controlling
the growth and tumor-initiating capacity of CSCs and provide a novel perspective 
on targeting CSCs for cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC4670923
PMID: 26539911  [PubMed - in process]


91. Lung Cancer. 2015 Dec;90(3):598-603. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.10.023. Epub
2015 Oct 27.

Expression of epigenetic modifiers is not significantly altered by exposure to
secondhand smoke.

Tommasi S(1), Zheng A(2), Besaratinia A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, USC Keck School of Medicine, University of 
Southern California, M/C 9603, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA. Electronic address:
tommasi@med.usc.edu. (2)Department of Preventive Medicine, USC Keck School of
Medicine, University of Southern California, M/C 9603, Los Angeles, CA 90033,
USA.

OBJECTIVES: Secondhand smoke (SHS) is a major risk factor for lung cancer in
nonsmokers. DNA damage-derived mutagenicity is a well-established mechanism of
SHS-carcinogenicity; however very little is known about the impact of SHS
exposure on the epigenome.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We have investigated whether exposure to SHS can modulate 
the expression of key epigenetic regulators responsible for the establishment
and/or maintenance of DNA methylation and histone modification patterns in vivo. 
We have sub-chronically exposed mice to a mutagenic but non-tumorigenic dose of
SHS, and subsequently determined the expression levels of major epigenetic
modifiers in the lungs of SHS-exposed mice, immediately after termination of
exposure and following 7-month recovery in clean air.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: Quantification of the expression of genes encoding DNA
methyltransferases (Dnmt1, Dnmt3a, Dnmt3b and Dnmt3l), methyl binding domain
proteins (Mecp2, Mbd2 and Mbd3) and histone deacetylases (Hdac1 and Hdac2) by
quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction analysis showed
modest but not statistically significant differences in the relative
transcription of these key epigenetic regulators between SHS-exposed mice and
age-matched controls. The non-significant changes in the expression of main
epigenetic modifiers in SHS-exposed mice imply that SHS may predominantly induce 
genotoxic effects, particularly at non-tumorigenic doses, whereas epigenetic
effects may only be secondary and manifest en route to tumor formation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26525280  [PubMed - in process]


92. J Mol Biol. 2015 Dec 4;427(24):3817-23. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2015.10.018. Epub 2015
Nov 6.

Solution NMR Studies of an Alternative Mode of Sin3 Engagement by the Sds3
Subunit in the Histone Deacetylase-Associated Sin3L/Rpd3L Corepressor Complex.

Clark MD(1), Zhang Y(2), Radhakrishnan I(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL
60208, USA. (2)Department of Chemistry, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL
60208, USA. (3)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Northwestern University,
Evanston, IL 60208, USA. Electronic address: i-radhakrishnan@northwestern.edu.

The Sds3 transcriptional corepressor facilitates the assembly of the 1- to 2-MDa 
histone deacetylase-associated Sin3L/Rpd3L complex by providing a crucial
homodimerization activity. Sds3 engages the scaffolding protein Sin3A, via a
bipartite motif within the Sin3 interaction domain (SID) comprising a helix and
an extended segment. Here, we show that the SID samples two discrete,
substantially populated conformations with lifetimes in the tens of milliseconds 
range. The two conformations differ via a translation of the main chain and the
corresponding side chains in the 5- to 7-Å range. Given the close proximity of
the SID to other functional motifs in Sds3 at the sequence level, the
conformational exchange has the potential to regulate these activities.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26522936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Sci Rep. 2015 Nov 2;5:15961. doi: 10.1038/srep15961.

Inhibition of tribbles protein-1 attenuates radioresistance in human glioma
cells.

Tang B(1), Wu W(2), Zhang Q(3), Sun Y(3), Cui Y(3), Wu F(3), Wei X(3), Qi G(1),
Liang X(1), Tang F(1), Li Y(2), Fan W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Guilin Medical University, Affiliated
Hospital, and Laboratory of Liver Injury and Repair Molecular Medicine, Guilin
Medical University, Guilin, 541001, China. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, The
First Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun, 130021, China. (3)Affiliated
Zhongshan Hospital of Dalian University, Dalian, 116001, China.

Radiotherapy is one of the remedies in the treatment of glioma. The
radioresistance is a major drawback, of which the mechanism is unclear. Tribble
protein and histone deacetylase are involved in the cancer pathogenesis. This
study aims to test a hypothesis that the histone deacetylase inhibitors attenuate
the radioresistance in human glioma cells. In this study, human glioma cells were
cultured. The cells were treated with irradiation with or without a histone
deacetylase inhibitor, butyrate. Apoptosis of the glioma cells was assessed by
flow cytometry. The results showed that human glioma cells expressed a low level 
of Trib1, which was significantly up regulated by exposure to small doses
(2<U+2009>Gy/day for 4 days) of irradiation. Trib1-deficient glioma cells showed an
enhanced response to irradiation-induced apoptosis. Exposure to small doses of
irradiation, Trib1 formed a complex with pHDAC1 (phosphor histone deacetylase-1) 
to inhibit p53 expression in glioma cells. The presence of HDAC1 inhibitor,
butyrate or parthenolide, significantly enforced irradiation-induced glioma cell 
apoptosis. In conclusion, the Trib1 plays a critical role in the development of
radioresistance of glioma cells. The data suggest that inhibition of Trib1 or
HDAC1 has the potential to prevent or attenuate the radioresistance.

PMCID: PMC4629151
PMID: 26521947  [PubMed - in process]


94. Tumour Biol. 2015 Oct 31. [Epub ahead of print]

miR-449a enhances radiosensitivity through modulating pRb/E2F1 in prostate cancer
cells.

Mao A(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Liu Y(1,)(5,)(6), Wang Y(1,)(5,)(6), Zhao Q(1,)(5,)(6,)(4),
Zhou X(1,)(5,)(6), Sun C(1,)(5,)(6), Di C(1,)(5,)(6), Si J(1,)(5,)(6), Gan
L(1,)(5,)(6), Zhang H(7,)(8,)(9,)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Modern Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Lanzhou, 730000,
People's Republic of China. (2)School of Nuclear Science and Technology, Lanzhou 
University, Lanzhou, 730000, People's Republic of China. (3)Institute of Gansu
Medical Science Research, Lanzhou, 730050, People's Republic of China.
(4)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100039, People's Republic 
of China. (5)Key Laboratory of Heavy Ion Radiation Medicine of Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Lanzhou, 730000, People's Republic of China. (6)Key Laboratory of Heavy
Ion Radiation Medicine of Gansu Province, Lanzhou, 730000, People's Republic of
China. (7)Institute of Modern Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Lanzhou,
730000, People's Republic of China. zhangh@impcas.ac.cn. (8)Key Laboratory of
Heavy Ion Radiation Medicine of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Lanzhou, 730000,
People's Republic of China. zhangh@impcas.ac.cn. (9)Key Laboratory of Heavy Ion
Radiation Medicine of Gansu Province, Lanzhou, 730000, People's Republic of
China. zhangh@impcas.ac.cn. (10)Department of Heavy Ion Radiation Medicine,
Institute of Modern Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 509 Nanchang Road,
Lanzhou, 730000, China. zhangh@impcas.ac.cn.

miR-449a, a novel tumor suppressor, is deregulated in various malignancies,
including prostate cancer. Overexpression of miR-449a induces cell cycle arrest, 
apoptosis, and senescence, but its role in response to ionizing radiation and
underlying molecular mechanism are still unknown. Here, we report that miR-449a
enhances radiation-induced G2/M phase arrest and apoptosis through modulating
pRb/E2F1 and sensitizes prostate cancer cells to X-ray radiation. In wild-type Rb
PC-3 cells, overexpression of miR-449a enhances radiation-induced G2/M arrest and
apoptosis and promotes the sensitivity to X-ray radiation. While mutant Rb DU-145
cells are resistant to the X-ray radiation despite in the presence of miR-449a.
The cell cycle distribution of DU-145 cells is not significantly altered by
miR-449a in the response to ionizing radiation. Furthermore, elevated miR-449a
downregulates cell cycle regulator CDC25A and oncogene HDAC1. By targeting genes 
involved in controlling pRb/E2F1 activity, miR-449a regulates cell cycle
progression and apoptosis and consequently enhances the radiosensitivity of PC-3 
cells. Thus, miR-449a, as a miRNA component of the Rb pathway, promotes the
radiosensitivity of PC-3 cells through regulating pRb/E2F1.

PMID: 26520443  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


95. Mol Pharmacol. 2016 Jan;89(1):27-41. doi: 10.1124/mol.115.100206. Epub 2015 Oct
30.

Chronic Oxidative Stress Increases Resistance to Doxorubicin-Induced Cytotoxicity
in Renal Carcinoma Cells Potentially Through Epigenetic Mechanism.

Ponnusamy L(1), Mahalingaiah PK(1), Singh KP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Toxicology, The Institute of Environmental and
Human Health (TIEHH), Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas. (2)Department of
Environmental Toxicology, The Institute of Environmental and Human Health
(TIEHH), Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas kamaleshwar.singh@ttu.edu.

Renal cell carcinoma is the most common form of kidney cancer and is highly
resistant to chemotherapy. Although the role of oxidative stress in kidney cancer
is known, the chemotherapeutic response of cancer cells adapted to chronic
oxidative stress is not clear. Hence, the effect of oxidative stress on
sensitivity to doxorubicin-induced cytotoxicity was evaluated using an in vitro
model of human kidney cancer cells adapted to chronic oxidative stress. Results
of MTT- and anchorage-independent growth assays and cell cycle analysis revealed 
significant decrease in sensitivity to doxorubicin in Caki-1 cells adapted to
oxidative stress. Changes in the expression of genes involved in drug transport, 
cell survival, and DNA repair-dependent apoptosis further confirmed increased
resistance to doxorubicin-induced cytotoxicity in these cells. Decreased
expression of mismatch repair (MMR) gene MSH2 in cells exposed to oxidative
stress suggests that loss of MMR-dependent apoptosis could be a potential
mechanism for increased resistance to doxorubicin-induced cytotoxicity.
Additionally, downregulation of HDAC1, an increase in the level of histone H3
acetylation, and hypermethylation of MSH2 promoter were also observed in Caki-1
cells adapted to chronic oxidative stress. DNA-demethylating agent 5-Aza-2dC
significantly restored the expression of MSH2 and doxorubicin-induced
cytotoxicity in Caki-1 cells adapted to chronic oxidative stress, suggesting the 
role of DNA hypermethylation in inactivation of MSH2 expression and consequently 
MMR-dependent apoptosis in these cells. In summary, this study for the first time
provides direct evidence for the role of oxidative stress in chemotherapeutic
resistance in renal carcinoma cells potentially through epigenetic mechanism.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics.

PMID: 26519223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2016 Jan;80(1):26-33. doi: 10.1097/TA.0000000000000896.

Histone deactylase gene expression profiles are associated with outcomes in blunt
trauma patients.

Sillesen M(1), Bambakidis T, Dekker SE, Fabricius R, Svenningsen P, Bruhn PJ,
Svendsen LB, Hillingsø J, Alam HB.

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Surgical Gastroenterology (M.S., P.S., P.J.B., L.B.S.,
J.H.), and Surgery (R.F.), and Institute for Inflammation Research (M.S.),
Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Denmark; Division of Trauma,
Emergency Surgery and Surgical Critical Care (M.S.), Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; Department of Surgery (T.B., S.E.D., H.B.A.),
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan; Department of Anesthesiology
(S.E.D.), Institute for Cardiovascular Research, VU University Medical Center,
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Treatment with histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors, such as
valproic acid, increases survival in animal models of trauma and sepsis. Valproic
acid is a pan-inhibitor that blocks most of the known HDAC isoforms. Targeting
individual HDAC isoforms may increase survival and reduce complications, but
little is known of the natural history of HDAC gene expression following trauma. 
We hypothesized that distinct HDAC isoform gene expression patterns would be
associated with differences in outcomes following trauma.
METHODS: Twenty-eight-day longitudinal HDAC leukocyte gene expression profiles in
172 blunt trauma patients were extracted from the Inflammation and the Host
Response to Injury (Glue Grant) data set. Outcome was classified as complicated
(death or no recovery by Day 28, n = 51) or uncomplicated (n = 121). Mixed
modeling was used to compare the HDAC expression trajectories between the groups,
corrected for Injury Severity Score (ISS), base deficit, and volume of blood
products transfused during the initial 12 hours following admission. Weighted
gene correlation network analysis identified modules of genes with significant
coexpression, and HDAC genes were mapped to these modules. Biologic function of
these modules was investigated using the Gene Ontology database.
RESULTS: Elevated longitudinal HDAC expression trajectories for HDAC1, HDAC3,
HDAC6, and HDAC11 were associated with complicated outcomes. In contrast,
suppressed expression of Sirtuin 3 (SIRT3) was associated with adverse outcome (p
< 0.01). Weighted gene correlation network analysis identified significant
coexpression of HDAC and SIRT genes with genes involved in ribosomal function and
down-regulation of protein translation in response to stress (HDAC1), T-cell
signaling, and T-cell selection (HDAC3) as well as coagulation and hemostasis
(SIRT3). No coexpression of HDAC11 was identified.
CONCLUSION: Expression trajectories of HDAC1, HDAC3, HDAC6, HDAC11, and SIRT3
correlate with outcomes following trauma and may potentially serve as biomarkers.
They may also be promising targets for pharmacologic intervention. The effects of
HDAC and SIRT gene expression in trauma may be mediated through pathways involved
in ribosomal and T-cell function as well as coagulation and hemostasis.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Prognostic study, level III.

PMID: 26517778  [PubMed - in process]


97. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2015 Nov-Dec;33(6):877-86. Epub 2015 Oct 27.

Altered acetylation of proteins in patients with rheumatoid arthritis revealed by
acetyl-proteomics.

Arito M(1), Nagai K(2), Ooka S(3), Sato T(1), Takakuwa Y(3), Kurokawa MS(4), Sase
T(5), Okamoto K(1), Suematsu N(1), Kato T(6).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Proteomics and Molecular Medicine, St. Marianna University Graduate
School of Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan. (2)Department of Genetic Engineering, Kinki 
University, Wakayama, Japan. (3)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal 
Medicine, St. Marianna University Graduate School of Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan.
(4)Disease Biomarker Analysis and Molecular Regulation, St. Marianna University
Graduate School of Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan. (5)Department of Neurosurgery, St. 
Marianna University Graduate School of Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan. (6)Clinical
Proteomics and Molecular Medicine, St. Marianna University Graduate School of
Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan. t3kato@marianna-u.ac.jp.

OBJECTIVES: Post-translational modifications (PTMs) are often critical for the
function of proteins as well as antigenicity of proteins. We here tried to
elucidate alteration of PTMs in Rheumatoid arthritis (RA), focusing on
acetylation. We applied acetyl-proteomics to peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) to elucidate PTM difference between patients with RA and healthy donors.
METHODS: Proteins, extracted from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of 7
RA patients and 7 healthy donors, were separated by 2-dimansional
electrophoresis. Acetylation ratios of each protein spot were estimated by the
combination of Sypro Ruby staining and anti-acetylated lysine antibodies.
Proteins highly acetylated in the RA group were identified by mass spectrometry. 
Focusing on a-enolase (ENO1), one of the identified proteins, involvement of
histone deacetylases (HDACs) in the high acetylation was investigated.
Furthermore, the effects of acetylation on the activity of ENO1 were
investigated.
RESULTS: In PBMCs from the patients with RA, 29 acetylated protein spots were
detected. One of highly acetylated proteins in the RA patients was identified as 
ENO1. The acetylation of ENO1 was found to be regulated in part by HDAC1. The
enzymatic activity of ENO1 was up-regulated by acetylation.
CONCLUSIONS: Highly acetylated ENO1 may play roles in the pathophysiology of RA
through the maintenance of activated lymphocytes by increasing glycolysis-derived
energy supply.

PMID: 26517718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Kidney Int. 2015 Oct 28. doi: 10.1038/ki.2015.326. [Epub ahead of print]

Histone deacetylase-mediated silencing of AMWAP expression contributes to
cisplatin nephrotoxicity.

Ranganathan P(1), Hamad R(1,)(2), Mohamed R(1), Jayakumar C(1), Muthusamy T(3),
Ramesh G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Vascular Biology Center, Georgia Regents
University, Augusta, Georgia, USA. (2)Department of Pathology, Suez Canal
University, Ismailia, Egypt. (3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Georgia Regents University, Augusta, Georgia, USA.

Cisplatin-induced acute kidney injury is a serious problem in cancer patients
during treatment of solid tumors. Currently, there are no therapies available to 
treat or prevent cisplatin nephrotoxicity. Since histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibition augments cisplatin anti-tumor activity, we tested whether HDAC
inhibitors can prevent cisplatin-induced nephrotoxicity and determined the
underlying mechanism. Cisplatin upregulated the expression of several HDACs in
the kidney. Inhibition of HDAC with clinically used trichostatin A suppressed
cisplatin-induced kidney injury, inflammation, and epithelial cell apoptosis.
Moreover, trichostatin A upregulated the novel anti-inflammatory protein,
activated microglia/macrophage WAP domain protein (AMWAP), in epithelial cells
which was enhanced with cisplatin treatment. Interestingly, HDAC1 and -2 specific
inhibitors are sufficient to potently upregulate AMWAP in epithelial cells.
Administration of recombinant AMWAP or its epithelial cell-specific
overexpression reduced cisplatin-induced kidney dysfunction. Moreover, AMWAP
treatment suppressed epithelial cell apoptosis, and siRNA-based knockdown of
AMWAP expression abolished trichostatin A-mediated suppression of epithelial cell
apoptosis in vitro. Thus, HDAC-mediated silencing of AMWAP may contribute to
cisplatin nephrotoxicity. Hence, HDAC1 and -2 specific inhibitors or AMWAP could 
be useful therapeutic agents for the prevention of cisplatin
nephrotoxicity.Kidney International advance online publication, 28 October 2015; 
doi:10.1038/ki.2015.326.

PMID: 26509586  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


99. Sheng Li Xue Bao. 2015 Oct 25;67(5):447-54.

Selective class I histone deacetylase inhibitors suppress persistent spontaneous 
nociception and thermal hypersensitivity in a rat model of bee venom-induced
inflammatory pain.

Yang F(1), Yang Y(1), Wang Y(2,)(3), Yang F(2), Li CL(2,)(3), Wang XL(2,)(3), Li 
Z(2,)(3), Chen J(1,)(2,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biomedical Sciences of Pain, School of Basic Medical Sciences,
Capital Medical University, Beijing 100069, China. (2)Institute for Biomedical
Sciences of Pain and Institute for Functional Brain Disorders, Tangdu Hospital,
the Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an 710038, China. (3)Key Laboratory of
Brain Stress and Behavior, PLA, Xi'an 710038, China. (4)Beijing Institute for
Brain Disorders, Beijing 100069, China. junchen@fmmu.edu.cn.

To confirm whether class I histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs) are effective 
in relief of peripheral inflammatory pain, the effects of two selective
inhibitors, MS-275 and MGCD0103, were studied in rats inflamed by subcutaneous
(s.c.) injection of bee venom (BV). The BV test is characterized by displaying
both persistent spontaneous nociception (PSN) and primary hypersensitivity.
Intrathecal (i.t.) pre-treatment of either MS-275 or MGCD0103 with a single dose 
of 60 nmol/20 µL resulted in profound suppression of both PSN and primary thermal
hypersensitivity but without significant influence upon the primary mechanical
hypersensitivity and mirror-image thermal hypersensitivity. Moreover, the
up-regulation of both HDAC1 and HDAC2 induced by s.c. BV injection was completely
suppressed by i.t. pre-treatment of MS-275. The present results provide with
another new line of evidence showing involvement of epigenetic regulation of
chromatin structure by HDAC1/2-mediated histone hypoacetylation in the BV-induced
PSN and thermal hypersensitivity and demonstrate the beneficial effects of class 
I HDACIs in prevention of peripheral inflammatory pain from occurring.

PMID: 26490061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Genom Data. 2015 May 9;5:15-6. doi: 10.1016/j.gdata.2015.05.001. eCollection
2015.

Genome-wide analysis of histone acetylation dynamics during mouse embryonic stem 
cell neural differentiation.

Liu P(1), Dou X(2), Peng G(1), Han JD(2), Jing N(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China. (2)Chinese Academy of Sciences Key Laboratory
of Computational Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences-Max Planck Partner
Institute for Computational Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.

Epigenetic modification as an intrinsic fine-tune program cooperates with key
transcription factors to regulate the cell fate determination. The histone
acetylation participating in neural differentiation of pluripotent stem cells is 
expected but not well studied. Here, using acetylated histone H3 ChIP-sequencing 
(ChIP-seq), we demonstrate that the histone H3 acetylation level is gradually
increased on the neural gene loci while decreased on the neural-inhibitory gene
loci during mouse embryonic stem cell (mESC) neural differentiation. We further
show that histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) is essential for neural commitment by
targeting Nodal signaling. Thus, our study reveals a mechanism by which the
epigenetic modification of histone acetylation/deacetylation interacts with
extracellular signaling in mESC neural fate determination. Data were deposited in
Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) datasets under reference number GSE66025.

PMCID: PMC4583617
PMID: 26484213  [PubMed]


101. Chem Biol Interact. 2015 Dec 5;242:227-34. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2015.10.014. Epub
2015 Oct 19.

Ginsenoside 20(s)-Rh2 as potent natural histone deacetylase inhibitors
suppressing the growth of human leukemia cells.

Liu ZH(1), Li J(1), Xia J(2), Jiang R(1), Zuo GW(3), Li XP(1), Chen Y(1), Xiong
W(1), Chen DL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Stem Cell and Tissue Engineering, Department of Histology and
Embryology, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China. (2)Department 
of Human Anatomy, Chongqing Medical and Health School, Chongqing 400016, China.
(3)Key Laboratories of Clinical Diagnostics, Province and Ministry of Education, 
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China. (4)Laboratory of Stem Cell
and Tissue Engineering, Department of Histology and Embryology, Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing 400016, China. Electronic address: xinmengyuandlc@163.com.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Activation and abnormal expression of histone
deacetylase (HDAC) which is important target for cancer therapeutics are related 
to the occurrence of human leukemia. 20(s)-Ginsenoside Rh2 (20(s)-Rh2) may be a
potential HDAC inhibitor (HDACi) of leukemia, but the mechanism has not been
reported.
METHODS: The cell proliferation and apoptosis was assessed in cultured K562 and
KG-1a cells. The protein expression was measured with immunoblotting. The
activities of HDAC and histone acetyltransferase (HAT) were measured with BCA.
In vivo experiments were performed on naked mice carrying K562 cells for
assessment of tumor growth, apoptosis, protein expression, and HDAC/HAT
activities.
RESULTS: 20(s)-Rh2 effectively induced cell cycle arrest at G0/G1 phase and
apoptosis in K562 and KG1-a cells, decreased the levels of proteins associated
with cell proliferation (Cyclin D1, Bcl-2, ERK, p-ERK) and activated
pro-apoptotic proteins (Bax, cleaved Caspase-3, p38, p-p38, JNK, p-JNK).
20(s)-Rh2 down-regulated HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC6, increased histone H3 acetylation
and HAT activity. Moreover, 20(s)-Rh2 inhibited the growth of human leukemia
xenograft tumors in vivo.
CONCLUSION: 20(s)-Rh2 inhibited the proliferation of K562 and KG1-a cell by
reducing the expression and activity of HDACs, increasing histone acetylation,
and regulating key proteins in the downstream signaling pathways. Therefore,
20(s)-Rh2 could become a potential natural HDACi for chemotherapy of leukemia.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26482938  [PubMed - in process]


102. J Biol Chem. 2015 Dec 4;290(49):29652-62. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.671982. Epub 2015
Oct 14.

Human MageB2 Protein Expression Enhances E2F Transcriptional Activity, Cell
Proliferation, and Resistance to Ribotoxic Stress.

Peche LY(1), Ladelfa MF(2), Toledo MF(2), Mano M(3), Laiseca JE(2), Schneider
C(4), Monte M(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Laboratorio Nazionale del Consorzio Interuniversitario per le
Biotecnologie, Area Science Park, Padriciano 99, 34149 Trieste, Italy. (2)the
Departamento de Química Biológica and Instituto de Química Biológica Ciencias
Exactas y Naturales/Consejo de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas, Facultad
de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Universidad de Buenos Aires, 1428 Buenos Aires, 
Argentina. (3)the International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology,
Area Science Park, Padriciano 99, 34149 Trieste, Italy, and. (4)From the
Laboratorio Nazionale del Consorzio Interuniversitario per le Biotecnologie, Area
Science Park, Padriciano 99, 34149 Trieste, Italy, the Dipartimento di Scienze e 
Tecnologie Biomediche, Università di Udine, p.le Kolbe 4, 33100 Udine, Italy
claudio.schneider@lncib.it. (5)the Departamento de Química Biológica and
Instituto de Química Biológica Ciencias Exactas y Naturales/Consejo de
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales,
Universidad de Buenos Aires, 1428 Buenos Aires, Argentina, mmonte@qb.fcen.uba.ar.

MageB2 belongs to the melanoma antigen gene (MAGE-I) family of tumor-specific
antigens. Expression of this gene has been detected in human tumors of different 
origins. However, little is known about the protein function and how its
expression affects tumor cell phenotypes. In this work, we found that human
MageB2 protein promotes tumor cell proliferation in a p53-independent fashion, as
observed both in cultured cells and growing tumors in mice. Gene expression
analysis showed that MageB2 enhances the activity of E2F transcription factors.
Mechanistically, the activation of E2Fs is related to the ability of MageB2 to
interact with the E2F inhibitor HDAC1. Cellular distribution of MageB2 protein
includes the nucleoli. Nevertheless, ribotoxic drugs rapidly promote its
nucleolar exit. We show that MageB2 counteracts E2F inhibition by ribosomal
proteins independently of Mdm2 expression. Importantly, MageB2 plays a critical
role in impairing cell cycle arrest in response to Actinomycin D. The data
presented here support a relevant function for human MageB2 in cancer cells both 
under cycling and stressed conditions, presenting a distinct functional feature
with respect to other characterized MAGE-I proteins.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4705963 [Available on 2016-12-04]
PMID: 26468294  [PubMed - in process]


103. MAbs. 2016 Jan 2;8(1):37-42. doi: 10.1080/19420862.2015.1098795. Epub 2015 Oct
14.

A monoclonal antibody specific for prophase phosphorylation of histone
deacetylase 1: a readout for early mitotic cells.

Segré CV(1,)(2,)(3), Senese S(1,)(4,)(3), Loponte S(1,)(3), Santaguida S(1,)(5), 
Soffientini P(1,)(6), Grigorean G(1,)(7), Cinquanta M(8), Ossolengo G(8), Seiser 
C(9), Chiocca S(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Experimental Oncology ; European Institute of Oncology ; Via
Adamello 16; 20139 Milan , Italy. (2)b Present addresses: Fondazione Umberto
Veronesi ; Piazza Velasca 5; 20121 Milano , Italy. (3)i These authors equally
contributed to the work. (4)c Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry ;
University of California; Los Angeles ; Los Angeles , CA 90095 , USA. (5)d Koch
Institute for Integrative Cancer Research at MIT; Massachusetts Institute of
Technology ; Cambridge , USA. (6)e IFOM; the FIRC Institute for Molecular
Oncology Foundation ; via Adamello 16; 20139 Milan , Italy. (7)f Chromatography
and Mass Spectrometry Division; Thermo Fisher Scientific ; 1400 Northpoint
Parkway; Suite 10; West Palm Beach ; Fl 33407 , USA. (8)g Consortium for Genomic 
Technologies - COGENTECH ; via Adamello 16; 20139 Milan , Italy. (9)h Max F.
Perutz Laboratories; Medical University of Vienna ; Vienna Biocenter , Austria.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are modification enzymes that regulate a plethora of
biological processes. HDAC1, a crucial epigenetic modifier, is deregulated in
cancer and subjected to a variety of post-translational modifications. Here, we
describe the generation of a new monoclonal antibody that specifically recognizes
a novel highly dynamic prophase phosphorylation of serine 406-HDAC1, providing a 
powerful tool for detecting early mitotic cells.

PMID: 26467746  [PubMed - in process]


104. Int J Oncol. 2015 Dec;47(6):2264-75. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.3192. Epub 2015 Oct 7.

Radiation-induced modulation of immunogenic genes in tumor cells is regulated by 
both histone deacetylases and DNA methyltransferases.

Cacan E(1), Greer SF(1), Garnett-Benson C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA 30302, USA.

Radiation treatment is a pivotal therapy for several cancer types, including
colorectal cancer. It has been shown that sublethal doses of radiation modulate
gene expression, making tumor cells more susceptible to T-cell-mediated immune
attack. We have recently shown that low dose radiation enhances expression of
multiple death receptors (Fas, DR4 and DR5) and co-stimulatory molecules (4-1BBL 
and OX-40L) in colorectal cancer (CRC) cells; however, it is unclear how ionizing
radiation (IR) enhances expression of these molecules mechanistically. In the
present study, we elucidate the molecular mechanisms by which radiation controls 
expression of these molecules in CRC. Here we report that, enhanced expression of
these genes following radiation treatment of CRC cells is due, in part, to
changes in DNA methylation and histone acetylation. We observed that radiation (5
Gy) significantly increased histone acetylation at the promoter regions of
4-1BBL, Fas and DR5 but not OX-40L. However, radiation did not induce changes in 
the global levels of acetylated histone H3 suggesting specificity of IR-induced
changes. Furthermore, evaluation of epigenetic controlling enzymes revealed that 
IR did not alter overall cellular levels of HDACs (HDAC1, HDAC2 or HDAC3) or
DNMTs (DNMT1, DNMT3a, or DNMT3b). Instead, radiation decreased binding of HDAC2
and HDAC3 at the promoter regions of Fas and 4-1BBL, respectively. Radiation also
resulted in reduced DNMT1 at both the Fas and 4-1BBL promoter regions but not a
control gene. We conclude that single dose radiation can influence the expression
of immune response relevant genes in colorectal tumor cells by altering the
binding of epigenetic enzymes, and modulating histone acetylation, at specific
gene promoters.

PMID: 26458736  [PubMed - in process]


105. Blood. 2015 Nov 19;126(21):2392-403. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-03-632984. Epub 2015
Oct 7.

Functional-genetic dissection of HDAC dependencies in mouse lymphoid and myeloid 
malignancies.

Matthews GM(1), Mehdipour P(2), Cluse LA(1), Falkenberg KJ(3), Wang E(4), Roth
M(5), Santoro F(2), Vidacs E(1), Stanley K(1), House CM(6), Rusche JR(7), Vakoc
CR(4), Zuber J(5), Minucci S(8), Johnstone RW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Therapeutics Program, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, East Melbourne,
Victoria, Australia; Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, University of
Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia; (2)Department of Experimental
Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, Milan, Italy; (3)Cancer Therapeutics
Program, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, East Melbourne, Victoria, Australia;
Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna Biocenter, Vienna, Austria;
Department of Pathology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia;
(4)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY; (5)Research Institute
of Molecular Pathology, Vienna Biocenter, Vienna, Austria; (6)Sir Peter MacCallum
Department of Oncology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia; 
(7)Repligen Corporation, Waltham, MA; (8)Department of Experimental Oncology,
European Institute of Oncology, Milan, Italy; Drug Development Program, European 
Institute of Oncology, Milan, Italy; and Department of Biosciences, University of
Milan, Milan, Italy.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors (HDACis) have demonstrated activity in
hematological and solid malignancies. Vorinostat, romidepsin, belinostat, and
panobinostat are Food and Drug Administration-approved for hematological
malignancies and inhibit class II and/or class I HDACs, including HDAC1, 2, 3,
and 6. We combined genetic and pharmacological approaches to investigate whether 
suppression of individual or multiple Hdacs phenocopied broad-acting HDACis in 3 
genetically distinct leukemias and lymphomas. Individual Hdacs were depleted in
murine acute myeloid leukemias (MLL-AF9;Nras(G12D); PML-RARa acute promyelocytic 
leukemia [APL] cells) and Eµ-Myc lymphoma in vitro and in vivo. Strikingly,
Hdac3-depleted cells were selected against in competitive assays for all 3 tumor 
types. Decreased proliferation following Hdac3 knockdown was not prevented by
BCL-2 overexpression, caspase inhibition, or knockout of Cdkn1a in Eµ-Myc
lymphoma, and depletion of Hdac3 in vivo significantly reduced tumor burden.
Interestingly, APL cells depleted of Hdac3 demonstrated a more differentiated
phenotype. Consistent with these genetic studies, the HDAC3 inhibitor RGFP966
reduced proliferation of Eµ-Myc lymphoma and induced differentiation in APL.
Genetic codepletion of Hdac1 with Hdac2 was pro-apoptotic in Eµ-Myc lymphoma in
vitro and in vivo and was phenocopied by the HDAC1/2-specific agent RGFP233. This
study demonstrates the importance of HDAC3 for the proliferation of leukemia and 
lymphoma cells, suggesting that HDAC3-selective inhibitors could prove useful for
the treatment of hematological malignancies. Moreover, our results demonstrate
that codepletion of Hdac1 with Hdac2 mediates a robust pro-apoptotic response.
Our integrated genetic and pharmacological approach provides important insights
into the individual or combinations of HDACs that could be prioritized for
targeting in a range of hematological malignancies.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4653767 [Available on 2016-11-19]
PMID: 26447190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Med Chem. 2016 Feb 25;59(4):1455-70. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.5b01342. Epub
2015 Oct 13.

Discovery of Selective Histone Deacetylase 6 Inhibitors Using the Quinazoline as 
the Cap for the Treatment of Cancer.

Yang Z(1,)(2), Wang T(2), Wang F(2), Niu T(3), Liu Z(4), Chen X(4), Long C(4),
Tang M(2), Cao D(2), Wang X(2), Xiang W(2), Yi Y(3), Ma L(2), You J(1), Chen
L(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy/Collaborative Innovation Center of
Biotherapy and Cancer Center, College of Chemistry, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 
610064, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy/Collaborative Innovation
Center of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital of Sichuan
University, Chengdu, 610041, China. (3)Department of Hematology and Research
Laboratory of Hematology, West China Hospital of Sichuan University , Chengdu,
610041, China. (4)Guangdong Zhongsheng Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Dongguan,
Guangdong 523325, China.

Novel selective histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) inhibitors using the quinazoline as
the cap were designed, synthesized, and evaluated for HDAC enzymatic assays.
N-Hydroxy-4-(2-methoxy-5-(methyl(2-methylquinazolin-4-yl)amino)phenoxy)butanamide
, 23bb, was the most potent selective inhibitor for HDAC6 with an IC50 of 17 nM
and showed 25-fold and 200-fold selectivity relative to HDAC1 and HDAC8,
respectively. In vitro, 23bb presented low nanomolar antiproliferative effects
against panel of cancer cell lines. Western blot analysis further confirmed that 
23bb increased acetylation level of a-tubulin in vitro. 23bb has a good
pharmacokinetic profile with oral bioavailability of 47.0% in rats. In in vivo
efficacy evaluations of colorectal HCT116, acute myelocytic leukemia MV4-11, and 
B cell lymphoma Romas xenografts, 23bb more effectively inhibited the tumor
growth than SAHA even at a 4-fold reduced dose or ACY-1215 at the same dose. Our 
results indicated that 23bb is a potent oral anticancer candidate for selective
HDAC6 inhibitor and deserves further investigation.

PMID: 26443078  [PubMed - in process]


107. J Biol Chem. 2015 Nov 20;290(47):28465-76. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.634311. Epub
2015 Oct 2.

Procollagen Lysyl Hydroxylase 2 Expression Is Regulated by an Alternative
Downstream Transforming Growth Factor ß-1 Activation Mechanism.

Gjaltema RA(1), de Rond S(2), Rots MG(3), Bank RA(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the MATRIX Research Group and Epigenetic Editing Research Group,
Department of Pathology and Medical Biology, University Medical Center Groningen,
University of Groningen, 9713 GZ Groningen, The Netherlands. (2)From the MATRIX
Research Group and. (3)Epigenetic Editing Research Group, Department of Pathology
and Medical Biology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, 9713 GZ Groningen, The Netherlands. (4)From the MATRIX Research Group 
and r.a.bank@umcg.nl.

PLOD2 (procollagen-lysine, 2-oxoglutarate 5-dioxygenase 2) hydroxylates lysine
residues in collagen telopeptides and is essential for collagen pyridinoline
cross-link formation. PLOD2 expression and subsequent pyridinoline cross-links
are increased in fibrotic pathologies by transforming growth factor ß-1 (TGFß1). 
In this report we examined the molecular processes underlying TGFß1-induced PLOD2
expression. We found that binding of the TGFß1 pathway related transcription
factors SMAD3 and SP1-mediated TGFß1 enhanced PLOD2 expression and could be
correlated to an increase of acetylated histone H3 and H4 at the PLOD2 promoter. 
Interestingly, the classical co-activators of SMAD3 complexes, p300 and CBP, were
not responsible for the enhanced H3 and H4 acetylation. Depletion of SMAD3
reduced PLOD2 acetylated H3 and H4, indicating that another as of yet
unidentified histone acetyltransferase binds to SMAD3 at PLOD2. Assessing histone
methylation marks at the PLOD2 promoter depicted an increase of the active
histone mark H3K79me2, a decrease of the repressive H4K20me3 mark, but no role
for the generally strong transcription-related modifications: H3K4me3, H3K9me3
and H3K27me3. Collectively, our findings reveal that TGFß1 induces a SP1- and
SMAD3-dependent recruitment of histone modifying enzymes to the PLOD2 promoter
other than the currently known TGFß1 downstream co-activators and epigenetic
modifications. This also suggests that additional activation strategies are used 
downstream of the TGFß1 pathway, and hence their unraveling could be of great
importance to fully understand TGFß1 activation of genes.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4653703 [Available on 2016-11-20]
PMID: 26432637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Adv Biol Regul. 2016 Jan;60:151-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jbior.2015.09.001. Epub 2015
Sep 25.

Role of sphingosine 1-phosphate receptors, sphingosine kinases and sphingosine in
cancer and inflammation.

Pyne NJ(1), McNaughton M(2), Boomkamp S(2), MacRitchie N(2), Evangelisti C(3),
Martelli AM(3), Jiang HR(2), Ubhi S(2), Pyne S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Strathclyde Institute of Pharmacy and Biomedical Sciences, University of
Strathclyde, 161 Cathedral St, Glasgow, G4 0RE, Scotland, UK. Electronic address:
n.j.pyne@strath.ac.uk. (2)Strathclyde Institute of Pharmacy and Biomedical
Sciences, University of Strathclyde, 161 Cathedral St, Glasgow, G4 0RE, Scotland,
UK. (3)Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences (DIBINEM), University of 
Bologna, Bologna, Italy.

Sphingosine kinase (there are two isoforms, SK1 and SK2) catalyses the formation 
of sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P), a bioactive lipid that can be released from
cells to activate a family of G protein-coupled receptors, termed S1P1-5. In
addition, S1P can bind to intracellular target proteins, such as HDAC1/2, to
induce cell responses. There is increasing evidence of a role for S1P receptors
(e.g. S1P4) and SK1 in cancer, where high expression of these proteins in ER
negative breast cancer patient tumours is linked with poor prognosis. Indeed,
evidence will be presented here to demonstrate that S1P4 is functionally linked
with SK1 and the oncogene HER2 (ErbB2) to regulate mitogen-activated protein
kinase pathways and growth of breast cancer cells. Although much emphasis is
placed on SK1 in terms of involvement in oncogenesis, evidence will also be
presented for a role of SK2 in both T-cell and B-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia. In patient T-ALL lymphoblasts and T-ALL cell lines, we have
demonstrated that SK2 inhibitors promote T-ALL cell death via autophagy and
induce suppression of c-myc and PI3K/AKT pathways. We will also present evidence 
demonstrating that certain SK inhibitors promote oxidative stress and protein
turnover via proteasomal degradative pathways linked with induction of p53-and
p21-induced growth arrest. In addition, the SK1 inhibitor, PF-543 exacerbates
disease progression in an experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis mouse model
indicating that SK1 functions in an anti-inflammatory manner. Indeed,
sphingosine, which accumulates upon inhibition of SK1 activity, and
sphingosine-like compounds promote activation of the inflammasome, which is
linked with multiple sclerosis, to stimulate formation of the pro-inflammatory
mediator, IL-1ß. Such compounds could be exploited to produce antagonists that
diminish exaggerated inflammation in disease. The therapeutic potential of
modifying the SK-S1P receptor pathway in cancer and inflammation will therefore, 
be reviewed.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26429117  [PubMed - in process]


109. Tumour Biol. 2015 Sep 30. [Epub ahead of print]

The potential role of the NEK6, AURKA, AURKB, and PAK1 genes in adenomatous
colorectal polyps and colorectal adenocarcinoma.

Kasap E(1), Gerceker E(2), Boyacioglu SÖ(3), Yuceyar H(2), Yildirm H(3), Ayhan
S(4), Korkmaz M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Medical Faculty, Celal Bayar University,
Manisa, Turkey. elmaskasap@yahoo.com. (2)Department of Gastroenterology, Medical 
Faculty, Celal Bayar University, Manisa, Turkey. (3)Department of Medical
Genetics and Medical Biology, Medical Faculty, Celal Bayar University, Manisa,
Turkey. (4)Department of Pathology, Medical Faculty, Celal Bayar University,
Manisa, Turkey.

Colorectal adenomatous polyp (CRAP) is a major risk factor for the development of
sporadic colorectal cancer (CRC). Histone modifications are one of the epigenetic
mechanisms that may have key roles in the carcinogenesis of CRC. The objective of
the present study is to investigate the alternations in the defined histone
modification gene expression profiles in patients with CRAP and CRC. Histone
modification enzyme key gene expressions of the CRC, CRAP, and control groups
were evaluated and compared using the reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) array
method. Gene expression analysis was performed in the CRAP group after dividing
the patients into subgroups according to the polyp diameter, pathological
results, and morphological parameters which are risk factors for developing CRC
in patients with CRAP. PAK1, NEK6, AURKA, AURKB, HDAC1, and HDAC7 were
significantly more overexpressed in CRC subjects compared to the controls
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). PAK1, NEK6, AURKA, AURKB, and HDAC1 were significantly more
overexpressed in the CRAP group compared to the controls (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.005). There were 
no significant differences between the CRAP and CRC groups with regards to PAK1, 
NEK6, AURKA, or AURKB gene overexpression. PAK1, NEK6, AURKA, and AURKB were
significantly in correlation with the polyp diameter as they were more
overexpressed in polyps with larger diameters. In conclusion, overexpressions of 
NEK6, AURKA, AURKB, and PAK1 genes can be used as predictive markers to decide
the colonoscopic surveillance intervals after the polypectomy procedure
especially in polyps with larger diameters.

PMID: 26423403  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


110. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Dec;35(24):4158-69. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00546-15. Epub 2015 Sep 
28.

BRG1 Governs Nanog Transcription in Early Mouse Embryos and Embryonic Stem Cells 
via Antagonism of Histone H3 Lysine 9/14 Acetylation.

Carey TS(1), Cao Z(2), Choi I(2), Ganguly A(3), Wilson CA(2), Paul S(3), Knott
JG(4).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Epigenetics Laboratory, Department of Animal Science, Michigan
State University, East Lansing, Michigan, USA Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan, USA.
(2)Developmental Epigenetics Laboratory, Department of Animal Science, Michigan
State University, East Lansing, Michigan, USA. (3)Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, Institute of Reproductive Health and Regenerative Medicine, 
University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas, USA. (4)Developmental
Epigenetics Laboratory, Department of Animal Science, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, Michigan, USA Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan, USA knottj@msu.edu.

During mouse preimplantation development, the generation of the inner cell mass
(ICM) and trophoblast lineages comprises upregulation of Nanog expression in the 
ICM and its silencing in the trophoblast. However, the underlying epigenetic
mechanisms that differentially regulate Nanog in the first cell lineages are
poorly understood. Here, we report that BRG1 (Brahma-related gene 1) cooperates
with histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) to regulate Nanog expression. BRG1 depletion
in preimplantation embryos and Cdx2-inducible embryonic stem cells (ESCs)
revealed that BRG1 is necessary for Nanog silencing in the trophoblast lineage.
Conversely, in undifferentiated ESCs, loss of BRG1 augmented Nanog expression.
Analysis of histone H3 within the Nanog proximal enhancer revealed that H3 lysine
9/14 (H3K9/14) acetylation increased in BRG1-depleted embryos and ESCs.
Biochemical studies demonstrated that HDAC1 was present in BRG1-BAF155 complexes 
and BRG1-HDAC1 interactions were enriched in the trophoblast lineage. HDAC1
inhibition triggered an increase in H3K9/14 acetylation and a corresponding rise 
in Nanog mRNA and protein, phenocopying BRG1 knockdown embryos and ESCs. Lastly, 
nucleosome-mapping experiments revealed that BRG1 is indispensable for nucleosome
remodeling at the Nanog enhancer during trophoblast development. In summary, our 
data suggest that BRG1 governs Nanog expression via a dual mechanism involving
histone deacetylation and nucleosome remodeling.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4648823 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 26416882  [PubMed - in process]


111. Sci Rep. 2015 Sep 28;5:14470. doi: 10.1038/srep14470.

Activating transcription factor 3 represses inflammatory responses by binding to 
the p65 subunit of NF-<U+03BA>B.

Kwon JW(1), Kwon HK(1), Shin HJ(1), Choi YM(1), Anwar MA(1), Choi S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Science and Technology, Ajou University, Suwon,
443-749, Korea.

Activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) is induced by inflammatory responses,
cell death, cytokines, and oxidative stress conditions. ATF3 is a negative
regulator in the Toll-like receptor 4 signalling pathway. The principal molecule 
in this pathway is nuclear factor <U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) that translocates into the nucleus
to initiate the transcription of inflammatory mediators. However, scarce data are
available regarding the interaction of ATF3 and p65, a part of the NF-<U+03BA>B dimer.
Therefore, we studied the mechanism of regulation of p65 by ATF3 in RAW 264.7
cells. First, LPS-mediated NF-<U+03BA>B activation was confirmed, and then the direct
interaction of ATF3 and p65 was observed through immunoprecipitation (IP). The
presence of histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) was also detected in the complex. In
ATF3 deficient cells, NF-<U+03BA>B activity was up-regulated and HDAC1 was not detected 
by IP. These observations suggest that p65 is attenuated by ATF3 such that ATF3
recruits HDAC1 to the ATF3/p65 complex and facilitates the deacetylation of p65. 
Likewise, inflammatory response genes were induced by translocated NF-<U+03BA>B in
ATF3-deficient cells. Cumulatively, we uncovered a novel mechanism for the
negative regulation of NF-<U+03BA>B by ATF3 via direct interaction with p65.

PMCID: PMC4585983
PMID: 26412238  [PubMed - in process]


112. Cell Rep. 2015 Oct 6;13(1):52-60. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.08.067. Epub 2015
Sep 24.

Tgif1 Counterbalances the Activity of Core Pluripotency Factors in Mouse
Embryonic Stem Cells.

Lee BK(1), Shen W(2), Lee J(1), Rhee C(1), Chung H(1), Kim KY(3), Park IH(3), Kim
J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, the University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, TX 78712, USA; Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Center for
Systems and Synthetic Biology, the University of Texas at Austin, Austin,
TX 78712, USA. (2)Department of Molecular Biosciences, the University of Texas at
Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA. (3)Department of Genetics, Yale Stem Cell Center, 
Yale School of Medicine, 10 Amistad, 201B, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular Biosciences, the University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, TX 78712, USA; Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Center for
Systems and Synthetic Biology, the University of Texas at Austin, Austin,
TX 78712, USA. Electronic address: jonghwankim@mail.utexas.edu.

Core pluripotency factors, such as Oct4, Sox2, and Nanog, play important roles in
maintaining embryonic stem cell (ESC) identity by autoregulatory feedforward
loops. Nevertheless, the mechanism that provides precise control of the levels of
the ESC core factors without indefinite amplification has remained elusive. Here,
we report the direct repression of core pluripotency factors by Tgif1, a
previously known terminal repressor of TGFß/activin/nodal signaling.
Overexpression of Tgif1 reduces the levels of ESC core factors, whereas its
depletion leads to the induction of the pluripotency factors. We confirm the
existence of physical associations between Tgif1 and Oct4, Nanog, and HDAC1/2 and
further show the level of Tgif1 is not significantly altered by treatment with an
activator/inhibitor of the TGFß/activin/nodal signaling. Collectively, our
findings establish Tgif1 as an integral member of the core regulatory circuitry
of mouse ESCs that counterbalances the levels of the core pluripotency factors in
a TGFß/activin/nodal-independent manner.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26411691  [PubMed - in process]


113. PLoS Biol. 2015 Sep 25;13(9):e1002258. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002258.
eCollection 2015.

HDAC1/2-Dependent P0 Expression Maintains Paranodal and Nodal Integrity
Independently of Myelin Stability through Interactions with Neurofascins.

Brügger V(1), Engler S(2), Pereira JA(3), Ruff S(1), Horn M(3), Welzl H(4),
Münger E(1), Vaquié A(1), Sidiropoulos PN(3), Egger B(1), Yotovski P(5),
Filgueira L(5), Somandin C(3), Lühmann TC(6), D'Antonio M(7), Yamaguchi T(8),
Matthias P(8), Suter U(3), Jacob C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland;
Institute of Molecular Health Sciences, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland. (3)Institute of Molecular Health Sciences, Department of
Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. (4)Department of Anatomy, University of
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. (5)Anatomy, Department of Medicine, University of
Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland. (6)Department of Materials, Laboratory for
Biologically Oriented Materials, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. (7)Division of 
Genetics and Cell Biology, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, DIBIT, Milano,
Italy. (8)FMI for Biomedical Research, Novartis Research Foundation, Basel,
Switzerland.

The pathogenesis of peripheral neuropathies in adults is linked to maintenance
mechanisms that are not well understood. Here, we elucidate a novel critical
maintenance mechanism for Schwann cell (SC)-axon interaction. Using mouse
genetics, ablation of the transcriptional regulators histone deacetylases 1 and 2
(HDAC1/2) in adult SCs severely affected paranodal and nodal integrity and led to
demyelination/remyelination. Expression levels of the HDAC1/2 target gene myelin 
protein zero (P0) were reduced by half, accompanied by altered localization and
stability of neurofascin (NFasc)155, NFasc186, and loss of Caspr and septate-like
junctions. We identify P0 as a novel binding partner of NFasc155 and NFasc186,
both in vivo and by in vitro adhesion assay. Furthermore, we demonstrate that
HDAC1/2-dependent P0 expression is crucial for the maintenance of paranodal/nodal
integrity and axonal function through interaction of P0 with neurofascins. In
addition, we show that the latter mechanism is impaired by some P0 mutations that
lead to late onset Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease.

PMCID: PMC4583457
PMID: 26406915  [PubMed - in process]


114. Cytoskeleton (Hoboken). 2015 Oct;72(10):542-56. doi: 10.1002/cm.21256. Epub 2015 
Nov 4.

Contractile actin cables induced by Bacillus anthracis lethal toxin depend on the
histone acetylation machinery.

Rolando M(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Stefani C(1,)(2,)(5), Doye A(1,)(2), Acosta MI(1,)(2), 
Visvikis O(1,)(2), Yevick HG(6), Buchrieser C(3,)(4), Mettouchi A(1,)(2),
Bassereau P(6), Lemichez E(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Toxins in Host-Pathogen Interactions, Equipe Labellisée La Ligue
Contre Le Cancer, INSERM, U1065, Centre Méditerranéen De Médecine Moléculaire
(C3M), 151 Route St Antoine de Ginestière, BP 2 3194, 06204 Nice Cedex, France.
(2)UFR Médecine, IFR50, Faculté De Médecine, Université De Nice-Sophia Antipolis,
Nice, France. (3)Biologie Des Bactéries Intracellulaires, Institut Pasteur,
Paris, France. (4)UMR 3525, CNRS, Paris, France. (5)Immunology Program, Benaroya 
Research Institute at Virginia Mason, Seattle, WA 98101, USA. (6)Institut
Curie-Centre de Recherche, Membrane and Cell Functions Group; CNRS UMR 168,
Physico-Chimie Curie, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, 26 Rue d'ulm, Paris Cedex
05, 75248, France.

It remains a challenge to decode the molecular basis of the long-term actin
cytoskeleton rearrangements that are governed by the reprogramming of gene
expression. Bacillus anthracis lethal toxin (LT) inhibits mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) signaling, thereby modulating gene expression, with major
consequences for actin cytoskeleton organization and the loss of endothelial
barrier function. Using a laser ablation approach, we characterized the
contractile and tensile mechanical properties of LT-induced stress fibers. These 
actin cables resist pulling forces that are transmitted at cell-matrix interfaces
and at cell-cell discontinuous adherens junctions. We report that treating the
cells with trichostatin A (TSA), a broad range inhibitor of histone deacetylases 
(HDACs), or with MS-275, which targets HDAC1, 2 and 3, induces stress fibers. LT 
decreased the cellular levels of HDAC1, 2 and 3 and reduced the global HDAC
activity in the nucleus. Both the LT and TSA treatments induced Rnd3 expression, 
which is required for the LT-mediated induction of actin stress fibers.
Furthermore, we reveal that treating the LT-intoxicated cells with garcinol, an
inhibitor of histone acetyl-transferases (HATs), disrupts the stress fibers and
limits the monolayer barrier dysfunctions. These data demonstrate the importance 
of modulating the flux of protein acetylation in order to control actin
cytoskeleton organization and the endothelial cell monolayer barrier. © 2015
Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26403219  [PubMed - in process]


115. Aging (Albany NY). 2015 Sep;7(9):648-63.

Heart-specific Rpd3 downregulation enhances cardiac function and longevity.

Kopp ZA(1), Hsieh JL(1), Li A(1), Wang W(1), Bhatt DT(1), Lee A(1), Kim SY(1),
Fan D(1), Shah V(1), Siddiqui E(1), Ragam R(1), Park K(1), Ardeshna D(1), Park
K(1), Wu R(1), Parikh H(1), Parikh A(1), Lin YR(1), Park Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Medicine, Rutgers-New Jersey Medical 
School, Newark, NJ 07103, USA.

Downregulation of Rpd3, a homologue of mammalian Histone Deacetylase 1 (HDAC1),
extends lifespan in Drosophila melanogaster. Once revealed that long-lived fruit 
flies exhibit limited cardiac decline, we investigated whether Rpd3
downregulation would improve stress resistance and/or lifespan when targeted in
the heart. Contested against three different stressors (oxidation, starvation and
heat), heart-specific Rpd3 downregulation significantly enhanced stress
resistance in flies. However, these higher levels of resistance were not observed
when Rpd3 downregulation was targeted in other tissues or when other long-lived
flies were tested in the heart-specific manner. Interestingly, the expressions of
anti-aging genes such as sod2, foxo and Thor, were systemically increased as a
consequence of heart-specific Rpd3 downregulation. Showing higher resistance to
oxidative stress, the heart-specific Rpd3 downregulation concurrently exhibited
improved cardiac functions, demonstrating an increased heart rate, decreased
heart failure and accelerated heart recovery. Conversely, Rpd3 upregulation in
cardiac tissue reduced systemic resistance against heat stress with decreased
heart function, also specifying phosphorylated Rpd3 levels as a significant
modulator. Continual downregulation of Rpd3 throughout aging increased lifespan, 
implicating that Rpd3 deacetylase in the heart plays a significant role in
cardiac function and longevity to systemically modulate the fly's response to the
environment.

PMCID: PMC4600623
PMID: 26399365  [PubMed - in process]


116. FASEB J. 2016 Feb;30(2):525-43. doi: 10.1096/fj.15-275529. Epub 2015 Sep 21.

The cell- and tissue-specific transcription mechanism of the TATA-less syntaxin
1A gene.

Nakayama T(1), Mikoshiba K(2), Akagawa K(2).

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Physiology, Kyorin University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan;
and RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Neuro-Developmental Disorder Research Group,
Laboratory for Developmental Neurobiology, Saitama, Japan
nakayama@ks.kyorin-u.ac.jp. (2)*Department of Physiology, Kyorin University
School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan; and RIKEN Brain Science Institute,
Neuro-Developmental Disorder Research Group, Laboratory for Developmental
Neurobiology, Saitama, Japan.

Syntaxin 1A (Stx1a) plays an important role in regulation of neuronal synaptic
function. To clarify the mechanism of basic transcriptional regulation and
neuron-specific transcription of Stx1a we cloned the Stx1a gene from rat, in
which knowledge of the expression profile was accumulated, and elucidated that
Stx1a consisting of 10 exons, possesses multiple transcription initiation sites
and a 204-bp core promoter region (CPR) essential for transcription in PC12
cells. The TATA-less, conserved, GC-rich CPR has 2 specific protein (SP) sites
that bind SP1 and are responsible for 65% of promoter activity. The endogenous
CPR, including 23 CpG sites, is not methylated in PC12 cells, which express Stx1a
and fetal rat skin keratinocyte (FRSK) cells, which do not, although an exogenous
methylated CPR suppresses reporter activity in both lines. Trichostatin A (TSA)
and class I histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors, but not 5-azacytidine, induce 
Stx1a in FRSK cells. Acetylated histone H3 only associates to the CPR in FRSK
cells after TSA addition, whereas the high acetylated histone H3-CPR association 
in PC12 cells was unchanged following treatment. HDAC inhibitor induction of
Stx1a was negated by mithramycin A and deletion/mutation of 2 SP sites. HDAC1,
HDAC2, and HDAC8 detach from the CPR when treated with TSA in FRSK cells and are 
associated with the CPR in lungs, and acetylated histone H3 associates to this
region in the brain. In the first study characterizing a syntaxin promoter, we
show that association of SP1 and acetylated histone H3 to CPR is important for
Stx1a transcription and that HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC8 decide cell/tissue
specificity in a suppressive manner.-Nakayama, T., Mikoshiba, K., Akagawa, K. The
cell- and tissue-specific transcription mechanism of the TATA-less syntaxin 1A
gene.

© FASEB.

PMID: 26391271  [PubMed - in process]


117. Cell Mol Immunol. 2015 Sep 21. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2015.88. [Epub ahead of print]

Inhibition of squamous cancer growth in a mouse model by Staphylococcal
enterotoxin B-triggered Th9 cell expansion.

Miao BP(1,)(2), Zhang RS(1), Sun HJ(1), Yu YP(1), Chen T(1), Li LJ(3), Liu JQ(3),
Liu J(4), Yu HQ(2), Zhang M(5), Liu ZG(2), Yang PC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Shenzhen
University and the Second People's Hospital of Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China.
(2)Center of Allergy & Immunology, Shenzhen University School of Medicine,
Shenzhen, China. (3)Brain Body Institute, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON L8N
4A6, Canada. (4)Shenzhen Women & Children Healthcare, Shenzhen, China.
(5)Department of Respirology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Shenzhen
University and the Second People's Hospital of Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China.

Currently, therapy for squamous cancer (SqC) is unsatisfactory. Staphylococcal
enterotoxin B (SEB) has strong immune regulatory activity. This study tests the
hypothesis that SEB enforces the effect of immunotherapy on SqC growth in a mouse
model. C3H/HeN mice and the SqC cell line squamous cell carcinoma VII were used
to create an SqC mouse model. Immune cell assessment was performed by flow
cytometry. Real-time RT-PCR and western blotting were used to evaluate target
molecule expression. An apoptosis assay was used to assess the suppressive effect
of T helper-9 (Th9) cells on the SqC cells. The results showed that immunotherapy
consisting of SEB plus SqC antigen significantly inhibited SqC growth in the
mice. The frequency of Th9 cells was markedly increased in the SqC tissue and
mouse spleens after treatment. SEB markedly increased the levels of signal
transducer and activator of transcription 5 phosphorylation and the expression of
histone deacetylase-1 (HDAC1) and PU.1 (the transcription factor of the
interleukin 9 (IL-9) gene) in CD4(+) T cells. Exposure to SqC-specific Th9 cells 
markedly induced SqC cell apoptosis both in vitro and in vivo. In conclusion, the
administration of SEB induces Th9 cells in SqC-bearing mice, and theseTh9 cells
inhibit SqC growth.Cellular & Molecular Immunology advance online publication, 21
September 2015; doi:10.1038/cmi.2015.88.

PMID: 26388239  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


118. Neurochem Res. 2016 Mar;41(3):620-30. doi: 10.1007/s11064-015-1703-1. Epub 2015
Sep 16.

New Insights into Epigenetic and Pharmacological Regulation of Amyloid-Degrading 
Enzymes.

Nalivaeva NN(1,)(2), Belyaev ND(1), Turner AJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences,
University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, UK. (2)I.M.Sechenov Institute of
Evolutionary Physiology and Biochemistry, RAS, 44 Thorez av, St., Petersburg,
194223, Russia. (3)School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Faculty of
Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, UK.
a.j.turner@leeds.ac.uk.

Currently, deficit of amyloid ß-peptide (Aß) clearance from the brain is
considered as one of the possible causes of amyloid accumulation and neuronal
death in the sporadic form of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Aß clearance can involve 
either specific proteases present in the brain or Aß-binding/transport proteins. 
Among amyloid-degrading enzymes the most intensively studied are neprilysin (NEP)
and insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE). Since ageing and development of brain
pathologies is often accompanied by a deficit in the levels of expression and
activity of these enzymes in the brain, there is an urgent need to understand the
mechanisms involved in their regulation. We have recently reported that NEP and
also an Aß-transport protein, transthyretin are epigenetically co-regulated by
the APP intracellular domain (AICD) and this regulation depends on the cell type 
and APP695 isoform expression in a process that can be regulated by the tyrosine 
kinase inhibitor, Gleevec. We have now extended our work and shown that, unlike
NEP, another amyloid-degrading enzyme, IDE, is not related to over-expression of 
APP695 in neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells but is up-regulated by APP751 and APP770
isoforms independently of AICD but correlating with reduced HDAC1 binding to its 
promoter. Studying the effect of the nuclear retinoid X receptor agonist,
bexarotene, on NEP and IDE expression, we have found that both enzymes can be
up-regulated by this compound but this mechanism is not APP-isoform specific and 
does not involve AICD but, on the contrary, affects HDAC1 occupancy on the NEP
gene promoter. These new insights into the mechanisms of NEP and IDE regulation
suggest possible pharmacological targets in developing AD therapies.

PMID: 26376806  [PubMed - in process]


119. Cell Cycle. 2015;14(20):3292-305. doi: 10.1080/15384101.2015.1087620.

Glutamine contributes to maintenance of mouse embryonic stem cell self-renewal
through PKC-dependent downregulation of HDAC1 and DNMT1/3a.

Ryu JM(1), Lee SH(2), Seong JK(3,)(4), Han HJ(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Veterinary Physiology ; College of Veterinary Medicine, Seoul 
National University ; Seoul , Korea. (2)b Medical Science Research Institute,
Soonchunhyang University Seoul Hospital ; Seoul , Korea. (3)c BK21 PLUS Program
for Creative Veterinary Science Research and Research Institute for Veterinary
Science, Seoul National University ; Seoul , Korea. (4)d Department of Anatomy
and Cell Biology ; Korea Mouse Phenotyping Center (KMPC), College of Veterinary
Medicine, Seoul National University ; Seoul , Korea.

Although glutamine (Gln) is not an essential amino acid, it is considered a
critical substrate in many key metabolic processes that control a variety of
physiological functions and are involved in regulating early embryonic
development. Thus, we investigated the effect of Gln on regulation of mouse
embryonic stem cell (mESC) self-renewal and related signaling pathways. Gln
deprivation decreased Oct4 expression as well as expression of cell cycle
regulatory proteins. However, Gln treatment retained the expression of cell cycle
regulatory proteins and the Oct4 in mESCs, which were blocked by compound 968 (a 
glutaminase inhibitor). In addition, Gln stimulated PI3K/Akt pathway, which
subsequently elicited PKC<U+03F5> translocation to membrane without an influx of
intracellular Ca(2+). Inhibition of Akt and PKC blocked Gln-induced Oct4
expression and proliferation. Gln also stimulated mTOR phosphorylation in a
time-dependent manner, which abolished by PKC inhibition. Furthermore, Gln
increased the cellular population of both Oct4 and bromodeoxyuridine positive
cells, suggesting that Gln regulates self-renewal ability of mESCs. Gln induced a
decrease in HDAC1, but not in HDAC2, which were blocked by PKC inhibitors. Gln
treatment resulted in an increase in global histone acetylation and methylation. 
In addition, Gln significantly reduced methylation of the Oct4 promoter region
through decrease in DNMT1 and DNMT3a expression, which were blocked by PKC and
HDAC inhibitors. In conclusion, Gln stimulates mESC proliferation and maintains
mESC undifferentiation status through transcription regulation via the Akt, PKC<U+03F5>,
and mTOR signaling pathways.

PMID: 26375799  [PubMed - in process]


120. Muscle Nerve. 2015 Dec;52(6):1098-101. doi: 10.1002/mus.24912. Epub 2015 Oct 10.

Differential expression of HDAC and HAT genes in atrophying skeletal muscle.

Beharry AW(1), Judge AR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical Therapy, 101 S. Newell Drive, P.O. Box 100154,
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA, 32610.

INTRODUCTION: Histone deacetylase (HDAC) proteins, which counter the activity of 
histone acetyltransferases (HATs), are necessary for normal muscle atrophy in
response to several pathophysiological conditions. Despite this, it remains
unknown whether a common or unique transcriptional profile of HDAC and HAT genes 
exist during the progression of muscle atrophy.
METHODS: Muscles were harvested from cast immobilized, denervated, or nutrient
deprived animals for quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
analysis of HDAC and HAT gene expression.
RESULTS: The mRNA levels of Hdac2, Hdac4, Hdac6, Sirt1, p300, Cbp, and Pcaf
increased, and Hdac7 decreased in skeletal muscle in each experimental model of
muscle atrophy. Hdac1 and Hdac3 were increased only in cast immobilized and
denervated muscles.
CONCLUSIONS: While specific HDACs and HATs are increased in multiple models of
muscle atrophy, increased expression of class I HDACs was unique to muscle
disuse, reinforcing that specific HDAC inhibitors may be more effective than
pan-HDAC inhibitors at countering muscle atrophy. Muscle Nerve 52: 1098-1101,
2015.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4715560 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26372908  [PubMed - in process]


121. Circ Heart Fail. 2015 Nov;8(6):1094-104. doi:
10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.114.001781. Epub 2015 Sep 14.

HDACs Regulate miR-133a Expression in Pressure Overload-Induced Cardiac Fibrosis.

Renaud L(1), Harris LG(1), Mani SK(1), Kasiganesan H(1), Chou JC(1), Baicu CF(1),
Van Laer A(1), Akerman AW(1), Stroud RE(1), Jones JA(1), Zile MR(1), Menick
DR(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Gazes Cardiac
Research Institute (L.R., L.G.H., S.K.M., H.K., C.F.B., A.V.L., M.R.Z., D.R.M.), 
Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Department of Cardiothoracic Surgical
Research (A.W.A., R.E.S., J.A.J.), and Department of Drug Discovery and
Biomedical Sciences, College of Pharmacy (J.C.C.), The Medical University of
South Carolina, Charleston; and Research Services, Ralph H. Johnson Veterans
Affairs Medical Center, Charleston, SC (J.A.J., M.R.Z., D.R.M.). (2)From the
Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Gazes Cardiac Research Institute 
(L.R., L.G.H., S.K.M., H.K., C.F.B., A.V.L., M.R.Z., D.R.M.), Division of
Cardiothoracic Surgery, Department of Cardiothoracic Surgical Research (A.W.A.,
R.E.S., J.A.J.), and Department of Drug Discovery and Biomedical Sciences,
College of Pharmacy (J.C.C.), The Medical University of South Carolina,
Charleston; and Research Services, Ralph H. Johnson Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, Charleston, SC (J.A.J., M.R.Z., D.R.M.). menickd@musc.edu.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) and histone deacetylases (HDACs) serve a
significant role in the pathogenesis of a variety of cardiovascular diseases. The
transcriptional regulation of miRNAs is poorly understood in cardiac hypertrophy.
We investigated whether the expression of miR-133a is epigenetically regulated by
class I and IIb HDACs during hypertrophic remodeling.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Transverse aortic constriction (TAC) was performed in CD1
mice to induce pressure overload hypertrophy. Mice were treated with class I and 
IIb HDAC inhibitor (HDACi) via drinking water for 2 and 4 weeks post TAC. miRNA
expression was determined by real-time polymerase chain reaction.
Echocardiography was performed at baseline and post TAC end points for structural
and functional assessment. Chromatin immunoprecipitation was used to identify
HDACs and transcription factors associated with miR-133a promoter. miR-133a
expression was downregulated by 0.7- and 0.5-fold at 2 and 4 weeks post TAC,
respectively, when compared with vehicle control (P<0.05). HDAC inhibition
prevented this significant decrease 2 weeks post TAC and maintained miR-133a
expression near vehicle control levels, which coincided with (1) a decrease in
connective tissue growth factor expression, (2) a reduction in cardiac fibrosis
and left atrium diameter (marker of end-diastolic pressure), suggesting an
improvement in diastolic function. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis
revealed that HDAC1 and HDAC2 are present on the miR-133a enhancer regions.
CONCLUSIONS: The results reveal that HDACs play a role in the regulation of
pressure overload-induced miR-133a downregulation. This work is the first to
provide insight into an epigenetic-miRNA regulatory pathway in pressure
overload-induced cardiac fibrosis.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4651803 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26371176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Cell. 2015 Sep 24;163(1):230-45. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.08.037. Epub 2015 Sep
10.

Systematic identification of factors for provirus silencing in embryonic stem
cells.

Yang BX(1), El Farran CA(2), Guo HC(3), Yu T(2), Fang HT(1), Wang HF(2),
Schlesinger S(4), Seah YF(1), Goh GY(5), Neo SP(6), Li Y(7), Lorincz MC(8),
Tergaonkar V(9), Lim TM(10), Chen L(3), Gunaratne J(11), Collins JJ(12), Goff
SP(13), Daley GQ(14), Li H(15), Bard FA(16), Loh YH(17).

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetics and Cell Fates Laboratory, A(*)STAR Institute of Molecular and
Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis Drive Proteos, Singapore 138673, Singapore.
(2)Epigenetics and Cell Fates Laboratory, A(*)STAR Institute of Molecular and
Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis Drive Proteos, Singapore 138673, Singapore; Department 
of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117543,
Singapore. (3)College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia University, New 
York, NY 10032, USA; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Columbia
University, New York, NY 10032, USA. (5)Membrane Traffic Laboratory, A(*)STAR
Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis Drive Proteos, Singapore
138673, Singapore. (6)Quantitative Proteomics Group, A(*)STAR Institute of
Molecular and Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis Drive Proteos, Singapore 138673,
Singapore. (7)Division of Cancer Genetics and Therapeutics, Laboratory of NF-<U+03BA>B
Signaling, A(*)STAR Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis Drive
Proteos, Singapore 138673, Singapore. (8)Department of Medical Genetics, Life
Sciences Institute, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z3,
Canada. (9)Division of Cancer Genetics and Therapeutics, Laboratory of NF-<U+03BA>B
Signaling, A(*)STAR Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis Drive
Proteos, Singapore 138673, Singapore; Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin
School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore 119077,
Singapore. (10)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of
Singapore, Singapore 117543, Singapore. (11)Quantitative Proteomics Group,
A(*)STAR Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis Drive Proteos,
Singapore 138673, Singapore; Department of Anatomy, Yong Loo Lin School of
Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117597, Singapore.
(12)Department of Biological Engineering, Synthetic Biology Center, Institute for
Medical Engineering and Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA; Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA
02139, USA; Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering, Harvard
University, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA. (13)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia
University, New York, NY 10032, USA; Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
New York, NY 10032, USA. (14)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA 02115,
USA; Stem Cell Transplantation Program, Division of Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital and Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular
Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Harvard Stem Cell
Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research,
Boston, MA 02115, USA. (15)Center for Individualized Medicine, Department of
Molecular Pharmacology & Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
MN 55905, USA. (16)Membrane Traffic Laboratory, A(*)STAR Institute of Molecular
and Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis Drive Proteos, Singapore 138673, Singapore;
Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University 
of Singapore, Singapore 119077, Singapore. (17)Epigenetics and Cell Fates
Laboratory, A(*)STAR Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis Drive
Proteos, Singapore 138673, Singapore; Department of Biological Sciences, National
University of Singapore, Singapore 117543, Singapore. Electronic address:
yhloh@imcb.a-star.edu.sg.

Comment in
    Cell. 2015 Sep 24;163(1):30-2.

Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) repress the expression of exogenous proviruses and
endogenous retroviruses (ERVs). Here, we systematically dissected the cellular
factors involved in provirus repression in embryonic carcinomas (ECs) and ESCs by
a genome-wide siRNA screen. Histone chaperones (Chaf1a/b), sumoylation factors
(Sumo2/Ube2i/Sae1/Uba2/Senp6), and chromatin modifiers (Trim28/Eset/Atf7ip) are
key determinants that establish provirus silencing. RNA-seq analysis uncovered
the roles of Chaf1a/b and sumoylation modifiers in the repression of ERVs.
ChIP-seq analysis demonstrates direct recruitment of Chaf1a and Sumo2 to ERVs.
Chaf1a reinforces transcriptional repression via its interaction with members of 
the NuRD complex (Kdm1a, Hdac1/2) and Eset, while Sumo2 orchestrates the provirus
repressive function of the canonical Zfp809/Trim28/Eset machinery by sumoylation 
of Trim28. Our study reports a genome-wide atlas of functional nodes that mediate
proviral silencing in ESCs and illuminates the comprehensive, interconnected, and
multi-layered genetic and epigenetic mechanisms by which ESCs repress
retroviruses within the genome.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4686136
PMID: 26365490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2015 Oct;39(10):1939-50. doi: 10.1111/acer.12850. Epub 2015
Sep 13.

Histone Deacetylase Gene Expression Following Binge Alcohol Consumption in Rats
and Humans.

López-Moreno JA(1), Marcos M(2), Calleja-Conde J(1), Echeverry-Alzate V(1),
Bühler KM(1), Costa-Alba P(3), Bernardo E(4), Laso FJ(2), Rodríguez de Fonseca
F(5), Nadal R(6), Viveros MP(7), Maldonado R(8), Giné E(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychobiology, School of Psychology, Complutense University of
Madrid, Madrid, Spain. (2)Alcoholism Unit, Department of Internal Medicine,
University Hospital of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain. (3)Emergency Department,
University Hospital of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain. (4)Department of Vascular
Biology and Inflammation, Fundación Centro Nacional de Investigaciones
Cardiovasculares Carlos III, Madrid, Spain. (5)Fundación IMABIS, Laboratorio de
Medicina Regenerativa, Hospital Regional Universitario Carlos Haya, Málaga,
Spain. (6)Psychobiology Unit, School of Psychology, Institut de Neurociències,
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. (7)Department of Physiology 
(Animal Physiology II), School of Biology, Complutense University of Madrid,
Madrid, Spain. (8)Laboratori de Neurofarmacologia, Departament de Ciències
Experimentals i de la Salut, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.
(9)Department of Cellular Biology, School of Medicine, Complutense University of 
Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Alcohol binge drinking is one of the most common patterns of
excessive alcohol use and recent data would suggest that histone deacetylases
(HDACs) gene expression profiling could be useful as a biomarker for psychiatric 
disorders.
METHODS: This study aimed to characterize the gene expression patterns of Hdac
1-11 in samples of rat peripheral blood, liver, heart, prefrontal cortex, and
amygdala following repeated binge alcohol consumption and to determine the
parallelism of Hdac gene expression between rats and humans in peripheral blood. 
To accomplish this goal, we examined Hdac gene expression following 1, 4, or 8
alcohol binges (3 g/kg, orally) in the rat, in patients who were admitted to the 
hospital emergency department for acute alcohol intoxication, and in rats trained
in daily operant alcohol self-administration.
RESULTS: We primarily found that acute alcohol binging reduced gene expression
(Hdac1-10) in the peripheral blood of alcohol-naïve rats and that this effect was
attenuated following repeated alcohol binges. There was also a reduction of Hdac 
gene expression in the liver (Hdac2,4,5), whereas there was increased expression 
in the heart (Hdac1,7,8) and amygdala (Hdac1,2,5). Additionally, increased blood 
alcohol concentrations were measured in rat blood at 1 to 4 hours following
repeated alcohol binging, and the only group that developed hepatic steotosis
(fatty liver) were those animals exposed to 8 alcohol binge events. Finally, both
binge consumption of alcohol in humans and daily operant alcohol
self-administration in rats increased Hdac gene expression in peripheral blood.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that increases in HDAC gene expression within
the peripheral blood are associated with chronic alcohol consumption, whereas
HDAC gene expression is reduced following initial exposure to alcohol.

Copyright © 2015 by the Research Society on Alcoholism.

PMID: 26365275  [PubMed - in process]


124. Thorax. 2015 Nov;70(11):1022-32. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2014-206411. Epub 2015
Sep 10.

Aberrant expression and activity of histone deacetylases in sporadic idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis.

Korfei M(1), Skwarna S(1), Henneke I(1), MacKenzie B(1), Klymenko O(1), Saito
S(2), Ruppert C(3), von der Beck D(1), Mahavadi P(1), Klepetko W(4), Bellusci
S(3), Crestani B(5), Pullamsetti SS(6), Fink L(7), Seeger W(3), Krämer OH(8),
Guenther A(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Justus-Liebig-University Giessen, Giessen,
Germany Universities of Giessen and Marburg Lung Center (UGMLC), Member of the
German Center for Lung Research (DZL). (2)Department of Medicine, Section of
Pulmonary Diseases, Critical Care and Environmental Medicine, Tulane University
Health Science Center, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA. (3)Department of Internal
Medicine, Justus-Liebig-University Giessen, Giessen, Germany Universities of
Giessen and Marburg Lung Center (UGMLC), Member of the German Center for Lung
Research (DZL) Excellence Cluster Cardio-Pulmonary System (ECCPS), Giessen,
Germany. (4)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Vienna General Hospital, Vienna,
Austria European IPF Network and European IPF Registry. (5)CHU Paris Nord-Val de 
Seine, Hôpital Xavier Bichat-Claude Bernard, Paris, France European IPF Network
and European IPF Registry. (6)Department of Internal Medicine,
Justus-Liebig-University Giessen, Giessen, Germany Universities of Giessen and
Marburg Lung Center (UGMLC), Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL) 
Department of Lung Development and Remodeling, Max-Planck-Institute for Heart and
Lung Research, Bad Nauheim, Germany. (7)Universities of Giessen and Marburg Lung 
Center (UGMLC), Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL) Excellence
Cluster Cardio-Pulmonary System (ECCPS), Giessen, Germany Institute of Pathology 
and Cytology, Wetzlar, Germany. (8)Department of Toxicology, University Medical
Center, Mainz, Germany. (9)Department of Internal Medicine,
Justus-Liebig-University Giessen, Giessen, Germany Universities of Giessen and
Marburg Lung Center (UGMLC), Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL) 
Excellence Cluster Cardio-Pulmonary System (ECCPS), Giessen, Germany Agaplesion
Lung Clinic Waldhof Elgershausen, Greifenstein, Germany European IPF Network and 
European IPF Registry.

BACKGROUND: Activation and differentiation of fibroblasts into contractile
protein-expressing myofibroblasts and their acquired apoptosis-resistant
phenotype are critical factors towards the development of idiopathic pulmonary
fibrosis (IPF), a fatal disease characterised by distorted pulmonary structure
and excessive extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition. The molecular mechanisms
underlying these processes in IPF remain incompletely understood. We investigated
the possible implication of aberrant overexpression and activity of histone
deacetylases (HDACs) in IPF.
METHODS: We analysed lung tissues from patients with sporadic IPF (n=26) and
non-diseased control lungs (n=16) for expression of class I and II HDACs. Primary
IPF fibroblasts were treated with HDAC inhibitors (HDACi) LBH589 or valproic acid
(VPA).
RESULTS: Compared to control lungs, protein levels of class I (HDAC1, HDAC2,
HDAC3, HDAC8) and class II HDACs (HDAC4, HDAC 5, HDAC 7, HDAC 9) were
significantly elevated in IPF lungs. Using immunohistochemistry, strong induction
of nearly all HDAC enzymes was observed in myofibroblasts of fibroblast foci and 
in abnormal bronchiolar basal cells at sites of aberrant re-epithelialisation in 
IPF lungs, but not in controls. Treatment of primary IPF fibroblasts with the
pan-HDACi LBH589 resulted in significantly reduced expression of genes associated
with ECM synthesis, proliferation and cell survival, as well as in suppression of
HDAC7, and was paralleled by induction of endoplasmic reticulum stress and
apoptosis. The profibrotic and apoptosis-resistant phenotype of IPF fibroblasts
was also partly attenuated by the class I HDACi VPA.
CONCLUSIONS: Aberrant overexpression of HDACs in basal cells of IPF lungs may
contribute to the bronchiolisation process in this disease. Similarly, generation
and apoptosis resistance of IPF fibroblasts are mediated by enhanced activity of 
HDAC enzymes. Therefore, pan-HDAC inhibition by LBH589 may present a novel
therapeutic option for patients with IPF.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 26359372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Nat Commun. 2015 Sep 10;6:8230. doi: 10.1038/ncomms9230.

Epigenetic regulation of Smad2 and Smad3 by profilin-2 promotes lung cancer
growth and metastasis.

Tang YN(1), Ding WQ(1), Guo XJ(1), Yuan XW(1), Wang DM(1), Song JG(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Innovation Center for Cell Signalling
Network, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for
Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.

Altered transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) signalling has been implicated in
tumour development and progression. However, the molecular mechanism behind this 
alteration is poorly understood. Here we show that profilin-2 (Pfn2) increases
Smad2 and Smad3 expression via an epigenetic mechanism, and that profilin-2 and
Smad expression correlate with an unfavourable prognosis of lung cancer patients.
Profilin-2 overexpression promotes, whereas profilin-2 knockdown drastically
reduces, lung cancer growth and metastasis. We show that profilin-2 suppresses
the recruitment of HDAC1 to Smad2 and Smad3 promoters by preventing nuclear
translocation of HDAC1 through protein-protein interaction at the C terminus of
both proteins, leading to the transcriptional activation of Smad2 and Smad3.
Increased Smad2 and Smad3 expression enhances TGF-ß1-induced EMT and production
of the angiogenic factors VEGF and CTGF. These findings reveal a new regulatory
mechanism of TGF-ß1/Smad signalling, and suggest a potential molecular target for
the development of anticancer drugs.

PMID: 26354229  [PubMed - in process]


126. Biol Reprod. 2015 Oct;93(4):89. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.115.133504. Epub 2015 Sep
9.

Maternal SIN3A regulates reprogramming of gene expression during mouse
preimplantation development.

Jimenez R(1), Melo EO(1), Davydenko O(2), Ma J(1), Mainigi M(2), Franke V(3),
Schultz RM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (3)Bioinformatics Group, 
Division of Biology, Faculty of Science, Zagreb University, Zagreb, Croatia.
(4)Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 
rschultz@sas.upenn.edu.

The oocyte-to-embryo transition entails genome activation and a dramatic
reprogramming of gene expression that is required for continued development.
Superimposed on genome activation and reprogramming is development of a
transcriptionally repressive state at the level of chromatin structure. Inducing 
global histone hyperacetylation relieves this repression and histone deacetylases
1 and 2 (HDAC1 and HDAC2) are involved in establishing the repressive state.
Because SIN3A is an HDAC1/2-containing complex, we investigated whether it is
involved in reprogramming gene expression during the course of genome activation.
We find that Sin3a mRNA is recruited during maturation and that inhibiting its
recruitment not only inhibits development beyond the 2-cell stage but also
compromises the fidelity of reprogramming gene expression. The SIN3A that is
synthesized during oocyte maturation reaches a maximum level in the mid-1-cell
embryo and is essentially absent by the mid-2-cell stage. Overexpressing SIN3A in
1-cell embryos has no obvious effect on pre- and postimplantation development.
These results provide a mechanism by which reprogramming can occur using a
maternally inherited transcription machinery, namely, recruitment of mRNAs
encoding transcription factors and chromatin remodelers, such as SIN3A.

© 2015 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4711907 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26353893  [PubMed - in process]


127. Oncol Rep. 2015 Nov;34(5):2238-50. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4263. Epub 2015 Sep 9.

HDAC1 and HDAC2 independently predict mortality in hepatocellular carcinoma by a 
competing risk regression model in a Southeast Asian population.

Ler SY(1), Leung CH(2), Khin LW(3), Lu GD(4), Salto-Tellez M(5), Hartman M(6),
Iau PT(6), Yap CT(1), Hooi SC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University
of Singapore, Singapore, Republic of Singapore. (2)School of Chemical and Life
Sciences, Singapore Polytechnic, Singapore, Republic of Singapore.
(3)Investigational Medicine Unit, Dean's Office, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine,
National University of Singapore and National University Health System,
Singapore, Republic of Singapore. (4)School of Public Health, Guangxi Medical
University, Nanning, Guangxi, P.R. China. (5)Cancer Science Institute of
Singapore, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Republic of Singapore.
(6)Department of Surgery, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of
Singapore and National University Health System, Singapore, Republic of
Singapore.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are enzymes involved in transcriptional repression. 
We aimed to examine the significance of HDAC1 and HDAC2 gene expression in the
prediction of recurrence and survival in 156 patients with hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) among a South East Asian population who underwent curative
surgical resection in Singapore. We found that HDAC1 and HDAC2 were upregulated
in the majority of HCC tissues. The presence of HDAC1 in tumor tissues was
correlated with poor tumor differentiation. Notably, HDAC1 expression in adjacent
non-tumor hepatic tissues was correlated with the presence of satellite nodules
and multiple lesions, suggesting that HDAC1 upregulation within the field of HCC 
may contribute to tumor spread. Using competing risk regression analysis, we
found that increased cancer-specific mortality was significantly associated with 
HDAC2 expression. Mortality was also increased with high HDAC1 expression. In the
liver cancer cell lines, HEP3B, HEPG2, PLC5, and a colorectal cancer cell line,
HCT116, the combined knockdown of HDAC1 and HDAC2 increased cell death and
reduced cell proliferation as well as colony formation. In contrast, knockdown of
either HDAC1 or HDAC2 alone had minimal effects on cell death and proliferation. 
Taken together, our study suggests that both HDAC1 and HDAC2 exert pro-survival
effects in HCC cells, and the combination of isoform-specific HDAC inhibitors
against both HDACs may be effective in targeting HCC to reduce mortality.

PMCID: PMC4583520
PMID: 26352599  [PubMed - in process]


128. Z Rheumatol. 2015 Dec;74(10):902-10. doi: 10.1007/s00393-015-1619-9.

JHDM1D and HDAC1-3 mRNA expression levels in peripheral blood mononuclear cells
of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus.

Nawrocki MJ(1), Strugala AJ(2), Piotrowski P(3,)(4), Wudarski M(5), Olesinska
M(5), Jagodzinski PP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Poznan University of Medical
Sciences, 6 Swiecickiego St, 60-781, Poznan, Poland. mjnawrocki@ump.edu.pl.
(2)Department of Molecular and Systems Biology, Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry
Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland. (3)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, 6 Swiecickiego St,
60-781, Poznan, Poland. (4)Mossakowski Medical Research Centre, Polish Academy of
Sciences, 5 Pawinskiego Street, 02-106, Warsaw, Poland. (5)Institute of
Rheumatology, Warsaw, Poland.

BACKGROUND: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic relapsing autoimmune 
disease characterized by production of autoantibodies against a series of nuclear
antigens and by chronic inflammation. The etiology of SLE is the result of
interactions between genetic, epigenetic, hormonal, and environmental factors.
Changes in histone acetylation and methylation contribute to structural chromatin
modifications.
OBJECTIVE: We studied the histone demethylase JHDM1D and histone deacetylases
HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3 transcript levels in peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) from patients diagnosed with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
Furthermore, the association of JHDM1D, HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3 transcript levels
with gender, age, and major clinical manifestations were analyzed.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RQ-PCR) 
analysis was used to determine JHDM1D, HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3 mRNA expression
levels in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from 30 patients with SLE
and 36 healthy controls.
RESULTS: Significantly lower HDAC2 transcript levels (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.006785) and
significantly higher JHDM1D (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0000002) and HDAC1 (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.010581) transcript
levels in SLE patients were observed compared with healthy controls. Higher
JHDM1D mRNA expression was detected in active SLE patients when compared with
inactive patients (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005). Furthermore, the JHDM1D transcript levels were
positively correlated with disease activity (r(s) =<U+2009>0.368, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.045), while
HDAC2 mRNA expression was positively correlated with disease duration (r(s)
=<U+2009>0.502, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0047).
CONCLUSION: Our analyses confirmed the importance of epigenetic alterations
(histone demethylation and acetylation) in SLE etiology. Moreover, our results
suggest that the presence of some clinical manifestations, like hematological
disease and anti-Ro antibody, might be associated with the dysregulation of
histone demethylase and deacetylases mRNA expression levels.

PMID: 26347123  [PubMed - in process]


129. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 29;6(29):27427-39. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4861.

The positive feedback between Snail and DAB2IP regulates EMT, invasion and
metastasis in colorectal cancer.

Wang J(1,)(2), Zhu X(1,)(3), Hu J(1,)(3), He G(1,)(3), Li X(1,)(3), Wu P(1,)(3), 
Ren X(1,)(3), Wang F(1,)(3), Liao W(1,)(3), Liang L(1,)(3), Ding Y(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou 510515, Guangdong Province, People's Republic of China. (2)Department
of Pathology, The Affiliated Hospital of Luzhou Medical College, Luzhou 646000,
Luzhou, China. (3)Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Molecular Tumor Pathology,
Guangzhou 510515, Guangdong Province, People's Republic of China.

DAB2IP has been identified as a tumor suppressor in several cancers but its
oncogenic role and transcriptionally regulatory mechanisms in the progression of 
colorectal carcinoma (CRC) remain unknown. In this study, DAB2IP was
down-regulated in CRC tissues and a valuable prognostic marker for survival of
CRC patients, especially in the late stage. Moreover, DAB2IP was sufficient to
suppress proliferation, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), invasion and
metastasis in CRC. Mechanically, the linear complex of EZH2/HDAC1/Snail
contributed to DAB2IP silencing in CRC cells. The study further proved that the
positive feedback loop between Snail and DAB2IP existed in CRC cells and DAB2IP
was required for Snail-induced aggressive cell behaviors. Finally, DAB2IP
correlated negatively with Snail and EZH2 expressions in CRC tissues. Our
findings reveal the suppressive role and a novel regulatory mechanism of DAB2IP
expression in the progression of CRC. DAB2IP may be a potential, novel
therapeutic and prognostic target for clinical CRC patients.

PMCID: PMC4695000
PMID: 26336990  [PubMed - in process]


130. Biomol Ther (Seoul). 2015 Sep;23(5):434-41. doi: 10.4062/biomolther.2015.026.
Epub 2015 Sep 1.

A New Histone Deacetylase Inhibitor, MHY219, Inhibits the Migration of Human
Prostate Cancer Cells via HDAC1.

De U(1), Kundu S(2), Patra N(2), Ahn MY(3), Ahn JH(1), Son JY(1), Yoon JH(2),
Moon HR(2), Lee BM(1), Kim HS(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746. (2)College of
Pharmacy, Pusan National University, Busan 609-735. (3)Department of Oral &
Maxillofacial Pathology, College of Dentistry, Wonkwang Bone Regeneration
Institute, Daejeon Dental Hospital, Wonkwang University, Daejeon 302-120,
Republic of Korea.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are considered novel agents for cancer
chemotherapy. We previously investigated MHY219, a new HDAC inhibitor, and its
potent anticancer activity in human prostate cancer cells. In the present study, 
we evaluated MHY219 molecular mechanisms involved in the regulation of prostate
cancer cell migration. Similar to suberanilohydroxamic acid (SAHA), MHY219
inhibited HDAC1 enzyme activity in a dose-dependent manner. MHY219 cytotoxicity
was higher in LNCaP (IC50=0.67 µM) than in DU145 cells (IC50=1.10 µM) and PC3
cells (IC50=5.60 µM) after 48 h of treatment. MHY219 significantly inhibited the 
HDAC1 protein levels in LNCaP and DU145 cells at high concentrations. However,
inhibitory effects of MHY219 on HDAC proteins levels varied based on the cell
type. MHY219 significantly inhibited LNCaP and DU145 cells migration by
down-regulation of matrix metalloprotease-1 (MMP-1) and MMP-2 and induction of
tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-1 (TIMP-1). These results suggest that
MHY219 may potentially be used as an anticancer agent to block cancer cell
migration through the repression of MMP-1 and MMP-2, which is related to the
reduction of HDAC1.

PMCID: PMC4556203
PMID: 26336583  [PubMed]


131. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Dec;167(12):3011-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37344. Epub 2015
Sep 3.

A microdeletion encompassing PHF21A in an individual with global developmental
delay and craniofacial anomalies.

Labonne JD(1,)(2), Vogt J(3), Reali L(3), Kong IK(4), Layman LC(1,)(2,)(5), Kim
HG(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Reproductive Endocrinology, Infertility and Genetics, Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, Georgia.
(2)Department of Neuroscience and Regenerative Medicine, Georgia Regents
University, Augusta, Georgia. (3)West Midlands Regional Genetics Service,
Birmingham Women's Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom. (4)Department of Animal 
Science, Division of Applied Life Science, Gyeongsang National University, Jinju,
Gyeongsangnam-do, Republic of Korea. (5)Department of Physiology, Medical College
of Georgia, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, Georgia.

In Potocki-Shaffer syndrome (PSS), the full phenotypic spectrum is manifested
when deletions are at least 2.1<U+2009>Mb in size at 11p11.2. The PSS-associated genes
EXT2 and ALX4, together with PHF21A, all map to this region flanked by markers
D11S1393 and D11S1319. Being proximal to EXT2 and ALX4, a 1.1<U+2009>Mb region
containing 12 annotated genes had been identified by deletion mapping to explain 
PSS phenotypes except multiple exostoses and parietal foramina. Here, we report a
male patient with partial PSS phenotypes including global developmental delay,
craniofacial anomalies, minor limb anomalies, and micropenis. Using microarray,
qPCR, RT-qPCR, and Western blot analyses, we refined the candidate gene region,
which harbors five genes, by excluding two genes, SLC35C1 and CRY2, which
resulted in a corroborating role of PHF21A in developmental delay and
craniofacial anomalies. This microdeletion contains the least number of genes at 
11p11.2 reported to date. Additionally, we also discuss the phenotypes observed
in our patient with respect to those of published cases of microdeletions across 
the Potocki-Shaffer interval. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26333423  [PubMed - in process]


132. Cell Reprogram. 2015 Oct;17(5):393-403. doi: 10.1089/cell.2015.0027. Epub 2015
Sep 2.

Handmade Cloned Buffalo (Bubalus bubalis) Embryos Produced from Somatic Cells
Isolated from Milk and Ear Skin Differ in Their Developmental Competence,
Epigenetic Status, and Gene Expression.

Jyotsana B(1), Sahare AA(2), Raja AK(2), Singh KP(2), Singla SK(2), Chauhan
MS(2), Manik RS(2), Palta P(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Animal Biotechnology Section, Central Sheep and Wool Research Institute ,
Avikanagar-304501 (Rajasthan), India . (2)2 Animal Biotechnology Centre, National
Dairy Research Institute , Karnal-132001 (Haryana), India .

We compared the cloning efficiency of buffalo embryos produced by handmade
cloning (HMC) using ear skin- and milk-derived donor cells. The blastocyst rate
was lower (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) for milk-derived than that for skin-derived embryos, whereas
the total cell number and apoptotic index were similar. The global level of
H3K9ac was higher (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) in skin- than in milk-derived cells, whereas the
level of H3K27me3 was similar in the two groups. The global level of H3K9ac was
similar between milk-derived and in vitro-fertilized (IVF) blastocysts, which was
higher (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) than that in skin-derived blastocysts. The level of H3K27me3
was similar among the three groups. The expression level of IGF-1R and G6PD was
higher (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) in skin- than in milk-derived cells, whereas DNMT1, DNMT3a, and
HDAC1 expression level was similar. In the blastocysts, the expression level of
DNMT1, HDAC1, OCT4, and CDX2 was higher (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) in skin-derived than that in
IVF blastocysts. The expression level of DNMT3a and IGF-1R, was in the order
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) skin-derived and IVF<U+2009>><U+2009>milk-derived blastocysts and that of NANOG was 
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) IVF-> milk-derived<U+2009>><U+2009>skin-derived blastocysts. The expression level of
all these genes, except NANOG, was lower (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) in milk- than in skin-derived
or IVF blastocysts. In conclusion, milk-derived cells can be used for producing
HMC embryos of quality similar to that of skin-derived embryos, although with a
lower blastocyst rate.

PMID: 26332294  [PubMed - in process]


133. J Med Chem. 2015 Oct 8;58(19):7672-80. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.5b01044. Epub
2015 Sep 16.

Discovery of Novel Class I Histone Deacetylase Inhibitors with Promising in Vitro
and in Vivo Antitumor Activities.

Yao Y(1), Tu Z(1), Liao C(2), Wang Z(1), Li S(1), Yao H(3), Li Z(4), Jiang S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Medicinal Chemistry, Guangzhou Institute of Biomedicine and
Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510530, China. (2)School of
Medical Engineering, Hefei University of Technology , Hefei, Anhui 230009, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Natural Medicines and Department of Medicinal
Chemistry, China Pharmaceutical University , Nanjing, 210009, China.
(4)Department of Nanomedicine, Houston Methodist Hospital Research Institute ,
Houston, Texas 77030, United States.

A successful structure-based design of novel cyclic depsipeptides that
selectively target class I HDAC isoforms is described. Compound 11 has an IC50 of
2.78 nM for binding to the HDAC1 protein, and the prodrugs 12 and 13 also exhibit
promising antiproliferative activities in the nanomolar range against various
cancer cell lines. Compounds 12 and 13 show more than 20-fold selectivity toward 
human cancer cells over human normal cells in comparison with romidepsin (FK228),
demonstrating low probability of toxic side effects. In addition, compound 13
exhibits excellent in vivo anticancer activities in a human prostate carcinoma
(Du145) xenograft model with no observed toxicity. Thus, prodrug 13 has
therapeutic potential as a new class of anticancer agent for further clinical
translation.

PMID: 26331334  [PubMed - in process]


134. Org Biomol Chem. 2015 Oct 28;13(40):10226-35. doi: 10.1039/c5ob01509j. Epub 2015 
Aug 26.

Pyrimidinedione-mediated selective histone deacetylase 6 inhibitors with
antitumor activity in colorectal cancer HCT116 cells.

Liu YM(1), Lee HY, Lai MJ, Pan SL, Huang HL, Kuo FC, Chen MC, Liou JP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical University, 250 Wuxing
Street, Taipei 11031, Taiwan. jpl@tmu.edu.tw.

We synthesized a series of pyrimidinedione derivatives and evaluated their
activities. The results indicate that compound 6,
4-[5-fluoro-2,6-dioxo-3-(tetrahydro-furan-2-yl)-3,6-dihydro-2H-pyrimidin-1-ylmeth
yl]-N-hydroxy-benzamide, exhibits potent antiproliferative activity, apoptosis
induction with cleavage of caspase and PARP, and enhanced tendency to inhibit
HDAC6 (IC50 = 12.4 nM) activity over HDAC1 (IC50 = 1710 nM) and HDAC2 (IC50 =
5500 nM). Compound 6 also inhibits tumor growth and is less toxic than parent 4
in vivo. These data provide compelling evidence that compound 6 is a potential
antitumor compound with HDAC6 targeted inhibitory activity and may be tested for 
preclinical investigation for cancer treatment.

PMID: 26309122  [PubMed - in process]


135. Sci Signal. 2015 Aug 25;8(391):ra85. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.aaa9806.

RelB/p52-mediated NF-<U+03BA>B signaling alters histone acetylation to increase the
abundance of corticotropin-releasing hormone in human placenta.

Di Stefano V(1), Wang B(2), Parobchak N(1), Roche N(3), Rosen T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and 
Reproductive Sciences, Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick,
NJ 08901, USA. (2)Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Department of Obstetrics, 
Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical School,
New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA. wangbi@rwjms.rutgers.edu rosentj@rwjms.rutgers.edu.
(3)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Women's Health, Rutgers New Jersey
Medical School, Newark, NJ 07101, USA.

Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) produced in the placenta may be part of a
clock that regulates the length of human gestation. Maternal plasma CRH abundance
exponentially increases as pregnancy advances. Glucocorticoid stimulates CRH
expression in full-term human placenta by promoting noncanonical (RelB/p52
heterodimer-mediated) nuclear factor <U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) pathway activity. Using
dexamethasone to mimic glucocorticoid exposure, we found that an epigenetic
switch mediated the glucocorticoid-induced expression of CRH as gestation
advances. The amount of acetylated histone H3 lysine 9 (H3K9) associated with the
CRH promoter was greater in cytotrophoblasts from full-term placenta than in
those from midterm placenta. Knocking down the lysine acetyltransferase CBP
reduced H3K9 histone acetylation and prevented dexamethasone-induced CRH
expression. Unexpectedly, knocking down the histone deacetylase HDAC1 or
pharmacologically inhibiting type I and II HDACs also decreased the expression of
CRH yet increased the acetylation of H3K9 and other histone regions. Both CBP and
HDAC1 bound at the CRH promoter in a complex with the RelB/p52 heterodimer in a
mutually dependent manner; knocking down any one factor in the complex prevented 
binding of the others as well as the dexamethasone-induced CRH expression. Our
results suggest that glucocorticoids induce a transcription complex consisting of
RelB/p52, CBP, and HDAC1 that triggers a dynamic acetylation-mediated epigenetic 
change to induce CRH expression in full-term human placenta.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 26307012  [PubMed - in process]


136. Pharmacology. 2015;96(3-4):184-91. doi: 10.1159/000438864. Epub 2015 Aug 20.

Novel Histone Deacetylase Inhibitor Modulates Cardiac Peroxisome
Proliferator-Activated Receptors and Inflammatory Cytokines in Heart Failure.

Lkhagva B(1), Lin YK, Kao YH, Chazo TF, Chung CC, Chen SA, Chen YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Heart failure (HF) affects cardiac metabolism and inflammation.
Histone deacetylases (HDACs) play a critical role in cardiac pathophysiology.
This study investigated whether HDAC inhibition can regulate HF by modifying
cardiac inflammation and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)
isoforms.
METHODS: Echocardiography, electrocardiography, ELISA and Western blot were
performed in rats with isoproterenol-induced HF, with and without orally
administered MPT0E014 (a novel HDAC inhibitor, 50 mg/kg for 7 consecutive days).
RESULTS: The left ventricles (LVs) of HF rats expressed significantly higher
levels of HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3, HDAC4 and HDAC6 than the healthy LVs did. HF rats 
treated with MPT0E014 exhibited improved cardiac fraction shortening with
reducing chamber size. The MPT0E014-treated HF LVs exhibited a smaller increase
in the expression of interleukin (IL)-6, p22, SMAD2/3, extracellular
signal-regulated kinase 1/2, PPAR isoforms and circulatory tumor growth factor-ß1
than the untreated HF LVs did. Moreover, MPT0E014-treated HF LVs expressed less
fibroblast growth factor receptor than untreated HF LVs did.
CONCLUSIONS: HDAC inhibition can improve cardiac function and attenuate the
effects of HF on cardiac metabolism and inflammation, which might contribute to
the beneficial effects of HDAC inhibition in HF.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26304494  [PubMed - in process]


137. EMBO Rep. 2015 Oct;16(10):1288-98. doi: 10.15252/embr.201540244. Epub 2015 Aug
24.

UTX inhibits EMT-induced breast CSC properties by epigenetic repression of EMT
genes in cooperation with LSD1 and HDAC1.

Choi HJ(1), Park JH(2), Park M(3), Won HY(1), Joo HS(1), Lee CH(3), Lee JY(4),
Kong G(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, Hanyang University, Seoul,
Korea. (2)Institute for Bioengineering and Biopharmaceutical Research (IBBR),
Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea. (3)College of Pharmacy, Dongguk University,
Seoul, Korea. (4)Institute for Bioengineering and Biopharmaceutical Research
(IBBR), Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea jy2jy2@hanyang.ac.kr
gkong@hanyang.ac.kr. (5)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, Hanyang
University, Seoul, Korea Institute for Bioengineering and Biopharmaceutical
Research (IBBR), Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea jy2jy2@hanyang.ac.kr
gkong@hanyang.ac.kr.

The histone H3K27 demethylase, UTX, is a known component of the H3K4
methyltransferase MLL complex, but its functional association with H3K4
methylation in human cancers remains largely unknown. Here we demonstrate that
UTX loss induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-mediated breast cancer
stem cell (CSC) properties by increasing the expression of the SNAIL, ZEB1 and
ZEB2 EMT transcription factors (EMT-TFs) and of the transcriptional repressor
CDH1. UTX facilitates the epigenetic silencing of EMT-TFs by inducing competition
between MLL4 and the H3K4 demethylase LSD1. EMT-TF promoters are occupied by
c-Myc and MLL4, and UTX recognizes these proteins, interrupting their
transcriptional activation function. UTX decreases H3K4me2 and H3 acetylation at 
these promoters by forming a transcriptional repressive complex with LSD1, HDAC1 
and DNMT1. Taken together, our findings indicate that UTX is a prominent tumour
suppressor that functions as a negative regulator of EMT-induced CSC-like
properties by epigenetically repressing EMT-TFs.

© 2015 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4766458 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26303947  [PubMed - in process]


138. FEBS Lett. 2015 Sep 14;589(19 Pt B):2776-83. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2015.08.009. 
Epub 2015 Aug 20.

Loss of histone deacetylase Hdac1 disrupts metabolic processes in intestinal
epithelial cells.

Gonneaud A(1), Turgeon N(1), Boisvert FM(1), Boudreau F(1), Asselin C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Département d'anatomie et biologie cellulaire, Faculté de médecine et des
sciences de la santé, Pavillon de recherche appliquée sur le cancer, Université
de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec J1E 4K8, Canada. (2)Département d'anatomie et
biologie cellulaire, Faculté de médecine et des sciences de la santé, Pavillon de
recherche appliquée sur le cancer, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec
J1E 4K8, Canada. Electronic address: Claude.Asselin@USherbrooke.ca.

By using acetyl-CoA as a substrate, acetyltransferases and histone deacetylases
regulate protein acetylation by adding or removing an acetyl group on lysines.
Nuclear-located Hdac1 is a regulator of intestinal homeostasis. We have
previously shown that Hdac1 define specific intestinal epithelial cell basal and 
inflammatory-dependent gene expression patterns and control cell proliferation.
We show here that Hdac1 depletion in cellulo leads to increased histone
acetylation after metabolic stresses, and to metabolic disturbances resulting in 
impaired responses to oxidative stresses, AMPK kinase activation and
mitochondrial biogenesis. Thus, nuclear Hdac1 may control intestinal epithelial
cell metabolism by regulating the supply of acetyl groups.

Copyright © 2015 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26297832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 Oct;14(10):2321-31. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-15-0374.
Epub 2015 Aug 20.

Differences in Expression of Key DNA Damage Repair Genes after Epigenetic-Induced
BRCAness Dictate Synthetic Lethality with PARP1 Inhibition.

Wiegmans AP(1), Yap PY(2), Ward A(2), Lim YC(3), Khanna KK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Signal Transduction Laboratory, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute,
Herston, Queensland, Australia. Tumour Microenvironment Laboratory, QIMR
Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Herston, Queensland, Australia.
adrian.wiegmans@qimrberghofer.edu.au. (2)Signal Transduction Laboratory, QIMR
Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Herston, Queensland, Australia.
(3)Translational Brain Cancer Laboratory, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research
Institute, Herston, Queensland, Australia.

The triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) subtype represents a cancer that is
highly aggressive with poor patient outcome. Current preclinical success has been
gained through synthetic lethality, targeting genome instability with PARP
inhibition in breast cancer cells that harbor silencing of the homologous
recombination (HR) pathway. Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) are a class of
drugs that mediate epigenetic changes in expression of HR pathway genes. Here, we
compare the activity of the pan-HDAC inhibitor suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid
(SAHA), the class I/IIa HDAC inhibitor valproic acid (VPA), and the
HDAC1/2-specific inhibitor romidepsin (ROMI) for their capability to regulate DNA
damage repair gene expression and in sensitizing TNBC to PARPi. We found that two
of the HDACis tested, SAHA and ROMI, but not VPA, indeed inhibit HR repair and
that RAD51, BARD1, and FANCD2 represent key proteins whose inhibition is required
for HDACi-mediated therapy with PARP inhibition in TNBC. We also observed that
restoration of BRCA1 function stabilizes the genome compared with mutant BRCA1
that results in enhanced polyploid population after combination treatment with
HDACi and PARPi. Furthermore, we found that overexpression of the key HR protein 
RAD51 represents a mechanism for this resistance, promoting aberrant repair and
the enhanced polyploidy observed. These findings highlight the key components of 
HR in guiding synthetic lethality with PARP inhibition and support the rationale 
for utilizing the novel combination of HDACi and PARPi against TNBC in the
clinical setting.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26294743  [PubMed - in process]


140. Cell Death Dis. 2015 Aug 20;6:e1857. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2015.190.

KAT5-mediated SOX4 acetylation orchestrates chromatin remodeling during myoblast 
differentiation.

Jang SM(1), Kim JW(1), Kim CH(1), An JH(1), Johnson A(2), Song PI(3), Rhee S(1), 
Choi KH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Chung-Ang University, Seoul 156-756, Korea.
(2)Department of Dermatology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little
Rock, AR 72205, USA. (3)Department of Dermatology, University of Colorado Denver 
Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

Transcription factor SOX4 has been implicated in skeletal myoblast
differentiation through the regulation of Cald1 gene expression; however, the
detailed molecular mechanism underlying this process is largely unknown. Here, we
demonstrate that SOX4 acetylation at lysine 95 by KAT5 (also known as Tip60) is
essential for Cald1 promoter activity at the onset of C2C12 myoblast
differentiation. KAT5 chromodomain was found to facilitate SOX4 recruitment to
the Cald1 promoter, which is involved in chromatin remodeling at the promoter.
Chromatin occupancy analysis of SOX4, KAT5, and HDAC1 indicated that the
expression of putative SOX4 target genes during C2C12 myoblast differentiation is
specifically regulated by the molecular switching of the co-activator KAT5 and
the co-repressor HDAC1 on SOX4 transcriptional activation.

PMCID: PMC4558493
PMID: 26291311  [PubMed - in process]


141. Saudi J Biol Sci. 2015 Sep;22(5):610-22. doi: 10.1016/j.sjbs.2015.01.012. Epub
2015 Jan 20.

Identifying new targets in leukemogenesis using computational approaches.

Jayaraman A(1), Jamil K(2), Khan HA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, School of Life Sciences,
Jawaharlal Nehru Institute of Advanced Studies (JNIAS), Secunderabad, Telangana, 
India ; Center for Biotechnology, Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University
(JNTUH), Kukatpally, Hyderabad, Telangana, India. (2)Centre for Biotechnology and
Bioinformatics, School of Life Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru Institute of Advanced
Studies (JNIAS), Secunderabad, Telangana, India. (3)Department of Biochemistry,
College of Sciences, Bldg. 5, King Saud University, P.O. Box 2455, Riyadh, Saudi 
Arabia.

There is a need to identify novel targets in Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL), 
a hematopoietic cancer affecting children, to improve our understanding of
disease biology and that can be used for developing new therapeutics. Hence, the 
aim of our study was to find new genes as targets using in silico studies; for
this we retrieved the top 10% overexpressed genes from Oncomine public domain
microarray expression database; 530 overexpressed genes were short-listed from
Oncomine database. Then, using prioritization tools such as ENDEAVOUR, DIR and
TOPPGene online tools, we found fifty-four genes common to the three
prioritization tools which formed our candidate leukemogenic genes for this
study. As per the protocol we selected thirty training genes from PubMed. The
prioritized and training genes were then used to construct STRING functional
association network, which was further analyzed using cytoHubba hub analysis tool
to investigate new genes which could form drug targets in leukemia. Analysis of
the STRING protein network built from these prioritized and training genes led to
identification of two hub genes, SMAD2 and CDK9, which were not implicated in
leukemogenesis earlier. Filtering out from several hundred genes in the network
we also found MEN1, HDAC1 and LCK genes, which re-emphasized the important role
of these genes in leukemogenesis. This is the first report on these five
additional signature genes in leukemogenesis. We propose these as new targets for
developing novel therapeutics and also as biomarkers in leukemogenesis, which
could be important for prognosis and diagnosis.

PMCID: PMC4537869
PMID: 26288567  [PubMed]


142. J Med Chem. 2015 Sep 10;58(17):6803-18. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.5b00545. Epub
2015 Aug 27.

Potent and Selective Inhibitors of Histone Deacetylase-3 Containing Chiral
Oxazoline Capping Groups and a N-(2-Aminophenyl)-benzamide Binding Unit.

Marson CM(1), Matthews CJ(1), Atkinson SJ(2), Lamadema N(3), Thomas NS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University College London , Christopher Ingold
Laboratories, 20 Gordon Street, London WC1H OAJ, U.K. (2)Epinova DPU,
Immuno-Inflammation Therapy Area Unit, GlaxoSmithKline , Gunnels Wood Road,
Stevenage, Herts SG1 2NY, U.K. (3)Department of Haematological Medicine,
Leukaemia Sciences Laboratories, Rayne Institute, King's College London , 123
Coldharbour Lane, London SE5 9NU, U.K.

A novel series of potent chiral inhibitors of histone deacetylase (HDAC) is
described that contains an oxazoline capping group and a
N-(2-aminophenyl)-benzamide unit. Among several new inhibitors of this type
exhibiting Class I selectivity and potent inhibition of HDAC3-NCoR2, in vitro
assays for the inhibition of HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3-NCoR2 by
N-(2-aminophenyl)-benzamide 15k gave respective IC50 values of 80, 110, and 6 nM.
Weak inhibition of all other HDAC isoforms (HDAC4, 5, 6, 7, and 9: IC50 > 100<U+202F>000
nM; HDAC8: IC50 = 25<U+202F>000 nM; HDAC10: IC50 > 4000 nM; HDAC11: IC50 > 2000 nM)
confirmed the Class I selectivity of 15k. 2-Aminoimidazolinyl,
2-thioimidazolinyl, and 2-aminooxazolinyl units were shown to be effective
replacements for the pyrimidine ring present in many other
2-(aminophenyl)-benzamides previously reported, but the 2-aminooxazolinyl unit
was the most potent in inhibiting HDAC3-NCoR2. Many of the new HDAC inhibitors
showed higher solubilities and lower binding to human serum albumin than that of 
Mocetinostat. Increases in histone H3K9 acetylation in the human cell lines U937 
and PC-3 was observed for all three oxazolinyl inhibitors evaluated; those HDAC
inhibitors also lowered cyclin E expression in U937 cells but not in PC-3 cells, 
indicating underlying differences in the mechanisms of action of the inhibitors
on those two cell lines.

PMID: 26287310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. BMC Res Notes. 2015 Aug 18;8:356. doi: 10.1186/s13104-015-1336-0.

Insulin and IGF-1, but not 17ß-estradiol, alter the subcellular localization of
MIER1a in MCF7 breast carcinoma cells.

Li S(1), Paterno GD(2), Gillespie LL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Cancer Research Laboratories, Division of BioMedical Sciences,
Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St John's, NL, A1B 3V6,
Canada. s.li@mun.ca. (2)Terry Fox Cancer Research Laboratories, Division of
BioMedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St
John's, NL, A1B 3V6, Canada. gpaterno@mun.ca. (3)Terry Fox Cancer Research
Laboratories, Division of BioMedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Memorial
University of Newfoundland, St John's, NL, A1B 3V6, Canada. lgillesp@mun.ca.

BACKGROUND: MIER1a is a transcriptional regulator that interacts with estrogen
receptor a and inhibits estrogen-stimulated growth of breast carcinoma cells.
Interestingly, analysis of MIER1a subcellular localization in breast samples
revealed a stepwise shift from the nucleus to the cytoplasm during progression to
invasive carcinoma. Previously, we demonstrated that MIER1a is nuclear in MCF7
cells yet it does not contain a nuclear localization signal. Instead MIER1a is
targeted to the nucleus through interaction and co-transport with HDAC 1 and 2.
RESULTS: In this study, we demonstrate that treatment of MCF7 breast carcinoma
cells with either insulin or insulin-like growth factor affects the subcellular
localization of MIER1a. Both factors reduce the percentage of cells with nuclear 
MIER1a from 81 and 89 to 41 and 56%, respectively. Treatment with 17ß-estradiol, 
on the other hand, had no effect and MIER1a remained nuclear.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate that insulin and IGF-1 can contribute to loss
of nuclear MIER1a in the MCF7 breast carcinoma cell line.

PMCID: PMC4539687
PMID: 26281834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Neurosci. 2015 Aug 12;35(32):11399-414. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0345-15.2015.

The Autotaxin-Lysophosphatidic Acid Axis Modulates Histone Acetylation and Gene
Expression during Oligodendrocyte Differentiation.

Wheeler NA(1), Lister JA(2), Fuss B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Anatomy and Neurobiology and. (2)Human and Molecular Genetics, 
Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine, Richmond, Virginia 23298.
(3)Departments of Anatomy and Neurobiology and bfuss@vcu.edu.

During development, oligodendrocytes (OLGs), the myelinating cells of the CNS,
undergo a stepwise progression during which OLG progenitors, specified from
neural stem/progenitor cells, differentiate into fully mature myelinating OLGs.
This progression along the OLG lineage is characterized by well synchronized
changes in morphology and gene expression patterns. The latter have been found to
be particularly critical during the early stages of the lineage, and they have
been well described to be regulated by epigenetic mechanisms, especially by the
activity of the histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2. The data presented here
identify the extracellular factor autotaxin (ATX) as a novel upstream signal
modulating HDAC1/2 activity and gene expression in cells of the OLG lineage.
Using the zebrafish as an in vivo model system as well as rodent primary OLG
cultures, this functional property of ATX was found to be mediated by its
lysophospholipase D (lysoPLD) activity, which has been well characterized to
generate the lipid signaling molecule lysophosphatidic acid (LPA). More
specifically, the lysoPLD activity of ATX was found to modulate HDAC1/2 regulated
gene expression during a time window coinciding with the transition from OLG
progenitor to early differentiating OLG. In contrast, HDAC1/2 regulated gene
expression during the transition from neural stem/progenitor to OLG progenitor
appeared unaffected by ATX and its lysoPLD activity. Thus, together, our data
suggest that an ATX-LPA-HDAC1/2 axis regulates OLG differentiation specifically
during the transition from OLG progenitor to early differentiating OLG and via a 
molecular mechanism that is evolutionarily conserved from at least zebrafish to
rodent.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: The formation of the axon insulating and
supporting myelin sheath by differentiating oligodendrocytes (OLGs) in the CNS is
considered an essential step during vertebrate development. In addition, loss
and/or dysfunction of the myelin sheath has been associated with a variety of
neurologic diseases in which repair is limited, despite the presence of
progenitor cells with the potential to differentiate into myelinating OLGs. This 
study characterizes the autotaxin-lysophosphatidic acid signaling axis as a
modulator of OLG differentiation in vivo in the developing zebrafish and in vitro
in rodent OLGs in culture. These findings provide novel insight into the
regulation of developmental myelination, and they are likely to lead to advancing
studies related to the stimulation of myelin repair under pathologic conditions.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/3511399-16$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4532767
PMID: 26269646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Oct;1849(10):1248-59. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2015.07.016. Epub 2015 Aug 7.

NF<U+03BA>B- and AP-1-mediated DNA looping regulates matrix metalloproteinase-9
transcription in TNF-a-treated human leukemia U937 cells.

Chen YJ(1), Chang LS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, National Sun Yat-Sen University, Kaohsiung
804, Taiwan. (2)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, National Sun Yat-Sen
University, Kaohsiung 804, Taiwan; Department of Biotechnology, Kaohsiung Medical
University, Kaohsiung 807, Taiwan. Electronic address: lschang@mail.nsysu.edu.tw.

The aim of this study is to explore the spatial association of critical genomic
elements in the effect of TNF-a on matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) expression 
in human leukemia U937 cells. TNF-a up-regulated MMP-9 protein expression and
mRNA level in U937 cells, and Akt-mediated-NF<U+03BA>B/p65 activation and JNK-mediated
c-Jun activation were proven to be involved in TNF-a-induced MMP-9 up-regulation.
Promoter luciferase activity assay revealed that NF<U+03BA>B (nt-600) and AP-1 (nt-79)
binding sites were crucial for TNF-a-induced transcription of MMP-9 gene. The
results of a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay indicated that TNF-a reduced
histone deacetylase-1 (HDAC-1) recruitment but increased p300 (a histone
acetyltransferase) recruitment to MMP-9 promoter regions surrounding NF<U+03BA>B and
AP-1 binding sites. Consistently, TNF-a increased enrichment of the acetylated
histone H3 mark on MMP-9 promoter regions. DNA affinity purification assay
revealed that p300 and HDAC1 could bind oligonucleotides containing AP-1/c-Jun
and NF<U+03BA>B/p65 binding sites. Chromosome conformation capture assay showed that
TNF-a stimulated chromosomal loops in the MMP-9 promoter via NF<U+03BA>B/p65 and
AP-1/c-Jun. The p300-associated acetyltransferase activity was crucial for
p65/c-Jun-mediated DNA looping, and inhibition of HDAC activity increased the
level of DNA looping. Reduction in the level of DNA looping eliminated all
TNF-a-stimulated MMP-9 up-regulation. Taken together, our data suggest that
p65/c-Jun-mediated DNA looping is involved in TNF-a-induced MMP-9 up-regulation
and that the recruitment of p300 or HDAC1 to NF<U+03BA>B and AP-1 binding sites modifies
the level of DNA looping.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26260845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Oncol Rep. 2015 Oct;34(4):1905-14. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4187. Epub 2015 Aug 10.

Never in mitosis gene A-related kinase 6 and aurora kinase A: New gene biomarkers
in the conversion from ulcerative colitis to colorectal cancer.

Gerçeker E(1), Boyacioglu SO(2), Kasap E(1), Baykan A(1), Yuceyar H(1), Yildirim 
H(2), Ayhan S(3), Ellidokuz E(1), Korkmaz M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Medical Faculty, Celal Bayar University,
Manisa, Turkey. (2)Department of Medical Genetics and Medical Biology, Medical
Faculty, Celal Bayar University, Manisa, Turkey. (3)Department of Pathology,
Medical Faculty, Celal Bayar University, Manisa, Turkey.

Ulcerative colitis (UC) is an important risk factor for colorectal cancer (CRC). 
Histone modifications are one of the epigenetic mechanisms that may have key
roles in the carcinogenesis of CRC. At present, there are no studies comparing
histone modification patterns of UC and CRC in the literature. Therefore the aim 
of the present study was to investigate whether genes, particularly those
involved in histone modification, have value in patient monitoring with regards
to CRC development in UC. Key gene expressions of the histone modification enzyme
were assessed and compared in CRC, UC and control groups using the RT-PCR array
technique. Patients were divided into subgroups based on the extent and duration 
of the disease and inflammatory burden, which are considered risk factors for CRC
development in UC patients. In UC and CRC groups, a significantly higher
overexpression of the NEK6 and AURKA genes compared to the control group was
identified. In addition, there was a significantly higher overexpression of HDAC1
and PAK1 genes in the UC group, and of HDAC1, HDAC7, PAK1 and AURKB genes in the 
CRC group. NEK6, AURKA, HDAC1 and PAK1 were significantly overexpressed in
patients with a longer UC duration. Overexpression of AURKA and NEK6 genes was
significantly more pronounced in UC patients with more extensive colon
involvement. HDAC1, HDAC7, PAK1, NEK6, AURKA and AURKB are important diagnostic
and prognostic markers involved in the carcinogenesis of CRC. HDAC1, PAK1, NEK6
and AURKA may be considered as diagnostic markers to be used in CRC screening for
UC patients.

PMID: 26259750  [PubMed - in process]


147. Toxicol Sci. 2015 Nov;148(1):229-40. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfv178. Epub 2015 Aug
10.

Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor Activation Synergistically Induces
Lipopolysaccharide-Mediated Expression of Proinflammatory Chemokine (c-c motif)
Ligand 20.

Lahoti TS(1), Boyer JA(1), Kusnadi A(1), Muku GE(1), Murray IA(1), Perdew GH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, Center for Molecular
Toxicology and Carcinogenesis, Penn State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania 16802. (2)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, Center
for Molecular Toxicology and Carcinogenesis, Penn State University, University
Park, Pennsylvania 16802 ghp2@psu.edu.

The Ah receptor (AHR) is directly involved in the regulation of both innate and
adaptive immunity. However, these activities are poorly understood at the level
of gene regulation. The chemokine (c-c motif) ligand 20 (CCL20) plays a
nonredundant role in the chemoattraction of C-C motif receptor 6 expressing cells
(eg, T cells and others). A survey of promoter regions of chemokine genes
revealed that there are several putative dioxin responsive elements in the mouse 
Ccl20 promoter. The addition of an AHR agonist along with lipopolysaccharide
(LPS) to cultured primary peritoneal macrophages results in synergistic induction
of both Ccl20 mRNA and protein, compared with each compound alone. Through the
use of macrophage cultures derived from Ahr(-) (/) (-) and Ahr(nls/nls) mice, it 
was established that expression of the AHR and its ability to translocate into
the nucleus are necessary for AHR ligand-mediated synergistic induction of Ccl20.
Gel shift analysis determined that a potent tandem AHR binding site ~3.1 kb
upstream from the transcriptional start site can efficiently bind the AHR/ARNT
(aryl hydrocarbon receptor/AHR nuclear translocator) heterodimer upon activation 
with a number of AHR agonists. Furthermore, studies reveal that LPS increases AHR
levels on the Ccl20 promoter while decreasing HDAC1 occupancy. The level of Ccl20
constitutive expression in the colon is greatly attenuated in Ahr(-) (/) (-)
mice. These studies suggest that the presence of AHR ligands during localized
inflammation may augment chemokine expression, thus participating in the overall 
response to pathogens.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
of Toxicology. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4731409 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26259605  [PubMed - in process]


148. Eur J Immunol. 2015 Oct;45(10):2834-46. doi: 10.1002/eji.201445344. Epub 2015 Sep
1.

Gain-of-function STAT1 mutations impair STAT3 activity in patients with chronic
mucocutaneous candidiasis (CMC).

Zheng J(1), van de Veerdonk FL(2), Crossland KL(1), Smeekens SP(2), Chan CM(3),
Al Shehri T(1), Abinun M(1,)(4), Gennery AR(1,)(4), Mann J(5), Lendrem DW(3),
Netea MG(2), Rowan AD(3), Lilic D(1,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Primary Immune Deficiency Group, Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, Radboud 
University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (3)Musculoskeletal Research
Group, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. (4)Department of Paediatric Immunology,
Great North Children's Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. (5)Fibrosis Research
Group, Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne,
UK. (6)Regional Immunology and Allergy Department, Royal Victoria Infirmary,
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) triggered production
of Th-17 cytokines mediates protective immunity against fungi. Mutations
affecting the STAT3/interleukin 17 (IL-17) pathway cause selective susceptibility
to fungal (Candida) infections, a hallmark of chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis
(CMC). In patients with autosomal dominant CMC, we and others previously reported
defective Th17 responses and underlying gain-of-function (GOF) STAT1 mutations,
but how this affects STAT3 function leading to decreased IL-17 is unclear. We
also assessed how GOF-STAT1 mutations affect STAT3 activation, DNA binding, gene 
expression, cytokine production, and epigenetic modifications. We excluded
impaired STAT3 phosphorylation, nuclear translocation, and sequestration of STAT3
into STAT1/STAT3 heterodimers and confirm significantly reduced transcription of 
STAT3-inducible genes (RORC/IL-17/IL-22/IL-10/c-Fos/SOCS3/c-Myc) as likely
underlying mechanism. STAT binding to the high affinity sis-inducible element was
intact but binding to an endogenous STAT3 DNA target was impaired. Reduced
STAT3-dependent gene transcription was reversed by inhibiting STAT1 activation
with fludarabine or enhancing histone, but not STAT1 or STAT3 acetylation with
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors trichostatin A or ITF2357. Silencing HDAC1,
HDAC2, and HDAC3 indicated a role for HDAC1 and 2. Reduced STAT3-dependent gene
transcription underlies low Th-17 responses in GOF-STAT1 CMC, which can be
reversed by inhibiting acetylation, offering novel targets for future therapies.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26255980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Mutat Res. 2015 Jun;776:16-23. doi: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2015.01.005. Epub 2015 Jan
24.

Damaged DNA-binding protein down-regulates epigenetic mark H3K56Ac through
histone deacetylase 1 and 2.

Zhu Q(1), Battu A(1), Ray A(1), Wani G(1), Qian J(1), He J(1), Wang QE(1), Wani
AA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, United
States. (2)Department of Radiology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH
43210, United States; Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, OH 43210, United States; James Cancer Hospital and
Solove Research Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, United 
States. Electronic address: wani.2@osu.edu.

Acetylated histone H3 lysine 56 (H3K56Ac) is one of the reversible histone
post-translational modifications (PTMs) responsive to DNA damage. We previously
described a biphasic decrease and increase of epigenetic mark H3K56Ac in response
to ultraviolet radiation (UVR)-induced DNA damage. Here, we report a new function
of UV damaged DNA-binding protein (DDB) in deacetylation of H3K56Ac through
specific histone deacetylases (HDACs). We show that simultaneous depletion of
HDAC1/2 compromises the deacetylation of H3K56Ac, while depletion of HDAC1 or
HDAC2 alone has no effect on H3K56Ac. The H3K56Ac deacetylation does not require 
functional nucleotide excision repair (NER) factors XPA and XPC, but depends on
the function of upstream factors DDB1 and DDB2. UVR enhances the association of
DDB2 with HDAC1 and, enforced DDB2 expression leads to translocation of HDAC1 to 
UVR-damaged chromatin. HDAC1 and HDAC2 are recruited to UVR-induced DNA damage
spots, which are visualized by anti-XPC immunofluorescence. Dual HDAC1/2
depletion decreases XPC ubiquitination, but does not affect the recruitment of
DDB2 to DNA damage. By contrast, the local accumulation of <U+03B3>H2AX at UVR-induced
DNA damage spots was compromised upon HDAC1 as well as dual HDAC1/2 depletions.
Additionally, UVR-induced ATM activation decreased in H12899 cells expressing
H3K56Ac-mimicing H3K56Q. These results revealed a novel role of DDB in H3K56Ac
deacetylation during early step of NER and the existence of active functional
cross-talk between DDB-mediated damage recognition and H3K56Ac deacetylation.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 26255936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Exp Neurol. 2015 Nov;273:92-104. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2015.07.026. Epub 2015 
Jul 31.

Rapid changes in expression of class I and IV histone deacetylases during
epileptogenesis in mouse models of temporal lobe epilepsy.

Jagirdar R(1), Drexel M(1), Kirchmair E(1), Tasan RO(1), Sperk G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Medical University Innsbruck, 6020 Innsbruck,
Austria. (2)Department of Pharmacology, Medical University Innsbruck, 6020
Innsbruck, Austria. Electronic address: guenther.sperk@i-med.ac.at.

A prominent role of epigenetic mechanisms in manifestation of epilepsy has been
proposed. Thus altered histone H3 and H4 acetylation has been demonstrated in
experimental models of temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE). We now investigated changes 
in the expression of the class I and class IV histone deacetylases (HDAC) in two 
complementary mouse TLE models. Unilateral intrahippocampal injection of kainic
acid (KA) induced a status epilepticus lasting 6 to 24h, development of
spontaneous limbic seizures (2 to 3 days after KA injection) and chronic
epilepsy, as revealed by telemetric recordings of the EEGs. Mice were killed at
different intervals after KA injection and expression of HDAC mRNAs was
investigated by in situ hybridization. We observed marked decreases in the
expression of HDACs 1, 2 and 11 (by up to 75%) in the granule cell and pyramidal 
cell layers of the hippocampus during the acute status epilepticus (2 to 6h after
KA injection). This was followed by increased expression of all class I HDAC
mRNAs in all principal cell layers of the hippocampus after 12 to 48 h. In the
chronic phase, 14 and 28 days after KA, only modest increases in the expression
of HDAC1 mRNA were observed in granule and pyramidal cells. Immunohistochemistry 
using an antibody detecting HDAC2 revealed results consistent with the mRNA data 
and indicates also expression in glial cells on the injection side. Similar
changes as seen in the KA model were observed after a pilocarpine-induced status 
epilepticus except that decreases in HDACs 2, 3 and 8 were also seen at the
chronic 28 day interval. The prominent decreases in HDAC expression during status
epilepticus are consistent with the previously demonstrated increased expression 
of numerous proteins and with the augmented acetylation of histone H4. It is
suggested that respective putative gene products could facilitate proconvulsive
as well as anticonvulsive mechanisms. The increased expression of all class I
HDACs during the "silent phase", on the other hand, may be related to decreased
histone acetylation, which could cause a decrease in expression of certain
proteins, a mechanism that could also promote epileptogenesis. Thus, addressing
HDAC expression may have a therapeutic potential in interfering with a status
epilepticus and with the manifestation of TLE.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 26238735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Biol Pharm Bull. 2015;38(8):1126-33. doi: 10.1248/bpb.b15-00002.

Positive Regulation of Interleukin-2 Expression by a Pseudokinase, Tribbles 1, in
Activated T Cells.

Miyajima C(1), Itoh Y, Inoue Y, Hayashi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Signaling, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Nagoya City University.

Tribbles 1 (TRB1), a member of the Tribbles family, is a pseudokinase that is
conserved among species and implicated in various human diseases including
leukemia, cardiovascular diseases, and metabolic disorders. However, the role of 
TRB1 in the immune response is not understood. To evaluate this role, we examined
regulation of TRB1 expression and the function of TRB1 in interleukin-2 (IL-2)
induction in Jurkat cells, a human acute T cell leukemia cell line. We found that
TRB1 was strongly induced by phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) and ionomycin 
in these cells. IL-2 expression was induced in Jurkat cells activated by PMA and 
ionomycin; however, knockdown of TRB1 resulted in decreased induction of IL-2.
TRB1 null Jurkat cells established using the CRISPR/Cas9 system also showed
reduction of IL-2 expression on PMA/ionomycin stimulation. TRB1 knockdown also
markedly inhibited IL-2 promoter activation. To determine the mechanism of the
stimulatory effect on IL-2 induction, we focused on histone deacetylases (HDACs),
and found that HDAC1 preferentially interacts with TRB1. TRB1 suppressed the
interaction of HDAC1 with nuclear factor of activated T cells 2 (NFAT2), which is
a crucial transcription factor for IL-2 induction. These results indicate that
TRB1 is a positive regulator of IL-2 induction in activated T cells.

PMID: 26235576  [PubMed - in process]


152. Mol Biol Cell. 2015 Sep 15;26(18):3178-89. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E15-04-0209. Epub
2015 Jul 29.

Tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand induces the expression of
proinflammatory cytokines in macrophages and re-educates tumor-associated
macrophages to an antitumor phenotype.

Gao J(1), Wang D(1), Liu D(1), Liu M(1), Ge Y(1), Jiang M(2), Liu Y(1), Zheng
D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences; and 
School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100005, China.
(2)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences; and 
School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100005, China
jiangminghong@163.com liuyx2000@yeah.net.

Tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) is a promising
candidate for cancer therapy, because it can induce apoptosis in various tumor
cells but not in most normal cells. Although it is well known that TRAIL and its 
receptors are expressed in many types of normal cells, including immune cells,
their immunological effects and regulatory mechanisms are still obscure. In the
present study, we demonstrated that TRAIL affected the activity of NF-<U+03BA>B (nuclear
factor-<U+03BA>B) and the expression of its downstream proinflammatory cytokines IL-1ß
(interleukin-1ß), IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor a in macrophages. TRAIL also
induced microRNA-146a (miR-146a) expression in an NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent manner. As a
result, miR-146a was involved as a negative-feedback regulator in the
down-regulation of proinflammatory cytokine expression. In addition, the
suppression of histone deacetylase (HDAC) activities by trichostatin A improved
miR-146a expression due to the up-regulation of the DNA-binding activity of NF-<U+03BA>B
at the miR-146a promoter in TRAIL-induced macrophages, suggesting that histone
acetylation was involved in the suppression of miR-146a expression. Further
investigation revealed that the HDAC subtype HDAC1 directly regulated the
expression of miR-146a in TRAIL-stimulated macrophages. Finally, the
TRAIL-sensitive human non small cell lung carcinoma cell line NCI-H460 was used
to elucidate the physiological significance of TRAIL with respect to
tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs). We demonstrated that TRAIL re-educated TAMs 
to an M1-like phenotype and induced cytotoxic effects in the tumor cells. These
data provide new evidence for TRAIL in the immune regulation of macrophages and
may shed light on TRAIL-based antitumor therapy in human patients.

© 2015 Gao et al. This article is distributed by The American Society for Cell
Biology under license from the author(s). Two months after publication it is
available to the public under an AttributionNoncommercialShare Alike 3.0
Unported Creative Commons License
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0).

PMCID: PMC4569310
PMID: 26224317  [PubMed - in process]


153. Bioorg Med Chem. 2015 Sep 1;23(17):5881-90. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2015.06.071. Epub 
2015 Jul 4.

Design, synthesis and biological evaluation of isoquinoline-based derivatives as 
novel histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Yang W(1), Li L(2), Wang Y(3), Wu X(1), Li T(1), Yang N(1), Su M(3), Sheng L(3), 
Zheng M(3), Zang Y(3), Li J(4), Liu H(5).

Author information: 
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Receptor Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, 555 Zuchongzhi Road, Shanghai 201203, PR China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Drug Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201203, PR China; East China Normal
University, Institutes for Advanced Interdisciplinary Research, North Zhongshan
Road Campus: 3663 N. Zhongshan Rd., Shanghai 200062, PR China. (3)State Key
Laboratory of Drug Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201203, PR China. (4)State Key Laboratory of Drug
Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai 201203, PR China; East China Normal University, Institutes for Advanced 
Interdisciplinary Research, North Zhongshan Road Campus: 3663 N. Zhongshan Rd.,
Shanghai 200062, PR China. Electronic address: jli@mail.shcnc.ac.cn. (5)CAS Key
Laboratory of Receptor Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, 555 Zuchongzhi Road, Shanghai 201203, PR China. Electronic
address: hliu@mail.shcnc.ac.cn.

The design, synthesis and biological evaluation of a series of isoquinoline-based
hydroxamic acid compounds as novel HDACs inhibitors were reported herein. A
detailed SAR study showed most of the compounds displayed good to excellent
inhibitory activities against HDAC1, 3, 6. The IC50 values of compound 10 c
against HDAC1, 3, 6 were 4.17 ± 0.11 nM, 4.00 ± 0.10 nM, 3.77 ± 0.07 nM,
respectively. Most of the compounds showed great anti-proliferative activities
against RPMI 8226, HCT 116 and Hep G2 cells. The IC50 values of compounds 10 a-h 
against RPMI 8226 cancer cell proliferation were all below 1 µM. HCT 116 cell was
sensitive to the compounds 10 a, 10 f-g and 18 a with the IC50 values <0.3 µM.
The active compounds 10a-d did not show inhibitory activity against hERG channel.
All these evidence indicated these compounds had great potential as HDACs
inhibitors for the further development.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26211462  [PubMed - in process]


154. J Mol Biol. 2015 Oct 9;427(20):3201-15. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2015.07.011. Epub 2015
Jul 22.

Epigenetic Modulation of Human Podocyte Vitamin D Receptor in HIV Milieu.

Chandel N(1), Ayasolla KS(1), Lan X(1), Sultana-Syed M(1), Chawla A(1), Lederman 
R(1), Vethantham V(1), Saleem MA(2), Chander PN(3), Malhotra A(1), Singhal PC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Immunology and Inflammation, Feinstein Institute for Medical
Research, Manhasset, NY 11030, USA; Hofstra North Shore LIJ Medical School,
Hempstead, NY 11549-1000, USA. (2)Renal Academic Unit, University of Bristol,
City of Bristol BS8 1TH, United Kingdom. (3)Department of Pathology, New York
Medical College, Valhalla, NY 10595, USA. (4)Center of Immunology and
Inflammation, Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, Manhasset, NY 11030, USA;
Hofstra North Shore LIJ Medical School, Hempstead, NY 11549-1000, USA. Electronic
address: psinghal@nshs.edu.

HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) has been reported to induce podocyte injury
through down regulation of vitamin D receptor (VDR) and activation of renin
angiotensin system; however, the involved mechanism is not clear. Since HIV has
been reported to modulate gene expression via epigenetic phenomena, we asked
whether epigenetic factors contribute to down regulation of VDR. Kidney cells in 
HIV transgenic mice and HIV-infected podocytes (HIV/HPs) displayed enhanced
expression of SNAIL, a repressor of VDR. To elucidate the mechanism, we studied
the effect of HIV on expression of molecules involved in SNAIL repressor complex 
formation and demonstrated that HIV enhances expression of the histone
deacetylase HDAC1 and DNA methyl transferases DNMT3b and DNMT1. 293T cells, when 
stably transfected with SNAIL (SNAIL/293T), displayed suppressed transcription
and translation of VDR. In SNAIL/293T cells, co-immunoprecipitation studies
revealed the association of HDAC1, DNMT3b, DNMT1, and mSin3A with SNAIL.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments confirmed the presence of the SNAIL
repressor complex at the VDR promoter. Consistent with the enhanced DNA methyl
transferase expression in HIV/HPs, there was an increased CpG methylation at the 
VDR promoter. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay confirmed occurrence of H3K4
trimethylation on SNAIL promoter. Neither a VDR agonist (VDA) nor an HDAC
inhibitor (HDACI) nor a demethylating agent (DAC) individually could optimally up
regulate VDR in HIV milieu. However, VDA and HDACI when combined were successful 
in de-repressing VDR expression. Our findings demonstrate that SNAIL recruits
multiple chromatin enzymes to form a repressor complex in HIV milieu that down
regulates VDR expression.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4586951 [Available on 2016-10-09]
PMID: 26210663  [PubMed - in process]


155. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2015 Oct;22(5):777-92. doi: 10.1530/ERC-14-0302. Epub 2015
Jul 23.

RhoB upregulation leads to either apoptosis or cytostasis through differential
target selection.

Marlow LA(1), Bok I(1), Smallridge RC(2), Copland JA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cancer BiologyInternal MedicineDivision of
EndocrinologyEndocrine Malignancy Working GroupMayo Clinic, 4500 San Pablo Road, 
Jacksonville, Florida 32224, USA. (2)Departments of Cancer BiologyInternal
MedicineDivision of EndocrinologyEndocrine Malignancy Working GroupMayo Clinic,
4500 San Pablo Road, Jacksonville, Florida 32224, USA Departments of Cancer
BiologyInternal MedicineDivision of EndocrinologyEndocrine Malignancy Working
GroupMayo Clinic, 4500 San Pablo Road, Jacksonville, Florida 32224, USA
Departments of Cancer BiologyInternal MedicineDivision of EndocrinologyEndocrine 
Malignancy Working GroupMayo Clinic, 4500 San Pablo Road, Jacksonville, Florida
32224, USA. (3)Departments of Cancer BiologyInternal MedicineDivision of
EndocrinologyEndocrine Malignancy Working GroupMayo Clinic, 4500 San Pablo Road, 
Jacksonville, Florida 32224, USA Departments of Cancer BiologyInternal
MedicineDivision of EndocrinologyEndocrine Malignancy Working GroupMayo Clinic,
4500 San Pablo Road, Jacksonville, Florida 32224, USA copland.john@mayo.edu.

Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma is a highly aggressive undifferentiated carcinoma
with a mortality rate near 100% due to an assortment of genomic abnormalities
which impede the success of therapeutic options. Our laboratory has previously
identified that RhoB upregulation serves as a novel molecular therapeutic target 
and agents upregulating RhoB combined with paclitaxel lead to antitumor synergy. 
Knowing that histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) transcriptionally suppresses RhoB, we 
sought to extend our findings to other HDACs and to identify the HDAC inhibitor
(HDACi) that optimally synergize with paclitaxel. Here we identify HDAC6 as a
newly discovered RhoB repressor. By using isoform selective HDAC inhibitors
(HDACi) and shRNAs, we show that RhoB has divergent downstream signaling
partners, which are dependent on the HDAC isoform that is inhibited. When RhoB
upregulates only p21 (cyclin kinase inhibitor) using a class I HDACi
(romidepsin), cells undergo cytostasis. When RhoB upregulates BIMEL using class
II/(I) HDACi (belinostat or vorinostat), apoptosis occurs. Combinatorial synergy 
with paclitaxel is dependent upon RhoB and BIMEL while upregulation of RhoB and
only p21 blocks synergy. This bifurcated regulation of the cell cycle by RhoB is 
novel and silencing either p21 or BIMEL turns the previously silenced pathway on,
leading to phenotypic reversal. This study intimates that the combination of
belinostat/vorinostat with paclitaxel may prove to be an effective therapeutic
strategy via the novel observation that class II/(I) HDACi antagonize
HDAC6-mediated suppression of RhoB and subsequent BIMEL, thereby promoting
antitumor synergy. These overall observations may provide a mechanistic
understanding of optimal therapeutic response.

© 2015 Society for Endocrinology.

PMCID: PMC4559850 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26206775  [PubMed - in process]


156. Nat Commun. 2015 Jul 22;6:7821. doi: 10.1038/ncomms8821.

DOT1L cooperates with the c-Myc-p300 complex to epigenetically derepress CDH1
transcription factors in breast cancer progression.

Cho MH(1), Park JH(2), Choi HJ(1), Park MK(3), Won HY(1), Park YJ(1), Lee CH(3), 
Oh SH(4), Song YS(1), Kim HS(1), Oh YH(1), Lee JY(2), Kong G(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, Hanyang University, Seoul
133-791, Korea. (2)Institute for Bioengineering and Biopharmaceutical Research
(IBBR), Hanyang University, Seoul 133-791, Korea. (3)College of Pharmacy, Dongguk
University, Seoul 100-715, Korea. (4)College of Pharmacy, Gachon University,
Incheon 405-840, Republic of Korea. (5)1] Department of Pathology, College of
Medicine, Hanyang University, Seoul 133-791, Korea [2] Institute for
Bioengineering and Biopharmaceutical Research (IBBR), Hanyang University, Seoul
133-791, Korea.

DOT1L has emerged as an anticancer target for MLL-associated leukaemias; however,
its functional role in solid tumours is largely unknown. Here we identify that
DOT1L cooperates with c-Myc and p300 acetyltransferase to epigenetically activate
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) regulators in breast cancer progression. 
DOT1L recognizes SNAIL, ZEB1 and ZEB2 promoters via interacting with the
c-Myc-p300 complex and facilitates lysine-79 methylation and acetylation towards 
histone H3, leading to the dissociation of HDAC1 and DNMT1 in the regions. The
upregulation of these EMT regulators by the DOT1L-c-Myc-p300 complex enhances
EMT-induced breast cancer stem cell (CSC)-like properties. Furthermore, in vivo
orthotopic xenograft models show that DOT1L is required for malignant
transformation of breast epithelial cells and breast tumour initiation and
metastasis. Clinically, DOT1L expression is associated with poorer survival and
aggressiveness of breast cancers. Collectively, we suggest that cooperative
effect of DOT1L and c-Myc-p300 is critical for acquisition of aggressive
phenotype of breast cancer by promoting EMT/CSC.

PMCID: PMC4525167
PMID: 26199140  [PubMed - in process]


157. Int J Dev Biol. 2015;59(4-6):171-7. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.150071tz.

Histone deacetylases 1 and 2 are required for brain development.

Jaworska J(1), Ziemka-Nalecz M, Zalewska T.

Author information: 
(1)NeuroRepair Department, Mossakowski Medical Research Centre, Polish Academy of
Sciences, Warsaw, Poland.

Epigenetic modifications of histones have been implicated in the regulation of
cell specific expression of genes required for neuronal development. The best
studied post-translational (epigenetic) modification of histones is the process
of reversible acetylation. Two types of enzymes - histone acetyltransferases
(HATs) and histone deacetylases (HDACs) establish and maintain specific patterns 
of histone acetylation in balance, thereby contributing to both transcriptional
activation and repression of specific sets of genes. Histone deacetylases
catalyze the removal of acetyl groups from selected lysine residues in the
conserved tails of core histone proteins and are considered as transcriptional
corepressors. A significant amount of data implicates HDACs in diverse biological
processes, including tissue specific developmental program by silencing specific 
growth-inhibitory genes. In line with this, gene disruption studies have shown
that the class I deacetylases, HDAC1 and HDAC2 play an essential role in nervous 
system development. In the present review, we briefly highlight current insights 
supporting the function of histone deacetylases in rodent brain development and
discuss present knowledge referring to their role in neurogenesis, taking into
consideration results obtained in culture systems and in in vivo studies.

PMID: 26198144  [PubMed - in process]


158. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2015 Oct 1;288(1):40-51. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2015.07.013.
Epub 2015 Jul 17.

Developmental exposure to 50 parts-per-billion arsenic influences histone
modifications and associated epigenetic machinery in a region- and sex-specific
manner in the adult mouse brain.

Tyler CR(1), Hafez AK(1), Solomon ER(1), Allan AM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center, 
Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA. (2)Department of Neurosciences, University of New
Mexico Health Sciences Center, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA. Electronic address:
aallan@salud.unm.edu.

Epidemiological studies report that arsenic exposure via drinking water adversely
impacts cognitive development in children and, in adults, can lead to greater
psychiatric disease susceptibility, among other conditions. While it is known
that arsenic toxicity has a profound effect on the epigenetic landscape, very few
studies have investigated its effects on chromatin architecture in the brain. We 
have previously demonstrated that exposure to a low level of arsenic (50ppb)
during all three trimesters of fetal/neonatal development induces deficits in
adult hippocampal neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus (DG), depressive-like
symptoms, and alterations in gene expression in the adult mouse brain. As
epigenetic processes control these outcomes, here we assess the impact of our
developmental arsenic exposure (DAE) paradigm on global histone posttranslational
modifications and associated chromatin-modifying proteins in the dentate gyrus
and frontal cortex (FC) of adult male and female mice. DAE influenced histone 3K4
trimethylation with increased levels in the male DG and FC and decreased levels
in the female DG (no change in female FC). The histone methyltransferase MLL
exhibited a similar sex- and region-specific expression profile as H3K4me3
levels, while histone demethylase KDM5B expression trended in the opposite
direction. DAE increased histone 3K9 acetylation levels in the male DG along with
histone acetyltransferase (HAT) expression of GCN5 and decreased H3K9ac levels in
the male FC along with decreased HAT expression of GCN5 and PCAF. DAE decreased
expression of histone deacetylase enzymes HDAC1 and HDAC2, which were concurrent 
with increased H3K9ac levels but only in the female DG. Levels of H3 and H3K9me3 
were not influenced by DAE in either brain region of either sex. These findings
suggest that exposure to a low, environmentally relevant level of arsenic during 
development leads to long-lasting changes in histone methylation and acetylation 
in the adult brain due to aberrant expression of epigenetic machinery based on
region and sex.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4579037 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26193056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 17;10(7):e0133555. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0133555.
eCollection 2015.

Correction: Decreased Expression of CoREST1 and CoREST2 Together with LSD1 and
HDAC1/2 during Neuronal Differentiation.

PLOS ONE Staff.

Erratum for
    PLoS One. 2015;10(6):e0131760.

PMCID: PMC4505873
PMID: 26186538  [PubMed]


160. J Pineal Res. 2015 Oct;59(3):321-33. doi: 10.1111/jpi.12261. Epub 2015 Aug 11.

HDAC1 inhibition by melatonin leads to suppression of lung adenocarcinoma cells
via induction of oxidative stress and activation of apoptotic pathways.

Fan C(1), Pan Y(2), Yang Y(3), Di S(1), Jiang S(4), Ma Z(1), Li T(3), Zhang Z(1),
Li W(1), Li X(1), Reiter RJ(5), Yan X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Tangdu Hospital, The Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an, China. (2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The 92nd
Hospital of PLA, Nanping, China. (3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, The
Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China. (4)Department of Aerospace
Medicine, The Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China. (5)Department of 
Cellular and Structural Biology, UT Health Science Center, San Antonio, TX, USA.

Melatonin is an indoleamine synthesized in the pineal gland that shows a wide
range of physiological and pharmacological functions, including anticancer
effects. In this study, we investigated the effect of melatonin on drug-induced
cellular apoptosis against the cultured human lung adenocarcinoma cells and
explored the role of histone deacetylase (HDAC) signaling in this process. The
results showed that melatonin treatment led to a dose- and time-dependent
decrease in the viability of human A549 and PC9 lung adenocarcinoma cells.
Additionally, melatonin exhibited potent anticancer activity in vitro, as
evidenced by reductions of the cell adhesion, migration, and the intracellular
glutathione (GSH) level and increases in the apoptotic index, caspase 3 activity,
and reactive oxygen species (ROS) in A549 and PC9 cells. Melatonin treatment also
influenced the expression of HDAC-related molecules (HDAC1 and Ac-histone H3),
upregulated the apoptosis-related molecules (PUMA and Bax), and downregulated the
proliferation-related molecule (PCNA) and the anti-apoptosis-related molecule
(Bcl2). Furthermore, the inhibition of HDAC signaling using HDAC1 siRNA or SAHA
(a potent pan-inhibitor of HDACs) sensitized A549 and PC9 cells to the melatonin 
treatment. In summary, these data indicate that in vitro-administered melatonin
is a potential suppressor of lung adenocarcinoma cells by the targeting of HDAC
signaling and suggest that melatonin in combination with HDAC inhibitors may be a
novel therapeutic intervention for human lung adenocarcinoma.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26184924  [PubMed - in process]


161. Virology. 2015 Nov;485:1-15. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2015.06.021. Epub 2015 Jul 14.

Therapeutic doses of irradiation activate viral transcription and induce
apoptosis in HIV-1 infected cells.

Iordanskiy S(1), Van Duyne R(2), Sampey GC(1), Woodson CM(1), Fry K(1), Saifuddin
M(1), Guo J(1), Wu Y(1), Romerio F(3), Kashanchi F(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Systems Biology, Laboratory of Molecular Virology, George Mason
University, Manassas, VA 20110, USA. (2)School of Systems Biology, Laboratory of 
Molecular Virology, George Mason University, Manassas, VA 20110, USA; Center for 
Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Frederick, MD 21702, USA. (3)Department of Medicine, University of Maryland
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA. (4)School of Systems Biology,
Laboratory of Molecular Virology, George Mason University, Manassas, VA 20110,
USA. Electronic address: fkashanc@gmu.edu.

The highly active antiretroviral therapy reduces HIV-1 RNA in plasma to
undetectable levels. However, the virus continues to persist in the long-lived
resting CD4(+) T cells, macrophages and astrocytes which form a viral reservoir
in infected individuals. Reactivation of viral transcription is critical since
the host immune response in combination with antiretroviral therapy may eradicate
the virus. Using the chronically HIV-1 infected T lymphoblastoid and monocytic
cell lines, primary quiescent CD4(+) T cells and humanized mice infected with
dual-tropic HIV-1 89.6, we examined the effect of various X-ray irradiation (IR) 
doses (used for HIV-related lymphoma treatment and lower doses) on HIV-1
transcription and viability of infected cells. Treatment of both T cells and
monocytes with IR, a well-defined stress signal, led to increase of HIV-1
transcription, as evidenced by the presence of RNA polymerase II and reduction of
HDAC1 and methyl transferase SUV39H1 on the HIV-1 promoter. This correlated with 
the increased GFP signal and elevated level of intracellular HIV-1 RNA in the
IR-treated quiescent CD4(+) T cells infected with GFP-encoding HIV-1. Exposition 
of latently HIV-1infected monocytes treated with PKC agonist bryostatin 1 to IR
enhanced transcription activation effect of this latency-reversing agent.
Increased HIV-1 replication after IR correlated with higher cell death: the level
of phosphorylated Ser46 in p53, responsible for apoptosis induction, was markedly
higher in the HIV-1 infected cells following IR treatment. Exposure of HIV-1
infected humanized mice with undetectable viral RNA level to IR resulted in a
significant increase of HIV-1 RNA in plasma, lung and brain tissues.
Collectively, these data point to the use of low to moderate dose of IR alone or 
in combination with HIV-1 transcription activators as a potential application for
the "Shock and Kill" strategy for latently HIV-1 infected cells.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4619158 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26184775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Bone Miner Res. 2016 Jan;31(1):52-64. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2592. Epub 2015 Aug 6.

NF-<U+03BA>B Has a Direct Role in Inhibiting Bmp- and Wnt-Induced Matrix Protein
Expression.

Tarapore RS(1), Lim J(1), Tian C(1), Pacios S(1), Xiao W(1,)(2), Reid D(1), Guan 
H(3), Mattos M(1), Yu B(4), Wang CY(4), Graves DT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontics, School of Dental Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (2)Department of Periodontology, Peking
University School and Hospital of Stomatology, Beijing, China. (3)Division of
Microbiology, School of Dental Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA. (4)Division of Oral Biology and Medicine, School of
Dentistry, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

The host response to pathogens through nuclear factor <U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) is an essential 
defense mechanism for eukaryotic organisms. NF-<U+03BA>B-mediated host responses inhibit
bone and other connective tissue synthesis and are thought to affect the
transcription of matrix proteins through multiple indirect pathways. We
demonstrate that inhibiting NF-<U+03BA>B in osteoblasts increases osteocalcin expression
in vivo in mice with periodontal disease. Mutating NF-<U+03BA>B binding sites on
osteocalcin (OC) or bone sialoprotein (Bsp) promoters rescues the negative impact
of NF-<U+03BA>B on their transcription and that NF-<U+03BA>B can inhibit Wnt- and Bmp-induced
OC and Bsp transcription, even when protein synthesis is inhibited, indicating a 
direct effect of NF-<U+03BA>B. This inhibition depends on p65-p50 NF-<U+03BA>B heterodimer
formation and deacetylation by HDAC1 but is not affected by the noncanonical
NF-<U+03BA>B pathway. Moreover, NF-<U+03BA>B reduces Runx2 and ß-catenin binding to OC/Bsp
promoters independently of their nuclear localization. Thus, inflammatory signals
stimulate the direct interaction of NF-<U+03BA>B with response elements to inhibit
binding of ß-catenin and Runx2 binding to nearby consensus sites and reduce
expression of matrix proteins. This direct mechanism provides a new explanation
for the rapid decrease in new bone formation after inflammation-related NF-<U+03BA>B
activation. © 2015 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

© 2015 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMCID: PMC4713353
PMID: 26179215  [PubMed - in process]


163. J Cell Physiol. 2016 Feb;231(2):436-48. doi: 10.1002/jcp.25090.

Distinct Roles for Intestinal Epithelial Cell-Specific Hdac1 and Hdac2 in the
Regulation of Murine Intestinal Homeostasis.

Gonneaud A(1), Turgeon N(1), Boudreau F(1), Perreault N(1), Rivard N(1), Asselin 
C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Département d'anatomie et biologie cellulaire, Pavillon de recherche appliquée
sur le cancer, Faculté de médecine et des sciences de la santé, Université de
Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada.

The intestinal epithelium responds to and transmits signals from the microbiota
and the mucosal immune system to insure intestinal homeostasis. These
interactions are in part conveyed by epigenetic modifications, which respond to
environmental changes. Protein acetylation is an epigenetic signal regulated by
histone deacetylases, including Hdac1 and Hdac2. We have previously shown that
villin-Cre-inducible intestinal epithelial cell (IEC)-specific Hdac1 and Hdac2
deletions disturb intestinal homeostasis. To determine the role of Hdac1 and
Hdac2 in the regulation of IEC function and the establishment of the dual
knockout phenotype, we have generated villin-Cre murine models expressing one
Hdac1 allele without Hdac2, or one Hdac2 allele without Hdac1. We have also
investigated the effect of short-term deletion of both genes in
naphtoflavone-inducible Ah-Cre and tamoxifen-inducible villin-Cre(ER) mice. Mice 
with one Hdac1 allele displayed normal tissue architecture, but increased
sensitivity to DSS-induced colitis. In contrast, mice with one Hdac2 allele
displayed intestinal architecture defects, increased proliferation, decreased
goblet cell numbers as opposed to Paneth cells, increased immune cell
infiltration associated with fibrosis, and increased sensitivity to DSS-induced
colitis. In comparison to dual knockout mice, intermediary activation of Notch,
mTOR, and Stat3 signaling pathways was observed. While villin-Cre(ER) Hdac1 and
Hdac2 deletions led to an impaired epithelium and differentiation defects,
Ah-Cre-mediated deletion resulted in blunted proliferation associated with the
induction of a DNA damage response. Our results suggest that IEC determination
and intestinal homeostasis are highly dependent on Hdac1 and Hdac2 activity
levels, and that changes in the IEC acetylome may alter the mucosal environment.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26174178  [PubMed - in process]


164. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Feb 3;95(5):374-7.

[Association of irradiation-induced hippocampal neurogenesis impairment with
histone H3 acetylation].

[Article in Chinese]

Ji S, Sun R, Cai S, Xu Y, Ji J, Li K, Zhang Y, Zhang L.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effect of whole brain irradiation (WBI) on neurogenesis
in hippocampus and its relationship with histone acetylation.
METHODS: A signal dose of 30Gy 4MeV electron beam was offered to male
Sprague-Dawley rats (150 - 200 g). At Days 7 and 30, immunohistochemistry and
Western blot were used to analyze the effects of WBI on neurogenesis and the
expression of acetyl-H3 and histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) in hippocampus. Finally
trichostatin A (TSA), a HDAC1 inhibitor, was used to verify whether H3
acetylation was associated with neurogenesis impairment.
RESULTS: Immunofluorescence showed that, at Day 7 post-irradiation, the number of
BrdU + NeuN + cells reduced by 67% (P < 0. 01) and it approached zero at Day 30
(P < 0. 01). Meanwhile, a significant decrease of HDAC1-dependent H3 acetylation 
was observed. Western blot showed 30% (P <0. 05) and 61% (P < 0. 01) reductions
in H3 acetylation at Days 7 and 30 post-irradiation respectively. These results
were further confirmed by immunofluorescent staining. Also HDAC1 levels
significantly increased in a time-dependent manner at Days 7 and 30
post-irradiation. And TSA rescued neurogenesis impairment after WBI.
CONCLUSION: Radiation-induced HDAC1-dependent H3 acetylation decline is
associated with long-term neurogenesis impairment in dentate gyrus.

PMID: 26168675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 10;10(7):e0132680. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132680.
eCollection 2015.

Mutagenesis Study Reveals the Rim of Catalytic Entry Site of HDAC4 and -5 as the 
Major Binding Surface of SMRT Corepressor.

Kim GS(1), Jung HE(1), Kim JS(2), Lee YC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hormone Research Center, School of Biological Sciences and Technology, Chonnam
National University, Gwangju, 500-757, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of
Chemistry and Institute of Basic Sciences, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, 
500-757, Republic of Korea.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) play a pivotal role in eukaryotic gene expression by
modulating the levels of acetylation of chromatin and related transcription
factors. In contrast to class I HDACs (HDAC1, -2, -3 and -8), the class IIa HDACs
(HDAC4, -5, -7 and -9) harbor cryptic deacetylases activity and recruit the
SMRT-HDAC3 complex to repress target genes in vivo. In this regard, the specific 
interaction between the HDAC domain of class IIa HDACs and the C-terminal region 
of SMRT repression domain 3 (SRD3c) is known to be critical, but the molecular
basis of this interaction has not yet been addressed. Here, we used an extensive 
mutant screening system, named the "partitioned one- plus two-hybrid system", to 
isolate SRD3c interaction-defective (SRID) mutants over the entire catalytic
domains of HDAC4 (HDAC4c) and -5. The surface presentation of the SRID mutations 
on the HDAC4c structure revealed that most of the mutations were mapped to the
rim surface of the catalytic entry site, strongly suggesting this mutational
hot-spot region as the major binding surface of SRD3c. Notably, among the HDAC4c 
surface residues required for SRD3c binding, some residues (C667, C669, C751,
D759, T760 and F871) are present only in class IIa HDACs, providing the molecular
basis for the specific interactions between SRD3c and class IIa enzymes. To
investigate the functional consequence of SRID mutation, the in vitro HDAC
activities of HDAC4 mutants immuno-purified from HEK293 cells were measured. The 
levels of HDAC activity of the HDAC4c mutants were substantially decreased
compared to wild-type. Consistent with this, SRID mutations of HDAC4c prevented
the association of HDAC4c with the SMRT-HDAC3 complex in vivo. Our findings may
provide structural insight into the binding interface of HDAC4 and -5 with SRD3c,
as a novel target to design modulators specific to these enzymes.

PMCID: PMC4498904
PMID: 26161557  [PubMed - in process]


166. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2015;2015:412149. doi: 10.1155/2015/412149.
Epub 2015 Jun 16.

Sulforaphane Reverses the Expression of Various Tumor Suppressor Genes by
Targeting DNMT3B and HDAC1 in Human Cervical Cancer Cells.

Ali Khan M(1), Kedhari Sundaram M(2), Hamza A(2), Quraishi U(2), Gunasekera D(2),
Ramesh L(2), Goala P(1), Al Alami U(1), Ansari MZ(2), Rizvi TA(3), Sharma C(2),
Hussain A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Natural Science and Public Health, College of Sustainability
Sciences & Humanities, Zayed University, P.O. Box 19282, Dubai, UAE. (2)School of
Life Sciences, Manipal University, P.O. Box 345050, Dubai, UAE. (3)Department of 
Microbiology & Immunology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, United Arab
Emirates University, P.O. Box 17666, Al Ain, UAE.

Sulforaphane (SFN) may hinder carcinogenesis by altering epigenetic events in the
cells; however, its molecular mechanisms are unclear. The present study
investigates the role of SFN in modifying epigenetic events in human cervical
cancer cells, HeLa. HeLa cells were treated with SFN (2.5<U+2009>µM) for a period of 0, 
24, 48, and 72 hours for all experiments. After treatment, expressions of DNMT3B,
HDAC1, RARß, CDH1, DAPK1, and GSTP1 were studied using RT-PCR while promoter DNA 
methylation of tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) was studied using MS-PCR. Inhibition
assays of DNA methyl transferases (DNMTs) and histone deacetylases (HDACs) were
performed at varying time points. Molecular modeling and docking studies were
performed to explore the possible interaction of SFN with HDAC1 and DNMT3B.
Time-dependent exposure to SFN decreases the expression of DNMT3B and HDAC1 and
significantly reduces the enzymatic activity of DNMTs and HDACs. Molecular
modeling data suggests that SFN may interact directly with DNMT3B and HDAC1 which
may explain the inhibitory action of SFN. Interestingly, time-dependent
reactivation of the studied TSGs via reversal of methylation in SFN treated cells
correlates well with its impact on the epigenetic alterations accumulated during 
cancer development. Thus, SFN may have significant implications for epigenetic
based therapy.

PMCID: PMC4487331
PMID: 26161119  [PubMed]


167. Reproduction. 2015 Oct;150(4):245-56. doi: 10.1530/REP-15-0031. Epub 2015 Jul 9.

Dnmt3l-knockout donor cells improve somatic cell nuclear transfer reprogramming
efficiency.

Liao HF(1), Mo CF(1), Wu SC(1), Cheng DH(1), Yu CY(1), Chang KW(2), Kao TH(1), Lu
CW(1), Pinskaya M(1), Morillon A(1), Lin SS(3), Cheng WT(1), Bourc'his D(1),
Bestor T(1), Sung LY(1), Lin SP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of BiotechnologyDepartment of Animal Science and TechnologyGenome
and Systems Biology Degree ProgramNational Taiwan University, Taipei 106,
TaiwanGenome and Systems Biology Degree ProgramAcademia Sinica, Taipei,
TaiwanInstitut CurieCNRS UMR3244, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, 75248 Paris
Cedex 05, FranceDepartment of Animal Science and BiotechnologyTunghai University,
Taichung 407, TaiwanINSERM U934/CNRS UMR3215Institut Curie, 75005 Paris,
FranceDepartment of Genetics and DevelopmentCollege of Physicians and Surgeons of
Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USAAgricultural Biotechnology
Research CenterAcademia Sinica, Taipei 115, TaiwanCenter for Systems
BiologyResearch Center for Developmental Biology and Regenerative
MedicineNational Taiwan University, Taipei 106, Taiwan. (2)Institute of
BiotechnologyDepartment of Animal Science and TechnologyGenome and Systems
Biology Degree ProgramNational Taiwan University, Taipei 106, TaiwanGenome and
Systems Biology Degree ProgramAcademia Sinica, Taipei, TaiwanInstitut CurieCNRS
UMR3244, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, 75248 Paris Cedex 05, FranceDepartment
of Animal Science and BiotechnologyTunghai University, Taichung 407, TaiwanINSERM
U934/CNRS UMR3215Institut Curie, 75005 Paris, FranceDepartment of Genetics and
DevelopmentCollege of Physicians and Surgeons of Columbia University, New York,
New York 10032, USAAgricultural Biotechnology Research CenterAcademia Sinica,
Taipei 115, TaiwanCenter for Systems BiologyResearch Center for Developmental
Biology and Regenerative MedicineNational Taiwan University, Taipei 106, Taiwan
Institute of BiotechnologyDepartment of Animal Science and TechnologyGenome and
Systems Biology Degree ProgramNational Taiwan University, Taipei 106,
TaiwanGenome and Systems Biology Degree ProgramAcademia Sinica, Taipei,
TaiwanInstitut CurieCNRS UMR3244, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, 75248 Paris
Cedex 05, FranceDepartment of Animal Science and BiotechnologyTunghai University,
Taichung 407, TaiwanINSERM U934/CNRS UMR3215Institut Curie, 75005 Paris,
FranceDepartment of Genetics and DevelopmentCollege of Physicians and Surgeons of
Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USAAgricultural Biotechnology
Research CenterAcademia Sinica, Taipei 115, TaiwanCenter for Systems
BiologyResearch Center for Developmental Biology and Regenerative
MedicineNational Taiwan University, Taipei 106, Taiwan. (3)Institute of
BiotechnologyDepartment of Animal Science and TechnologyGenome and Systems
Biology Degree ProgramNational Taiwan University, Taipei 106, TaiwanGenome and
Systems Biology Degree ProgramAcademia Sinica, Taipei, TaiwanInstitut CurieCNRS
UMR3244, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, 75248 Paris Cedex 05, FranceDepartment
of Animal Science and BiotechnologyTunghai University, Taichung 407, TaiwanINSERM
U934/CNRS UMR3215Institut Curie, 75005 Paris, FranceDepartment of Genetics and
DevelopmentCollege of Physicians and Surgeons of Columbia University, New York,
New York 10032, USAAgricultural Biotechnology Research CenterAcademia Sinica,
Taipei 115, TaiwanCenter for Systems BiologyResearch Center for Developmental
Biology and Regenerative MedicineNational Taiwan University, Taipei 106, Taiwan
Institute of BiotechnologyDepartment of Animal Science and TechnologyGenome and
Systems Biology Degree ProgramNational Taiwan University, Taipei 106,
TaiwanGenome and Systems Biology Degree ProgramAcademia Sinica, Taipei,
TaiwanInstitut CurieCNRS UMR3244, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, 75248 Paris
Cedex 05, FranceDepartment of Animal Science and BiotechnologyTunghai University,
Taichung 407, TaiwanINSERM U934/CNRS UMR3215Institut Curie, 75005 Paris,
FranceDepartment of Genetics and DevelopmentCollege of Physicians and Surgeons of
Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USAAgricultural Biotechnology
Research CenterAcademia Sinica, Taipei 115, TaiwanCenter for Systems
BiologyResearch Center for Developmental Biology and Regenerative
MedicineNational Taiwan University, Taipei 106, Taiwan Institute of
BiotechnologyDepartment of Animal Science and TechnologyGenome and Systems
Biology Degree ProgramNational Taiwan University, Taipei 106, TaiwanGenome and
Systems Biology Degree ProgramAcademia Sinica, Taipei, TaiwanInstitut CurieCNRS
UMR3244, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, 75248 Paris Cedex 05, FranceDepartment
of Animal Science and BiotechnologyTunghai University, T

Nuclear transfer (NT) is a technique used to investigate the development and
reprogramming potential of a single cell. DNA methyltransferase-3-like, which has
been characterized as a repressive transcriptional regulator, is expressed in
naturally fertilized egg and morula/blastocyst at pre-implantation stages. In
this study, we demonstrate that the use of Dnmt3l-knockout (Dnmt3l-KO) donor
cells in combination with Trichostatin A treatment improved the developmental
efficiency and quality of the cloned embryos. Compared with the WT group,
Dnmt3l-KO donor cell-derived cloned embryos exhibited increased cell numbers as
well as restricted OCT4 expression in the inner cell mass (ICM) and silencing of 
transposable elements at the blastocyst stage. In addition, our results indicate 
that zygotic Dnmt3l is dispensable for cloned embryo development at
pre-implantation stages. In Dnmt3l-KO mouse embryonic fibroblasts, we observed
reduced nuclear localization of HDAC1, increased levels of the active histone
mark H3K27ac and decreased accumulation of the repressive histone marks H3K27me3 
and H3K9me3, suggesting that Dnmt3l-KO donor cells may offer a more permissive
epigenetic state that is beneficial for NT reprogramming.

© 2015 Society for Reproduction and Fertility.

PMID: 26159833  [PubMed - in process]


168. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Oct 1;24(19):5367-77. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv258. Epub 2015 Jul 
7.

Histone deacetylase 1 regulates tissue destruction in rheumatoid arthritis.

Hawtree S(1), Muthana M(1), Wilkinson JM(2), Akil M(1), Wilson AG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infection and Immunity, University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10
2RX, UK and. (2)Academic Unit of Bone Metabolism, University of Sheffield,
Sheffield S10 2RX, UK and. (3)Department of Infection and Immunity, University of
Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2RX, UK and Conway Institute, Belfield Campus,
University College Dublin, Dublin 4, Ireland gerry.wilson@ucd.ie.

Emerging evidence implicates epigenetic mechanisms in the pathogenesis of
rheumatoid arthritis (RA). In this study, we have investigated the role of
histone deacetylase (HDAC) enzymes in RA synovial fibroblasts (RASFs), a key
cellular mediator of cartilage and bone destruction and determined effects of
HDAC1 inhibition on both RASF phenotype in vitro, and joint inflammation and
damage in the collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) model. Expression of HDACs 1-11
messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) was compared between RASFs and osteoarthritic
synovial fibroblast (OASFs) using quantitative polymerase chain reaction. HDAC1
expression in RASFs was inhibited using small interfering RNA (siRNA) technology 
to assess effects on invasiveness, migration, proliferation and apoptosis.
Effects of HDAC1 knockdown (KD) on the transcriptome were assessed using gene
microarrays. The effects of siRNA-mediated HDAC(KD) on clinical scores, tissue
inflammation and damage were assessed on CIA up to 47 days following
immunization. Expression of HDAC1 was significantly higher in RASFs than OASFs.
HDAC1(KD) resulted in reduced proliferation, invasion and migration in vitro and 
transcriptome profiling revealed effects on expression of genes regulating
proliferation migration and inflammation. Furthermore, inhibition of HDAC1 in CIA
resulted in reduced joint swelling, cartilage and bone damage and lower tumor
necrosis factor in joint tissue. These results implicate HDAC1 as an important
mediator of tissue damage in RA and support the potential therapeutic utility of 
inhibitors of this enzyme.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26152200  [PubMed - in process]


169. ASN Neuro. 2015 Jun 30;7(3). pii: 1759091415593066. doi:
10.1177/1759091415593066. Print 2015 May-Jun.

Combined HDAC1 and HDAC2 Depletion Promotes Retinal Ganglion Cell Survival After 
Injury Through Reduction of p53 Target Gene Expression.

Lebrun-Julien F(1), Suter U(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Health Sciences, Department of Biology, Swiss Federal
Institute of Technology (ETH) Zürich, CH, Switzerland
frederic.lebrun@biol.ethz.ch. (2)Institute of Molecular Health Sciences,
Department of Biology, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH) Zürich, CH,
Switzerland.

Histones deacetylases (HDACs), besides their function as epigenetic regulators,
deacetylate and critically regulate the activity of nonhistone targets. In
particular, HDACs control partially the proapoptotic activity of p53 by balancing
its acetylation state. HDAC inhibitors have revealed neuroprotective properties
in different models, but the exact mechanisms of action remain poorly understood.
We have generated a conditional knockout mouse model targeting retinal ganglion
cells (RGCs) to investigate specifically the functional role of HDAC1 and HDAC2
in an acute model of optic nerve injury. Our results demonstrate that combined
HDAC1 and HDAC2 ablation promotes survival of axotomized RGCs. Based on global
gene expression analyses, we identified the p53-PUMA apoptosis-inducing axis to
be strongly activated in axotomized mouse RGCs. Specific HDAC1/2 ablation
inhibited this apoptotic pathway by impairing the crucial acetylation status of
p53 and reducing PUMA expression, thereby contributing to the ensuing enhanced
neuroprotection due to HDAC1/2 depletion. HDAC1/2 inhibition and the affected
downstream signaling components emerge as specific targets for developing
therapeutic strategies in neuroprotection.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMCID: PMC4720215
PMID: 26129908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jul 14;112(28):E3669-78. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1504021112. Epub 2015 Jun 29.

Structural insights into the assembly of the histone deacetylase-associated
Sin3L/Rpd3L corepressor complex.

Clark MD(1), Marcum R(1), Graveline R(2), Chan CW(1), Xie T(1), Chen Z(1), Ding
Y(1), Zhang Y(1), Mondragón A(1), David G(2), Radhakrishnan I(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL
60208-3500; (2)Department of Pharmacology, New York University School of
Medicine, New York City, NY 10016. (3)Department of Molecular Biosciences,
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208-3500;
i-radhakrishnan@northwestern.edu.

Acetylation is correlated with chromatin decondensation and transcriptional
activation, but its regulation by histone deacetylase (HDAC)-bearing corepressor 
complexes is poorly understood. Here, we describe the mechanism of assembly of
the mammalian Sin3L/Rpd3L complex facilitated by Sds3, a conserved subunit deemed
critical for proper assembly. Sds3 engages a globular, helical region of the HDAC
interaction domain (HID) of the scaffolding protein Sin3A through a bipartite
motif comprising a helix and an adjacent extended segment. Sds3 dimerizes through
not only one of the predicted coiled-coil motifs but also, the segment preceding 
it, forming an ~ 150-Å-long antiparallel dimer. Contrary to previous findings in 
yeast, Sin3A rather than Sds3 functions in recruiting HDAC1 into the complex by
engaging the latter through a highly conserved segment adjacent to the helical
HID subdomain. In the resulting model for the ternary complex, the two copies of 
the HDACs are situated distally and dynamically because of a natively
unstructured linker connecting the dimerization domain and the Sin3A interaction 
domain of Sds3; these features contrast with the static organization described
previously for the NuRD (nucleosome remodeling and deacetylase) complex. The Sds3
linker features several conserved basic residues that could potentially maintain 
the complex on chromatin by nonspecific interactions with DNA after initial
recruitment by sequence-specific DNA-binding repressors.

PMCID: PMC4507224
PMID: 26124119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Circ Res. 2015 Jul 31;117(4):364-75. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.306829. Epub
2015 Jun 29.

Bach1 Represses Wnt/ß-Catenin Signaling and Angiogenesis.

Jiang L(1), Yin M(1), Wei X(1), Liu J(1), Wang X(1), Niu C(1), Kang X(1), Xu
J(1), Zhou Z(1), Sun S(1), Wang X(1), Zheng X(1), Duan S(1), Yao K(1), Qian R(1),
Sun N(1), Chen A(1), Wang R(1), Zhang J(1), Chen S(1), Meng D(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology (L.J., Xiangxiang Wei,
J.L., Xinhong Wang, C.N., X.K., J.X., Z.Z., R.Q., N.S., A.C., R.W., S.C., D.M.)
and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (S.S., Xu Wang), School of
Basic Medical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China; Department of
Cardiothoracic Surgery, Shanghai Children's Medical Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China (M.Y.); Key Laboratory of
Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional Sciences, Shanghai Institutes
for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China (X.Z.,
S.D.); Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Institute of Cardiovascular Disease,
ZhongShan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China (K.Y.); Center for Vascular
Disease and Translational Medicine, Xiangya Third Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha, China (A.C.); Department of Biology, Laurentian University,
Sudbury, Ontario, Canada (R.W.); and Division of Cardiology, Department of
Medicine, Stem Cell Institute, University of Minnesota Medical School,
Minneapolis (J.Z.). (2)From the Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology
(L.J., Xiangxiang Wei, J.L., Xinhong Wang, C.N., X.K., J.X., Z.Z., R.Q., N.S.,
A.C., R.W., S.C., D.M.) and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
(S.S., Xu Wang), School of Basic Medical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China; Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Shanghai Children's Medical Center, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China (M.Y.); Key
Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional Sciences,
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai, China (X.Z., S.D.); Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Institute of
Cardiovascular Disease, ZhongShan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
(K.Y.); Center for Vascular Disease and Translational Medicine, Xiangya Third
Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, China (A.C.); Department of
Biology, Laurentian University, Sudbury, Ontario, Canada (R.W.); and Division of 
Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Stem Cell Institute, University of Minnesota 
Medical School, Minneapolis (J.Z.). dmeng@fudan.edu.cn chen1216@fudan.edu.cn.

Erratum in
    Circ Res. 2015 Oct 9;117(9):e79.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2015 Oct 9;117(9):e75-6.

RATIONALE: Wnt/ß-catenin signaling has an important role in the angiogenic
activity of endothelial cells (ECs). Bach1 is a transcription factor and is
expressed in ECs, but whether Bach1 regulates angiogenesis is unknown.
OBJECTIVE: This study evaluated the role of Bach1 in angiogenesis and
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Hind-limb ischemia was surgically induced in Bach1(-/-) mice
and their wild-type littermates and in C57BL/6J mice treated with adenoviruses
coding for Bach1 or GFP. Lack of Bach1 expression was associated with significant
increases in perfusion and vascular density and in the expression of
proangiogenic cytokines in the ischemic hindlimb of mice, with enhancement of the
angiogenic activity of ECs (eg, tube formation, migration, and proliferation).
Bach1 overexpression impaired angiogenesis in mice with hind-limb ischemia and
inhibited Wnt3a-stimulated angiogenic response and the expression of
Wnt/ß-catenin target genes, such as interleukin-8 and vascular endothelial growth
factor, in human umbilical vein ECs. Interleukin-8 and vascular endothelial
growth factor were responsible for the antiangiogenic response of Bach1.
Immunoprecipitation and GST pull-down assessments indicated that Bach1 binds
directly to TCF4 and reduces the interaction of ß-catenin with TCF4. Bach1
overexpression reduces the interaction between p300/CBP and ß-catenin, as well as
ß-catenin acetylation, and chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments confirmed
that Bach1 occupies the TCF4-binding site of the interleukin-8 promoter and
recruits histone deacetylase 1 to the interleukin-8 promoter in human umbilical
vein ECs.
CONCLUSIONS: Bach1 suppresses angiogenesis after ischemic injury and impairs
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling by disrupting the interaction between ß-catenin and TCF4 
and by recruiting histone deacetylase 1 to the promoter of TCF4-targeted genes.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4676728
PMID: 26123998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 Oct 15;414:143-7. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2015.05.037. Epub 
2015 Jun 24.

Histone hypoacetylation and increased histone deacetylases in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells from patients with Graves' disease.

Yan N(1), Zhou JZ(2), Zhang JA(3), Cai T(2), Zhang W(2), Wang Y(2), Muhali FS(2),
Guan L(2), Song RH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Jinshan Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai,
China. (2)Clinical Research Center, The First Affiliated Hospital of Medical
School, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China. (3)Department of Endocrinology, 
Jinshan Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, China. Electronic address:
zhangjinan@hotmail.com.

The objective of this study was to investigate histone modification patterns in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of patients with Graves' disease (GD).
Thirty GD patients and 20 healthy controls were enrolled in this study. Global
histone H3/H4 acetylation levels of PBMCs in all subjects were detected by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. mRNA levels of histone-related chromatin
modifier genes were measured by real-time quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. Global histone H4 acetylation level in
PBMCs of GD patients was significantly decreased compared with controls
(p=0.005). The mRNA expression of histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2 were
significantly increased in PBMCs of GD patients compared with controls (p=0.004
and 0.018; respectively). No significant difference was observed either in SIRT1 
or in HATs mRNA including p300, CREBBP between GD patients and controls (p>0.05).
Our findings firstly suggested that histone acetylation modifications are
aberrant in PBMCs of GD patients, possibly due to the deregulation of epigenetic 
modifier genes.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26116233  [PubMed - in process]


173. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 25;10(6):e0131760. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131760.
eCollection 2015.

Decreased Expression of CoREST1 and CoREST2 Together with LSD1 and HDAC1/2 during
Neuronal Differentiation.

Sáez JE(1), Gómez AV(1), Barrios ÁP(1), Parada GE(1), Galdames L(1), González
M(1), Andrés ME(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, 
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(7):e0133555.

CoREST (CoREST1, rcor1) transcriptional corepressor together with the histone
demethylase LSD1 (KDM1A) and the histone deacetylases HDAC1/2 form
LSD1-CoREST-HDAC (LCH) transcriptional complexes to regulate gene expression.
CoREST1 belong to a family that also comprises CoREST2 (rcor2) and CoREST3
(rcor3). CoREST1 represses the expression of neuronal genes during neuronal
differentiation. However, the role of paralogs CoREST2 and CoREST3 in this
process is just starting to emerge. Here, we report the expression of all CoRESTs
and partners LSD1 and HDAC1/2 in two models of neuronal differentiation:
Nerve-Growth-Factor (NGF)-induced neuronal phenotype of PC12 cells, and in vitro 
maturation of embryonic rat cortical neurons. In both models, a concomitant and
gradual decrease of LSD1, HDAC1, HDAC2, CoREST1, and CoREST2, but not CoREST3 was
observed. As required by the study, full-length rat rcor1 gene was identified
using in silico analysis of available rat genome. The work was also complemented 
by the analysis of rat RNA-seq databases. The analysis showed that all CoRESTs,
including the identified four splicing variants of rat CoREST3, display a wide
expression in adult tissues. Moreover, the analysis of RNA-seq databases showed
that CoREST2 displays a higher expression than CoREST1 and CoREST3 in the mature 
brain. Immunofluorescent assays and immunoblots of adult rat brain showed that
all CoRESTs are present in both glia and neurons. Regarding functional
partnership, CoREST2 and CoREST3 interact with all LSD1 splicing variants. In
conclusion, neuronal differentiation is accompanied by decreased expression of
all core components of LCH complexes, but not CoREST3. The combination of the
differential transcriptional repressor capacity of LCH complexes and variable
protein levels of its different components should result in a finely tuned gene
expression during neuronal differentiation and in the adult brain.

PMCID: PMC4482511
PMID: 26111147  [PubMed - in process]


174. Exp Cell Res. 2015 Aug 15;336(2):263-75. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2015.06.008. Epub
2015 Jun 19.

4-(1-Ethyl-4-anisyl-imidazol-5-yl)-N-hydroxycinnamide - A new pleiotropic HDAC
inhibitor targeting cancer cell signalling and cytoskeletal organisation.

Mahal K(1), Kahlen P(2), Biersack B(3), Schobert R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Organic Chemistry Laboratory, University of Bayreuth, Universitätsstrasse 30, 
95440 Bayreuth, Germany. Electronic address: katharina.mahal@uni-bayreuth.de.
(2)Department of Genetics, University of Bayreuth, Universitätsstrasse 30, 95440 
Bayreuth, Germany. Electronic address: philip.kahlen@uni-bayreuth.de. (3)Organic 
Chemistry Laboratory, University of Bayreuth, Universitätsstrasse 30, 95440
Bayreuth, Germany. Electronic address: bernhard.biersack@yahoo.com. (4)Organic
Chemistry Laboratory, University of Bayreuth, Universitätsstrasse 30, 95440
Bayreuth, Germany. Electronic address: rainer.schobert@uni-bayreuth.de.

Histone deacetylases (HDAC) which play a crucial role in cancer cell
proliferation are promising drug targets. However, HDAC inhibitors (HDACi)
modelled on natural hydroxamic acids such as trichostatin A frequently lead to
resistance or even an increased agressiveness of tumours. As a workaround we
developed 4-(1-ethyl-4-anisyl-imidazol-5-yl)-N-hydroxycinnamide (etacrox), a
hydroxamic acid that combines HDAC inhibition with synergistic effects of the
4,5-diarylimidazole residue. Etacrox proved highly cytotoxic against a panel of
metastatic and resistant cancer cell lines while showing greater specificity for 
cancer over non-malignant cells when compared to the approved HDACi vorinostat.
Like the latter, etacrox and the closely related imidazoles bimacroxam and
animacroxam acted as pan-HDACi yet showed some specificity for HDAC6. Akt
signalling and interference with nuclear beta-catenin localisation were elicited 
by etacrox at lower concentrations when compared to vorinostat. Moreover, etacrox
disrupted the microtubule and focal adhesion dynamics of cancer cells and
inhibited the proteolytic activity of prometastatic and proangiogenic matrix
metalloproteinases. As a consequence, etacrox acted strongly antimigratory and
antiinvasive against various cancer cell lines in three-dimensional transwell
invasion assays and also antiangiogenic in vivo with respect to blood vessel
formation in the chorioallantoic membrane assay. These pleiotropic effects and
its water-solubility and tolerance by mice render etacrox a promising new HDACi
candidate.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26101158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Oncotarget. 2015 Jun 30;6(18):16461-70.

By recruiting HDAC1, MORC2 suppresses p21 Waf1/Cip1 in gastric cancer.

Zhang Q(1), Song Y(1), Chen W(1), Wang X(1), Miao Z(2), Cao L(1), Li F(1), Wang
G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Ministry of Public
Health, and Key Laboratory of Medical Cell Biology, Ministry of Education, China 
Medical University, Shenyang, China. (2)Department of Surgical Oncology and
General Surgery, First Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, China.

Microrchidia (MORC) family CW-type zinc-finger 2 (MORC2) regulates chromatin
remodeling during the DNA-damage response, represses gene transcription, promotes
lipogenesis. Here, we found that MORC2 down-regulated p21 by recruiting HDAC1 to 
the p21 promoter, in a p53-independent manner. MORC2-mediated down-regulation of 
p21 in turn promoted cell cycle progression in gastric cancer cells. Furthermore,
MORC2 expression correlated negatively with p21 expression in gastric tumors in
patients. We suggest that MORC2 may be a potential therapeutic target in cancer.

PMCID: PMC4599282
PMID: 26098774  [PubMed - in process]


176. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Aug 7;463(4):961-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.06.042. Epub 2015 Jun 18.

Transcription factor FOXA2-centered transcriptional regulation network in
non-small cell lung cancer.

Jang SM(1), An JH(1), Kim CH(1), Kim JW(2), Choi KH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Chung-Ang University, Seoul 156-756, Republic of
Korea. (2)Department of Life Science, Chung-Ang University, Seoul 156-756,
Republic of Korea. Electronic address: jungkim@cau.ac.kr. (3)Department of Life
Science, Chung-Ang University, Seoul 156-756, Republic of Korea. Electronic
address: khchoi@cau.ac.kr.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-mediated death. Although various
therapeutic approaches are used for lung cancer treatment, these mainly target
the tumor suppressor p53 transcription factor, which is involved in apoptosis and
cell cycle arrest. However, p53-targeted therapies have limited application in
lung cancer, since p53 is found to be mutated in more than half of lung cancers. 
In this study, we propose tumor suppressor FOXA2 as an alternative target protein
for therapies against lung cancer and reveal a possible FOXA2-centered
transcriptional regulation network by identifying new target genes and binding
partners of FOXA2 by using various screening techniques. The genes encoding
Glu/Asp-rich carboxy-terminal domain 2 (CITED2), nuclear receptor subfamily 0,
group B, member 2 (NR0B2), cell adhesion molecule 1 (CADM1) and BCL2-associated X
protein (BAX) were identified as putative target genes of FOXA2. Additionally,
the proteins including highly similar to heat shock protein HSP 90-beta (HSP90A),
heat shock 70 kDa protein 1A variant (HSPA1A), histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and 
HDAC3 were identified as novel interacting partners of FOXA2. Moreover, we showed
that FOXA2-dependent promoter activation of BAX and p21 genes is significantly
reduced via physical interactions between the identified binding partners and
FOXA2. These results provide opportunities to understand the FOXA2-centered
transcriptional regulation network and novel therapeutic targets to modulate this
network in p53-deficient lung cancer.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26093302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. ACS Nano. 2015 Jul 28;9(7):6826-36. doi: 10.1021/nn506782f. Epub 2015 Jun 22.

Gd-Metallofullerenol Nanomaterial Suppresses Pancreatic Cancer Metastasis by
Inhibiting the Interaction of Histone Deacetylase 1 and Metastasis-Associated
Protein 1.

Pan Y, Wang L(1), Kang SG(2), Lu Y, Yang Z(3), Huynh T(2), Chen C(1), Zhou
R(2,)(3), Guo M, Zhao Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)CAS Key Laboratory for Biomedical Effects of Nanomaterials and Nanosafety,
National Center for Nanoscience and Technology and Institute of High Energy
Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China. (2)§Computational
Biology Center, IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center,1101 Kitchawan Road,
Yorktown Heights, New York 10598, United States. (3)<U+22A5>Institute of Quantitative
Biology and Medicine, SRMP and RAD-X, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, China.

The treatment of pancreatic cancer frequently fails due to local recurrence and
hepatic metastasis. Our previous study found that Gd@C82(OH)22 can suppress
pancreatic cancer by inhibiting MMP-2/9 expression. In this study, we further
explored the epigenetic mechanism of Gd@C82(OH)22 in human pancreatic cancer
metastasis. Gd@C82(OH)22 suppressed tumor metastasis through down-regulation of
metastasis-associated protein 1 (MTA1), HDAC1, HIF-1a, and MMP-2/9 and
up-regulation of reversion-cysteine protein with the Kazal motif (RECK). The
level of acetylation was increased in the promoter region of the RECK gene after 
Gd@C82(OH)22 treatment. The interaction of MTA1, HDAC1, and HIF-1a was inhibited 
by Gd@C82(OH)22. Furthermore, large-scale molecular dynamics simulations revealed
Gd@C82(OH)22 could serve as an effective HDAC inhibitor to the protein-protein
association between HDAC1 and MTA1, especially through MTA1's SANT and ELM2
dimerization domains. Our findings implicate Gd@C82(OH)22 as a novel HDAC
inhibitor acting to increase RECK expression by suppressing the MTA1/HDAC1
co-repressor complex. Gd@C82(OH)22 may serve as a potential HDAC1 inhibitor to
suppress pancreatic cancer cell invasion and metastasis both in vitro and in
vivo. According to computer analysis and experimental validation, Gd@C82(OH)22
activates RECK expression by inhibiting the interaction of HDAC1 and MTA1.

PMID: 26083726  [PubMed - in process]


178. J Formos Med Assoc. 2015 Jun 12. pii: S0929-6646(15)00180-1. doi:
10.1016/j.jfma.2015.05.010. [Epub ahead of print]

Resveratrol reverses morphine-induced neuroinflammation in morphine-tolerant rats
by reversal HDAC1 expression.

Tsai RY(1), Wang JC(2), Chou KY(3), Wong CS(4), Cherng CH(5).

Author information: 
(1)College of Nursing and Health Sciences, Da-Yeh University, Changhua, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, Cathay General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)General Education Center, National Taipei University of Nursing and Health
Sciences, Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Department of Anesthesiology, Cathay General
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; School of Medicine, Fu-Jen Catholic University, New
Taipei City, Taiwan; Graduate Institute of Medical Science, National Defense
Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address: w82556@gmail.com.
(5)Department of Anesthesiology, Tri-Service General Hospital and National
Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address:
cherng1018@yahoo.com.tw.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: We previously showed that subsequent intrathecal (i.t.)
injection of resveratrol (30 µg) significantly reverses morphine-evoked
neuroinflammation in morphine-tolerant rats. The present study examined the
underlying mechanism.
METHODS: Male Wistar rats were implanted with two i.t. catheters, one of which
was connected to a miniosmotic pump and used for morphine (15 µg/h) or saline
infusion for 120 hours. To examine the effects on spinal cord expression of
histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), the inflammatory cytokine tumor necrosis factor-a 
(TNF-a), and TNF receptor (TNFR) 1 and TNFR2 during tolerance induction, a
tail-flick test was performed prior to infusion and after 24 hours, 48 hours, 72 
hours, 96 hours, and 120 hours of infusion.
RESULTS: Resveratrol treatment prior to morphine challenge restored the
antinociceptive effect of morphine in morphine-tolerant rats and reversed the
morphine infusion-induced increase in HDAC1, TNF-a, and TNFR1 expression.
Moreover, chronic morphine infusion increased TNFR1-specific expression in neuron
in morphine-tolerant rat spinal cords, and this effect was almost completely
inhibited by resveratrol treatment prior to morphine challenge.
CONCLUSION: Resveratrol restores the antinociceptive effect of morphine by
reversing morphine infusion-induced spinal cord neuroinflammation and increase in
TNFR1 expression. The reversal of the morphine-induced increase in TNFR1
expression by resveratrol is partially due to reversal of the morphine
infusion-induced increase in HDAC1 expression. Resveratrol pretreatment can be
used as an adjuvant in clinical pain management for patients who need long-term
morphine treatment or with neuropathic pain.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 26078221  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


179. Chin Med. 2015 May 13;10:9. doi: 10.1186/s13020-015-0038-9. eCollection 2015.

Histone deacetylation of memory T lymphocytes by You-Gui-Wan alleviates
allergen-induced eosinophilic airway inflammation in asthma.

Zhang HP(1), Fu JJ(2), Fan T(2), Zhang WB(3), Wang ZL(4), Wang L(1), Wang G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pneumology Group, Department of Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western
Medicine, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy of China, West China Hospital,
Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610041 PR China ; Pneumology Group, Department of
Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine, West China Hospital, Sichuan
University, Chengdu, 610041 PR China. (2)Pneumology Group, Department of
Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine, West China Hospital, Sichuan
University, Chengdu, 610041 PR China. (3)Department of Respiratory Medicine,
Chongqing Traditional Chinese Medicine Hospital, Chongqing, 400011 PR China.
(4)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, West China Hospital,
Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610041 PR China.

BACKGROUND: You-Gui pills (You-Gui-Wan; YGW) can promote T lymphocyte
proliferation and differentiation, and restore Th1/Th2 balance in the treatment
of asthma, but their mechanism of action is not fully known. This study aims to
explore whether YGW can induce histone deacetylation or acetylation in memory T
lymphocytes (Tm) for improvement of airway inflammation in asthma.
METHODS: CD4(+)CD45RB(low) cells, as Tm, were obtained by magnetic-activated cell
sorting and flow cytometry from the spleens of BALB/c mice with ovalbumin
(OVA)-induced asthma. Tm were cocultured with hydrocortisone (CORT; 1000 nM),
serum containing low (0.225 g/kg), moderate (0.9 g/kg), or high (3.6 g/kg) doses 
of YGW, or medium only, and then adoptively transferred into naïve mice (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>5
per group). Recipient mice were challenged with aerosolized OVA. The levels of
IL-4, IL-5, IL-13, and IFN-<U+03B3> in culture supernatants and bronchoalveolar lavage
fluid (BALF) from the OVA-challenged mice were measured by ELISA. Histone
deacetylase (HDAC) and histone acetyltransferase (HAT) activities and protein
expressions of T-bet, GATA-3, and HDAC1-11 in lung tissue were measured by
western blotting analyses. The alveolar eosinophilic inflammation index (AEII)
was evaluated in the lungs of adoptive transfer recipient mice.
RESULTS: YGW reduced inflammation and eosinophil infiltration into the lung
tissues as evidenced by histology, with similar effects to those of CORT. High-, 
moderate-, and low-YGW increased HDAC (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0009 and P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0253
respectively) and decreased HAT (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0001, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0000 and P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0039,
respectively) activities in dose-dependent manners in the lung tissues of
adoptive transfer recipient mice. Increased histone deacetylation of Tm by YGW
reduced the AEII by reducing GATA-3 (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.014),IL-4 (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0004), IL-5
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0067), and IL-13 (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0002), and inducing IFN-<U+03B3> release (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0375).
Moreover, YGW reduced inflammatory cytokines such as IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13 by
upregulating the activities of HDAC7 (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.003)/10 (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.003), HDAC11
(P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001), and HDAC9-11 (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001 and P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001, respectively),
respectively, and increased IFN-<U+03B3> release by increasing HDAC9 (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: Histone deacetylation of Tm was observed during alleviation of
allergen-induced eosinophilic airway inflammation in asthma by YGW.

PMCID: PMC4465301
PMID: 26075017  [PubMed]


180. Immunobiology. 2015 Oct;220(10):1136-40. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2015.06.007. Epub
2015 Jun 5.

Activation of insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor regulates the
radiation-induced lung cancer cell apoptosis.

Zhang H(1), Zhang C(1), Wu D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Xiangya Hospital of Central South
University, No.87, Xiangya Road, Kaifu District, HuNan, ChangSha 410008, China.
(2)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Xiangya Hospital of Central South
University, No.87, Xiangya Road, Kaifu District, HuNan, ChangSha 410008, China.
Electronic address: dongkairwu@outlook.com.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: The prevalence of lung cancer is increasing in the recent
decades. The underlying mechanism is unclear. The insulin-like growth factor
(IGF) and p53 protein are important molecules involving the tumor immunity. This 
study aims to investigate the role of IGF intervene the radiation-induced lung
cancer apoptosis.
METHODS: Lung cancer cells were isolated from surgically removed lung cancer
tissue. The lung cancer cell lines, A549 cells and H23 cells were irradiated. The
expression of IGF1 receptor (IGF1R) by the lung cancer cells, and apoptosis, were
assessed by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: The results showed that human lung cancer cells expressed IGF1R. IGF1R
played a critical role in the radiation-induced lung cancer cell apoptosis. The
histone deacetylase-1 (HDAC1) phosphorylation was up regulated by irradiation.
The phosphorylated HDAC1 bound the p53 promoter to inhibit the gene
transcription, which was abolished by the presence of an inhibitor of HDAC1 or a 
STAT3 inhibitor.
CONCLUSION: The data suggest that activation of IGF1R plays a critical role in
the radioresistance, which can be prevented in the presence of the inhibitors of 
HDAC1 or STAT3 inhibitors.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26074062  [PubMed - in process]


181. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 11;10(6):e0129803. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0129803.
eCollection 2015.

Epigenetic Modification Agents Improve Gene-Specific Methylation Reprogramming in
Porcine Cloned Embryos.

Huan Y(1), Wu Z(2), Zhang J(2), Zhu J(3), Liu Z(3), Song X(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Qingdao Agricultural University,
Qingdao, Shandong Province, China. (2)Shouguang City Hospital of Chinese
Medicine, Weifang, Shandong Province, China. (3)College of Life Science,
Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin, Heilongjiang Province, China.

Incomplete DNA methylation reprogramming in cloned embryos leads to poor cloning 
efficiency. Epigenetic modification agents can improve genomic methylation
reprogramming and the development of cloned embryos, however, the effect of
epigenetic modification agents on gene-specific methylation reprogramming remains
poorly studied. Here, we investigated DNA methylation reprogramming of
pluripotency (Oct4) and tissue specific (Thy1) genes during early embryo
development in pigs. In this study, we found that compared with in vitro
fertilized counterparts, cloned embryos displayed the disrupted patterns of Oct4 
demethylation and Thy1 remethylation. When 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dC) or
trichostatin A (TSA) enhanced the development of cloned embryos, the transcripts 
of DNA methyltransferases (Dnmt1 and Dnmt3a), histone acetyltransferase 1 (Hat1) 
and histone deacetylase 1 (Hdac1) and the methylation and expression patterns of 
Oct4 and Thy1 became similar to those detected in in vitro fertilized
counterparts. Further studies showed that Dnmt1 knockdown in cloned embryos
enhanced the methylation reprogramming of Oct4 and Thy1 and promoted the
activation of Oct4 and the silence of Thy1. In conclusion, our results
demonstrated that cloned embryos displayed incomplete gene-specific methylation
reprogramming and disrupted expression patterns of pluripotency and tissue
specific genes, and epigenetic modification agents improved gene-specific
methylation reprogramming and expression pattern by regulating epigenetic
modification related genes. This work would have important implications in
improving cloning efficiency.

PMCID: PMC4465902
PMID: 26068219  [PubMed - in process]


182. Nat Commun. 2015 Mar 13;6:6537. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7537.

The interferon-related developmental regulator 1 is used by human papillomavirus 
to suppress NF<U+03BA>B activation.

Tummers B(1), Goedemans R(1), Pelascini LP(2), Jordanova ES(3), van Esch EM(4),
Meyers C(5), Melief CJ(6), Boer JM(7), van der Burg SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Oncology, Leiden University Medical Center,
Albinusdreef 2, 2333ZA Leiden, The Netherlands. (2)Department of Molecular Cell
Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, Albinusdreef 2, 2333ZA Leiden, The
Netherlands. (3)Center for Gynaecological Oncology, Plesmanlaan 121, 1066CX
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (4)Department of Gynaecology, Leiden University
Medical Center, Albinusdreef 2, 2333ZA Leiden, The Netherlands. (5)Department of 
Microbiology and Immunology, The Pennsylvania State University College of
Medicine, 500 University Drive, Hershey, Pennsylvania 17033, USA. (6)Department
of Immunohematology and Blood Transfusion, Leiden University Medical Center,
Albinusdreef 2, 2333ZA Leiden, The Netherlands. (7)Department of Human Genetics, 
Leiden University Medical Center, Albinusdreef 2, 2333ZA Leiden, The Netherlands.

High-risk human papillomaviruses (hrHPVs) infect keratinocytes and successfully
evade host immunity despite the fact that keratinocytes are well equipped to
respond to innate and adaptive immune signals. Using non-infected and freshly
established or persistent hrHPV-infected keratinocytes we show that hrHPV impairs
the acetylation of NF<U+03BA>B/RelA K310 in keratinocytes. As a consequence,
keratinocytes display a decreased pro-inflammatory cytokine production and immune
cell attraction in response to stimuli of the innate or adaptive immune pathways.
HPV accomplishes this by augmenting the expression of interferon-related
developmental regulator 1 (IFRD1) in an EGFR-dependent manner. Restoration of
NF<U+03BA>B/RelA acetylation by IFRD1 shRNA, cetuximab treatment or the HDAC1/3
inhibitor entinostat increases basal and induced cytokine expression. Similar
observations are made in IFRD1-overexpressing HPV-induced cancer cells. Thus, our
study reveals an EGFR-IFRD1-mediated viral immune evasion mechanism, which can
also be exploited by cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC4382698
PMID: 26055519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Cell Reprogram. 2015 Jun;17(3):160-9. doi: 10.1089/cell.2014.0097.

Production of a Cloned Buffalo (Bubalus bubalis) Calf from Somatic Cells Isolated
from Urine.

Madheshiya PK(1), Sahare AA(1), Jyotsana B(1), Singh KP(1), Saini M(1), Raja
AK(1), Kaith S(1), Singla SK(1), Chauhan MS(1), Manik RS(1), Palta P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Embryo Biotechnology Laboratory, Animal Biotechnology Centre, National Dairy
Research Institute , Karnal-132001, Haryana, India .

This study was aimed at isolation of cells from urine and skin on the ventral
part of the tails of healthy adult female buffaloes (Bubalus bubalis), an area
rarely exposed to solar radiation, establishment of the cells in culture, and
their use as donor cells for production of buffalo embryos by handmade cloning
(HMC). The blastocyst rate and total cell number of urine- and tail skin-derived 
embryos were similar to those of control embryos derived from ear skin cells;
however, their apoptotic index was lower (p<0.05) than that of control
blastocysts. The global level of histone H3 acetylated at lysine 9 (H3K9ac) was
similar in the three types of donor cells and in urine- and tail skin-derived HMC
blastocysts and in vitro-fertilized (IVF) blastocysts (controls). The global
level of histone H3 trimethylated at lysine 27 (H3K27me3) in the cells was in the
order (p<0.05) urine=tail skin>ear skin-derived cells, whereas in blastocysts, it
was higher (p<0.05) in urine- and tail skin-derived HMC blastocysts than that in 
IVF blastocysts. The expression level of CASPASE3, CASPASE9, P53, DNMT1, DNMT3a, 
OCT4, and NANOG, which was similar in HMC blastocysts of three the groups, was
lower (p<0.05) than that in IVF blastocysts, whereas that of HDAC1 was similar
among the four groups. Following transfer of urine-derived embryos (n=10) to five
recipients (two embryos/recipient), one of the recipients delivered a normal calf
that is now 5 weeks old.

PMCID: PMC4487680 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 26053516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Int J Mol Med. 2015 Aug;36(2):534-40. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2236. Epub 2015 Jun 
5.

Association between histone deacetylases and the loss of cochlear hair cells:
Role of the former in noise-induced hearing loss.

Wen LT(1), Wang J(1), Wang Y(1), Chen FQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Xijing Hospital, Fourth
Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710032, P.R. China.

Noise-induced hearing loss (NIHL) is one of the most frequent disabilities in
industrialized countries. It has been demonstrated that hair cell loss in the
auditory end organ may account for the majority of ear pathological conditions.
Previous studies have indicated that histone deacetylases (HDACs) play an
important role in neurodegenerative diseases, including hearing impairment, in
older persons. Thus, we hypothesized that the inhibition of HDACs would prevent
hair cell loss and, consequently, NIHL. In the present study, a CBA/J mouse model
of NIHL was established. Following an injection with the HDAC inhibitor,
suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA), the expression levels of HDAC1, HDAC4 and
acetyl-histone H3 (Lys9) (H3-AcK9) were measured. The number of hair cells was
quantified and their morphology was observed. The results revealed that 1 h
following exposure to 110 dB SPL broadband noise, there was a significant
increase in HDAC1 and HDAC4 expression, and a marked decrease in the H3-AcK9
protein levels, as shown by western blot analysis. Pre-treatment with SAHA
significantly inhibited these effects. Two weeks following exposure to noise, the
mice exhibited significant hearing impairment and an obvious loss in the number
of outer hair cells. An abnormal cell morphology with cilia damage was also
observed. Pre-treatment with SAHA markedly attenuated these noise-induced
effects. Taken together, the findings of our study suggest that HDAC expression
is associated with outer hair cell function and plays a significant role in NIHL.
Our data indicate that SAHA may be a potential therapeutic agent for the
prevention of NIHL.

PMID: 26046130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Oncol Rep. 2015 Aug;34(2):663-72. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4010. Epub 2015 May 28.

Depletion of histone deacetylase 1 inhibits metastatic abilities of gastric
cancer cells by regulating the miR-34a/CD44 pathway.

Lin L(1), Jiang H(1), Huang M(1), Hou X(1), Sun X(1), Jiang X(1), Dong X(1), Sun 
X(1), Zhou B(1), Qiao H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150001, P.R. China.

Overexpression of histone deacetylases (HDACs) is associated with higher
metastatic rates and a poor prognosis in gastric cancer. However, the underlying 
mechanisms involved remain unclear. The present study aimed to investigate the
molecular pathways that are involved in HDAC1-mediated metastatic activities in
gastric cancer cells. First we used a microRNA (miRNA or miR) microarray to
screen potential miRNAs whose expression can be altered by HDAC1 depletion. Of
these miRNAs, miR-34a is important as it is often inactivated in cancer cells and
acts as a tumor suppressor for various types of cancer. The reverse
transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) results confirmed 
that miR-34a was upregulated by HDAC1 knockdown. Cells depleted of HDAC1 had
lower abilities to migrate, invade and adhere, which were restored by a miR-34a
antagomiR. Depletion of HDAC1 also resulted in impaired microfilaments and
microtubules, while co-transfection of the miR-34a antagomiR attenuated these
changes in the cellular cytoskeleton. The HDAC1/miR-34a axis regulated the
expression and activation of CD44 and its downstream factors including Bcl-2, Ras
homolog family member A (RhoA), LIM domain kinase 1 (LIMK-1) and matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP)-2. The latter three proteins were responsible for the
organization of tubulin and actin cytoskeleton and the formation of cellular
pseudopodia. In conclusion, results of the present study indicated that HDAC1
depletion inhibits the metastatic abilities of gastric cancer cells by regulating
the miRNA-34a/CD44 pathway, which may be a potential target for the treatment of 
gastric cancer.

PMID: 26035691  [PubMed - in process]


186. Inflamm Res. 2015 Jul;64(7):513-26. doi: 10.1007/s00011-015-0832-y. Epub 2015 Jun
2.

Acetylation of lysine 9 on histone H3 is associated with increased
pro-inflammatory cytokine release in a cigarette smoke-induced rat model through 
HDAC1 depression.

Chen X(1), Guan XJ, Peng XH, Cui ZL, Luan CY, Guo XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respirology Medicine, Xinhua Hospital, School of Medicine,
Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, 200092, China.

OBJECTIVE AND DESIGN: Cigarette smoke (CS)-induced inflammation is critical in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). However, the role of acetylation at
histone 3 lysine 9 (H3K9) in COPD inflammation remains unclear. The present study
assessed the effect of acetylation of H3K9 on transcription both in rat lungs and
in macrophages.
METHODS: Sprague-Dawley rats were exposed to CS for either 6 or 12 weeks and rat 
lungs were collected. Rat macrophages were subjected to 20 % cigarette smoke
extract (CSE) for 48 h.
RESULTS: CS increased MCP-1 and IL-8 expressions at both mRNA and protein levels 
in rat lungs after 6 and 12 weeks; increased TNF-a and MMP9 expressions at both
levels were noted only after 12 weeks. CSE increased these genes expression in
macrophages after 48 h exposure. Increased abundance of acetylated H3K9 protein
in rat lungs and in macrophages were associated with decreased expression of
histone deacetylase-1(HDAC1). Chromatin immunoprecipitation demonstrated
increased level of acetylated H3K9 on promoter regions of these genes both in
vivo and in vitro. Knockdown of HDAC1 increased these genes mRNA expression.
CONCLUSIONS: CS increased H3K9 acetylation and subsequently altered the
expression of pro-inflammatory mediators and protease genes through HDAC1
depression in CS-induced rat lungs and in macrophages.

PMID: 26033389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Aug;1849(8):909-18. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2015.05.008.
Epub 2015 May 27.

Histone deacetylase HDAC1 downregulates transcription of the serotonin
transporter (5-HTT) gene in tumor cells.

Phi van DK(1), Mühlbauer E(2), Phi-van L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Halle-Wittenberg,
D-06097 Halle, Germany. (2)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of 
Halle-Wittenberg, D-06097 Halle, Germany; Saxon Academy of Sciences, D-04107
Leipzig, Germany. (3)Institute of Animal Welfare and Animal Husbandry,
Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, D-29223 Celle, Germany. Electronic address:
loc.phivan@fli.bund.de.

Serotonin (5-HT) has been reported to be involved in cancer progression by
stimulating angiogenesis and cell growth. In this study, we examined the
expression of the serotonin transporter (5-HTT) and the role of histone
deacetylases (HDACs) in regulating the 5-HTT gene in tumor cells. The 5-HTT gene 
expression was almost silenced in chicken lymphoma DT40, myelomonocytic tumor
HD11 and hepatoma DU249 cells, compared to their physiological counterpart. In
contrast, HDAC1 mRNA expression was increased in these cell lines. Indeed, the
pan-HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA) enhanced the 5-HTT mRNA expression in
several tumor cell lines including the human cell lines HepG2 and THP-1 and
increased the 5-HT uptake in HD11 cells. In addition, treatment with
parthenolide, which is capable of depleting HDAC1, and knockdown of HDAC1 using
siRNA resulted in increased 5-HTT mRNA expression, confirming the role of HDAC1
in the down-regulation of 5-HTT in the tumor cells. Deletion analysis of the
5-HTT promoter and site-directed mutagenesis revealed that the transcription
factor CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta (C/EBPß), in interacting with the
5-HTT promoter, mediated both the inhibition of the 5-HTT expression by HDAC1 and
the activation by CREB-binding protein (CBP). Using a chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay, we found increased acetylation of histone H4
associated with the 5-HTT promoter in cells treated with TSA. Our results suggest
that the 5-HTT gene is epigenetically downregulated by HDAC1 in several types of 
cancer.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26024595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. PLoS One. 2015 May 27;10(5):e0127945. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0127945.
eCollection 2015.

Environmental Enrichment Reduces Anxiety by Differentially Activating
Serotonergic and Neuropeptide Y (NPY)-Ergic System in Indian Field Mouse (Mus
booduga): An Animal Model of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder.

Ragu Varman D(1), Rajan KE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, School of Life Sciences, Bharathidasan
University, Palkalaiperur campus, Tiruchirappalli, India.

Exposure to a predator elicits an innate fear response and mimics several
behavioral disorders related to post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). The
protective role of an enriched condition (EC) against psychogenic stressors in
various animal models has been well documented. However, this condition has not
been tested in field mice in the context of PTSD. In this study, we show that
field mice (Mus booduga) housed under EC exhibit predominantly proactive and less
reactive behavior compared with mice housed under standard conditions (SC) during
exposure to their natural predator (field rat Rattus rattus). Furthermore, we
observed that EC mice displayed less anxiety-like behavior in an elevated plus
maze (EPM) and light/dark-box after exposure to the predator (7 hrs/7 days). In
EC mice, predator exposure elevated the level of serotonin (5-Hydroxytrypamine,
[5-HT]) in the amygdala as part of the coping response. Subsequently, the
serotonin transporter (SERT) and 5-HT1A receptor were up-regulated significantly,
but the same did not occur in the 5-HT2C receptor, which is associated with the
activation of calmodulin-dependent protein kinase-II (CaMKII) and a transcription
factor cAMP response element binding protein (CREB). Our results show that
predator exposure induced the activation of CaMKII/CREB, which is accompanied
with increased levels of histone acetylation (H3, H4) and decreased histone
deacetylases (HDAC1, 2). Subsequently, in the amygdala, the transcription of
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), neuropeptide Y (NPY) and its Y1
receptor were up-regulated, whereas the Y2 receptor was down-regulated.
Therefore, EC facilitated a coping response against a fear associated cue in a
PTSD animal model and reduced anxiety by differentially activating serotonergic
and NPY-ergic systems.

PMCID: PMC4446351
PMID: 26016844  [PubMed - in process]


189. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2015 Aug;135:53-9. doi: 10.1016/j.pbb.2015.05.012. Epub 
2015 May 23.

Post-occlusion administration of sodium butyrate attenuates cognitive impairment 
in a rat model of chronic cerebral hypoperfusion.

Liu H(1), Zhang JJ(2), Li X(1), Yang Y(1), Xie XF(1), Hu K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Zhongnan Hospital, Wuhan University, Donghu Road
169#, Wuhan 430071, China; Hubei Clinical Research Center for Dementia and
Cognitive Impairment, Donghu Road 169#, Wuhan 430071, China. (2)Department of
Neurology, Zhongnan Hospital, Wuhan University, Donghu Road 169#, Wuhan 430071,
China; Hubei Clinical Research Center for Dementia and Cognitive Impairment,
Donghu Road 169#, Wuhan 430071, China. Electronic address: wdsjkx@163.com.

Chronic cerebral hypoperfusion (CCH) has been commonly associated with
Alzheimer's disease and other types of dementia, but therapies that can improve
cerebral blood flow displayed little effect on impaired cognition. Epigenetic
intervention with histone deacetylase inhibitors, such as sodium butyrate (SB),
on the other hand has been shown to improve cognition in several animal models of
dementia. To investigate the effect of SB on cognitive impairment induced by CCH 
in rats, adult male SD rats were given intraperitoneal injections of SB at a
daily dose of 840mg/kg for 4weeks, from the 29th day after permanent occlusion of
bilateral common carotid arteries (2VO). Learning and memory were assessed by
Morris water maze and novel object recognition. Following behavioral tests,
western blotting of histone acetylation, of transcription factors, of
neuronal/synaptic proteins, were performed using rat hippocampus and cortex. The 
data showed that SB treatment alleviated hippocampal dependent spatial learning
disability in 2VO rats, and altered HDAC1/2 mRNA level, histone H4 acetylation
and Nrf2 transcriptional activation in rat hippocampus. Accordingly,
cognition-protective effect of SB appeared to be partially mediated by enhancing 
histone acetylation and hence by facilitating the transcription of Nrf2
downstream genes in the hippocampus. Thus, SB might be considered for putative
treatment for CCH-related cognitive impairment.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26013850  [PubMed - in process]


190. Medchemcomm. 2015 Apr 1;6(4):613-618.

Discovery of a new class of histone deacetylase inhibitors with a novel zinc
binding group.

Li Y(1), Woster PM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Drug Discovery and Biomedical Sciences, South Carolina College
of Pharmacy, Medical University of South Carolina, 70 President St., Charleston, 
SC 29425.

Small molecules featuring a hydroxamic acid or a benzamide zinc binding group
(ZBG) are the most thoroughly studied histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors.
However, concerns about the pharmacokinetic liabilities of the hydroxamic acid
moiety and potential metabolic toxicity of the aniline portion of benzamide HDAC 
inhibitors have stimulated research efforts aimed at discovering alternative
ZBGs. Here we report the 2-(oxazol-2-yl)phenol moiety as a novel ZBG that can be 
used to produce compounds that are potent HDAC inhibitors. A series of analogues 
with this novel ZBG have been synthesized, and these analogues exhibit selective 
inhibition against HDAC1 as well as the class IIb HDACs (HDAC6 and HDAC10).
Compound 10 possesses an IC50 value of 7.5 µM in the MV-4-11 leukemia cell line, 
and induces a comparable amount of acetylated histone 3 lysine 9 (H3K9) and
p21Waf1/CIP1 as 0.5 µM of SAHA. Modeling of compound 10 in the active site of
HDAC2 demonstrates that the 2-(oxazol-2-yl)phenol moiety has a zinc-binding
pattern similar to benzamide HDAC inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC4440699
PMID: 26005563  [PubMed]


191. Genes Cancer. 2015 Mar;6(3-4):169-81.

Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) reverses chemoresistance in head and neck 
cancer cells by targeting cancer stem cells via the downregulation of nanog.

Kumar B(1), Yadav A(2), Lang JC(1), Teknos TN(1), Kumar P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery; The Ohio State University 
Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, OH, USA ; The Ohio State University
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, OH, USA. (2)The Ohio State University
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, OH, USA. (3)Department of
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery; The Ohio State University Wexner Medical
Center, Columbus, OH, USA.

Acquisition of chemoresistance and metastatic phenotype are the major causes of
treatment failure and mortality in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) 
patients. Histone deacetylases (HDACs) have been shown to be overexpressed in
many tumor types and directly linked to poor prognosis. In this study, we
demonstrate that HDACs are markedly elevated in HNSCC. HDACs expression was
further increase in cisplatin resistant cell lines (CisR). In addition,
cisplatin-resistant cells showed enhanced stem cell properties and tumor
metastasis. Depletion of HDAC1 and 2 in CisR cell lines significantly reversed
cisplatin resistance and tumorsphere formation. Next, we tested the efficacy of
Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA), an HDAC inhibitor, by using both in vitro
and in vivo models. SAHA significantly inhibited cell proliferation and
synergistically enhanced the anti-proliferative effects of cisplatin. In
addition, SAHA significantly decreased tumorsphere formation by markedly reducing
nanog expression. In a SCID mouse xenograft model, SAHA significantly enhanced
the anti-tumor effects of cisplatin treatment with no added systemic toxicity.
Furthermore, SAHA and cisplatin combination treatment significantly decreased
tumor metastasis and nanog expression, in vivo. Taken together, our results
suggest that targeting HDACs with SAHA could be an effective treatment strategy
for the treatment of HNSCC patients.

PMCID: PMC4426953
PMID: 26000099  [PubMed]


192. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 May 19;16(5):11482-99. doi: 10.3390/ijms160511482.

Anti-Fibrotic Effects of Class I HDAC Inhibitor, Mocetinostat Is Associated with 
IL-6/Stat3 Signaling in Ischemic Heart Failure.

Nural-Guvener H(1), Zakharova L(2), Feehery L(3), Sljukic S(4), Gaballa M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Laboratory, Banner Sun Health Research Institute, Sun 
City, AZ 85351, USA. feyzaguvener@gmail.com. (2)Cardiovascular Research
Laboratory, Banner Sun Health Research Institute, Sun City, AZ 85351, USA.
hbssmode@yahoo.com. (3)Cardiovascular Research Laboratory, Banner Sun Health
Research Institute, Sun City, AZ 85351, USA. lorraine.feehery@bannerhealth.com.
(4)Cardiovascular Research Laboratory, Banner Sun Health Research Institute, Sun 
City, AZ 85351, USA. zana.sljukic@gmail.com. (5)Cardiovascular Research
Laboratory, Banner Sun Health Research Institute, Sun City, AZ 85351, USA.
gaballalab@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have linked histone deacetylases (HDAC) to remodeling 
of the heart and cardiac fibrosis in heart failure. However, the molecular
mechanisms linking chromatin remodeling events with observed anti-fibrotic
effects are unknown. Here, we investigated the molecular players involved in
anti-fibrotic effects of HDAC inhibition in congestive heart failure (CHF)
myocardium and cardiac fibroblasts in vivo.
METHODS AND RESULTS: MI was created by coronary artery occlusion. Class I HDACs
were inhibited in three-week post MI rats by intraperitoneal injection of
Mocetinostat (20 mg/kg/day) for duration of three weeks. Cardiac function and
heart tissue were analyzed at six week post-MI. CD90+ cardiac fibroblasts were
isolated from ventricles through enzymatic digestion of heart. In vivo treatment 
of CHF animals with Mocetinostat reduced CHF-dependent up-regulation of HDAC1 and
HDAC2 in CHF myocardium, improved cardiac function and decreased scar size and
total collagen amount. Moreover, expression of pro-fibrotic markers, collagen-1, 
fibronectin and Connective Tissue Growth Factor (CTGF) were reduced in the left
ventricle (LV) of Mocetinostat-treated CHF hearts. Cardiac fibroblasts isolated
from Mocetinostat-treated CHF ventricles showed a decrease in expression of
collagen I and III, fibronectin and Timp1. In addition, Mocetinostat attenuated
CHF-induced elevation of IL-6 levels in CHF myocardium and cardiac fibroblasts.
In parallel, levels of pSTAT3 were reduced via Mocetinostat in CHF myocardium.
CONCLUSIONS: Anti-fibrotic effects of Mocetinostat in CHF are associated with the
IL-6/STAT3 signaling pathway. In addition, our study demonstrates in vivo
regulation of cardiac fibroblasts via HDAC inhibition.

PMCID: PMC4463712
PMID: 25997003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Cell Microbiol. 2015 Nov;17(11):1640-52. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12461. Epub 2015 Jun
11.

Chromatin-bound bacterial effector ankyrin A recruits histone deacetylase 1 and
modifies host gene expression.

Rennoll-Bankert KE(1), Garcia-Garcia JC(2), Sinclair SH(3,)(4), Dumler
JS(1,)(3,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. (2)Procter & Gamble Co., Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore,
MD, USA. (4)Cellular and Molecular Medicine Program, The Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. (5)Division of Medical Microbiology,
Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA.

Control of host epigenetics is becoming evident as a mechanism by which symbionts
and pathogens survive. Anaplasma phagocytophilum, an obligate intracellular
bacterium, down-regulates multiple host defence genes where histone deacetylase 1
(HDAC1) binds and histone 3 is deacetylated at their promoters, including the
NADPH oxidase component, CYBB. How HDAC1 is targeted to defence gene promoters is
unknown. Ankyrin A (AnkA), an A.<U+2009>phagocytophilum type IV secretion system
effector, enters the granulocyte nucleus, binds stretches of AT-rich DNA and
alters transcription of antimicrobial defence genes, including down-regulation of
CYBB. Here we found AnkA binds to a predicted matrix attachment region in the
proximal CYBB promoter. Using the CYBB promoter as a model of cis-gene silencing,
we interrogated the mechanism of AnkA-mediated CYBB repression. The N-terminus of
AnkA was critical for nuclear localization, the central ANK repeats and
C-terminus were important for DNA binding, and most promoter activity localized
to the central ANK repeats. Furthermore, a direct interaction between AnkA and
HDAC1 was detected at the CYBB promoter, and was critical for AnkA-mediated CYBB 
repression. This novel microbial manipulation of host chromatin and gene
expression provides important evidence of the direct effects that prokaryotic
nuclear effectors can exert over host transcription and function.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25996657  [PubMed - in process]


194. J Neurosci. 2015 May 13;35(19):7332-48. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2174-14.2015.

Sp3/REST/HDAC1/HDAC2 Complex Represses and Sp1/HIF-1/p300 Complex Activates ncx1 
Gene Transcription, in Brain Ischemia and in Ischemic Brain Preconditioning, by
Epigenetic Mechanism.

Formisano L(1), Guida N(2), Valsecchi V(3), Cantile M(3), Cuomo O(3), Vinciguerra
A(3), Laudati G(3), Pignataro G(3), Sirabella R(2), Di Renzo G(3), Annunziato
L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology, Department of Neuroscience, Reproductive and
Dentistry Sciences, School of Medicine, "Federico II" University of Naples,
Naples 80131, Italy, Division of Pharmacology, Department of Science and
Technology, University of Sannio, 82100 Benevento, Italy, and. (2)IRCSS SDN,
Naples 80131, Italy. (3)Division of Pharmacology, Department of Neuroscience,
Reproductive and Dentistry Sciences, School of Medicine, "Federico II" University
of Naples, Naples 80131, Italy. (4)Division of Pharmacology, Department of
Neuroscience, Reproductive and Dentistry Sciences, School of Medicine, "Federico 
II" University of Naples, Naples 80131, Italy, IRCSS SDN, Naples 80131, Italy
lannunzi@unina.it.

The Na(+)-Ca(2+) exchanger 1 (NCX1) is reduced in stroke by the RE1-silencing
transcription factor (REST), whereas it is increased in ischemic brain
preconditioning (PC) by hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1). Because ncx1 brain
promoter (ncx1-Br) has five putative consensus sequences, named Sp1A-E, for the
specificity protein (Sp) family of transcription factors (Sp1-4), we investigated
the role of this family in regulating ncx1 transcription in rat cortical neurons.
Here we found that Sp1 is a transcriptional activator, whereas Sp3 is a
transcriptional repressor of ncx1, and that both bind ncx1-Br in a
sequence-specific manner, modulating ncx1 transcription through the Sp1 sites
C-E. Furthermore, by transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (tMCAO) in rats, 
the transcriptional repressors Sp3 and REST colocalized with the two
histone-deacetylases (HDACs) HDAC1 and HDAC2 on the ncx1-Br, with a consequent
hypoacetylation. Contrarily, in PC+tMCAO the transcriptional activators Sp1 and
HIF-1 colocalized with histone acetyltransferase p300 on ncx1-Br with a
consequent hyperacetylation. In addition, in neurons silenced with siRNA of NCX1 
and subjected to oxygen and glucose deprivation (OGD) (3 h) plus reoxygenation
(RX) (24 h), the neuroprotection of Class I HDAC inhibitor MS-275 was
counteracted, whereas in neurons overexpressing NCX1 and subjected to ischemic
preconditioning (PC+OGD/RX), the neurotoxic effect of p300 inhibitor C646 was
prevented. Collectively, these results demonstrate that NCX1 expression is
regulated by the Sp3/REST/HDAC1/HDAC2 complex in tMCAO and by the Sp1/HIF-1/p300 
complex in PC+tMCAO and that epigenetic intervention, by modulating the
acetylation of ncx1-Br, may be a strategy for the development of innovative
therapeutic intervention in stroke.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/357332-17$15.00/0.

PMID: 25972164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Oncotarget. 2015 May 30;6(15):13757-71.

Loss of the deubiquitylase BAP1 alters class I histone deacetylase expression and
sensitivity of mesothelioma cells to HDAC inhibitors.

Sacco JJ(1), Kenyani J(1), Butt Z(1), Carter R(1), Chew HY(1,)(2), Cheeseman
LP(1,)(3), Darling S(1), Denny M(1), Urbé S(1), Clague MJ(1), Coulson JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cellular & Molecular Physiology, Institute of Translational Medicine,
University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK. (2)Current address: Cancer Stem Cell
Biology, Agency for Science Technology and Research, Genome Institute of
Singapore, Singapore. (3)Current address: MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology,
Cambridge, UK.

Histone deacetylases are important targets for cancer therapeutics, but their
regulation is poorly understood. Our data show coordinated transcription of HDAC1
and HDAC2 in lung cancer cell lines, but suggest HDAC2 protein expression is
cell-context specific. Through an unbiased siRNA screen we found that
BRCA1-associated protein 1 (BAP1) regulates their expression, with HDAC2 reduced 
and HDAC1 increased in BAP1 depleted cells. BAP1 loss-of-function is increasingly
reported in cancers including thoracic malignancies, with frequent mutation in
malignant pleural mesothelioma. Endogenous HDAC2 directly correlates with BAP1
across a panel of lung cancer cell lines, and is downregulated in mesothelioma
cell lines with genetic BAP1 inactivation. We find that BAP1 regulates HDAC2 by
increasing transcript abundance, rather than opposing its ubiquitylation.
Importantly, although total cellular HDAC activity is unaffected by transient
depletion of HDAC2 or of BAP1 due to HDAC1 compensation, this isoenzyme imbalance
sensitizes MSTO-211H cells to HDAC inhibitors. However, other established
mesothelioma cell lines with low endogenous HDAC2 have adapted to become more
resistant to HDAC inhibition. Our work establishes a mechanism by which BAP1 loss
alters sensitivity of cancer cells to HDAC inhibitors. Assessment of BAP1 and
HDAC expression may ultimately help identify patients likely to respond to HDAC
inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC4537048
PMID: 25970771  [PubMed - in process]


196. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Apr 13;14(2):3274-80. doi: 10.4238/2015.April.13.6.

Differential gene expression of epigenetic modifying enzymes between Tibet pig
and Yorkshire in high and low altitudes.

Ban DM(1), Zhang B(1), Wang ZX(1), Zhang H(2), Wu CX(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Engineering Laboratory for Animal Breeding, China Agricultural
University, Beijing, China. (2)National Engineering Laboratory for Animal
Breeding, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China zhanghao827@163.com.

Epigenetic modifying enzymes play important roles in the adaptation to hypoxia,
although no studies have examined their expression levels in Tibet pigs. The lung
is an important functional organ in hypoxia adaptation. In this study, we
examined the mRNA expression level of 5 enzymes in the lung of Tibet pigs using
real-time polymerase chain reaction to determine the epigenetic performance of
hypoxia adaptation. We selected four groups of pig as the study object, which
were Tibet pig in highland (TH), Yorkshire in highland (YH), Tibet pig in lowland
(TL), Yorkshire in lowland (YL). Expression of Dnmt1 in Tibet pig was higher than
that in Yorkshire (P < 0.01), although there was no significant difference
between different altitudes within each breed. Expression of Dnmt3a was higher in
Tibet pig than that in Yorkshire (P < 0.01), and higher in pigs from highland
than that in lowland areas (P < 0.05). Expression of Hdac1 was higher in group TH
than in Yorkshire (P < 0.01). Expression of Kdm3a was higher in group TH than in 
the rest of the groups (P < 0.01). Expression of Uhrf1 was higher in Tibet pig
than in Yorkshire (P < 0.01). In conclusion, the expression levels of the 5
epigenetic modifying genes were higher in group TH than in group YH. Under
conditions of oxygen deficiency, breed was the most important factor affecting
DNA methylation and gene expression.

PMID: 25966093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Neurochem Res. 2015 Jul;40(7):1372-8. doi: 10.1007/s11064-015-1601-6. Epub 2015
May 12.

Epigenetic Regulation of Dopamine Transporter mRNA Expression in Human
Neuroblastoma Cells.

Green AL(1), Hossain MM, Tee SC, Zarbl H, Guo GL, Richardson JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental and Occupational Medicine, Environmental and
Occupational Health Sciences Institute, Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical
School, 170 Frelinghuysen Rd., Piscataway, NJ, 08854, USA.

The dopamine transporter (DAT) is a key regulator of dopaminergic
neurotransmission. As such, proper regulation of DAT expression is important to
maintain homeostasis, and disruption of DAT expression can lead to
neurobehavioral dysfunction. Based on genomic features within the promoter of the
DAT gene, there is potential for DAT expression to be regulated through
epigenetic mechanisms, including DNA methylation and histone acetylation.
However, the relative contribution of these mechanisms to DAT expression has not 
been empirically determined. Using pharmacologic and genetic approaches, we
demonstrate that inhibition of DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) activity increased
DAT mRNA approximately 1.5-2 fold. This effect was confirmed by siRNA knockdown
of DNMT1. Likewise, the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors valproate and
butyrate also increased DAT mRNA expression, but the response was much more
robust with expression increasing over tenfold. Genetic knockdown of HDAC1 by
siRNA also increased DAT expression, but not to the extent seen with
pharmacological inhibition, suggesting additional isoforms of HDAC or other
targets may contribute to the observed effect. Together, these data identify the 
relative contribution of DNMTs and HDACs in regulating expression. These finding 
may aid in understanding the mechanistic basis for changes in DAT expression in
normal and pathophysiological states.

PMCID: PMC4745645 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 25963949  [PubMed - in process]


198. PLoS One. 2015 May 11;10(5):e0126592. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0126592.
eCollection 2015.

Quantification of histone deacetylase isoforms in human frontal cortex, human
retina, and mouse brain.

Anderson KW(1), Chen J(2), Wang M(2), Mast N(3), Pikuleva IA(3), Turko IV(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Bioscience and Biotechnology Research, Rockville, Maryland,
United States of America; Biomolecular Measurement Division, National Institute
of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland, United States of America;
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Maryland, College Park,
Maryland, United States of America. (2)Institute for Bioscience and Biotechnology
Research, Rockville, Maryland, United States of America; Biomolecular Measurement
Division, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland,
United States of America. (3)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences,
Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibition has promise as a therapy for Alzheimer's
disease (AD) and other neurodegenerative diseases. Currently, therapeutic HDAC
inhibitors target many HDAC isoforms, a particularly detrimental approach when
HDAC isoforms are known to have different and specialized functions. We have
developed a multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) mass spectrometry assay using
stable isotope-labeled QconCATs as internal standards to quantify HDAC isoforms. 
We further determined a quantitative pattern of specific HDACs expressed in
various human and mouse neural tissues. In human AD frontal cortex, HDAC1,2
decreased 32%, HDAC5 increased 47%, and HDAC6 increased 31% in comparison to
age-matched controls. Human neural retina concentrations of HDAC1, 2, HDAC5,
HDAC6, and HDAC7 decreased in age-related macular degeneration (AMD)-affected
donors and exhibited a greater decrease in AD-affected donors in comparison to
age-matched control neural retinas. Additionally, HDAC concentrations were
measured in whole hemisphere of brain of 5XFAD mice, a model of ß-amyloid
deposition, to assess similarity to AD in human frontal cortex. HDAC profiles of 
human frontal cortex and mouse hemisphere had noticeable differences and
relatively high concentrations of HDAC3 and HDAC4 in mice, which were
undetectable in humans. Our method for quantification of HDAC isoforms is a
practical and efficient technique to quantify isoforms in various tissues and
diseases. Changes in HDAC concentrations reported herein contribute to the
understanding of the pathology of neurodegeneration.

PMCID: PMC4427357
PMID: 25962138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Bioorg Med Chem. 2015 Jul 1;23(13):3457-71. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2015.04.028. Epub 
2015 Apr 16.

Discovery, bioactivity and docking simulation of Vorinostat analogues containing 
1,2,4-oxadiazole moiety as potent histone deacetylase inhibitors and antitumor
agents.

Cai J(1), Wei H(2), Hong KH(3), Wu X(4), Zong X(1), Cao M(5), Wang P(5), Li L(5),
Sun C(1), Chen B(5), Zhou G(5), Chen J(1), Ji M(6).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Institute of Pharmaceutical
Engineering, Southeast University, 87 Dingjiaqiao, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210096, PR
China. (2)College of Chemistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Qingdao Agricultural 
University, Qingdao 266109, PR China. (3)Department of Medicinal Chemistry and
the Institute for Therapeutics Discovery and Development, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55414, USA. (4)Department of Molecular Biosciences,
University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66045, USA. (5)School of Biological Science & 
Medical Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, PR China. (6)School of
Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Institute of Pharmaceutical Engineering,
Southeast University, 87 Dingjiaqiao, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210096, PR China; School
of Biological Science & Medical Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing
210096, PR China; Suzhou Key Laboratory of Biomaterials and Technologies &
Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science and Technology, Suzhou
215123, PR China. Electronic address: jimin@seu.edu.cn.

In our study, three series of hydroxamate, 2-aminobenzamide, and trifluoromethyl 
ketone analogues have been designed and synthesized. The synthesized compounds
were investigated for their in vitro antiproliferative activities using the
MTT-based assay against three human cancer cell lines including A549, NCI-H661,
and U937. Most analogues exhibited higher antiproliferative activities against
human acute myeloid leukemia cell U937 than the other two human lung cancer cell 
lines. Furthermore, the compounds were examined against HDAC1, 2, and 8 isoforms.
Docking study of compounds 6h, 9b, and 10a suggested that they might bind tightly
to the binding pocket of HDAC2 and/or HDAC8. The results suggest that these
compounds might have potential as lead compounds for the development of
anti-tumor drugs with HDACs inhibitory activities.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25953722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Anat Rec (Hoboken). 2015 Aug;298(8):1431-9. doi: 10.1002/ar.23172. Epub 2015 Jun 
22.

Histone H3k9 and H3k27 Acetylation Regulates IL-4/STAT6-Mediated Ige
Transcription in B Lymphocytes.

Fu X(1,)(2,)(3), Wang X(1,)(2,)(3), Duan Z(1,)(2,)(3), Zhang C(1,)(2,)(3), Fu
X(1,)(2,)(3), Yang J(1,)(2,)(3,)(4,)(5,)(6), Liu X(1,)(2,)(3), He J(2,)(3,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, China. (2)Tianjin Key Laboratory
of Cellular and Molecular Immunology, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Educational Ministry of China, Tianjin Medical University,
Tianjin, China. (4)Department of Immunology, School of Basic Medical Sciences,
Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, China. (5)Laboratory of Molecular
Immunology, Research Center of Basic Medical Science, Tianjin Medical University,
Tianjin, China. (6)Department of Immunology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
Manitoba R3E 0T5, Canada. (7)Department of Physiology, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, China.

IL-4 activates STAT6 and causes the subsequent up-regulation of Ig heavy chain
germline Ige via chromatin remodeling involved in B lymphocytes development.
STAT6 acts as a molecular switch to regulate the higher-order chromatin
remodeling via dynamically orchestrating co-activators (CBP/Tudor-SN) and
co-repressors (HDAC1/PSF). Here, we demonstrated that STAT6/Tudor-SN/PSF form a
complex, balancing the acetylation and deacetylation states to co-regulate
IL-4/STAT6 gene transcription. In addition, we confirmed that IL-4 treatment
increased the HATs activity in Ramos cells. As "active" markers, the expression
of H3K9ac and H3K27ac increased after treatment with IL-4. However,
transcriptional repressors such as H3K9me3 and H3K27me3 decreased in response to 
IL-4 stimulation. Moreover, IL-4 treatment enhanced H3 acetylation at the Ige
promoter regions. Our results revealed that the Ige gene transcription is
regulated by histone modifications in the IL-4/STAT6 pathway. The study will
provide novel insights into the pathogenesis of allergic diseases.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25952120  [PubMed - in process]


201. Cell Death Dis. 2015 May 7;6:e1747. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2015.106.

Acetylation of HDAC1 and degradation of SIRT1 form a positive feedback loop to
regulate p53 acetylation during heat-shock stress.

Yang H(1), Yan B(1), Liao D(1), Huang S(2), Qiu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, University of
Florida, Gainsville, FL 32610, USA. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

The tumor suppressor p53 is an essential transcription factor that sensitively
regulates cellular responses to various stresses. Acetylation, a critically
important posttranslational modification of p53, is induced in response to
cellular stresses. P53 acetylation level strongly correlates with protein
stability and activity. The steady-state level of p53 acetylation is balanced by 
dynamic acetylation and deacetylation. Despite the function of p53 acetylation
being well studied, how the steady state of p53 acetylation level is regulated in
response to cellular stresses remains unclear. In particular, the dynamic
regulation of the deacetylase activities responsible for p53 deacetylation during
cellular stress is unknown. In the current study, we investigated the dynamic
regulation of HDAC1 (histone deacetylase 1) and SIRT1 (sirtuin 1), two major
enzymes for p53 deacetylation, during cell stress. We found that various cell
stress events induce HDAC1 acetylation. The increased level of HDAC1 acetylation 
correlates with the level of p53 acetylation. Acetylated HDAC1 loses the ability 
to deacetylate p53. Cellular stresses also promote the decline of the SIRT1
protein in a proteasome-dependent pathway, which also results in the increase of 
p53 acetylation. Importantly, the decreased level of SIRT1 also contributes to
the accumulation of HDAC1 acetylation as SIRT1 deacetylates HDAC1. Therefore, the
increase of HDAC1 acetylation and reduced level of SIRT1 protein during cellular 
stress directly link to the induction of p53 acetylation. These results unveil
the mechanism underlying the dynamic regulation of p53 acetylation during cell
stress.

PMCID: PMC4669686
PMID: 25950477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Cell Cycle. 2015;14(12):1779-85. doi: 10.1080/15384101.2015.1042634.

Histone deacetylases 1 and 2 regulate DNA replication and DNA repair: potential
targets for genome stability-mechanism-based therapeutics for a subset of
cancers.

Bhaskara S(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Radiation Oncology and Department of Oncological Sciences;
Huntsman Cancer Institute; University of Utah School of Medicine ; Salt Lake City
, UT , USA.

Histone deacetylases 1 and 2 (HDAC1,2) belong to the class I HDAC family, which
are targeted by the FDA-approved small molecule HDAC inhibitors currently used in
cancer therapy. HDAC1,2 are recruited to DNA break sites during DNA repair and to
chromatin around forks during DNA replication. Cancer cells use DNA repair and
DNA replication as survival mechanisms and to evade chemotherapy-induced
cytotoxicity. Hence, it is vital to understand how HDAC1,2 function during the
genome maintenance processes (DNA replication and DNA repair) in order to gain
insights into the mode-of-action of HDAC inhibitors in cancer therapeutics. The
first-in-class HDAC1,2-selective inhibitors and Hdac1,2 conditional knockout
systems greatly facilitated dissecting the precise mechanisms by which HDAC1,2
control genome stability in normal and cancer cells. In this perspective, I
summarize the findings on the mechanistic functions of class I HDACs,
specifically, HDAC1,2 in genome maintenance, unanswered questions for future
investigations and views on how this knowledge could be harnessed for
better-targeted cancer therapeutics for a subset of cancers.

PMCID: PMC4614045
PMID: 25942572  [PubMed - in process]


203. Attach Hum Dev. 2015;17(3):288-301. doi: 10.1080/14616734.2015.1037316. Epub 2015
May 5.

Beyond the usual suspects: a multidimensional genetic exploration of infant
attachment disorganization and security.

Pappa I(1), Szekely E, Mileva-Seitz VR, Luijk MP, Bakermans-Kranenburg MJ, van
IJzendoorn MH, Tiemeier H.

Author information: 
(1)a School of Pedagogical and Educational Sciences , Erasmus University
Rotterdam , Rotterdam , The Netherlands.

Although the environmental influences on infant attachment disorganization and
security are well-studied, little is known about their heritability. Candidate
gene studies have shown small, often non-replicable effects. In this study, we
gathered the largest sample (N = 657) of ethnically homogenous, 14-month-old
children with both observed attachment and genome-wide data. First, we used a
Genome-Wide Association Study (GWAS) approach to identify single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with attachment disorganization and security.
Second, we annotated them into genes (Versatile Gene-based Association Study) and
functional pathways. Our analyses provide evidence of novel genes (HDAC1, ZNF675,
BSCD1) and pathways (synaptic transmission, cation transport) associated with
attachment disorganization. Similar analyses identified a novel gene (BECN1) but 
no distinct pathways associated with attachment security. The results of this
first extensive, exploratory study on the molecular-genetic basis of infant
attachment await replication in large, independent samples.

PMID: 25939396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2015 Jul;134:65-9. doi: 10.1016/j.pbb.2015.04.011. Epub 
2015 Apr 28.

Lacosamide reduces HDAC levels in the brain and improves memory: Potential for
treatment of Alzheimer's disease.

Bang SR(1), Ambavade SD(2), Jagdale PG(1), Adkar PP(1), Waghmare AB(3), Ambavade 
PD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, JSPM's Jayawantrao Sawant College of Pharmacy and 
Research(1), Handewadi Road, Hadapsar, Pune 411028, India. (2)Department of
Pharmacology, JSPM's Jayawantrao Sawant College of Pharmacy and Research(1),
Handewadi Road, Hadapsar, Pune 411028, India. Electronic address:
shirishkumar77@yahoo.com. (3)Haffkine Biopharmaceutical Corporation Ltd., Pimpri,
Pune 18, India.

Lacosamide, a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, has been approved for the
treatment of epilepsy. Some HDAC inhibitors have been proven effective for the
treatment of memory disorders. The present investigation was designed to evaluate
the effect of lacosamide on memory and brain HDAC levels. The effect on memory
was evaluated in animals with scopolamine-induced amnesia using the elevated plus
maze, object recognition test, and radial arm maze. The levels of
acetylcholinesterase and HDAC in the cerebral cortex were evaluated. Lacosamide
at doses of 10 and 30mg/kg significantly reduced the transfer latency in the
elevated plus maze. Lacosamide at a dose of 30mg/kg significantly increased the
time spent with a familiar object in the object recognition test at the 24h
interval and decreased the time spent in the baited arm. Moreover, at this dose, 
the number of errors in the radial arm maze at 3 and 24h intervals was minimized 
and a reduction in the level of HDAC1, but not acetylcholinesterase, was observed
in the cerebral cortex. These effects of lacosamide are equivalent to those of
piracetam at a dose of 300mg/kg. These results suggest that lacosamide at a
30mg/kg dose improves disrupted memory, possibly by inhibiting HDAC, and could be
used to treat amnesic symptoms of Alzheimer's disease.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25931268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Epigenetics. 2015;10(5):431-45. doi: 10.1080/15592294.2015.1039216.

Selective inhibition of esophageal cancer cells by combination of HDAC inhibitors
and Azacytidine.

Ahrens TD(1), Timme S, Hoeppner J, Ostendorp J, Hembach S, Follo M, Hopt UT,
Werner M, Busch H, Boerries M, Lassmann S.

Author information: 
(1)a Dept. of Pathology; University Medical Center ; Freiburg , Germany.

Esophageal cancers are highly aggressive tumors with poor prognosis despite some 
recent advances in surgical and radiochemotherapy treatment options. This study
addressed the feasibility of drugs targeting epigenetic modifiers in esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) and esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) cells. We
tested inhibition of histone deacetylases (HDACs) by SAHA, MS-275, and FK228,
inhibition of DNA methyltransferases by Azacytidine (AZA) and Decitabine (DAC),
and the effect of combination treatment using both types of drugs. The drug
targets, HDAC1/2/3 and DNMT1, were expressed in normal esophageal epithelium and 
tumor cells of ESCC or EAC tissue specimens, as well as in non-neoplastic
esophageal epithelial (Het-1A), ESCC (OE21, Kyse-270, Kyse-410), and EAC (OE33,
SK-GT-4) cell lines. In vitro, HDAC activity, histone acetylation, and p21
expression were similarly affected in non-neoplastic, ESCC, and EAC cell lines
post inhibitor treatment. Combined MS-275/AZA treatment, however, selectively
targeted esophageal cancer cell lines by inducing DNA damage, cell viability
loss, and apoptosis, and by decreasing cell migration. Non-neoplastic Het-1A
cells were protected against HDACi (MS-275)/AZA treatment. RNA transcriptome
analyses post MS-275 and/or AZA treatment identified novel regulated candidate
genes (up: BCL6, Hes2; down: FAIM, MLKL), which were specifically associated with
the treatment responses of esophageal cancer cells. In summary, combined
HDACi/AZA treatment is efficient and selective for the targeting of esophageal
cancer cells, despite similar target expression of normal and esophageal cancer
epithelium, in vitro and in human esophageal carcinomas. The precise mechanisms
of action of treatment responses involve novel candidate genes regulated by
HDACi/AZA in esophageal cancer cells. Together, targeting of epigenetic modifiers
in esophageal cancers may represent a potential future therapeutic approach.

PMCID: PMC4623041 [Available on 2016-04-29]
PMID: 25923331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Jun 5;461(3):555-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.04.080. Epub 2015 Apr 23.

Activation of toll like receptor-3 induces corneal epithelial barrier
dysfunction.

Wei J(1), Jiang H(2), Gao H(1), Wang G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, General Hospital of Jinan Military Command, Jinan
250031, China. (2)Department of Ophthalmology, General Hospital of Jinan Military
Command, Jinan 250031, China. Electronic address: huarjiang@outlook.com.

The epithelial barrier is critical in the maintenance of the homeostasis of the
cornea. A number of eye disorders are associated with the corneal epithelial
barrier dysfunction. Viral infection is one common eye disease type. This study
aims to elucidate the mechanism by which the activation of toll like receptor 3
(TLR3) in the disruption of the corneal epithelial barrier. In this study, HCE
cells (a human corneal epithelial cell line) were cultured into epithelial layers
using as an in vitro model of the corneal epithelial barrier. PolyI:C was used as
a ligand of TLR3. The transepithelial electric resistance (TER) and permeability 
of the HCE epithelial layer were assessed using as the parameters to evaluate the
corneal epithelial barrier integrity. The results showed that exposure to PolyI:C
markedly decreased the TER and increased the permeability of the HCE epithelial
layers; the levels of cell junction protein, E-cadherin, were repressed by
PolyI:C via increasing histone deacetylase-1 (HDAC1), the latter binding to the
promoter of E-cadherin and repressed the transcription of E-cadherin. The
addition of butyrate (an inhibitor of HDAC1) to the culture blocked the corneal
epithelial barrier dysfunction caused by PolyI:C. In conclusion, activation of
TLR3 can disrupt the corneal epithelial barrier, which can be blocked by the
inhibitor of HDAC1.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25912142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Nat Commun. 2015 Apr 23;6:6830. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7830.

Histone deacetylation promotes mouse neural induction by restricting
Nodal-dependent mesendoderm fate.

Liu P(1), Dou X(2), Liu C(1), Wang L(1), Xing C(3), Peng G(1), Chen J(1), Yu
F(1), Qiao Y(1), Song L(1), Wu Y(1), Yue C(1), Li J(1), Han JD(2), Tang K(3),
Jing N(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Computational Biology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences-Max Planck Partner Institute for Computational
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China. (3)Institute of Life Science, Nanchang
University, Nanchang 330031, China.

Cell fate determination requires the cooperation between extrinsic signals and
intrinsic molecules including transcription factors as well as epigenetic
regulators. Nevertheless, how neural fate commitment is regulated by epigenetic
modifications remains largely unclear. Here we show that transient histone
deacetylation at epiblast stage promotes neural differentiation of mouse
embryonic stem cells (mESCs). Histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) deficiency in mESCs
partially phenocopies the inhibition of histone deacetylation in vitro, and
displays reduced incorporation into neural tissues in chimeric mouse embryos in
vivo. Mechanistic studies show that Nodal, which is repressed by histone
deacetylation, is a direct target of HDAC1. Furthermore, the inhibition of
histone deacetylation in the anterior explant of mouse embryos at E7.0 leads to
Nodal activation and neural development repression. Thus, our study reveals an
intrinsic mechanism that epigenetic histone deacetylation ensures neural fate
commitment by restricting Nodal signalling in murine anterior epiblast ex vivo
and mESC in vitro.

PMID: 25904100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Aug;167A(8):1916-20. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37114. Epub 2015 
Apr 21.

Microdeletion 1p35.2: a recognizable facial phenotype with developmental delay.

Wilson BT(1,)(2), Omer M(3), Hellens SW(2), Zwolinski SA(2), Yates LM(1,)(2),
Lynch SA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, International Centre for 
Life, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. (2)Northern Genetics Service, Newcastle upon Tyne 
Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, International Centre for Life, Newcastle upon
Tyne, UK. (3)National Centre for Medical Genetics, Our Lady's Children's
Hospital, Crumlin, Ireland.

We describe two patients with microdeletion 1p35.2, intrauterine growth
retardation, small stature, hypermetropia, hearing impairment and developmental
delay. Both patients have long, myopathic facies, with fine eyebrows, small
mouths and micrognathia. We postulate a role for the histone deacetylase HDAC1 in
the facial phenotype and suggest that deletion of KPNA6 may prevent transmission 
of the 1p35.2 deletion from affected girls to any offspring through impaired
zygotic genome activation.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25900906  [PubMed - in process]


209. Eur J Med Chem. 2015;96:340-59. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2015.04.014. Epub 2015 Apr 
8.

Design and structure activity relationship of tumor-homing histone deacetylase
inhibitors conjugated to folic and pteroic acids.

Sodji QH(1), Kornacki JR(2), McDonald JF(3), Mrksich M(4), Oyelere AK(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Georgia Institute of Technology,
Atlanta, GA 30332-0400, USA. (2)Department of Chemistry, Northwestern University,
2145 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208-3113, USA; Department of Biomedical
Engineering, Northwestern University, 2145 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL
60208-3113, USA. (3)School of Biology, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, 
GA 30332-0400, USA; Parker H. Petit Institute for Bioengineering and Bioscience, 
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332-0400, USA. (4)Department of
Chemistry, Northwestern University, 2145 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208-3113, 
USA; Department of Biomedical Engineering, Northwestern University, 2145 Sheridan
Road, Evanston, IL 60208-3113, USA. Electronic address:
milan.mrksich@northwestern.edu. (5)School of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Georgia 
Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332-0400, USA; Parker H. Petit Institute
for Bioengineering and Bioscience, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA
30332-0400, USA. Electronic address: aoyelere@gatech.edu.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibition has recently emerged as a novel therapeutic
approach for the treatment of various pathological conditions including cancer.
Currently, two HDAC inhibitors (HDACi)  Vorinostat and Romidepsin  have been
approved for the treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. However, HDACi remain
ineffective against solid tumors and are associated with adverse events including
cardiotoxicity. Targeted delivery may enhance the therapeutic indices of HDACi
and enable them to be efficacious against solid tumors. We showed herein that
morphing of folic and pteroic acids into the surface recognition group of HDACi
results in hydroxamate and benzamide HDACi which derived tumor homing by
targeting folate receptor (FR), a receptor commonly overexpressed in solid
tumors. We observed a correlation between the potency of HDAC1 inhibition and
cytotoxicity as only the potent pteroate hydroxamates, 11d and 11e, displayed
antiproliferative activity against two representative FR-expression cancer cells.
Our observation further supports the previous results which suggest that for a
drug to be successfully targeted using the FR, it must be extremely potent
against its primary target as the FR has a low delivery efficiency.

Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

PMCID: PMC4433810 [Available on 2016-05-26]
PMID: 25899338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Oncogene. 2016 Feb 11;35(6):715-26. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.122. Epub 2015 Apr 20.

Hepatitis B virus X protein induces EpCAM expression via active DNA demethylation
directed by RelA in complex with EZH2 and TET2.

Fan H(1,)(2), Zhang H(1,)(2), Pascuzzi PE(3), Andrisani O(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN,
USA. (2)Department of Purdue Center for Cancer Research, Purdue University, West 
Lafayette, IN, USA. (3)Purdue University Libraries, Purdue University, West
Lafayette, IN, USA.

Chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is a major risk factor for developing
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), and HBV X protein (HBx) acts as cofactor in
hepatocarcinogenesis. In liver tumors from animals modeling HBx- and HBV-mediated
hepatocarcinogenesis, downregulation of chromatin regulating proteins SUZ12 and
ZNF198 induces expression of several genes, including epithelial cell adhesion
molecule (EpCAM). EpCAM upregulation occurs in HBV-mediated HCCs and hepatic
cancer stem cells, by a mechanism not understood. Herein we demonstrate HBx
induces EpCAM expression via active DNA demethylation. In hepatocytes, EpCAM is
silenced by polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) and ZNF198/LSD1/Co-REST/HDAC1
chromatin-modifying complexes. Cells with stable knockdown of SUZ12, an essential
PRC2 subunit, upon HBx expression demethylate a CpG dinucleotide located adjacent
to NF-<U+03BA>B/RelA half-site. This NF-<U+03BA>B/RelA site is in a CpG island downstream from 
EpCAM transcriptional start site (TSS). Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
assays demonstrate HBx-dependent RelA occupancy of NF-<U+03BA>B half-site, whereas RelA 
knockdown suppresses CpG demethylation and EpCAM expression. Tumor necrosis
factor-a activates RelA, propagating demethylation to nearby CpG sites, shown by 
sodium bisulfite sequencing. RelA-dependent demethylation occurring upon HBx
expression requires methyltrasferase EZH2, TET2 a key factor in cytosine
demethylation and inactive DNMT3L, shown by knockdown assays and sodium bisulfite
sequencing. Co-immunoprecipitations and sequential ChIP assays demonstrate that
RelA in the presence of HBx forms a complex with EZH2, TET2 and DNMT3L, although 
the role of DNMT3L remains to be understood. Interestingly, the human EpCAM gene 
also has a CpG island downstream from its TSS, and a NF-<U+03BA>B-binding site flanked
by CpGs. HepG2 cells derived from human HCC exhibit demethylation of these
NF-<U+03BA>B-flanking CpG sites, and HBV replication propagates demethylation to nearby 
CpG sites. DLK1, another PRC2 target gene, also upregulated in HBV-mediated HCCs,
is demethylated in liver tumors at CpG dinucleotides flanking the NF-<U+03BA>B-binding
sequence, supporting that this active DNA demethylation mechanism functions
during oncogenic transformation.

PMCID: PMC4615262 [Available on 2016-08-11]
PMID: 25893293  [PubMed - in process]


211. BMC Cancer. 2015 Mar 25;15:172. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1155-7.

Ras induces experimental lung metastasis through up-regulation of RbAp46 to
suppress RECK promoter activity.

Yeh HH(1,)(2), Tseng YF(3), Hsu YC(4), Lan SH(5,)(6), Wu SY(7,)(8), Raghavaraju
G(9), Cheng DE(10), Lee YR(11), Chang TY(12), Chow NH(13), Hung WC(14,)(15), Liu 
HS(16,)(17,)(18).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, National Cheng Kung University,
Tainan, Taiwan. s5889102@gmail.com. (2)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences,
National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan. s5889102@gmail.com. (3)Department
of Microbiology and Immunology, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
hen@ms8.url.com.tw. (4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, National Cheng 
Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan. yuchiao.katie@gmail.com. (5)Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
littleblue3016@yahoo.com.tw. (6)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, National
Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan. littleblue3016@yahoo.com.tw. (7)Department
of Microbiology and Immunology, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
blacktea98@yahoo.com.tw. (8)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, National Cheng
Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan. blacktea98@yahoo.com.tw. (9)Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
giriraghavaraju@gmail.com. (10)Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan. doglying@gmail.com.
(11)Department of Medical Research, Chiayi Christian Hospital, Chiayi, Taiwan.
yingray.lee@gmail.com. (12)Department of Parasitology, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan, Taiwan. z7608045@email.ncku.edu.tw. (13)Department of
Pathology, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
chownh@mail.ncku.edu.tw. (14)Center of Infectious Disease and Signaling Research,
National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan. hung1228@nhri.org.tw.
(15)National Institute of Cancer Research, National Health Research Institutes,
Tainan, Taiwan. hung1228@nhri.org.tw. (16)Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
a713@mail.ncku.edu.tw. (17)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, National Cheng
Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan. a713@mail.ncku.edu.tw. (18)Center of Infectious 
Disease and Signaling Research, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
a713@mail.ncku.edu.tw.

BACKGROUND: Mutant Ras plays multiple functions in tumorigenesis including tumor 
formation and metastasis. Reversion-inducing cysteine-rich protein with Kazal
motifs (RECK), a metastasis inhibitor gene, suppresses matrix metalloproteinase
(MMP) activity in the metastatic cascade. Clarifying the relationship between Ras
and RECK and understanding the underlying molecular mechanism may lead to the
development of better treatment for Ras-related tumors.
METHODS: Suppression subtractive hybridization PCR (SSH PCR) was conducted to
identify Ha-ras (val12) up-regulated genes in bladder cancer cells. Stable cell
lines of human breast cancer (MCF-7-ras) and mouse NIH3T3 fibroblasts (7-4)
harboring the inducible Ha-ras (val12) oncogene, which could be induced by
isopropylthio-ß-D-galactoside (IPTG), were used to clarify the relationship
between Ras and the up-regulated genes. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
assay, DNA affinity precipitation assay (DAPA) and RECK reporter gene assay were 
utilized to confirm the complex formation and binding with promoters.
RESULTS: Retinoblastoma binding protein-7 (RbAp46) was identified and confirmed
as a Ha-ras (val12) up-regulated gene. RbAp46 could bind with histone deacetylase
(HDAC1) and Sp1, followed by binding to RECK promoter at the Sp1 site resulting
in repression of RECK expression. High expression of Ras protein accompanied with
high RbAp46 and low RECK expression were detected in 75% (3/4) of the clinical
bladder cancer tumor tissues compared to the adjacent normal parts. Ras induced
RbAp46 expression increases invasion of the bladder cancer T24 cells and MMP-9
activity was increased, which was confirmed by specific lentiviral shRNAs
inhibitors against Ras and RbAp46. Similarly, knockdown of RbAp46 expression in
the stable NIH3T3 cells "7-4" by shRNA decreased Ras-related lung metastasis
using a xenograft nude mice model.
CONCLUSIONS: We confirmed that RbAp46 is a Ha-ras (val12) up-regulated gene and
binds with HDAC1 and Sp1. Furthermore, RbAp46 binds to the RECK promoter at the
Sp1 site via recruitment by Sp1. RECK is subsequently activated, leading to
increased MMP9 activity, which may lead to increased metastasis in vivo. Our
findings of Ras upregulation of RbAp46 may lead to revealing a novel mechanism of
Ras-related tumor cell metastasis.

PMCID: PMC4377201
PMID: 25885317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Br J Pharmacol. 2015 Aug;172(15):3817-30. doi: 10.1111/bph.13165. Epub 2015 Jun
12.

Inhibition of breast cancer progression by a novel histone deacetylase inhibitor,
LW479, by down-regulating EGFR expression.

Li J(1), Zhang T(1,)(2), Yang F(1), He Y(1), Dai F(1), Gao D(1), Chen Y(1), Liu
M(1,)(3), Yi Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Regulatory Biology, Institute of Biomedical
Sciences and School of Life Sciences, East China Normal University, Shanghai,
China. (2)Department of Orthopedics, Shanghai 1st People's Hospital, Shanghai
Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China. (3)Center for Cancer and Stem Cell Biology,
Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M University Health Science
Center, Houston, TX, USA.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Compounds targeting epigenetic events of tumours are
likely to be an important addition to anticancer therapy. Histone deacetylase
inhibitors (HDACI) have emerged as a promising novel class for therapeutic
interventions associated with cancer, and many of them are currently in clinical 
investigation. Here, we assessed a novel hydroxamate-based HDACI, LW479, in
breast cancer progression and explored its underlying mechanism(s).
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: LW479 was identified using the HDACI screening kit.
Western blot and flow cytometry were used to analyse the biological effects of
LW479 as a novel HDACI. The effects of LW479 were assessed in mouse models of
spontaneous and experimental breast cancer. Co-immunoprecipitation,
immunofluorescent staining and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays along with
immunohistochemical analysis, were used to elucidate the molecular basis of the
actions of LW479.
KEY RESULTS: LW479 was identified as a novel HDACI and showed marked cytotoxicity
and induced apoptosis, as well as cell cycle arrest, in a panel of breast cancer 
cell lines. Intraperitoneal injections of LW479 markedly suppressed breast tumour
growth and pulmonary metastasis in nude mice. LW479 also decreased levels of EGF 
receptors (EGFR) by blocking the binding of the transcription factor Sp1 and
HDAC1 to the EGFR promoter region.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: Our data have elucidated the mechanisms underlying 
the inhibition by LW479 of tumour growth and metastasis, in models of breast
cancer with aberrant EGFR expression. LW479 could be a candidate drug for breast 
cancer prevention.

© 2015 The British Pharmacological Society.

PMCID: PMC4523338 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 25884486  [PubMed - in process]


213. Nat Commun. 2015 Apr 16;6:6818. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7818.

NF<U+03BA>B1 is a suppressor of neutrophil-driven hepatocellular carcinoma.

Wilson CL(1), Jurk D(2), Fullard N(1), Banks P(1), Page A(1), Luli S(1),
Elsharkawy AM(3), Gieling RG(4), Chakraborty JB(5), Fox C(1), Richardson C(6),
Callaghan K(1), Blair GE(7), Fox N(7), Lagnado A(2), Passos JF(2), Moore AJ(8),
Smith GR(1), Tiniakos DG(1), Mann J(1), Oakley F(1), Mann DA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Fibrosis Research Group, Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University,
Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK. (2)Newcastle University Institute for Ageing and
Institute for Cell and Molecular Biosciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle
Upon Tyne NE4 5PL, UK. (3)Liver Unit, University Hospitals Birmingham, Birmingham
B15 2TH, UK. (4)Hypoxia and Therapeutics Group, Manchester Pharmacy School,
University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PT, UK. (5)Department of Medicine,
Immunology and Inflammation, Imperial College of Science, Technology and
Medicine, Hammersmith Hospital, London W12 0NN, UK. (6)Centre for Behaviour and
Evolution/Institute of Neuroscience, Medical School, Newcastle University,
Newcastle Upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK. (7)Faculty of Biological Sciences, School of
Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Leeds, Garstang Building, Leeds LS2
9JT, UK. (8)Institute for Cell and Molecular Biosciences, Newcastle University,
Catherine Cookson Building, Framlington Place, Newcastle Upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK.

Erratum in
    Nat Commun. 2015;6:8411.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) develops on the background of chronic hepatitis.
Leukocytes found within the HCC microenvironment are implicated as regulators of 
tumour growth. We show that diethylnitrosamine (DEN)-induced murine HCC is
attenuated by antibody-mediated depletion of hepatic neutrophils, the latter
stimulating hepatocellular ROS and telomere DNA damage. We additionally report a 
previously unappreciated tumour suppressor function for hepatocellular nfkb1
operating via p50:p50 dimers and the co-repressor HDAC1. These anti-inflammatory 
proteins combine to transcriptionally repress hepatic expression of a S100A8/9,
CXCL1 and CXCL2 neutrophil chemokine network. Loss of nfkb1 promotes
ageing-associated chronic liver disease (CLD), characterized by steatosis,
neutrophillia, fibrosis, hepatocyte telomere damage and HCC.
Nfkb1(S340A/S340A)mice carrying a mutation designed to selectively disrupt
p50:p50:HDAC1 complexes are more susceptible to HCC; by contrast, mice lacking
S100A9 express reduced neutrophil chemokines and are protected from HCC.
Inhibiting neutrophil accumulation in CLD or targeting their tumour-promoting
activities may offer therapeutic opportunities in HCC.

PMCID: PMC4410629
PMID: 25879839  [PubMed - in process]


214. Mol Neurobiol. 2016 Mar;53(2):1266-78. doi: 10.1007/s12035-014-9081-2. Epub 2015 
Jan 27.

Resveratrol Represses Pokemon Expression in Human Glioma Cells.

Yang Y(1), Cui J(2), Xue F(3), Overstreet AM(2), Zhan Y(4,)(5), Shan D(6), Li
H(7), Li H(8), Wang Y(9), Zhang M(10), Yu C(4), Xu ZQ(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Beijing Key Laboratory of Neural Regeneration and 
Repair, Beijing Laboratory of Brain Disorders (MOST), Beijing Institute for Brain
Disorders, Capital Medical University, Beijing, 100069, China.
yutaoy@ccmu.edu.cn. (2)Department of Cancer and Cell Biology, University of
Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, 45267, USA. (3)Beijing Friendship
Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, 100050, China. (4)Department of
Neurosurgery, Beijing Sanbo Brain Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, 
100093, China. (5)Department of Neurosurgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, 450052, China. (6)Third Institute of
Oceanography, State Oceanic Administration, Xiamen, 361005, China. (7)Department 
of Molecular and Biomedical Pharmacology, University of Kentucky College of
Medicine, Lexington, KY, 40536, USA. (8)Department of Neurobiology, Beijing Key
Laboratory of Neural Regeneration and Repair, Beijing Laboratory of Brain
Disorders (MOST), Beijing Institute for Brain Disorders, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, 100069, China. (9)Tianjin Anding Hospital, Tianjin, 300222, 
China. (10)Jiaxing Entry-Exit Inspection and Quarantine, Jiaxing, 314001, China. 
(11)Department of Neurobiology, Beijing Key Laboratory of Neural Regeneration and
Repair, Beijing Laboratory of Brain Disorders (MOST), Beijing Institute for Brain
Disorders, Capital Medical University, Beijing, 100069, China.
zhiqingx@ccmu.edu.cn.

Erratum in
    Mol Neurobiol. 2016 Mar;53(2):1279.

POK erythroid myeloid ontogenic factor (Pokemon), an important proto-oncoprotein,
is a transcriptional repressor that regulates the expression of many genes and
plays an important role in tumorigenesis. Resveratrol (RSV), a natural
polyphenolic compound, has many beneficial biological effects on health. In this 
study, we investigated the role of Pokemon in RSV-induced biological effects and 
the effect of RSV on the expression of Pokemon in glioma cells. We found that
overexpression of Pokemon decreased RSV-induced cell apoptosis, senescence, and
anti-proliferative effects. Moreover, we showed that RSV could efficiently
decrease the activity of the Pokemon promoter and the expression of Pokemon.
Meanwhile, RSV also inhibited Sp1 DNA binding activity to the Pokemon promoter;
whereas, it did not influence the expression and nuclear translocation of Sp1. In
addition, we found that RSV could increase the recruitment of HDAC1, but
decreased p300 to the Pokemon promoter. Taken together, all these results
extended our understanding on the anti-cancer mechanism of RSV in glioma cells.

PMID: 25875864  [PubMed - in process]


215. Reprod Sci. 2015 Nov;22(11):1387-92. doi: 10.1177/1933719115580997. Epub 2015 Apr
12.

Is There a Link Between Expression Levels of Histone
Deacetylase/Acetyltransferase in Mouse Sperm and Subsequent Blastocyst
Development?

Kim J(1), Kim JH(2), Jee BC(3), Suh CS(4), Kim SH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Cha Gangnam Hospital, Cha University,
Seoul, South Korea Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea. (2)Department of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Bundang, South Korea.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Seoul National University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, South Korea Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Seoul
National University Hospital, Seoul, South Korea blasto@snubh.org. (4)Department 
of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Seoul, South Korea Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Seoul National
University Hospital, Seoul, South Korea. (5)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Seoul National University Bundang
Hospital, Bundang, South Korea.

Histone acetylation has been known to be significant in spermatogenesis. Histone 
acetylation is regulated by the act of histone deacetylases (HDACs) and histone
acetyltransferases (HATs). We investigated the link between expression levels of 
HDACs and HATs in mouse sperm and subsequent blastocyst formation rate. In the
univariate analysis, expression levels of HDAC1 and HAT were generally not
associated with the blastocyst formation rate. When divided by the mature oocyte 
number category, a significant positive association was observed between the
expression levels of HDAC1 and the blastocyst-forming rate in the highest (>
75th) percentile group (a group with =34 mature oocytes). In conclusion,
expression of sperm HDAC1 could be considered as a possible predictor of embryo
development in mice with high ovarian response.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 25868580  [PubMed - in process]


216. J Cell Mol Med. 2015 Jul;19(7):1742-55. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12550. Epub 2015 Apr
11.

Belinostat, a potent HDACi, exerts antileukaemic effect in human acute
promyelocytic leukaemia cells via chromatin remodelling.

Valiuliene G(1), Stirblyte I(1), Cicenaite D(1), Kaupinis A(2), Valius M(2),
Navakauskiene R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry, Vilnius
University, Vilnius, Lithuania. (2)Proteomics Centre, Institute of Biochemistry, 
Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania.

Epigenetic changes play a significant role in leukaemia pathogenesis, therefore
histone deacetylases (HDACis) are widely accepted as an attractive strategy for
acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL) treatment. Belinostat (Bel, PXD101), a
hydroxamate-type HDACi, has proved to be a promising cure in clinical trials for 
solid tumours and haematological malignancies. However, insight into molecular
effects of Bel on APL, is still lacking. In this study, we investigated the
effect of Bel alone and in combination with differentiation inducer retinoic acid
(RA) on human promyelocytic leukaemia NB4 and HL-60 cells. We found that
treatment with Bel, depending on the dosage used, inhibits cell proliferation,
whereas in combination with RA enhances and accelerates granulocytic leukaemia
cell differentiation. We also evaluated the effect of used treatments with Bel
and RA on certain epigenetic modifiers (HDAC1, HDAC2, PCAF) as well as cell cycle
regulators (p27) gene expression and protein level modulation. We showed that Bel
in combination with RA up-regulates basal histone H4 hyperacetylation level more 
strongly compared to Bel or RA alone. Furthermore, chromatin immunoprecipitation 
assay indicated that Bel induces the accumulation of hyperacetylated histone H4
at the p27 promoter region. Mass spectrometry analysis revealed that in control
NB4 cells, hyperacetylated histone H4 is mainly found in association with
proteins involved in DNA replication and transcription, whereas after Bel
treatment it is found with proteins implicated in pro-apoptotic processes, in
defence against oxidative stress and tumour suppression. Summarizing, our study
provides some novel insights into the molecular mechanisms of HDACi Bel action on
APL cells.

© 2015 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

PMCID: PMC4511371
PMID: 25864732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Int Immunopharmacol. 2015 Oct;28(2):813-7. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2015.03.050.
Epub 2015 Apr 9.

Molecular control of CD4(+) T cell lineage plasticity and integrity.

Ellmeier W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunobiology, Institute of Immunology, Center for
Pathophysiology, Infectiology and Immunology, Medical University of Vienna,
Lazarettgasse 19, 1090 Vienna, Austria. Electronic address:
wilfried.ellmeier@meduniwien.ac.at.

CD4(+) helper T cells and CD8(+) cytotoxic T cells form the two major subsets of 
peripheral T lymphocytes. Helper T cells fulfill crucial roles in the activation 
and coordination of the immune response, while cytotoxic T cells kill
virus-infected or tumor cells. Recent data suggest that the lineage identify of
helper T cells is not fixed and that CD4(+) T cells under certain physiological
conditions can be reprogrammed to express CD8 lineage genes and to develop into
intestinal intraepithelial CD4(+) cytotoxic T lymphocytes that lack the
expression of the key helper T cell lineage commitment factor ThPOK. Moreover,
the analysis of mice with a conditional deletion of the transcription factor
ThPOK or the histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2 indicated that CD8 lineage
genes are actively repressed in CD4(+) T cells in order to maintain the lineage
integrity of helper T cells. In this review I summarize recent studies that
indicate plasticity of CD4(+) T cells towards a CTL program and that demonstrate 
that ThPOK and HDAC1-HDAC2 are part of a transcriptional regulatory circuit that 
counteracts the activity of the transcription factor Runx3 to maintain CD4(+) T
cell lineage integrity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25864621  [PubMed - in process]


218. Anticancer Res. 2015 Apr;35(4):2071-6.

The relationship of CD133, histone deacetylase 1 and thrombospondin-1 in gastric 
cancer.

Eto S(1), Yoshikawa K(2), Shimada M(1), Higashijima J(1), Tokunaga T(1), Nakao
T(1), Nishi M(1), Takasu C(1), Sato H(1), Kurita N(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Digestive Surgery, University of Tokushima, Tokushima,
Japan. (2)The Department of Digestive Surgery, University of Tokushima,
Tokushima, Japan yoshikawa.kozo@tokushima-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND/AIM: Gastric cancer is one of the most common types of cancer. Cancer 
stem cells (CSCs) have been reported to play important roles in multiple cancer
types. This study investigated the correlation between cluster of differentiation
133 (CD133), histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and thrombospondin-1 (THBS1)
expression in advanced gastric cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The study included 65 patients with gastric cancer with
recurrence after surgery. Expression of CD133, HDAC1 and THBS1 was examined by
immunohistochemistry. Prognostic factors were investigated by multivariate
analysis using Cox's proportional hazard model.
RESULTS: Clinicopathological variables, including survival, of patients positive 
for CD133 expression (n=6, 23%), were compared with those without CD133
expression (n=20, 77%). Positive HDAC1 expression and THBS1 expression were
observed in 34 (52%) and 17 (26%) patients, respectively. Using univariate
analysis, positive expression of CD133 and negative expression of THBS1 predicted
significantly worse prognosis. Multivariate analysis revealed CD133-positive and 
THBS1-negative expression were independent prognostic indicators.
CONCLUSION: CD133 expression and THBS1 expression were prognostic factors, and a 
negative relationship between HDAC and THBS1 was observed in advanced gastric
cancer. These biomarkers may help determine postoperative treatment in patients
with gastric cancer.

Copyright© 2015 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 25862862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. J Mol Model. 2015 May;21(5):109. doi: 10.1007/s00894-015-2655-8. Epub 2015 Apr
10.

Curcumin and hydroxamate-derivative (PCI-34058) interfere with histone
deacetylase I catalytic core Asp-His charge relay system: atomistic simulation
studies.

Omotuyi IO(1), Abiodun MO, Komolafe K, Ejelonu OC, Olusanya O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutic Innovation, Nagasaki University,
1-14 Bunkyo-machi, 852-8531, Nagasaki, Japan, omotuyi@nagasaki-u.ac.jp.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are representative targets for the natural and
synthetic chemicals used to transform cells to confer antitumor properties. In
the current study, curcumin and hydroxamate-derivative PCI-34058-bound HDAC1 were
subjected to atomistic simulation. The results support the view that fitting of
curcumin and PCI-34058 within the HDAC1 pocket depends on extensive interactions 
between the aromatic moieties of the inhibitors and the extensive network of
aromatic amino acid side chains lining the pocket of HDAC1. The interaction
forces a local perturbation of the coiled structures connecting the pocket
residues resulting in ligand-induced tightening of the pocket. In addition to the
competitive occupancy of the histone-acetyl-lysine binding pocket by the
inhibitors, interference with the in-pocket aspartate-histidine (ASP-HIS) charge 
relay system was also observed in inhibitor-bound HDAC1 systems. In conclusion,
curcumin and PCI-34058-mediated ligand-dependent HDAC1 tunnel closure interferes 
negatively with the ASP-HIS charge relay system in HDAC1. Future design of HDAC
inhibitors may benefit from optimizing competitive interaction with the ligand
site and interference with the charge relay system.

PMID: 25860111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Cancer Res. 2015 Jun 1;75(11):2363-74. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-2928. Epub
2015 Apr 8.

PLK1 and HOTAIR Accelerate Proteasomal Degradation of SUZ12 and ZNF198 during
Hepatitis B Virus-Induced Liver Carcinogenesis.

Zhang H(1), Diab A(1), Fan H(1), Mani SK(1), Hullinger R(1), Merle P(2),
Andrisani O(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences and Purdue Center for Cancer Research,
Purdue University, West Lafayette Indiana. (2)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie
de Lyon, UMR INSERM 1052, CNRS 5286, Lyon Cedex, France. (3)Department of Basic
Medical Sciences and Purdue Center for Cancer Research, Purdue University, West
Lafayette Indiana. andrisao@purdue.edu.

Elucidating mechanisms of hepatitis B virus (HBV)-mediated hepatocarcinogenesis
is needed to gain insights into the etiology and treatment of liver cancer. Cells
where HBV is replicating exhibit increased expression of Plk1 kinase and reduced 
levels of two transcription repression factors, SUZ12 and ZNF198. SUZ12 is an
essential subunit of the transcription repressive complex PRC2. ZNF198 stabilizes
the transcription repressive complex composed of LSD1, Co-REST, and HDAC1. These 
two transcription repressive complexes are held together by binding the long
noncoding RNA HOTAIR. In this study, we linked these regulatory events
mechanistically by showing that Plk1 induces proteasomal degradation of SUZ12 and
ZNF198 by site-specific phosphorylation. Plk1-dependent ubiquitination of SUZ12
and ZNF198 was enhanced by expression of HOTAIR, significantly reducing SUZ12 and
ZNF198 stability. In cells expressing the HBV X protein (HBx), downregulation of 
SUZ12 and ZNF198 mediated global changes in histone modifications. In turn,
HBx-expressing cells propagated an altered chromatin landscape after cell
division, as exemplified by changes in histone modifications of the EpCAM
promoter, a target of PRC2 and LSD1/Co-REST/HDAC1 complexes. Notably, liver
tumors from X/c-myc bitransgenic mice exhibited downregulation of SUZ12 and
ZNF198 along with elevated expression of Plk1, HOTAIR, and EpCAM. Clinically,
similar effects were documented in a set of HBV-related liver tumors consistent
with the likelihood that downregulation of SUZ12 and ZNF198 leads to epigenetic
reprogramming of infected hepatocytes. Because both Plk1 and HOTAIR are elevated 
in many human cancers, we propose that their combined effects are involved in
epigenetic reprogramming associated broadly with oncogenic transformation.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4452430 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25855382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 7;10(4):e0121149. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121149.
eCollection 2015.

Cullin3-BTB interface: a novel target for stapled peptides.

de Paola I(1), Pirone L(2), Palmieri M(3), Balasco N(4), Esposito L(5), Russo
L(3), Mazzà D(6), Di Marcotullio L(6), Di Gaetano S(5), Malgieri G(3), Vitagliano
L(5), Pedone E(5), Zaccaro L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biostructures and Bioimaging, C.N.R., Napoli, Italy. (2)Institute
of Crystallography, C.N.R., Bari, Italy. (3)Second University of Napoli, Caserta,
Italy. (4)Institute of Biostructures and Bioimaging, C.N.R., Napoli, Italy;
Second University of Napoli, Caserta, Italy. (5)Institute of Biostructures and
Bioimaging, C.N.R., Napoli, Italy; Interuniversity Centre for Research on
Bioactive Peptides (CIRPEB), Napoli, Italy. (6)Department of Molecular Medicine, 
La Sapienza University, Roma, Italy.

Cullin3 (Cul3), a key factor of protein ubiquitination, is able to interact with 
dozens of different proteins containing a BTB (Bric-a-brac, Tramtrack and Broad
Complex) domain. We here targeted the Cul3-BTB interface by using the intriguing 
approach of stabilizing the a-helical conformation of Cul3-based peptides through
the "stapling" with a hydrocarbon cross-linker. In particular, by combining
theoretical and experimental techniques, we designed and characterized stapled
Cul3-based peptides embedding the helix 2 of the protein (residues 49-68).
Intriguingly, CD and NMR experiments demonstrate that these stapled peptides were
able to adopt the helical structure that the fragment assumes in the parent
protein. We also show that some of these peptides were able to bind to the BTB of
the tetrameric KCTD11, a substrate adaptor involved in HDAC1 degradation, with
high affinity (~ 300-600 nM). Cul3-derived staple peptides are also able to bind 
the BTB of the pentameric KCTD5. Interestingly, the affinity of these peptides is
of the same order of magnitude of that reported for the interaction of
full-length Cul3 with some BTB containing proteins. Moreover, present data
indicate that stapling endows these peptides with an increased serum stability.
Altogether, these findings indicate that the designed stapled peptides can
efficiently mimic protein-protein interactions and are potentially able to
modulate fundamental biological processes involving Cul3.

PMCID: PMC4388676
PMID: 25848797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Autoimmunity. 2015;48(6):379-88. doi: 10.3109/08916934.2015.1030617.

Epigallocatechin gallate stimulates the neuroreactive salivary secretomotor
system in autoimmune sialadenitis of MRL-Fas(lpr) mice via activation of
cAMP-dependent protein kinase A and inactivation of nuclear factor <U+03BA>B.

Saito K(1), Mori S, Date F, Hong G.

Author information: 
(1)a Liaison Centre for Innovative Dentistry, Tohoku University Graduate School
of Dentistry , Sendai , Japan .

The water channel aquaporin 5 (AQP5) plays a crucial role in regulating salivary 
flow rates. Xerostomia is often observed in patients with Sjögren's syndrome, and
this is attributed to reduced AQP5 expression in the salivary glands. Recently,
anti-type 3 muscarinic cholinergic receptors (M3R) autoantibodies and nuclear
factor <U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) have been found to be negative regulators of AQP5 expression in
the salivary gland. Anti-M3R autoantibodies desensitize M3R to salivary
secretagogues in Sjögren's syndrome, while activated NF-<U+03BA>B translocates to nuclei
and binds to the AQP5 gene promoter, resulting in the suppression of AQP5
expression. We previously documented that epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG), which 
is a robust antioxidant contained in green tea, ameliorates oxidative
stress-induced tissue damage to the salivary glands of MRL/MpJ-lpr/lpr
(MRL-Fas(lpr)) mice, which are widely used as a model of Sjögren's syndrome.
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) can activate NF-<U+03BA>B and inactivate protein kinase A 
(PKA), which is a key driver of AQP5 expression. In this study, we examined the
effects of administering EGCG to MRL-Fas(lpr) mice with autoimmune sialadenitis
on the levels of AQP5, activated NF-<U+03BA>B p65 subunit, activated PKA, activated
c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) (an activator of NF-<U+03BA>B), inhibitor <U+03BA>B (I<U+03BA>B) and
histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) (an inhibitor of NF-<U+03BA>B). In EGCG-treated mice,
intense aster-like immunostaining for AQP5 was observed on the apical plasma
membranes (APMs) of submandibular gland acinar cells. Likewise, PKA, I<U+03BA>B and
HDAC1 were highly expressed in salivary gland tissues, whereas the expression of 
JNK and NF-<U+03BA>B p65 was negligible. Rank correlation and partial correlation
analyses revealed that treatment with EGCG upregulated AQP5 expression on the APM
of acinar cells through activation of PKA and inactivation of NF-<U+03BA>B, while I<U+03BA>B
and HDAC1 played a pivotal role in the induction of AQP5 expression by PKA. Our
study indicates that EGCG may have therapeutic potential for Sjögren's syndrome
patients.

PMID: 25847253  [PubMed - in process]


223. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 Jul 5;409:51-8. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2015.03.023. Epub
2015 Apr 2.

Selective inhibition of prostaglandin E2 receptors EP2 and EP4 modulates DNA
methylation and histone modification machinery proteins in human endometriotic
cells.

Arosh JA(1), Lee J(2), Starzinski-Powitz A(3), Banu SK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Endocrinology and Cell Signaling Laboratory, Department of
Integrative Biosciences, College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, 
Texas A&M University, College Station, 77843 Texas, USA. Electronic address:
jarosh@cvm.tamu.edu. (2)Reproductive Endocrinology and Cell Signaling Laboratory,
Department of Integrative Biosciences, College of Veterinary Medicine and
Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, 77843 Texas, USA.
(3)Molekulare Zellbiologie und Humangenetik, Institut für Zellbiologie und
Neurowissenschaft, Siesmayerstraße 70, Geb. B, 60323 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

Endometriosis is an inflammatory gynecological disease of reproductive-age women.
The prevalence of endometriosis is 5-10% in reproductive-age women. Modern
medical treatments are directed to inhibit the action of estrogen in
endometriotic cells. However, hormonal therapies targeting estrogen can be
prescribed only for a short time because of their undesirable side effects.
Recent studies from our laboratory, using human endometriotic epithelial cell
line 12Z and stromal cell line 22B derived from red lesion, discovered that
selective inhibition of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) receptors EP2 and EP4 inhibits
adhesion, invasion, growth, and survival of 12Z and 22B cells by modulating
integrins, MMPs and TIMPs, cell cycle, survival, and intrinsic apoptotic
pathways, suggesting multiple epigenetic mechanisms. The novel findings of the
present study indicate that selective pharmacological inhibition of EP2 and EP4: 
(i) decreases expression of DNMT3a, DNMT3b, H3K9me3, H3K27me3, SUV39H1, HP1a,
H3K27, EZH2, JMJD2a, HDAC1, HDAC3, MeCP2, CoREST and Sin3A; (ii) increases
expression of H3K4me3, H3H9ac, H3K27ac; and (iii) does not modulate the
expression of DNMT1, hSET1, LSD1, MBD1, p300, HDAC2, and JMJD3 epigenetic
machinery proteins in an epithelial and stromal cell specific manner. In this
study, we report for the first time that inhibition of PGE2-EP2/EP4 signaling
modulates DNA methylation, H3 histone methylation and acetylation, and epigenetic
memory machinery proteins in human endometriotic epithelial cells and stromal
cells. Thus, targeting EP2 and EP4 receptors may emerge as long-term nonsteroidal
therapy for treatment of active endometriotic lesions in women.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25843056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Psychiatr Res. 2015 May;64:40-50. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2015.03.006. Epub
2015 Mar 22.

Multiple epigenetic factors predict the attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder 
among the Chinese Han children.

Xu Y(1), Chen XT(2), Luo M(3), Tang Y(4), Zhang G(5), Wu D(6), Yang B(7), Ruan
DY(8), Wang HL(9).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology and Food Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, 
Hefei, Anhui Province, 230009, PR China. Electronic address:
xuyixuyi3734@163.com. (2)School of Pharmacy, Anhui Medical University, Hefei,
Anhui Province, 230031, PR China. Electronic address: chenxt@ustc.edu.cn.
(3)School of Biotechnology and Food Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, 
Hefei, Anhui Province, 230009, PR China. Electronic address: 457662345@qq.com.
(4)School of Biotechnology and Food Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, 
Hefei, Anhui Province, 230009, PR China. Electronic address:
yuqingtang3@gmail.com. (5)Biostatistics and Data Management Core, John A. Burns
School of Medicine, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI 96813, USA. Electronic
address: georgexzh@gmail.com. (6)Department of Pediatrics, the First Affiliated
Hospital of Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui Province, 230022, PR China.
Electronic address: wude7310@sohu.com. (7)Department of Child Neurology, Anhui
Provincial Children's Hospital, Hefei, Anhui Province, 230031, PR China.
Electronic address: 0111yangbin@sina.com. (8)School of Biotechnology and Food
Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, Anhui Province, 230009, PR
China; School of Life Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China,
Hefei, Anhui 230027, PR China. Electronic address: ruandy@ustc.edu.cn. (9)School 
of Biotechnology and Food Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei,
Anhui Province, 230009, PR China. Electronic address: wanghl@hfut.edu.cn.

Attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is one of the most common
psychiatric disorders of childhood. Despite its prevalence, the critical factors 
involved in its development remain to be identified. It was recently suggested
that epigenetic mechanisms probably contribute to the etiology of ADHD. The
present study was designed to examine the associations of epigenetic markers with
ADHD among Chinese Han children, aiming to establish the prediction model for
this syndrome from the epigenetic perspective. We conducted a pair-matching
case-control study, and the ADHD children were systematically evaluated via
structured diagnostic interviews, including caregiver interviews, based on the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th edition, revised
criteria (DSM-IV-R). The expression levels of risk genes DAT1, DRD4, DRD5, as
well as their promoter methylation, were determined respectively, followed by the
expression profiles of histone-modifying genes p300, MYST4, HDAC1, MeCP2. The
multivariate logistic regressions were performed to establish ADHD prediction
models. All of the seven genes tested were identified as risk factors for ADHD.
The methylation of one critical CpG site located upstream of DRD4 was shown to
affect its transcription, suggesting a role in ADHD's development. Aberrant DNA
methylation and histone acetylation were indicated in ADHD patients. In addition,
a prediction model was established using the combination of p300, MYST4 and
HDAC1, with the accuracy of 0.9338. This is, to our knowledge, the first study to
clearly demonstrate the associations between epigenetic markers and ADHD,
shedding light on the preliminary diagnosis and etiological studies of this
widespread disorder.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25840828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Phytomedicine. 2015 Mar 15;22(3):362-8. doi: 10.1016/j.phymed.2015.01.004. Epub
2015 Feb 4.

Scopoletin has a potential activity for anti-aging via autophagy in human lung
fibroblasts.

Nam H(1), Kim MM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Dong-Eui University, Busan 614-714, Republic of
Korea. (2)Department of Chemistry, Dong-Eui University, Busan 614-714, Republic
of Korea. Electronic address: mmkim@deu.ac.kr.

Autophagy was known to be associated with aging in addition to cancer and
neurodegeneration. The effects of scopoletin on autophagy and anti-aging were
investigated in human lung fibroblast cell line, IMR 90. Here we show that
scopoletin induces autophagy. It is also identified that the modulation of p53 by
scopoletin are related to the induction of autophagy. Moreover, the level of
SA-ß-Gal staining, an aging marker, is reduced by scopoletin. In addition, while 
the expression levels of histone deacetylases such as HDAC1, SIRT1 and SIRT6 are 
increased in IMR 90 cells in the presence of scopoletin, the expression levels of
histone acetyltransferases are decreased. Furthermore, scopoletin enhances the
level of transcription factors such as Nrf-2and p-FoxO1 related to anti-aging. In
addition, scopoletin modulates the reprogramming proteins. Therefore, these
findings suggest that scopoletin could exert a positive effect on anti-aging
related to autophagy through modulation of p53 in human lung fibroblasts.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25837273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Mod Pathol. 2015 Jul;28(7):884-94. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2015.34. Epub 2015 Apr 
3.

Expression of the class 1 histone deacetylases HDAC8 and 3 are associated with
improved survival of patients with metastatic melanoma.

Wilmott JS(1), Colebatch AJ(2), Kakavand H(1), Shang P(3), Carlino MS(4),
Thompson JF(5), Long GV(1), Scolyer RA(6), Hersey P(7).

Author information: 
(1)1] Melanoma Institute Australia, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia [2]
Discipline of Medicine, Sydney Medical School, The University of Sydney, Sydney, 
New South Wales, Australia. (2)1] Molecular Oncology Laboratory, Peter MacCallum 
Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia [2] Discipline of Medicine, Sydney 
Medical School, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(3)Melanoma Institute Australia, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. (4)1]
Melanoma Institute Australia, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia [2] Westmead
Institute for Cancer Research, The University of Sydney at Westmead Millennium
Institute, Westmead, New South Wales, Australia [3] Crown Princess Mary Cancer
Centre, Westmead Hospital, Westmead, New South Wales, Australia. (5)1] Melanoma
Institute Australia, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia [2] Departments of
Melanoma and Surgical Oncology, Camperdown, New South Wales, Australia [3] Mater 
Hospital, North Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia [4] Discipline of
Surgery, Sydney Medical School, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South
Wales, Australia. (6)1] Melanoma Institute Australia, Sydney, New South Wales,
Australia [2] Departments of Tissue Pathology and Diagnostic Oncology, Royal
Prince Alfred Hospital, Camperdown, New South Wales, Australia [3] Discipline of 
Pathology, Sydney Medical School, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South
Wales, Australia. (7)1] Melanoma Institute Australia, Sydney, New South Wales,
Australia [2] Discipline of Medicine, Sydney Medical School, The University of
Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia [3] Kolling Institute, Royal North
Shore Hospital, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.

Prior studies have shown that combinations of histone deacetylase (HDAC) and BRAF
inhibitors (BRAFi) have synergistic effects on BRAFi-resistant melanoma through
enhanced apoptosis and inhibition of the cAMP-dependent drug resistance pathway. 
However, little is known about the expression of various HDACs and their
associations with BRAF/NRAS mutation status, clinicopathologic characteristics,
and patient outcome. The present study extensively profiled HDAC class 1 and
their targets/regulators utilizing immunohistochemistry in human melanoma samples
from patients with stage IV melanoma, known BRAF/NRAS mutational status, and
detailed clinicopatholgical data. HDAC8 was increased in BRAF-mutated melanoma
(P=0.016), however, no association between expression of other HDACs and
NRAS/BRAF status was identified. There was also a correlation between HDAC1,
HDAC8 expression, and phosphorylated NF<U+03BA>b p65 immunoreactivity (P<0.001).
Increased cytoplasmic HDAC8 immunoreactivity was independently associated with an
improved survival from both diagnosis of primary melanoma and from first
detection of stage IV disease to melanoma death on multivariate analysis (HR
0.992, 95% CI 0.987-0.996; P<0.001 and HR 0.993, 95% CI 0.988-0.998; P=0.009,
respectively). These results suggest not only that HDAC8 may be a prognostic
biomarker in melanoma, but also provide important data regarding the regulation
of HDACs in melanoma and a rational basis for targeting them therapeutically.

PMID: 25836739  [PubMed - in process]


227. Biol Pharm Bull. 2015;38(4):618-24. doi: 10.1248/bpb.b15-00003.

Pseudokinase tribbles 1 (TRB1) negatively regulates tumor-suppressor activity of 
p53 through p53 deacetylation.

Miyajima C(1), Inoue Y, Hayashi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Drug Metabolism and Disposition, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Nagoya City University.

Tribbles 1 (TRB1) is one of the mammalian orthologs of Drosophila Tribbles, which
regulates development and cell proliferation. TRB1 is suggested to act as a
scaffold protein in signaling pathways for important cellular processes. TRB1 has
also been identified as a myeloid oncogenic driver and mediates leukemogenesis
through the mitogen-activated protein extracellular kinase (MEK)/extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) pathway and CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) 
transcriptional factors. However, the physiological roles of TRB1 in solid tumors
have not been clarified. Here, we show that TRB1 interacts with p53 and
suppresses its tumor suppressor activity. TRB1 knockdown enhances transcriptional
activity of p53 and decreases cell viability. Interestingly, TRB1 enhances
histone deacety lase 1 (HDAC1)-mediated p53 deacetylation and decreases DNA
binding of p53. These results suggest that TRB1 is involved in the proliferation 
of tumor cells by inhibiting the activities of tumor suppressor p53 in solid
tumors.

PMID: 25832642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2015 Sep;54(9):1713-23. doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/kev022. 
Epub 2015 Mar 31.

Inhibiting histone deacetylase 1 suppresses both inflammation and bone loss in
arthritis.

Cantley MD(1), Fairlie DP(2), Bartold PM(3), Marino V(3), Gupta PK(2), Haynes
DR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Anatomy and Pathology, School of Medical Sciences, University of
Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, melissa.cantley@adelaide.edu.au. (2)Institute for
Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, and. (3)Colgate
Australian Clinical Dental Research Centre, School of Dentistry, University of
Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia. (4)Discipline of Anatomy and Pathology, School
of Medical Sciences, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA.

OBJECTIVE: Histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) is highly expressed in the synovium of
RA patients. Thus we aimed to investigate a novel HDAC inhibitor (HDACi), NW-21, 
designed to target HDAC1. The effect of NW-21 on osteoclast formation and
activity, cytokine and chemokine expression in vitro and arthritis in mice was
assessed.
METHODS: The effects on human osteoclast formation and activity derived from
human blood monocytes stimulated with receptor activator of nuclear factor <U+03BA>B
ligand (RANKL) and M-CSF were assessed. The anti-inflammatory activity of NW-21
was assessed using human monocytes stimulated with either TNF-a or
lipopolysaccharide for 24 h. mRNA expression of monocyte chemotactic protein 1
(MCP-1), TNF-a, macrophage inflammatory protein 1a (MIP-1a), IL-1 and RANTES
(regulated on activation, normal T cell expressed and secreted) was assessed. The
effect of NW-21 in the collagen antibody-induced arthritis model was assessed
following daily oral administration at 5 mg/kg/day. The HDAC1 inhibitors NW-21
and MS-275 were compared with a broad-acting HDACi, 1179.4b. Effects on
inflammation and bone were assessed using paw inflammation scoring, histology and
live animal micro-CT.
RESULTS: NW-21 suppressed osteoclast formation and activity as well as
significantly reducing mRNA expression of MCP-1 and MIP-1a in monocytes
stimulated by lipopolysaccharide or TNF-a (P < 0.05) in vitro. Only inhibitors
that targeted HDAC1 (NW-21 and MS-275) reduced inflammation and bone loss in the 
arthritis model.
CONCLUSION: The results indicate that inhibitors targeting HDAC1, such as NW-21
and MS-275, may be useful for treating RA, as such drugs can simultaneously
target both inflammation and bone resorption.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British 
Society for Rheumatology. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25832610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Cell Reprogram. 2015 Apr;17(2):115-23. doi: 10.1089/cell.2014.0073.

Deficiency of genomic reprogramming in trophoblast stem cells following nuclear
transfer.

Ogawa H(1), Watanabe H, Fukuda A, Kono T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, Tokyo University of Agriculture , Tokyo, 156-8502,
Japan .

To examine the genomic reprogrammability of trophoblast stem (TS) cells using a
nuclear transfer technique, we produced TS cloned embryos using five TS cell
lines from three strains of mice (ICR, B6D2F1, and B6CBF1) as donors and observed
developmental ability during preimplantation development. The developmental rates
of the TS cloned embryos that developed to the two-cell, four- to eight-cell,
morula, and blastocyst stages were 58-83%, 0-38.6%, 0-21.3%, and 0-15.9%,
respectively, indicating that more than 50% of TS cloned embryos arrested at the 
two-cell stage. These TS cloned two-cell embryos were expressed low level of
Dappa3 (also known as PGC7/Stella), indicating that zygotic gene activation (ZGA)
was disrupted in these embryos. However, a small portion of the TS cloned embryos
(0-15.9%) reached the blastocyst stage. In these TS cloned blastocysts, the
numbers of trophectoderm (TE) and inner cell mass (ICM) cells were 31.9 ± 4.6 and
12.1 ± 3.0, respectively, which were not significantly different from those in
the fertilized embryos. In addition, the gene expression analysis showed that
Oct3/4, and Cdx2, which are ICM- and TE-specific marker genes, respectively, and 
Dppa3, and Hdac1, which are zygotic gene activation-related genes, were expressed
in TS cloned blastocysts at the same levels as in the fertilized blastocysts.
These results indicate that although TS cloned embryos are able to differentiate 
into ICM cells, the genomic reprogrammability of TS cells is very low following
nuclear transfer.

PMCID: PMC4378359
PMID: 25826724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Cell Reprogram. 2015 Apr;17(2):89-94. doi: 10.1089/cell.2014.0056.

Downregulation of DNA methyltransferase 1 in zona-free cloned buffalo (Bubalus
bubalis) embryos by small interefering RNA improves in vitro development but does
not alter DNA methylation level.

Selokar NL(1), Saini M, Agrawal H, Palta P, Chauhan MS, Manik R, Singla SK.

Author information: 
(1)1 Animal Biotechnology Centre, National Dairy Research Institute , 132001
Karnal, India .

Aberrant epigenetic reprogramming, especially genomic hypermethylation, is
implicated as the primary reason behind the failure of the cloning process during
somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT). We transfected one-cell-stage zona-free
buffalo embryos produced by handmade cloning with 50<U+2009>nM DNMT1 small interfering
RNA (siRNA), using lipofectamine, to knockdown the DNA methyltransferase 1
(DNMT1) gene. siRNA treatment decreased (p<0.001) the expression level of DNMT1
mRNA and DNMT1 protein in the one-cell-stage embryos and increased (p<0.05) the
blastocyst rate (52.3 ± 1.3% vs. 45.3 ± 2.5%) compared to that in the controls,
but did not reduce the DNA methylation level similar to the in vitro-fertilized
(IVF) embryos. It also increased (p<0.05) the relative mRNA abundance of P53 and 
CASPASE 3, but not that of HDAC1, DNMT1, and DNMT3a, in the blastocysts of the
siRNA group compared to the controls. The global level of H3K18ac was higher
(p<0.05) in the blastocysts of the siRNA group than in the controls, whereas that
of H3K9ac and H3K27me3 was not significantly different between the two groups. In
conclusion, lipofection can be successfully used for transfection of DNMT1 siRNA 
into one-cell-stage zona-free cloned buffalo embryos. It results in a concomitant
decrease in the DNMT1 mRNA and protein levels in the one-cell-stage embryos.
siRNA-mediated knockdown increases the blastocyst rate but does not alter the DNA
methylation level.

PMCID: PMC4378840
PMID: 25826721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Oncotarget. 2015 May 10;6(13):11252-63.

E2F1 enhances glycolysis through suppressing Sirt6 transcription in cancer cells.

Wu M(1), Seto E(2), Zhang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genitourinary Oncology and Department of Cancer Imaging and
Metabolism, H Lee Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL, USA. (2)Department of
Molecular Oncology, H Lee Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL, USA.

The fast proliferation of cancer cells requires reprogramming of its energy
metabolism with aerobic glycolysis as a major energy source. Sirt6, a class III
histone deacetylase, has been shown to down regulate glycolysis by inhibiting the
expression of several key glycolytic genes. Based on the published study on the
metabolic phenotype of E2F1 -/- mice and SIRT6 -/- mice, we hypothesize that E2F1
enhances glycolysis and inhibits the expression of Sirt6. Indeed, over-expressing
of E2F1, but not its DNA binding deficient mutant, significantly enhanced glucose
uptake and lactate production in bladder and prostate cancer cell lines. E2F1
over-expression also suppressed Sirt6 expression and function. Moreover, E2F1
directly bound to Sirt6 promoter and suppressed Sirt6 promoter activity under
both normoxic and hypoxic culture conditions. E2F1 siRNA blocked the
up-regulation of E2F1 under hypoxia, increased Sirt6 expression and decreased
glycolysis compared to those of scrambled siRNA transected cells. Furthermore,
HDAC1 deacetylated E2F1 and diminished its transcription suppression of Sirt6
promoter. Treatment with the HDAC inhibitor, trichostatin A (TSA), suppressed
Sirt6 promoter activity with increased binding of acetylated E2F1 to Sirt6
promoter. Mutating the E2F1 binding site on the proximal Sirt6 promoter abolished
the suppression of Sirt6 transcription by TSA. These data indicate a novel
oncogenic role of E2F1, i.e. enhancing glycolysis by suppressing Sirt6
transcription.

PMCID: PMC4484454
PMID: 25816777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Jul;12(1):1449-56. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3519. Epub 2015 Mar
20.

Synergistic effects of valproic acid and arsenic trioxide on RPMI8226 cells in
vitro and the possible underlying mechanisms.

Wang X(1), Zhang M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, The First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine,
Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, P.R. China.

The aim of the present study was to investigate the synergistic effects of
valproic acid (VPA) and arsenic trioxide (ATO) on the proliferation of RPMI8226
cells and the possible underlying mechanisms. Cell apoptosis was assessed by flow
cytometry. The mRNA expression levels were analyzed by semi-quantitative
polymerase chain reaction, and the protein expression levels were analyzed by
western blotting. The histone acetylation and methylation states of the gene
promoters were detected using a chromatin immunoprecipitation technique. The
apoptotic rates of the RPMI8226 cells in the combined drug groups were
significantly increased compared with those of the single drug groups (P<0.05).
The mRNA and protein expression levels of Bcl-2 and the expression levels of
HDAC1 mRNA and H3K9me2 protein decreased significantly in the combined groups
compared with the single drug groups. The mRNA and protein expression levels of
Bax, Caspase 8, Caspase 9 and LSD1, and the protein expression of acetylated H3
increased significantly in the combination groups compared with the single drug
groups. Histone methylation and acetylation of the Bcl-2 and bax gene promoters
were increased in the combination groups compared with the single drug groups.
VPA and ATO had synergistic effects on the proliferation of RPMI8226 cells, which
may have been associated with the decreased expression of Bcl-2 and the increased
expression levels of Bcl-2-associated X protein, Caspase 8 and Caspase 9.
Therefore, the expression levels of the Bcl-2 gene family may have been regulated
by the levels of gene promoter methylation and acetylation.

PMID: 25815518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Mar 26;11(3):e1004785. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004785.
eCollection 2015.

Positive role of promyelocytic leukemia protein in type I interferon response and
its regulation by human cytomegalovirus.

Kim YE(1), Ahn JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Samsung Biomedical Research Institute,
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Suwon, Republic of Korea.

Promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML), a major component of PML nuclear bodies
(also known as nuclear domain 10), is involved in diverse cellular processes such
as cell proliferation, apoptosis, gene regulation, and DNA damage response. PML
also acts as a restriction factor that suppresses incoming viral genomes,
therefore playing an important role in intrinsic defense. Here, we show that PML 
positively regulates type I interferon response by promoting transcription of
interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) and that this regulation by PML is
counteracted by human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) IE1 protein. Small hairpin
RNA-mediated PML knockdown in human fibroblasts reduced ISG induction by
treatment of interferon-ß or infection with UV-inactivated HCMV. PML was required
for accumulation of activated STAT1 and STAT2, interacted with them and HDAC1 and
HDAC2, and was associated with ISG promoters after HCMV infection. During HCMV
infection, viral IE1 protein interacted with PML, STAT1, STAT2, and HDACs.
Analysis of IE1 mutant viruses revealed that, in addition to the STAT2-binding
domain, the PML-binding domain of IE1 was necessary for suppression of
interferon-ß-mediated ISG transcription, and that IE1 inhibited ISG transcription
by sequestering interferon-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3) in a manner requiring
its binding of PML and STAT2, but not of HDACs. In conclusion, our results
demonstrate that PML participates in type I interferon-induced ISG expression by 
regulating ISGF3, and that this regulation by PML is counteracted by HCMV IE1,
highlighting a widely shared viral strategy targeting PML to evade intrinsic and 
innate defense mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC4374831
PMID: 25812002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Am J Hematol. 2015 Jul;90(7):624-8. doi: 10.1002/ajh.24019. Epub 2015 May 28.

Inactivation of HDAC1 or HDAC2 induces gamma globin expression without altering
cell cycle or proliferation.

Esrick EB(1,)(2), McConkey M(3), Lin K(3), Frisbee A(3), Ebert BL(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts. (2)Harvard Medical School, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts. (3)Division of Hematology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts.

Other than hydroxyurea, no pharmacologic agents are clinically available for
fetal hemoglobin (HbF) induction in sickle cell disease (SCD). An optimal
candidate would induce HbF without causing cell cycle inhibition and would act
independently of hydroxyurea in order to yield additional HbF induction when
combined. We explored whether inhibition of histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1 or HDAC2
could achieve these goals. In human erythroid progenitor cells, shRNA knockdown
of the HDAC1 or HDAC2 genes induced gamma globin, without altering cellular
proliferation in vitro, and without altering cell cycle phase. Treatment with
hydroxyurea in combination with HDAC2 knockdown yielded a further increase in
gamma globin expression. Additionally, when CD34+ cells were treated with both
hydroxyurea and MS-275 (an inhibitor of HDAC 1, 2, and 3), an additive induction 
of relative gamma globin expression was achieved. Our findings support further
clinical investigation of HDAC inhibitors in combination with hydroxyurea in SCD 
patients.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25808664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Apr;7(2):132-42. doi: 10.1093/jmcb/mjv021. Epub 2015 Mar
23.

PI3K/mTOR mediate mitogen-dependent HDAC1 phosphorylation in breast cancer: a
novel regulation of estrogen receptor expression.

Citro S(1), Miccolo C(2), Meloni L(3), Chiocca S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, IFOM-IEO 
Campus, via Adamello 16, 20139 Milan, Italy susanna.chiocca@ieo.eu
simona.citro@ieo.eu. (2)Department of Experimental Oncology, European Institute
of Oncology, IFOM-IEO Campus, via Adamello 16, 20139 Milan, Italy. (3)Department 
of Experimental Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, IFOM-IEO Campus, via
Adamello 16, 20139 Milan, Italy Present address: Department for Molecular
Biomedical Research, Technologiepark Zwijnaarde, 927 VIB west, 9052 Ghent,
Belgium.

Histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) is an important epigenetic controller involved in
transcriptional regulation through modification of chromatin structure. Genetic
and epigenetic changes and deregulation of signal transduction pathways have been
implicated in the development of breast cancer. Downregulation of estrogen
receptor a (ERa) expression is one of the mechanisms behind the acquisition of
endocrine resistance. Sustained and increased hormone and growth factor receptor 
signaling in breast cancer cells contribute to resistance to endocrine therapy.
Both HDACs and the PI3K/mTOR signaling pathway are becoming promising targets in 
breast cancer, reversing also acquired hormone resistance. Here we show how
mitogens, activating the PI3K/mTOR pathway, trigger the phosphorylation of HDAC1 
in breast cancer cells, which is completely dependent on the activity of the p70 
S6 kinase (S6K1). Our findings show that S6K1, overexpressed in many breast
cancers, controls HDAC1-dependent transcriptional regulation of ERa levels upon
mitogenic stimuli, controlling HDAC1 recruitment to the ERa promoter.
Furthermore, cell treatment with both mTOR and HDACs inhibitors shows an additive
effect in inhibiting breast cancer proliferation. This confirms the novel
cross-talk between the HDAC1 and PI3K pathways with clinical implications towards
the treatment of this malignant disease.

© The Author (2015). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Journal of
Molecular Cell Biology, IBCB, SIBS, CAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25801958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Theriogenology. 2015 Jul 1;84(1):101-8.e1. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2015.02.018. Epub 2015 Feb 23.

Effect of donor cell type on developmental competence, quality, gene expression, 
and epigenetic status of interspecies cloned embryos produced using cells from
wild buffalo and oocytes from domestic buffalo.

Saini M(1), Selokar NL(2), Raja AK(3), Sahare AA(3), Singla SK(3), Chauhan MS(3),
Manik RS(3), Palta P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Animal Biotechnology Centre, National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal, India;
Division of Animal Physiology and Reproduction, Central Institute for Research on
Buffaloes, Hisar, India. (2)Division of Animal Physiology and Reproduction,
Central Institute for Research on Buffaloes, Hisar, India. (3)Animal
Biotechnology Centre, National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal, India. (4)Animal
Biotechnology Centre, National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal, India.
Electronic address: prabhatpalta@yahoo.com.

This study compared the cloning efficiency of donor cells of fibroblast and
epithelial origin isolated from ear skin of a wild buffalo (Bubalus arnee) and
used with cytoplasts from domestic buffalo (Bubalus bubalis) in interspecies SCNT
by hand-made cloning. The cleavage (93.0 ± 2.8% vs. 85.6 ± 2.4%) and blastocyst
rates (50.6 ± 4.0% vs. 20.5 ± 2.6%) were higher (P < 0.05) for fibroblasts than
those for epithelial cells, whereas the total cell number (490 ± 42 and 492 ± 95,
respectively) and apoptotic index (2.3 ± 0.3 and 2.5 ± 0.6, respectively) of
blastocysts were similar. The global level of H3K18ac and H3K27me3 was lower (P <
0.05) in fibroblasts than that in epithelial cells. The global level of H3K18ac
was higher (P < 0.05) in fibroblast than that in epithelial cell-derived
blastocysts, whereas that of H3K27me3 was similar between the two groups. The
expression level of HDAC1, DNMT1, DNMT3a, and P53 was higher (P < 0.05) in
fibroblasts than that in epithelial cells; that of CASPASE3 showed an opposite
pattern (P < 0.001), whereas CASPASE7 expression level was similar in the two
groups. In the embryos, the expression level of HDAC1, DNMT3a, and CDX2 was lower
(P < 0.05) in fibroblast than that in epithelial cell-derived blastocysts; that
of NANOG showed an opposite pattern (P < 0.05), whereas that of OCT4 was similar 
between the two groups. In conclusion, donor cells of fibroblast origin are
easier to reprogram than those of epithelial origin in interspecies SCNT, and
cloning efficiency, epigenetic status, and gene expression pattern vary among
cells having different origin although they may be from the same tissue.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25799471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Front Neurol. 2015 Mar 5;6:44. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2015.00044. eCollection 2015.

Mechanism of Action of 2-Aminobenzamide HDAC Inhibitors in Reversing Gene
Silencing in Friedreich's Ataxia.

Soragni E(1), Chou CJ(1), Rusche JR(2), Gottesfeld JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute , La 
Jolla, CA , USA. (2)Repligen Corporation , Waltham, MA , USA.

The genetic defect in Friedreich's ataxia (FRDA) is the hyperexpansion of a
GAATTC triplet in the first intron of the FXN gene, encoding the essential
mitochondrial protein frataxin. Histone post-translational modifications near the
expanded repeats are consistent with heterochromatin formation and consequent FXN
gene silencing. Using a newly developed human neuronal cell model, derived from
patient-induced pluripotent stem cells, we find that 2-aminobenzamide histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors increase FXN mRNA levels and frataxin protein in
FRDA neuronal cells. However, only compounds targeting the class I HDACs 1 and 3 
are active in increasing FXN mRNA in these cells. Structural analogs of the
active HDAC inhibitors that selectively target either HDAC1 or HDAC3 do not show 
similar increases in FXN mRNA levels. To understand the mechanism of action of
these compounds, we probed the kinetic properties of the active and inactive
inhibitors, and found that only compounds that target HDACs 1 and 3 exhibited a
slow-on/slow-off mechanism of action for the HDAC enzymes. HDAC1- and
HDAC3-selective compounds did not show this activity. Using siRNA methods in the 
FRDA neuronal cells, we show increases in FXN mRNA upon silencing of either HDACs
1 or 3, suggesting the possibility that inhibition of each of these class I HDACs
is necessary for activation of FXN mRNA synthesis, as there appears to be
redundancy in the silencing mechanism caused by the GAATTC repeats. Moreover,
inhibitors must have a long residence time on their target enzymes for this
activity. By interrogating microarray data from neuronal cells treated with
inhibitors of different specificity, we selected two genes encoding histone
macroH2A (H2AFY2) and Polycomb group ring finger 2 (PCGF2) that were specifically
down-regulated by the inhibitors targeting HDACs1 and 3 versus the more selective
inhibitors for further investigation. Both genes are involved in transcriptional 
repression and we speculate their involvement in FXN gene silencing. Our results 
shed light on the mechanism whereby HDAC inhibitors increase FXN mRNA levels in
FRDA neuronal cells.

PMCID: PMC4350406
PMID: 25798128  [PubMed]


238. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2015 Jul;72(13):2491-507. doi: 10.1007/s00018-015-1880-8. Epub
2015 Mar 22.

Structure and function insights into the NuRD chromatin remodeling complex.

Torchy MP(1), Hamiche A, Klaholz BP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrated Structural Biology, Centre for Integrative Biology
(CBI), Institute of Genetics and of Molecular and Cellular Biology (IGBMC), 1 rue
Laurent Fries, Illkirch, France.

Transcription regulation through chromatin compaction and decompaction is
regulated through various chromatin-remodeling complexes such as nucleosome
remodeling and histone deacetylation (NuRD) complex. NuRD is a 1 MDa
multi-subunit protein complex which comprises many different subunits, among
which histone deacetylases HDAC1/2, ATP-dependent remodeling enzymes CHD3/4,
histone chaperones RbAp46/48, CpG-binding proteins MBD2/3, the GATAD2a (p66a)
and/or GATAD2b (p66ß) and specific DNA-binding proteins MTA1/2/3. Here, we review
the currently known crystal and NMR structures of these subunits, the functional 
data and their relevance for biomedical research considering the implication of
NuRD subunits in cancer and various other diseases. The complexity of this
macromolecular assembly, and its poorly understood mode of interaction with the
nucleosome, the repeating unit of chromatin, illustrate that this complex is a
major challenge for structure-function relationship studies which will be tackled
best by an integrated biology approach.

PMID: 25796366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2015 Jun 1;308(11):H1391-401. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00390.2014. Epub 2015 Mar 20.

Inhibition of class I histone deacetylase activity represses matrix
metalloproteinase-2 and -9 expression and preserves LV function postmyocardial
infarction.

Mani SK(1), Kern CB(2), Kimbrough D(1), Addy B(1), Kasiganesan H(1), Rivers
WT(3), Patel RK(3), Chou JC(4), Spinale FG(5), Mukherjee R(3), Menick DR(6).

Author information: 
(1)Gazes Cardiac Research Institute, Division of Cardiology, Department of
Medicine, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina;
(2)Department of Regenerative Medicine and Cell Biology, Medical University of
South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina; (3)Department of Surgery, Medical
University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina; (4)Department of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South 
Carolina; (5)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of South Carolina
School of Medicine, Columbia, South Carolina. (6)Gazes Cardiac Research
Institute, Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Medical University of 
South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina; Ralph H. Johnson Veterans Affairs
Medical Center, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina;
and menickd@musc.edu.

Left ventricular (LV) remodeling, after myocardial infarction (MI), can result in
LV dilation and LV pump dysfunction. Post-MI induction of matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs), particularly MMP-2 and MMP-9, have been implicated as 
causing deleterious effects on LV and extracellular matrix remodeling in the MI
region and within the initially unaffected remote zone. Histone deacetylases
(HDACs) are a class of enzymes that affect the transcriptional regulation of
genes during pathological conditions. We assessed the efficacy of both class
I/IIb- and class I-selective HDAC inhibitors on MMP-2 and MMP-9 abundance and
determined if treatment resulted in the attenuation of adverse LV and
extracellular matrix remodeling and improved LV pump function post-MI. MI was
surgically induced in MMP-9 promoter reporter mice and randomized for treatment
with a class I/IIb HDAC inhibitor for 7 days post-MI. After MI, LV dilation, LV
pump dysfunction, and activation of the MMP-9 gene promoter were significantly
attenuated in mice treated with either the class I/IIb HDAC inhibitor tichostatin
A or suberanilohydroxamic acid (voronistat) compared with MI-only mice.
Immunohistological staining and zymographic levels of MMP-2 and MMP-9 were
reduced with either tichostatin A or suberanilohydroxamic acid treatment. Class I
HDAC activity was dramatically increased post-MI. Treatment with the selective
class I HDAC inhibitor PD-106 reduced post-MI levels of both MMP-2 and MMP-9 and 
attenuated LV dilation and LV pump dysfunction post-MI, similar to class I/IIb
HDAC inhibition. Taken together, these unique findings demonstrate that selective
inhibition of class I HDACs may provide a novel therapeutic means to attenuate
adverse LV remodeling post-MI.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4451303 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25795711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Exp Mol Pathol. 2015 Jun;98(3):419-26. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2015.03.024. Epub
2015 Mar 18.

HDAC1 overexpression independently predicts biochemical recurrence and is
associated with rapid tumor cell proliferation and genomic instability in
prostate cancer.

Burdelski C(1), Ruge OM(2), Melling N(1), Koop C(2), Simon R(2), Steurer S(2),
Sauter G(2), Kluth M(2), Hube-Magg C(2), Minner S(2), Wittmer C(2), Wilczak W(2),
Hinsch A(2), Lebok P(2), Izbicki JR(1), Heinzer H(3), Graefen M(3), Huland H(3), 
Schlomm T(4), Krech T(5).

Author information: 
(1)General, Visceral and Thoracic Surgery Department and Clinic, University
Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany. (2)Institute of Pathology, University 
Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany. (3)Martini-Clinic, Prostate Cancer
Center, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany. (4)Martini-Clinic, 
Prostate Cancer Center, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany;
Department of Urology, Section for translational Prostate Cancer Research,
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany. (5)Institute of Pathology, 
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany. Electronic address:
t.krech@uke.de.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) play an important role in tumor development and
progression by modifying histone and non-histone proteins. In the current study
we analyzed prevalence and prognostic impact of HDAC1 in prostate cancer. HDAC1
expression was analyzed by immunohistochemistry on a tissue microarray containing
more than 12,400 prostate cancer specimens. Results were compared to tumor
phenotype, biochemical recurrence, and molecular subtypes defined by ERG status
as well as genomic deletions of 3p, 5q, 6q and PTEN. HDAC1 immunostaining was
detectable in 75.4% of 9744 interpretable cancers and considered strong in 15.4%,
moderate in 39.4% and weak in 20.7% of cases. High HDAC1 expression was
associated with high Gleason grade (p<0.0001), advanced pathological tumor stage 
(p<0.0001), positive nodal status (p=0.0010), elevated preoperative PSA-level
(p=0.0127), early PSA recurrence (p<0.0001) and increased cell proliferation
(p<0.0001). Moreover, high-level HDAC1 staining was associated with TMPRSS2:ERG
rearrangement and ERG expression in prostate cancers (p<0.0001) and was linked to
deletions of PTEN (p<0.0001), 6q (p<0.0001) and 5q (p=0.0028) in ERG-negative
cancers. The prognostic impact of HDAC1 was independent of established
clinicopathological parameters and was mostly driven by ERG-negative cancers as
revealed by subgroup analyses. HDAC1 has strong prognostic impact in prostate
cancer and might contribute to the development of a fraction of genetically
instable and particularly aggressive prostate cancers. HDAC1 measurement might
therefore be of clinical value for risk stratification of prostate cancer and
should be further evaluated in this regard.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25794974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 20;10(3):e0121281. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121281.
eCollection 2015.

CoREST1 promotes tumor formation and tumor stroma interactions in a mouse model
of breast cancer.

Mazumdar S(1), Arendt LM(2), Phillips S(3), Sedic M(4), Kuperwasser C(2), Gill
G(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental, Molecular and Chemical Biology, Sackler School of
Graduate Biomedical Sciences, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America; Genetics Program, Sackler School of
Graduate Biomedical Sciences, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America. (2)Department of Developmental,
Molecular and Chemical Biology, Sackler School of Graduate Biomedical Sciences,
Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of
America; Molecular Oncology Research Institute, Tufts Medical Center, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America. (3)Department of Developmental,
Molecular and Chemical Biology, Sackler School of Graduate Biomedical Sciences,
Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of
America; Genetics Program, Sackler School of Graduate Biomedical Sciences, Tufts 
University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America;
Molecular Oncology Research Institute, Tufts Medical Center, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America. (4)Department of Developmental,
Molecular and Chemical Biology, Sackler School of Graduate Biomedical Sciences,
Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of
America; Cellular, Molecular and Developmental Biology Program, Sackler School of
Biomedical Sciences, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, 
United States of America; Molecular Oncology Research Institute, Tufts Medical
Center, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America. (5)Department of
Developmental, Molecular and Chemical Biology, Sackler School of Graduate
Biomedical Sciences, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, 
United States of America.

Regulators of chromatin structure and gene expression contribute to tumor
formation and progression. The co-repressor CoREST1 regulates the localization
and activity of associated histone modifying enzymes including lysine specific
demethylase 1 (LSD1) and histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1). Although several CoREST1 
associated proteins have been reported to enhance breast cancer progression, the 
role of CoREST1 in breast cancer is currently unclear. Here we report that
knockdown of CoREST1 in the basal-type breast cancer cell line, MDA-MB-231, led
to significantly reduced incidence and diminished size of tumors compared to
controls in mouse xenograft studies. Notably, CoREST1-depleted cells gave rise to
tumors with a marked decrease in angiogenesis. CoREST1 knockdown led to a
decrease in secreted angiogenic and inflammatory factors, and mRNA analysis
suggests that CoREST1 promotes expression of genes related to angiogenesis and
inflammation including VEGF-A and CCL2. CoREST1 knockdown decreased the ability
of MDA-MB-231 conditioned media to promote endothelial cell tube formation and
migration. Further, tumors derived from CoREST1-depleted cells had reduced
macrophage infiltration and the secretome of CoREST1 knockdown cells was
deficient in promoting macrophage migration and macrophage-mediated angiogenesis.
Taken together, these findings reveal that the epigenetic regulator CoREST1
promotes tumorigenesis in a breast cancer model at least in part through
regulation of gene expression patterns in tumor cells that have profound non-cell
autonomous effects on endothelial and inflammatory cells in the tumor
microenvironment.

PMCID: PMC4368644
PMID: 25793264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Sci Rep. 2015 Mar 20;5:9087. doi: 10.1038/srep09087.

Gene expression mapping of histone deacetylases and co-factors, and correlation
with survival time and 1H-HRMAS metabolomic profile in human gliomas.

Dali-Youcef N(1), Froelich S(2), Moussallieh FM(3), Chibbaro S(2), Noël G(4),
Namer IJ(3), Heikkinen S(5), Auwerx J(6).

Author information: 
(1)1] Laboratoire de Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire, Hôpitaux Universitaires
de Strasbourg, Nouvel Hôpital Civil, 1 place de l'hôpital, 67091 Strasbourg
Cedex, France [2] Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire 
(IGBMC)/CNRS UMR 7104/INSERM U 964/Université de Strasbourg, 1 rue Laurent Fries,
67404 Illkirch, France. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, Hôpitaux Universitaires de
Strasbourg, avenue Molière, 67085 Strasbourg Cedex, France. (3)Department of
Biophysics and Nuclear Medicine, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, CHU de
Hautepierre, avenue Molière, 67200 Strasbourg Cedex, France. (4)Centre Paul
Strauss, 3 rue de la porte de l'Hôpital 67065 Strasbourg, Cedex, France.
(5)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC)/CNRS
UMR 7104/INSERM U 964/Université de Strasbourg, 1 rue Laurent Fries, 67404
Illkirch, France. (6)1] Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et
Cellulaire (IGBMC)/CNRS UMR 7104/INSERM U 964/Université de Strasbourg, 1 rue
Laurent Fries, 67404 Illkirch, France [2] Institut Clinique de la Souris, 1 rue
Laurent Fries, 67404 Illkirch, France.

Primary brain tumors are presently classified based on imaging and
histopathological techniques, which remains unsatisfaying. We profiled here by
quantitative real time PCR (qRT-PCR) the transcripts of eighteen histone
deacetylases (HDACs) and a subset of transcriptional co-factors in non-tumoral
brain samples from 15 patients operated for epilepsia and in brain tumor samples 
from 50 patients diagnosed with grade II oligodendrogliomas (ODII, n = 9), grade 
III oligodendrogliomas (ODIII, n = 22) and glioblastomas (GL, n = 19). Co-factor 
transcripts were significantly different in tumors as compared to non-tumoral
samples and distinguished different molecular subgroups of brain tumors,
regardless of tumor grade. Among all patients studied, the expression of HDAC1
and HDAC3 was inversely correlated with survival, whereas the expression of
HDAC4, HDAC5, HDAC6, HDAC11 and SIRT1 was significantly and positively correlated
with survival time of patients with gliomas. (1)H-HRMAS technology revealed
metabolomically distinct groups according to the expression of HDAC1, HDAC4 and
SIRT1, suggesting that these genes may play an important role in regulating brain
tumorigenesis and cancer progression. Our study hence identified different
molecular fingerprints for subgroups of histopathologically similar brain tumors 
that may enable the prediction of outcome based on the expression level of
co-factor genes and could allow customization of treatment.

PMCID: PMC4367156
PMID: 25791281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 19;10(3):e0120118. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0120118.
eCollection 2015.

HDAC1 regulates the proliferation of radial glial cells in the developing Xenopus
tectum.

Tao Y(1), Ruan H(2), Guo X(2), Li L(1), Shen W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, 300 Guangzhou Road, Nanjing, Jiangsu, 210029, China. (2)Zhejiang Key 
Laboratory of Organ Development and Regeneration, College of Life and
Environmental Sciences, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.

In the developing central nervous system (CNS), progenitor cells differentiate
into progeny to form functional neural circuits. Radial glial cells (RGs) are a
transient progenitor cell type that is present during neurogenesis. It is thought
that a combination of neural trophic factors, neurotransmitters and electrical
activity regulates the proliferation and differentiation of RGs. However, it is
less clear how epigenetic modulation changes RG proliferation. We sought to
explore the effect of histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity on the proliferation of
RGs in the visual optic tectum of Xenopus laevis. We found that the number of
BrdU-labeled precursor cells along the ventricular layer of the tectum decrease
developmentally from stage 46 to stage 49. The co-labeling of BrdU-positive cells
with brain lipid-binding protein (BLBP), a radial glia marker, showed that the
majority of BrdU-labeled cells along the tectal midline are RGs. BLBP-positive
cells are also developmentally decreased with the maturation of the brain.
Furthermore, HDAC1 expression is developmentally down-regulated in tectal cells, 
especially in the ventricular layer of the tectum. Pharmacological blockade of
HDACs using Trichostatin A (TSA) or Valproic acid (VPA) decreased the number of
BrdU-positive, BLBP-positive and co-labeling cells. Specific knockdown of HDAC1
by a morpholino (HDAC1-MO) decreased the number of BrdU- and BLBP-labeled cells
and increased the acetylation level of histone H4 at lysine 12 (H4K12). The
visual deprivation-induced increase in BrdU- and BLBP-positive cells was blocked 
by HDAC1 knockdown at stage 49 tadpoles. These data demonstrate that HDAC1
regulates radial glia cell proliferation in the developing optical tectum of
Xenopus laevis.

PMCID: PMC4366096
PMID: 25789466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Cell Cycle. 2015;14(8):1327-36. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.987621.

Cdk5 controls IL-2 gene expression via repression of the mSin3a-HDAC complex.

Lam E(1), Pareek TK, Letterio JJ.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Pediatrics; Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology;
University Hospitals Rainbow Babies & Children's Hospital Center; The Angie
Fowler Adolescent & Young Adult Cancer Institute; The Case Comprehensive Cancer
Center ; Case Western Reserve University ; Cleveland , OH USA.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (Cdk5) is a unique member of a family of
serine/threonine cyclin-dependent protein kinases. We previously demonstrated
disruption of Cdk5 gene expression in mice impairs T-cell function and
ameliorates T-cell-mediated neuroinflammation. Here, we show Cdk5 modulates gene 
expression during T-cell activation by impairing the repression of gene
transcription by histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) through specific phosphorylation
of the mSin3a protein at serine residue 861. Disruption of Cdk5 activity in
T-cells enhances HDAC activity and binding of the HDAC1/mSin3a complex to the
IL-2 promoter, leading to suppression of IL-2 gene expression. These data point
to essential roles for Cdk5 in regulating gene expression in T-cells and
transcriptional regulation by the co-repressor mSin3a.

PMCID: PMC4614394
PMID: 25785643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Neuroscience. 2015 May 21;294:172-81. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.02.054.
Epub 2015 Mar 14.

Galangin-induced down-regulation of BACE1 by epigenetic mechanisms in SH-SY5Y
cells.

Zeng H(1), Huang P(1), Wang X(1), Wu J(1), Wu M(1), Huang J(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei 430072, China.
(2)College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei 430072, China.
Electronic address: jianhuang@whu.edu.cn.

Alzheimer's disease (AD), the most common cause of dementia in aging people, is
found to have a critical link with the deposition of ß-amyloid (Aß) in the brain.
The inhibition of ß-site amyloid precursor protein-cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1), a
key enzyme for Aß production, is a promising target for AD therapy. In pursuit to
find a potent inhibitor of BACE1, we identified galangin, a natural flavonoid,
had a significant lowering effect on Aß levels. Furthermore, a dramatic reduction
of BACE1 at mRNA and protein levels was observed after galangin treatment. We
further investigated whether epigenetic mechanisms, such as histone acetylation
and DNA methylation, were involved in galangin-induced transcriptional regulation
of BACE1. Our data show that galangin induces a decrease of acetylated H3 in the 
BACE1 promoter regions through the up-regulation of endogenous HDAC1-mediated
deacetylation, which is independent of DNA methylation status. The above findings
suggest a novel mechanism for polyphenols' neuroprotective effect in
neurodegeneration and galangin as a potential drug candidate for AD therapy.

Copyright © 2015 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25779965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Sci Rep. 2015 Mar 17;5:9191. doi: 10.1038/srep09191.

Trek1 contributes to maintaining nasal epithelial barrier integrity.

Jiang J(1), Liu JQ(1), Li J(2), Li M(2), Chen HB(2), Yan H(2), Mo LH(2), Qiu
SQ(3), Liu ZG(2), Yang PC(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] ENT Institute of Shenzhen University and Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Allergy
&Immunology, Shenzhen. 518060, China [2] ENT Hospital, Longgang Central Hospital,
Shenzhen. 518116, China [3] Brain Body Institute, McMaster University, Hamilton, 
ON, Canada L8N 4A6. (2)ENT Institute of Shenzhen University and Shenzhen Key
Laboratory of Allergy &Immunology, Shenzhen. 518060, China. (3)1] ENT Institute
of Shenzhen University and Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Allergy &Immunology,
Shenzhen. 518060, China [2] ENT Hospital, Longgang Central Hospital, Shenzhen.
518116, China. (4)1] ENT Institute of Shenzhen University and Shenzhen Key
Laboratory of Allergy &Immunology, Shenzhen. 518060, China [2] Brain Body
Institute, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada L8N 4A6.

Epithelial barrier integrity is critical to maintain the homeostasis in the body.
The regulatory mechanism of the epithelial barrier function has not been fully
understood. This study aims to elucidate the role of the TWIK-related potassium
channel-1 (Trek1) in the regulation of the epithelial barrier function of the
nasal mucosa. In this study, the levels of Trek1 were assessed by real time
RT-PCR and Western blotting. The epithelial barrier function of the rat nasal
epithelia was evaluated by the Ussing chamber system. The results showed that
Trek1 was detected in the human and rat nasal epithelia, which were significantly
lower in patients and rats with allergic rhinitis than that in healthy controls. 
Exposure to the signature T helper 2 cytokine, interleukin (IL)-4, markedly
suppressed the expression of Trek1 in the nasal mucosa via up regulating the
expression of the histone deacetylase (HDAC)1. The IL-4-induced rat nasal
epithelial barrier dysfunction could be blocked by HDAC1 inhibitor (Trichostatin 
A), or sodium butyrate, or administration of Clostridium Butyricum. We conclude
that Trek1 is critical to maintain the nasal epithelial barrier function.

PMID: 25778785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Learn Mem. 2015 Mar 16;22(4):225-31. doi: 10.1101/lm.036699.114. Print 2015 Apr.

The Class I HDAC inhibitor RGFP963 enhances consolidation of cued fear
extinction.

Bowers ME(1), Xia B(2), Carreiro S(2), Ressler KJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Behavioral Neuroscience and Psychiatric Disorders, Emory University, Atlanta, 
Georgia 30329, USA. (2)RepliGen Waltham, Massachusetts 02453, USA. (3)Behavioral 
Neuroscience and Psychiatric Disorders, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30329,
USA Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, Maryland 20815, USA
kressle@emory.edu.

Evidence indicates that broad, nonspecific histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibition 
enhances learning and memory, however, the contribution of the various HDACs to
specific forms of learning is incompletely understood. Here, we show that the
Class I HDAC inhibitor, RGFP963, enhances consolidation of cued fear extinction. 
However, RGFP966, a strong inhibitor of HDAC3, does not significantly enhance
consolidation of cued fear extinction. These data extend previous evidence that
demonstrate the Class I HDACs play a role in the consolidation of long-term
memory, suggesting that HDAC1 and/or HDAC2, but less likely HDAC3, may function
as negative regulators of extinction retention. The development of specific HDAC 
inhibitors, such as RGFP963, will further illuminate the role of specific HDACs
in various types of learning and memory. Moreover, HDAC inhibitors that enhance
cued fear extinction may show translational promise for the treatment of
fear-related disorders, including post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).

© 2015 Bowers et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4371170
PMID: 25776040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Mol Cell Biochem. 2015 Jun;404(1-2):241-50. doi: 10.1007/s11010-015-2383-5. Epub 
2015 Mar 13.

Hydrogen sulfide mitigates homocysteine-mediated pathological remodeling by
inducing miR-133a in cardiomyocytes.

Kesherwani V(1), Nandi SS, Sharawat SK, Shahshahan HR, Mishra PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Integrative Physiology, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, 668 S 41st Street, DRC1, Room 5047, Omaha, NE, 68198-5850, USA.

An elevated level of homocysteine called hyperhomocysteinemia (HHcy) is
associated with pathological cardiac remodeling. Hydrogen sulfide (H2S) acts as a
cardioprotective gas; however, the mechanism by which H2S mitigates
homocysteine-mediated pathological remodeling in cardiomyocytes is unclear. We
hypothesized that H2S ameliorates HHcy-mediated hypertrophy by inducing
cardioprotective miR-133a in cardiomyocytes. To test the hypothesis, HL1
cardiomyocytes were treated with (1) plain medium (control, CT), (2) 100 µM of
homocysteine (Hcy), (3) Hcy with 30 µM of H2S (Hcy + H2S), and (4) H2S for 24 h. 
The levels of hypertrophy markers: c-fos, atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), and
beta-myosin heavy chain (ß-MHC), miR-133a, and its transcriptional inducer myosin
enhancer factor-2C (MEF2C) were determined by Western blotting, RT-qPCR, and
immunofluorescence. The activity of MEF2C was assessed by co-immunoprecipitation 
of MEF2C with histone deacetylase-1(HDAC1). Our results show that H2S ameliorates
homocysteine-mediated up-regulation of c-fos, ANP, and ß-MHC, and down-regulation
of MEF2C and miR-133a. HHcy induces the binding of MEF2C with HDAC1, whereas H2S 
releases MEF2C from MEF2C-HDAC1 complex causing activation of MEF2C. These
findings elicit that HHcy induces cardiac hypertrophy by promoting MEF2C-HDAC1
complex formation that inactivates MEF2C causing suppression of anti-hypertrophy 
miR-133a in cardiomyocytes. H2S mitigates hypertrophy by inducing miR-133a
through activation of MEF2C in HHcy cardiomyocytes. To our knowledge, this is a
novel mechanism of H2S-mediated activation of MEF2C and induction of miR-133a and
inhibition of hypertrophy in HHcy cardiomyocytes.

PMCID: PMC4417035 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25763715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Oncotarget. 2015 Apr 30;6(12):9740-55.

Dual targeting of retinoid X receptor and histone deacetylase with DW22 as a
novel antitumor approach.

Wang L(1,)(2), Chen G(3), Chen K(1,)(2), Ren Y(4), Li H(1,)(2), Jiang X(1,)(2),
Jia L(1), Fu S(1,)(2), Li Y(1,)(2), Liu X(1,)(2), Wang S(1,)(2), Yang J(1,)(2),
Wu C(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Shenyang Pharmaceutical University, Shenyang, P.R.
China. (2)Benxi Institute of Pharmaceutical Research, Shenyang Pharmaceutical
University, Benxi, P.R. China. (3)Key Laboratory of Structure-Based Drugs Design 
& Discovery of Ministry of Education, Shenyang Pharmaceutical University,
Shenyang, P.R. China. (4)Department of Pathology, Wuhan General Hospital of
Guangzhou Command, People's Liberation Army, Wuhan, P.R. China.

Retinoid X receptor (RXR) and Histone deacetylase (HDAC) are considered important
targets for cancer therapy due to their crucial roles in genetic or epigenetic
regulations of cancer development and progression. Here, we evaluated the
potential of dual targeting of RXR and HDAC using DW22 as a novel therapeutic
approach to cancer treatment. We found that the co-expression of RXR-a and HDAC1 
was frequently appeared in lung cancer and breast cancer tissues and cell lines. 
RXR was activated by DW22 in RXRa and HDAC1 overexpressed A549 and MDA-MB-435
cell lines. Meanwhile, DW22 inhibited the activity of HDAC by decreasing its
expression in A549 and MDA-MB-435 cell lines, but not in RXRa and HDAC1 deficient
cell lines. Moreover, DW22 suppressed cell growth, induced cell differentiation, 
prompted cell apoptosis and arrested cell cycle in A549, MDA-MB-435 or HL60 cell 
lines. Treatment human umbilical vascular endothelial cells (HUVECs) with DW22
suppressed migration, invasion and tube formation through decreasing VEGF
expression. The up-regulation of Ac-H3 and p21, and down-regulation of VEGF
caused by DW22 was markedly attenuated by silencing of HDAC1. Furthermore,
knockdown of RXRa by siRNA completely blocked DW22-induced cell differentiation, 
but partially attenuated DW22-caused inhibition of cell proliferation, induction 
of cell apoptosis, and suppression of cell migration, invasion and tube
formation. Moreover, intravenous administration of DW22 significantly retarded
tumor growth of A549 and MDA-MB-435 xenograft mice models, and induced no
substantial weight loss and gross toxicity. In addition, DW22 also reduced cell
proliferation, angiogenesis, and induced cell apoptosis in vivo. Collectively,
our data demonstrates that dual targeting of RXR and HDAC using DW22 possesses
pleiotropic antitumor activities both in vitro and in vivo, providing a novel
therapeutic approach for cancer treatment.

PMCID: PMC4496394
PMID: 25762635  [PubMed - in process]


250. RNA Biol. 2015;12(5):538-54. doi: 10.1080/15476286.2015.1023495.

microRNA-449a functions as a tumor suppressor in neuroblastoma through inducing
cell differentiation and cell cycle arrest.

Zhao Z(1), Ma X, Sung D, Li M, Kosti A, Lin G, Chen Y, Pertsemlidis A, Hsiao TH, 
Du L.

Author information: 
(1)a Greehey Children's Cancer Research Institute; The University of Texas Health
Science Center at San Antonio ; San Antonio , TX USA.

microRNA-449a (miR-449a) has been identified to function as a tumor suppressor in
several types of cancers. However, the role of miR-449a in neuroblastoma has not 
been intensively investigated. We recently found that the overexpression of
miR-449a significantly induces neuroblastoma cell differentiation, suggesting its
potential tumor suppressor function in neuroblastoma. In this study, we further
investigated the mechanisms underlying the tumor suppressive function of miR-449a
in neuroblastoma. We observed that miR-449a inhibits neuroblastoma cell survival 
and growth through 2 mechanisms--inducing cell differentiation and cell cycle
arrest. Our comprehensive investigations on the dissection of the target genes of
miR-449a revealed that 3 novel targets- MFAP4, PKP4 and TSEN15 -play important
roles in mediating its differentiation-inducing function. In addition, we further
found that its function in inducing cell cycle arrest involves down-regulating
its direct targets CDK6 and LEF1. To determine the clinical significance of the
miR-449a-mediated tumor suppressive mechanism, we examined the correlation
between the expression of these 5 target genes in neuroblastoma tumor specimens
and the survival of neuroblastoma patients. Remarkably, we noted that high tumor 
expression levels of all the 3 miR-449a target genes involved in regulating cell 
differentiation, but not the target genes involved in regulating cell cycle, are 
significantly correlated with poor survival of neuroblastoma patients. These
results suggest the critical role of the differentiation-inducing function of
miR-449a in determining neuroblastoma progression. Overall, our study provides
the first comprehensive characterization of the tumor-suppressive function of
miR-449a in neuroblastoma, and reveals the potential clinical significance of the
miR-449a-mediated tumor suppressive pathway in neuroblastoma prognosis.

PMCID: PMC4615578
PMID: 25760387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Development. 2015 Mar 15;142(6):1180-92. doi: 10.1242/dev.113506.

Histone deacetylase 1 and 2 regulate Wnt and p53 pathways in the ureteric bud
epithelium.

Chen S(1), Yao X(1), Li Y(1), Saifudeen Z(1), Bachvarov D(2), El-Dahr SS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Pediatric Nephrology, Tulane University
Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA. (2)Department of Molecular
Medicine, Laval University, Québec, QC, Canada G1R 2J6. (3)Department of
Pediatrics, Section of Pediatric Nephrology, Tulane University Health Sciences
Center, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA seldahr@tulane.edu.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) regulate a broad range of biological processes
through removal of acetyl groups from histones as well as non-histone proteins.
Our previous studies showed that Hdac1 and Hdac2 are bound to promoters of key
renal developmental regulators and that HDAC activity is required for embryonic
kidney gene expression. However, the existence of many HDAC isoforms in embryonic
kidneys raises questions concerning the possible specificity or redundancy of
their functions. We report here that targeted deletion of both the Hdac1 and
Hdac2 genes from the ureteric bud (UB) cell lineage of mice causes bilateral
renal hypodysplasia. One copy of either Hdac1 or Hdac2 is sufficient to sustain
normal renal development. In addition to defective cell proliferation and
survival, genome-wide transcriptional profiling revealed that the canonical Wnt
signaling pathway is specifically impaired in UB(Hdac1,2-/-) kidneys. Our results
also demonstrate that loss of Hdac1 and Hdac2 in the UB epithelium leads to
marked hyperacetylation of the tumor suppressor protein p53 on lysine 370, 379
and 383; these post-translational modifications are known to boost p53 stability 
and transcriptional activity. Genetic deletion of p53 partially rescues the
development of UB(Hdac1,2-/-) kidneys. Together, these data indicate that Hdac1
and Hdac2 are crucial for kidney development. They perform redundant, yet
essential, cell lineage-autonomous functions via p53-dependent and -independent
pathways.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4360175
PMID: 25758227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Reprod Domest Anim. 2015 Jun;50(3):400-9. doi: 10.1111/rda.12502. Epub 2015 Mar
6.

P53-Mediated Repression of the Reprogramming in Cloned Bovine Embryos Through
Direct Interaction with HDAC1 and Indirect Interaction with DNMT3A.

Ma PJ(1), Zhang H, Li R, Wang YS, Zhang Y, Hua S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical Education, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 
Province, China.

P53 is a transcriptional activator, regulating growth arrest, DNA repair and
apoptosis. We found that the expression level of P53 and the epigenetic profiles 
were significantly different in bovine somatic cell nuclear transfer embryos from
those in vitro fertilization (IVF) embryos. So we inferred that abnormally
expression of P53 might contribute to the incomplete reprogramming. Using bovine 
foetal fibroblasts, we constructed and screened a highly efficient shRNA vector
targeting bovine P53 gene and then reconstituted somatic cell nuclear transfer
embryos (RNAi-SCNT). The results indicated that expression levels of P53 were
downregulated significantly in RNAi-SCNT embryos, and the blastulation rate and
the total number of cell increased significantly. Moreover, methylation levels of
CpG islands located 5' region of OCT4, NANOG, H19 and IGF2R in RNAi -SCNT embryos
were significantly normalized to that IVF embryos, and the methylation levels of 
genome DNA, H3K9 and H4K5 acetylation levels were also returned to levels similar
to the IVF embryos. Differentially expressed genes were identified by microarray,
and 28 transcripts were found to be significantly different (> twofolds) in
RNAi-SCNT embryos compared to the control nuclear transfer embryos (SCNT). Among 
the 28 differentially expressed transcripts, just HDAC1 and DNMT3A were closely
associated with the epigenetic modifications. Finally, ChIP further showed that
P53 might repress the epigenetic reprogramming by regulating HDAC1 directly and
DNMT3A indirectly. These findings offer significant references to further
elucidate the mechanism of epigenetic reprogramming in SCNT embryos.

© 2015 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

PMID: 25753134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Genes Dev. 2015 Mar 1;29(5):513-25. doi: 10.1101/gad.254532.114.

A KAP1 phosphorylation switch controls MyoD function during skeletal muscle
differentiation.

Singh K(1), Cassano M(2), Planet E(2), Sebastian S(1), Jang SM(2), Sohi G(1),
Faralli H(1), Choi J(3), Youn HD(3), Dilworth FJ(4), Trono D(5).

Author information: 
(1)Sprott Center for Stem Cell Research, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute,
Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8L6, Canada; (2)School of Life Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique 
Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland; (3)Department of
Biomedical Sciences and Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Korea; (4)Sprott Center for Stem
Cell Research, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8L6,
Canada; Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa,
Ontario K1H 8L6, Canada didier.trono@epfl.ch jdilworth@ohri.ca. (5)School of Life
Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne,
Switzerland; didier.trono@epfl.ch jdilworth@ohri.ca.

The transcriptional activator MyoD serves as a master controller of myogenesis.
Often in partnership with Mef2 (myocyte enhancer factor 2), MyoD binds to the
promoters of hundreds of muscle genes in proliferating myoblasts yet activates
these targets only upon receiving cues that launch differentiation. What
regulates this off/on switch of MyoD function has been incompletely understood,
although it is known to reflect the action of chromatin modifiers. Here, we
identify KAP1 (KRAB [Krüppel-like associated box]-associated protein 1)/TRIM28
(tripartite motif protein 28) as a key regulator of MyoD function. In myoblasts, 
KAP1 is present with MyoD and Mef2 at many muscle genes, where it acts as a
scaffold to recruit not only coactivators such as p300 and LSD1 but also
corepressors such as G9a and HDAC1 (histone deacetylase 1), with promoter
silencing as the net outcome. Upon differentiation, MSK1-mediated phosphorylation
of KAP1 releases the corepressors from the scaffold, unleashing transcriptional
activation by MyoD/Mef2 and their positive cofactors. Thus, our results reveal
KAP1 as a previously unappreciated interpreter of cell signaling, which modulates
the ability of MyoD to drive myogenesis.

© 2015 Singh et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4358404
PMID: 25737281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Med Chem. 2015 Mar 26;58(6):2809-20. doi: 10.1021/jm502011f. Epub 2015 Mar 13.

Design and synthesis of orally bioavailable aminopyrrolidinone histone
deacetylase 6 inhibitors.

Lin X(1), Chen W(1), Qiu Z(1), Guo L(1), Zhu W(1), Li W(1), Wang Z(1), Zhang
W(1), Zhang Z(1), Rong Y(1), Zhang M(1), Yu L(1), Zhong S(1), Zhao R(1), Wu X(1),
Wong JC(1), Tang G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Roche Pharmaceutical Research and Early Development, Roche Innovation Center
Shanghai, 720 Cailun Road, Shanghai 201203, China.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) removes the acetyl group from lysine residues in a 
number of non-histone substrates and plays important roles in microtubule
dynamics and chaperone activities. There is growing interest in identifying
HDAC6-selective inhibitors as chemical biology tools and ultimately as new
therapeutic agents. Herein we report the design, synthesis, and phenotypic
screening of a novel class of 3-aminopyrrolidinone-based hydroxamic acids as
HDAC6 inhibitors. In particular, the a-methyl-substituted enantiomer 33 (3-S)
showed significant in-cell tubulin acetylation (Tub-Ac) with an EC50 of 0.30 µM
but limited impact on p21 levels at various concentrations. In enzyme inhibition 
assays, 33 demonstrated high selectivity for HDAC6 with an IC50 of 0.017 µM and
selectivity indexes of 10 against HDAC8 and over 4000 against HDAC1-3 isoforms.
Moreover, 33 has suitable drug metabolism and pharmacokinetics properties
compared with other hydroxamic acid-based HDAC inhibitors, warranting further
biological studies and development as a selective HDAC6 inhibitor.

PMID: 25734520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Cell Cycle. 2015;14(8):1315-26. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.995053.

De-regulated expression of the BRG1 chromatin remodeling factor in bone marrow
mesenchymal stromal cells induces senescence associated with the silencing of
NANOG and changes in the levels of chromatin proteins.

Squillaro T(1), Severino V, Alessio N, Farina A, Di Bernardo G, Cipollaro M,
Peluso G, Chambery A, Galderisi U.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Experimental Medicine; Biotechnology and Molecular Biology
Section ; Second University of Naples ; Naples , Italy.

Stem cells have a peculiar chromatin architecture that contributes to their
unique properties, including uncommitted status, multi/pluripotency and
self-renewal. We analyzed the effect of the de-regulation of the SWI/SNF
chromatin remodeling complex in mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC) through the
silencing and up-regulation of BRG1, which is the ATPase subunit of the complex. 
The altered expression of BRG1 promoted the senescence of MSC with suppression of
the NANOG transcription, which is part of the transcriptional circuitry governing
stem cell functions. To gain insight on the way NANOG was silenced, we evaluated 
how the de-regulated BRG1 expression affect the binding of activators and
repressors on the NANOG promoter. We found 4 E2F binding motifs on NANOG
promoter, which can be occupied by RB1 and RB2/P130. These are members of the
retinoblastoma gene family. In MSC with a silenced BRG1, the relative binding of 
the 2 retinoblastoma proteins increased, and this was associated with the
recruitment of DNMT1. This induced the methylation of CpG on the NANOG promoter. 
Opposingly, when a high level of BRG1 was present, the same E2F binding motifs
were docking sites for BRG1, which induced chromatin compaction without CpG
methylation but with increased histone deacetylation, associated with the
presence of HDAC1 on E2F binding sites. Besides the sharp regulation of the NANOG
expression, we evidenced, through proteomic analysis, that the de-regulation of
the SWI/SNF function affected the expression of histones and other nuclear
proteins involved in "nuclear architecture," suggesting that BRG1 may act as
global regulator of gene expression.

PMCID: PMC4614278
PMID: 25724006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Gene Expr Patterns. 2015 Jan;17(1):56-68. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2014.12.003. Epub
2015 Feb 17.

Spatiotemporal expression analysis of Prdm1 and Prdm1 binding partners in early
chick embryo.

Zwane TB(1), Nikitina NV(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of the Witwatersrand, Private
Bag 3, WITS 2050 Johannesburg, South Africa. (2)School of Molecular and Cell
Biology, University of the Witwatersrand, Private Bag 3, WITS 2050 Johannesburg, 
South Africa. Electronic address: natalya.nikitina@wits.ac.za.

Prdm1 is a global repressor of transcription that plays multiple important roles 
during embryonic development, including neural crest specification. Prdm1 acts by
repressing large sets of genes via sequence-specific recruitment of
co-repressors, many of which are epigenetic modifiers. It is not known whether
Prdm1 is expressed during neural crest development in chick embryo. Moreover, the
mechanism of Prdm1 action or the nature of possible binding partners that mediate
its effects in the neural crest had not yet been addressed. Prdm1 binding
partners are known to play important roles during embryonic development, yet in
many cases no spatiotemporal expression analysis during early vertebrate
development has been performed. In this paper we report the expression patterns
of Prdm1 and seven of its known or putative binding partners (Hdac1 and 2, Tle1
and 3, G9a, Prmt5, Lsd1) during early stages of chicken embryogenesis. Prdm1 is
expressed in the neural plate border and premigratory neural crest during chick
development. Six Prdm1 binding partners (except Tle1) are co-expressed with Prdm1
in the prospective neural plate border at HH4-HH6, and all seven show strong and 
specific expression in the neural plate border at HH7-HH8, suggesting all of them
may cooperate with Prdm1 during neural crest development in chick embryos.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25700964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Tsitologiia. 2014;56(8):581-90.

[Role of MEK/ERK pathway in the regulation of HDACI-induced senescence of
transformed rat embryo fibroblasts].

[Article in Russian]

Kochetkova EIu, Bykova TV, Zubova SG, Pospelova TV.

A key regulator of cellular senescence, mTORC1 complex, is the target of many
signaling cascades including Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK-signaling cascade. In this paper we 
investigated the role of MEK/ERK-branch of this cascade in the process of
cellular senescence induced by histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACI) sodium
butyrate (NaBut), in transformed rat embryo fibroblasts. Suppression of MEK/ERK
activity by inhibitor PD0325901 does not prevent activation of mTORC1 complex
induced by NaBut treatment. After the suppression of MEK/ERK, activity of mTORC1 
increased as well as complex mTORC2. Activation of mTOR-containing complexes
accompanied by the reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton with the formation of
actin stress fibers and the appearance of some markers of cellular senescence. In
contrast to NaBut-induced senescence accumulation of proteins was not observed,
which may be due to increased activity of the degradation processes. Furthermore,
the induction of senescence in conditions suppressed MEK/ERK leads to a drastic
decrease in cell viability. Thus, NaBut-induced senescence upon suppressed
activity of MEK/ERK-branch of MAP kinase cascade has a more pronounced
tumor-suppressor effect associated with stronger activation of both
mTOR-complexes, reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton and protein degradation.

PMID: 25697003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Mol Biol. 2015 Apr 10;427(7):1644-54. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2015.02.010. Epub 2015
Feb 15.

Lysine deacetylases regulate the heat shock response including the age-associated
impairment of HSF1.

Zelin E(1), Freeman BC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, 601 South Goodwin Avenue, Urbana, IL 61801, USA. (2)Department 
of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
601 South Goodwin Avenue, Urbana, IL 61801, USA. Electronic address:
bfree@illinois.edu.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is critical for defending cells from both acute and
chronic stresses. In aging cells, the DNA binding activity of HSF1 deteriorates
correlating with the onset of pathological events including neurodegeneration and
heart disease. We find that DNA binding by HSF1 is controlled by lysine
deacetylases with HDAC7, HDAC9, and SIRT1 distinctly increasing the magnitude and
length of a heat shock response (HSR). In contrast, HDAC1 inhibits HSF1 in a
deacetylase-independent manner. In aging cells, the levels of HDAC1 are elevated 
and the HSR is impaired, yet reduction of HDAC1 in aged cells restores the HSR.
Our results provide a mechanistic basis for the age-associated regulation of the 
HSR. Besides HSF1, the deacetylases differentially modulate the activities of
unrelated DNA binding proteins. Taken together, our data further support the
model that lysine deacetylases are selective regulators of DNA binding proteins.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4357550 [Available on 2016-04-10]
PMID: 25688804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 May 15;21(10):2348-58. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-1290. 
Epub 2015 Feb 16.

Selective Inhibition of HDAC1 and HDAC2 as a Potential Therapeutic Option for
B-ALL.

Stubbs MC(1), Kim W(2), Bariteau M(2), Davis T(2), Vempati S(2), Minehart J(3),
Witkin M(3), Qi J(4), Krivtsov AV(5), Bradner JE(4), Kung AL(6), Armstrong SA(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatric Oncology, Boston
Children's Hospital, Dana-Farber-Cancer Institute, and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts. mstubbs@incyte.com. (2)Division of Hematology/Oncology,
Department of Pediatric Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Dana-Farber-Cancer 
Institute, and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. (3)Human Oncology
and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York. (4)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber-Cancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. (5)Division of Hematology/Oncology,
Department of Pediatric Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Dana-Farber-Cancer 
Institute, and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. Human Oncology and 
Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York.
(6)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatric Oncology, Boston
Children's Hospital, Dana-Farber-Cancer Institute, and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts. Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Boston, Massachusetts.
(7)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatric Oncology, Boston
Children's Hospital, Dana-Farber-Cancer Institute, and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts. Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York. Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts.

PURPOSE: Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) have recently emerged as
efficacious therapies that target epigenetic mechanisms in hematologic
malignancies. One such hematologic malignancy, B-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (B-ALL), may be highly dependent on epigenetic regulation for leukemia
development and maintenance, and thus sensitive to small-molecule inhibitors that
target epigenetic mechanisms.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: A panel of B-ALL cell lines was tested for sensitivity to
HDACi with varying isoform sensitivity. Isoform-specific shRNAs were used as
further validation of HDACs as relevant therapeutic targets in B-ALL. Mouse
xenografts of B-cell malignancy-derived cell lines and a pediatric B-ALL were
used to demonstrate pharmacologic efficacy.
RESULTS: Nonselective HDAC inhibitors were cytotoxic to a panel of B-ALL cell
lines as well as to xenografted human leukemia patient samples. Assessment of
isoform-specific HDACi indicated that targeting HDAC1-3 with class I
HDAC-specific inhibitors was sufficient to inhibit growth of B-ALL cell lines.
Furthermore, shRNA-mediated knockdown of HDAC1 or HDAC2 resulted in growth
inhibition in these cells. We then assessed a compound that specifically inhibits
only HDAC1 and HDAC2. This compound suppressed growth and induced apoptosis in
B-ALL cell lines in vitro and in vivo, whereas it was far less effective against 
other B-cell-derived malignancies.
CONCLUSIONS: Here, we show that HDAC inhibitors are a potential therapeutic
option for B-ALL, and that a more specific inhibitor of HDAC1 and HDAC2 could be 
therapeutically useful for patients with B-ALL.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4433811 [Available on 2016-05-15]
PMID: 25688158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Epigenomics. 2015;7(1):5-7. doi: 10.2217/epi.14.62.

Isoform-selective histone deacetylase inhibitors: the trend and promise of
disease treatment.

Zhang Y(1), Xu W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Shandong
University, 44 Wenhuaxi Road, Ji'nan, Shandong 250012, PR China.

PMID: 25687460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Cell J. 2015 Winter;16(4):466-75. Epub 2015 Jan 13.

DNA Methylation and Histone Acetylation Patterns in Cultured Bovine Adipose
Tissue-Derived Stem Cells (BADSCs).

Abouhamzeh B(1), Salehi M(2), Hosseini A(3), Masteri-Farahani AR(4), Fadai F(4), 
Heidari MH(4), Nourozian M(4), Soleimani M(5), Khorashadizadeh M(6),
Mossahebi-Mohammadi M(7), Mansouri A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Molecular Biology Research Center, Shahid Beheshti University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran ; Department of Cell Biology and Anatomical
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran. (2)Cellular and Molecular Biology Research Center, Shahid Beheshti 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran ; Department of Biotechnology,
Faculty of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran,
Iran. (3)Cellular and Molecular Biology Research Center, Shahid Beheshti
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. (4)Department of Cell Biology and
Anatomical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran. (5)Department of Hematology, Faculty of Medical Science, 
Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran. (6)Department of Medical Biotechnology,
School of Advanced Medical Technology, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran. (7)Department of Stem Cell Biology, Stem Cell Technology Research
Center, Tehran, Iran.

OBJECTIVE: Many studies have focused on the epigenetic characteristics of donor
cells to improve somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT). We hypothesized that the
epigenetic status and chromatin structure of undifferentiated bovine adipose
tissue-derived stem cells (BADSCs) would not remain constant during different
passages. The objective of this study was to determine the mRNA expression
patterns of DNA methyltransferases (DNMT1, DNMT3a, DNMT3b) and histone
deacetyltransferses (HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3) in BADSCs. In addition, we compared the
measured levels of octamer binding protein-4 expression (OCT4) and acetylation of
H3K9 (H3K9ac) in BADSCs cultures and different passages in vitro.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this experimental study, subcutaneous fat was obtained 
from adult cows immediately post-mortem. Relative level of DNMTs and HDACs was
examined using quantitative real time polymerase chain reaction (q-PCR), and the 
level of OCT4 and H3K9ac was analyzed by flow cytometry at passages 3 (P3), 5
(P5) and 7 (P7).
RESULTS: The OCT4 protein level was similar at P3 and P5 but a significant
decrease in its level was seen at P7. The highest and lowest levels of H3K9ac
were observed at P5 and P7, respectively. At P5, the expression of HDACs and
DNMTs was significantly decreased. In contrast, a remarkable increase in the
expression of DNMTs was observed at P7.
CONCLUSION: Our data demonstrated that the epigenetic status of BADSCs was
variable during culture. The P5 cells showed the highest level of stemness and
multipotency and the lowest level of chromatin compaction. Therefore, we suggest 
that P5 cells may be more efficient for SCNT compared with other passages.

PMCID: PMC4297485
PMID: 25685737  [PubMed]


262. Oncol Rep. 2015 Apr;33(4):1976-84. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.3802. Epub 2015 Feb 13.

(-)-Epigallocatechin-3-gallate reverses the expression of various
tumor-suppressor genes by inhibiting DNA methyltransferases and histone
deacetylases in human cervical cancer cells.

Khan MA(1), Hussain A(2), Sundaram MK(2), Alalami U(1), Gunasekera D(2), Ramesh
L(2), Hamza A(2), Quraishi U(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Natural Science and Public Health, College of Sustainability
Sciences and Humanities, Zayed University, Dubai, United Arab Emirates. (2)School
of Life Sciences, Manipal University, Dubai, United Arab Emirates.

There has been increasing evidence that numerous bioactive dietary agents can
hamper the process of carcinogenesis by targeting epigenetic alterations
including DNA methylation. This therapeutic approach is considered as a
significant goal for cancer therapy due to the reversible nature of
epigenetic-mediated gene silencing and warrants further attention. One such
dietary agent, green tea catechin, (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) has been
shown to modulate many cancer-related pathways. Thus, the present study was
designed to investigate the role of EGCG as an epigenetic modifier in HeLa cells.
DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) and histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibition assays
were conducted, and the transcription levels of DNMT3B and HDAC1 were assessed by
enzymatic activity assay and RT-PCR, respectively. Furthermore, we studied the
binding interaction of EGCG with DNMT3B and HDAC1 by molecular modeling as well
as promoter DNA methylation and expression of retinoic acid receptor-ß (RARß),
cadherin 1 (CDH1) and death-associated protein kinase-1 (DAPK1) in EGCG-treated
HeLa cells by RT-PCR and MS-PCR. In the present study, time-dependent
EGCG-treated HeLa cells were found to have a significant reduction in the
enzymatic activity of DNMT and HDAC. However, the expression of DNMT3B was
significantly decreased in a time-dependent manner whereas there was no
significant change in HDAC1 expression. Molecular modeling data also supported
the EGCG-mediated DNMT3B and HDAC1 activity inhibition. Furthermore,
time-dependent exposure to EGCG resulted in reactivation of known
tumor-suppressor genes (TSGs) in HeLa cells due to marked changes in the
methylation of the promoter regions of these genes. Overall, the present study
suggests that EGCG may have a significant impact on the development of novel
epigenetic-based therapy.

PMID: 25682960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Zygote. 2016 Feb;24(1):89-97. doi: 10.1017/S0967199414000768. Epub 2015 Feb 12.

ING2 (inhibitor of growth protein-2) plays a crucial role in preimplantation
development.

Zhou L(1), Wang P(1), Zhang J(1), Heng BC(2), Tong GQ(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine,Department of
Reproduction,Nanjing Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital Affiliated to
Nanjing Medical University,Nanjing 210004,PR China. (2)Sunway
University,Department of Biological Sciences,Faculty of Science & Technology,5
Jalan Universiti,Bandar Sunway 47500,Selangor Darul Ehsan,Malaysia.
(3)Reproduction Medicine Center,Shuguang Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine,528 Zhangheng Rd,Shanghai 201203,PR
China.

ING2 (inhibitor of growth protein-2) is a member of the ING-gene family and
participates in diverse cellular processes involving tumor suppression, DNA
repair, cell cycle regulation, and cellular senescence. As a subunit of the Sin3 
histone deacetylase complex co-repressor complex, ING2 binds to H3K4me3 to
regulate chromatin modification and gene expression. Additionally, ING2 recruits 
histone methyltransferase (HMT) activity for gene repression, which is
independent of the HDAC class I or II pathway. However, the physiological
function of ING2 in mouse preimplantation embryo development has not yet been
characterized previously. The expression, localization and function of ING2
during preimplantation development were investigated in this study. We showed
increasing expression of ING2 within the nucleus from the 4-cell embryo stage
onwards; and that down-regulation of ING2 expression by endoribonuclease-prepared
small interfering RNA (esiRNA) microinjection results in developmental arrest
during the morula to blastocyst transition. Embryonic cells microinjected with
ING2-specific esiRNA exhibited decreased blastulation rate compared to the
negative control. Further investigation of the underlying mechanism indicated
that down-regulation of ING2 significantly increased expression of p21, whilst
decreasing expression of HDAC1. These results suggest that ING2 may play a
crucial role in the process of preimplantation embryo development through
chromatin regulation.

PMCID: PMC4697306
PMID: 25672483  [PubMed - in process]


264. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Feb 27;43(4):2033-44. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv068. Epub 2015 
Feb 4.

Structural and functional characterization of a cell cycle associated HDAC1/2
complex reveals the structural basis for complex assembly and nucleosome
targeting.

Itoh T(1), Fairall L(1), Muskett FW(1), Milano CP(1), Watson PJ(1), Arnaudo N(2),
Saleh A(1), Millard CJ(1), El-Mezgueldi M(1), Martino F(2), Schwabe JW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Henry Wellcome Laboratories of Structural Biology, Department of Biochemistry,
University of Leicester, Lancaster Road, Leicester LE1 9HN, UK. (2)MRC Laboratory
of Molecular Biology, Francis Crick Avenue, Cambridge Biomedical Campus,
Cambridge CB2 0QH, UK. (3)Henry Wellcome Laboratories of Structural Biology,
Department of Biochemistry, University of Leicester, Lancaster Road, Leicester
LE1 9HN, UK john.schwabe@le.ac.uk.

Recent proteomic studies have identified a novel histone deacetylase complex that
is upregulated during mitosis and is associated with cyclin A. This complex is
conserved from nematodes to man and contains histone deacetylases 1 and 2, the
MIDEAS corepressor protein and a protein called DNTTIP1 whose function was
hitherto poorly understood. Here, we report the structures of two domains from
DNTTIP1. The amino-terminal region forms a tight dimerization domain with a novel
structural fold that interacts with and mediates assembly of the HDAC1:MIDEAS
complex. The carboxy-terminal domain of DNTTIP1 has a structure related to the
SKI/SNO/DAC domain, despite lacking obvious sequence homology. We show that this 
domain in DNTTIP1 mediates interaction with both DNA and nucleosomes. Thus,
DNTTIP1 acts as a dimeric chromatin binding module in the HDAC1:MIDEAS
corepressor complex.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4344507
PMID: 25653165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. FASEB J. 2015 May;29(5):2070-80. doi: 10.1096/fj.14-257931. Epub 2015 Feb 3.

HDAC1 and HDAC2 collectively regulate intestinal stem cell homeostasis.

Zimberlin CD(1), Lancini C(1), Sno R(1), Rosekrans SL(1), McLean CM(1), Vlaming
H(1), van den Brink GR(1), Bots M(1), Medema JP(1), Dannenberg JH(2).

Author information: 
(1)*Laboratory for Experimental Oncology and Radiobiology, Center for
Experimental Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands; Division of Gene Regulation, Netherlands Cancer Institute,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Tygat Institute for Liver and Intestinal Research and
Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands; and Cancer Genomics Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(2)*Laboratory for Experimental Oncology and Radiobiology, Center for
Experimental Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands; Division of Gene Regulation, Netherlands Cancer Institute,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Tygat Institute for Liver and Intestinal Research and
Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands; and Cancer Genomics Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands 
j.dannenberg@nki.nl.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are posttranslational modifiers that deacetylate
proteins. Despite their crucial role in numerous biological processes, the use of
broad-range HDAC inhibitors (HDACi), has shown clinical efficacy. However,
undesired side effects highlight the necessity to better understand the biology
of different HDACs and target the relevant HDACs. Using a novel mouse model, in
which HDAC1 and HDAC2 can be simultaneously deleted in the intestine of adult
mice, we show that the simultaneous deletion of HDAC1 and HDAC2 leads to a rapid 
loss of intestinal homeostasis. Importantly, this deletion cannot be sustained,
and 8 days after initial ablation, stem cells that have escaped HDAC1 or HDAC2
deletion swiftly repopulate the intestinal lining. In vitro ablation of HDAC1 and
HDAC2 using intestinal organoid cultures resulted in a down-regulation of
multiple intestinal stem cell markers and functional loss of clonogenic capacity.
Importantly, treatment of wild-type organoids with class I-specific HDACi MS-275 
also induced a similar loss of stemness, providing a possible rationale for the
gastrointestinal side effects often observed in HDACi-treated patients. In
conclusion, these data show that HDAC1 and HDAC2 have a redundant function and
are essential to maintain intestinal homeostasis.

© FASEB.

PMID: 25648995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Chem Sci. 2015 Jan 1;6(1):804-815.

Kinetically Selective Inhibitors of Histone Deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) as Cognition
Enhancers.

Wagner FF(1), Zhang YL(1), Fass DM(2), Joseph N(3), Gale JP(1), Weïwer M(1),
McCarren P(1), Fisher SL(4), Kaya T(1), Zhao WN(5), Reis SA(5), Hennig KM(5),
Thomas M(1), Lemercier BC(1), Lewis MC(1), Guan JS(3), Moyer MP(1), Scolnick
E(1), Haggarty SJ(5), Tsai LH(3), Holson EB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research; Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT; 7
Cambridge Center, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. (2)Stanley Center for
Psychiatric Research; Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT; 7 Cambridge Center,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA ; SL Fisher Consulting, LLC, PO Box 3052,
Framingham, Massachusetts, USA. (3)Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research; Broad
Institute of Harvard and MIT; 7 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA ;
Picower Institute for Learning and Memory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. (4)SL Fisher
Consulting, LLC, PO Box 3052, Framingham, Massachusetts, USA. (5)Stanley Center
for Psychiatric Research; Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT; 7 Cambridge Center,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA ; Chemical Neurobiology Laboratory, Center for
Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Department of Neurology
and Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Aiming towards the development of novel nootropic therapeutics to address the
cognitive impairment common to a range of brain disorders, we set out to develop 
highly selective small molecule inhibitors of HDAC2, a chromatin modifying
histone deacetylase implicated in memory formation and synaptic plasticity. Novel
ortho-aminoanilide inhibitors were designed and evaluated for their ability to
selectively inhibit HDAC2 versus the other Class I HDACs. Kinetic and
thermodynamic binding properties were essential elements of our design strategy
and two novel classes of ortho-aminoanilides, that exhibit kinetic selectivity
(biased residence time) for HDAC2 versus the highly homologous isoform HDAC1,
were identified. These kinetically selective HDAC2 inhibitors (BRD6688 and
BRD4884) increased H4K12 and H3K9 histone acetylation in primary mouse neuronal
cell culture assays, in the hippocampus of CK-p25 mice, a model of
neurodegenerative disease, and rescued the associated memory deficits of these
mice in a cognition behavioural model. These studies demonstrate for the first
time that selective pharmacological inhibition of HDAC2 is feasible and that
inhibition of the catalytic activity of this enzyme may serve as a therapeutic
approach towards enhancing the learning and memory processes that are affected in
many neurological and psychiatric disorders.

PMCID: PMC4310013
PMID: 25642316  [PubMed]


267. Stem Cells. 2015 May;33(5):1601-17. doi: 10.1002/stem.1949.

Epigenetic regulation contributes to urocortin-enhanced midbrain dopaminergic
neuron differentiation.

Huang HY(1), Chiu TL, Chang HF, Hsu HR, Pang CY, Liew HK, Wang MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Research, Neuro-Medical Scientific Center, Buddhist Tzu 
Chi General Hospital, Hualien, Taiwan.

The production of midbrain dopaminergic (mDA) neurons requires precise extrinsic 
inductive signals and intrinsic transcriptional cascade at a specific time point 
in development. Urocortin (UCN) is a peptide of the corticotropin-releasing
hormone family that mediates various responses to stress. UCN was first cloned
from adult rat midbrain. However, the contribution of UCN to the development of
mDA neurons is poorly understood. Here, we show that UCN is endogenously
expressed in the developing ventral midbrain (VM) and its receptors are exhibited
in Nurr1(+) postmitotic mDA precursors and TH(+) neurons, suggesting possible
roles in regulating their terminal differentiation. UCN treatment increased DA
cell numbers in rat VM precursor cultures by promoting the conversion of Nurr1(+)
precursors into DA neurons. Furthermore, neutralization of secreted UCN with
anti-UCN antibody resulted in a reduction in the number of DA neurons. UCN
induced an abundance of acetylated histone H3 and enhanced late DA regulator
Nurr1, Foxa2, and Pitx3 expressions. Using pharmacological and RNA interference
approaches, we further demonstrated that histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibition
and late transcriptional factors upregulation contribute to UCN-mediated DA
neuron differentiation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses revealed that UCN 
promoted histone acetylation of chromatin surrounding the TH promoter by directly
inhibiting HDAC and releasing of methyl CpG binding protein 2-CoREST-HDAC1
repressor complex from the promoter, ultimately leading to an increase in
Nurr1/coactivators-mediated transcription of TH gene. Moreover, UCN treatment in 
vivo also resulted in increased DA neuron differentiation. These findings suggest
that UCN might contribute to regulate late mDA neuron differentiation during VM
development.

© 2015 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 25641682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Int J Oncol. 2015 Apr;46(4):1659-66. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.2857. Epub 2015 Jan
28.

Naphthazarin enhances ionizing radiation-induced cell cycle arrest and apoptosis 
in human breast cancer cells.

Kim MY(1), Park SJ(1), Shim JW(1), Yang K(1), Kang HS(2), Heo K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center, Dongnam Institute of Radiological and Medical Science
(DIRAMS), Busan 619-953, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Molecular Biology,
College of Natural Sciences, Pusan National University, Busan 609-735, Republic
of Korea.

Naphthazarin (Naph, DHNQ, 5,8-dihydroxy-l,4-naphthoquinone) is one of the
naturally available 1,4-naphthoquinone derivatives that are well-known for their 
anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, antibacterial and antitumor cytotoxic effects in 
cancer cells. Herein, we investigated whether Naph has effects on cell cycle
arrest and apoptosis in MCF-7 human breast cancer cells exposed to ionizing
radiation (IR). Naph reduced the MCF-7 cell viability in a dose-dependent manner.
We also found that Naph and/or IR increased the p53-dependent p21 (CIP/WAF1)
promoter activity. Noteworthy, our ChIP assay results showed that Naph and IR
combined treatment activated the p21 promoter via inhibition of binding of
multi-domain proteins, DNMT1, UHRF1 and HDAC1. Apoptosis and cell cycle analyses 
demonstrated that Naph and IR combined treatment induced cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis in MCF-7 cells. Herein, we showed that Naph treatment enhances
IR-induced cell cycle arrest and death in MCF-7 human breast cancer cells through
the p53-dependent p21 activation mechanism. These results suggest that Naph might
sensitize breast cancer cells to radiotherapy by enhancing the p53-p21 mechanism 
activity.

PMID: 25633658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. J Biol Chem. 2015 Mar 13;290(11):6825-36. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.617258. Epub 2015
Jan 25.

Class I histone deacetylase-mediated repression of the proximal promoter of the
activity-regulated cytoskeleton-associated protein gene regulates its response to
brain-derived neurotrophic factor.

Fukuchi M(1), Nakashima F(1), Tabuchi A(1), Shimotori M(1), Tatsumi S(1), Okuno
H(2), Bito H(2), Tsuda M(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of Medicine and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toyama, 2630 Sugitani, Toyama 930-0194,
Japan and. (2)the Department of Neurochemistry, Graduate School of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan. (3)From the Department of 
Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of Medicine and Pharmaceutical Sciences,
University of Toyama, 2630 Sugitani, Toyama 930-0194, Japan and
tsuda@pha.u-toyama.ac.jp.

We examined the transcriptional regulation of the activity-regulated
cytoskeleton-associated protein gene (Arc), focusing on BDNF-induced Arc
expression in cultured rat cortical cells. Although the synaptic
activity-responsive element (SARE), located -7 kbp upstream of the Arc
transcription start site, responded to NMDA, BDNF, or FGF2, the proximal region
of the promoter (Arc/-1679) was activated by BDNF or FGF2, but not by NMDA,
suggesting the presence of at least two distinct Arc promoter regions, distal and
proximal, that respond to extracellular stimuli. Specificity protein 4 (SP4) and 
early growth response 1 (EGR1) controlled Arc/-1679 transcriptional activity via 
the region encompassing -169 to -37 of the Arc promoter. We found that
trichostatin A (TSA), a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, significantly
enhanced the inductive effects of BDNF or FGF2, but not those of NMDA on Arc
expression. Inhibitors of class I/IIb HDACs, SAHA, and class I HDACs, MS-275, but
not of class II HDACs, MC1568, enhanced BDNF-induced Arc expression. The
enhancing effect of TSA was mediated by the region from -1027 to -1000 bp, to
which serum response factor (SRF) and HDAC1 bound. The binding of HDAC1 to this
region was reduced by TSA. Thus, Arc expression was suppressed by class I
HDAC-mediated mechanisms via chromatin modification of the proximal promoter
whereas the inhibition of HDAC allowed Arc expression to be markedly enhanced in 
response to BDNF or FGF2. These results contribute to our understanding of the
physiological role of Arc expression in neuronal functions such as memory
consolidation.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4358108
PMID: 25623071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Oncol Lett. 2015 Feb;9(2):881-886. Epub 2014 Nov 25.

Activation of the intrinsic apoptosis pathway contributes to the induction of
apoptosis in hepatocellular carcinoma cells by valproic acid.

Yang W(1), Zhao X(2), Pei F(1), Ji M(1), Ma W(3), Wang Y(1), Jiang G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Central Laboratory, Jinan Central Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan,
Shandong 250013, P.R. China. (2)Central Laboratory, Jinan Central Hospital,
Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong 250013, P.R. China ; Central Laboratory,
Shandong Provincial Qianfoshan Hospital, Jinan, Shandong 250014, P.R. China.
(3)Central Laboratory, Shandong Provincial Qianfoshan Hospital, Jinan, Shandong
250014, P.R. China. (4)Key Laboratory for Rare and Uncommon Diseases of Shandong 
Province, Key Medical Laboratory for Tumor Immunology and Chinese Medicine
Immunology of Shandong Province, Institute of Basic Medicine, Shandong Academy of
Medical Sciences, Jinan, Shandong 250062, P.R. China.

The level of histone deacetylation is closely associated with the genesis and
development of tumors, but the antitumor effect and mechanism of the class I
histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACI) valproate acid sodium (VPA) on
hepatocellular carcinoma cells has not been clearly demonstrated. In the present 
study, the antitumor effect and mechanism of VPA were measured in vitro. Firstly,
it was found that, as an HDAC inhibitor, VPA could inhibit HDAC activity and
HDAC1 gene expression in hepatocellular carcinoma cells and, as a result, an
inhibition of cell proliferation was detected by MTT assay. Subsequently, the
cell cycle and cell apoptosis profiles were analyzed using flow cytometry (FCM). 
The expression of the mRNA and protein of cyclins A, D1 and E and P21(Waf/cip1)
was measured by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and FCM analysis 
to determine the molecular mechanism of VPA-induced cell cycle arrest. The
activity and mRNA and protein expression of caspases 3, 8 and 9 were detected to 
determine the apoptotic pathway. Caspase expression was blocked by caspase
inhibitors in order to observe whether the intrinsic or extrinsic pathway
contributed to HepG2 cell apoptosis. The results revealed that the mRNA and
protein expression of cyclins A and D1 was downregulated while the expression of 
P21(Waf/cip1) was upregulated by VPA. The expression of cyclin E was only
slightly affected by VPA. The mRNA and protein expression and activity of
caspases 3 and 9 were upregulated by VPA. By contrast, inhibitors of caspases 3
and 9 could reverse cell apoptosis and there was no notable change in caspase 8
expression in any of these experiments. The intrinsic apoptosis pathway, but not 
the death receptor pathway, contributed to the induction of apoptosis in
hepatocellular carcinoma cells. Furthermore, VPA could inhibit the proliferation 
of hepatocellular carcinoma cells by inducing G1 phase arrest and cell apoptosis.
These effects were attributed to the change in the caspase level.

PMCID: PMC4301473
PMID: 25621063  [PubMed]


271. J Biotechnol. 2015 May 10;201:86-97. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2015.01.005. Epub
2015 Jan 19.

2D-DIGE screening of high-productive CHO cells under glucose limitation--basic
changes in the proteome equipment and hints for epigenetic effects.

Wingens M(1), Gätgens J(2), Schmidt A(1), Albaum SP(3), Büntemeyer H(1), Noll
T(1), Hoffrogge R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Culture Technology, Bielefeld University, Bielefeld,
Germany. (2)IBG-1: Biotechnology; Bioprocesses and Bioanalytics, Research Center 
Jülich, Germany. (3)Bioinformatics Resource Facility, Center for Biotechnology
(CeBiTec), Bielefeld University, Bielefeld, Germany. (4)Institute of Cell Culture
Technology, Bielefeld University, Bielefeld, Germany. Electronic address:
raimund.hoffrogge@uni-bielefeld.de.

CHO derivates (Chinese hamster ovary) belong to the most important mammalian
cells for industrial recombinant protein production. Many efforts have been made 
to improve productivity and stability of CHO cells in bioreactor processes. Here,
we followed up one barely understood phenomenon observed with process
optimizations: a significantly increased cell-specific productivity in late
phases of glucose-limited perfusion cultivations, when glucose (and lactate)
reserves are exhausted. Our aim was to elucidate the cellular activities
connected to the metabolic shift from glucose surplus to glucose limitation
phase. With 2D-DIGE, we compared three stages in a perfusion culture of CHO
cells: the initial growth with high glucose concentration and low lactate
production, the second phase with glucose going to limitation and high lactate
level, and finally the state of glucose limitation and also low lactate
concentration but increased cell-specific productivity. With our proteomic
approach we were able to demonstrate consequences of glucose limitation for the
protein expression machinery which also could play a role for a higher
recombinant protein production. Most interestingly, we detected epigenetic
effects on the level of proteins involved in histone modification (HDAC1/-2, SET,
RBBP7, DDX5). Together with shifts in the protein inventory of energy metabolism,
cytoskeleton and protein expression, a picture emerges of basic changes in the
cellular equipment under long-term glucose limitation of CHO cells.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25612871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. J Diabetes Res. 2014;2014:195739. doi: 10.1155/2014/195739. Epub 2014 Dec 31.

The class I histone deacetylase inhibitor MS-275 prevents pancreatic beta cell
death induced by palmitate.

Plaisance V(1), Rolland L(1), Gmyr V(2), Annicotte JS(1), Kerr-Conte J(2), Pattou
F(2), Abderrahmani A(1).

Author information: 
(1)European Genomic Institute for Diabetes (EGID) FR 3508, University of Lille,
CNRS UMR 8199, and Faculty of Medicine West, 1 Place de Verdun, 59045 Lille,
France. (2)Department of Endocrine Surgery, Lille University Hospital, INSERM UMR
859, University of Lille, EGID FR 3508, Biotherapies for Diabetes, Lille, France.

Elevation of the dietary saturated fatty acid palmitate contributes to the
reduction of functional beta cell mass in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes.
The diabetogenic effect of palmitate is achieved by increasing beta cell death
through induction of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress markers including
activating transcription factor 3 (Atf3) and CAAT/enhancer-binding protein
homologous protein-10 (Chop). In this study, we investigated whether treatment of
beta cells with the MS-275, a HDAC1 and HDAC3 activity inhibitor which prevents
beta cell death elicited by cytokines, is beneficial for combating beta cell
dysfunction caused by palmitate. We show that culture of isolated human islets
and MIN6 cells with MS-275 reduced apoptosis evoked by palmitate. The protective 
effect of MS-275 was associated with the attenuation of the expression of Atf3
and Chop. Silencing of HDAC3, but not of HDAC1, mimicked the effects of MS-275 on
the expression of the two ER stress markers and apoptosis. These data point to
HDAC3 as a potential drug target for preserving beta cells against lipotoxicity
in diabetes.

PMCID: PMC4294305
PMID: 25610877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Feb 18;43(3):1593-608. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv024. Epub 2015
Jan 21.

Global Oct4 target gene analysis reveals novel downstream PTEN and TNC genes
required for drug-resistance and metastasis in lung cancer.

Tang YA(1), Chen CH(2), Sun HS(3), Cheng CP(4), Tseng VS(5), Hsu HS(6), Su WC(7),
Lai WW(8), Wang YC(9).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, National Cheng Kung University, No.1,
University Road, Tainan 701, Taiwan Department of Pharmacology, National Cheng
Kung University, No.1, University Road, Tainan 701, Taiwan. (2)Department of
Pharmacology, National Cheng Kung University, No.1, University Road, Tainan 701, 
Taiwan. (3)Institute of Molecular Medicine, College of Medicine, National Cheng
Kung University, No.1, University Road, Tainan 701, Taiwan. (4)Department of
Computer Science and Information Engineering, National Cheng Kung University,
No.1, University Road, Tainan 701, Taiwan. (5)Department of Computer Science and 
Information Engineering, National Cheng Kung University, No.1, University Road,
Tainan 701, Taiwan Institute of Medical Informatics, College of Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science, National Cheng Kung University, No.1,
University Road, Tainan 701, Taiwan. (6)Division of Thoracic Surgery, Taipei
Veterans General Hospital; Institute of Emergency and Critical Care Medicine,
National Yang-Ming University School of Medicine, No.155, Sec.2, Linong Street,
Taipei 112, Taiwan. (7)Department of Internal Medicine, National Cheng Kung
University Hospital, No.138, Sheng Li Road, Tainan 704, Taiwan. (8)Department of 
Surgery, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, No.138, Sheng Li Road, Tainan
704, Taiwan. (9)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, National Cheng Kung
University, No.1, University Road, Tainan 701, Taiwan Department of Pharmacology,
National Cheng Kung University, No.1, University Road, Tainan 701, Taiwan
ycw5798@mail.ncku.edu.tw.

Overexpression of Oct4, a stemness gene encoding a transcription factor, has been
reported in several cancers. However, the mechanism by which Oct4 directs
transcriptional program that leads to somatic cancer progression remains unclear.
In this study, we provide mechanistic insight into Oct4-driven transcriptional
network promoting drug-resistance and metastasis in lung cancer cell, animal and 
clinical studies. Through an integrative approach combining our Oct4
chromatin-immunoprecipitation sequencing and ENCODE datasets, we identified the
genome-wide binding regions of Oct4 in lung cancer at promoter and enhancer of
numerous genes involved in critical pathways which promote tumorigenesis.
Notably, PTEN and TNC were previously undefined targets of Oct4. In addition,
novel Oct4-binding motifs were found to overlap with DNA elements for Sp1
transcription factor. We provided evidence that Oct4 suppressed PTEN in an
Sp1-dependent manner by recruitment of HDAC1/2, leading to activation of AKT
signaling and drug-resistance. In contrast, Oct4 transactivated TNC independent
of Sp1 and resulted in cancer metastasis. Clinically, lung cancer patients with
Oct4 high, PTEN low and TNC high expression profile significantly correlated with
poor disease-free survival. Our study reveals a critical Oct4-driven
transcriptional program that promotes lung cancer progression, illustrating the
therapeutic potential of targeting Oc4 transcriptionally regulated genes.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4330385
PMID: 25609695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. J Inflamm (Lond). 2014 Dec 20;11(1):43. doi: 10.1186/s12950-014-0043-2.
eCollection 2014.

The histone deacetylase Hdac1 regulates inflammatory signalling in intestinal
epithelial cells.

Gonneaud A(1), Gagné JM(1), Turgeon N(1), Asselin C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Département d'anatomie et biologie cellulaire, Faculté de médecine et des
sciences de la santé, Pavillon de recherche appliquée sur le cancer, Université
de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec J1E 4K8 Canada.

BACKGROUND: It has recently been found that both nuclear epithelial-expressed
histone deacetylases Hdac1 and Hdac2 are important to insure intestinal
homeostasis and control the mucosal inflammatory response in vivo. In addition,
HDAC inhibitors modulate epithelial cell inflammatory responses in cancer cells. 
However, little is known of the specific role of different HDAC, notably Hdac1,
in the regulation of inflammatory gene expression in intestinal epithelial cells 
(IEC).
METHODS: We investigated the role of Hdac1 in non-transformed IEC-6 rat cells
infected with lentiviral vectors expressing specific Hdac1 shRNAs, to suppress
Hdac1 expression. Proliferation was assessed by cell counting. Deacetylase
activity was measured with a colorimetric HDAC assay. Cells were treated with
IL-1ß and/or the JQ1 bromodomain acetyl-binding inhibitor. Nuclear protein levels
of Hdac1, Hdac2, phosphorylated or unphosphorylated NF-<U+03BA>B p65 or C/EBPß, and
NF-<U+03BA>B p50 and actin were determined by Western blot. Chemokine and acute phase
protein expression was assessed by semi-quantitative RT-PCR analysis. Secreted
cytokine and chemokine levels were assessed with a protein array. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments were done to assess RNA polymerase II
recruitment.
RESULTS: Reduced Hdac1 protein levels led to Hdac2 protein increases and
decreased cell proliferation. Hdac1 depletion prolonged nuclear IL-1ß-induced
phosphorylation of NF-<U+03BA>B p65 protein on Ser536 as opposed to total p65, and of
C/EBPß on Ser105. In addition, semi-quantitative RT-PCR analysis revealed three
patterns of expression caused by Hdac1 depletion, namely increased basal and
IL-1ß-stimulated levels (Hp, Kng1), increased IL-1ß-stimulated levels (Cxcl2) and
decreased basal levels with normal IL-1ß induction levels (Ccl2, Ccl5, Cxcl1,
C3). Secreted cytokine and chemokine measurements confirmed that Hdac1 played
roles both as an IL-1ß signalling repressor and activator. Hdac1 depletion did
not alter the JQ1 dependent inhibition of basal and IL-1ß-induced inflammatory
gene expression. Hdac1 depletion led to decreased basal levels of RNA polymerase 
II enrichment on the Ccl2 promoter, as opposed to the Gapdh promoter, correlating
with decreased Ccl2 basal mRNA expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Hdac1 is a major nuclear HDAC controlling IL-1ß-dependent
inflammatory response in IEC, notably by regulating gene-specific transcriptional
responses. Hdac1 may be important in restricting basal and inflammatory-induced
gene levels to defined ranges of expression.

PMCID: PMC4299484
PMID: 25606026  [PubMed]


275. Reprod Domest Anim. 2015 Apr;50(2):292-8. doi: 10.1111/rda.12487. Epub 2015 Jan
21.

Effects of co-culture of cumulus oocyte complexes with denuded oocytes during in 
vitro maturation on the developmental competence of cloned bovine embryos.

Ha AN(1), Fakruzzaman M, Lee KL, Bang JI, Deb GK, Wang Z, Kong IK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Division of Applied Life Science (BK21 Plus),
Gyeongsang National University, Jinju, Korea.

This study evaluated the effects of co-culture of immature cumulus oocyte
complexes (COCs) with denuded immature oocytes (DO) during in vitro maturation on
the developmental competence and quality of cloned bovine embryos. We
demonstrated that developmental competence, judged by the blastocyst formation
rate, was significantly higher in the co-cultured somatic cell nuclear transfer
(SCNT+DO, 37.1 ± 1.1%) group than that in the non-co-cultured somatic cell
nuclear transfer (SCNT-DO, 25.1 ± 0.9%) group and was very similar to that in the
control IVF (IVF, 38.8 ± 2.8%) group. Moreover, the total cell number per
blastocyst in the SCNT+DO group (101.7 ± 6.2) was higher than that in the SCNT-DO
group (81.7 ± 4.3), while still less than that in the IVF group (133.3 ± 6.0).
Furthermore, our data showed that mRNA levels of the methylation-related genes
DNMT1 and DNMT3a in the SCNT+DO group were similar to that in the IVF group,
while they were significantly higher in the SCNT-DO group. Similarly, while the
mRNA levels of the deacetylation-related genes HDAC2 and HDAC3 were significantly
higher in the SCNT-DO group, they were comparable between the IVF and SCNT+DO
groups. However, the mRNA levels of HDAC1 and DNMT3B were significantly higher in
the SCNT+DO group than in the other groups. In conclusion, the present study
demonstrated that co-culture of COCs with DO improves the in vitro developmental 
competence and quality of cloned embryos, as evidenced by increased total cell
number.

© 2015 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

PMID: 25605137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Oncotarget. 2015 Mar 10;6(7):4863-87.

HDAC1,2 inhibition impairs EZH2- and BBAP-mediated DNA repair to overcome
chemoresistance in EZH2 gain-of-function mutant diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Johnson DP(1), Spitz GS(2), Tharkar S(2), Quayle SN(3), Shearstone JR(3), Jones
S(3), McDowell ME(2), Wellman H(2), Tyler JK(4), Cairns BR(1), Chandrasekharan
MB(2), Bhaskara S(2,)(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. (2)Department of Radiation
Oncology, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt 
Lake City, UT, USA. (3)Acetylon Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Gain-of-function mutations in the catalytic site of EZH2 (Enhancer of Zeste
Homologue 2), is observed in about 22% of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL)
cases. Here we show that selective inhibition of histone deacetylase 1,2
(HDAC1,2) activity using a small molecule inhibitor causes cytotoxic or
cytostatic effects in EZH2 gain-of-function mutant (EZH2GOF) DLBCL cells. Our
results show that blocking the activity of HDAC1,2 increases global H3K27ac
without causing a concomitant global decrease in H3K27me3 levels. Our data shows 
that inhibition of HDAC1,2 is sufficient to decrease H3K27me3 present at DSBs,
decrease DSB repair and activate the DNA damage response in these cells. In
addition to increased H3K27me3, we found that the EZH2GOF DLBCL cells overexpress
another chemotherapy resistance factor - B-lymphoma and BAL-associated protein
(BBAP). BBAP monoubiquitinates histone H4K91, a residue that is also subjected to
acetylation. Our results show that selective inhibition of HDAC1,2 increases
H4K91ac, decreases BBAP-mediated H4K91 monoubiquitination, impairs BBAP-dependent
DSB repair and sensitizes the refractory EZH2GOF DLBCL cells to treatment with
doxorubicin, a chemotherapy agent. Hence, selective HDAC1,2 inhibition provides a
novel DNA repair mechanism-based therapeutic approach as it can overcome both
EZH2- and BBAP-mediated DSB repair in the EZH2GOF DLBCL cells.

PMCID: PMC4467121
PMID: 25605023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Reprod Domest Anim. 2015 Apr;50(2):214-20. doi: 10.1111/rda.12472. Epub 2015 Jan 
21.

Early cleavage of handmade cloned buffalo (Bubalus bubalis) embryos is an
indicator of their developmental competence and quality.

Kaith S(1), Saini M, Raja AK, Sahare AA, Jyotsana B, Madheshiya P, Palta P,
Chauhan MS, Manik RS, Singla SK.

Author information: 
(1)Embryo Biotechnology Laboratory, Animal Biotechnology Centre, National Dairy
Research Institute, Karnal, India.

Following IVF, embryos which cleave early have been shown to have higher
developmental competence and quality than those that cleave relatively later
across many species. We investigated the effect of time of cleavage on the
developmental competence, quality, epigenetic status and gene expression in
buffalo embryos produced by handmade cloning (HMC). Following classification of
embryos as early cleaving (EC) or late cleaving (LC) based on whether they had
cleaved or not at 24 h post in vitro culture, 54% (164/303) were found to be EC
and the rest to be LC. The blastocyst rate (58.1 ± 3.4 vs 36.9 ± 1.6%, p < 0.01) 
and the total cell number (285.5 ± 41.9 vs 141.4 ± 36.1, p < 0.05) were higher,
whereas the apoptotic index (3.6 ± 0.6 vs 12.2 ± 1.7, p < 0.01) and the global
level of H3K9ac and H3K27me3 were lower (p < 0.05) in the blastocysts produced
from EC than in those produced from LC embryos. The relative transcript level of 
CASPASE3, CASPASE7, DNMT1, DNMT3a and CDX2 was higher (p < 0.05) and that of SOX2
was lower (p < 0.05) in blastocysts produced from LC than in those produced from 
EC embryos, whereas the expression level of CASPASE6, P53, P21, HDAC1, OCT4 and
NANOG was not significantly different between the two groups. These results show 
that (i) following HMC, blastocysts produced from embryos that cleave early
differ from those produced from late cleaving embryos in terms of epigenetic
status and expression level of many important apoptosis-, pluripotency-,
trophectoderm- and epigenetics-related genes, and (ii) EC embryos are superior to
LC embryos in view of their higher developmental competence and quality.

© 2015 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

PMID: 25604613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Jan 15;21(2):428-38. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-1150.

DUSP1 expression induced by HDAC1 inhibition mediates gefitinib sensitivity in
non-small cell lung cancers.

Lin YC(1), Lin YC(2), Shih JY(3), Huang WJ(4), Chao SW(4), Chang YL(5), Chen
CC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan. (2)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National
Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. Division of Oncology and Hematology,
Department of Internal Medicine, Far-Eastern Memorial Hospital, New Taipei City, 
Taiwan. Department of Oncology, National Taiwan University Hospital and National 
Taiwan University, College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Department of Internal
Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital and National Taiwan University,
College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Graduate Institute of Pharmacognosy,
Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. (5)Department of Pathology, National
Taiwan University Hospital and National Taiwan University, College of Medicine,
Taipei, Taiwan. (6)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National
Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. chingchowchen@ntu.edu.tw.

PURPOSE: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a leading cause of cancer-related 
death worldwide. Patients with NSCLC with EGFR-activating mutation benefit
greatly by gefitinib, an EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor. However, acquired
resistance limits its clinical use. Histone deacetylases (HDAC) are oncoproteins 
associated with cancer progression and drug resistance. Here, we disclosed that
inhibition of HDAC1 induced protein phosphatase DUSP1 upregulation to overcome
gefitinib-acquired resistance.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The effect of HDAC1 inhibition restored gefitinib
sensitivity was assessed by in vitro MTT and apoptotic assays, and in vivo
xenograft and orthotopic lung cancer mouse models. Protein phosphatase array was 
used to detect DUSP1 expression. Immunohistochemical staining and quantitative
PCR were used to analyze DUSP1 expression in clinical NSCLC specimens.
RESULTS: Gefitinib-resistant NSCLC cells showed HDAC1 overexpression, and its
knockdown sensitized resistant cells to gefitinib in vitro and in preclinical
models through DUSP1 expression. Overexpression of DUSP1 in resistant cells
restored gefitinib sensitivity by inhibiting EGFR signaling and inducing
apoptosis, whereas its knockdown in sensitive cells conferred gefitinib
resistance. A novel HDAC inhibitor, WJ-26210-2, in combination with gefitinib
upregulated DUSP1 expression to exert in vitro and in vivo synergistic effect on 
inactivation of EGFR signaling, growth inhibition, and apoptosis. Clinically,
high DUSP1 level was correlated with delayed emergence of gefitinib-acquired
resistance.
CONCLUSIONS: Decreased DUSP1 might be a mechanism responsible for gefitinib
resistance, and DUSP1 might be a biomarker for gefitinib efficacy. HDAC1
inhibition-induced DUSP1 upregulation could be a promising strategy to overcome
gefitinib-acquired resistance. Clin Cancer Res; 21(2); 428-38. ©2015 AACR.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25593344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Nat Med. 2015 Feb;21(2):150-8. doi: 10.1038/nm.3777. Epub 2015 Jan 12.

Orphan nuclear receptor NR4A1 regulates transforming growth factor-ß signaling
and fibrosis.

Palumbo-Zerr K(1), Zerr P(1), Distler A(1), Fliehr J(1), Mancuso R(1), Huang
J(1), Mielenz D(2), Tomcik M(3), Fürnrohr BG(4), Scholtysek C(1), Dees C(1),
Beyer C(1), Krönke G(1), Metzger D(5), Distler O(6), Schett G(1), Distler JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg,
Erlangen, Germany. (2)Division of Molecular Immunology, Department of Internal
Medicine III, Nikolaus-Fiebiger Centre, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg,
Erlangen, Germany. (3)1] Department of Internal Medicine III, University of
Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany. [2] Institute of Rheumatology and
Department of Rheumatology, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, 
Czech Republic. (4)1] Division of Molecular Immunology, Department of Internal
Medicine III, Nikolaus-Fiebiger Centre, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg,
Erlangen, Germany. [2] Division of Biological Chemistry, Medical University
Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria. (5)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie
Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS UMR7104/INSERM U 964, Université de Strasbourg,
Illkirch, France. (6)Center for Research of Systemic Autoimmune Diseases,
University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2015 Mar;14(3):163.

Mesenchymal responses are an essential aspect of tissue repair. Failure to
terminate this repair process correctly, however, results in fibrosis and organ
dysfunction. Therapies that block fibrosis and restore tissue homeostasis are not
yet available for clinical use. Here we characterize the nuclear receptor NR4A1
as an endogenous inhibitor of transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) signaling and 
as a potential target for anti-fibrotic therapies. NR4A1 recruits a repressor
complex comprising SP1, SIN3A, CoREST, LSD1, and HDAC1 to TGF-ß target genes,
thereby limiting pro-fibrotic TGF-ß effects. Even though temporary upregulation
of TGF-ß in physiologic wound healing induces NR4A1 expression and thereby
creates a negative feedback loop, the persistent activation of TGF-ß signaling in
fibrotic diseases uses AKT- and HDAC-dependent mechanisms to inhibit NR4A1
expression and activation. Small-molecule NR4A1 agonists can overcome this lack
of active NR4A1 and inhibit experimentally-induced skin, lung, liver, and kidney 
fibrosis in mice. Our data demonstrate a regulatory role of NR4A1 in TGF-ß
signaling and fibrosis, providing the first proof of concept for targeting NR4A1 
in fibrotic diseases.

PMID: 25581517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Diabetes. 2015 Jun;64(6):2069-81. doi: 10.2337/db14-1206. Epub 2015 Jan 9.

Enhancement of hypothalamic STAT3 acetylation by nuclear receptor Nur77 dictates 
leptin sensitivity.

Chen Y(1), Wu R(1), Chen HZ(1), Xiao Q(1), Wang WJ(1), He JP(1), Li XX(1), Yu
XW(1), Li L(1), Wang P(2), Wan XC(2), Tian XH(2), Li SJ(3), Yu X(3), Wu Q(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, School of Life Sciences,
Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian Province, China. (2)Department of Neurosurgery,
Zhongshan Hospital, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian Province, China. (3)State
Key Laboratory of Neuroscience, Institute of Neuroscience, Shanghai Institutes
for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, Shanghai
Province, China. (4)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, School of
Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian Province, China
qiaow@xmu.edu.cn.

Leptin, an anorexigenic hormone in the hypothalamus, suppresses food intake and
increases energy expenditure. Failure to respond to leptin will lead to obesity. 
Here, we discovered that nuclear receptor Nur77 expression is lower in the
hypothalamus of obese mice compared with normal mice. Injection of leptin results
in significant reduction in body weight in wild-type mice but not in Nur77
knockout (KO) littermates or mice with specific Nur77 knockdown in the
hypothalamus. Hypothalamic Nur77 not only participates in leptin central control 
of food intake but also expands leptin's reach to liver and adipose tissues to
regulate lipid metabolism. Nur77 facilitates signal transducer and activator of
transcription 3 (STAT3) acetylation by recruiting acetylase p300 and
disassociating deacetylase histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) to enhance the
transcriptional activity of STAT3 and consequently modulates the expression of
downstream gene Pomc in the hypothalamus. Nur77 deficiency compromises response
to leptin in mice fed a high-fat diet. Severe leptin resistance in Nur77 KO mice 
with increased appetite, lower energy expenditure, and hyperleptinemia
contributes to aging-induced obesity. Our study opens a new avenue for regulating
metabolism with Nur77 as the positive modulator in the leptin-driven antiobesity 
in the hypothalamus.

© 2015 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long
as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the
work is not altered.

PMID: 25576055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Cell Biol Int. 2015 Apr;39(4):446-56. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10413. Epub 2015 Jan 5.

c-Abl induces stabilization of histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) in a kinase
activity-dependent manner.

Aoyama K(1), Yamaguchi N, Yuki R, Morii M, Kubota S, Hirata K, Abe K, Honda T,
Kuga T, Hashimoto Y, Tomonaga T, Yamaguchi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Chiba University, Chiba, 260-8675, Japan.

c-Abl is a non-receptor-type tyrosine kinase that regulates various cellular
events, including cell proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis, through
phosphorylation of cytoplasmic and nuclear targets. Although we showed that c-Abl
induces histone deacetylation, the molecular mechanisms of this phenomenon are
largely unknown. Here, we analyzed the effect of c-Abl on the expression of
histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), because c-Abl was shown to be involved in
maintenance of nuclear protein levels of HDAC1. Co-transfection of HDAC1 with
c-Abl increased the levels of HDAC1 protein in a kinase activity-dependent manner
without affecting its mRNA levels. Treatment with the proteasome inhibitor MG132 
increased protein levels of HDAC1 in cells transfected with HDAC1 but not in
cells co-transfected with HDAC1 and c-Abl. Among class I HDACs, knockdown of
endogenous c-Abl preferentially suppressed endogenous protein levels of HDAC1,
suggesting that c-Abl stabilizes HDAC1 protein by inhibiting its proteasomal
degradation. Subcellular fractionation showed that the stabilization of HDAC1 by 
c-Abl occurred in the nucleus. Despite the fact that HDAC1 was phosphorylated by 
co-expression with c-Abl, stabilization of HDAC1 by c-Abl was not affected by
mutations in its sites phosphorylated by c-Abl. Co-expression with HDAC1 and
nuclear-targeted c-Abl did not affect HDAC1 stabilization. Therefore, these
results suggest that c-Abl induces HDAC1 stabilization possibly through
phosphorylation of a cytoplasmic target that is involved in proteasomal
degradation of HDAC1.

© 2015 International Federation for Cell Biology.

PMID: 25561363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Am J Otolaryngol. 2015 Mar-Apr;36(2):242-8. doi: 10.1016/j.amjoto.2014.11.003.
Epub 2014 Nov 20.

Histone deacetylase inhibitor sodium butyrate attenuates gentamicin-induced
hearing loss in vivo.

Wang J(1), Wang Y(2), Chen X(2), Zhang PZ(2), Shi ZT(2), Wen LT(2), Qiu JH(2),
Chen FQ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Xijing Hospital, Fourth
Military Medical University, 17 Changle Western Road, Xi'an, China; Department of
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Xi'an Children's Hospital, Shanxi, Xi'an,
China. (2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Xijing Hospital,
Fourth Military Medical University, 17 Changle Western Road, Xi'an, China.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Xijing Hospital, Fourth
Military Medical University, 17 Changle Western Road, Xi'an, China. Electronic
address: chenfq2@yahoo.com.

OBJECTIVE: Although histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibition has been shown to
protect against gentamicin (GM)-induced hearing loss in vitro, its protective
effect has not been proven in vivo. In the present study, the aim was to
investigate the protective effect of sodium butyrate (NaB), a specific HDAC
inhibitor, on GM-induced ototoxicity in vivo.
METHODS: Forty 8-week-old albino guinea pigs were divided into two experimental
groups. Group 1 (n=10) underwent bilateral ear surgery to place sponges
(0.3mm(3)) permeated with NaB (10µl, 100mg/ml) and physiological saline (10µl;
control) in the right and left round window niches, respectively. The sponges
were left in place for 15days to evaluate the effects of NaB at the applied
concentration. Group 2 (n=30) underwent the same bilateral ear surgery described 
for Group 1, except three days after surgery, the animals received intramuscular 
GM injections (200mg/kg/day) for 5 consecutive days. Seven days after the final
GM injection, the protective effects of NaB were examined.
RESULTS: After 15days of NaB treatment (10µl, 100mg/ml), an increase in histone
acetylation was detected in Corti organ samples. Auditory brainstem response
(ABR) threshold shifts and hair cell loss were also reduced in NaB-treated ears
after GM administration. Furthermore, GM treatment increased HDAC1 expression in 
outer hair cells (OHCs) in vivo, and NaB blocked this action.
CONCLUSION: GM increases HDAC1 expression in OHCs, and NaB is able to block this 
action. Thus, it appears that the HDAC inhibitor, NaB, attenuates GM-induced
hearing loss in guinea pigs.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25554003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Immune Netw. 2014 Dec;14(6):321-7. doi: 10.4110/in.2014.14.6.321. Epub 2014 Dec
22.

SUMO Proteins are not Involved in TGF-ß1-induced, Smad3/4-mediated Germline a
Transcription, but PIASy Suppresses it in CH12F3-2A B Cells.

Lee SH(1), Kim PH(2), Oh SM(3), Park JH(3), Yoo YC(1), Lee J(1), Park SR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, Konyang University, Daejeon
302-718, Korea. (2)Department of Molecular Bioscience, School of Biomedical
Science, Kangwon National University, Chuncheon 200-701, Korea. (3)Department of 
Biochemistry, College of Medicine, Konyang University, Daejeon 302-718, Korea.

TGF-ß induces IgA class switching by B cells. We previously reported that Smad3
and Smad4, pivotal TGF-ß signal-transducing transcription factors, mediate
germline (GL) a transcription induced by TGF-ß1, resulting in IgA switching by
mouse B cells. Post-translational sumoylation of Smad3 and Smad4 regulates
TGF-ß-induced transcriptional activation in certain cell types. In the present
study, we investigated the effect of sumoylation on TGF-ß1-induced,
Smad3/4-mediated GLa transcription and IgA switching by mouse B cell line,
CH12F3-2A. Overexpression of small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO)-1, SUMO-2 or
SUMO-3 did not affect TGF-ß1-induced, Smad3/4-mediated GLa promoter activity,
expression of endogenous GLa transcripts, surface IgA expression, and IgA
production. Next, we tested the effect of the E3 ligase PIASy on TGF-ß1-induced, 
Smad3/4-mediated GLa promoter activity. We found that PIASy overexpression
suppresses the GLa promoter activity in cooperation with histone deacetylase 1.
Taken together, these results suggest that SUMO itself does not affect regulation
of GLa transcription and IgA switching induced by TGF-ß1/Smad3/4, while PIASy
acts as a repressor.

PMCID: PMC4275389
PMID: 25550698  [PubMed]


284. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 30;9(12):e116252. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116252.
eCollection 2014.

Activation of the RhoB signaling pathway by thyroid hormone receptor ß in thyroid
cancer cells.

Ichijo S(1), Furuya F(1), Shimura H(2), Hayashi Y(3), Takahashi K(1), Ohta K(1), 
Kobayashi T(1), Kitamura K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Interdisciplinary Graduate School of
Medicine and Engineering, University of Yamanashi, Yamanashi, Japan.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Fukushima Medical University, Fukushima,
Japan. (3)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Division of Molecular and
Cellular Adaptation, Research Institute of Environmental Medicine, Nagoya
University, Nagoya, Japan.

Thyroid hormone receptor (TR) mediates the crucial effects of the thyroid hormone
(T3) on cellular growth, development, and differentiation. Decreased expression
or inactivating somatic mutations of TRs have been found in human cancers of the 
liver, breast, lung, and thyroid. The mechanisms of TR-associated carcinogenesis 
are still not clear. To establish the function of TRß in thyroid cancer cell
proliferation, we constructed a recombinant adenovirus vector, AdTRß, which
expresses human TRß1 cDNA. Thyroid cancer cell lines in which TRß protein levels 
were significantly decreased as compared to intact thyroid tissues were infected 
with AdTRß and the function of TRß on cell proliferation and migration was
analyzed. Ligand-bound TRß induced HDAC1 and HDAC3 dissociation from, and histone
acetylation associated with the RhoB promoter and enhanced the expression of RhoB
mRNA and protein. In AdTRß-infected cells, T3 and farnesyl transferase inhibitor 
(FTI)-treatment induced the distribution of RhoB on the cell membrane and
enhanced the abundance of active GTP-bound RhoB. This RhoB protein led to
p21-associated cell-cycle arrest in the G0/G1 phase, following inhibition of cell
proliferation and invasion. Conversely, lowering cellular RhoB by small
interfering RNA knockdown in AdTRß-infected cells led to downregulation of p21
and inhibited cell-cycle arrest. The growth of BHP18-21v tumor xenografts in vivo
was significantly inhibited by AdTRß injection with FTIs-treatment, as compared
to control virus-injected tumors. This novel signaling pathway triggered by
ligand-bound TRß provides insight into possible mechanisms of proliferation and
invasion of thyroid cancer and may provide new therapeutic targets for thyroid
cancers.

PMCID: PMC4280201
PMID: 25548921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Breast Cancer. 2014 Dec;17(4):323-31. doi: 10.4048/jbc.2014.17.4.323. Epub 2014
Dec 26.

Expression of Histone Deacetylases HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3, and HDAC6 in Invasive
Ductal Carcinomas of the Breast.

Seo J(1), Min SK(1), Park HR(1), Kim DH(1), Kwon MJ(1), Kim LS(2), Ju YS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hallym University Sacred Heart Hospital, Hallym
University College of Medicine, Anyang, Korea. (2)Division of Breast and
Endocrine Surgery, Hallym University Sacred Heart Hospital, Hallym University
College of Medicine, Anyang, Korea. (3)Department of Occupation and Environmental
Medicine, Hallym University Sacred Heart Hospital, Hallym University College of
Medicine, Anyang, Korea.

PURPOSE: DNA deacetylation by histone deacetylase (HDAC) is an important
mechanism involved in the oncogenic tumorigenesis of breast cancer. Previous
studies have reported an association of the estrogen receptor (ER) with HDACs and
demonstrated the efficacy of HDAC inhibitors for the treatment of breast cancers 
via in vitro experiments. In this study, we examined the association of HDAC
expression with clinicopathological parameters and disease-specific survival.
METHODS: Immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis of HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3, and HDAC6 was
performed using tissue microarrays in 300 invasive ductal carcinomas. IHC scoring
was determined by multiplication of the intensity (0 to 3) and the proportion (0 
to 4) of staining, and we classified tumors into low- and high-HDAC expression
groups.
RESULTS: High expression of HDAC1 was correlated with the molecular subtype
(p=0.001) and human epidermal growth factor 2 (HER2) amplification (p=0.012).
High expression of HDAC6 was correlated with a younger age (p<0.001), ER
expression (p=0.025), progesterone receptor expression (p=0.034), molecular
subtype (p=0.023), and HER2 amplification (p=0.011). High HDAC1 expression was
correlated with luminal A tumors (p=0.001), while high HDAC6 expression was more 
common in luminal B tumors (p=0.023). Although the expression of HDACs did not
exhibit prognostic significance in the entire cohort, high expression of HDAC1
and HDAC6 was associated with improved overall survival (OS) in patients with
ER-positive tumors (p=0.017 and p=0.029, respectively), and high expression of
HDAC2 was correlated with improved OS in ER-negative tumors (p=0.048) on
univariate analysis. Furthermore, high HDAC6 expression was associated with
improved disease-free survival (p=0.048) on multivariate analysis.
CONCLUSION: HDAC1 expression is significantly correlated with the molecular
subtypes of tumors, with the highest expression being observed in luminal A
tumors. HDAC6 is a significantly correlated with ER expression and the molecular 
subtype, thereby supporting the estrogen regulatory property of HDAC6. HDAC1 and 
HDAC6 expression are good prognostic factors for ER-positive tumors.

PMCID: PMC4278050
PMID: 25548579  [PubMed]


286. ACS Chem Biol. 2015 Mar 20;10(3):687-92. doi: 10.1021/cb500767c. Epub 2015 Jan 2.

Computational design of a time-dependent histone deacetylase 2 selective
inhibitor.

Zhou J(1), Li M(1), Chen N(1), Wang S(2), Luo HB(1), Zhang Y(2,)(3), Wu R(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, 
P.R. China. (2)Department of Chemistry, New York University, New York, New York 
10003, United States. (3)§NYU-ECNU Center for Computational Chemistry at NYU
Shanghai, Shanghai 200062, P.R. China.

Development of isoform-selective histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors is of
great biological and medical interest. Among 11 zinc-dependent HDAC isoforms, it 
is particularly challenging to achieve isoform inhibition selectivity between
HDAC1 and HDAC2 due to their very high structural similarities. In this work, by 
developing and applying a novel de novo reaction-mechanism-based inhibitor design
strategy to exploit the reactivity difference, we have discovered the first
HDAC2-selective inhibitor, ß-hydroxymethyl chalcone. Our bioassay experiments
show that this new compound has a unique time-dependent selective inhibition on
HDAC2, leading to about 20-fold isoform-selectivity against HDAC1. Furthermore,
our ab initio QM/MM molecular dynamics simulations, a state-of-the-art approach
to study reactions in biological systems, have elucidated how the ß-hydroxymethyl
chalcone can achieve the distinct time-dependent inhibition toward HDAC2.

PMCID: PMC4372102
PMID: 25546141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol. 2015 Jan;39(1):292-9. doi: 10.1016/j.etap.2014.11.032.
Epub 2014 Dec 10.

Influence of the carbamate fungicide benomyl on the gene expression and activity 
of aromatase in the human breast carcinoma cell line MCF-7.

Kawaratani Y(1), Matsuoka T(2), Hirata Y(3), Fukata N(4), Nagaoka Y(5), Uesato
S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science and Biotechnology, Faculty of Chemistry, Materials 
and Bioengineering, Kansai University, Suita, Osaka 564-8680, Japan. Electronic
address: hoechst.atanpe@gmail.com. (2)Department of Life Science and
Biotechnology, Faculty of Chemistry, Materials and Bioengineering, Kansai
University, Suita, Osaka 564-8680, Japan. Electronic address:
audaciapaula@gmail.com. (3)Department of Life Science and Biotechnology, Faculty 
of Chemistry, Materials and Bioengineering, Kansai University, Suita, Osaka
564-8680, Japan. Electronic address: y.hirata@gly.oups.ac.jp. (4)Department of
Life Science and Biotechnology, Faculty of Chemistry, Materials and
Bioengineering, Kansai University, Suita, Osaka 564-8680, Japan. Electronic
address: fukanao0921@gmail.com. (5)Department of Life Science and Biotechnology, 
Faculty of Chemistry, Materials and Bioengineering, Kansai University, Suita,
Osaka 564-8680, Japan. Electronic address: ynagaoka@kansai-u.ac.jp. (6)Department
of Life Science and Biotechnology, Faculty of Chemistry, Materials and
Bioengineering, Kansai University, Suita, Osaka 564-8680, Japan. Electronic
address: uesato@kansai-u.ac.jp.

The carbamate fungicide benomyl reportedly inhibited the growth of the human
breast cancer cell line MCF-7 by inducing apoptosis. However, influence of
benomyl on the expression and activity of aromatase of MCF-7 cells remains to be 
examined, since benomyl was identified as an endocrine disruptor. We here
confirmed through cell cycle analysis and immunofluorescence staining that
benomyl damaged microtubules and caused apoptosis. We also found that benomyl
inhibited histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1 and accumulated acetylated histone H3 in
MCF-7 cells. Additionally, benomyl enhanced the levels of aromatase protein and
mRNA, albeit at high concentrations. It is thus likely that benomyl enhanced the 
promoter activity of the aromatase gene via acetylation of histone H3 as does the
HDAC inhibitor Vorinostat. In conclusion, benomyl remains to be a risk factor as 
an endocrine disruptor for breast cancer.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25543211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jan 6;112(1):E56-64. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1415195112.
Epub 2014 Dec 22.

HDAC inhibition imparts beneficial transgenerational effects in Huntington's
disease mice via altered DNA and histone methylation.

Jia H(1), Morris CD(1), Williams RM(2), Loring JF(2), Thomas EA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience and. (2)Chemical
Physiology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037. (3)Departments of
Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience and bthomas@scripps.edu.

Increasing evidence has demonstrated that epigenetic factors can profoundly
influence gene expression and, in turn, influence resistance or susceptibility to
disease. Epigenetic drugs, such as histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors, are
finding their way into clinical practice, although their exact mechanisms of
action are unclear. To identify mechanisms associated with HDAC inhibition, we
performed microarray analysis on brain and muscle samples treated with the
HDAC1/3-targeting inhibitor, HDACi 4b. Pathways analyses of microarray datasets
implicate DNA methylation as significantly associated with HDAC inhibition.
Further assessment of DNA methylation changes elicited by HDACi 4b in human
fibroblasts from normal controls and patients with Huntington's disease (HD)
using the Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip revealed a limited, but
overlapping, subset of methylated CpG sites that were altered by HDAC inhibition 
in both normal and HD cells. Among the altered loci of Y chromosome-linked genes,
KDM5D, which encodes Lys (K)-specific demethylase 5D, showed increased
methylation at several CpG sites in both normal and HD cells, as well as in DNA
isolated from sperm from drug-treated male mice. Further, we demonstrate that
first filial generation (F1) offspring from drug-treated male HD transgenic mice 
show significantly improved HD disease phenotypes compared with F1 offspring from
vehicle-treated male HD transgenic mice, in association with increased Kdm5d
expression, and decreased histone H3 Lys4 (K4) (H3K4) methylation in the CNS of
male offspring. Additionally, we show that overexpression of Kdm5d in mutant HD
striatal cells significantly improves metabolic deficits. These findings indicate
that HDAC inhibitors can elicit transgenerational effects, via cross-talk between
different epigenetic mechanisms, to have an impact on disease phenotypes in a
beneficial manner.

PMCID: PMC4291662
PMID: 25535382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Cell Biochem Funct. 2015 Jan;33(1):23-8. doi: 10.1002/cbf.3075. Epub 2014 Dec 22.

Regulation of Trek1 expression in nasal mucosa with allergic rhinitis by specific
immunotherapy.

Wang Y(1), Lv L, Zang H, Gao Z, Zhang F, Wang X, Zhou X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Liaocheng Second People's Hospital, Taishan
Medical College, Liaocheng, China.

Epithelial barrier dysfunction is involved in the pathogenesis of allergic
disorders, such as nasal allergy. TWIK-related K(+) 1 (Trek1) potassium channels 
are required in the maintenance of the epithelial barrier function. This study
aims to investigate the role of antigen-specific immunotherapy (SIT) in the
regulation of Trek1 expression in the nasal mucosa. In this study, patients with 
nasal allergy were treated with SIT and/or Clostridium butyricum. The expression 
of Trek1 and histone demethylase 1 (HDAC1) in the nasal epithelia was assessed by
real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction and Western blotting.
Serum cytokines were assessed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. The results
showed that Trek1 and HDAC1 were detected in the nasal epithelia. Trek1 was
lower, whereas HDAC1 was higher in patients with allergic rhinitis as compared
with healthy controls. Trek1-null RPMI2650 monolayers showed a markedly
compromised epithelial barrier function. Treatment with SIT significantly
increased the Trek1 levels in the nasal epithelia of allergic rhinitis patients
that were further improved in conjunction of SIT and administration of probiotic 
C. butyricum. In conclusion, nasal epithelia express Trek1 that can be suppressed
by allergic response. SIT can restore the expression of Trek1 in the nasal
epithelia and can be further improved by conjunction with administration of C.
butyricum.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 25529528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jan 23;290(4):2508-20. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.603761. Epub 2014 
Dec 17.

Dual roles of histone H3 lysine 9 acetylation in human embryonic stem cell
pluripotency and neural differentiation.

Qiao Y(1), Wang R(1), Yang X(2), Tang K(3), Jing N(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and
Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, 320 Yue Yang Road, Shanghai 200031, China. (2)From the State Key
Laboratory of Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai 
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 320 Yue Yang
Road, Shanghai 200031, China, the School of Life Science and Technology, Shanghai
Tech University, Shanghai 200031, China, and. (3)the Institute of Life Science,
Nanchang University, Nanchang, Jiangxi 330031, China. (4)From the State Key
Laboratory of Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai 
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 320 Yue Yang
Road, Shanghai 200031, China, njing@sibcb.ac.cn.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2015 Apr 17;290(16):9949.

Early neurodevelopment requires cell fate commitment from pluripotent stem cells 
to restricted neural lineages, which involves the epigenetic regulation of
chromatin structure and lineage-specific gene transcription. However, it remains 
unclear how histone H3 lysine 9 acetylation (H3K9Ac), an epigenetic mark
representing transcriptionally active chromatin, is involved in the neural
commitment from pluripotent embryonic stem cells (ESCs). In this study, we
demonstrate that H3K9Ac gradually declines during the first 4 days of in vitro
neural differentiation of human ESCs (hESCs) and then increases during days 4-8. 
Consistent with this finding, the H3K9Ac enrichment at several pluripotency genes
was decreased, and H3K9Ac occupancies at the loci of neurodevelopmental genes
increased during hESC neural commitment. Inhibiting H3K9 deacetylation on days
0-4 by histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACis) promoted hESC pluripotency and
suppressed its neural differentiation. Conversely, HDACi-elicited up-regulation
of H3K9 acetylation on days 4-8 enhanced neural differentiation and activated
multiple neurodevelopmental genes. Mechanistically, HDACis promote pluripotency
gene transcription to support hESC self-renewal through suppressing HDAC3
activity. During hESC neural commitment, HDACis relieve the inhibitory activities
of HDAC1/5/8 and thereby promote early neurodevelopmental gene expression by
interfering with gene-specific histone acetylation patterns. Furthermore, p300 is
primarily identified as the major histone acetyltransferase involved in both hESC
pluripotency and neural differentiation. Our results indicate that epigenetic
modification plays pivotal roles during the early neural specification of hESCs. 
The histone acetylation, which is regulated by distinct HDAC members at different
neurodevelopmental stages, plays dual roles in hESC pluripotency maintenance and 
neural differentiation.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4303699
PMID: 25519907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2015 Feb 15;308(4):R276-82. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00429.2014. Epub 2014 Dec 17.

Fetal iron deficiency induces chromatin remodeling at the Bdnf locus in adult rat
hippocampus.

Tran PV(1), Kennedy BC(2), Lien YC(3), Simmons RA(3), Georgieff MK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota;
Center for Neurobehavioral Development, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
Minnesota; tranx271@umn.edu. (2)Department of Pediatrics, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota; Graduate Program in Neuroscience, University
of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota; and. (3)Children's Hospital Philadelphia,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (4)Department of
Pediatrics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota; Center for
Neurobehavioral Development, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota;
Graduate Program in Neuroscience, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
Minnesota; and.

Fetal and subsequent early postnatal iron deficiency causes persistent
impairments in cognitive and affective behaviors despite prompt postnatal iron
repletion. The long-term cognitive impacts are accompanied by persistent
downregulation of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), a factor critical for
hippocampal plasticity across the life span. This study determined whether
early-life iron deficiency epigenetically modifies the Bdnf locus and whether
dietary choline supplementation during late gestation reverses these
modifications. DNA methylation and histone modifications were assessed at the
Bdnf-IV promoter in the hippocampus of rats [at postnatal day (PND) 65] that were
iron-deficient (ID) during the fetal-neonatal period. Iron deficiency was induced
in rat pups by providing pregnant and nursing dams an ID diet (4 mg/kg Fe) from
gestational day (G) 2 through PND7, after which iron deficiency was treated with 
an iron-sufficient (IS) diet (200 mg/kg Fe). This paradigm resulted in about 60% 
hippocampal iron loss on PND15 with complete recovery by PND65. For choline
supplementation, pregnant rat dams were given dietary choline (5 g/kg) from G11
through G18. DNA methylation was determined by quantitative sequencing of
bisulfite-treated DNA, revealing a small alteration at the Bdnf-IV promoter.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis showed increased HDAC1 binding accompanied
by reduced binding of RNA polymerase II and USF1 at the Bdnf-IV promoter in
formerly ID rats. These changes were correlated with altered histone
methylations. Prenatal choline supplementation reverses these epigenetic
modifications. Collectively, the findings identify epigenetic modifications as a 
potential mechanism to explicate the long-term repression of Bdnf following fetal
and early postnatal iron deficiency.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4329464
PMID: 25519736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Mol Med. 2015 Mar 12;20:612-24. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2014.00156.

Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1-sirtuin 1 functional interplay regulates
LPS-mediated high mobility group box 1 secretion.

Walko TD 3rd(1), Di Caro V(1), Piganelli J(2), Billiar TR(3), Clark RS(4), Aneja 
RK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Critical Care Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine and Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United 
States of America. (2)Department of Immunology, University of Pittsburgh School
of Medicine and Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
United States of America. (3)Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine and Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, United States of America. (4)Departments of Critical Care Medicine 
and Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine and Children's
Hospital of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Pathophysiological conditions that lead to the release of the prototypic
damage-associated molecular pattern molecule high mobility group box 1 (HMGB1)
also result in activation of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1; now known as
ADP-ribosyl transferase 1 [ARTD1]). Persistent activation of PARP1 promotes
energy failure and cell death. The role of poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation in HMGB1
release has been explored previously; however, PARP1 is a versatile enzyme and
performs several other functions including cross-talk with another nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide- (NAD(+)) dependent member of the Class III histone
deacetylases (HDACs), sirtuin-1 (SIRT1). Previously, it has been shown that the
hyperacetylation of HMGB1 is a seminal event prior to its secretion, a process
that also is dependent on HDACs. Therefore, in this study, we seek to determine
if PARP1 inhibition alters LPS-mediated HMGB1 hyperacetylation and subsequent
secretion due to its effect on SIRT1. We demonstrate in an in vitro model that
LPS treatment leads to hyperacetylated HMGB1 with concomitant reduction in
nuclear HDAC activity. Treatment with PARP1 inhibitors mitigates the LPS-mediated
reduction in nuclear HDAC activity and decreases HMGB1 acetylation. By utilizing 
an NAD(+)-based mechanism, PARP1 inhibition increases the activity of SIRT1.
Consequently, there is an increased nuclear retention and decreased extracellular
secretion of HMGB1. We also demonstrate that PARP1 physically interacts with
SIRT1. Further confirmation of this data was obtained in a murine model of
sepsis, that is, administration of PJ-34, a specific PARP1 inhibitor, led to
decreased serum HMGB1 concentrations in mice subjected to cecal ligation and
puncture (CLP) as compared with untreated mice. In conclusion, our study provides
new insights in understanding the molecular mechanisms of HMGB1 secretion in
sepsis.

PMCID: PMC4365057
PMID: 25517228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Mar;1849(3):270-81. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.12.008.
Epub 2014 Dec 13.

Pokemon (FBI-1) interacts with Smad4 to repress TGF-ß-induced transcriptional
responses.

Yang Y(1), Cui J(2), Xue F(3), Zhang C(4), Mei Z(5), Wang Y(6), Bi M(7), Shan
D(8), Meredith A(7), Li H(9), Xu ZQ(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Beijing Key Laboratory of Major Brain Disorders,
Capital Medical University, Beijing,100069, China. Electronic address:
yutaoy@ccmu.edu.cn. (2)Department of Cancer and Cell Biology, University of
Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, 45267, USA; Institute of Disease
Control and Prevention, Chinese Academy of Military Medical Sciences, Beijing,
100071, China. (3)Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical University,
Beijing, 100050, China. (4)Institute of Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese
Academy of Military Medical Sciences, Beijing, 100071, China. (5)Department of
Neurobiology, Beijing Key Laboratory of Major Brain Disorders, Capital Medical
University, Beijing,100069, China. (6)Beijing Chao-Yang Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, 100020, China. (7)Department of Cancer and Cell Biology,
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, 45267, USA. (8)Third
Institute of Oceanography, State Oceanic Administration, Xiamen, 361005, China.
(9)Department of Molecular and Biomedical Pharmacology, University of Kentucky
College of Medicine, Lexington KY, 40536, USA. (10)Department of Neurobiology,
Beijing Key Laboratory of Major Brain Disorders, Capital Medical University,
Beijing,100069, China. Electronic address: zhiqingx@ccmu.edu.cn.

Pokemon, an important proto-oncoprotein, is a transcriptional repressor that
belongs to the POK (POZ and Krüppel) family. Smad4, a key component of TGF-ß
pathway, plays an essential role in TGF-ß-induced transcriptional responses. In
this study, we show that Pokemon can interact directly with Smad4 both in vitro
and in vivo. Overexpression of Pokemon decreases TGF-ß-induced transcriptional
activities, whereas knockdown of Pokemon increases these activities.
Interestingly, Pokemon does not affect activation of Smad2/3, formation of Smads 
complex, or DNA binding activity of Smad4. TGF-ß1 treatment increases the
interaction between Pokemon and Smad4, and also enhances the recruitment of
Pokemon to Smad4-DNA complex. In addition, we also find that Pokemon recruits
HDAC1 to Smad4 complex but decreases the interaction between Smad4 and p300/CBP. 
Taken together, all these data suggest that Pokemon is a new partner of Smad4 and
plays a negative role in TGF-ß pathway.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 25514493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Cell Cycle. 2014;13(24):3909-20. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.973310.

Oncogenic STRAP functions as a novel negative regulator of E-cadherin and
p21(Cip1) by modulating the transcription factor Sp1.

Jin L(1), Datta PK.

Author information: 
(1)a Division of Hematology and Oncology; Department of Medicine; UAB
Comprehensive Cancer Center; University of Alabama at Birmingham ; Birmingham ,
AL USA.

We have previously reported the identification of a novel WD-domain protein,
STRAP that plays a role in maintenance of mesenchymal morphology by regulating
E-cadherin and that enhances tumorigenicity partly by downregulating CDK
inhibitor p21(Cip1). However, the functional mechanism of regulation of
E-cadherin and p21(Cip1) by STRAP is unknown. Here, we have employed STRAP knock 
out and knockdown cell models (mouse embryonic fibroblast, human cancer cell
lines) to show how STRAP downregulates E-cadherin and p21(Cip1) by abrogating the
binding of Sp1 to its consensus binding sites. Moreover, ChIP assays suggest that
STRAP recruits HDAC1 to Sp1 binding sites in p21(Cip1) promoter. Interestingly,
loss of STRAP can stabilize Sp1 by repressing its ubiquitination in G1 phase,
resulting in an enhanced expression of p21(Cip1) by >4.5-fold and cell cycle
arrest. Using Bioinformatics and Microarray analyses, we have observed that 87%
mouse genes downregulated by STRAP have conserved Sp1 binding sites. In NSCLC,
the expression levels of STRAP inversely correlated with that of Sp1 (60%). These
results suggest a novel mechanism of regulation of E-cadherin and p21(Cip1) by
STRAP by modulating Sp1-dependent transcription, and higher expression of STRAP
in lung cancer may contribute to downregulation of E-cadherin and p21(Cip1) and
to tumor progression.

PMCID: PMC4614439
PMID: 25483064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Epigenetics. 2014 Nov;9(11):1511-20. doi: 10.4161/15592294.2014.983367.

Dysregulated Class I histone deacetylases are indicators of poor prognosis in
multiple myeloma.

Mithraprabhu S(1), Kalff A, Chow A, Khong T, Spencer A.

Author information: 
(1)a Myeloma Research Group; Division of Blood Cancers; Australian Center for
Blood Diseases; Alfred Hospital; Monash University ; Melbourne , Australia.

Histone deacetylases (HDAC) control gene expression through their ability to
acetylate proteins, thereby influencing a diverse range of cellular functions.
Class I HDAC (HDAC1-3 and 8) and HDAC6 are predominantly upregulated in
malignancies and their altered expression in some cancers has a significant
prognostic implication. The expression and prognostic consequence of dysregulated
Class I HDAC and HDAC6, key players in multiple myeloma (MM), are unknown. This
study hypothesized that HDAC are dysregulated in MM and patients with high
expression have significantly poorer prognostic outcomes. Quantitative PCR for 11
HDAC (Class I, II, and IV) was performed in genetically heterogeneous human
myeloma cell lines (HMCL) and primary MM and compared to normal plasma cells
(PC). In HMCL, HDAC1-3 and 8 (Class I), and HDAC5 and HDAC10 (Class II) were
significantly upregulated compared to normal PC. In primary MM, the median
expression level of all of the HDAC, except HDAC1 and HDAC11, were elevated when 
compared to normal PC. Patients with higher levels of HDAC1-3, HDAC4, HDAC6, and 
HDAC11 transcripts demonstrated a significantly shorter progression-free survival
(PFS). Immunohistochemical staining for HDAC1 and HDAC6 on bone marrow trephines 
from a uniformly treated cohort of transplant eligible MM patients revealed that 
HDAC1 protein was detectable in most patients and that higher levels of MM cell
HDAC1 protein expression (=90 % versus =20 % MM cell positivity) correlated with 
both shorter PFS (P = 0 .07) and shorter overall survival (P = 0 .003).
Conversely, while the majority of patients expressed HDAC6, there was no
correlation between HDAC6 levels and patient outcome. Together, these results
indicate that overexpression of Class I HDAC, particularly HDAC1, is associated
with poor prognosis in MM.

PMCID: PMC4622977
PMID: 25482492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Methods. 2015 Jan;71:146-57. doi: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2014.11.015. Epub 2014 Dec 3.

Benchmarking methods and data sets for ligand enrichment assessment in virtual
screening.

Xia J(1), Tilahun EL(2), Reid TE(2), Zhang L(3), Wang XS(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100191, PR China; Molecular Modeling and
Drug Discovery Core for District of Columbia Developmental Center for AIDS
Research (DC D-CFAR), Laboratory of Cheminformatics and Drug Design, Department
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Howard University, Washington,
DC 20059, USA. (2)Molecular Modeling and Drug Discovery Core for District of
Columbia Developmental Center for AIDS Research (DC D-CFAR), Laboratory of
Cheminformatics and Drug Design, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College
of Pharmacy, Howard University, Washington, DC 20059, USA. (3)State Key
Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Peking University, Beijing 100191, PR China. Electronic address:
liangren@bjmu.edu.cn. (4)Molecular Modeling and Drug Discovery Core for District 
of Columbia Developmental Center for AIDS Research (DC D-CFAR), Laboratory of
Cheminformatics and Drug Design, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College
of Pharmacy, Howard University, Washington, DC 20059, USA. Electronic address:
x.simon.wang@gmail.com.

Retrospective small-scale virtual screening (VS) based on benchmarking data sets 
has been widely used to estimate ligand enrichments of VS approaches in the
prospective (i.e. real-world) efforts. However, the intrinsic differences of
benchmarking sets to the real screening chemical libraries can cause biased
assessment. Herein, we summarize the history of benchmarking methods as well as
data sets and highlight three main types of biases found in benchmarking sets,
i.e. "analogue bias", "artificial enrichment" and "false negative". In addition, 
we introduce our recent algorithm to build maximum-unbiased benchmarking sets
applicable to both ligand-based and structure-based VS approaches, and its
implementations to three important human histone deacetylases (HDACs) isoforms,
i.e. HDAC1, HDAC6 and HDAC8. The leave-one-out cross-validation (LOO CV)
demonstrates that the benchmarking sets built by our algorithm are
maximum-unbiased as measured by property matching, ROC curves and AUCs.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4278665
PMID: 25481478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. J Hematol Oncol. 2014 Dec 5;7:88. doi: 10.1186/s13045-014-0088-y.

c-FLIP is involved in tumor progression of peripheral T-cell lymphoma and
targeted by histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Zheng Z(1), Cheng S(2), Wu W(3), Wang L(4,)(5), Zhao Y(6), Shen Y(7), Janin
A(8,)(9), Zhao WL(10,)(11).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics, Shanghai Institute of Hematology,
Shanghai Rui Jin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 197 
Rui Jin Er Road, Shanghai, 200025, China. zheng_zhong89@163.com. (2)State Key
Laboratory of Medical Genomics, Shanghai Institute of Hematology, Shanghai Rui
Jin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 197 Rui Jin Er
Road, Shanghai, 200025, China. orenge@medmail.com.cn. (3)State Key Laboratory of 
Medical Genomics, Shanghai Institute of Hematology, Shanghai Rui Jin Hospital,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 197 Rui Jin Er Road, Shanghai, 
200025, China. wuwen@medmail.com.cn. (4)State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics,
Shanghai Institute of Hematology, Shanghai Rui Jin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, 197 Rui Jin Er Road, Shanghai, 200025, China.
wl_wangdong@126.com. (5)Pôle de Recherches Sino-Français en Science du Vivant et 
Génomique, Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Shanghai, China.
wl_wangdong@126.com. (6)State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics, Shanghai
Institute of Hematology, Shanghai Rui Jin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
School of Medicine, 197 Rui Jin Er Road, Shanghai, 200025, China.
joyce19890611@163.com. (7)State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics, Shanghai
Institute of Hematology, Shanghai Rui Jin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
School of Medicine, 197 Rui Jin Er Road, Shanghai, 200025, China.
shen_yang@126.com. (8)Pôle de Recherches Sino-Français en Science du Vivant et
Génomique, Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Shanghai, China.
anne_janin@yahoo.com. (9)U1165 Inserm/Université Paris 7, Hôpital Saint Louis,
Pairs, France. anne_janin@yahoo.com. (10)State Key Laboratory of Medical
Genomics, Shanghai Institute of Hematology, Shanghai Rui Jin Hospital, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 197 Rui Jin Er Road, Shanghai, 200025,
China. zhao.weili@yahoo.com. (11)Pôle de Recherches Sino-Français en Science du
Vivant et Génomique, Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Shanghai, China.
zhao.weili@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Peripheral T-cell lymphomas (PTCLs) are often aggressive tumors and
resistant to conventional chemotherapy. Dysregulation of extrinsic apoptosis
plays an important role on tumor cell sensitivity to chemotherapeutic agents.
Cellular FLICE inhibitory protein (c-FLIP) is a key regulator of extrinsic
apoptotic pathway.
METHODS: c-FLIP expression was assessed by real-time PCR and compared according
to clinical parameters in patients with PTCLs. The relation of c-FLIP to tumor
cell apoptosis mediated by histone deacetylases inhibitors (HDACIs) and the
possible mechanism were examined in T-lymphoma cell lines and in a murine
xenograft model.
RESULTS: c-FLIP was overexpressed and associated with decreased tumor TRAIL/DR5
expression, elevated serum lactate dehydrogenase level and high-risk
International Prognostic Index of the patients. In vitro, molecular silencing of 
c-FLIP by specific small-interfering RNA increased TRAIL/DR5 expression, enhanced
T-lymphoma cell apoptosis and sensitized cells to chemotherapeutic agents.
However, HDACIs valproic acid (VPA) and suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA)
could downregulate c-FLIP expression and triggered extrinsic apoptosis of
T-lymphoma cells, through inhibiting NF-<U+03BA>B signaling and interrupting P50
interaction with c-FLIP promoter. As Class I HDACIs, both VPA and SAHA inhibited 
HDAC1, resulting in P50 inactivation and c-FLIP downregulation. In vivo, oral VPA
treatment significantly retarded tumor growth and induced in situ apoptosis,
consistent with inhibition of HDAC1/P50/c-FLIP axis and increase of TRAIL/DR5
expression.
CONCLUSIONS: c-FLIP overexpression in PTCLs protected tumor cells from extrinsic 
apoptosis and contributed to tumor progression. Although linking to
chemoresistance, c-FLIP indicated tumor cell sensitivity to HDACIs, providing a
potential biomarker of targeting apoptosis in treating PTCLs.

PMCID: PMC4261569
PMID: 25477070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Theor Biol Med Model. 2014 Dec 3;11:51. doi: 10.1186/1742-4682-11-51.

Papillomavirus binding factor (PBF) is an intrinsically disordered protein with
potential participation in osteosarcoma genesis, in silico evidence.

Castillo P, Cetina AF, Méndez-Tenorio A, Espinoza-Fonseca LM, Barrón BL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Escuela Nacional de Ciencias Biológicas, Instituto
Politécnico Nacional, Carpio y Plan de Ayala S/N, Casco de Santo Tomás, México,
DF 11340, México. bbarron@ipn.mx.

BACKGROUND: Papillomavirus binding factor (PBF) or zinc finger protein 395 is a
transcription factor associated to a poor prognosis in patients with
osteosarcoma, an aggressive bone cancer that predominantly affects adolescents.
To investigate the role of the PBF protein in the osteosarcoma genesis, in this
paper we present the bioinformatics analysis of physicochemical properties of PBF
and its probable interactions with several key cellular targets.
RESULTS: The physicochemical characteristics determined to PBF,
disorder-promoting amino acids, flexibility, hydrophobicity, prediction of
secondary and tertiary structures and probability to be crystallized, supported
that this protein can be considered as an intrinsically disordered protein (IDP),
with a zinc finger-like domain. The in silico analysis to find out PBF
interactions with cellular factors, confirmed the experimentally demonstrated
interaction of PBF with two key cellular proteins involved in regulation of
cellular apoptosis, 14-3-3ß and Scythe/BAT3 proteins. Furthermore, other
interactions were found with proteins like HDAC1 and TPR which are known to be
deregulated in several cancers. Experimental confirmation of specific
interactions will contribute to understand the osteosarcoma process and might
lead to the identification of new targets for diagnosis and treatments.
CONCLUSIONS: According to the in silico PBF analyses, this protein can be
considered as an IDP capable to bind several key cellular factors, and these
interactions might play an important role in the osteosarcoma process.

PMCID: PMC4265421
PMID: 25471943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2015 Feb;352(2):236-43. doi: 10.1124/jpet.114.219345. Epub 
2014 Dec 2.

MS-275 inhibits aroclor 1254-induced SH-SY5Y neuronal cell toxicity by preventing
the formation of the HDAC3/REST complex on the synapsin-1 promoter.

Formisano L(1), Guida N(2), Laudati G(2), Mascolo L(2), Di Renzo G(2), Canzoniero
LM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology, Department of Science and Technology, University of 
Sannio, Benevento, Italy (L.F., L.M.T.C.); and Division of Pharmacology,
Department of Neuroscience, Reproductive and Odontostomatologic Sciences, School 
of Medicine, "Federico II" University of Naples, Naples, Italy (L.F., N.G., G.L.,
L.M., G.D.R., L.M.T.C.) cformisa@unisannio.it. (2)Division of Pharmacology,
Department of Science and Technology, University of Sannio, Benevento, Italy
(L.F., L.M.T.C.); and Division of Pharmacology, Department of Neuroscience,
Reproductive and Odontostomatologic Sciences, School of Medicine, "Federico II"
University of Naples, Naples, Italy (L.F., N.G., G.L., L.M., G.D.R., L.M.T.C.).

Polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) exposure has been associated with
neurodegenerative diseases, such as Parkinson's disease, amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis, and dementia. Neuronal death elicited by the PCB mixture Aroclor 1254 
(A1254) has been attributed to an increase in RE-1-silencing transcription factor
(REST), which, in turn, correlates with a decrease in the synapsin-1 promoter
gene. Although histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are known to be
neuroprotective in several neurologic disorders, the core mechanisms governing
this effect are not yet understood. Here, to examine how HDAC class I
[N-(2-aminophenyl)-4-[N-(pyridin-3-yl-methoxycarbonyl)aminomethyl]-benzamide
(MS-275)] and HDAC class II
[3-[5-(3-(3-fluorophenyl)-3-oxopropen-1-yl)-1-methyl-1H-pyrrol-2-yl]-N-hydroxy-2-
propenamide (MC-1568)] inhibitors prevent A1254-induced neuronal cell death, we
exposed SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells to A1254. Exposure to A1254 (30.6 µM) for 24 
and 48 hours resulted in a time-dependent cell death. Indeed, after 48 hours,
MS-275, but not MC-1568, reverted A1254-induced cell death in a dose-dependent
manner. Furthermore, A1254 significantly increased HDAC3, but not HDAC1 or HDAC2.
Interestingly, REST physically interacted with HDAC3 after A1254 exposure.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed that MS-275 reverted the increased 
levels of HDAC3 binding and decreased acetylation of histone H3 within the
synapsin-1 promoter region, thus reverting synapsin-1 mRNA reduction. Moreover,
REST knockdown by small interfering RNA (siRNA) prevented HDAC3 from binding to
the synapsin-1 promoter. Likewise, HDAC3 siRNA significantly reduced
A1254-induced cell toxicity in SH-SY5Y cells and cortical neurons. Hence, this
study demonstrates that inhibition of HDAC class I attenuates A1254-induced
neuronal cell death by preventing HDAC3 binding and histone deacetylation within 
the synapsin-1 promoter region.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics.

PMID: 25467131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Feb;1850(2):426-34. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2014.11.017.
Epub 2014 Nov 23.

DJ-1 regulates the expression of renal (pro)renin receptor via reactive oxygen
species-mediated epigenetic modification.

Lee DY(1), Kim HS(2), Won KJ(1), Lee KP(1), Jung SH(1), Park ES(1), Choi WS(2),
Lee HM(3), Kim B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Functional Genomics Institute, School of Medicine,
Konkuk University, 322 Danwol-dong, Choongju 380-701, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Immunology, Functional Genomics Institute, School of Medicine,
Konkuk University, 322 Danwol-dong, Choongju 380-701, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Herbal Cosmetic Science, College of Natural Science, Hoseo
University, Asan 336-795, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of Physiology,
Functional Genomics Institute, School of Medicine, Konkuk University, 322
Danwol-dong, Choongju 380-701, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
bkkim2@kku.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: DJ-1 protein plays multifunctional roles including transcriptional
regulation and scavenging oxidative stress; thus, it may be associated with the
development of renal disorders. We investigated whether DJ-1 protein regulates
the expression of (pro)renin receptor (PRR), a newly identified member of
renin-angiotensin system.
METHODS: The levels of mRNA and protein were determined by real-time PCR and
western blot, respectively. H2O2 production was tested by using fluorescence
probe. Histone modification was determined by chromatin immunoprecipitation.
RESULTS: The expression of PRR was significantly higher in the kidney from DJ-1
knockout mice (DJ-1-/-) compared with wild-type mice (DJ-1+/+). Histone
deacetylase 1 recruitment at the PRR promoter was lower, and histone H3
acetylation and RNA polymerase II recruitment were higher in DJ-1-/- than in
DJ-1+/+. Knockdown or inhibition of histone deacetylase 1 restored PRR expression
in mesangial cells from DJ-1+/+. H2O2 production was greater in DJ-1-/- cells
compared with DJ-1+/+ cells. These changes in PRR expression and epigenetic
modification in DJ-1-/- cells were induced by H2O2 treatment and reversed
completely by addition of an antioxidant reagent. Prorenin-stimulated ERK1/2
phosphorylation was greater in DJ-1-/- than in DJ-1+/+ cells and this was
inhibited by a PRR-inhibitory peptide, and by AT1 and AT2 receptor inhibitors.
The expression of renal fibrotic genes was higher in DJ-1-/- than in DJ-1+/+
cells and decreased in PRR-knockdown DJ-1-/- cells.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that DJ-1 protein regulates the expression of renal PRR 
through H2O2-mediated epigenetic modification.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: We suggest that renal DJ-1 protein may be an important
molecule in the acceleration of renal pathogenesis through PRR regulation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25463323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Med Oncol. 2015 Jan;32(1):390. doi: 10.1007/s12032-014-0390-0. Epub 2014 Dec 2.

(-)-Epigallocatechin-3-gallate induces cancer cell apoptosis via acetylation of
amyloid precursor protein.

Hu Q(1), Chang X, Yan R, Rong C, Yang C, Cheng S, Gu X, Yao H, Hou X, Mo Y, Zhao 
L, Chen Y, Dinlin X, Wang Q, Fang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen
University, Guangzhou, 510120, China.

Epigenetic modifications are involved in cancer pathogenesis, and HDACis are
considered potential therapeutic agents. We and others have shown the inhibitory 
activity of EGCG on HDAC1. But little is known about the effect of EGCG as on
epigenetic regulation in cancer. Here, we try to demonstrate that EGCG acts as an
HDACi downregulated APP expression, which was pathophysiologically upregulated in
cancers and exerts a key role in cancer cell growth. We used PC-12 cells, SK-N-SH
cells and primary tumor tissues for our analysis. Male 4-week-old athymic nude
mice were used for heterotopic tumor growth assay. We employed Western blotting
analysis to detect Bcl-2, Bax, APP, caspase-3, caspase-7, HDAC1 and H4Ac. We used
AnnexinV-FITC and TUNEL staining for apoptosis detection. Tumor tissues were
examined by immunohistochemical staining. We demonstrated that EGCG suppresses
the growth of xenografted adrenal pheochromocytoma. Flow cytometry analysis and
TUNEL staining showed that EGCG induced the apoptosis. Treatment with EGCG
resulted in decrease in Bcl-2 but increase in Bax and activated caspase-3 and
caspase-7. HDAC inhibitor EGCG leaded to hyperacetylated histone H4 by
immunofluorescence. EGCG decreased APP levels by immunofluorescence staining and 
Western blot analysis. Silencing specific to HDAC1 leaded to caspase-3 and
caspase-7 activation and cleavage. Our results are the first to demonstrate a
functional interaction between EGCG and APP in suppression tumor growth, and
provide a new epigenetic effects of EGCG on antitumor.

PMID: 25452172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. FEBS Lett. 2014 Dec 20;588(24):4825-30. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.11.017. Epub 
2014 Nov 21.

Epigenetic regulation of the NR4A orphan nuclear receptor NOR1 by histone
acetylation.

Zhao Y(1), Nomiyama T(2), Findeisen HM(2), Qing H(1), Aono J(2), Jones KL(2),
Heywood EB(2), Bruemmer D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Saha Cardiovascular Research Center, University of Kentucky, Lexington 40536, 
USA; Graduate Center for Nutritional Sciences, University of Kentucky, Lexington 
40536, USA. (2)Saha Cardiovascular Research Center, University of Kentucky,
Lexington 40536, USA. (3)Saha Cardiovascular Research Center, University of
Kentucky, Lexington 40536, USA; Graduate Center for Nutritional Sciences,
University of Kentucky, Lexington 40536, USA. Electronic address:
Dennis.Bruemmer@uky.edu.

The nuclear receptor NOR1 is an immediate-early response gene implicated in the
transcriptional control of proliferation. Since the expression level of NOR1 is
rapidly induced through cAMP response element binding (CREB) protein-dependent
promoter activation, we investigated the contribution of histone acetylation to
this transient induction. We demonstrate that NOR1 transcription is induced by
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibition and by depletion of HDAC1 and HDAC3. HDAC
inhibition activated the NOR1 promoter, increased histone acetylation and
augmented the recruitment of phosphorylated CREB to the promoter. Furthermore,
HDAC inhibition increased Ser133 phosphorylation of CREB and augmented NOR1
protein stability. These data outline previously unrecognized mechanisms of NOR1 
regulation and illustrate a key role for histone acetylation in the rapid
induction of NOR1.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4268421
PMID: 25451221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Int J Cardiol. 2014 Dec 20;177(3):982-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2014.09.175. Epub 
2014 Oct 5.

Histone deacetylase inhibition reduces pulmonary vein arrhythmogenesis through
calcium regulation.

Lkhagva B(1), Chang SL(2), Chen YC(3), Kao YH(4), Lin YK(5), Chiu CT(6), Chen
SA(2), Chen YJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei, Taiwan. (2)Division of Cardiology and Cardiovascular Research
Center, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Department of
Biomedical Engineering, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Medical Education and Research, Wan
Fang Hospital, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. (5)Division of
Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Wan Fang Hospital,
Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. (6)Department of Anatomy and Cell
Biology, McGill University, Montreal, Canada. (7)Graduate Institute of Clinical
Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan;
Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Wan Fang
Hospital, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address:
a9900112@ms15.hinet.net.

Pulmonary veins (PVs) play a critical role in the pathophysiology of atrial
fibrillation (AF). Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are vital to calcium homeostasis 
and AF genesis. However, the electrophysiological effects of HDAC inhibition were
unclear. This study evaluated whether HDAC inhibition can regulate PV electrical 
activity through calcium modulation. Whole-cell patch-clamp, confocal microscopic
with fluorescence, and Western blot were used to evaluate electrophysiological
characteristics and Ca(2+) dynamics in isolated rabbit PV cardiomyocytes with and
without MPT0E014 (a pan HDAC inhibitor), MS-275 (HDAC1 and 3 inhibitor), and
MC-1568 (HDAC4 and 6 inhibitor) for 5~8h. Atrial electrical activity and
induced-AF (rapid atrial pacing and acetylcholine infusion) were measured in
rabbits with and without MPT0E014 (10mg/kg treated for 5 hours) in vivo. MPT0E014
(1 µM)-treated PV cardiomyocytes (n=12) had slower beating rates (2.1 ± 0.2 vs.
2.8 ± 0.1 Hz, p < 0.05) than control PV cardiomyocytes. However, control (n=11)
and MPT0E014 (1 µM)-treated (n = 12) SAN cardiomyocytes had similar beating rates
(3.2 ± 0.2 vs. 2.9 ± 0.3 Hz). MS-275-treated PV cardiomyocytes (n = 12, 2.3 ± 0.2
Hz), but not MC-1568-treated PV cardiomyocytes (n=14, 3.1 ± 0.3 Hz) had slower
beating rates than control PV cardiomocytes. MPT0E014-treated PV cardiomyocytes
(n=14) had a lower frequency (2.4 ± 0.6 vs. 0.3 ± 0.1 spark/mm/s, p < 0.05) of
Ca(2+) sparks than control PV (n=17) cardiomyocytes. As compared to control,
MPT0E014-treated PV cardiomyocytes had reduced Ca(2+) transient amplitudes,
sodium-calcium exchanger currents, and ryanodine receptor expressions. Moreover, 
MPT0E014-treated rabbits had less AF and shorter AF duration than control
rabbits. In conclusions, HDAC inhibition reduced PV arrhythmogenesis and AF
inducibility with modulation on calcium homeostasis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25449511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Dev Biol. 2015 Feb 15;398(2):153-62. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.10.014. Epub 2014 
Oct 28.

Comprehensive single cell-resolution analysis of the role of chromatin regulators
in early C. elegans embryogenesis.

Krüger AV(1), Jelier R(1), Dzyubachyk O(2), Zimmerman T(3), Meijering E(2),
Lehner B(4).

Author information: 
(1)EMBL/CRG Systems Biology Research Unit, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG),
Dr. Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain; University Pompeu Fabra (UPF), 08003
Barcelona, Spain. (2)Biomedical Imaging Group Rotterdam, Departments of Medical
Informatics and Radiology, Erasmus MC - University Medical Center Rotterdam,
Rotterdam, the Netherlands. (3)Advanced Light Microscopy Facility, Centre for
Genomic Regulation (CRG), Dr. Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain. (4)EMBL/CRG
Systems Biology Research Unit, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Dr. Aiguader 
88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain; University Pompeu Fabra (UPF), 08003 Barcelona,
Spain; Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Pg. Lluis
Companys 23, 08010 Barcelona, Spain. Electronic address: ben.lehner@crg.eu.

Chromatin regulators are widely expressed proteins with diverse roles in gene
expression, nuclear organization, cell cycle regulation, pluripotency, physiology
and development, and are frequently mutated in human diseases such as cancer.
Their inhibition often results in pleiotropic effects that are difficult to study
using conventional approaches. We have developed a semi-automated nuclear
tracking algorithm to quantify the divisions, movements and positions of all
nuclei during the early development of Caenorhabditis elegans and have used it to
systematically study the effects of inhibiting chromatin regulators. The
resulting high dimensional datasets revealed that inhibition of multiple
regulators, including F55A3.3 (encoding FACT subunit SUPT16H), lin-53 (RBBP4/7), 
rba-1 (RBBP4/7), set-16 (MLL2/3), hda-1 (HDAC1/2), swsn-7 (ARID2), and let-526
(ARID1A/1B) affected cell cycle progression and caused chromosome segregation
defects. In contrast, inhibition of cir-1 (CIR1) accelerated cell division timing
in specific cells of the AB lineage. The inhibition of RNA polymerase II also
accelerated these division timings, suggesting that normal gene expression is
required to delay cell cycle progression in multiple lineages in the early
embryo. Quantitative analyses of the dataset suggested the existence of at least 
two functionally distinct SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex activities in the 
early embryo, and identified a redundant requirement for the egl-27 and lin-40
MTA orthologs in the development of endoderm and mesoderm lineages. Moreover, our
dataset also revealed a characteristic rearrangement of chromatin to the nuclear 
periphery upon the inhibition of multiple general regulators of gene expression. 
Our systematic, comprehensive and quantitative datasets illustrate the power of
single cell-resolution quantitative tracking and high dimensional phenotyping to 
investigate gene function. Furthermore, the results provide an overview of the
functions of essential chromatin regulators during the early development of an
animal.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25446273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Oct 31;453(4):810-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.10.021. Epub 2014 Oct 14.

Histone deacetylase1 promotes TGF-ß1-mediated early chondrogenesis through
down-regulating canonical Wnt signaling.

Huang X(1), Xu J(2), Huang M(3), Li J(4), Dai L(5), Dai K(6), Zhang X(7).

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Health Sciences,
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences (SIBS), Chinese Academy of Sciences
(CAS) & Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine (SJTUSM), Shanghai
200031, China. Electronic address: xjhuang@sibs.ac.cn. (2)The Key Laboratory of
Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for
Biological Sciences (SIBS), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) & Shanghai Jiao
Tong University School of Medicine (SJTUSM), Shanghai 200031, China. Electronic
address: xujiajia@sibs.ac.cn. (3)The Key Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology,
Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences (SIBS),
Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) & Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of
Medicine (SJTUSM), Shanghai 200031, China. Electronic address:
mingjian77@gmail.com. (4)The Key Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of
Health Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences (SIBS), Chinese
Academy of Sciences (CAS) & Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine
(SJTUSM), Shanghai 200031, China. Electronic address: owllj@163.com. (5)The Key
Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences (SIBS), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) &
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine (SJTUSM), Shanghai 200031,
China. Electronic address: lmdai@sibs.ac.cn. (6)The Key Laboratory of Stem Cell
Biology, Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences (SIBS), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) & Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine (SJTUSM), Shanghai 200031, China; Shanghai Key
Laboratory of Orthopaedic Implant, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Shanghai
Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine
(SJTUSM), Shanghai 200011, China. Electronic address: krdai@163.com. (7)The Key
Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences (SIBS), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) &
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine (SJTUSM), Shanghai 200031,
China; Shanghai Key Laboratory of Orthopaedic Implant, Department of Orthopaedic 
Surgery, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School
of Medicine (SJTUSM), Shanghai 200011, China. Electronic address:
xlzhang@sibs.ac.cn.

Cartilage formation during both embryonic development and bone repairing
processes involves mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) differentiation. Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling pathway inhibits early chondrogenesis and is down-regulated during
Transforming growth factor-ß1 (TGF-ß1)-induced chondrogenesis. However, the
regulatory molecules that participate in the process is unknown. This study was
designed to investigate the underlying mechanisms that down-regulate
Wnt/ß-catenin pathway during chondrogenesis. TGF-ß1-induced micromass cultures of
C3H10T1/2 were used as chondrocyte differentiation model. Gene expression profile
was detected by realtime-PCR. Regulatory role of HDAC1 on ß-catenin was
investigated by luciferase assay, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay,
co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) assay and in vitro ubiquitination assay. In this
study, we showed that HDAC1 was induced and suppressed ß-catenin gene expression 
through direct binding to its promoter. Besides, HDAC1 could also interact with
deacetylate ß-catenin protein through its deacetylase domain, which causes
degradation of ß-catenin. Our results indicate that HDAC1 plays an important role
in chondrogenesis and may represent a therapeutic target for modulation of
cartilage development.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25445594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Jan 2;456(1):320-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.11.079. Epub 2014 Nov 28.

Trichostatin A, a histone deacetylase inhibitor, reverses epithelial-mesenchymal 
transition in colorectal cancer SW480 and prostate cancer PC3 cells.

Wang X(1), Xu J(1), Wang H(2), Wu L(1), Yuan W(1), Du J(3), Cai S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacy College, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China. (2)Department of 
Medical Laboratory, Anhui Provincial Hospital, Hefei 230001, China. (3)Department
of Microbial and Biochemical Pharmacy, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China. Electronic address:
dujun@mail.sysu.edu.cn. (4)Pharmacy College, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, 
China. Electronic address: csh5689@sina.com.

Trichostatin A (TSA) is a kind of classical histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor.
In this study, we reported the reversal effects of TSA on EMT and investigated
the possible involved molecular mechanisms in SW480 and PC3 cells. Firstly, we
observed that TSA induced the reversal process of epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) in SW480 and PC3 cells, resulting in attenuated cell invasion
and migration abilities. TSA-induced EMT reversal was characterized by
up-regulation of E-cadherin and down-regulation of Vimentin. Then, treatment with
TSA also decreased the expression of transcription factor Slug. Furthermore,
over-expression of Slug significantly caused down-regulation of E-cadherin and
up-regulation of Vimentin. Meanwhile, TSA treatment in Slug-expressing cells
could prevent these changes. These findings suggested that Slug played a crucial 
role in TSA-induced EMT reversal. Additionally, the study showed that TSA could
induce the increase of HDAC1 and HDAC2 on the Slug gene promoter, which might be 
responsible for the suppression of Slug. Overall, TSA could reverse EMT in SW480 
and PC3 cells and TSA-mediated down-regulation of Slug was involved in the
reversal process.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25434997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 25;9(11):e113071. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113071.
eCollection 2014.

Predictive gene signatures: molecular markers distinguishing colon adenomatous
polyp and carcinoma.

Drew JE(1), Farquharson AJ(1), Mayer CD(2), Vase HF(1), Coates PJ(3), Steele
RJ(3), Carey FA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Metabolic Health, Rowett Institute of Nutrition and Health, University of
Aberdeen, Aberdeen, AB21 9SB, Scotland. (2)Biomathematics and Statistics
Scotland, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, AB21 9SB, Scotland. (3)Ninewells
Hospital and Medical School, Dundee, DD1 9SU, Scotland.

Cancers exhibit abnormal molecular signatures associated with disease initiation 
and progression. Molecular signatures could improve cancer screening, detection, 
drug development and selection of appropriate drug therapies for individual
patients. Typically only very small amounts of tissue are available from patients
for analysis and biopsy samples exhibit broad heterogeneity that cannot be
captured using a single marker. This report details application of an in-house
custom designed GenomeLab System multiplex gene expression assay, the
hCellMarkerPlex, to assess predictive gene signatures of normal, adenomatous
polyp and carcinoma colon tissue using archived tissue bank material. The
hCellMarkerPlex incorporates twenty-one gene markers: epithelial (EZR, KRT18,
NOX1, SLC9A2), proliferation (PCNA, CCND1, MS4A12), differentiation (B4GANLT2,
CDX1, CDX2), apoptotic (CASP3, NOX1, NTN1), fibroblast (FSP1, COL1A1), structural
(ACTG2, CNN1, DES), gene transcription (HDAC1), stem cell (LGR5), endothelial
(VWF) and mucin production (MUC2). Gene signatures distinguished normal,
adenomatous polyp and carcinoma. Individual gene targets significantly
contributing to molecular tissue types, classifier genes, were further
characterised using real-time PCR, in-situ hybridisation and immunohistochemistry
revealing aberrant epithelial expression of MS4A12, LGR5 CDX2, NOX1 and SLC9A2
prior to development of carcinoma. Identified gene signatures identify aberrant
epithelial expression of genes prior to cancer development using in-house custom 
designed gene expression multiplex assays. This approach may be used to assist in
objective classification of disease initiation, staging, progression and
therapeutic responses using biopsy material.

PMCID: PMC4244109
PMID: 25423035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 20;9(11):e113262. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113262.
eCollection 2014.

Histone deacetylase 1 and 3 regulate the mesodermal lineage commitment of mouse
embryonic stem cells.

Lv W(1), Guo X(1), Wang G(1), Xu Y(1), Kang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical and Translational Research Center of Shanghai First Maternity and
Infant Health Hospital, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Signaling and Disease
Research, School of Life Science and Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai,
P.R. China.

The important role of histone acetylation alteration has become increasingly
recognized in mesodermal lineage differentiation and development. However, the
contribution of individual histone deacetylases (HDACs) to mesoderm specification
remains poorly understood. In this report, we found that trichostatin A (TSA), an
inhibitor of histone deacetylase (HDACi), could induce early differentiation of
embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and promote mesodermal lineage differentiation.
Further analysis showed that the expression levels of HDAC1 and 3 are decreased
gradually during ESCs differentiation. Ectopic expression of HDAC1 or 3
significantly inhibited differentiation into the mesodermal lineage. By contrast,
loss of either HDAC1 or 3 enhanced the mesodermal differentiation of ESCs.
Additionally, we demonstrated that the activity of HDAC1 and 3 is indeed required
for the regulation of mesoderm gene expression. Furthermore, HDAC1 and 3 were
found to interact physically with the T-box transcription factor T/Bry, which is 
critical for mesodermal lineage commitment. These findings indicate a key
mechanism for the specific role of HDAC1 and 3 in mammalian mesoderm
specification.

PMCID: PMC4239075
PMID: 25412078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2014 Nov 20. doi: 10.1071/RD14176. [Epub ahead of print]

Treatment of buffalo (Bubalus bubalis) donor cells with trichostatin A and
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine alters their growth characteristics, gene expression and
epigenetic status and improves the in vitro developmental competence, quality and
epigenetic status of cloned embryos.

Saini M, Selokar NL, Agrawal H, Singla SK, Chauhan MS, Manik RS, Palta P.

We examined the effects of treating buffalo skin fibroblast donor cells with
trichostatin A (TSA), a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, and
5-aza-2?-deoxycytidine (5azadC), a DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) inhibitor, on the
cells and embryos produced by hand-made cloning. Treatment of donor cells with
TSA or 5azadC resulted in altered expression levels of the HDAC1, DNMT1, DNMT3a, 
P53, CASPASE3 and CASPASE9 genes and global levels of acetylation of lysine at
position 9 or 14 in histone 3 (H3K9/14ac), acetylation of lysine at position 5 in
histone 4 (H4K5ac), acetylation of lysine at position 18 in histone 3 (H3K18ac)
and tri-methylation of lysine at position 27 in histone 3 (H3K27me3). Moreover,
global levels of DNA methylation and activity of DNMT1 and HDAC1 were decreased, 
while global acetylation of H3 and H3K9 was significantly increased in comparison
to untreated cells. Simultaneous treatment of donor cells with TSA (50nM) and
5azadC (7.5nM) resulted in higher in vitro development to the blastocyst stage,
reduction of the apoptotic index and the global level of H3K27 me3 and altered
expression levels of HDAC1, P53, CASPASE3, CASPASE9 and DNMT3a in cloned
blastocysts. Transfer of cloned embryos produced with donor cells treated with
TSA led to the birth of a calf that survived for 21 days. These results show that
treatment of buffalo donor cells with TSA and 5azadC improved developmental
competence and quality of cloned embryos and altered their epigenetic status and 
gene expression, and that these beneficial effects were mediated by a reduction
in DNA and histone methylation and an increase in histone acetylation in donor
cells.

PMID: 25409339  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


310. BMC Biol. 2014 Nov 19;12:95. doi: 10.1186/s12915-014-0095-z.

Suppression of histone deacetylation promotes the differentiation of human
pluripotent stem cells towards neural progenitor cells.

Yang J(1), Tang Y(2), Liu H(3), Guo F(4), Ni J(5), Le W(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences/Shanghai Jiao
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. yangjuan@sibs.ac.cn. (2)Key 
Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences/Shanghai Jiao
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. tangyu-sky@163.com.
(3)Center for Translational Research of Neurology Disease, The 1st Affiliated
Hospital, Dalian Medical University, Dalian, China. liu_hui0505@163.com. (4)Key
Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences/Shanghai Jiao
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. fguo@sibs.ac.cn. (5)Key
Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences/Shanghai Jiao
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. nijun@sibs.ac.cn. (6)Key
Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences/Shanghai Jiao
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. wdle@sibs.ac.cn. (7)Center
for Translational Research of Neurology Disease, The 1st Affiliated Hospital,
Dalian Medical University, Dalian, China. wdle@sibs.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND: Emerging studies of human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) raise new
prospects for neurodegenerative disease modeling and cell replacement therapies. 
Therefore, understanding the mechanisms underlying the commitment of neural
progenitor cells (NPCs) is important for the application of hPSCs in
neurodegenerative disease therapies. It has been reported that epigenetic
modifications of histones play important roles in neural differentiation, but the
exact mechanisms in regulating hPSC differentiation towards NPCs are not fully
elucidated.
RESULTS: We demonstrated that suppression of histone deacetylases (HDACs)
promoted the differentiation of hPSCs towards NPCs. Application of HDAC
inhibitors (HDACi) increased the expression of neuroectodermal markers and
enhanced the neuroectodermal specification once neural differentiation was
initiated, thereby leading to more NPC generation. Similarly, the transcriptome
analysis showed that HDACi increased the expression levels of ectodermal markers 
and triggered the NPC differentiation related pathways, while decreasing the
expression levels of endodermal and mesodermal markers. Furthermore, we
documented that HDAC3 but not HDAC1 or HDAC2 was the critical regulator
participating in NPC differentiation, and knockdown of HDAC3's cofactor SMRT
exhibited a similar effect as HDAC3 on NPC generation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study reveals that HDACs, especially HDAC3, negatively regulate 
the differentiation of hPSCs towards NPCs at an earlier stage of neural
differentiation. Moreover, HDAC3 might function by forming a repressor complex
with its cofactor SMRT during this process. Thus, our findings uncover an
important epigenetic mechanism of HDAC3 in the differentiation of hPSCs towards
NPCs.

PMCID: PMC4254204
PMID: 25406762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Nat Commun. 2014 Nov 19;5:5406. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6406.

BRMS1L suppresses breast cancer metastasis by inducing epigenetic silence of
FZD10.

Gong C(1), Qu S(1), Lv XB(1), Liu B(1), Tan W(1), Nie Y(1), Su F(1), Liu Q(1),
Yao H(2), Song E(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Malignant Tumor Epigenetics and Gene
Regulation, Medical Research Center, Guangzhou 510120, China [2] Breast Tumor
Center, Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510120, 
China. (2)1] Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Malignant Tumor Epigenetics
and Gene Regulation, Medical Research Center, Guangzhou 510120, China [2]
Department of Oncology, Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University,
Guangzhou 510120, China.

BRMS1L (breast cancer metastasis suppressor 1 like, BRMS1-like) is a component of
Sin3A-histone deacetylase (HDAC) co-repressor complex that suppresses target gene
transcription. Here we show that reduced BRMS1L in breast cancer tissues is
associated with metastasis and poor patient survival. Functionally, BRMS1L
inhibits breast cancer cells migration and invasion by inhibiting
epithelial-mesenchymal transition. These effects are mediated by epigenetic
silencing of FZD10, a receptor for Wnt signalling, through HDAC1 recruitment and 
histone H3K9 deacetylation at the promoter. Consequently, BRMS1L-induced FZD10
silencing inhibits aberrant activation of WNT3-FZD10-ß-catenin signalling.
Furthermore, BRMS1L is a target of miR-106b and miR-106b upregulation leads to
BRMS1L reduction in breast cancer cells. RNA interference-mediated silencing of
BRMS1L expression promotes metastasis of breast cancer xenografts in
immunocompromised mice, whereas ectopic BRMS1L expression inhibits metastasis.
Therefore, BRMS1L provides an epigenetic regulation of Wnt signalling in breast
cancer cells and acts as a breast cancer metastasis suppressor.

PMID: 25406648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Int J Mol Med. 2015 Jan;35(1):238-46. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2014.2004. Epub 2014 Nov 
14.

Epigenetic silencing of HDAC1 by miR-449a upregulates Runx2 and promotes
osteoblast differentiation.

Liu T(1), Hou L(1), Zhao Y(2), Huang Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Medical School, Tongji University, Shanghai 
200072, P.R. China. (2)The Affiliated Stomatology Hospital of Tongji University, 
Shanghai 200072, P.R. China. (3)Laboratoire PROTEE, Bâtiment R, Université du Sud
Toulon-Var, 83957 La Garde Cedex, France.

Human-induced pluripotent (iPS) cells can be induced to differentiate into
osteoblasts, but the process is inefficient and time-consuming. Previous studies 
indicated a close association between the expression of Runx2 and osteoblast
differentiation, and established that the transcriptional activation of the Runx2
gene was closely associated with histone acetylation. microRNA-449a (miR-449a)
represses HDAC1 expression, thereby regulating histone acetylation. In the
present study, whether the expression of miR-449a enhanced the generation of
osteoblasts from human iPS cells was investigated. Introduction of miR-449a into 
human iPS cells resulted in the expression of osteoblast markers after only four 
days, compared to eight days for untransfected human iPS cells. Differentiation
to osteoblasts was associated with a reduction in HDAC1 expression, and higher
levels of histone acetylation, particularly at the binding sites on the Runx2
promoter in the human miR-449a-transfected iPS cells. Silencing of endogenous
HDAC1 expression by exogenous miR-449a therefore maintains histone acetylation
status, stimulates Runx2 gene expression and rapidly promotes osteoblast
differentiation.

PMID: 25405810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Oncogenesis. 2014 Nov 17;3:e127. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2014.39.

Inhibition of class I HDACs abrogates the dominant effect of MLL-AF4 by
activation of wild-type MLL.

Ahmad K(1), Katryniok C(1), Scholz B(2), Merkens J(2), Löscher D(2), Marschalek
R(2), Steinhilber D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutical Chemistry/ZAFES, Goethe University Frankfurt,
Frankfurt, Germany. (2)Institute of Pharmaceutical Biology/ZAFES, Goethe
University Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany.

The ALOX5 gene encodes 5-lipoxygenase (5-LO), a key enzyme of inflammatory
reactions, which is transcriptionally activated by trichostatin A (TSA).
Physiologically, 5-LO expression is induced by calcitriol and/or transforming
growth factor-ß. Regulation of 5-LO mRNA involves promoter activation and
elongation control within the 3'-portion of the ALOX5 gene. Here we focused on
the ALOX5 promoter region. Transcriptional initiation was associated with an
increase in histone H3 lysine 4 trimethylation in a TSA-inducible manner.
Therefore, we investigated the effects of the MLL (mixed lineage leukemia)
protein and its derivatives, MLL-AF4 and AF4-MLL, respectively. MLL-AF4 was able 
to enhance ALOX5 promoter activity by 47-fold, which was further stimulated when 
either vitamin D receptor and retinoid X receptor or SMAD3/SMAD4 were
co-transfected. In addition, we investigated several histone deacetylase
inhibitors (HDACi) in combination with gene knockdown experiments (HDAC1-3, MLL).
We were able to demonstrate that a combined inhibition of HDAC1-3 induces ALOX5
promoter activity in an MLL-dependent manner. Surprisingly, a constitutive
activation of ALOX5 by MLL-AF4 was inhibited by class I HDAC inhibitors, by
relieving inhibitory functions deriving from MLL.Conversely, a knockdown of MLL
increased the effects mediated by MLL-AF4. Thus, HDACi treatment seems to switch 
'inactive MLL' into 'active MLL' and overwrites the dominant functions deriving
from MLL-AF4.

PMCID: PMC4259963
PMID: 25402609  [PubMed]


314. Drug Discov Ther. 2014 Oct;8(5):225-8.

HDAC1/3 dual selective inhibitors - new therapeutic agents for the potential
treatment of cancer.

Li X(1), Xu W.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Shandong University.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) have attracted a great deal of interest as
anticancer drug targets, and many HDAC inhibitors (HDACIs) have displayed
clinical efficacy in treating specific tumors. However, all of these agents have 
significant toxicity, including fatigue, nausea, vomiting, thrombocytopenia, and 
neutropenia. Thus, increased effort is being directed toward developing selective
HDACIs that are tolerated better and cause fewer adverse reactions. This article 
focuses mainly on the N-hydroxycinnamamide-based HDAC 1/3 dual inhibitors, and
this article outlines the anticancer potential of these inhibitors. Since
selective HDAC1/3 inhibitors may cause fewer adverse reactions than selective
pan-HDACIs and selective Class <U+0399> inhibitors in clinical settings, further study
of their mechanism of anticancer activity and optimization of their structure is 
warranted.

PMID: 25382558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2014;15(20):8679-84.

Anti-CSC effects in human esophageal squamous cell carcinomas and Eca109/9706
cells induced by nanoliposomal quercetin alone or combined with CD 133 antiserum.

Zheng NG(1), Mo SJ, Li JP, Wu JL.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cell Biology Research Center, Medical College of Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou, China E-mail : zhengng@zzu.edu.cn.

CD133 was recently reported to be a cancer stem cell and prognostic marker.
Quercetin is considered as a potential chemopreventive agent due to its
involvement in suppression of oxidative stress, proliferation and metastasis. In 
this study, the expression of CD133/CD44 in esophageal carcinomas and Eca109/9706
cells was explored. In immunoflurorescence the locations of CD133+ and multidrug 
resistance 1 (MDR 1)+ in the same E-cancer cells were coincident, mainly in
cytomembranes. In esophageal squamous cell carcinomas detected by double/single
immunocytochemistry, small CD133+ cells were located in the basal layer of
stratified squamous epithelium, determined as CSLC (cancer stem like cells);
CD44+ surrounding the cells appeared in diffuse pattern, and the larger CD44+
(hi) cells were mainly located in the prickle cell layer of the epithelium, as
progenitor cells. In E-cancer cells exposed to nanoliposomal quercetin (nLQ with 
cytomembrane permeability), down-regulation of NF-<U+03BA>Bp65, histone deacetylase 1
(HDAC1) and cyclin D1 and up-regulation of caspase-3 were shown by
immunoblotting, and attenuated HDAC1 with nuclear translocation and promoted
E-cadherin expression were demonstrated by immunocytochemistry. In particular,
enhanced E-cadherin expression reflected the reversed epithelial mesenchymal
transition (EMT) capacity of nLQ, acting as cancer attenuator/preventive agent.
nLQ acting as an HDAC inhibitor induced apoptotic cells detected by TUNEL assay
mediated via HDAC-NF-<U+03BA>B signaling. Apoptotic effects of liposomal quercetin (LQ, 
with cytomembrane-philia) combined with CD133 antiserum were also detected by
CD133 immunocytochemistry combined with TUNEL assay. The combination could induce
greater apoptotic effects than nLQ induced alone, suggesting a novel anti-CSC
treatment strategy.

PMID: 25374189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Dev Neurobiol. 2015 Jul;75(7):738-56. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22245. Epub 2014 Nov 13.

Characterization of brain cell nuclei with decondensed chromatin.

Yu P(1), McKinney EC(1), Kandasamy MM(1), Albert AL(2), Meagher RB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Davison Life Sciences Building,
Athens, Georgia, 30602. (2)Department of Biology, Emory University, Atlanta,
Georgia, 30322.

Although multipotent cell types have enlarged nuclei with decondensed chromatin, 
this property has not been exploited to enhance the characterization of neural
progenitor cell (NPC) populations in the brain. We found that mouse brain cell
nuclei that expressed exceptionally high levels of the pan neuronal marker
NeuN/FOX3 (NeuN-High) had decondensed chromatin relative to most NeuN-Low or
NeuN-Neg (negative) nuclei. Purified NeuN-High nuclei expressed significantly
higher levels of transcripts encoding markers of neurogenesis, neuroplasticity,
and learning and memory (ARC, BDNF, ERG1, HOMER1, NFL/NEF1, SYT1), subunits of
chromatin modifying machinery (SIRT1, HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC11, KAT2B, KAT3A, KAT3B, 
KAT5, DMNT1, DNMT3A, Gadd45a, Gadd45b) and markers of NPC and cell cycle activity
(BRN2, FOXG1, KLF4, c-MYC, OCT4, PCNA, SHH, SOX2) relative to neuronal NeuN-Low
or to mostly non-neuronal NeuN-Neg nuclei. NeuN-High nuclei expressed higher
levels of HDAC1, 2, 4, and 5 proteins. The cortex, hippocampus, hypothalamus,
thalamus, and nucleus accumbens contained high percentages of large decondensed
NeuN-High nuclei, while the cerebellum, and pons contained very few. NeuN-High
nuclei have the properties consistent with their being derived from extremely
active neurons with elevated rates of chromatin modification and/or NPC-like
cells with multilineage developmental potential. The further analysis of
decondensed neural cell nuclei should provide novel insights into neurobiology
and neurodegenerative disease.

© 2014 The Authors Developmental Neurobiology Published by Wiley Periodicals,
Inc.

PMID: 25369517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 4;9(11):e111720. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111720.
eCollection 2014.

Phospho-aspirin-2 (MDC-22) inhibits estrogen receptor positive breast cancer
growth both in vitro and in vivo by a redox-dependent effect.

Huang L(1), Wong CC(1), Cheng KW(1), Rigas B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Prevention, Department of Medicine, Stony Brook University,
Stony Brook, New York, United States of America. (2)Division of Cancer
Prevention, Department of Medicine, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New
York, United States of America; Medicon Pharmaceuticals, Inc, Setauket, New York,
United States of America.

Phospho-aspirin (PA-2) is a novel aspirin derivative that exhibits promising
anticancer properties and is considerably safer than conventional aspirin. In
this study, we investigated the chemotherapeutic efficacy of PA-2 in preclinical 
models of estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer and elucidated its
mechanism of action. PA-2 inhibited the growth of ER+ cells more potently than
aspirin in vitro, and exerted a triple cytokinetic effect that includes induction
of apoptosis and cell cycle arrest as well as the inhibition of cell
proliferation. PA-2 is highly efficacious in vivo, as treatment of established
MCF7 xenografts with PA-2 induced tumor stasis (98.2% inhibition, p<0.01). PA-2
triggered the activation of p53-dependent apoptosis via two distinct mechanisms: 
1) acetylation of p53 (at K373), which disrupts its interaction with its
transcription repressor MDM2, and 2) translocation of p53 to the mitochondria
leading to the dissipation of mitochondrial transmembrane potential (<U+0394><U+03A8>(m)).
Consistent with these observations, both the RNAi-mediated knockdown of p53 and
forced deactylation via HDAC1 over-expression attenuated the anticancer effect of
PA-2 in MCF7 cells. An upstream mediator of the signaling effects of PA-2 is
RONS. PA-2 induced oxidative stress in vitro and in mice bearing MCF7 xenografts;
its induction effect appears to be tumor-specific. Crucially, administration of
N-acetylcysteine, a ROS scavenger, abrogated the effect of PA-2 on p53
acetylation and mitochondria translocation, thus identifying RONS as proximal
molecules mediating the anticancer effect of PA-2. In summary, our findings
demonstrate that PA-2 is a promising antineoplastic compound against ER+ breast
cancer, warranting further evaluation as an anticancer agent.

PMCID: PMC4219766
PMID: 25369051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. J Chem Inf Model. 2014 Nov 24;54(11):3162-71. doi: 10.1021/ci500513n. Epub 2014
Nov 6.

Structure-function analysis of the conserved tyrosine and diverse p-stacking
among class I histone deacetylases: a QM (DFT)/MM MD study.

Zhou J(1), Xie H, Liu Z, Luo HB, Wu R.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University , Guangzhou, 510006 
Guangdong, P.R. China.

Discovery of the isoform-selective histone deacetylases (HDACs) inhibitors is of 
great medical importance and still a challenge. The comparison studies on the
structure-function relationship of the conserved residues, which are located in
the linker binding channel among class I HDACs (including 4 isoforms:
HDAC1/2/3/8), have been carried out by using ab initio QM/MM MD simulations, a
state-of-the-art approach to simulate metallo-enzymes. We found that the
conserved tyrosine (Y303/308/286/306 in HDAC1/2/3/8, respectively) could modulate
the zinc-inhibitor chelation among all class I HDACs with different regulatory
mechanisms. For HDAC1/2/3 selective-inhibitor benzamide, the conserved tyrosine
could modulate the coordinative ability of the central atom (Zn(2+)), while for
pan-inhibitor SAHA, the conserved tyrosine could increase the chelating ability
of the ligand (SAHA). Moreover, it is first found that the conserved tyrosine is 
correlated with the intertransformation of p-p stacking styles (parallel shift vs
T-shaped) by the aromatic ring in benzamide and the two conserved phenylalanine
residues of HDACs. In addition, the catalytic roles of the conserved tyrosine in 
stabilizing the transition state and intermediate are further revealed. These
findings provide useful molecular basis knowledge for further isoform-selective
inhibitor design among class I HDACs.

PMID: 25360823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Am J Transl Res. 2014 Oct 11;6(5):538-47. eCollection 2014.

Regulation of CRADD-caspase 2 cascade by histone deacetylase 1 in gastric cancer.

Shen Q(1), Tang W(2), Sun J(3), Feng L(3), Jin H(3), Wang X(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Biomedical Research Center, Sir Runrun Shaw
Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University China ; Laboratory of Cancer
Biology, Biomedical Research Center, Sir Runrun Shaw Hospital, School of
Medicine, Zhejiang University China. (2)Department of Medical Oncology,
Biomedical Research Center, Sir Runrun Shaw Hospital, School of Medicine,
Zhejiang University China ; Department of Medical Oncology, Jinhua Guangfu
Hospital Jinhua, Zhejiang, China. (3)Laboratory of Cancer Biology, Biomedical
Research Center, Sir Runrun Shaw Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang
University China. (4)Department of Medical Oncology, Biomedical Research Center, 
Sir Runrun Shaw Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University China.

CRADD, also referred as RAIDD, is an adaptor protein that could interact with
both caspase 2 and RIP that can promote apoptosis once activated. HDAC inhibitors
are promising anti-cancer agents by inducing apoptosis of various cancer cells.
In this study, we found that CRADD was induced by TSA (trichostatin A) to
activate caspase 2-dependent apoptosis. CRADD was downregulated in gastric cancer
and the restoration of its expression suppressed the viability of gastric cancer 
cells. HDAC1 was responsible for its downregulation in gastric cancer since HDAC1
siRNA upregulated CRADD expression and HDAC1 directly bound to the promoter of
CRADD. Therefore, the high expression of HDAC1 can downregulate CRADD to confer
gastric cancer cells the resistance to caspase 2-dependent apoptosis. HDAC
inhibitors, potential anti-cancer drugs under investigation, can promote caspase 
2-dependent apoptosis by inducing the expression of CRADD.

PMCID: PMC4212928
PMID: 25360218  [PubMed]


320. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2014 Dec;33(4):857-67. doi: 10.1007/s10555-014-9513-5.

Towards an understanding of the structure and function of MTA1.

Millard CJ(1), Fairall L, Schwabe JW.

Author information: 
(1)Henry Wellcome Laboratories of Structural Biology, Department of Biochemistry,
University of Leicester, Leicester, LE1 9HN, UK.

Gene expression is controlled through the recruitment of large coregulator
complexes to specific gene loci to regulate chromatin structure by modifying
epigenetic marks on DNA and histones. Metastasis-associated protein 1 (MTA1) is
an essential component of the nucleosome remodelling and deacetylase (NuRD)
complex that acts as a scaffold protein to assemble enzymatic activity and
nucleosome targeting proteins. MTA1 consists of four characterised domains, a
number of interaction motifs, and regions that are predicted to be intrinsically 
disordered. The ELM2-SANT domain is one of the best-characterised regions of
MTA1, which recruits histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and activates the enzyme in
the presence of inositol phosphate. MTA1 is highly upregulated in several types
of aggressive tumours and is therefore a possible target for cancer therapy. In
this review, we summarise the structure and function of the four domains of MTA1 
and discuss the possible functions of less well-characterised regions of the
protein.

PMCID: PMC4244562
PMID: 25352341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Curr Cancer Drug Targets. 2014;14(8):685-99.

Nontoxic-dose of deguelin induce NPMc+ AML cell differentiation by selectively
targeting Mt NPM1/SIRT1 instead of HDAC1/3.

Wang YP, Yi S, Wen L, Zhang BP, Zhao Z, Hu JY, Zhao F, He J, Fang J, Zhang C, Cui
G, Chen Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei Province, P.R. China.
yanchen981@163.com.

AML with Mt NPM1 has relatively good responses to induction therapy. However, a
proportion of NPMc+ AML cells cannot be cleared by conventional treatments.
Therefore, we determined the therapeutic efficacy of deguelin that has
demonstrated extensive biological activity with low toxicity. We previously
reported that deguelin selectively reduces Mt NPM1, as well as induces
differentiation and potentiates apoptosis in NPMc+ AML cells. Nevertheless,
little information is available regarding the mechanism of deguelin-induced
differentiation. Here, we investigated the role of deguelin in the induction of
NPMc+ AML cell differentiation. Deguelin at the nontoxic concentration of 2 µM
strongly inhibited cell growth but reduced apoptosis in OCI-AML3 cells carrying
Mt NPM1, whereas the antiproliferative effect was minimal in OCIM2 cells
harboring Wt NPM1. Compared with OCIM2 cells that showed no response,
deguelin-treated OCI-AML3 cells exhibited the morphological features of
granulocytic/monocytic differentiation, increased expression of differentiation
antigens, and a nitroblue tetrazolium reduction activity. Induction of
differentiation was associated with downregulation of Mt NPM1 and SIRT1, but not 
Wt NPM1, which was accompanied by an increase in CEBPß and G-CSFR expression, and
further confirmed by sh-Mt NPM1 and sh-SIRT1. sh-Mt NPM1 treatment reduced SIRT1 
expression, but did not change HDAC1/3 levels, suggesting that the decline of
SIRT1 was partially accountable for the deguelin-induced, Mt-NPM1-related
differentiation. Moreover, Mt NPM1 overexpression blocked deguelin-induced cell
differentiation. Lastly, we showed that deguelin reduced the expression of Mt
NPM1 via the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Taken together, our results suggest
that deguelin may be a therapeutic candidate for NPMc+ AML.

PMID: 25348016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Oct 23;5:e1491. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.433.

HDAC1 and Klf4 interplay critically regulates human myeloid leukemia cell
proliferation.

Huang Y(1), Chen J(2), Lu C(3), Han J(2), Wang G(1), Song C(1), Zhu S(1), Wang
C(1), Li G(1), Kang J(1), Wang J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical and Translational Research Center of Shanghai First Maternity and
Infant Health Hospital, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Signaling and Disease
Research, School of Life Science and Technology, Tongji University, 1239 Siping
Road, Shanghai 200092, PR China. (2)Department of Hematology, Changhai Hospital, 
The Second Military Medical University, Shanghai 200433, PR China. (3)Laboratory 
of Population & Quantitative Genetics, Department of Biostatistics and
Computational Biology, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai
200433, PR China.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is recognized as a complex disease of hematopoietic 
stem cell disorders, but its pathogenesis mechanisms, diagnosis, and treatment
remain unclear. General histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors have been used in
blood cancers including AML, but the lack of gene specificity greatly limits
their anti-cancer effects and clinical applications. Here, we found that HDAC1
expression was negatively correlated with that of Krüppel-like factor 4 (Klf4)
and that AML patients with lower HDAC1 level had better prognosis. Further,
knockdown of HDAC1 in leukemia cells K562, HL-60, and U937 significantly
increased Klf4 expression and inhibited cell cycle progression and cell
proliferation, similar results were found for HDAC inhibitors (VPA and
mocetinostat). Moreover, overexpression or knockdown of Klf4 could markedly block
the effects of HDAC1 overexpression or knockdown on leukemia cells in vitro and
in vivo, respectively. Mechanistic analyses demonstrated that HDAC1 and Klf4
competitively bound to the promoter region of Klf4 and oppositely regulated Klf4 
expression in myeloid leukemia. We identified HDAC1 as a potential specific
target for repressing cell proliferation and inducing cell cycle arrest through
interplay and modulation of Klf4 expression, suggests that HDAC1 and Klf4 are
potential new molecular markers and targets for clinical diagnosis, prognosis,
and treatment of myeloid leukemia.

PMCID: PMC4237257
PMID: 25341045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Cancer Prev. 2014 Sep;19(3):187-98. doi: 10.15430/JCP.2014.19.3.187.

The Nuclear Matrix Protein, NRP/B, Acts as a Transcriptional Repressor of
E2F-mediated Transcriptional Activity.

Choi J(1), Yang ES(2), Cha K(3), Whang J(2), Choi WJ(1), Avraham S(3), Kim TA(4).

Author information: 
(1)CHA Cancer Institute, CHA University, Seoul, Korea. (2)Cancer Cell Biology
Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD,
USA. (3)Division of Experimental Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (4)CHA Cancer Institute, CHA University,
Seoul, Korea ; Cancer Cell Biology Branch, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

BACKGROUND: NRP/B, a family member of the BTB/Kelch repeat proteins, is
implicated in neuronal and cancer development, as well as the regulation of
oxidative stress responses in breast and brain cancer. Our previous studies
indicate that the NRP/B-BTB/POZ domain is involved in the dimerization of NRP/B
and in a complex formation with the tumor suppressor, retinoblastoma protein.
Although much evidence supports the potential role of NRP/B as a tumor
suppressor, the molecular mechanisms of NRP/B action on E2F transcription factors
have not been elucidated.
METHODS: Three-dimensional modeling of NRP/B was used to generate point mutations
in the BTB/Kelch domains. Tet-on inducible NRP/B expression was established. The 
NRP/B deficient breast cancer cell line, MDA-MB-231, was generated using
lentiviral shNRP/B to evaluate the effect of NRP/B on cell proliferation,
invasion and migration. Immunoprecipitation was performed to verify the
interaction of NRP/B with E2F and histone deacetylase (HDAC-1), and the
expression level of NRP/B protein was analyzed by Western blot analysis. Changes 
in cell cycle were determined by flow cytometry. Transcriptional activities of
E2F transcription factors were measured by chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
(CAT) activity.
RESULTS: Ectopic overexpression of NRP/B demonstrated that the NRP/B-BTB/POZ
domain plays a critical role in E2F-mediated transcriptional activity. Point
mutations within the BTB/POZ domain restored E2-promoter activity inhibited by
NRP/B. Loss of NRP/B enhanced the proliferation and migration of breast cancer
cells. Endogenous NRP/B interacted with E2F and HDAC1. Treatement with an HDAC
inhibitor, trichostatin A (TSA), abolished the NRP/B-mediated suppression of
E2-promoter activity. Gain or loss of NRP/B in HeLa cells confirmed the
transcriptional repressive capability of NRP/B on the E2F target genes, Cyclin E 
and HsORC (Homo sapiens Origin Recognition Complex).
CONCLUSIONS: The present study shows that NRP/B acts as a transcriptional
repressor by interacting with the co-repressors, HDAC1, providing new insight
into the molecular mechanisms of NRP/B on tumor suppression.

PMCID: PMC4189505
PMID: 25337588  [PubMed]


324. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 21;9(10):e110576. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110576.
eCollection 2014.

HDAC1 controls CD8+ T cell homeostasis and antiviral response.

Tschismarov R(1), Firner S(2), Gil-Cruz C(2), Göschl L(3), Boucheron N(1),
Steiner G(4), Matthias P(5), Seiser C(6), Ludewig B(2), Ellmeier W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunobiology, Institute of Immunology, Center for
Pathophysiology, Infectiology and Immunology, Medical University of Vienna,
Vienna, Austria. (2)Institute of Immunobiology, Cantonal Hospital St.Gallen, St. 
Gallen, Switzerland. (3)Division of Immunobiology, Institute of Immunology,
Center for Pathophysiology, Infectiology and Immunology, Medical University of
Vienna, Vienna, Austria; Division of Rheumatology, Medicine III, Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. (4)Division of Rheumatology, Medicine III,
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. (5)Friedrich Miescher Institute
for Biomedical Research, Novartis Research Foundation and University of Basel,
Faculty of Sciences, Basel, Switzerland. (6)Department of Medical Biochemistry,
Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Vienna Biocenter, Medical University of Vienna,
Vienna, Austria.

Reversible lysine acetylation plays an important role in the regulation of T cell
responses. HDAC1 has been shown to control peripheral T helper cells, however the
role of HDAC1 in CD8+ T cell function remains elusive. By using conditional gene 
targeting approaches, we show that LckCre-mediated deletion of HDAC1 led to
reduced numbers of thymocytes as well as peripheral T cells, and to an increased 
fraction of CD8+CD4- cells within the CD3/TCRßlo population, indicating that
HDAC1 is essential for the efficient progression of immature CD8+CD4- cells to
the DP stage. Moreover, CD44hi effector CD8+ T cells were enhanced in mice with a
T cell-specific deletion of HDAC1 under homeostatic conditions and
HDAC1-deficient CD44hi CD8+ T cells produced more IFN<U+03B3> upon ex vivo PMA/ionomycin
stimulation in comparison to wild-type cells. Naïve (CD44l°CD62L+) HDAC1-null
CD8+ T cells displayed a normal proliferative response, produced similar amounts 
of IL-2 and TNFa, slightly enhanced amounts of IFN<U+03B3>, and their in vivo
cytotoxicity was normal in the absence of HDAC1. However, T cell-specific loss of
HDAC1 led to a reduced anti-viral CD8+ T cell response upon LCMV infection and
impaired expansion of virus-specific CD8+ T cells. Taken together, our data
indicate that HDAC1 is required for the efficient generation of thymocytes and
peripheral T cells, for proper CD8+ T cell homeostasis and for an efficient in
vivo expansion and activation of CD8+ T cells in response to LCMV infection.

PMCID: PMC4204873
PMID: 25333902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Jan;11(1):105-12. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2733. Epub 2014 Oct 21.

Ampelopsin induces apoptosis by regulating multiple c-Myc/S-phase
kinase-associated protein 2/F-box and WD repeat-containing protein 7/histone
deacetylase 2 pathways in human lung adenocarcinoma cells.

Chen XM(1), Xie XB(2), Zhao Q(1), Wang F(3), Bai Y(4), Yin JQ(2), Jiang H(3), Xie
XL(3), Jia Q(3), Huang G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Basic Science, Guangzhou Medical
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510182, P.R. China. (2)Department of
Musculoskeletal Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510080, P.R. China. (3)Institute of Biology,
Guizhou Academy of Sciences, Guiyang, Guizhou 550009, P.R. China. (4)Guangzhou
Institute of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou,
Guangdong 510230, P.R. China.

Ampelopsin (AMP), a plant flavonoid, has been reported to inhibit cell growth
and/or induce apoptosis in various types of tumor. The aim of the present study
was to assess the apoptosis-inducing activity of AMP in A549 human lung
adenocarcinoma epithelial cells and the associated underlying mechanism. A549
cells were incubated with different concentrations of AMP in culture medium. Cell
growth and apoptosis were evaluated by MTT assay and Annexin V/propidium iodide
double staining and flow cytometry, respectively. In addition, western blotting
and reverse transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction analysis were
used to examine the time-dependent changes in protein expression. Certain changes
in apoptotic protein expression were detected following exposure to AMP,
including X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein release, reduced B-cell
lymphoma 2, myeloid cell leukemia 1 and survivin expression levels, increased
Bcl-2-associated X protein expression levels and cleaved-poly ADP ribose
polymerase expression. The results revealed that AMP was a potent inhibitor of
A549 cell proliferation. The c-Myc/S-phase kinase-associated protein 2 (Skp2) and
histone deacetylase (HDAC)1/2 pathways were found to exert an important role in
AMP-induced A549 cell apoptosis, as increased levels of c-Myc mRNA and reduced
levels of c-Myc/Skp2 and HDAC1 and 2 proteins following AMP treatment were
observed. The levels of F-box and WD repeat-containing protein 7a (Fbw7a), Fbw7ß,
Fbw7<U+03B3>, phosphorylated-(p-)c-Myc (Thr58) and glycogen synthase kinase 3ß (GSK3ß)
proteins involved in c-Myc ubiquitin-dependent degradation were also analyzed.
Following exposure to AMP, the expression levels of Fbw7a, Fbw7<U+03B3> and GSK3ß were
reduced and p-c-Myc (Thr58) expression levels were increased. The results suggest
that AMP exerts an anticancer effect, which is associated with the degradation of
c-Myc, Skp2 and HDAC1 and 2. The ability of AMP to induce apoptosis independently
of Fbwa and Fbw7<U+03B3> suggests a possible use in drug-resistant cancer associated
with Fbw7 deficiency. Understanding the exact underlying mechanism requires
further investigation of the association between c-Myc and Fbw7a/<U+03B3> reversal, and 
analysis of whether Thr58 phosphorylation of c-Myc is dependent on GSK3ß.

PMCID: PMC4237074
PMID: 25333250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Oct 16;5:e1476. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.422.

HDAC8 and STAT3 repress BMF gene activity in colon cancer cells.

Kang Y(1), Nian H(2), Rajendran P(3), Kim E(3), Dashwood WM(3), Pinto JT(4),
Boardman LA(5), Thibodeau SN(5), Limburg PJ(5), Löhr CV(6), Bisson WH(7),
Williams DE(8), Ho E(1), Dashwood RH(9).

Author information: 
(1)Linus Pauling Institute, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN, USA. (3)Center for Epigenetics & Disease Prevention, Institute of 
Biosciences & Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, New York Medical College,
Valhalla, NY, USA. (5)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. (6)College of Veterinary
Medicine, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA. (7)Department of
Environmental and Molecular Toxicology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR,
USA. (8)1] Linus Pauling Institute, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA
[2] Department of Environmental and Molecular Toxicology, Oregon State
University, Corvallis, OR, USA. (9)1] Center for Epigenetics & Disease
Prevention, Institute of Biosciences & Technology, Texas A&M Health Science
Center, Houston, TX, USA [2] Department of Nutrition & Food Science, Texas A&M
University, College Station, TX, USA [3] Department of Clinical Cancer
Prevention, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA [4] Department of
Molecular & Cellular Medicine, Texas A&M University College of Medicine, College 
Station, TX, USA.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are undergoing clinical trials as
anticancer agents, but some exhibit resistance mechanisms linked to
anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 functions, such as BH3-only protein silencing. HDAC
inhibitors that reactivate BH3-only family members might offer an improved
therapeutic approach. We show here that a novel seleno-a-keto acid triggers
global histone acetylation in human colon cancer cells and activates apoptosis in
a p21-independent manner. Profiling of multiple survival factors identified a
critical role for the BH3-only member Bcl-2-modifying factor (Bmf). On the
corresponding BMF gene promoter, loss of HDAC8 was associated with signal
transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3)/specificity protein 3 (Sp3)
transcription factor exchange and recruitment of p300. Treatment with a p300
inhibitor or transient overexpression of exogenous HDAC8 interfered with BMF
induction, whereas RNAi-mediated silencing of STAT3 activated the target gene.
This is the first report to identify a direct target gene of HDAC8 repression,
namely, BMF. Interestingly, the repressive role of HDAC8 could be uncoupled from 
HDAC1 to trigger Bmf-mediated apoptosis. These findings have implications for the
development of HDAC8-selective inhibitors as therapeutic agents, beyond the
reported involvement of HDAC8 in childhood malignancy.

PMCID: PMC4237248
PMID: 25321483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Stem Cells Dev. 2015 Mar 1;24(5):550-64. doi: 10.1089/scd.2014.0310. Epub 2014
Dec 2.

Epigenetic disruptions of histone signatures for the trophectoderm and inner cell
mass in mouse parthenogenetic embryos.

Chen YH(1), Yu J.

Author information: 
(1)1 Graduate Institute of Aerospace and Undersea Medicine, National Defense
Medical Center , Taipei, Taiwan .

Epigenetic asymmetry has been shown to be associated with the first lineage
allocation event in preimplantation development, that is, the formation of the
trophectoderm (TE) and inner cell mass (ICM) lineages in the blastocyst. Since
parthenogenesis causes aberrant segregation between the TE and ICM lineages, we
examined several development-associated histone modifications in parthenotes,
including those involved in (i) transcriptional activation [acetylated histone H3
lysine 9 (H3K9Ac) and lysine 14 (H3K14Ac), trimethylated histone H3 lysine 4
(H3K4Me3), and dimethylated histone H3 arginine 26 (H3R26Me2)] and (ii)
transcriptional repression [trimethylated histone H3 lysine 9 (H3K9Me3) and
lysine 27 (H3K27Me3), and mono-ubiquitinated histone H2A lysine 119 (H2AK119u1)].
Here, we report that in parthenotes, H3R26Me2 expression decreased from the
morula stage, while expression patterns and levels of H3K9Ac, H3K27Me3, and
H2AK119u1 were unchanged until the blastocyst stage; whereas H3K14Ac, H3K4Me3,
and H3K9Me3 showed normal patterns and levels of expressions. Relative to the
decrease of H3K9Ac in the ICM and increase in the TE of parthenotes, we detected 
reduced expression of TAT-interactive protein 60 acetyltransferase and histone
deacetylase 1 deacetylase in the ICM and TE of parthenotes, respectively.
Relative to the decrease of H3R26Me2, we also observed decreased expression of
coactivator-associated arginine methyltransferase 1 methyltransferase and
increased expression of the Wnt effector transcription factor 7L2 and miR-181c
microRNA in parthenotes. Furthermore, relative to the decrease in H3K27Me3 and
H2AK119u1, we found increased phosphorylation of Akt1 and enhancer of zeste
homolog 2 in parthenogenetic TE. Therefore, our findings that histone signatures 
are impaired in parthenotes provide a mechanistic explanation for aberrant
lineage segregation and TE defects.

PMCID: PMC4333321
PMID: 25315067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. J Cancer Res Ther. 2014 Jul-Sep;10(3):469-78. doi: 10.4103/0973-1482.137937.

Epigenetic therapy of cancer with histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Lakshmaiah KC, Jacob LA, Aparna S(1), Lokanatha D, Saldanha SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Kidwai Memorial Institute of Oncology,
Bengaluru, Karnataka, India.

Epigenetics is the study of heritable alterations in gene expression that are not
accompanied by the corresponding change in DNA sequence. Three interlinked
epigenetic processes regulate gene expression at the level of chromatin, namely
DNA methylation, nucleosomal remodeling and histone covalent modifications.
Post-translational modifications that occur on certain amino acid residues of the
tails of histone proteins modify chromatin structure and form the basis for
"histone code". The enzymes Histone Acetyl Transferase (HAT) and Histone
Deacetylase (HDAC) control the level of acetylation of histones and thereby alter
gene expression. In many cancers, the balance between HAT and HDAC is altered.
HDAC enzymes are grouped into four different classes namely Class I (HDAC1,
HDAC2, HDAC3, and HDAC8), Class II (HDAC4, HDAC5, HDAC6, HDAC7, HDAC9, and
HDAC10), Class III HDAC and Class IV (HDAC11). Histone Deacetylase Inhibitors
(HDACI) exert anticancer activity by promoting acetylation of histones as well as
by promoting acetylation of non-histone protein substrates. The effects of HDACI 
on gene transcription are complex. They cause cell cycle arrest, inhibit DNA
repair, induce apoptosis and acetylate non histone proteins causing downstream
alterations in gene expression. HDACI are a diverse group of compounds, which
vary in structure, biological activity, and specificity. In general, HDACIs
contain a zinc-binding domain, a capping group, and a straight chain linker
connecting the two. They are classified into four classes namely short chain
fatty acids, hydroxamic acids, cyclic peptides and synthetic benzamides. This
review describes the clinical utility of HDACI as monotherapy as well as
combination therapy with other treatment modalities such as chemotherapy and
radiotherapy. Adverse effects and shortcomings of treatment with HDACI are also
discussed in detail.

PMID: 25313724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Histopathology. 2015 Jan;66(2):270-82. doi: 10.1111/his.12534. Epub 2014 Oct 31.

Nuclear expression of histone deacetylases and their histone modifications
predicts clinical outcome in colorectal cancer.

Benard A(1), Goossens-Beumer IJ, van Hoesel AQ, Horati H, de Graaf W, Putter H,
Zeestraten EC, Liefers GJ, van de Velde CJ, Kuppen PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

AIMS: Epigenetic changes are of crucial importance in cancer development and are 
potentially reversible; they are therefore targets of interest for anti-cancer
therapy. The aim of this study was to investigate the clinical prognostic value
of the histone deacetylases SIRT1, HDAC1 and HDAC2 and the histone modifications 
H4K16Ac and H3K56Ac in colorectal cancer.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The epigenetic markers were immunohistochemically stained on
tissue microarrays containing colorectal tumours (n = 254) and normal colorectal 
tissues (n = 50). Nuclear expression was assessed on the semi-automated Ariol
system. Multivariate trend survival analyses of the combined markers showed
better patient survival and less tumour recurrence when more markers showed high 
nuclear expression. For the combination of the histone deacetylases and H3K56Ac, 
the hazard ratio (HR) for overall survival (OS) was 0.82 [95% confidence interval
(CI) 0.72-0.94; P = 0.005] and the HR for distant recurrence-free survival (DRFS)
was 0.77 (95% CI 0.64-0.92; P = 0.003) per additional marker showing high
expression. Similarly, for the combination of histone deactylases and H4K16Ac,
HRs of 0.86 (95% CI 0.76-0.97; P = 0.01) for OS and 0.79 (95% CI 0.68-0.93; P =
0.006) for DRFS were observed per additional marker showing high expression.
CONCLUSIONS: The studied epigenetic markers showed clinical prognostic value in
colorectal cancer, both as individual markers and when combined into multimarker 
analyses. These results indicate that epigenetic mechanisms play an important
role in colorectal carcinogenesis.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25307864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2014;15(18):7849-55.

Effect of trichostatin A on anti HepG2 liver carcinoma cells: inhibition of HDAC 
activity and activation of Wnt/ß-Catenin signaling.

Shi QQ(1), Zuo GW, Feng ZQ, Zhao LC, Luo L, You ZM, Li DY, Xia J, Li J, Chen DL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Stem Cell and Tissue Engineering, Department of Histology and
Embryology, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China E-mail :
lijingyangyang@126.com.cn; chendilong@21cn.com.

PURPOSE: To investigate the effect of deacetylase inhibitory trichostatin A (TSA)
on anti HepG2 liver carcinoma cells and explore the underlying mechanisms.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: HepG2 cells exposed to different concentrations of TSA for
24, 48, or 72h were examined for cell growth inhibition using CCK8, changes in
cell cycle distribution with flow cytometry, cell apoptosis with annexin
V-FTIC/PI double staining, and cell morphology changes under an inverted
microscope. Expression of ß-catenin, HDAC1, HDAC3, H3K9, CyclinD1 and Bax
proteins was tested by Western blotting. Gene expression for ß-catenin, HDAC1and 
HDAC3 was tested by q-PCR. ß-Catenin and H3K9 proteins were also tested by
immunofluorescence. Activity of Renilla luciferase (pTCF/LEF-luc) was assessed
using the Luciferase Reporter Assay system reagent. The activity of total HDACs
was detected with a HDACs colorimetric kit.
RESULTS: Exposure to TSA caused significant dose-and time-dependent inhibition of
HepG2 cell proliferation (p<0.05) and resulted in increased cell percentages in
G0/ G1 and G2/M phases and decrease in the S phase. The apoptotic index in the
control group was 6.22±0.25%, which increased to 7.17±0.20% and 18.1±0.42% in the
treatment group. Exposure to 250 and 500nmol/L TSA also caused cell morphology
changes with numerous floating cells. Expression of ß-catenin, H3K9and Bax
proteins was significantly increased, expression levels of CyclinD1, HDAC1, HDAC3
were decreased. Expression of ß-catenin at the genetic level was significantly
increased, with no significant difference in HDAC1and HDAC3 genes. In the
cytoplasm, expression of ß-catenin fluorescence protein was not obvious changed
and in the nucleus, small amounts of green fluorescence were observed. H3K9
fluorescence protein were increased. Expression levels of the transcription
factor TCF werealso increased in HepG2 cells following induction by TSA, whikle
the activity of total HDACs was decreased.
CONCLUSIONS: TSA inhibits HDAC activity, promotes histone acetylation, and
activates Wnt/ß-catenin signaling to inhibit proliferation of HepG2 cell, arrest 
cell cycling and induce apoptosis.

PMID: 25292076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Mol Cell. 2014 Oct 23;56(2):323-32. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.09.006. Epub 2014 
Oct 2.

Oxidative stress diverts tRNA synthetase to nucleus for protection against DNA
damage.

Wei N(1), Shi Y(1), Truong LN(2), Fisch KM(2), Xu T(1), Gardiner E(1), Fu G(1),
Hsu YS(1), Kishi S(3), Su AI(2), Wu X(2), Yang XL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Chemical Physiology and Cell and Molecular Biology, The Scripps
Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, The Scripps Research
Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (3)Department 
of Metabolism and Aging, The Scripps Research Institute, 130 Scripps Way,
Jupiter, FL 33458, USA. (4)Departments of Chemical Physiology and Cell and
Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road,
La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. Electronic address: xlyang@scripps.edu.

Tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase (TyrRS) is known for its essential aminoacylation
function in protein synthesis. Here we report a function for TyrRS in DNA damage 
protection. We found that oxidative stress, which often downregulates protein
synthesis, induces TyrRS to rapidly translocate from the cytosol to the nucleus. 
We also found that angiogenin mediates or potentiates this stress-induced
translocalization. The nuclear-localized TyrRS activates transcription factor
E2F1 to upregulate the expression of DNA damage repair genes such as BRCA1 and
RAD51. The activation is achieved through direct interaction of TyrRS with TRIM28
to sequester this vertebrate-specific epigenetic repressor and its associated
HDAC1 from deacetylating and suppressing E2F1. Remarkably, overexpression of
TyrRS strongly protects against UV-induced DNA double-strand breaks in zebrafish,
whereas restricting TyrRS nuclear entry completely abolishes the protection.
Therefore, oxidative stress triggers an essential cytoplasmic enzyme used for
protein synthesis to translocate to the nucleus to protect against DNA damage.

PMCID: PMC4224670
PMID: 25284223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 3;9(10):e109578. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0109578.
eCollection 2014.

Histone deacetylase 1/Sp1/microRNA-200b signaling accounts for maintenance of
cancer stem-like cells in human lung adenocarcinoma.

Chen DQ(1), Huang JY(1), Feng B(1), Pan BZ(1), De W(2), Wang R(1), Chen LB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Jinling Hospital, School of Medicine, Nanjing 
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, P. R. China. (2)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, P. R. China.

The presence of cancer stem-like cells (CSCs) is one of the mechanisms
responsible for chemoresistance that has been a major hindrance towards lung
adenocarcinoma (LAD) treatment. Recently, we have identified microRNA (miR)-200b 
as a key regulator of chemoresistance in human docetaxel-resistant LAD cells.
However, whether miR-200b has effects on regulating CSCs remains largely unclear 
and needs to be further elucidated. Here, we showed that miR-200b was
significantly downregulated in CD133+/CD326+ cells that exhibited properties of
CSCs derived from docetaxel-resistant LAD cells. Also, restoration of miR-200b
could inhibit maintenance and reverse chemoresistance of CSCs. Furthermore,
suppressor of zeste-12 (Suz-12) was identified as a direct and functional target 
of miR-200b, and silencing of Suz-12 phenocopied the effects of miR-200b on CSCs.
Additionally, overexpression of histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1 was identified as a 
pivotal mechanism responsible for miR-200b repression in CSCs through a
specificity protein (Sp) 1-dependent mechanism, and restoration of miR-200b by
HDAC1 repression significantly suppressed CSCs formation and reversed
chemoresistance of CSCs by regulating Suz-12-E-cadherin signaling. Also,
downregulation of HDAC1 or upregulation of miR-200b reduced the in vivo
tumorigenicity of CSCs. Finally, Suz-12 was inversely correlated with miR-200b,
positively correlated with HDAC1 and up-regulated in docetaxel-resistant LAD
tissues compared with docetaxel-sensitive tissues. Taken together, the
HDAC1/miR-200b/Suz-12-E-cadherin signaling might account for maintenance of CSCs 
and formation of chemoresistant phenotype in docetaxel-resistant LAD cells.

PMCID: PMC4184862
PMID: 25279705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Org Biomol Chem. 2014 Nov 28;12(44):8966-76. doi: 10.1039/c4ob00542b.

Effect of C7-substitution of 1-arylsulfonyl-5-(N-hydroxyacrylamide)indolines on
the selectivity towards a subclass of histone deacetylases.

Lee HY(1), Wang LT, Li YH, Pan SL, Chen YL, Teng CM, Liou JP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical University, 250 Wuxing
Street, Taipei 11031, Taiwan. jpl@tmu.edu.tw.

This study focused on the substitution effect at position C7 of
1-arylsulfonyl-5-(N-hydroxyacrylamide)indolines. Compound 9,
(E)-3-(7-amino-1-(4-methoxyphenylsulfonyl)indolin-5-yl)-N-hydroxyacrylamide,
displayed 4- to 14-fold more potent antiproliferative activity than vorinostat
(SAHA, 1). Notably, 9 possessed specific histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitory
activity toward HDAC1 and HDAC2, but had no effect on HDAC6, indicating that 9
has the potential to be developed as a class I HDAC inhibitor. In a xenograft
tumor model, 9 suppressed the growth of HCT116 cells at 100 mg kg(-1), which led 
to a TGI (tumor growth inhibition) of 40.3%. Taken together, the C7 substitutions
have a crucial effect on class I HDACs, which is beneficial for synthesizing
efficient anticancer agents.

PMID: 25277250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 2;9(9):e108520. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108520. eCollection
2014.

Further characterization of HDAC and SIRT gene expression patterns in pancreatic 
cancer and their relation to disease outcome.

Ouaïssi M(1), Silvy F(2), Loncle C(3), Ferraz da Silva D(4), Martins Abreu C(4), 
Martinez E(2), Berthézene P(3), Cadra S(3), Le Treut YP(5), Hardwigsen J(5),
Sastre B(1), Sielezneff I(6), Benkoel L(7), Delgrande J(8), Ouaissi A(9), Iovanna
J(3), Lombardo D(2), Mas E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Aix-Marseille University, CRO2, UMR_S 911, Marseille, France; INSERM UMR 911, 
Marseille, France; AP-HM, Timone Hospital, Department of Digestive and visceral
Surgery, Marseille, France. (2)Aix-Marseille University, CRO2, UMR_S 911,
Marseille, France; INSERM UMR 911, Marseille, France. (3)Aix-Marseille
University, CRCM, UMR_S 1068, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, CNRS, UMR7258, Marseille,
France; INSERM, UMR 1068, Marseille, France. (4)Aix-Marseille University, CRO2,
UMR_S 911, Marseille, France; INSERM UMR 911, Marseille, France; Faculdade de
Farmácia da Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal. (5)AP-HM, La Conception
Hospital, Department of hepatic transplantation and general surgery, Marseille,
France; Aix-Marseille University, Marseille, France. (6)AP-HM, Timone Hospital,
Department of Digestive and visceral Surgery, Marseille, France; Aix-Marseille
University, Marseille, France. (7)INSERM UMR 911, Marseille, France. (8)AP-HM,
Timone Hospital, Department of histopathology, Marseille, France. (9)Faculdade de
Farmácia da Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal.

Ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas is ranking 4 for patient' death from
malignant disease in Western countries, with no satisfactory treatment. We
re-examined more precisely the histone deacetylases (HDAC) and Sirtuin (SIRT)
gene expression patterns in pancreatic cancer with more pancreatic tumors and
normal tissues. We also examined the possible relationship between HDAC gene
expression levels and long term disease outcome. Moreover, we have evaluated by
using an in vitro model system of human pancreatic tumor cell line whether HDAC7 
knockdown may affect the cell behavior. We analyzed 29 pancreatic adenocarcinoma 
(PA), 9 chronic pancreatitis (CP), 8 benign pancreatic (BP) and 11 normal
pancreatic tissues. Concerning pancreatic adenocarcinoma, we were able to collect
biopsies at the tumor periphery. To assess the possible involvement of HDAC7 in
cell proliferation capacity, we have generated recombinant human Panc-1 tumor
which underexpressed or overexpressed HDAC7. The expression of HDAC1,2,3,4,7 and 
Nur77 increased in PA samples at levels significantly higher than those observed 
in the CP group (p = 0.0160; 0.0114; 0.0227; 0.0440; 0.0136; 0.0004,
respectively). The expression of HDAC7, was significantly greater in the PA
compared with BP tissue samples (p = 0.05). Mean mRNA transcription levels of PA 
for HDAC7 and HDAC2 were higher when compared to their counterpart biopsies taken
at the tumor periphery (p = 0.0346, 0.0053, respectively). Moreover, the data
obtained using confocal microscopy and a quantitative method of
immunofluorescence staining strongly support the HDAC7 overexpression in PA
surgical specimens. The number of deaths and recurrences at the end of follow up 
were significantly greater in patients with overexpression of HDAC7.
Interestingly, the rate of growth was significantly reduced in the case of cell
carrying shRNA construct targeting HDAC7 encoding gene when compared to the
parental Panc-1 tumor cells (p = 0.0015) at 48 h and 96 h (p = 0.0021). This
study strongly support the notion that HDAC7play a role in pancreatic
adenocarcinoma progression.

PMCID: PMC4183483
PMID: 25275504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Oct;30(10):1062-6.

[Regulatory effect of ginsenoside Rh2 on HDAC1/2 activity and cyclin in human
erythroleukemia K562 cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Xia J(1), Chen D(1), Zuo G(2), Wei Q(1), You Z(1), Li D(1), Liu Z(1), Li J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Stem Cell and Tissue Engineering, Department of Histology and
Embryology, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China. (2)Provincial 
and Ministry of Education Key Laboratories of Clinical Diagnostics, Chongqing
Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of the 20(S)-ginsenoside Rh2 [Rh2(S)]on
cell proliferation, histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and HDAC2 activity, and
expression of cyclin in human erythroleukemia K562 cells.
METHODS: The K562 cells were treated with Rh2(S) at various concentrations (10-80
µmol/L). Cell proliferation activity was detected by CCK-8 assay. Flow cytometry 
(FCM) was used to detect cell cycle and apoptotic changes. The HDAC activity of
cells was measured by chemical colorimetry. The protein expressions of HDAC1,
HDAC2, cyclin D1, CDK4, p16INK4A and p21 after 48 hour-treatment of Rh2 (S) (10, 
20, 40, 60 µmol/L) were examined by Western blotting.
RESULTS: The proliferation of K562 cells was inhibited by Rh2 (S) (20-80 µmol/L) 
in dose-and time-dependent manner. FCM analyses revealed that the number of the
K562 cells treated with 60 µmol/L Rh2(S) was arrested in G0/G1 phase. The
apoptosis rates of K562 cells were respectively (8.09±0.86)%, (9.44±0.53)% and
(22.80±2.16)% after induced by 20, 40, 60 µmol/L Rh2(S), which showed
statistically significant difference (P<0.05) compared with the control group
(2.63±0.14)%. HDAC activity of the cells treated with Rh2(S) (40, 60 µmol/L) was 
reduced. Western blotting showed that the expressions of HDAC1, HDAC2, cyclin D1 
and CDK4 decreased after induced by Rh2(S), and p16INK4A, p21 proteins were
enhanced significantly.
CONCLUSION: The Rh2(S) can inhibit the proliferation of K562 cells and induce its
cycle arrest and apoptosis through inhibiting HDAC1 and HDAC2 activity,
down-regulating the expression of cyclin D1 and activating p16INK4A and p21.

PMID: 25270209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Bioorg Med Chem. 2014 Nov 1;22(21):6146-55. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2014.08.030. Epub 
2014 Sep 4.

Design, synthesis and biological evaluation of
4-anilinothieno[2,3-d]pyrimidine-based hydroxamic acid derivatives as novel
histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Yang W(1), Li L(2), Ji X(1), Wu X(1), Su M(3), Sheng L(3), Zang Y(3), Li J(4),
Liu H(5).

Author information: 
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Receptor Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, 555 Zuchongzhi Road, Shanghai 201203, PR China.
(2)East China Normal University, Institutes for Advanced Interdisciplinary
Research, North Zhongshan Road Campus: 3663 N. Zhongshan Rd., Shanghai 200062, PR
China; State Key Laboratory of Drug Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia
Medica, SIBS, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201203, PR China. (3)State
Key Laboratory of Drug Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, SIBS,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201203, PR China. (4)East China Normal
University, Institutes for Advanced Interdisciplinary Research, North Zhongshan
Road Campus: 3663 N. Zhongshan Rd., Shanghai 200062, PR China; State Key
Laboratory of Drug Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, SIBS, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201203, PR China. Electronic address:
jli@mail.shcnc.ac.cn. (5)CAS Key Laboratory of Receptor Research, Shanghai
Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 555 Zuchongzhi Road,
Shanghai 201203, PR China. Electronic address: hliu@mail.shcnc.ac.cn.

A series of 4-anilinothieno[2,3-d]pyrimidine-based hydroxamic acid derivatives as
novel HDACs inhibitors were designed, synthesized and evaluated. Most of these
compounds displayed good to excellent inhibitory activities against HDAC1, 3, 6. 
The IC50 values of compound 10r against HDAC1, HDAC3, HDAC6 was 1.14 ± 0.03 nM,
3.56 ± 0.08 nM, 11.43 ± 0.12 nM. Compound 10r noticeably up-regulated the level
of histone H3 acetylation compared to the SAHA. Most of the compounds showed the 
strong anti-proliferative activity against human cancer cell lines including
RMPI8226 and HCT-116. The IC50 values of Compounds 10r and 10t against RPMI8226
was 2.39 ± 0.20 µM, 1.41 ± 0.44 µM, respectively, and the HCT-116 was sensitive
to the compounds 10h, 10 m, 10r, 10 w with the IC50 values <1.9 µM.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25261927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2014;110:317-38. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-405943-6.00009-9.

Stra13 and Sharp-1, the non-grouchy regulators of development and disease.

Ow JR(1), Tan YH(2), Jin Y(2), Bahirvani AG(2), Taneja R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University
of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore; National University of Singapore Graduate
School for Integrative Sciences and Engineering, National University of
Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. (2)Department of Physiology, Yong Loo Lin School
of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(3)Department of Physiology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University
of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore; National University of Singapore Graduate
School for Integrative Sciences and Engineering, National University of
Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. Electronic address: phsrt@nus.edu.sg.

Stra13 and Sharp-1 are transcriptional repressors that share domain structure
similarity with members of the basic helix-loop-helix-Orange subfamily. In
contrast to other members that include Hes and Hey proteins, transcriptional
repression mediated by Stra13 and Sharp-1 does not involve recruitment of the
corepressor Groucho. Both proteins undergo sumoylation at evolutionarily
conserved sites, and this posttranslational modification serves as a platform for
association with chromatin-modifying enzymes including histone deacetylases and
histone methyltransferases. In addition to being widely expressed during
embryonic development and in adult tissues, the expression of both genes is
induced by a number of stimuli. Loss-of-function and gain-of-function studies
have demonstrated their function in cellular differentiation and regeneration, in
regulation of circadian rhythms, immune homeostasis, and metabolism. Given their 
diverse physiological functions in several tissues, it is not surprising that
deregulated expression of Stra13 and Sharp-1 is apparent in human pathologies.
Here, we review our current understanding of their cellular functions that
suggest a requirement in maintenance of tissue homeostasis.

© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25248481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Oct;6(5):368-79. doi: 10.1093/jmcb/mju034. Epub 2014 Sep
19.

CKIP-1 suppresses the adipogenesis of mesenchymal stem cells by enhancing
HDAC1-associated repression of C/EBPa.

Li D(1), Zhu H(2), Liang C(3), Li W(3), Xing G(3), Ma L(4), Ding L(4), Zhang
Y(5), He F(6), Zhang L(7).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, Beijing 
Institute of Radiation Medicine, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer
Medicine, Beijing 100850, China Beijing Institute of Basic Medical Sciences,
Beijing 100850, China. (2)Beijing Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Beijing
100850, China. (3)State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research
Center, Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Collaborative Innovation Center 
for Cancer Medicine, Beijing 100850, China. (4)Laboratory Animal Center of the
Academy of Military Medical Sciences, Beijing 100850, China. (5)Beijing Institute
of Basic Medical Sciences, Beijing 100850, China zhanglq@nic.bmi.ac.cn
hefc@nic.bmi.ac.cn zhangyi612@hotmail.com. (6)State Key Laboratory of Proteomics,
Beijing Proteome Research Center, Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine,
Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Beijing 100850, China
zhanglq@nic.bmi.ac.cn hefc@nic.bmi.ac.cn zhangyi612@hotmail.com. (7)State Key
Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, Beijing Institute of 
Radiation Medicine, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Beijing 
100850, China Institute of Cancer Stem Cell, Dalian Medical University, Dalian
116044, China zhanglq@nic.bmi.ac.cn hefc@nic.bmi.ac.cn zhangyi612@hotmail.com.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are considered as the developmental origin of
multiple lineage cells including osteocytes, adipocytes, and muscle cells.
Previous studies demonstrated that the PH domain-containing protein CKIP-1 plays 
an important role in the development of osteoblasts and cardiomyocytes. However, 
whether CKIP-1 is involved in the generation of adipocytes as well as the MSC
differentiation remains unknown. Here we show that CKIP-1 is a novel regulator of
MSCs differentiating into adipocytes. MSCs derived from CKIP-1-deficient mice
display enhanced adipogenesis upon induction. Further analysis showed that CKIP-1
interacts with the histone deacetylase HDAC1 in the nucleus and inhibits the
transcription of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein a (C/EBPa), which is a crucial
adipogenic transcription factor. Ectopic expression of CKIP-1 in a MSC-like cell 
line C3H/10T1/2 reduced the generation of adipocytes due to suppression of
adipogenic factors, including C/EBPa. Moreover, CKIP-1-deficient mice showed an
increase in body weight and white adipose tissue gains when fed on a high-fat
diet. Collectively, these results suggest that CKIP-1 is a novel inhibitor of
MSC-originated adipogenesis by enhancing HDAC1-associated repression of C/EBPa.

© The Author (2014). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Journal of
Molecular Cell Biology, IBCB, SIBS, CAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25240053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2014 Oct;55:220-6. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2014.09.008.
Epub 2014 Sep 18.

Chromatin remodeling protein SMAR1 regulates NF-<U+03BA>B dependent Interleukin-8
transcription in breast cancer.

Malonia SK(1), Yadav B(1), Sinha S(1), Lazennec G(2), Chattopadhyay S(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Cell Science, Ganeshkhind, Pune 411007, India. (2)INSERM, 
U844, University of Montpellier, Montpellier F-34091, France. (3)National Centre 
for Cell Science, Ganeshkhind, Pune 411007, India. Electronic address:
samit@nccs.res.in.

Interleukin-8 (IL-8) is a pleiotropic chemokine involved in metastasis and
angiogenesis of breast tumors. The expression of IL-8 is deregulated in
metastatic breast carcinomas owing to aberrant NF-<U+03BA>B activity, which is known to 
positively regulate IL-8 transcription. Earlier, we have shown that tumor
suppressor SMAR1 suppresses NF-<U+03BA>B transcriptional activity by modulating I<U+03BA>Ba
function. Here, we show that NF-<U+03BA>B target gene IL-8, is a direct transcriptional 
target of SMAR1. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation and reporter assays, we
demonstrate that SMAR1 binds to IL-8 promoter MAR (matrix attachment region) and 
recruits HDAC1 dependent co-repressor complex. Further, we also show that SMAR1
antagonizes p300-mediated acetylation of RelA/p65, a post-translational
modification indispensable for IL-8 transactivation. Thus, we decipher a new role
of SMAR1 in NF-<U+03BA>B dependent transcriptional regulation of pro-angiogenic
chemokine IL-8.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25239884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. J Med Chem. 2014 Oct 9;57(19):8026-34. doi: 10.1021/jm5008962. Epub 2014 Sep 30.

Identification of a novel aminotetralin class of HDAC6 and HDAC8 selective
inhibitors.

Tang G(1), Wong JC, Zhang W, Wang Z, Zhang N, Peng Z, Zhang Z, Rong Y, Li S,
Zhang M, Yu L, Feng T, Zhang X, Wu X, Wu JZ, Chen L.

Author information: 
(1)Roche Pharmaceutical Research and Early Development, Roche Innovation Center
Shanghai , 720 Cailun Road, Shanghai, 201203 China.

Herein we report the identification of a novel class of HDAC6 and HDAC8 selective
inhibitors through a unique chemistry and phenotypic screening strategy.
Tetrahydroisoquinoline 12 was identified as a potent HDAC6 and HDAC8 dual
inhibitor from a focused library through cellular tubulin acetylation and p21
induction screening assays. Scaffold hopping from 12 led to the discovery of an
aminotetralin class of HDAC inhibitors. In particular, the 3-R stereoisomer 32
showed highly potent inhibition against HDAC6 and HDAC8 with IC50 values of 50
and 80 nM, respectively. Treatment of neuroblastoma BE(2)C cells with 32 resulted
in elevated levels of acetylated tubulin, TrkA, and neurite outgrowth with only
marginal effects on p21 induction and histone H3 acetylation. Consistent with its
weak enzymatic inhibition of HDAC1, 32 showed significantly less cytotoxicity
than SAHA and moderately inhibited the growth of myeloma NCI-H929 and OPM-2
cells.

PMID: 25238284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Bioorg Chem. 2014 Dec;57:65-82. doi: 10.1016/j.bioorg.2014.08.006. Epub 2014 Sep 
3.

Design, synthesis, 3D pharmacophore, QSAR, and docking studies of carboxylic acid
derivatives as Histone Deacetylase inhibitors and cytotoxic agents.

Abdel-Atty MM(1), Farag NA(1), Kassab SE(2), Serya RA(3), Abouzid KA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutical Chemistry Department, Faculty of Pharmacy, Misr International
University, Cairo 11431, Egypt. (2)Pharmaceutical Chemistry Department, Faculty
of Pharmacy, Damanhur University, Damanhur, Egypt. (3)Pharmaceutical Chemistry
Department, Faculty of Pharmacy, Ain Shams University, Cairo 11566, Egypt.
(4)Pharmaceutical Chemistry Department, Faculty of Pharmacy, Ain Shams
University, Cairo 11566, Egypt. Electronic address: abouzid@yahoo.com.

In this study, five series of (E)-6-(4-substituted phenyl)-4-oxohex-5-enoic acids
IIb-f (E), (E)-3-(4-(substituted)-phenyl)acrylic acids IIIa-g (E),
4-(4-(substituted)phenylamino)-4-oxobutanoic acids VIa,b,e,
5-(4-(substituted)phenylamino)-5-oxopentanoic acids VIIa,f and
2-[(4-(substituted)phenyl) carbamoyl]benzoic acids VIIIa,e were designed and
synthesized. Selected compounds were screened in vitro for their cytotoxic effect
on 60 human NCI tumor cell lines. Compound IIf (E) displayed significant
inhibitory activity against NCI Non-Small Cell Lung A549/ATCC Cancer cell line
(68% inhibition) and NCI-H460 Cancer cell line (66% inhibition). Moreover, the
final compounds were evaluated in vitro for their cytotoxic activity on HepG2
Cancer cell line in which histone deacetylase (HDAC) is overexpressed. Compounds 
IIc (E), IIf (E), IIIb (E), and IIIg (E) exhibited the highest cytotoxic activity
against HepG2 human cancer cell lines with IC50 ranging from 2.27 to 10.71µM. In 
addition, selected compounds were tested on histone deacetylase isoforms
(HDAC1-11). Molecular docking simulation was also carried out for HDLP enzyme to 
investigate their HDAC binding affinity. In addition, generation of
3D-pharmacophore model and quantitative structure activity relationship (QSAR)
models were combined to explore the structural requirements controlling the
observed cytotoxic properties.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25233258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2014 Dec;351(3):510-8. doi: 10.1124/jpet.114.217315. Epub
2014 Sep 17.

Downregulation of Ca2+-activated Cl- channel TMEM16A by the inhibition of histone
deacetylase in TMEM16A-expressing cancer cells.

Matsuba S(1), Niwa S(1), Muraki K(1), Kanatsuka S(1), Nakazono Y(1), Hatano N(1),
Fujii M(1), Zhan P(1), Suzuki T(1), Ohya S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Division of Pathological Sciences, Kyoto
Pharmaceutical University, Kyoto, Japan (S.M., S.N., S.K., Y.N., M.F., S.O.);
Laboratory of Cellular Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Aichi-Gakuin University,
Nagoya, Japan (K.M., N.H.); and Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto
Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan (P.Z., T.S.). (2)Department of
Pharmacology, Division of Pathological Sciences, Kyoto Pharmaceutical University,
Kyoto, Japan (S.M., S.N., S.K., Y.N., M.F., S.O.); Laboratory of Cellular
Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Aichi-Gakuin University, Nagoya, Japan (K.M.,
N.H.); and Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto Prefectural University of
Medicine, Kyoto, Japan (P.Z., T.S.) sohya@mb.kyoto-phu.ac.jp.

The Ca(2+)-activated Cl(-) channel transmembrane proteins with unknown function
16 A (TMEM16A; also known as anoctamin 1 or discovered on gastrointestinal
stromal tumor 1) plays an important role in facilitating the cell growth and
metastasis of TMEM16A-expressing cancer cells. Histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors (HDACi) are useful agents for cancer therapy, but it remains unclear
whether ion channels are epigenetically regulated by them. Using real-time
polymerase chain reaction, Western blot analysis, and whole-cell patch-clamp
assays, we found a significant decrease in TMEM16A expression and its functional 
activity was induced by the vorinostat, a pan-HDACi in TMEM16A-expressing human
cancer cell lines, the prostatic cancer cell line PC-3, and the breast cancer
cell line YMB-1. TMEM16A downregulation was not induced by the chemotherapy drug 
paclitaxel in either cell type. Pharmacologic blockade of HDAC3 by 1 µM T247
[N-(2-aminophenyl)-4-[1-(2-thiophen-3-ylethyl)-1H-[1],[2],[3]triazol-4-yl]benzami
de], a HDAC3-selective HDACi, elicited a large decrease in TMEM16A expression and
functional activity in both cell types, and pharmacologic blockade of HDAC2 by
AATB [4-(acetylamino)-N-[2-amino-5-(2-thienyl)phenyl]-benzamide; 300 nM] elicited
partial inhibition of TMEM16A expression (~40%) in both. Pharmacologic blockade
of HDAC1 or HDAC6 did not elicit any significant change in TMEM16A expression,
respectively. In addition, inhibition of HDAC3 induced by small interfering RNA
elicited a large decrease in TMEM16A transcripts in both cell types. Taken
together, in malignancies with a frequent gene amplification of TMEM16A, HDAC3
inhibition may exert suppressive effects on cancer cell viability via
downregulation of TMEM16A.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics.

PMID: 25232193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Chin J Cancer. 2014 Oct;33(10):501-10. doi: 10.5732/cjc.014.10066. Epub 2014 Sep 
16.

Differential expression of genes involved in the epigenetic regulation of cell
identity in normal human mammary cell commitment and differentiation.

Coradini D(1), Boracchi P, Oriana S, Biganzoli E, Ambrogi F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, Medical Statistics,
Biometry and Bioinformatics, University of Milan, Via Vanzetti 5, Milan 20133,
Italy; danila.coradini@gmail.com.

The establishment and maintenance of mammary epithelial cell identity depends on 
the activity of a group of proteins, collectively called maintenance proteins,
that act as epigenetic regulators of gene transcription through DNA methylation, 
histone modification, and chromatin remodeling. Increasing evidence indicates
that dysregulation of these crucial proteins may disrupt epithelial cell
integrity and trigger breast tumor initiation. Therefore, we explored in silico
the expression pattern of a panel of 369 genes known to be involved in the
establishment and maintenance of epithelial cell identity and mammary gland
remodeling in cell subpopulations isolated from normal human mammary tissue and
selectively enriched in their content of bipotent progenitors, committed luminal 
progenitors, and differentiated myoepithelial or differentiated luminal cells.
The results indicated that, compared to bipotent cells, differentiated
myoepithelial and luminal subpopulations were both characterized by the
differential expression of 4 genes involved in cell identity maintenance: CBX6
and PCGF2, encoding proteins belonging to the Polycomb group, and SMARCD3 and
SMARCE1, encoding proteins belonging to the Trithorax group. In addition to these
common genes, the myoepithelial phenotype was associated with the differential
expression of HDAC1, which encodes histone deacetylase 1, whereas the luminal
phenotype was associated with the differential expression of SMARCA4 and HAT1,
which encode a Trithorax protein and histone acetylase 1, respectively. The
luminal compartment was further characterized by the overexpression of ALDH1A3
and GATA3, and the down-regulation of NOTCH4 and CCNB1, with the latter
suggesting a block in cell cycle progression at the G2 phase. In contrast,
myoepithelial differentiation was associated with the overexpression of MYC and
the down-regulation of CCNE1, with the latter suggesting a block in cell cycle
progression at the G1 phase.

PMCID: PMC4198753
PMID: 25223915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 15;9(9):e107231. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107231.
eCollection 2014.

Hepatic FoxO1 acetylation is involved in oleanolic acid-induced memory of
glycemic control: novel findings from Study 2.

Zhou X(1), Zeng XY(1), Wang H(1), Li S(1), Jo E(1), Xue CC(1), Tan M(2), Molero
JC(1), Ye JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pharmacology for Diabetes, Health Innovations Research Institute and
School of Health Sciences, Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology, Melbourne,
Victoria, Australia. (2)State Key Laboratory of Drug Research, Shanghai Institute
of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.

Our recent study (referred as Study 1) showed that the triterpenoid oleanolic
acid (OA) was able to produce a sustained correction of hyperglycemia beyond
treatment period in type 2 diabetes (T2D) mice with liver as a responsible site. 
To follow up the previous observations, the present study (referred as Study 2)
investigated the possible role of acetylation of FoxO1 and associated events in
this therapeutic memory by characterizing the pathways regulating the acetylation
status during and post-OA treatments. OA treatment (100 mg/kg/day for 4 weeks,
during OA treatment) reduced hyperglycemia in T2D mice by ~87% and this effect
was largely (~70%) maintained even 4 weeks after the cessation of OA
administration (post-OA treatment). During OA treatment, the acetylation and
phosphorylation of FoxO1 were markedly increased (1.5 to 2.5-fold) while G6Pase
expression was suppressed by ~80%. Consistent with this, OA treatment reversed
pyruvate intolerance in high-fat fed mice. Histone acetyltransferase 1 (HAT1)
content was increased (>50%) and histone deacetylases (HDACs) 4 and 5 (not HDAC1)
were reduced by 30-50%. The OA-induced changes in FoxO1, G6Pase, HAT1 and HDACs
persisted during the post-OA treatment period when the increased phosphorylation 
of AMPK, SIRT1 content and reduced liver triglyceride had subsided. These results
confirmed the ability of OA to control hyperglycemia far beyond treatment period 
in T2D mice. Most importantly, in the present study we demonstrated acetylation
of FoxO1 in the liver is involved in OA-induced memory for the control of
hyperglycemia. Our novel findings suggest that acetylation of the key regulatory 
proteins of hepatic gluconeogenesis is a plausible mechanism by the triterpenoid 
to achieve a sustained glycemic control for T2D.

PMCID: PMC4164604
PMID: 25222566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Eur J Med Chem. 2014 Oct 30;86:528-41. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2014.09.009. Epub
2014 Sep 6.

Synthesis and biological evaluation of largazole analogues with modified surface 
recognition cap groups.

Bhansali P(1), Hanigan CL(2), Perera L(3), Casero RA Jr(2), Tillekeratne LM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal and Biological Chemistry, College of Pharmacy and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, The University of Toledo, 2801, W. Bancroft Street,
Toledo, OH 43606, United States. (2)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer
Center, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Bunting/Blaustein Cancer
Research Building 1, 1650 Orleans Street, Room 551, Baltimore, MD 21231, United
States. (3)Laboratory of Structural Biology, National Institute of Environmental 
Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human
Services, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, United States. (4)Department of
Medicinal and Biological Chemistry, College of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, The University of Toledo, 2801, W. Bancroft Street, Toledo, OH 43606,
United States. Electronic address: ltillek@utnet.utoledo.edu.

Several largazole analogues with modified surface recognition cap groups were
synthesized and their HDAC inhibitory activities were determined. The C7-epimer
12 caused negligible inhibition of HDAC activity, failed to induce global histone
3 (H3) acetylation in the HCT116 colorectal cancer cell line and demonstrated
minimal effect on growth. Although previous studies have shown some degree of
tolerance of structural changes at C7 position of largazole, these data show the 
negative effect of conformational change accompanying change of configuration at 
this position. Similarly, analogue 16a with D-1-naphthylmethyl side chain at C2
too had negligible inhibition of HDAC activity, failed to induce global histone 3
(H3) acetylation in the HCT116 colorectal cancer cell line and demonstrated
minimal effect on growth. In contrast, the L-allyl analogue 16b and the
L-1-naphthylmethyl analogue 16c were potent HDAC inhibitors, showing robust
induction of global H3 acetylation and significant effect on cell growth. The
data suggest that even bulky substituents are tolerated at this position,
provided the stereochemistry at C2 is retained. With bulky substituents,
inversion of configuration at C2 results in loss of inhibitory activity. The
activity profiles of 16b and 16c on Class I HDAC1 vs Class II HDAC6 are similar
to those of largazole and, taken together with x-ray crystallography information 
of HDAC8-largazole complex, may suggest that the C2 position of largazole is not 
a suitable target for structural optimization to achieve isoform selectivity. The
results of these studies may guide the synthesis of more potent and selective
HDAC inhibitors.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4188730
PMID: 25203782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Endocrinology. 2014 Dec;155(12):4762-73. doi: 10.1210/en.2014-1565. Epub 2014 Sep
9.

Inactivation of histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) but not HDAC2 is required for the
glucocorticoid-dependent CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein a (C/EBPa) expression and
preadipocyte differentiation.

Kuzmochka C(1), Abdou HS, Haché RJ, Atlas E.

Author information: 
(1)Northern Ontario School of Medicine, Ontario, Canada ON POM Reproduction,
Mother and Youth Health (H.-S.A.), CHUQ Research Centre, Quebec city, Quebec,
Canada G1R2J6; Environmental Health Science and Research Bureau (E.A.), Health
Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada M3J1P3; and York University (R.J.G.H.), Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada K1A0K9.

Several drugs currently used in the management of mood disorders, epilepsy (ie,
valproic acid), or the control of inflammation (ie, corticosteroids) have been
shown to promote visceral obesity in humans by increasing the number of newly
formed adipocytes. Valproic acid is classified as a nonspecific histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, along with trichostatin A and butyric acid. In
vitro experiments have demonstrated that such molecules greatly enhance the rate 
of preadipocyte differentiation, similarly to the effect of corticosteroids. The 
glucocorticoid receptor stimulates adipogenesis in part by enhancing the
transcription of C/ebpa through the titration, and subsequent degradation, of
HDAC1 from the C/ebpa promoter. There is, however, controversy in the literature 
as to the role of HDACs during adipogenesis. In this study, we sought to
demonstrate, using 2 different strategies, the definite role of HDAC1 in
adipogenesis. By using small interference RNA-mediated knockdown of HDAC1 and by 
generating an enzymatically inactive HDAC1D181A by site-directed mutagenesis, we 
were able to show that HDAC1, but not HDAC2, suppresses glucocorticoid
receptor-potentiated preadipocyte differentiation by decreasing
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/ebp)a and Ppar<U+03B3> expression levels at the onset 
of differentiation. Finally, we demonstrate that HDAC1D181A acts as a dominant
negative mutant of HDAC1 during adipogenesis by modulating C/EBPß transcriptional
activity on the C/ebpa promoter.

PMID: 25203139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Cryobiology. 2014 Oct;69(2):333-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cryobiol.2014.08.008. Epub 2014
Sep 3.

Global DNA modifications suppress transcription in brown adipose tissue during
hibernation.

Biggar Y(1), Storey KB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Department of Biology, Carleton University,
Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada. (2)Institute of Biochemistry and Department of
Biology, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada. Electronic address:
kenneth_storey@carleton.ca.

Hibernation is crucial to winter survival for many small mammals and is
characterized by prolonged periods of torpor during which strong global controls 
are applied to suppress energy-expensive cellular processes. We hypothesized that
one strategy of energy conservation is a global reduction in gene transcription
imparted by reversible modifications to DNA and to proteins involved in chromatin
packing. Transcriptional regulation during hibernation was examined over
euthermic control groups and five stages of the torpor/arousal cycle in brown
adipose tissue of thirteen-lined ground squirrels (Ictidomys tridecemlineatus).
Brown adipose is crucial to hibernation success because it is responsible for the
non-shivering thermogenesis that rewarms animals during arousal. A direct
modification of DNA during torpor was revealed by a 1.7-fold increase in global
DNA methylation during long term torpor as compared with euthermic controls.
Acetylation of histone H3 (on Lys23) was reduced by about 50% when squirrels
entered torpor, which would result in increased chromatin packing (and
transcriptional repression). This was accompanied by strong increases in histone 
deacetylase protein levels during torpor; e.g. HDAC1 and HDAC4 levels rose by
1.5- and 6-fold, respectively. Protein levels of two co-repressors of
transcription, MBD1 and HP1, also increased by 1.9- and 1.5-fold, respectively,
in long-term torpor and remained high during early arousal. MBD1, HP1 and HDACs
all returned to near control values during interbout indicating a reversal of
their inhibitory actions. Overall, the data presents strong evidence for a global
suppression of transcription during torpor via the action of epigenetic
regulatory mechanisms in brown adipose tissue of hibernating thirteen-lined
ground squirrels.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25192827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. J Genet. 2014 Aug;93(2):539-44.

Pattern of change in histone 3 lysine 9 acetylation and histone deacetylases in
development of zebrafish embryo.

Li Y(1), Wang J, Xie Y, Liu S, Tian Y.

Author information: 
(1)Hebei Key Lab of Laboratory Animal, Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang
050017, People's Republic of China. liushf@126.com.

PMID: 25189256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Dec 16;42(22):13545-56. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku788. Epub
2014 Sep 2.

AGO2 and SETDB1 cooperate in promoter-targeted transcriptional silencing of the
androgen receptor gene.

Cho S(1), Park JS(2), Kang YK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Development and Differentiation Research Center, KRIBB, 111 Gwahangno,
Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-806, South Korea Department of Functional Genomics,
University of Science and Technology (UST), 113 Gwahangno, Yuseong-gu, 305-333
Daejeon, South Korea. (2)Development and Differentiation Research Center, KRIBB, 
111 Gwahangno, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-806, South Korea. (3)Development and
Differentiation Research Center, KRIBB, 111 Gwahangno, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon
305-806, South Korea Department of Functional Genomics, University of Science and
Technology (UST), 113 Gwahangno, Yuseong-gu, 305-333 Daejeon, South Korea
ykkang@kribb.re.kr.

In mammals, RNA interference is primarily a post-transcriptional mechanism.
Evidence has accumulated for additional role in transcriptional gene silencing
(TGS) but the question for a good paradigm for small interfering antigene RNA
(agRNA)-induced chromatin modification remains unanswered. Here, we show that
SETDB1, a histone H3-lysine 9 (H3K9)-specific methyltransferase, cooperates with 
Argonaute-2 (AGO2) and plays an essential role in agRNA-induced TGS. The androgen
receptor (AR) gene was transcriptionally silenced by agRNA targeted to its
promoter, and we show that this repression was mitigated by knockdown of SETDB1
or AGO2. Chromatin immunoprecipitation demonstrated that agRNA-driven AGO2 was
first targeted to the AR promoter, followed by SETDB1. SIN3A and HDAC1/2, the
components of the SIN3-HDAC complex, immunoprecipitated with SETDB1, and
localized at the agRNA-targeted promoter. Agreeing with the presence of SETDB1,
trimethyl-H3K9 was enriched in the AR promoter. Both EZH2 and trimethyl-H3K27
were also present in the targeted locus; accordingly, EZH2 immunoprecipitated
with SETDB1. DNA methylation level was not significantly changed, suggesting the 
absence of de novo methylating activity in agRNA-induced AR promoter. Our results
demonstrate that SETDB1, together with AGO2, plays an essential role in TGS
through recruiting chromatin remodeler and/or other modifiers, consequently
creating a repressive chromatin milieu at the targeted promoter.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4267665
PMID: 25183519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2014 Oct 1;24(19):4768-72. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2014.06.080.
Epub 2014 Jul 5.

Design, synthesis and evaluation of novel HDAC inhibitors as potential antitumor 
agents.

Cheng J(1), Qin J(2), Guo S(2), Qiu H(2), Zhong Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Huilun Life Sciences & Technology Co. Ltd, Shanghai 201108, China.
Electronic address: chengjianjun83@163.com. (2)Shanghai Huilun Life Sciences &
Technology Co. Ltd, Shanghai 201108, China.

Phenyl imidazolidin-2-one was introduced as the linker for novel HDAC inhibitors.
A focused library of 20 compounds was designed and synthesized, among which eight
compounds showed equivalent or higher potencies against HDAC1 as compared to
vorinostat. In vitro antitumor activity assays in HCT-116, PC-3 and HL-60 cancer 
cells revealed six compounds with potent antitumor activities, and compound 1o
showed 6- to 9-fold higher potencies compared to vorinostat. In an HCT-116 nude
mice xenograft model, compound 1o displayed significant antitumor activity in
both continuous and intermittent dosing schedules.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25182565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Toxicology. 2014 Nov 5;325:144-50. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2014.08.011. Epub 2014 Aug 
29.

5-Fluorouracil causes severe CNS demyelination by disruption of
TCF7L2/HDAC1/HDAC2 complex in adolescent mice.

Weng Q(1), Tan B(2), Wang J(2), Wang J(2), Zhou H(3), Shi J(3), He Q(4), Yang
B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou 310058, China; Center for Drug Safety Evaluation and
Research, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China. Electronic address:
wengqinjie@zju.edu.cn. (2)Institute of Pharmacology, College of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China. (3)Departments of
Pediatrics and Obstetrics/Gynecology, Institute of Stem Cell and Developmental
Biology, West China Second Hospital, Chengdu 61004, China. (4)Institute of
Pharmacology, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou
310058, China; Center for Drug Safety Evaluation and Research, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou 310058, China.

Several studies have showed the anti-cancer efficacy of 5-FU (5-fluorouracil) on 
pediatric tumors. Although the delayed demyelination induced by 5-FU in adult
patients has been reported, the effect of 5-FU on oligodendrocyte myelination in 
adolescence is still unknown. Here, we demonstrate that systemic administration
with 5-FU leads to immediate demyelination in the central nervous system (CNS) of
adolescent mice, which is mainly attributed to the death of OLs. Gene-chip
microarray transcriptome analysis identifies that oligodendrocyte-specific factor
TCF7L2 may be a toxic target of 5-FU-impaired myelination. 5-FU-decreased TCF7L2 
results in disruption of the interaction between TCF7L2 and HDAC1/2. Inhibition
of crucial myelination-promoting factors by 5-FU is more significantly
antagonized by co-transfection of TCF7L2, HDAC1 and HDAC2 than TCF7L2 alone. Our 
findings reveal that 5-FU could acutely induce the severe myelin degeneration in 
adolescence and disruption of TCF7L2/HDAC1/HDAC2 complex is at least partially
involved in 5-FU-induced demyelination.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25178657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Cancer Lett. 2014 Nov 28;354(2):311-9. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2014.08.031. Epub
2014 Aug 27.

MiR-34a regulates therapy resistance by targeting HDAC1 and HDAC7 in breast
cancer.

Wu MY(1), Fu J(2), Xiao X(3), Wu J(4), Wu RC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, George Washington
University, Washington, D.C. 20037, USA. Electronic address: meiyiwu@gwu.edu.
(2)Key Laboratory of Epigenetics and Oncology, The Research Center for
Preclinical Medicine, Luzhou Medical College, Luzhou, Sichuan 646000, China.
(3)Department of Pathology, Affiliated Hospital of Luzhou Medical College,
Luzhou, Sichuan 646000, China. (4)Department of Oncology, Affiliated Hospital of 
Luzhou Medical College, Luzhou, Sichuan 646000, China. (5)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, George Washington University, Washington,
D.C. 20037, USA. Electronic address: rwu@gwu.edu.

Therapy resistance increases mortality of cancer patients and remains a major
obstacle for cancer treatment. The molecular mechanism underlying the therapy
resistance in cancer remains not fully understood, and there is an urgent need to
identify the cause of therapy resistance. MiR-34a is an important tumor
suppressor whose expression is suppressed in cancer stem cells (CSCs), and
re-expression of miR-34a is able to inhibit the tumorigenic activity of CSCs.
Because of its tumor suppressor function, elucidating the mechanism by which
miR-34a regulates therapy resistance is clearly important but remains a
challenge. Our current study addresses this challenge. We identified HDAC1 and
HDAC7 as novel targets of miR-34a in breast cancer, and further uncovered that
deacetylation of HSP70 K246 by HDAC1 and HDAC7 promotes cancer cell survival and 
therapy resistance by inhibiting autophagic cell death. Our study is significant 
as it not only identifies the miR-34a-HDAC1/HDAC7-HSP70 K246 axis as a novel
molecular signature predictive of therapy resistance, but also a viable target
for potential new anti-cancer therapies to reduce such resistance in breast
cancer.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25173798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Pharmacology. 2014;94(1-2):13-20. doi: 10.1159/000365932. Epub 2014 Aug 26.

Dexamethasone upregulates Nox1 expression in vascular smooth muscle cells.

Siuda D(1), Tobias S, Rus A, Xia N, Förstermann U, Li H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University Medical Center, Johannes Gutenberg
University, Mainz, Germany.

BACKGROUND/AIM: It has been demonstrated that dexamethasone-induced hypertension 
can be prevented by the NADPH oxidase inhibitor apocynin. The effect of
dexamethasone on NADPH oxidase, however, is unknown. The present study was
conducted to investigate the effect of dexamethasone on the gene expression of
Nox1, the major NADPH oxidase isoform in vascular smooth muscle cells.
RESULTS: Oral treatment of Wistar-Kyoto rats with dexamethasone (0.03 mg/kg/day) 
for 12 days led to an upregulation of Nox1 mRNA expression in the aorta. In
cultured A7r5 rat aortic smooth muscle cells, dexamethasone increased Nox1 mRNA
expression in a concentration- and time-dependent manner. The upregulation of
Nox1 mRNA expression was completely prevented by the glucocorticoid receptor
antagonist mifepristone. The effect of dexamethasone on Nox1 expression was
likely to be indirect as it could be largely blocked by cycloheximide, an
inhibitor of protein biosynthesis. Dexamethasone increased Nox1 mRNA stability as
well as Nox1 transcription. The dexamethasone-induced Nox1 expression was
completely prevented by scriptaid, a pan-inhibitor of histone deacetylases
(HDAC), indicating a crucial role for HDAC enzymes. In total, A7r5 cells
expressed 8 HDAC isoforms, with HDAC1, 5, 6 and 7 being the most abundant ones.
Knockdown of these 4 individual HDAC enzymes did not prevent the effect of
dexamethasone on Nox1 expression, although HDAC5 knockdown markedly reduced basal
Nox1 expression.
CONCLUSION: Dexamethasone upregulates Nox1 expression in vascular smooth muscle
cells. This effect involves the glucocorticoid receptor and HDAC enzymes.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25171190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. J Biomed Sci. 2014 Aug 27;21:85. doi: 10.1186/s12929-014-0085-z.

AIRE acetylation and deacetylation: effect on protein stability and
transactivation activity.

Incani F, Serra M, Meloni A, Cossu C, Saba L, Cabras T, Messana I, Rosatelli MC.

BACKGROUND: The AIRE protein plays a remarkable role as a regulator of central
tolerance by controlling the promiscuous expression of tissue-specific antigens
in thymic medullary epithelial cells. Defects in AIRE gene cause the autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy- candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy, a rare disease frequent in 
Iranian Jews, Finns, and Sardinian population.
RESULTS: In this study, we have precisely mapped, by mass spectrometry
experiments, the sites of protein acetylation and, by mutagenesis assays, we have
described a set of acetylated lysines as being crucial in influencing the
subcellular localization of AIRE. Furthermore, we have also determined that the
de-acetyltransferase enzymes HDAC1-2 are involved in the lysine de-acetylation of
AIRE.
CONCLUSIONS: On the basis of our results and those reported in literature, we
propose a model in which lysines acetylation increases the stability of AIRE in
the nucleus. In addition, we observed that the interaction of AIRE with
deacetylases complexes inhibits its transcriptional activity and is probably
responsible for the instability of AIRE, which becomes more susceptible to
degradation in the proteasome.

PMCID: PMC4256887
PMID: 25158603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. J Biol Chem. 2014 Oct 17;289(42):29074-85. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.564872. Epub
2014 Aug 25.

Nuclear matrix protein SMAR1 represses c-Fos-mediated HPV18 E6 transcription
through alteration of chromatin histone deacetylation.

Chakraborty S(1), Das K(1), Saha S(1), Mazumdar M(1), Manna A(1), Chakraborty
S(1), Mukherjee S(1), Khan P(1), Adhikary A(1), Mohanty S(1), Chattopadhyay S(2),
Biswas SC(3), Sa G(1), Das T(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Molecular Medicine, Bose Institute, P1/12, Calcutta
Improvement Trust Scheme VIIM, Kolkata 700054, West Bengal, India. (2)the
National Centre for Cell Science, Pune University Campus, Ganeshkhind, Pune
411007, Maharashtra, India, and. (3)the Department of Gynecology & Obstetrics,
Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research (IPGMER), Seth Sukhlal 
Karnani Memorial (SSKM) Hospital, Kolkata 700020, West Bengal, India. (4)From the
Division of Molecular Medicine, Bose Institute, P1/12, Calcutta Improvement Trust
Scheme VIIM, Kolkata 700054, West Bengal, India, tanya@jcbose.ac.in.

Matrix attachment region (MAR)-binding proteins have been implicated in the
transcriptional regulation of host as well as viral genes, but their precise role
in HPV-infected cervical cancer remains unclear. Here we show that HPV18 promoter
contains consensus MAR element in the LCR and E6 sequences where SMAR1 binds and 
reinforces HPV18 E6 transcriptional silencing. In fact, curcumin-induced
up-regulation of SMAR1 ensures recruitment of SMAR1-HDAC1 repressor complex at
the LCR and E6 MAR sequences, thereby decreasing histone acetylation at H3K9 and 
H3K18, leading to reorientation of the chromatin. As a consequence, c-Fos binding
at the putative AP-1 sites on E6 promoter is inhibited. E6 depletion interrupts
degradation of E6-mediated p53 and lysine acetyl transferase, Tip60. Tip60, in
turn, acetylates p53, thereby restoring p53-mediated transactivation of
proapoptotic genes to ensure apoptosis. This hitherto unexplained function of
SMAR1 signifies the potential of this unique scaffold matrix-associated
region-binding protein as a critical regulator of E6-mediated anti-apoptotic
network in HPV18-infected cervical adenocarcinoma. These results also justify the
candidature of curcumin for the treatment of HPV18-infected cervical carcinoma.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4200262
PMID: 25157104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Theriogenology. 2014 Oct 15;82(7):1036-42. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2014.07.027. Epub 2014 Jul 24.

Trichostatin A alters the expression of cell cycle controlling genes and
microRNAs in donor cells and subsequently improves the yield and quality of
cloned bovine embryos in vitro.

Saini M(1), Selokar NL(2), Revey T(3), Singla SK(4), Chauhan MS(4), Palta P(4),
Madan P(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Ontario Veterinary College, Guelph, Canada;
Animal Biotechnology Centre, National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal, India.
(2)Division of Animal Physiology and Reproduction, Central Institute for Research
on Buffaloes, Hisar, India. (3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Ontario
Veterinary College, Guelph, Canada. (4)Animal Biotechnology Centre, National
Dairy Research Institute, Karnal, India. (5)Department of Biomedical Sciences,
Ontario Veterinary College, Guelph, Canada. Electronic address:
pmadan@uoguelph.ca.

Trichostatin A (TSA), a histone deacetylase inhibitor, has been used to improve
nuclear reprogramming in somatic cell nuclear transfer embryos. However, the
molecular mechanism of TSA for the improvement of the pre- and postimplantation
embryonic development is unknown. In the present study, we investigated mechanism
of cell cycle arrest caused by TSA and also determined embryo quality and gene
expression in cloned bovine embryos produced from TSA-treated donor cells
compared with embryos produced by in vitro fertilization or parthenogenetic
activation. We observed that, 50 nM TSA-treated cells were synchronized at G0/G1 
stage with concomitant decrease in the proportion of these cells in the S stage
of the cell cycle, which was also supported by significant changes in cell
morphology and decreased proliferation (P<0.05). Measurement of relative
expression using real-time polymerase chain reaction of a some cell cycle-related
genes and microRNAs in treated donor cells showed decreased expression of HDAC1, 
DNMT1, P53, CYC E1, and CDK4 and increased expression of DNMT3a, CDKN1A, CDK2,
CDK3, miR-15a, miR-16, and miR-34a (P<0.05). No change in the relative expression
of miR-449a was noticed. Trichostatin A treatment of donor cells significantly
improved both cleavage and blastocyst rate (P<0.05) compared with the control
embryos, also apoptotic index in treated cloned blastocysts was significantly
decreased compared with the nontreated blastocysts (P<0.05) and was at the level 
of IVF counterpart. Relative expression of HDAC1 and DNMT3a was significantly
lower in treated cloned and parthenogenetic embryos than that of nontreated and
IVF counterpart, whereas in case of P53, expression level between treated and IVF
embryos was similar, which was significantly lower than nontreated cloned and
parthenogenetic embryos. In conclusion, our data suggested that TSA improves
yield and quality of cloned bovine embryos by modulating the expression of G0/G1 
cell cycle stage-related microRNA in donor cells, which support that TSA might be
great cell cycle synchronizer apart from potent epigenetic modulator in cloning
research in future.

Crown Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25151601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 19;9(8):e102684. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102684.
eCollection 2014.

Selective HDAC inhibition for the disruption of latent HIV-1 infection.

Barton KM(1), Archin NM(2), Keedy KS(1), Espeseth AS(3), Zhang YL(4), Gale J(4), 
Wagner FF(4), Holson EB(4), Margolis DM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, United States of America. (2)Department
of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina, United States of America. (3)Department of Antiviral Research, Merck
Research Laboratories, West Point, Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(4)Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of Massachusetts
Institute of Technology and Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United 
States of America. (5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, United States of
America; Department of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, North Carolina, United States of America; Department of
Epidemiology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina, United States of America.

Selective histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors have emerged as a potential
anti-latency therapy for persistent human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)
infection. We utilized a combination of small molecule inhibitors and short
hairpin (sh)RNA-mediated gene knockdown strategies to delineate the key HDAC(s)
to be targeted for selective induction of latent HIV-1 expression. Individual
depletion of HDAC3 significantly induced expression from the HIV-1 promoter in
the 2D10 latency cell line model. However, depletion of HDAC1 or -2 alone or in
combination did not significantly induce HIV-1 expression. Co-depletion of HDAC2 
and -3 resulted in a significant increase in expression from the HIV-1 promoter. 
Furthermore, concurrent knockdown of HDAC1, -2, and -3 resulted in a significant 
increase in expression from the HIV-1 promoter. Using small molecule HDAC
inhibitors of differing selectivity to ablate the residual HDAC activity that
remained after (sh)RNA depletion, the effect of depletion of HDAC3 was further
enhanced. Enzymatic inhibition of HDAC3 with the selective small-molecule
inhibitor BRD3308 activated HIV-1 transcription in the 2D10 cell line.
Furthermore, ex vivo exposure to BRD3308 induced outgrowth of HIV-1 from resting 
CD4+ T cells isolated from antiretroviral-treated, aviremic HIV+ patients. Taken 
together these findings suggest that HDAC3 is an essential target to disrupt
HIV-1 latency, and inhibition of HDAC2 may also contribute to the effort to purge
and eradicate latent HIV-1 infection.

PMCID: PMC4138023
PMID: 25136952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Cancer Lett. 2014 Nov 1;354(1):200-9. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2014.08.008. Epub
2014 Aug 15.

TIP30 nuclear translocation negatively regulates EGF-dependent cyclin D1
transcription in human lung adenocarcinoma.

Shuai S(1), Yan X(2), Zhang J(1), Kang S(1), Chen F(1), Luo R(3), Li A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center, Traditional Chinese Medicine-Integrated Hospital, Southern
Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510315, China. (2)Oncology Department,
Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510515,
China. (3)Cancer Center, Traditional Chinese Medicine-Integrated Hospital,
Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510315, China. Electronic
address: luorc0101@163.com. (4)Cancer Center, Traditional Chinese
Medicine-Integrated Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong
510315, China. Electronic address: liaimin2005@163.com.

Aberrant epidermal growth factor (EGF)-dependent signaling plays a key role in
the progression of human carcinomas. We found that TIP30, a tumor suppressor
protein, translocated into the nucleus of human lung adenocarcinoma cells
following EGF treatment, and the selective inhibitors of EGFR signaling pathways 
blocked this effect. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed that TIP30
negatively regulated EGF-dependent transcriptional activation of CCND1 through a 
HDAC1-dependent mechanism. In lung adenocarcinoma patients, the level of nuclear 
TIP30 was inversely correlated with that of EGFR and cyclin D1. These findings
suggest that nuclear TIP30-induced downregulation of cyclin D1 transcription
antagonizes EGFR signaling and suppresses tumorigenesis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25135222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2014 Sep;147(2):249-63. doi: 10.1007/s10549-014-3093-5. 
Epub 2014 Aug 17.

Transcriptional repression of ER through hMAPK dependent histone deacetylation by
class I HDACs.

Plotkin A(1), Volmar CH, Wahlestedt C, Ayad N, El-Ashry D.

Author information: 
(1)Sheila and David Fuente Graduate Program in Cancer Biology, University of
Miami Miller School of Medicine, 1501 NW 10th Ave., Miami, FL, 33136, USA.

Anti-estrogen therapies are not effective in ER- breast cancers, thus identifying
mechanisms underlying lack of ER expression in ER- breast cancers is imperative. 
We have previously demonstrated that hyperactivation of MAPK (hMAPK) downstream
of overexpressed EGFR or overexpression/amplification of Her2 represses ER
protein and mRNA expression. Abrogation of hMAPK in ER- breast cancer cell lines 
and primary cultures causes re-expression of ER and restoration of anti-estrogen 
responses. This study was performed to identify mechanisms of hMAPK-induced
transcriptional repression of ER. We found that ER promoter activity is
significantly reduced in the presence of hMAPK signaling, yet did not identify
specific promoter sequences responsible for this repression. We performed an
epigenetic compound screen in an ER- breast cancer cell line that expresses hMAPK
yet does not exhibit ER promoter hypermethylation. A number of HDAC inhibitors
were identified and confirmed to modulate ER expression and estrogen signaling in
multiple ER- cell lines and tumor samples lacking ER promoter methylation.
siRNA-mediated knockdown of HDACs 1, 2, and 3 reversed the mRNA repression in
multiple breast cancer cell lines and primary cultures and ER promoter-associated
histone acetylation increased following MAPK inhibition. These data implicate
histone deacetylation downstream of hMAPK in the observed ER mRNA repression
associated with hMAPK. Importantly, histone deacetylation appears to be a common 
mechanism in the transcriptional repression of ER between ER- breast cancers with
or without ER promoter hypermethylation.

PMID: 25129342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. FEBS J. 2015 May;282(9):1774-85. doi: 10.1111/febs.12972. Epub 2014 Sep 11.

Towards elucidating the stability, dynamics and architecture of the nucleosome
remodeling and deacetylase complex by using quantitative interaction proteomics.

Kloet SL(1), Baymaz HI, Makowski M, Groenewold V, Jansen PW, Berendsen M, Niazi
H, Kops GJ, Vermeulen M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen, the Netherlands.

The nucleosome remodeling and deacetylase (NuRD) complex is an evolutionarily
conserved chromatin-associated protein complex. Although the subunit composition 
of the mammalian complex is fairly well characterized, less is known about the
stability and dynamics of these interactions. Furthermore, detailed information
regarding protein-protein interaction surfaces within the complex is still
largely lacking. Here, we show that the NuRD complex interacts with a number of
substoichiometric zinc finger-containing proteins. Some of these interactions are
salt-sensitive (ZNF512B and SALL4), whereas others (ZMYND8) are not. The
stoichiometry of the core subunits is not affected by high salt concentrations,
indicating that the core complex is stabilized by hydrophobic interactions.
Interestingly, the RBBP4 and RBBP7 proteins are sensitive to high nonionic
detergent concentrations during affinity purification. In a subunit exchange
assay with stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-treated
nuclear extracts, RBBP4 and RBBP7 were identified as dynamic core subunits of the
NuRD complex, consistent with their proposed role as histone chaperones. Finally,
using cross-linking MS, we have uncovered novel features of NuRD molecular
architecture that complement our affinity purification-MS/MS data. Altogether,
these findings extend our understanding of MBD3-NuRD structure and
stability.STRUCTURED DIGITAL ABSTRACT: MBD3 physically interacts with ZNF512B,
HDAC1, ZMYND8, GATAD2B, SALL4, GATAD2A, ZNF592, MTA3, ZNF687, CDK2AP1, CHD3,
ZNF532, HDAC2, MTA2, CHD4, MTA1, KPNA2, CHD5, RBBP4 and RBBP7 by pull down (View 
interaction) CDK2AP1 physically interacts with MBD3, MTA3, HDAC2, GATAD2A, CHD4, 
CDK2AP1, MTA2, HDAC1, MTA1, CHD3, GATAD2B, MBD2, RBBP4 and RBBP7 by pull down
(View interaction) MBD3 physically interacts with MTA2, MTA3, RBBP4, RBBP7,
HDAC2, HDAC1, CHD4, CHD3 and MTA1 by cross-linking study (View interaction).

© 2014 FEBS.

PMID: 25123934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Oncotarget. 2014 May 30;5(10):3287-306.

Transmembrane voltage potential of somatic cells controls oncogene-mediated
tumorigenesis at long-range.

Chernet BT(1), Levin M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Regenerative and Developmental Biology and Department of Biology
Tufts University 200 Boston Avenue,Suite 4600 Medford, MA 02155 U.S.A.

The microenvironment is increasingly recognized as a crucial aspect of cancer. In
contrast and complement to the field's focus on biochemical factors and
extracellular matrix, we characterize a novel aspect of host:tumor interaction - 
endogenous bioelectric signals among non-excitable somatic cells. Extending prior
work focused on the bioelectric state of cancer cells themselves, we show for the
first time that the resting potentials of distant cells are critical for
oncogene-dependent tumorigenesis. In the Xenopus laevis tadpole model, we used
human oncogenes such as mutant KRAS to drive formation of tumor-like structures
that exhibited overproliferation, increased nuclear size, hypoxia, acidity, and
leukocyte attraction. Remarkably, misexpression of hyperpolarizing ion channels
at distant sites within the tadpole significantly reduced the incidence of these 
tumors. The suppression of tumorigenesis could also be achieved by
hyperpolarization using native CLIC1 chloride channels, suggesting a treatment
modality not requiring gene therapy. Using a dominant negative approach, we
implicate HDAC1 as the mechanism by which resting potential changes affect
downstream cell behaviors. Based on published data on the voltage-mediated
changes of butyrate flux through the SLC5A8 transporter, we present a model
linking resting potentials of host cells to the ability of oncogenes to initiate 
tumorigenesis. Antibiotic data suggest that the relevant butyrate is generated by
a native bacterial species, identifying a novel link between the microbiome and
cancer that is mediated by alterations in bioelectric signaling.

PMCID: PMC4102810
PMID: 24830454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jul 11;289(28):19519-30. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.556555. Epub
2014 May 12.

Retinoic acid and histone deacetylases regulate epigenetic changes in embryonic
stem cells.

Urvalek AM(1), Gudas LJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pharmacology and the Meyer Cancer Center, Weill Cornell
Medical College of Cornell University, New York, New York 10065. (2)From the
Department of Pharmacology and the Meyer Cancer Center, Weill Cornell Medical
College of Cornell University, New York, New York 10065 ljgudas@med.cornell.edu.

All-trans-retinoic acid (RA) is a vitamin A metabolite that plays major roles in 
regulating stem cell differentiation and development. RA is the ligand of the
retinoic acid receptor (RAR) family of transcription factors, which interact with
retinoic acid response elements (RAREs) within target gene proximal promoters and
enhancers. Although RA-mediated gene activation is well understood, less is known
about the mechanisms for repression at RA-regulated genes. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments, we show that in embryonic stem cells in the
absence of RA, histone deacetylases (HDACs) differentially bind to various RAREs 
in proximal promoters or enhancer regions of RA-regulated genes; HDAC1, HDAC2,
and HDAC3 bind at RAREs in the Hoxa1 and Cyp26a1 gene regulatory regions, whereas
only HDAC1 binds at the RARß2 RARE. shRNA knockdown of HDAC1, HDAC2, or HDAC3
differentially increases the deposition of the histone 3 lysine 27 acetylation
(H3K27ac) epigenetic mark associated with increases in these three transcripts.
Importantly, RA treatment differentially mediates the removal of HDACs from the
Hoxa1, Cyp26a1, and RARß2 genes and promotes the deposition of the H3K27ac mark
at these genes. Overall, we show that HDACs differentially bind to RA-regulated
genes to control key epigenetic marks involved in stem cell differentiation.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4094062
PMID: 24821725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Jul;34(14):2760-70.

Differential properties of transcriptional complexes formed by the CoREST family.

Barrios ÁP, Gómez AV, Sáez JE, Ciossani G, Toffolo E, Battaglioli E, Mattevi A,
Andrés ME.

Mammalian genomes harbor three CoREST genes. rcor1 encodes CoREST (CoREST1), and 
the paralogues rcor2 and rcor3 encode CoREST2 and CoREST3, respectively. Here, we
describe specific properties of transcriptional complexes formed by CoREST
proteins with the histone demethylase LSD1/KDM1A and histone deacetylases 1 and 2
(HDAC1/2) and the finding that all three CoRESTs are expressed in the adult rat
brain. CoRESTs interact equally strongly with LSD1/KDM1A. Structural analysis
shows that the overall conformation of CoREST3 is similar to that of CoREST1
complexed with LSD1/KDM1A. Nonetheless, transcriptional repressive capacity of
CoREST3 is lower than that of CoREST1, which correlates with the observation that
CoREST3 leads to a reduced LSD1/KDM1A catalytic efficiency. Also, CoREST2 shows a
lower transcriptional repression than CoREST1, which is resistant to HDAC
inhibitors. CoREST2 displays lower interaction with HDAC1/2, which is barely
present in LSD1/KDM1A-CoREST2 complexes. A nonconserved leucine in the first SANT
domain of CoREST2 severely weakens its association with HDAC1/2. Furthermore,
CoREST2 mutants with increased HDAC1/2 interaction and those without HDAC1/2
interaction exhibit equivalent transcriptional repression capacities, indicating 
that CoREST2 represses in an HDAC-independent manner. In conclusion, differences 
among CoREST proteins are instrumental in the modulation of protein-protein
interactions and catalytic activities of LSD1/KDM1A-CoREST-HDAC complexes,
fine-tuning gene expression regulation.

PMCID: PMC4097654
PMID: 24820421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Toxicol Mech Methods. 2014 Sep;24(6):377-84. doi: 10.3109/15376516.2014.920448.
Epub 2014 Jun 27.

Expression of histone deacetylase-1 and p300 in aristolochic acid nephropathy
models.

Tian Y(1), Yang Y, Gao L, Zhao H, Peng X, Zhang Z, Wu G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pharmacology of Chinese Veterinary Medicine, Department of
Animal Science and Technology, College of Animal Science and Technology, Beijing 
University of Agriculture , Beijing , China.

Aristolochic acid nephropathy (AAN) is mainly caused by aristolochic acid I
(AAI), but the actual mechanism is still uncertain. The current study explored
the correlation among the expression of Smad7, p300, histone deacetylase-1
(HDAC1) and the development of AAN using transmission electron microscopy (TEM), 
RT-PCR, and western blotting in the AAN mouse model and in the AAN cell model.
TEM revealed that the renal tubular epithelial cells from the AAI-treated mice
presented organelle damages and nuclear deformation. We found that a certain dose
of AAI caused renal fibrosis and induced renal tubular epithelial cells to
differentiate into myofibroblasts. There was a gradual increase in the expression
of HDAC1 mRNA and protein observed using RT-PCR and western blotting in the AAN
cell model compared with the control group. Gradual decrease in the expression of
Smad7 and p300 mRNA and protein was revealed in the AAN mouse and cell models
compared with the control group. These results suggest that AAI dose dependently 
contributed to the development of AAN, and HDAC1 and p300 participate in the
modulation of TGF-ß/Smad pathway-mediated renal interstitial fibrosis.

PMID: 24796935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2014 Sep;50(8):731-9. doi:
10.1007/s11626-014-9763-0. Epub 2014 May 2.

Nicotine inhibits the proliferation by upregulation of nitric oxide and increased
HDAC1 in mouse neural stem cells.

Lee H(1), Park JR, Yang J, Kim E, Hong SH, Woo HM, Ryu SM, Cho SJ, Park SM, Yang 
SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Kangwon National
University, Chuncheon, Gangwon, Republic of Korea.

Cigarette smoking (CS) is considered one of the major risk factors to cause
neurodegenerative disorders. Nicotine is the main chemical in CS which is
responsible for dysfunction of the brain as a neuroteratogen. Also, nicotine
dependency is a real mental illness and disease. Recently, chronic nicotine
exposure has been shown to cause oxidative/nitrosative stress leading to a
deleterious condition to cellular death in different brain regions. However,
little is known about the effects of nicotine on mouse neural stem cells (mNSCs).
The aim of this study is to investigate the effects of nicotine on mNSCs and
elucidate underlying mechanisms involved in expression of a diversity of genes
regulated by nicotine. When mNSCs were isolated from the whole brain of embryonic
day 16 mice treated with nicotine at vehicle, 100, 400, and 800 µM for 5 d,
nicotine significantly decreased the number and size of neurospheres. In
immunocytochemistry, nicotine-exposed mNSCs expressing nestin showed the
shortened filaments and condensed nuclei. In RT-PCR, messenger RNA (mRNA) levels 
of proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) and sirtuin1 (SIRT1) were
significantly decreased, while the production of nitric oxide and mRNA levels of 
cyclooxygenase2 (COX-2), tumor necrosis factor-alpha TNF-a, and histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) were increased in a dose-dependent manner. In addition,
sodium butyrate and valproic acid, HDAC inhibitors, partially rescue
proliferation of mNSCs via inhibition of HDAC1 expression and NO production.
Taken together, these data demonstrate that prolonged exposure of nicotine
decreased proliferation of mNSCs by increased NO and inflammatory cytokine
through increased HDAC1. Furthermore, this study could help in the development of
a therapy for nicotine-induced neurodegenerative disorder and drug abuse.

PMID: 24789730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. J Physiol Pharmacol. 2014 Apr;65(2):247-55.

Social isolation-induced epigenetic changes in midbrain of adult mice.

Siuda D(1), Wu Z, Chen Y, Guo L, Linke M, Zechner U, Xia N, Reifenberg G,
Kleinert H, Forstermann U, Li H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University Medical Center, Johannes Gutenberg
University, Mainz, Germany. huigeli@uni-mainz.de.

Social isolation and loneliness increase the risk of death as much as
well-established risk factors for mortality such as cigarette smoking and alcohol
consumption. The underlying molecular mechanisms are poorly understood. In the
present study, 3 months old male C57BL/6 mice were socially isolated by
individual housing for another 3 months. At the age of 6 months, epigenetic
changes were analyzed in midbrain. Social isolation of male adult mice led to an 
increased global DNA methylation, which was associated with enhanced activity of 
DNA methyltransferase. Di- and trimethylation of global histone H3 lysine 4
(H3K4) were increased in midbrain of socially isolated mice, accompanied by
enhanced H3K4 histone methyltransferase activity. In addition, social isolation
of adult mice led to activation of histone acetyltransferases as well as of
histone deacetylases (HDAC) resulting in a net enhancement of histone H3 lysine 9
(H3K9) acetylation. Gene-specific effects were observed for Hdac1, Hdac3 and the 
serotonin transporter Slc6a4. Social isolation led to an up-regulation of Hdac1
and Hdac3, associated with decreased DNA methylation in the CpG island of the
respective genes. On the contrary, the Slc6a4 gene was down-regulated, which was 
associated with enhanced DNA methylation. Collectively, the results from the
present study demonstrate for the first time that social isolation of adult mice 
leads to a wide range of global epigenetic changes and these effects may have
profound impact on gene expression pattern and phenotype of the socially isolated
animals.

PMID: 24781734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. ACS Chem Neurosci. 2014 Jul 16;5(7):588-96. doi: 10.1021/cn500021p. Epub 2014 May
21.

Image-guided synthesis reveals potent blood-brain barrier permeable histone
deacetylase inhibitors.

Seo YJ(1), Kang Y, Muench L, Reid A, Caesar S, Jean L, Wagner F, Holson E,
Haggarty SJ, Weiss P, King P, Carter P, Volkow ND, Fowler JS, Hooker JM, Kim SW.

Author information: 
(1)Biosciences Department, Brookhaven National Laboratory , Upton, New York
11973, United States.

Recent studies have revealed that several histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors, 
which are used to study/treat brain diseases, show low blood-brain barrier (BBB) 
penetration. In addition to low HDAC potency and selectivity observed, poor brain
penetrance may account for the high doses needed to achieve therapeutic efficacy.
Here we report the development and evaluation of highly potent and blood-brain
barrier permeable HDAC inhibitors for CNS applications based on an image-guided
approach involving the parallel synthesis and radiolabeling of a series of
compounds based on the benzamide HDAC inhibitor, MS-275 as a template. BBB
penetration was optimized by rapid carbon-11 labeling and PET imaging in the
baboon model and using the imaging derived data on BBB penetration from each
compound to feed back into the design process. A total of 17 compounds were
evaluated, revealing molecules with both high binding affinity and BBB
permeability. A key element conferring BBB penetration in this benzamide series
was a basic benzylic amine. These derivatives exhibited 1-100 nM inhibitory
activity against recombinant human HDAC1 and HDAC2. Three of the carbon-11
labeled aminomethyl benzamide derivatives showed high BBB penetration
(~0.015%ID/cc) and regional binding heterogeneity in the brain (high in thalamus 
and cerebellum). Taken together this approach has afforded a strategy and a
predictive model for developing highly potent and BBB permeable HDAC inhibitors
for CNS applications and for the discovery of novel candidate molecules for small
molecule probes and drugs.

PMCID: PMC4102966
PMID: 24780082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. J Cell Mol Med. 2014 Jul;18(7):1460-6. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12299. Epub 2014 Apr 30.

Cross-communication between histone H3 and H4 acetylation and Akt-mTOR signalling
in prostate cancer cells.

Makarevic J(1), Tawanaie N, Juengel E, Reiter M, Mani J, Tsaur I, Bartsch G,
Haferkamp A, Blaheta RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Johann Wolfgang Goethe-University, Frankfurt am Main,
Germany.

Molecular tumour targeting has significantly improved anti-cancer protocols.
Still, the addition of molecular targeting to the treatment regime has not led to
a curative breakthrough. Combined mammalian target of Rapamycin (mTOR) and
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibition has been shown not only to enhance
anti-tumour potential, but also to prevent resistance development seen under
mono-drug therapy. This investigation was designed to evaluate whether
cross-communication exists between mTOR signalling and epigenetic events
regulated by HDAC. DU-145 prostate cancer cells were treated with insulin-like
growth factor (IGF) to activate the Akt-mTOR cascade or with the HDAC-inhibitor
valproic acid (VPA) to induce histone H3 and H4 acetylation (aH3, aH4).
Subsequently, mTOR, Rictor, Raptor, p70s6k, Akt (all: total and phosphorylated), 
H3 and H4 (total and acetylated) were analysed by western blotting. Both
techniques revealed a link between mTOR and the epigenetic machinery. IGF
activated mTOR, Rictor, Raptor, p70s6k and Akt, but also enhanced aH3 and aH4.
Inversely, IGFr blockade and knock-down blocked the Akt-mTOR axis, but
simultaneously diminished aH3 and aH4. VPA treatment up-regulated histone
acetylation, but also activated mTOR-Akt signalling. HDAC1 and 2 knock-down
revealed that the interaction with the mTOR system is initiated by histone H3
acetylation. HDAC-mTOR communication, therefore, is apparent whereby
tumour-promoting (Akt/mTOR(high), aH3/aH4(low)) and tumour-suppressing signals
(Akt/mTOR(low) , aH3/aH4(high)) are activated in parallel. Combined use of an
HDAC- and mTOR inhibitor might then diminish pro-tumour effects triggered by the 
HDAC- (Akt/mTOR(high)) or mTOR inhibitor (aH3/aH4(low)) alone.

© 2014 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

PMCID: PMC4124028
PMID: 24779401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. BMC Biol. 2014 Apr 29;12:30. doi: 10.1186/1741-7007-12-30.

Specific NuRD components are required for fin regeneration in zebrafish.

Pfefferli C, Müller F, Jazwinska A(1), Wicky C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Fribourg, Ch, du Musée 10, CH-1700
Fribourg, Switzerland. anna.jazwinska@unifr.ch.

BACKGROUND: Epimorphic regeneration of a missing appendage in fish and urodele
amphibians involves the creation of a blastema, a heterogeneous pool of
progenitor cells underneath the wound epidermis. Current evidence indicates that 
the blastema arises by dedifferentiation of stump tissues in the vicinity of the 
amputation. In response to tissue loss, silenced developmental programs are
reactivated to form a near-perfect copy of the missing body part. However, the
importance of chromatin regulation during epimorphic regeneration remains poorly 
understood.
RESULTS: We found that specific components of the Nucleosome Remodeling and
Deacetylase complex (NuRD) are required for fin regeneration in zebrafish.
Transcripts of the chromatin remodeler chd4a/Mi-2, the histone deacetylase
hdac1/HDAC1/2, the retinoblastoma-binding protein rbb4/RBBP4/7, and the
metastasis-associated antigen mta2/MTA were specifically co-induced in the
blastema during adult and embryonic fin regeneration, and these transcripts
displayed a similar spatial and temporal expression patterns. In addition,
chemical inhibition of Hdac1 and morpholino-mediated knockdown of chd4a, mta2,
and rbb4 impaired regenerative outgrowth, resulting in reduction in blastema cell
proliferation and in differentiation defects.
CONCLUSION: Altogether, our data suggest that specialized NuRD components are
induced in the blastema during fin regeneration and are involved in blastema cell
proliferation and redifferentiation of osteoblast precursor cells. These results 
provide in vivo evidence for the involvement of key epigenetic factors in the
cellular reprogramming processes occurring during epimorphic regeneration in
zebrafish.

PMCID: PMC4038851
PMID: 24779377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Hepatogastroenterology. 2014 May;61(131):795-801.

Carcinogenic Potential of Biliary Epithelium of Congenital Choledochal Cyst Model
in Rats: A Special Reference to HDAC Expression.

Kuyama H, Morine Y, Shimada M, Saito Y, Utsunomiya T, Ishibashi H, Imura S,
Ikemoto T, Mori H, Hanaoka J.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Pancreaticobiliary maljunction (PBM) is well known to have
carcinogenic potential. The goal of this study was to clarify the carcinogenic
potential of the epithelium of choledochal cyst particularly by paying attention 
of HDAC1 and COX-2 expressions.
METHODOLOGY: Six-week male Lewis rats were divided into two groups; 1) single
dose of dibutyltin dichloride (8 mg/kg) was administered intravenously (DBTC
group), 2) saline administration was done with the same manner (control group).
Morphological changes of biliary tract and expressions of carcinogenesis-related 
genes, Ki67, HDAC1 and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) were examined
immunohistochemically after administration.
RESULTS: In the DBTC group, the bile duct had been gradually dilated on day 3
after administration and the biliary epithelium of dilated bile duct was
papillary proliferated on day 7. Ki67 and COX-2 expressions gradually increased
and reached the highest value of 6.0% and 3.6% on day 14, respectively. HDAC1
expression increased at the early postoperative period prior to other oncogene,
and reached the highest level of 15% on day 7.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggested that HDAC1 played an important role in
carcinogenesis of PBM through the regulation of COX-2.

PMID: 26176076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Tumour Biol. 2014 Jul;35(7):7239-47. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-1950-9. Epub 2014
Apr 27.

EZH2-specific microRNA-98 inhibits human ovarian cancer stem cell proliferation
via regulating the pRb-E2F pathway.

Liu T(1), Hou L, Huang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Medical School, Tongji University, Shanghai,
200072, China, liutelt@163.com.

The Polycomb group protein, enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), plays an
important role in transcriptional regulation through chromatin remodeling and
interactions with other transcription factors to control cell proliferation and
embryonic development. Previous study has shown that EZH2 is important for cell
cycle regulation and is highly expressed in human ovarian cancer. Loss of EZH2
inhibits growth of ovarian cancer as well as other human carcinomas. In this
study, an expression plasmid of EZH2-targeted microRNA-98 was constructed and
transfected into human ovarian cancer stem cells (OCSCs). Seventy-two hours after
transfection, cell growth was inhibited and arrested at the G0/G1 transition.
p21(CIPI/WAF1) was up-regulated, while the CDK2/cyclin E complex and c-Myc were
down-regulated. Most importantly, expression levels of E2F1, retinoblastoma
protein (pRb), and histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) in the pRb-E2F signaling pathway
had changed. Furthermore, microRNA-98 suppressed the growth of OCSCs xenograft
tumors. Our findings suggest that EZH2-specific microRNA-98 can effectively
inhibit cell proliferation in vitro and regulate the pRb-E2F pathway in human
OCSCs.

PMID: 24771265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Nat Commun. 2014 Apr 28;5:3680. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4680.

GATA-dependent regulatory switches establish atrioventricular canal specificity
during heart development.

Stefanovic S(1), Barnett P(1), van Duijvenboden K(1), Weber D(2), Gessler M(2),
Christoffels VM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Embryology and Physiology, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 15, 1105AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Developmental Biochemistry, Biocenter and Comprehensive Heart Failure Center, 
University of Wuerzburg, Am Hubland, D-97074 Wuerzburg, Germany.

The embryonic vertebrate heart tube develops an atrioventricular canal that
divides the atrial and ventricular chambers, forms atrioventricular conduction
tissue and organizes valve development. Here we assess the transcriptional
mechanism underlying this localized differentiation process. We show that
atrioventricular canal-specific enhancers are GATA-binding site-dependent and act
as switches that repress gene activity in the chambers. We find that
atrioventricular canal-specific gene loci are enriched in H3K27ac, a marker of
active enhancers, in atrioventricular canal tissue and depleted in H3K27ac in
chamber tissue. In the atrioventricular canal, Gata4 activates the enhancers in
synergy with Bmp2/Smad signalling, leading to H3K27 acetylation. In contrast, in 
chambers, Gata4 cooperates with pan-cardiac Hdac1 and Hdac2 and chamber-specific 
Hey1 and Hey2, leading to H3K27 deacetylation and repression. We conclude that
atrioventricular canal-specific enhancers are platforms integrating cardiac
transcription factors, broadly active histone modification enzymes and localized 
co-factors to drive atrioventricular canal-specific gene activity.

PMCID: PMC4015328
PMID: 24770533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. J Med Chem. 2014 May 22;57(10):4009-22. doi: 10.1021/jm401899x. Epub 2014 May 6.

Azaindolylsulfonamides, with a more selective inhibitory effect on histone
deacetylase 6 activity, exhibit antitumor activity in colorectal cancer HCT116
cells.

Lee HY(1), Tsai AC, Chen MC, Shen PJ, Cheng YC, Kuo CC, Pan SL, Liu YM, Liu JF,
Yeh TK, Wang JC, Chang CY, Chang JY, Liou JP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical University , 250
Wuxing Street, Taipei 11031, Taiwan.

A series of indolylsulfonylcinnamic hydroxamates has been synthesized. Compound
12,
(E)-3-(3-((1H-pyrrolo[2,3-b]pyridin-1-yl)sulfonyl)phenyl)-N-hydroxyacrylamide,
which has a 7-azaindole core cap, was shown to have antiproliferative activity
against KB, H460, PC3, HSC-3, HONE-1, A549, MCF-7, TSGH, MKN45, HT29, and HCT116 
human cancer cell lines. Pharmacological studies indicated that 12 functions as a
potent HDAC inhibitor with an IC50 value of 0.1 µM. It is highly selective for
histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) and is 60-fold more active than against HDAC1 and
223-fold more active than against HDAC2. It has a good pharmacokinetic profile
with oral bioavailability of 33%. In in vivo efficacy evaluations in colorectal
HCT116 xenografts, compound 12 suppresses tumor growth more effectively than SAHA
(1, N-hydroxy-N'-phenyloctanediamide) and is therefore seen as a suitable
candidate for further investigation.

PMID: 24766560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Haematologica. 2014 Aug;99(8):1292-303. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2013.092643. Epub
2014 Apr 24.

Sin3a-associated Hdac1 and Hdac2 are essential for hematopoietic stem cell
homeostasis and contribute differentially to hematopoiesis.

Heideman MR(1), Lancini C(1), Proost N(2), Yanover E(1), Jacobs H(3), Dannenberg 
JH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gene Regulation, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands. (2)Division of Molecular Genetics, Netherlands Cancer Institute,
Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (3)Division of Biological Stress Response,
Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (4)Division of Gene
Regulation, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, the Netherlands
j.dannenberg@nki.nl.

Class I histone deacetylases are critical regulators of gene transcription by
erasing lysine acetylation. Targeting histone deacetylases using relative
non-specific small molecule inhibitors is of major interest in the treatment of
cancer, neurological disorders and acquired immune deficiency syndrome.
Harnessing the therapeutic potential of histone deacetylase inhibitors requires
full knowledge of individual histone deacetylases in vivo. As hematologic
malignancies show increased sensitivity towards histone deacetylase inhibitors we
targeted deletion of class I Hdac1 and Hdac2 to hematopoietic cell lineages.
Here, we show that Hdac1 and Hdac2 together control hematopoietic stem cell
homeostasis, in a cell-autonomous fashion. Simultaneous loss of Hdac1 and Hdac2
resulted in loss of hematopoietic stem cells and consequently bone marrow
failure. Bone-marrow-specific deletion of Sin3a, a major Hdac1/2 co-repressor,
phenocopied loss of Hdac1 and Hdac2 indicating that Sin3a-associated
HDAC1/2-activity is essential for hematopoietic stem cell homeostasis. Although
Hdac1 and Hdac2 show compensatory and overlapping functions in hematopoiesis,
mice expressing mono-allelic Hdac1 or Hdac2 revealed that Hdac1 and Hdac2
contribute differently to the development of specific hematopoietic lineages.

Copyright© Ferrata Storti Foundation.

PMCID: PMC4116827
PMID: 24763403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Mar 4;94(8):596-8.

[Protein expressions of HDAC1 and DNMT1 in non-small-cell lung cancer and its
clinical significance].

[Article in Chinese]

Feng Y(1), Wang J(2), Wu Y, Feng X, Yu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Diseases, First Affiliated Hospital, Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou 450052, China. (2)Email: wangjing@zzu.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVE: To detect the serum protein expressions of histone deacetylase 1
(HDAC1) and DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) in patients with non-small-cell lung 
cancer and explore the correlation between their expressions and
clinicopathological features.
METHODS: Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was used to measure the
protein expressions of HDAC1 and DNMT1 in 136 lung cancer patients hospitalized
at Department of Respiratory Diseases, First Affiliated Hospital,Zhengzhou
University from September 2012 to June 2013 (cancer group). And 147 healthy
physical examination subjects from Sixth People's Hospital of Zhengzhou were
selected as controls and their clinicopathological features analyzed.
RESULTS: The protein expressions of HDAC1 and DNMT1 in patients with lung cancer 
(145 ± 53, 50 ± 11) were higher than those in control group (78 ± 56, 27 ± 6).
And there was statistical significance (t = 596.16, 152.64, both P = 0.000) . The
protein expressions of HDAC1 and DNMT1 were correlated with gender, smoking
history and age (among P < 0.05). There was a positive association between the
protein expressions of HDAC1 and DNMT1 in non-small-cell lung cancer (r = 0.525, 
P = 0.000). Statistical significance existed between the protein expressions of
HDAC1 and DNMT1 and histological types or different stages (all P < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: The higher protein expressions of HDAC1 and DNMT1 may play an
important role in the early process of lung cancer.

PMID: 24762689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. J Neurosci. 2014 Apr 23;34(17):6112-22. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5212-13.2014.

HDAC1 and HDAC2 control the specification of neural crest cells into peripheral
glia.

Jacob C(1), Lötscher P, Engler S, Baggiolini A, Varum Tavares S, Brügger V, John 
N, Büchmann-Møller S, Snider PL, Conway SJ, Yamaguchi T, Matthias P, Sommer L,
Mantei N, Suter U.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Health Sciences, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich,
CH-8093 Zurich, Switzerland, FMI for Biomedical Research, Novartis Research
Foundation, CH-4058 Basel, Switzerland, Institute of Anatomy, University of
Zurich, CH-8057 Zurich, Switzerland, Institute of Zoology, Department of Biology,
University of Fribourg, CH-1700 Fribourg, Switzerland, and Developmental Biology 
and Neonatal Medicine Program, H.B. Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Indiana 
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202.

Schwann cells, the myelinating glia of the peripheral nervous system (PNS),
originate from multipotent neural crest cells that also give rise to other cells,
including neurons, melanocytes, chondrocytes, and smooth muscle cells. The
transcription factor Sox10 is required for peripheral glia specification.
However, all neural crest cells express Sox10 and the mechanisms directing neural
crest cells into a specific lineage are poorly understood. We show here that
histone deacetylases 1 and 2 (HDAC1/2) are essential for the specification of
neural crest cells into Schwann cell precursors and satellite glia, which express
the early determinants of their lineage myelin protein zero (P0) and/or fatty
acid binding protein 7 (Fabp7). In neural crest cells, HDAC1/2 induced expression
of the transcription factor Pax3 by binding and activating the Pax3 promoter. In 
turn, Pax3 was required to maintain high Sox10 levels and to trigger expression
of Fabp7. In addition, HDAC1/2 were bound to the P0 promoter and activated P0
transcription. Consistently, in vivo genetic deletion of HDAC1/2 in mouse neural 
crest cells led to strongly decreased Sox10 expression, no detectable Pax3,
virtually no satellite glia, and no Schwann cell precursors in dorsal root
ganglia and peripheral nerves. Similarly, in vivo ablation of Pax3 in the mouse
neural crest resulted in strongly reduced expression of Sox10 and Fabp7.
Therefore, by controlling the expression of Pax3 and the concerted action of Pax3
and Sox10 on their target genes, HDAC1/2 direct the specification of neural crest
cells into peripheral glia.

PMCID: PMC3996228
PMID: 24760871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2014 Jul;31(7):899-911. doi: 10.1007/s10815-014-0233-0.
Epub 2014 Apr 24.

Candidate gene expression patterns in rabbit preimplantation embryos developed in
vivo and in vitro.

Henderson GR(1), Brahmasani SR, Yelisetti UM, Konijeti S, Katari VC, Sisinthy S.

Author information: 
(1)CSIR-Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Uppal Road, Hyderabad, 500
007, India.

PURPOSE: The levels and timing of expression of genes like BCLXL, HDAC1 and
pluripotency marker genes namely, OCT4, SOX2, NANOG and KLF4 are known to
influence preimplantation embryo development. Despite this information, precise
understanding of their influence during preimplantation embryo development is
lacking. The present study attempts to compare the expression of these genes in
the in vivo and in vitro developed preimplantation embryos.
METHODS: The in vivo and in vitro developed rabbit embryos collected at distinct 
developmental stages namely, pronuclear, 2 cell, 4 cell, 8 cell, 16 cell, Morula 
and blastocyst were compared at the transcriptional and translational levels
using Real Time PCR and immunocytochemical studies respectively.
RESULTS: The study establishes the altered levels of candidate genes at the
transcriptional level and translational level with reference to the zygotic
genome activation (ZGA) phase of embryo development in the in vivo and in vitro
developed embryos. The expression of OCT4, KLF4, NANOG and SOX2 genes were higher
in the in vitro developed embryos whereas and HDAC1 was lower. BCLXL expression
had its peak at ZGA in in vivo developed embryos. Protein expression of all the
candidate genes was observed in the embryos. BCLXL, KLF4 and NANOG exhibited
diffused localisation whereas HDAC1, OCT4, and SOX2 exhibited nuclear
localisation.
CONCLUSIONS: This study leads to conclude that BCLXL peak expression at the ZGA
phase may be a requirement for embryo development. Further expression of all the 
candidate genes was influenced by ZGA phase of development at the transcript
level, but not at the protein level.

PMCID: PMC4096891
PMID: 24760721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Epigenetics. 2014 Jul;9(7):942-50. doi: 10.4161/epi.28864. Epub 2014 Apr 21.

SETD6 controls the expression of estrogen-responsive genes and proliferation of
breast carcinoma cells.

O'Neill DJ(1), Williamson SC(1), Alkharaif D(1), Monteiro IC(1), Goudreault M(2),
Gaughan L(1), Robson CN(1), Gingras AC(3), Binda O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Northern Institute for Cancer Research; Newcastle University; Newcastle upon
Tyne, UK. (2)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute; Mount Sinai Hospital;
Toronto, ON Canada. (3)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute; Mount Sinai
Hospital; Toronto, ON Canada; Department of Molecular Genetics; University of
Toronto; Toronto, ON Canada.

The lysine methyltransferase SETD6 modifies the histone variant H2AZ, a key
component of nuclear receptor-dependent transcription. Herein, we report the
identification of several factors that associate with SETD6 and are implicated in
nuclear hormone receptor signaling. Specifically, SETD6 associates with the
estrogen receptor a (ERa), histone deacetylase HDAC1, metastasis protein MTA2,
and the transcriptional co-activator TRRAP. Luciferase reporter assays identify
SETD6 as a transcriptional repressor, in agreement with its association with
HDAC1 and MTA2. However, SETD6 behaves as a co-activator of several
estrogen-responsive genes, such as PGR and TFF1. Consistent with these results,
silencing of SETD6 in several breast carcinoma cell lines induced cellular
proliferation defects accompanied by enhanced expression of the cell cycle
inhibitor CDKN1A and induction of apoptosis. Herein, we have identified several
chromatin proteins that associate with SETD6 and described SETD6 as an essential 
factor for nuclear receptor signaling and cellular proliferation.

PMCID: PMC4143409
PMID: 24751716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Jun;42(10):6742-52. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku277. Epub 2014
Apr 19.

The crystal structure of the Split End protein SHARP adds a new layer of
complexity to proteins containing RNA recognition motifs.

Arieti F(1), Gabus C(1), Tambalo M(1), Huet T(1), Round A(2), Thore S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Geneva, Geneva 1211,
Switzerland. (2)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Grenoble Outstation and
Unit for Virus Host-Cell Interactions, University Grenoble Alpes-EMBL-CNRS,
Grenoble 38042, France. (3)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Geneva,
Geneva 1211, Switzerland stephane.thore@unige.ch.

The Split Ends (SPEN) protein was originally discovered in Drosophila in the late
1990s. Since then, homologous proteins have been identified in eukaryotic species
ranging from plants to humans. Every family member contains three predicted RNA
recognition motifs (RRMs) in the N-terminal region of the protein. We have
determined the crystal structure of the region of the human SPEN homolog that
contains these RRMs-the SMRT/HDAC1 Associated Repressor Protein (SHARP), at 2.0 Å
resolution. SHARP is a co-regulator of the nuclear receptors. We demonstrate that
two of the three RRMs, namely RRM3 and RRM4, interact via a highly conserved
interface. Furthermore, we show that the RRM3-RRM4 block is the main platform
mediating the stable association with the H12-H13 substructure found in the
steroid receptor RNA activator (SRA), a long, non-coding RNA previously shown to 
play a crucial role in nuclear receptor transcriptional regulation. We determine 
that SHARP association with SRA relies on both single- and double-stranded RNA
sequences. The crystal structure of the SHARP-RRM fragment, together with the
associated RNA-binding studies, extend the repertoire of nucleic acid binding
properties of RRM domains suggesting a new hypothesis for a better understanding 
of SPEN protein functions.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4041450
PMID: 24748666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. J Biol Chem. 2014 May 30;289(22):15554-65. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.548552. Epub
2014 Apr 15.

Tristetraprolin represses estrogen receptor a transactivation in breast cancer
cells.

Barrios-García T(1), Tecalco-Cruz A(1), Gómez-Romero V(1), Reyes-Carmona S(1),
Meneses-Morales I(1), León-Del-Río A(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Programa de Investigación de Cáncer de Mama and Departamento de
Biología Molecular y Biotecnología, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México D. F. 04510, Mexico. (2)From the 
Programa de Investigación de Cáncer de Mama and Departamento de Biología
Molecular y Biotecnología, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad
Nacional Autónoma de México, México D. F. 04510, Mexico leon@biomedicas.unam.mx.

Estrogen receptor a (ERa) mediates the effects of 17ß-estradiol (E2) in normal
mammary gland, and it is a key participant in breast cancer tumor development.
ERa transactivation activity is mediated by the synergistic interaction of two
domains designated AF1 and AF2. The function of AF2 is to recruit coactivator and
corepressor proteins that allow ERa to oscillate between the roles of
transcriptional activator and repressor. In contrast, the mechanism responsible
for AF-1 transcriptional activity is not completely understood. In this study, we
identified tristetraproline (TTP) as a novel ERa-associated protein. TTP
expression in MCF7 cells repressed ERa transactivation and reduced MCF7 cell
proliferation and the ability of the cells to form tumors in a mouse model. We
show that TTP transcriptional activity is mediated through its recruitment to the
promoter region of ERa target genes and its interaction with histone
deacetylases, in particular with HDAC1. TTP expression attenuates the
coactivating activity of SRC-1, suggesting that exchange between TTP and other
coactivators may play an important role in fine-tuning ERa transactivation. These
results indicate that TTP acts as a bona fide ERa corepressor and suggest that
this protein may be a contributing factor in the development of E2-dependent
tumors in breast cancer.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4140911
PMID: 24737323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Cereb Cortex. 2015 Sep;25(9):2729-40. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhu070. Epub 2014 Apr
15.

LSD1 Neurospecific Alternative Splicing Controls Neuronal Excitability in Mouse
Models of Epilepsy.

Rusconi F(1), Paganini L(1), Braida D(1), Ponzoni L(1), Toffolo E(1), Maroli
A(1), Landsberger N(2), Bedogni F(3), Turco E(4), Pattini L(5), Altruda F(4), De 
Biasi S(6), Sala M(7), Battaglioli E(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine. (2)Theoretical
and Applied Sciences, Division of Biomedical Research, University of Insubria,
Busto Arsizio 21052, Italy San Raffaele Rett Research Center, Division of
Neuroscience, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan 20132, Italy. (3)San
Raffaele Rett Research Center, Division of Neuroscience, San Raffaele Scientific 
Institute, Milan 20132, Italy. (4)Department of Molecular Biotechnology and
Health Sciences, Molecular Biotechnology Center, Università Degli Studi di
Torino, Turin 10126, Italy. (5)Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informazione e
Bioingegneria-Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy. (6)Department of Biosciences, 
Università Degli Studi di Milano, Milan 20122, Italy. (7)Department of Medical
Biotechnology and Translational Medicine CNR, Institute of Neuroscience, Milan,
Italy.

Alternative splicing in the brain is dynamic and instrumental to adaptive changes
in response to stimuli. Lysine-specific demethylase 1 (LSD1/KDM1A) is a
ubiquitously expressed histone H3Lys4 demethylase that acts as a transcriptional 
co-repressor in complex with its molecular partners CoREST and HDAC1/2. In
mammalian brain, alternative splicing of LSD1 mini-exon E8a gives rise to
neuroLSD1, a neurospecific isoform that, upon phosphorylation, acts as a
dominant-negative causing disassembly of the co-repressor complex and
de-repression of target genes. Here we show that the LSD1/neuroLSD1 ratio changes
in response to neuronal activation and such effect is mediated by neurospecific
splicing factors NOVA1 and nSR100/SRRM4 together with a novel cis-silencer.
Indeed, we found that, in response to epileptogenic stimuli, downregulation of
NOVA1 reduces exon E8a splicing and expression of neuroLSD1. Using behavioral and
EEG analyses we observed that neuroLSD1-specific null mice are hypoexcitable and 
display decreased seizure susceptibility. Conversely, in a mouse model of Rett
syndrome characterized by hyperexcitability, we measured higher levels of NOVA1
protein and upregulation of neuroLSD1. In conclusion, we propose that, in the
brain, correct ratio between LSD1 and neuroLSD1 contributes to excitability and, 
when altered, could represent a pathogenic event associated with neurological
disorders involving altered E/I.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 24735673  [PubMed - in process]


442. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Jan 21;94(3):227-31.

[DNA hypermethylation at C/EBPa gene promoter relieves a PPAR<U+03B3>-associated
repression of HDAC1].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao Q(1), Zhang Z, Li J, Zhang A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, First Municipal People's Hospital, Shanghai 200080,
China. Email: sawboneszhao@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the molecular mechanisms of C/EBPa for regulating the
osteogenesis of C3H10T1/2 cells.
METHODS: We constructed an in vitro osteogenic differentiation model and
investigated the mRNA and protein expression profile of PPAR<U+03B3>2 during C3H10T1/2
osteogenesis by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and
Western blot. Next we constructed an adenovirus vector loading siRNA against
PPAR<U+03B3>2 and employed a specific antagonist of PPAR<U+03B3>, G3335, to examine the effect 
of PPAR<U+03B3> on activating the expression of C/EBPa. Then we performed ChIP to test
PPAR<U+03B3>2 binding on -1 286 bp/-1 065 bp region of C/EBPa promoter and explore the
role of PPAR<U+03B3> in the dependence of histone hypoacetylation on DNA methylation in 
-1 286 bp/-1 065 bp region of C/EBPa promoter.
RESULTS: During the osteogenic differentiation, PPAR<U+03B3> mRNA and protein expression
initially increased and then decreased in double-phase reactions. siRNA and G3335
induced down-regulation of PPAR<U+03B3> activity inhibited C/EBPa in C3H10T1/2 cells
up-regulation of osteogenic differentiation. ChIP results show that DNA
methylation could weaken the binding section PPAR<U+03B3>2 to -1 286 bp/-1 065 bp
capabilities.
CONCLUSION: This study provides a deeper insight into the molecular mechanisms
underlying the osteogenesis of MSCs regulated by C/EBPa in synergy with PPAR<U+03B3>.
PPAR<U+03B3> contributes to C/EBPa expression through binding on -1 286 bp/-1 065 bp
region of its promoter during the osteogenesis of C3H10T1/2 cells. And DNA
hypermethylation in-1 286 bp/-1 065 bp region during the terminal stage of
osteogenesis prevents PPAR<U+03B3> from binding on it so that PPAR<U+03B3>-associated
repression of HDAC1 is relieved to down-regulate the acetylation status of -1 286
bp/-1 065 bp region. Meanwhile DNA methylation and histone acetylation are linked
by PPAR<U+03B3> for regulating the differentiation of MSCs.

PMID: 24731470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:508216. doi: 10.1155/2014/508216. Epub 2014 Mar 3.

Expression of mesenchymal stem cells-related genes and plasticity of aspirated
follicular cells obtained from infertile women.

Dzafic E(1), Stimpfel M(1), Novakovic S(2), Cerkovnik P(2), Virant-Klun I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University Medical Centre Ljubljana,
lajmerjeva 3, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia. (2)Department of Molecular Diagnostics, 
Institute of Oncology Ljubljana, Zaloka 2, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia.

After removal of oocytes for in vitro fertilization, follicular aspirates which
are rich in somatic follicular cells are discarded in daily medical practice.
However, there is some evidence that less differentiated cells with stem cell
characteristics are present among aspirated follicular cells (AFCs). The aim of
this study was to culture AFCs in vitro and to analyze their gene expression
profile. Using the RT2 Profiler PCR array, we investigated the expression profile
of 84 genes related to stemness, mesenchymal stem cells (MCSs), and cell
differentiation in AFCs enriched by hypoosmotic protocol from follicular
aspirates of infertile women involved in assisted reproduction programme in
comparison with bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (BM-MSCs) and
fibroblasts. Altogether the expression of 57 genes was detected in AFCs: 16 genes
(OCT4, CD49f, CD106, CD146, CD45, CD54, IL10, IL1B, TNF, VEGF, VWF, HDAC1, MITF, 
RUNX2, PPARG, and PCAF) were upregulated and 20 genes (FGF2, CASP3, CD105, CD13, 
CD340, CD73, CD90, KDR, PDGFRB, BDNF, COL1A1, IL6, MMP2, NES, NUDT6, BMP6,
SMURF2, BMP4, GDF5, and JAG1) were downregulated in AFCs when compared with
BM-MSCs. The genes which were upregulated in AFCs were mostly related to MSCs and
connected with ovarian function, and differed from those in fibroblasts. The
cultured AFCs with predominating granulosa cells were successfully in vitro
differentiated into adipogenic-, osteogenic-, and pancreatic-like cells. The
upregulation of some MSC-specific genes and in vitro differentiation into other
types of cells indicated a subpopulation of AFCs with specific stemness, which
was not similar to those of BM-MSCs or fibroblasts.

PMCID: PMC3958784
PMID: 24724084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 10;9(4):e94523. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094523. eCollection
2014.

Histone deacetylase 1 and p300 can directly associate with chromatin and compete 
for binding in a mutually exclusive manner.

Li X(1), Yang H(1), Huang S(2), Qiu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Florida, Gainesville,
Florida, United States of America. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, United States of America.

Lysine acetyltransferases (KATs) and histone deacetylases (HDACs) are important
epigenetic modifiers and dynamically cycled on active gene promoters to regulate 
transcription. Although HDACs are recruited to gene promoters and DNA
hypersensitive sites through interactions with DNA binding factors, HDAC
activities are also found globally in intergenic regions where DNA binding
factors are not present. It is suggested that HDACs are recruited to those
regions through other distinct, yet undefined mechanisms. Here we show that HDACs
can be directly recruited to chromatin in the absence of other factors through
direct interactions with both DNA and core histone subunits. HDACs interact with 
DNA in a non-sequence specific manner. HDAC1 and p300 directly bind to the
overlapping regions of the histone H3 tail and compete for histone binding.
Previously we show that p300 can acetylate HDAC1 to attenuate deacetylase
activity. Here we have further mapped two distinct regions of HDAC1 that interact
with p300. Interestingly, these regions of HDAC1 also associate with histone H3. 
More importantly, p300 and HDAC1 compete for chromatin binding both in vitro and 
in vivo. Therefore, the mutually exclusive associations of HDAC1/p300,
p300/histone, and HDAC1/histone on chromatin contribute to the dynamic regulation
of histone acetylation by balancing HDAC or KAT activity present at histones to
reorganize chromatin structure and regulate transcription.

PMCID: PMC3983199
PMID: 24722339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Apr 10;5:e1166. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.133.

Preclinical anti-arthritic study and pharmacokinetic properties of a potent
histone deacetylase inhibitor MPT0G009.

Hsieh IN(1), Liou JP(2), Lee HY(2), Lai MJ(2), Li YH(2), Yang CR(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei,
Taiwan. (2)School of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical University,
Taipei, Taiwan.

The pathology of rheumatoid arthritis includes synoviocyte proliferation and
inflammatory mediator expression, which may result from dysregulated epigenetic
control by histone deacetylase (HDAC). Thus, HDAC inhibitors may be useful for
treating inflammatory disease. This was a preclinical study of the HDAC
inhibitor, MPT0G009. The IC50 values of MPT0G009 for HDAC1, 2, 3, 6 and 8
enzymatic activities were significantly lower than those for the currently
marketed HDAC inhibitor suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA; vorinostat). In
addition, MPT0G009 markedly inhibited cytokine secretion and macrophage
colony-stimulating factor/receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B
ligand-induced osteoclastogenesis by macrophages (50 ng/ml each). These MPT0G009 
effects on cytokine secretion and osteoclast formation were reduced by the
overexpression of HDAC 1 (class I HDAC) and 6 (class II HDAC) in cells,
suggesting that these effects were due to the inhibition of its activity. In an
in vivo rat model, oral administration of MPT0G009 (25 mg/kg) significantly
inhibited paw swelling and bone destruction. Furthermore, compared with SAHA,
MPT0G009 exhibited longer half-life (9.53 h for oral administration) and higher
oral bioavailability (13%) in rats. These results established the preclinical
anti-arthritic efficacy and pharmacokinetic parameters of MPT0G009, which may
provide a new therapeutic approach for treating inflammatory arthritis.

PMID: 24722291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Diabetes. 2014 Sep;63(9):2924-34. doi: 10.2337/db14-0066. Epub 2014 Apr 10.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatase 3 (MKP-3)-deficient mice are
resistant to diet-induced obesity.

Feng B(1), Jiao P(2), Helou Y(3), Li Y(1), He Q(1), Walters MS(4), Salomon A(5), 
Xu H(6).

Author information: 
(1)Hallett Center for Diabetes and Endocrinology, Rhode Island Hospital, Brown
University, Warren Alpert Medical School, Providence, RI. (2)Hallett Center for
Diabetes and Endocrinology, Rhode Island Hospital, Brown University, Warren
Alpert Medical School, Providence, RI School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Jilin
University, Changchun, Jilin Province, China. (3)Department of Molecular
Pharmacology and Physiology, Brown University, Providence, RI. (4)Department of
Genetic Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY. (5)Department of
Molecular Biology, Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Brown University, Providence,
RI Department of Chemistry, Brown University, Providence, RI. (6)Hallett Center
for Diabetes and Endocrinology, Rhode Island Hospital, Brown University, Warren
Alpert Medical School, Providence, RI Pathobiology Program, Brown University,
Providence, RI hxu@lifespan.org.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatase 3 (MKP-3) is a negative regulator of
extracellular signal-related kinase signaling. Our laboratory recently
demonstrated that MKP-3 plays an important role in obesity-related hyperglycemia 
by promoting hepatic glucose output. This study shows that MKP-3 deficiency
attenuates body weight gain induced by a high-fat diet (HFD) and protects mice
from developing obesity-related hepatosteatosis. Triglyceride (TG) contents are
dramatically decreased in the liver of MKP-3(-/-) mice fed an HFD compared with
wild-type (WT) controls. The absence of MKP-3 also reduces adiposity, possibly by
repressing adipocyte differentiation. In addition, MKP-3(-/-) mice display
increased energy expenditure, enhanced peripheral glucose disposal, and improved 
systemic insulin sensitivity. We performed global phosphoproteomic studies to
search for downstream mediators of MKP-3 action in liver lipid metabolism. Our
results revealed that MKP-3 deficiency increases the phosphorylation of histone
deacetylase (HDAC) 1 on serine 393 by 3.3-fold and HDAC2 on serine 394 by
2.33-fold. Activities of HDAC1 and 2 are increased in the livers of MKP-3(-/-)
mice fed an HFD. Reduction of HDAC1/2 activities is sufficient to restore TG
content of MKP-3(-/-) primary hepatocytes to a level similar to that in WT cells.

© 2014 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long
as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the
work is not altered.

PMCID: PMC4141371
PMID: 24722245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Biomed Pharmacother. 2014 May;68(4):483-91. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2014.03.011.
Epub 2014 Mar 18.

Non-toxic dose chidamide synergistically enhances platinum-induced DNA damage
responses and apoptosis in Non-Small-Cell lung cancer cells.

Zhou Y(1), Pan DS(2), Shan S(2), Zhu JZ(2), Zhang K(2), Yue XP(2), Nie LP(3), Wan
J(4), Lu XP(2), Zhang W(5), Ning ZQ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Institute, Shenzhen-PKU-HKUST Medical Center, Shenzhen,
518036 Guangdong, China; Chipscreen Biosciences Ltd., Bio-Incubator 2-601, 1st
Ave. of Gaoxin Road, Hi-Tech Industrial Park, Shenzhen, 518057 Guangdong, China. 
(2)Chipscreen Biosciences Ltd., Bio-Incubator 2-601, 1st Ave. of Gaoxin Road,
Hi-Tech Industrial Park, Shenzhen, 518057 Guangdong, China. (3)Department of
Clinical Laboratory, Shenzhen Hospital, Peking University, Guangdong, China.
(4)Biomedical Research Institute, Shenzhen-PKU-HKUST Medical Center, Shenzhen,
518036 Guangdong, China. (5)Biomedical Research Institute, Shenzhen-PKU-HKUST
Medical Center, Shenzhen, 518036 Guangdong, China. Electronic address:
zhangweispace@yeah.net. (6)Chipscreen Biosciences Ltd., Bio-Incubator 2-601, 1st 
Ave. of Gaoxin Road, Hi-Tech Industrial Park, Shenzhen, 518057 Guangdong, China. 
Electronic address: zqning@chipscreen.com.

Combination of low doses of histone deacetylases inhibitors and chemotherapy
drugs is considered as one of the most promising strategies to increase the
anticancer efficacy. Chidamide is a novel benzamide chemical class of HDAC
inhibitor that selectively inhibited HDAC1, 2, 3 and 10. We sought to determine
whether chidamide may enhance platinum-induced cytotoxicity in NSCLC cells. In
this study, the combination of chidamide with carboplatin showed a good synergism
on growth inhibition with the mean combination index value as 0.712 and 0.639 in 
A549 and NCI-H157 cells, respectively. The used concentration of chidamide was
non-toxic on cells by itself as low as 0.3µM. All of our experiments were
comparisons between combination regimen and single carboplatin regimen in A549
and NCI-H157 cell lines. Phosphorylated histone H2A.X (<U+03B3>H2A.X), a hall marker of 
DNA damage response, was dramatically increased by the combination treatment.
Cell cycle analysis by flow cytometry and phosphorylation level analysis of
histone H3 (Ser10) by western blotting showed that combination treatment
significantly increased the percentage of G2/M phase of cells. Mitochondrial
membrane potential and cleaved-PARP1 level analysis indicate that chidamide
synergistically enhances carboplatin-induced apoptosis. Additionally, synergistic
effects of chidamide were found when it was combined with two other platinum
drugs (cisplatin and oxaliplatin). The results suggest that Chidamide in
combination with platinum drugs may be a novel therapeutic option for NSCLC.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24721323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2014;15(5):2169-77.

Matrine reduces proliferation of human lung cancer cells by inducing apoptosis
and changing miRNA expression profiles.

Liu YQ(1), Li Y, Qin J, Wang Q, She YL, Luo YL, He JX, Li JY, Xie XD.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Preclinical Study for New Drugs of Gansu Province, School of
Basic Medical Sciences, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China E-mail :
xdxie@lzu.edu.cn.

Matrine, a main active component extracted from dry roots of Sophora flavecens , 
has been reported to exert antitumor effects on A549 human non-small lung cancer 
cells, but its mechanisms of action remain unclear. To determine effects of
matrine on proliferation of A549 cells and assess possible mechanisms, MTT assays
were employed to detect cytotoxicity, along with o flow cytometric analysis of
DNA content of nuclei of cells following staining with propidium iodide to
analyze cell cycle distribution. Western blotting was performed to determined
expression levels of Bax, Bcl-2, VEGF and HDAC1, while a microarray was used to
assessed changes of miRNA profiles. In the MTT assay, matrine suppressed growth
of human lung cancer cell A549 in a dose- and time- dependent manner at doses of 
0.25-2.5 mg/ml for 24h, 48h or 72h. Matrine induced cell cycle arrest in G0/G1
phase and decreased the G2/M phase, while down-regulating the expression of Bcl2 
protein, leading to a reduction in the Bcl-2/Bax ratio. In addition, matrine down
regulated the expression level of VEGF and HDAC1 of A549 cells. Microarray
analysis demonstrated that matrine altered the expression level of miRNAs
compared with untreated control A549 cells. In conclusion, matrine could inhibit 
proliferation of A549 cells, providing useful information for understanding
anticancer mechanisms.

PMID: 24716952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2014;33(4):953-66. doi: 10.1159/000358667. Epub 2014 Mar
31.

Synergetic effect of a-lipoic acid with keratinocyte growth factor on protecting 
alveolar epithelial type II cells of rat fetus from hyperoxia -induced injury.

Wang J(1), Liu W, Peng Y, Li W, Cheng T, Gao C, Mo L, Zhao Z, Chang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

AIM: To explore the potential mechanism of the synergetic effect of a-lipoic acid
with keratinocyte growth factor (KGF) on protecting alveolar epithelial type II
cells (ATIICs) from hyperoxia-induced injury.
METHODS: Primary culture of ATIICs from the Sprague-Dawley rat fetuses was
examined under room air and 95% of O2. Various KGF concentrations (0 to 100
ng/mL) and 0.5 mM of a-lipoic were added into the cell culture. Levels of
intracellular reactive oxygen species, necrosis, and proliferation of ATIICs were
measured using flow cytometry, ELISA, and MTT assays, respectively. RT-PCR was
performed to detect KGFR mRNA expression. Western blot was employed to detect the
expression of KGFR, phospho-p53, HDAC1, and acetylated H3 and H4.
RESULTS: KGF promoted the proliferation and inhibited the apoptosis of ATIICs in 
room air or under temporary exposure to hyperoxia. However, the resistance of
ATIICs to KGF was observed after prolonged exposure. Further investigation
demonstrated that down-regulation of KGF receptor via activation of p53 and
recruitment of HDAC1 induced by oxidative stress contributed to KGF resistance.
This resistance could be attenuated by a-lipoic acid, a powerful antioxidant.
CONCLUSION: Application of KGF combined with a-lipoic acid could inhibit KGF
resistance to provide maximum protection to ATIICs from hyperoxic injury.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 24713997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. J Med Chem. 2014 Apr 24;57(8):3324-41. doi: 10.1021/jm401877m. Epub 2014 Apr 15.

Discovery of the first N-hydroxycinnamamide-based histone deacetylase 1/3 dual
inhibitors with potent oral antitumor activity.

Li X(1), Inks ES, Li X, Hou J, Chou CJ, Zhang J, Jiang Y, Zhang Y, Xu W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, School of Pharmacy, Shandong University ,
Ji'nan, Shandong 250012, P. R. China.

In our previous study, we designed and synthesized a novel series of
N-hydroxycinnamamide-based HDAC inhibitors (HDACIs), among which the
representative compound 14a exhibited promising HDACs inhibition and antitumor
activity. In this current study, we report the development of a more potent class
of N-hydroxycinnamamide-based HDACIs, using 14a as lead, among which, compound
11r gave IC50 values of 11.8, 498.1, 3.9, 2000.8, 5700.4, 308.2, and 900.4 nM for
the inhibition of HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3, HDAC8, HDAC4, HDAC6, and HDAC11,
exhibiting dual HDAC1/3 selectivity. Compounds 11e, 11r, 11w, and 11y showed
excellent growth inhibition in multiple tumor cell lines. In vivo antitumor assay
in U937 xenograft model identified compound 11r as a potent, orally active HDACI.
To the best of our knowledge, this work constitutes the first report of oral
active N-hydroxycinnamamide-based HDACIs with dual HDAC1/3 selectivity.

PMCID: PMC4030833
PMID: 24694055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. J Biol Chem. 2014 May 16;289(20):13751-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.558197. Epub 2014
Apr 1.

Transcription factor Ikaros represses protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) expression
through an intronic binding site.

Nagpal K(1), Watanabe KS(2), Tsao BP(3), Tsokos GC(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115 and
knagpal@bidmc.harvard.edu. (2)From the Department of Medicine, Division of
Rheumatology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115 and. (3)the Division of Rheumatology, University of
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California 90095. (4)From the Department of 
Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115 and gtsokos@bidmc.harvard.edu.

Protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) is a highly conserved and ubiquitous
serine/threonine phosphatase. We have shown previously that PP2A expression is
increased in T cells of systemic lupus erythematosus patients and that this
increased expression and activity of PP2A plays a central role in the molecular
pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus. Although the control of PP2A
expression has been the focus of many studies, many aspects of its regulation
still remain poorly understood. In this study, we describe a novel mechanism of
PP2A regulation. We propose that the transcription factor Ikaros binds to a
variant site in the first intron of PP2A and modulates its expression. Exogenous 
expression of Ikaros leads to reduced levels of PP2Ac message as well as protein.
Conversely, siRNA-enabled silencing of Ikaros enhances the expression of PP2A,
suggesting that Ikaros acts as a suppressor of PP2A expression. A ChIP analysis
further proved that Ikaros is recruited to this site in T cells. We also
attempted to delineate the mechanism of Ikaros-mediated PP2Ac gene suppression.
We show that Ikaros-mediated suppression of PP2A expression is at least partially
dependent on the recruitment of the histone deacetylase HDAC1 to this intronic
site. We conclude that the transcription factor Ikaros can regulate the
expression of PP2A by binding to a site in the first intron and modulating
chromatin modifications at this site via recruitment of HDAC1.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4022849
PMID: 24692537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 1;9(4):e93222. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093222. eCollection 
2014.

Downregulation of HDAC1 is involved in the cardiomyocyte differentiation from
mesenchymal stem cells in a myocardial microenvironment.

Lu DF(1), Yao Y(1), Su ZZ(1), Zeng ZH(1), Xing XW(1), He ZY(1), Zhang C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology and Sino-US Cardiovascular Research Center, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Cardiovascular Research Center, Rush Medical
College, Rush University, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.

Under myocardial microenvironment, bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells
(MSCs) can transdifferentiate into cardiomyocytes (CMs). However, the role of
histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) in this directed differentiation process remains
unclear. The current study is to determine the acetylation regulatory mechanisms 
that may be involved in the directed CM differentiation from MSCs. MSCs isolated 
from male Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats were marked with Ad-EGFP and co-cultured with 
CMs. Flow cytometry was used to sort EGFP-positive (EGFP+) MSCs from the
co-culture system. Then, the expression of cardiac troponin T (cTnT) in these
MSCs was detected by immunofluorescence assay. In addition, HDAC1 levels at
different co-culture times were measured by quantitative real-time polymerase
chain reaction (QT-PCR) and Western blotting. At 4 days after co-culture with
CMs, the MSCs began to expression detectable levels of cTnT. The expression of
HDAC1 in CMs was much lower than that in MSCs. After co-culture with CMs, the
expression of HDAC1 in MSCs was significantly decreased in a time dependent
manner. In addition, our recent study has also identified that knockdown of the
HDAC1 could promote the directed differentiation of MSCs into CMs. The results
suggest that HDAC1 has a negative correlation with cardiac cell differentiation
from MSCs under a myocardial microenvironment. HDAC1 might play an important role
in the directed differentiation of MSCs into CMs in heart.

PMCID: PMC3972222
PMID: 24690943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 31;9(3):e92179. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092179. eCollection
2014.

Knockdown of the HDAC1 promotes the directed differentiation of bone mesenchymal 
stem cells into cardiomyocytes.

Lu DF(1), Wang Y(1), Su ZZ(1), Zeng ZH(1), Xing XW(1), He ZY(1), Zhang C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. (2)Department of Pharmacology and
Cardiovascular Research Center, Rush Medical college of Rush University, Chicago,
Illinois, United States of America.

Failure of the directed differentiation of the transplanted stem cells into
cardiomyocytes is still a major challenge of cardiac regeneration therapy. Our
recent study has demonstrated that the expression of histone deacetylase 1
(HDAC1) is decreased in bone mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs) during their
differentiation into cardiomyocytes. However, the potential roles of HDAC1 in
cardiac cell differentiation of BMSCs, as well as the mechanisms involved are
still unclear. In current study, the expression of HDAC1 in cultured rat BMSCs is
knocked down by lentiviral vectors expressing HDAC1-RNAi. The directed
differentiation of BMSCs into cardiomyocytes is evaluated by the expression
levels of cardiomyocyte-related genes such as GATA-binding protein 4 (GATA-4),
Nirenberg, Kim gene 2 homeobox 5 (Nkx2.5), cardiac troponin T (CTnT), myosin
heavy chain (MHC), and connexin-43. Compared with that in control BMSCs, the
expression of these cardiomyocyte-related genes is significantly increased in
these HDAC1 deficient stem cells. The results suggest that HDAC1 is involved in
the cardiomyocyte differentiation of BMSCs. Knockdown of the HDAC1 may promote
the directed differentiation of BMSCs into cardiomyocytes.

PMCID: PMC3970960
PMID: 24686813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Nat Immunol. 2014 May;15(5):439-48. doi: 10.1038/ni.2864. Epub 2014 Mar 30.

CD4(+) T cell lineage integrity is controlled by the histone deacetylases HDAC1
and HDAC2.

Boucheron N(1), Tschismarov R(1), Göschl L(2), Moser MA(3), Lagger S(4),
Sakaguchi S(5), Winter M(3), Lenz F(6), Vitko D(7), Breitwieser FP(7), Müller
L(5), Hassan H(5), Bennett KL(7), Colinge J(7), Schreiner W(6), Egawa T(8),
Taniuchi I(9), Matthias P(10), Seiser C(4), Ellmeier W(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Division of Immunobiology, Institute of Immunology, Center for
Pathophysiology, Infectiology and Immunology, Medical University of Vienna,
Vienna, Austria. [2]. (2)1] Division of Immunobiology, Institute of Immunology,
Center for Pathophysiology, Infectiology and Immunology, Medical University of
Vienna, Vienna, Austria. [2] Division of Rheumatology, Medicine III, Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. (3)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Max
F. Perutz Laboratories, Vienna Biocenter, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria. (4)1] Department of Medical Biochemistry, Max F. Perutz Laboratories,
Vienna Biocenter, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. [2]. (5)Division
of Immunobiology, Institute of Immunology, Center for Pathophysiology,
Infectiology and Immunology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(6)Division of Biosimulation and Bioinformatics, Center for Medical Statistics,
Informatics, and Intelligent Systems, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria. (7)CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy
of Sciences, Vienna, Austria. (8)Department of Pathology & Immunology, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA. (9)Laboratory for
Transcriptional Regulation, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences-RIKEN
Center for Allergy and Immunology, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan. (10)1] Friedrich
Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Novartis Research Foundation, Basel, 
Switzerland. [2] Faculty of Sciences, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

Erratum in
    Nat Immunol. 2014 Sep;15(9):894. Goeschl, Lisa [corrected to Göschl, Lisa].

Molecular mechanisms that maintain lineage integrity of helper T cells are
largely unknown. Here we show histone deacetylases 1 and 2 (HDAC1 and HDAC2) as
crucial regulators of this process. Loss of HDAC1 and HDAC2 during late T cell
development led to the appearance of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class
II-selected CD4(+) helper T cells that expressed CD8-lineage genes such as Cd8a
and Cd8b1. HDAC1 and HDAC2-deficient T helper type 0 (TH0) and TH1 cells further 
upregulated CD8-lineage genes and acquired a CD8(+) effector T cell program in a 
manner dependent on Runx-CBFß complexes, whereas TH2 cells repressed features of 
the CD8(+) lineage independently of HDAC1 and HDAC2. These results demonstrate
that HDAC1 and HDAC2 maintain integrity of the CD4 lineage by repressing
Runx-CBFß complexes that otherwise induce a CD8(+) effector T cell-like program
in CD4(+) T cells.

PMCID: PMC4346201
PMID: 24681565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 26;9(3):e90948. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090948. eCollection
2014.

Quantification of pancreatic cancer proteome and phosphorylome: indicates
molecular events likely contributing to cancer and activity of drug targets.

Britton D(1), Zen Y(2), Quaglia A(2), Selzer S(1), Mitra V(1), Lößner C(1), Jung 
S(1), Böhm G(1), Schmid P(1), Prefot P(1), Hoehle C(1), Koncarevic S(1), Gee
J(3), Nicholson R(3), Ward M(1), Castellano L(4), Stebbing J(4), Zucht HD(1),
Sarker D(2), Heaton N(2), Pike I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Proteome Sciences plc, Cobham, United Kingdom. (2)Institute of Liver Studies, 
King's College Hospital, London, United Kingdom. (3)Cardiff School of Pharmacy & 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. (4)Faculty 
of Medicine, Department of Surgery & Cancer, Imperial College, London, United
Kingdom.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(8):e107077.

OBJECTIVE: LC-MS/MS phospho-proteomics is an essential technology to help unravel
the complex molecular events that lead to and propagate cancer. We have developed
a global phospho-proteomic workflow to determine activity of signaling pathways
and drug targets in pancreatic cancer tissue for clinical application.
METHODS: Peptides resulting from tryptic digestion of proteins extracted from
frozen tissue of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma and background pancreas
(n<U+200A>=<U+200A>12), were labelled with tandem mass tags (TMT 8-plex), separated by strong
cation exchange chromatography, then were analysed by LC-MS/MS directly or first 
enriched for phosphopeptides using IMAC and TiO2, prior to analysis. In-house,
commercial and freeware bioinformatic platforms were used to identify relevant
biological events from the complex dataset.
RESULTS: Of 2,101 proteins identified, 152 demonstrated significant difference in
abundance between tumor and non-tumor tissue. They included proteins that are
known to be up-regulated in pancreatic cancer (e.g. Mucin-1), but the majority
were new candidate markers such as HIPK1 & MLCK. Of the 6,543 unique
phosphopeptides identified (6,284 unique phosphorylation sites), 635 showed
significant regulation, particularly those from proteins involved in cell
migration (Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factors & MRCKa) and formation of
focal adhesions. Activator phosphorylation sites on FYN, AKT1, ERK2, HDAC1 and
other drug targets were found to be highly modulated (=2 fold) in different cases
highlighting their predictive power.
CONCLUSION: Here we provided critical information enabling us to identify the
common and unique molecular events likely contributing to cancer in each case.
Such information may be used to help predict more bespoke therapy suitable for an
individual case.

PMCID: PMC3966770
PMID: 24670416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Tumour Biol. 2014 Jul;35(7):6373-81. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-1841-0. Epub 2014
Mar 26.

Differential expression of histone deacetylase and acetyltransferase genes in
gastric cancer and their modulation by trichostatin A.

Wisnieski F(1), Calcagno DQ, Leal MF, Chen ES, Gigek CO, Santos LC, Pontes TB,
Rasmussen LT, Payão SL, Assumpção PP, Lourenço LG, Demachki S, Artigiani R,
Burbano RR, Smith MC.

Author information: 
(1)Disciplina de Genética, Departamento de Morfologia e Genética, Universidade
Federal de São Paulo, Rua Botucatu, 740, São Paulo, 04023900, Brazil,
fernandawis@yahoo.com.br.

Gastric cancer is still the second leading cause of cancer-related death
worldwide, even though its incidence and mortality have declined over the recent 
few decades. Epigenetic control using histone deacetylase inhibitors, such as
trichostatin A (TSA), is a promising cancer therapy. This study aimed to assess
the messenger RNA (mRNA) levels of three histone deacetylases (HDAC1, HDAC2, and 
HDAC3), two histone acetyltransferases (GCN5 and PCAF), and two possible targets 
of these histone modifiers (MYC and CDKN1A) in 50 matched pairs of gastric tumors
and corresponding adjacent nontumors samples from patients with gastric
adenocarcinoma, as well as their correlations and their possible associations
with clinicopathological features. Additionally, we evaluated whether these genes
are sensitive to TSA in gastric cancer cell lines. Our results demonstrated
downregulation of HDAC1, PCAF, and CDKN1A in gastric tumors compared with
adjacent nontumors (P < 0.05). On the other hand, upregulation of HDAC2, GCN5,
and MYC was observed in gastric tumors compared with adjacent nontumors (P <
0.05). The mRNA level of MYC was correlated to HDAC3 and GCN5 (P < 0.05), whereas
CDKN1A was correlated to HDAC1 and GCN5 (P < 0.05 and P < 0.01, respectively). In
addition, the reduced expression of PCAF was associated with intestinal-type
gastric cancer (P = 0.03) and TNM stages I/II (P = 0.01). The increased
expression of GCN5 was associated with advanced stage gastric cancer (P = 0.02)
and tumor invasion (P = 0.03). The gastric cell lines treated with TSA showed
different patterns of histone deacetylase and acetyltransferase mRNA expression, 
downregulation of MYC, and upregulation of CDKN1A. Our findings suggest that
alteration of histone modifier genes play an important role in gastric
carcinogenesis, contributing to MYC and CDKN1A deregulation. In addition, all
genes studied here are modulated by TSA, although this modulation appears to be
dependent of the genetic background of the cell line.

PMID: 24668547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2014 Sep;111(9):1900-5. doi: 10.1002/bit.25246. Epub 2014 Jun 
11.

Kinome profiling of osteoblasts on hydroxyapatite opens new avenues on
biomaterial cell signaling.

Gemini-Piperni S(1), Milani R, Bertazzo S, Peppelenbosch M, Takamori ER,
Granjeiro JM, Ferreira CV, Teti A, Zambuzzi W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnological and Applied Clinical Sciences, University of
L'Aquila, L'Aquila, Italy.

In degenerative diseases or lesions, bone tissue replacement and regeneration are
important clinical goals. The most used bone substitutes today are hydroxyapatite
(HA) scaffolds. These scaffolds, developed over the last few decades, present
high porosity and good osteointegration, but haven't completely solved issues
related to bone defects. Moreover, the exact intracellular mechanisms involved in
the response to HA have yet to be addressed. This prompted us to investigate the 
protein networks responsible for signal transduction during early osteoblast
adhesion on synthetic HA scaffolds. By performing a global kinase activity assay,
we showed that there is a specific molecular machinery responding to HA contact, 
immediately triggering pathways leading to cytoskeleton rearrangement due to
activation of Adducin 1 (ADD1), protein kinase A (PKA), protein kinase C (PKC),
and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Moreover, we found a significantly
increased phosphorylation of the activating site Ser-421 in histone deacetylase 1
(HDAC1), a substrate of Cyclin-Dependent Kinase 5 (CDK5). These phosphorylation
events are hallmarks of osteoblast differentiation, pointing to HA surfaces
ability to promote differentiation. We also found that AKT was kept active,
suggesting the maintenance of survival pathways. Interestingly, though, the
substrate sequence of CDK5 also presented higher phosphorylation levels when
compared to control conditions. To our knowledge, this kinase has never before
been related to osteoblast biology, opening a new avenue of investigation for
novel pathways involved in this matter. These results suggest that HA triggers a 
specific intracellular signal transduction cascade during early osteoblast
adhesion, activating proteins involved with cytoskeleton rearrangement, and
induction of osteoblast differentiation.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24668294  [PubMed - in process]


458. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 21;9(3):e92793. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092793. eCollection
2014.

3-Methylcholanthrene, an AhR agonist, caused cell-cycle arrest by histone
deacetylation through a RhoA-dependent recruitment of HDAC1 and pRb2 to E2F1
complex.

Chang CC(1), Sue YM(2), Yang NJ(1), Lee YH(3), Juan SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei
Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan; Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences,
Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. (2)Department of Nephrology, Taipei
Medical University-Wan Fang Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Institute of Physiology,
National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.

We previously showed that treating vascular endothelial cells with
3-methylcholanthrene (3MC) caused cell-cycle arrest in the Go/G1 phase; this
resulted from the induction of p21 and p27 and a decreased level and activity of 
the cyclin-dependent kinase, Cdk2. We further investigated the molecular
mechanisms that modulate cell-cycle regulatory proteins through the
aryl-hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)/Ras homolog gene family, member A (RhoA)
dependent epigenetic modification of histone. AhR/RhoA activation mediated by 3MC
was essential for the upregulation of retinoblastoma 2 (pRb2) and histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), whereas their nuclear translocation was primarily
modulated by RhoA activation. The combination of increased phosphatase and tensin
homolog (PTEN) activity and decreased phosphatidylinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)
activation by 3MC led to the inactivation of the Ras-cRaf pathway, which
contributed to pRb2 hypophosphorylation. Increased HDAC1/pRb2 recruitment to the 
E2F1 complex decreased E2F1-transactivational activity and H3/H4 deacetylation,
resulting in the downregulation of cell-cycle regulatory proteins (Cdk2/4 and
Cyclin D3/E). Co-immunoprecipitation and electrophoretic mobility shift assay
(EMSA) results showed that simvastatin prevented the 3MC-increased binding
activities of E2F1 proteins in their promoter regions. Additionally, RhoA
inhibitors (statins) reversed the effect of 3MC in inhibiting DNA synthesis by
decreasing the nuclear translocation of pRb2/HDAC1, leading to a recovery of the 
levels of cell-cycle regulatory proteins. In summary, 3MC decreased cell
proliferation by the epigenetic modification of histone through an
AhR/RhoA-dependent mechanism that can be rescued by statins.

PMCID: PMC3962457
PMID: 24658119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Neurochem Int. 2014 Nov;77:17-23. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2014.03.006. Epub 2014
Mar 19.

Histone deacetylase expression in white matter oligodendrocytes after stroke.

Kassis H(1), Chopp M(2), Liu XS(1), Shehadah A(1), Roberts C(1), Zhang ZG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, MI 48202, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, MI 48202, USA;
Department of Physics, Oakland University, Rochester, MI 48309, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, MI 48202, USA.
Electronic address: zhazh@neuro.hfh.edu.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) constitute a super-family of enzymes grouped into
four major classes (Class I-IV) that deacetylate histone tails leading to
chromatin condensation and gene repression. Whether stroke-induced
oligodendrogenesis is related to the expression of individual HDACs in the
oligodendrocyte lineage has not been investigated. We found that 2 days after
stroke, oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) and mature oligodendrocytes
(OLGs) were substantially reduced in the peri-infarct corpus callosum, whereas at
7 days after stroke, a robust increase in OPCs and OLGs was observed. Ischemic
brains isolated from rats sacrificed 7 days after stroke were used to test levels
of individual members of Class I (1 and 2) and Class II (4 and 5) HDACs in white 
matter oligodendrocytes during stroke-induced oligodendrogenesis. Double
immunohistochemistry analysis revealed that stroke substantially increased the
number of NG2+OPCs with nuclear HDAC1 and HDAC2 immunoreactivity and cytoplasmic 
HDAC4 which were associated with augmentation of proliferating OPCs, as
determined by BrdU and Ki67 double reactive cells after stroke. A decrease in
HDAC1 and an increase in HDAC2 immunoreactivity were detected in mature
adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) positive OLGs, which paralleled an increase in
newly generated BrdU positive OLGs in the peri-infarct corpus callosum.
Concurrently, stroke substantially decreased the acetylation levels of histones
H3 and H4 in both OPCs and OLGs. Taken together, these findings demonstrate that 
stroke induces distinct profiles of Class I and Class II HDACs in white matter
OPCs and OLGs, suggesting that the individual members of Class I and II HDACs
play divergent roles in the regulation of OPC proliferation and differentiation
during brain repair after stroke.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4332872
PMID: 24657831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. FEBS Lett. 2014 Aug 19;588(16):2728-42. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.03.011. Epub 
2014 Mar 14.

Keep-ING balance: tumor suppression by epigenetic regulation.

Tallen G(1), Riabowol K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, Charité-Medical School Berlin,
Germany. (2)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Calgary, Canada. Electronic address: karl@ucalgary.ca.

Cancer cells accumulate genetic and epigenetic changes that alter gene expression
to drive tumorigenesis. Epigenetic silencing of tumor suppressor, cell cycle,
differentiation and DNA repair genes contributes to neoplastic transformation.
The ING (inhibitor of growth) proteins (ING1-ING5) have emerged as a versatile
family of growth regulators, phospholipid effectors, histone mark sensors and
core components of HDAC1/2 - and several HAT chromatin-modifying complexes. This 
review will describe the characteristic pathways by which ING family proteins
differentially affect the Hallmarks of Cancer and highlight the various
epigenetic mechanisms by which they regulate gene expression. Finally, we will
discuss their potentials as biomarkers and therapeutic targets in epigenetic
treatment strategies.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24632289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Nat Commun. 2014 Mar 11;5:3431. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4431.

Inhibition of endothelial ERK signalling by Smad1/5 is essential for
haematopoietic stem cell emergence.

Zhang C(1), Lv J(1), He Q(1), Wang S(1), Gao Y(1), Meng A(2), Yang X(3), Liu
F(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, Institute of
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China. (2)State Key
Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, Tsinghua-Peking Center for 
Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084,
China. (3)State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Genetic Laboratory of Development
and Diseases, Institute of Biotechnology, Beijing 100071, China.

The earliest HSCs are derived from haemogenic endothelium via
endothelial-to-haematopoietic transition during vertebrate embryogenesis;
however, the underlying mechanism is largely unclear. Here we show that interplay
of Smad1/5 and ERK signalling is essential for haemogenic endothelium-based HSC
emergence. Smad1/5 directly inhibits erk expression through recruiting HDAC1 to
and inducing de-acetylation of the erk promoter in endothelial cells.
Over-activated ERK signalling conferred by inhibition of Smad1/5 promotes the
arterial endothelial cell fate and constitutively strengthens the tight junction 
between endothelial cells, thereby repressing the specification of haemogenic
endothelium and the following endothelial-to-haematopoietic transition process.
These findings provide new insights into the in vitro generation of
transplantable HSCs for potential clinical applications.

PMID: 24614941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 10;9(3):e90755. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090755. eCollection
2014.

Hope for restoration of dead valuable bulls through cloning using donor somatic
cells isolated from cryopreserved semen.

Selokar NL(1), Saini M(2), Palta P(2), Chauhan MS(2), Manik R(2), Singla SK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Animal Biotechnology Centre, National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal, India;
Cellular Reprogramming Lab., Department of Animal Physiology and Reproduction,
Central Institute for Research on Buffaloes, Hisar, India. (2)Animal
Biotechnology Centre, National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal, India.

Somatic cells were isolated from cryopreserved semen of 4 buffalo bulls, 3 of
which had died over 10 years earlier, and were established in culture. The cells 
expressed cytokeratin-18, keratin and vimentin indicating that they were of
epithelial origin. The cells were used as nuclear donors for hand-made cloning
for producing buffalo embryos. The blastocyst rate and quality, as indicated by
apoptotic index, were comparable among embryos produced using cells obtained from
fresh or frozen-thawed semen or those obtained from conventional cell sources
such as skin. Examination of the epigenetic status revealed that the global level
of H3K27me3 but not that of H3K9/14ac and H4K5ac differed significantly (P<0.05) 
among cloned embryos from different bulls. The relative mRNA abundance of HDAC1, 
DNMT1, P53 and CASPASE 3 but not that of DNMT3a differed in cells and in cloned
embryos. Following transfer of 24 cloned embryos produced from fresh
semen-derived cells to 12 recipients, one calf weighing 55 kg, which is now 6
months of age and is normal, was born through normal parturition. Following
transfer of 20 embryos produced from frozen-thawed semen-derived cells to 10
recipients, 2 became pregnant, one of which aborted in the first trimester; the
calf born was severely underweight (17 kg), and died 12 h after birth. The
ability of cells derived from fresh and frozen-thawed semen to produce live
offspring confirms the ability of these cells to be reprogrammed. Our findings
pave the way for restoration of highly precious progeny-tested bulls, which has
immense economic importance, and can also be used for restoration of endangered
species.

PMCID: PMC3948694
PMID: 24614586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2014;15(3):1403-10.

Reversal of resistance towards cisplatin by curcumin in cervical cancer cells.

Roy M(1), Mukherjee S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Carcinogenesis and Toxicology, Chittaranjan
National Cancer Institute, Kolkata, India E-mail : mitacnci@yahoo.co.in.

Epigenetic regulators like histone deacetylases (1 and 2), and viral
onco-proteins (E6/E7) are known to be overexpressed in cervical cancer cells. The
present study was designed to investigate the effect of curcumin on HDACs (1 and 
2) and HPV E6/E7 in the cervical cancer cell line SiHa and a drug resistant clone
SiHaR (derived from SiHa). It was further intended to investigate whether
curcumin could sensitize the cells towards cisplatin induced cell killing by
modulation of multi drug resistant proteins like MRP1 and Pgp1. Curcumin
inhibited HDACs, HPV expression and differentially increased acetylation and
up-regulation of p53 in SiHa and SiHaR, leading to cell cycle arrest at G1-S
phase. Up-regulation of pRb, p21, p27 and corresponding inhibition of cyclin D1
and CDK4 were observed. Cisplatin resistance in SiHaR due to over-expression of
MRP1 and Pgp1 was overcome by curcumin. Curcumin also sensitized both the
cervical cancer cells towards cisplatin induced cell killing. Inhibition of HDACs
and HPVs led to cell cycle arrest at G1/S phase by alteration of cell cycle
regulatory proteins. Suppression of MRP1 and Pgp1 by curcumin resulted in
sensitization of cervical cancer cells, lowering the chemotherapeutic dose of the
drug cisplatin.

PMID: 24606473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 4;9(3):e91083. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091083. eCollection 
2014.

Lipopolysaccharide induces up-regulation of TGF-a through HDAC2 in a rat model of
bronchopulmonary dysplasia.

Ni W(1), Lin N(1), He H(1), Zhu J(1), Zhang Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)XinHua Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai,
China. (2)XinHua Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, China; MOE and Shanghai Key Laboratory of Children's Environmental
Health, Shanghai, China.

Bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) is characterized by alveolar simplification with
decreased alveolar number and increased airspace. Previous studies suggested that
transforming growth factor-a (TGF-a) may contribute to arrested alveolar
development in BPD. Histone deacetylases (HDACs) control cellular signaling and
gene expression. HDAC2 is crucial for suppression of inflammatory gene
expression. Here we investigated whether HDAC2 was involved in the arrest of
alveolarization, as well as the ability of HDAC2 to regulate TGF-a expression in 
a rat model of BPD induced by intra-amniotic injection of lipopolysaccharide
(LPS). Results showed that LPS exposure led to a suppression of both HDAC1 and
HDAC2 expression and activity, induced TGF-a expression, and disrupted alveolar
morphology. Mechanistic studies showed that overexpression of HDAC2, but not
HDAC1, suppressed LPS-induced TGF-a expression. Moreover, the HDAC inhibitor TSA 
or downregulation of HDAC2 by siRNA both significantly increased TGF-a expression
in cultured myofibroblasts. Finally, preservation of HDAC activity by
theophylline treatment improved alveolar development and attenuated TGF-a
release. Together, these findings indicate that attenuation of TGF-a-mediated
effects in the lung by enhancing HDAC2 may have a therapeutic effect on treating 
BPD.

PMCID: PMC3942494
PMID: 24595367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2014 May;50:112-22. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2014.02.019.
Epub 2014 Mar 1.

Identification of NuRSERY, a new functional HDAC complex composed by HDAC5,
GATA1, EKLF and pERK present in human erythroid cells.

Varricchio L(1), Dell'Aversana C(2), Nebbioso A(3), Migliaccio G(4), Altucci
L(5), Mai A(6), Grazzini G(7), Bieker JJ(8), Migliaccio AR(9).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology/Oncology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, One Gustave L. Levy, New 
York, NY, USA. (2)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, "Adriano Buzzati
Traverso", IGB, P. Castellino 111, Italy. (3)Department of Biochemistry,
Biophysics and General Pathology, Second University of Naples, L. De Crecchio 7, 
Naples, Italy. (4)Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Istituto Superiore di Sanita',
Viale Regina Elena 299, Italy. (5)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, "Adriano 
Buzzati Traverso", IGB, P. Castellino 111, Italy; Department of Biochemistry,
Biophysics and General Pathology, Second University of Naples, L. De Crecchio 7, 
Naples, Italy. (6)Istituto Pasteur-Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti, Dipartimento di
Chimica e Tecnologie del Farmaco, Università "Sapienza", P.le A. Moro 5, Italy.
(7)Centro Nazionale Sangue, via Giano della Bella 27, Rome, Italy.
(8)Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, One
Gustave L. Levy, New York, NY, USA. (9)Hematology/Oncology, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, One Gustave L. Levy, New York, NY, USA; Hematology, Oncology and
Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore di Sanita', Viale Regina Elena 299, Italy.
Electronic address: annarita.migliaccio@mssm.edu.

To clarify the role of HDACs in erythropoiesis, expression, activity and function
of class I (HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3) and class IIa (HDAC4, HDAC5) HDACs during in
vitro maturation of human erythroblasts were compared. During erythroid
maturation, expression of HDAC1, HDAC2 and HDAC3 remained constant and activity
and GATA1 association (its partner of the NuRD complex), of HDAC1 increased. By
contrast, HDAC4 content drastically decreased and HDAC5 remained constant in
content but decreased in activity. In erythroid cells, pull down experiments
identified the presence of a novel complex formed by HDAC5, GATA1, EKLF and pERK 
which was instead undetectable in cells of the megakaryocytic lineage. With
erythroid maturation, association among HDAC5, GATA1 and EKLF persisted but
levels of pERK sharply decreased. Treatment of erythroleukemic cells with
inhibitors of ERK phosphorylation reduced by >90% the total and nuclear content
of HDAC5, GATA1 and EKLF, suggesting that ERK phosphorylation is required for the
formation of this complex. Based on the function of class IIa HDACs as chaperones
of other proteins to the nucleus and the erythroid-specificity of HDAC5
localization, this novel HDAC complex was named nuclear remodeling shuttle
erythroid (NuRSERY). Exposure of erythroid cells to the class II-selective HDAC
inhibitor (HDACi) APHA9 increased <U+03B3>/(<U+03B3>+ß) globin expression ratios (Mai et al.,
2007), suggesting that NuRSERY may regulate globin gene expression. In agreement 
with this hypothesis, exposure of erythroid cells to APHA9 greatly reduced the
association among HDAC5, GATA1 and EKLF. Since exposure to APHA9 did not affect
survival rates or p21 activation, NuRSERY may represent a novel, possibly less
toxic, target for epigenetic therapies of hemoglobinopaties and other disorders.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4003889
PMID: 24594363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2014 Feb;34(2):246-50.

[Effect of siRNA targeting HDAC1 gene on proliferation, apoptosis, histone
acetylation, and histone methylation in gastric cancer cells in vitro].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhuang H(1), Ma X, Lai Y, Xu X, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Zhangzhou Hospital Affiliated to Fujian
Medical University, Zhangzhou 363000, China.E-mail: tangdd110@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of silencing histone deacetylases 1 (HDAC1) 
gene by RNA interference on the proliferation, apoptosis and histone modulation
in gastric cancer MGC-803 cell line.
METHODS: The optimal segment targeting HDAC1 gene was designed and transfected
into MGC-803 cells by Lipofectamine TM2000. HDAC1 mRNA and protein in the
transfected cells were detected by RT-PCR and Western blotting, respectively. The
growth inhibition of MGC803 cells was evaluated by MTT assay and the cell
apoptosis was detected with TUNEL assay. The expression of Bcl-2, procaspase-9,
procaspase-3, c-Myc, histone acetylation of H3, H4, and histone methylation of
H3K9 was detected by Western blotting.
RESULTS: The siRNA targeting HDAC1HDAC1 markedly suppressed mRNA expression,
inhibited cell proliferation and induced apoptosis of MGC-803 cells in a
concentration manner. Transfection of the cells with HDAC1 siRNA at 0, 30, 60,
and 120 nmol/L for 24 h resulted in a cell apoptotic rate of (4.8±2.7)%,
(18.5±3.5)%, (41.4±4.3)%, and (59.2±5.5)%, respectively, and caused
down-regulation of the expressions of Bcl-2, proCaspase9, proCaspase3 and c-Myc, 
upregulation of histone acetylation of H3, H4, and down-regulation of histone
methylation of H3K9.
CONCLUSION: Silencing HDAC1 gene expression with HDAC1 siRNA can promote histone 
H3 and H4 acetylation and inhibit histone methylation of H3K9 to suppress the
proliferation and induce apoptosis of gastric cancer MGC-803 cells.

PMID: 24589606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Apoptosis. 2014 May;19(5):883-94. doi: 10.1007/s10495-014-0971-6.

Apigenin induces apoptosis by targeting inhibitor of apoptosis proteins and
Ku70-Bax interaction in prostate cancer.

Shukla S(1), Fu P, Gupta S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Case Western Reserve University & The Urology
Institute, University Hospitals Case Medical Center, 10900 Euclid Avenue,
Cleveland, OH, 44106, USA.

Dysfunction of the apoptotic pathway in prostate cancer cells confers apoptosis
resistance towards various therapies. A novel strategy to overcome resistance is 
to directly target the apoptotic pathway in cancer cells. Apigenin, an anticancer
agent, selectively toxic to cancer cells induces cell cycle arrest and apoptosis 
through mechanisms which are not fully explored. In the present study we provide 
novel insight into the mechanisms of apoptosis induction by apigenin. Treatment
of androgen-refractory human prostate cancer PC-3 and DU145 cells with apigenin
resulted in dose-dependent suppression of XIAP, c-IAP1, c-IAP2 and survivin
protein levels. Apigenin treatment resulted in significant decrease in cell
viability and apoptosis induction with the increase of cytochrome C in
time-dependent manner. These effects of apigenin were accompanied by decrease in 
Bcl-xL and Bcl-2 and increase in the active form of Bax protein. The
apigenin-mediated increase in Bax was due to dissociation of Bax from Ku70 which 
is essential for apoptotic activity of Bax. Apigenin treatment resulted in the
inhibition of class I histone deacetylases and HDAC1 protein expression, thereby 
increasing the acetylation of Ku70 and the dissociation of Bax resulting in
apoptosis of cancer cells. Furthermore, apigenin significantly reduced HDAC1
occupancy at the XIAP promoter, suggesting that histone deacetylation might be
critical for XIAP downregulation. These results suggest that apigenin targets
inhibitor of apoptosis proteins and Ku70-Bax interaction in the induction of
apoptosis in prostate cancer cells and in athymic nude mouse xenograft model
endorsing its in vivo efficacy.

PMCID: PMC3997183
PMID: 24563225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 18;9(2):e88052. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088052. eCollection
2014.

A novel pathway links oxidative stress to loss of insulin growth factor-2 (IGF2) 
imprinting through NF-<U+03BA>B activation.

Yang B(1), Wagner J(1), Damaschke N(1), Yao T(1), Wuerzberger-Davis SM(2), Lee
MH(2), Svaren J(3), Miyamoto S(4), Jarrard DF(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public
Health, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America. (2)Department of Oncology, 
McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin, Madison,
Wisconsin, United States of America. (3)Comparative Biosciences, University of
Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America. (4)Department of
Oncology, McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin,
Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America ; University of Wisconsin Carbone
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America.
(5)Department of Urology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public
Health, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America ; University of Wisconsin
Carbone Comprehensive Cancer Center, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America
; Environmental and Molecular Toxicology, University of Wisconsin, Madison,
Wisconsin, United States of America.

Genomic imprinting is the allele-specific expression of a gene based on parental 
origin. Loss of imprinting(LOI) of Insulin-like Growth Factor 2 (IGF2) during
aging is important in tumorigenesis, yet the regulatory mechanisms driving this
event are largely unknown. In this study oxidative stress, measured by increased 
NF-<U+03BA>B activity, induces LOI in both cancerous and noncancerous human prostate
cells. Decreased expression of the enhancer-blocking element CCCTC-binding
factor(CTCF) results in reduced binding of CTCF to the H19-ICR (imprint control
region), a major factor in the allelic silencing of IGF2. This ICR then develops 
increased DNA methylation. Assays identify a recruitment of the canonical pathway
proteins NF-<U+03BA>B p65 and p50 to the CTCF promoter associated with the co-repressor 
HDAC1 explaining gene repression. An I<U+03BA>Ba super-repressor blocks oxidative
stress-induced activation of NF-<U+03BA>B and IGF2 imprinting is maintained. In vivo
experiments using I<U+03BA>Ba mutant mice with continuous NF-<U+03BA>B activation demonstrate
increased IGF2 LOI further confirming a central role for canonical NF-<U+03BA>B
signaling. We conclude CTCF plays a central role in mediating the effects of
NF-<U+03BA>B activation that result in altered imprinting both in vitro and in vivo.
This novel finding connects inflammation found in aging prostate tissues with the
altered epigenetic landscape.

PMCID: PMC3928145
PMID: 24558376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 14;9(2):e87915. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087915. eCollection
2014.

Release of neuronal HMGB1 by ethanol through decreased HDAC activity activates
brain neuroimmune signaling.

Zou JY(1), Crews FT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Bowles Center For Alcohol Studies, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, United States of America.

Neuroimmune gene induction is involved in many brain pathologies including
addiction. Although increased expression of proinflammatory cytokines has been
found in ethanol-treated mouse brain and rat brain slice cultures as well as in
post-mortem human alcoholic brain, the mechanisms remain elusive. High-mobility
group box 1 (HMGB1) protein is a nuclear protein that has endogenous
cytokine-like activity. We previously found increased HMGB1 in post-mortem
alcoholic human brain as well as in ethanol treated mice and rat brain slice
cultures. The present study investigated the mechanisms for ethanol-induced
release of HMGB1 and neuroimmune activation in a model of rat
hippocampal-entorhinal cortex (HEC) brain slice cultures. Ethanol exposure
triggered dose-dependent HMGB1 release, predominantly from neuronal cells.
Inhibitors of histone deacetylases (HDACs) promoted nucleocytoplasmic
mobilization of HDAC1/4 and HMGB1 resulting in increased total HMGB1 and
acetylated HMGB1 release. Similarly, ethanol treatment was found to induce the
translocation of HDAC1/4 and HMGB1 proteins from nuclear to cytosolic fractions. 
Furthermore, ethanol treatment reduced HDAC1/4 mRNA and increased acetylated
HMGB1 release into the media. These results suggest decreased HDAC activity may
be critical in regulating acetylated HMGB1 release from neurons in response to
ethanol. Ethanol and HMGB1 treatment increased mRNA expression of proinflammatory
cytokines TNFa and IL-1ß as well as toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4). Targeting HMGB1 
or microglial TLR4 by using siRNAs to HMGB1 and TLR4, HMGB1 neutralizing
antibody, HMGB1 inhibitor glycyrrhizin and TLR4 antagonist as well as inhibitor
of microglial activation all blocked ethanol-induced expression of
proinflammatory cytokines TNFa and IL-1ß. These results support the hypothesis
that ethanol alters HDACs that regulate HMGB1 release and that danger signal
HMGB1 as endogenous ligand for TLR4 mediates ethanol-induced brain neuroimmune
signaling through activation of microglial TLR4. These findings provide new
therapeutic targets for brain neuroimmune activation and alcoholism.

PMCID: PMC3925099
PMID: 24551070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. J Biol Chem. 2014 Mar 28;289(13):9372-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.533992. Epub 2014 
Feb 18.

Death domain-associated protein 6 (Daxx) selectively represses IL-6 transcription
through histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1)-mediated histone deacetylation in
macrophages.

Yao Z(1), Zhang Q, Li X, Zhao D, Liu Y, Zhao K, Liu Y, Wang C, Jiang M, Li N, Cao
X.

Author information: 
(1)From the National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology and Department
of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences, Beijing 100005.

As a multifunctional nuclear protein, death domain-associated protein 6 (Daxx)
regulates a wide range of biological processes, including cell apoptosis and gene
transcription. However, the function of Daxx in innate immunity remains unclear. 
In our study, we show that Daxx is highly expressed in macrophages and localized 
in nucleus of macrophages. The expression of Daxx is significantly up-regulated
by stimulation with TLR ligands LPS and poly(I:C). Silence of Daxx selectively
represses IL-6 expression at transcription level in LPS-activated macrophages.
Upon stimulation of LPS, Daxx specifically binds to the promoter of IL-6 and
inhibits histone acetylation at IL-6 promoter region. Further mechanism analyses 
show that histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) interacts with Daxx and binds to the
promoter of IL-6. Daxx silencing decreases the association of HDAC1 to IL-6
promoter. Therefore, our data reveal that Daxx selectively represses IL-6
transcription through HDAC1-mediated histone deacetylation in LPS-induced
macrophages, acting as a negative regulator of IL-6 during innate immunity and
potentially preventing inflammatory response because of overproduction of IL-6.

PMCID: PMC3979371
PMID: 24550390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. J Neurochem. 2014 Aug;130(3):419-31. doi: 10.1111/jnc.12680. Epub 2014 Mar 12.

The Aß-clearance protein transthyretin, like neprilysin, is epigenetically
regulated by the amyloid precursor protein intracellular domain.

Kerridge C(1), Belyaev ND, Nalivaeva NN, Turner AJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular & Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences,
University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.

Proteolytic cleavage of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) by the successive
actions of ß- and <U+03B3>-secretases generates several biologically active metabolites 
including the amyloid ß-peptide (Aß) and the APP intracellular domain (AICD). By 
analogy with the Notch signalling pathway, AICD has been proposed to play a role 
in transcriptional regulation. Among the cohort of genes regulated by AICD is the
Aß-degrading enzyme neprilysin (NEP). AICD binds to the NEP promoter causing
transcriptional activation by competitive replacement with histone deacetylases
(HDACs) leading to increased levels of NEP activity and hence increased Aß
clearance. We now show that the Aß-clearance protein transthyretin (TTR) is also 
epigenetically up-regulated by AICD. Like NEP regulation, AICD derived
specifically from the neuronal APP isoform, APP695 , binds directly to the TTR
promoter displacing HDAC1 and HDAC3. Cell treatment with the tyrosine kinase
inhibitor Gleevec (imatinib) or with the alkalizing agent NH4 Cl causes an
accumulation of 'functional' AICD capable of up-regulating both TTR and NEP,
leading to a reduction in total cellular Aß levels. Pharmacological regulation of
both NEP and TTR might represent a viable therapeutic target in Alzheimer's
disease.

© 2014 International Society for Neurochemistry.

PMID: 24528201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2014 Apr 1;306(7):G594-605. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00393.2013. Epub 2014 Feb 13.

The acetylome regulators Hdac1 and Hdac2 differently modulate intestinal
epithelial cell dependent homeostatic responses in experimental colitis.

Turgeon N(1), Gagné JM, Blais M, Gendron FP, Boudreau F, Asselin C.

Author information: 
(1)Département d'anatomie et biologie cellulaire, Faculté de médecine et des
sciences de la santé, Pavillon de recherche appliquée sur le cancer, Université
de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada.

Histone deacetylases (Hdac) remove acetyl groups from proteins, influencing
global and specific gene expression. Hdacs control inflammation, as shown by Hdac
inhibitor-dependent protection from dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced murine
colitis. Although tissue-specific Hdac knockouts show redundant and specific
functions, little is known of their intestinal epithelial cell (IEC) role. We
have shown previously that dual Hdac1/Hdac2 IEC-specific loss disrupts cell
proliferation and determination, with decreased secretory cell numbers and
altered barrier function. We thus investigated how compound Hdac1/Hdac2 or Hdac2 
IEC-specific deficiency alters the inflammatory response. Floxed Hdac1 and Hdac2 
and villin-Cre mice were interbred. Compound Hdac1/Hdac2 IEC-deficient mice
showed chronic basal inflammation, with increased basal disease activity index
(DAI) and deregulated Reg gene colonic expression. DSS-treated dual Hdac1/Hdac2
IEC-deficient mice displayed increased DAI, histological score, intestinal
permeability, and inflammatory gene expression. In contrast to double knockouts, 
Hdac2 IEC-specific loss did not affect IEC determination and growth, nor result
in chronic inflammation. However, Hdac2 disruption protected against DSS colitis,
as shown by decreased DAI, intestinal permeability and caspase-3 cleavage. Hdac2 
IEC-specific deficient mice displayed increased expression of IEC gene subsets,
such as colonic antimicrobial Reg3b and Reg3g mRNAs, and decreased expression of 
immune cell function-related genes. Our data show that Hdac1 and Hdac2 are
essential IEC homeostasis regulators. IEC-specific Hdac1 and Hdac2 may act as
epigenetic sensors and transmitters of environmental cues and regulate
IEC-mediated mucosal homeostatic and inflammatory responses. Different levels of 
IEC Hdac activity may lead to positive or negative outcomes on intestinal
homeostasis during inflammation.

PMID: 24525021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. J Biol Chem. 2014 Mar 21;289(12):8364-74. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.523456. Epub 2014
Feb 12.

Tudor-SN, a novel coactivator of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3>
protein, is essential for adipogenesis.

Duan Z(1), Zhao X, Fu X, Su C, Xin L, Saarikettu J, Yang X, Yao Z, Silvennoinen
O, Wei M, Yang J.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Department of
Immunology, School of Basic Medical Sciences.

Adipogenesis, in which mesenchymal precursor cells differentiate into mature
adipocytes, is a well orchestrated process. In the present study we identified
Tudor-SN as a novel co-activator of the transcription factor peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>). We provide the first evidence that
Tudor-SN and PPAR<U+03B3> exist in the same complex. Both are up-regulated by the early 
factor C/EBPß during adipogenesis and significantly influence the regulation of
PPAR<U+03B3> target genes in both 3T3-L1 pre-adipocyte and mouse embryonic fibroblasts
(MEF) upon exposure to a mixture of hormonal mixture. Moreover, aP2-PPAR<U+03B3>
response element (PPRE) interacts with both PPAR<U+03B3> and Tudor-SN, and the gene
transcriptional activation of PPRE-luc is enhanced by ectopic expression of
Tudor-SN. Deletion of Tudor-SN protein (MEF-KO) affects but does not completely
abolish the association of PPAR<U+03B3> and aP2-PPRE. Loss-of-function studies further
verified that Tudor-SN is required for adipogenesis, as deletion of Tudor-SN
(MEF-KO) impairs dexamethasone, 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine, and insulin
(DMI)-induced adipocyte differentiation and the expression of PPAR<U+03B3> target genes,
such as aP2 and adipsin. Furthermore, H3 acetylation levels were lower in MEF-KO 
than MEF-WT. Both HDAC1 and HDAC3 are stably associated with PPAR<U+03B3> in MEF-KO,
whereas only a small amount of association was observed in MEF-WT after 5 days of
treatment during adipogenesis. PPAR<U+03B3> requires various co-activators or
co-repressors, which may dynamically associate with and regulate the higher order
chromatin remodeling of the promoter region of PPAR<U+03B3>-bound target genes; Tudor-SN
is likely one of these co-activators.

PMCID: PMC3961662
PMID: 24523408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Exp Cell Res. 2014 May 15;324(1):40-53. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2014.01.024. Epub
2014 Feb 8.

Molecular mechanisms for inhibition of colon cancer cells by combined
epigenetic-modulating epigallocatechin gallate and sodium butyrate.

Saldanha SN(1), Kala R(2), Tollefsbol TO(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 175 Campbell Hall,
1300 University Boulevard, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA; Department of Biological
Sciences, Alabama State University, Montgomery, AL 36104, USA. Electronic
address: sabivan@uab.edu. (2)Department of Biology, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, 175 Campbell Hall, 1300 University Boulevard, Birmingham, AL 35294,
USA. (3)Department of Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 175 Campbell 
Hall, 1300 University Boulevard, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA; Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA;
Comprehensive Center for Healthy Aging, University of Alabama at Birmingham,
Birmingham, AL 35294, USA; Nutrition Obesity Research Center, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA; Comprehensive Diabetes Research
Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.
Electronic address: trygve@uab.edu.

Bioactive compounds are considered safe and have been shown to alter genetic and 
epigenetic profiles of tumor cells. However, many of these changes have been
reported at molecular concentrations higher than physiologically achievable
levels. We investigated the role of the combinatorial effects of epigallocatechin
gallate (EGCG), a predominant polyphenol in green tea, and sodium butyrate (NaB),
a dietary microbial fermentation product of fiber, in the regulation of survivin,
which is an overexpressed anti-apoptotic protein in colon cancer cells. For the
first time, our study showed that the combination treatment induced apoptosis and
cell cycle arrest in RKO, HCT-116 and HT-29 colorectal cancer cells. This was
found to be regulated by the decrease in HDAC1, DNMT1, survivin and HDAC activity
in all three cell lines. A G2/M arrest was observed for RKO and HCT-116 cells,
and G1 arrest for HT-29 colorectal cancer cells for combinatorial treatment.
Further experimentation of the molecular mechanisms in RKO colorectal cancer
(CRC) cells revealed a p53-dependent induction of p21 and an increase in nuclear 
factor kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B)-p65. An increase in double strand breaks as determined by 
gamma-H2A histone family member X (<U+03B3>-H2AX) protein levels and induction of
histone H3 hyperacetylation was also observed with the combination treatment.
Further, we observed a decrease in global CpG methylation. Taken together, these 
findings suggest that at low and physiologically achievable concentrations,
combinatorial EGCG and NaB are effective in promoting apoptosis, inducing cell
cycle arrest and DNA-damage in CRC cells.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4043227
PMID: 24518414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. EMBO Rep. 2014 Apr;15(4):419-27. doi: 10.1002/embr.201338241. Epub 2014 Feb 10.

The transcription factor FBI-1 inhibits SAM68-mediated BCL-X alternative splicing
and apoptosis.

Bielli P(1), Busà R, Di Stasi SM, Munoz MJ, Botti F, Kornblihtt AR, Sette C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, University of Rome Tor Vergata,
Rome, Italy.

Alternative splicing (AS) is tightly coupled to transcription for the majority of
human genes. However, how these two processes are linked is not well understood. 
Here, we unveil a direct role for the transcription factor FBI-1 in the
regulation of AS. FBI-1 interacts with the splicing factor SAM68 and reduces its 
binding to BCL-X mRNA. This, in turn, results in the selection of the proximal 5'
splice site in BCL-X exon 2, thereby favoring the anti-apoptotic BCL-XL variant
and counteracting SAM68-mediated apoptosis. Conversely, depletion of FBI-1, or
expression of a SAM68 mutant lacking the FBI-1 binding region, restores the
ability of SAM68 to induce BCL-XS splicing and apoptosis. FBI-1's role in
splicing requires the activity of histone deacetylases, whose pharmacological
inhibition recapitulates the effects of FBI-1 knockdown. Our study reveals an
unexpected function for FBI-1 in splicing modulation with a direct impact on cell
survival.

PMCID: PMC3989673
PMID: 24514149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. J Clin Invest. 2014 Mar;124(3):981-99. doi: 10.1172/JCI72723. Epub 2014 Feb 10.

ALS-associated mutation FUS-R521C causes DNA damage and RNA splicing defects.

Qiu H, Lee S, Shang Y, Wang WY, Au KF, Kamiya S, Barmada SJ, Finkbeiner S, Lui H,
Carlton CE, Tang AA, Oldham MC, Wang H, Shorter J, Filiano AJ, Roberson ED,
Tourtellotte WG, Chen B, Tsai LH, Huang EJ.

Autosomal dominant mutations of the RNA/DNA binding protein FUS are linked to
familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FALS); however, it is not clear how FUS
mutations cause neurodegeneration. Using transgenic mice expressing a common
FALS-associated FUS mutation (FUS-R521C mice), we found that mutant FUS proteins 
formed a stable complex with WT FUS proteins and interfered with the normal
interactions between FUS and histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1). Consequently,
FUS-R521C mice exhibited evidence of DNA damage as well as profound dendritic and
synaptic phenotypes in brain and spinal cord. To provide insights into these
defects, we screened neural genes for nucleotide oxidation and identified
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (Bdnf) as a target of FUS-R521C-associated DNA 
damage and RNA splicing defects in mice. Compared with WT FUS, mutant FUS-R521C
proteins formed a more stable complex with Bdnf RNA in electrophoretic mobility
shift assays. Stabilization of the FUS/Bdnf RNA complex contributed to Bdnf
splicing defects and impaired BDNF signaling through receptor TrkB. Exogenous
BDNF only partially restored dendrite phenotype in FUS-R521C neurons, suggesting 
that BDNF-independent mechanisms may contribute to the defects in these neurons. 
Indeed, RNA-seq analyses of FUS-R521C spinal cords revealed additional
transcription and splicing defects in genes that regulate dendritic growth and
synaptic functions. Together, our results provide insight into how
gain-of-function FUS mutations affect critical neuronal functions.

PMCID: PMC3938263
PMID: 24509083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Development. 2014 Feb;141(4):761-72. doi: 10.1242/dev.095802.

Foxa2 acts as a co-activator potentiating expression of the Nurr1-induced DA
phenotype via epigenetic regulation.

Yi SH(1), He XB, Rhee YH, Park CH, Takizawa T, Nakashima K, Lee SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, Hanyang
University, Seoul 133-791, Korea.

Understanding how dopamine (DA) phenotypes are acquired in midbrain DA (mDA)
neuron development is important for bioassays and cell replacement therapy for
mDA neuron-associated disorders. Here, we demonstrate a feed-forward mechanism of
mDA neuron development involving Nurr1 and Foxa2. Nurr1 acts as a transcription
factor for DA phenotype gene expression. However, Nurr1-mediated DA gene
expression was inactivated by forming a protein complex with CoREST, and then
recruiting histone deacetylase 1 (Hdac1), an enzyme catalyzing histone
deacetylation, to DA gene promoters. Co-expression of Nurr1 and Foxa2 was
established in mDA neuron precursor cells by a positive cross-regulatory loop. In
the presence of Foxa2, the Nurr1-CoREST interaction was diminished (by
competitive formation of the Nurr1-Foxa2 activator complex), and CoREST-Hdac1
proteins were less enriched in DA gene promoters. Consequently, histone 3
acetylation (H3Ac), which is responsible for open chromatin structures, was
strikingly increased at DA phenotype gene promoters. These data establish the
interplay of Nurr1 and Foxa2 as the crucial determinant for DA phenotype
acquisition during mDA neuron development.

PMID: 24496614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Physiol Genomics. 2014 Apr 1;46(7):245-55. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00168.2013. Epub 2014 Feb 4.

Differential regulation of DNA methylation versus histone acetylation in
cardiomyocytes during HHcy in vitro and in vivo: an epigenetic mechanism.

Chaturvedi P(1), Kalani A, Givvimani S, Kamat PK, Familtseva A, Tyagi SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, School of Medicine, University of
Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky.

The mechanisms of homocysteine-mediated cardiac threats are poorly understood.
Homocysteine, being the precursor to S-adenosyl methionine (a methyl donor)
through methionine, is indirectly involved in methylation phenomena for DNA, RNA,
and protein. We reported previously that cardiac-specific deletion of
N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor-1 (NMDAR1) ameliorates homocysteine-posed cardiac
threats, and in this study, we aim to explore the role of NMDAR1 in epigenetic
mechanisms of heart failure, using cardiomyocytes during hyperhomocysteinemia
(HHcy). High homocysteine levels activate NMDAR1, which consequently leads to
abnormal DNA methylation vs. histone acetylation through modulation of DNA
methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1), HDAC1, miRNAs, and MMP9 in cardiomyocytes. HL-1
cardiomyocytes cultured in Claycomb media were treated with 100 µM homocysteine
in a dose-dependent manner. NMDAR1 antagonist (MK801) was added in the absence
and presence of homocysteine at 10 µM in a dose-dependent manner. The expression 
of DNMT1, histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), NMDAR1, microRNA (miR)-133a, and miR-499
was assessed by real-time PCR as well as Western blotting. Methylation and
acetylation levels were determined by checking 5'-methylcytosine DNA methylation 
and chromatin immunoprecipitation. Hyperhomocysteinemic mouse models (CBS+/-)
were used to confirm the results in vivo. In HHcy, the expression of NMDAR1,
DNMT1, and matrix metalloproteinase 9 increased with increase in H3K9
acetylation, while HDAC1, miR-133a, and miR-499 decreased in cardiomyocytes.
Similar results were obtained in heart tissue of CBS+/- mouse. High homocysteine 
levels instigate cardiovascular remodeling through NMDAR1, miR-133a, miR-499, and
DNMT1. A decrease in HDAC1 and an increase in H3K9 acetylation and DNA
methylation are suggestive of chromatin remodeling in HHcy.

PMCID: PMC4035660
PMID: 24495916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Reprod Domest Anim. 2014 Apr;49(2):343-51. doi: 10.1111/rda.12284. Epub 2014 Feb 
3.

Production of wild buffalo (Bubalus arnee) embryos by interspecies somatic cell
nuclear transfer using domestic buffalo (Bubalus bubalis) oocytes.

Priya D(1), Selokar NL, Raja AK, Saini M, Sahare AA, Nala N, Palta P, Chauhan MS,
Manik RS, Singla SK.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Biotechnology Centre, National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal, India.

The objective of this study was to explore the possibility of producing wild
buffalo embryos by interspecies somatic cell nuclear transfer (iSCNT) through
handmade cloning using wild buffalo somatic cells and domestic buffalo (Bubalus
bubalis) oocytes. Somatic cells derived from the ear skin of wild buffalo were
found to express vimentin but not keratin and cytokeratin-18, indicating that
they were of fibroblast origin. The population doubling time of skin fibroblasts 
from wild buffalo was significantly (p < 0.05) higher, and the cell proliferation
rate was significantly (p < 0.05) lower compared with that of skin fibroblasts
from domestic buffalo. Neither the cleavage (92.6 ± 2.0% vs 92.8 ± 2.0%) nor the 
blastocyst rate (42.4 ± 2.4% vs 38.7 ± 2.8%) was significantly different between 
the intraspecies cloned embryos produced using skin fibroblasts from domestic
buffalo and interspecies cloned embryos produced using skin fibroblasts from wild
buffalo. However, the total cell number (TCN) was significantly (p < 0.05) lower 
(192.0 ± 25.6 vs 345.7 ± 42.2), and the apoptotic index was significantly (p <
0.05) higher (15.1 ± 3.1 vs 8.0 ± 1.4) for interspecies than that for
intraspecies cloned embryos. Following vitrification in open-pulled straws (OPS) 
and warming, although the cryosurvival rate of both types of cloned embryos, as
indicated by their re-expansion rate, was not significantly different (34.8 ±
1.5% vs 47.8 ± 7.8), the apoptotic index was significantly (p < 0.05) higher for 
vitrified-warmed interspecies than that for corresponding intraspecies cloned
embryos (48.9 ± 7.2 vs 23.9 ± 2.8). The global level of H3K18ac was significantly
(p < 0.05) lower in interspecies cloned embryos than that in intraspecies cloned 
embryos. The expression level of HDAC1, DNMT3a and CASPASE3 was significantly (p 
< 0.05) higher, that of P53 was significantly (p < 0.05) lower in interspecies
than in intraspecies embryos, whereas that of DNMT1 was similar between the two
types of embryos. In conclusion, these results demonstrate that wild buffalo
embryos can be produced by iSCNT.

© 2014 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

PMID: 24494649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 27;9(1):e87455. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087455. eCollection
2014.

Inhibition of HDAC1 and DNMT1 modulate RGS10 expression and decrease ovarian
cancer chemoresistance.

Cacan E(1), Ali MW(2), Boyd NH(1), Hooks SB(2), Greer SF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular Biology and Immunology, Center for Inflammation, Immunity
and Infection, Department of Biology, Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia,
United States of America. (2)Department of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical
Sciences, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, United States of America.

RGS10 is an important regulator of cell survival and chemoresistance in ovarian
cancer. We recently showed that RGS10 transcript expression is suppressed during 
acquired chemoresistance in ovarian cancer. The suppression of RGS10 is due to
DNA hypermethylation and histone deacetylation, two important mechanisms that
contribute to silencing of tumor suppressor genes during cancer progression.
Here, we fully investigate the molecular mechanisms of epigenetic silencing of
RGS10 expression in chemoresistant A2780-AD ovarian cancer cells. We identify two
important epigenetic regulators, HDAC1 and DNMT1, that exhibit aberrant
association with RGS10 promoters in chemoresistant ovarian cancer cells.
Knockdown of HDAC1 or DNMT1 expression, and pharmacological inhibition of DNMT or
HDAC enzymatic activity, significantly increases RGS10 expression and
cisplatin-mediated cell death. Finally, DNMT1 knock down also decreases HDAC1
binding to the RGS10 promoter in chemoresistant cells, suggesting HDAC1
recruitment to RGS10 promoters requires DNMT1 activity. Our results suggest that 
HDAC1 and DNMT1 contribute to the suppression of RGS10 during acquired
chemoresistance and support inhibition of HDAC1 and DNMT1 as an adjuvant
therapeutic approach to overcome ovarian cancer chemoresistance.

PMCID: PMC3903677
PMID: 24475290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Int J Cancer. 2014 Aug 15;135(4):785-97. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28721. Epub 2014 Jan
27.

TBX2 blocks myogenesis and promotes proliferation in rhabdomyosarcoma cells.

Zhu B(1), Zhang M, Byrum SD, Tackett AJ, Davie JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Simmons Cancer Institute,
Southern Illinois University School of Medicine, Carbondale, IL.

Rhabdomyosarcomas (RMSs) are the most frequent soft tissue sarcomas in children
that share many features of developing skeletal muscle. We have discovered that a
T-box family member, TBX2, is highly upregulated in tumor cells of both major RMS
subtypes. TBX2 is a repressor that is often overexpressed in cancer cells and is 
thought to function in bypassing cell growth control, including repression of p14
and p21. The cell cycle regulator p21 is required for the terminal
differentiation of skeletal muscle cells and is silenced in RMS cells. We have
found that TBX2 interacts with the myogenic regulatory factors MyoD and myogenin 
and inhibits the activity of these factors. TBX2 is expressed in primary
myoblasts and C2C12 cells, but is strongly downregulated upon differentiation.
TBX2 recruits the histone deacetylase HDAC1 and is a potent inhibitor of the
expression of muscle-specific genes and the cell cycle regulators, p21 and p14.
TBX2 promotes the proliferation of RMS cells and either depletions of TBX2 or
dominant negative TBX2 upregulate p21- and muscle-specific genes. Significantly, 
depletion or interference with TBX2 completely inhibits tumor growth in a
xenograft assay, highlighting the oncogenic role of TBX2 in RMS cells. Thus, the 
data demonstrate that elevated expression of TBX2 contributes to the pathology of
RMS cells by promoting proliferation and repressing differentiation-specific gene
expression. These results show that deregulated TBX2 serves as an oncogene in
RMS, suggesting that TBX2 may serve as a new diagnostic marker or therapeutic
target for RMS tumors.

Copyright © 2014 UICC.

PMCID: PMC4051830
PMID: 24470334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. J Cell Sci. 2014 Apr 1;127(Pt 7):1441-53. doi: 10.1242/jcs.136390. Epub 2014 Jan 
24.

HDAC1 activates FoxO and is both sufficient and required for skeletal muscle
atrophy.

Beharry AW(1), Sandesara PB, Roberts BM, Ferreira LF, Senf SM, Judge AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical Therapy, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL
32610-0154, USA.

The Forkhead box O (FoxO) transcription factors are activated, and necessary for 
the muscle atrophy, in several pathophysiological conditions, including muscle
disuse and cancer cachexia. However, the mechanisms that lead to FoxO activation 
are not well defined. Recent data from our laboratory and others indicate that
the activity of FoxO is repressed under basal conditions via reversible lysine
acetylation, which becomes compromised during catabolic conditions. Therefore, we
aimed to determine how histone deacetylase (HDAC) proteins contribute to
activation of FoxO and induction of the muscle atrophy program. Through the use
of various pharmacological inhibitors to block HDAC activity, we demonstrate that
class I HDACs are key regulators of FoxO and the muscle-atrophy program during
both nutrient deprivation and skeletal muscle disuse. Furthermore, we
demonstrate, through the use of wild-type and dominant-negative HDAC1 expression 
plasmids, that HDAC1 is sufficient to activate FoxO and induce muscle fiber
atrophy in vivo and is necessary for the atrophy of muscle fibers that is
associated with muscle disuse. The ability of HDAC1 to cause muscle atrophy
required its deacetylase activity and was linked to the induction of several
atrophy genes by HDAC1, including atrogin-1, which required deacetylation of
FoxO3a. Moreover, pharmacological inhibition of class I HDACs during muscle
disuse, using MS-275, significantly attenuated both disuse muscle fiber atrophy
and contractile dysfunction. Together, these data solidify the importance of
class I HDACs in the muscle atrophy program and indicate that class I HDAC
inhibitors are feasible countermeasures to impede muscle atrophy and weakness.

PMCID: PMC3970557
PMID: 24463822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Comput Math Methods Med. 2013;2013:358980. doi: 10.1155/2013/358980. Epub 2013
Dec 28.

Mathematical model of dynamic protein interactions regulating p53 protein
stability for tumor suppression.

Wang H(1), Peng G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Mathematical Sciences, Georgia Southern University, Statesboro, GA 30458, USA.
(2)Department of Clinical Cancer Prevention, The University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

In the field of cancer biology, numerous genes or proteins form extremely complex
regulatory network, which determines cancer cell fate and cancer cell survival.
p53 is a major tumor suppressor that is lost in more than 50% of human cancers.
It has been well known that a variety of proteins regulate its protein stability,
which is essential for its tumor suppressive function. It remains elusive how we 
could understand and target p53 stabilization process through network analysis.
In this paper we discuss the use of random walk and stationary distribution to
measure the compound effect of a network of genes or proteins. This method is
applied to the network of nine proteins that influence the protein stability of
p53 via regulating the interaction between p53 and its regulator MDM2. Our study 
identifies that some proteins such as HDAC1 in the network of p53 regulators may 
have more profound effects on p53 stability, agreeing with the established
findings on HDAC1. This work shows the importance of using mathematical analysis 
to dissect the complexity of biology networks in cancer.

PMCID: PMC3888710
PMID: 24454532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. J Biol Chem. 2014 Mar 7;289(10):6991-7002. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.511444. Epub
2014 Jan 22.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors modulate the transcriptional regulation of
guanylyl cyclase/natriuretic peptide receptor-a gene: interactive roles of
modified histones, histone acetyltransferase, p300, AND Sp1.

Kumar P(1), Tripathi S, Pandey KN.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Physiology, Tulane University Health Sciences Center,
School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112.

Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) binds guanylyl cyclase-A/natriuretic peptide
receptor-A (GC-A/NPRA) and produces the intracellular second messenger, cGMP,
which regulates cardiovascular homeostasis. We sought to determine the function
of histone deacetylases (HDACs) in regulating Npr1 (coding for GC-A/NPRA) gene
transcription, using primary mouse mesangial cells treated with class-specific
HDAC inhibitors (HDACi). Trichostatin A, a pan inhibitor, and mocetinostat
(MGCD0103), a class I HDAC inhibitor, significantly enhanced Npr1 promoter
activity (by 8- and 10-fold, respectively), mRNA levels (4- and 5.3-fold,
respectively), and NPRA protein (2.7- and 3.5-fold, respectively). However,
MC1568 (class II HDAC inhibitor) had no discernible effect. Overexpression of
HDAC1 and HDAC2 significantly attenuated Npr1 promoter activity, whereas HDAC3
and HDAC8 had no effect. HDACi-treated cultured cells in vitro and intact animals
in vivo showed significantly reduced binding of HDAC1 and -2 and increased
accumulation of acetylated H3-K9/14 and H4-K12 at the Npr1 promoter. Deletional
analyses of the Npr1 promoter along with ectopic overexpression and inhibition of
Sp1 confirmed that HDACi-induced Npr1 gene transcription is accomplished by Sp1
activation. Furthermore, HDACi attenuated the interaction of Sp1 with HDAC1/2 and
promoted Sp1 association with p300 and p300/cAMP-binding protein-associated
factor; it also promoted the recruitment of p300 and p300/cAMP-binding
protein-associated factor to the Npr1 promoter. Our results demonstrate that
trichostatin A and MGCD0103 enhanced Npr1 gene expression through inhibition of
HDAC1/2 and increased both acetylation of histones (H3-K9/14, H4-K12) and Sp1 by 
p300, and their recruitment to Npr1 promoter. Our findings define a novel
epigenetic regulatory mechanism that governs Npr1 gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC3945360
PMID: 24451378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Biochemistry. 2014 Feb 4;53(4):725-34. doi: 10.1021/bi400936h. Epub 2014 Jan 22.

Divergent kinetics differentiate the mechanism of action of two HDAC inhibitors.

Kral AM(1), Ozerova N, Close J, Jung J, Chenard M, Fleming J, Haines BB,
Harrington P, Maclean J, Miller TA, Secrist P, Wang H, Heidebrecht RW Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Merck & Co., Inc. , 33 Avenue Louis Pasteur, Boston, Massachusetts 02115,
United States.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) play diverse roles in many diseases including
cancer, sarcopenia, and Alzheimer's. Different isoforms of HDACs appear to play
disparate roles in the cell and are associated with specific diseases; as such, a
substantial effort has been made to develop isoform-selective HDAC inhibitors.
Our group focused on developing HDAC1/HDAC2-specific inhibitors as a cancer
therapeutic. In the course of characterizing the mechanism of inhibition of a
novel HDAC1/2-selective inhibitor, it was determined that it did not exhibit
classical Michaelis-Menten kinetic behavior; this result is in contrast to the
seminal HDAC inhibitor SAHA. Enzymatic assays, along with a newly developed
binding assay, were used to determine the rates of binding and the affinities of 
both the HDAC1/2-selective inhibitor and SAHA. The mechanism of action studies
identified a potential conformational change required for optimal binding by the 
selective inhibitor. A model of this putative conformational change is proposed.

PMID: 24450491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Development. 2014 Feb;141(3):604-16. doi: 10.1242/dev.100487.

A single allele of Hdac2 but not Hdac1 is sufficient for normal mouse brain
development in the absence of its paralog.

Hagelkruys A(1), Lagger S, Krahmer J, Leopoldi A, Artaker M, Pusch O, Zezula J,
Weissmann S, Xie Y, Schöfer C, Schlederer M, Brosch G, Matthias P, Selfridge J,
Lassmann H, Knoblich JA, Seiser C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna 1030, Austria.

The histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2 are crucial regulators of chromatin
structure and gene expression, thereby controlling important developmental
processes. In the mouse brain, HDAC1 and HDAC2 exhibit different developmental
stage- and lineage-specific expression patterns. To examine the individual
contribution of these deacetylases during brain development, we deleted different
combinations of Hdac1 and Hdac2 alleles in neural cells. Ablation of Hdac1 or
Hdac2 by Nestin-Cre had no obvious consequences on brain development and
architecture owing to compensation by the paralog. By contrast, combined deletion
of Hdac1 and Hdac2 resulted in impaired chromatin structure, DNA damage,
apoptosis and embryonic lethality. To dissect the individual roles of HDAC1 and
HDAC2, we expressed single alleles of either Hdac1 or Hdac2 in the absence of the
respective paralog in neural cells. The DNA-damage phenotype observed in double
knockout brains was prevented by expression of a single allele of either Hdac1 or
Hdac2. Strikingly, Hdac1(-/-)Hdac2(+/-) brains showed normal development and no
obvious phenotype, whereas Hdac1(+/-)Hdac2(-/-) mice displayed impaired brain
development and perinatal lethality. Hdac1(+/-)Hdac2(-/-) neural precursor cells 
showed reduced proliferation and premature differentiation mediated by
overexpression of protein kinase C, delta, which is a direct target of HDAC2.
Importantly, chemical inhibition or knockdown of protein kinase C delta was
sufficient to rescue the phenotype of neural progenitor cells in vitro. Our data 
indicate that HDAC1 and HDAC2 have a common function in maintaining proper
chromatin structures and show that HDAC2 has a unique role by controlling the
fate of neural progenitors during normal brain development.

PMCID: PMC4773893
PMID: 24449838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. J Biol Chem. 2014 Mar 7;289(10):7082-91. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.543769. Epub 2014 
Jan 21.

Transcriptional repression of the transforming growth factor ß (TGF-ß)
Pseudoreceptor BMP and activin membrane-bound inhibitor (BAMBI) by Nuclear Factor
<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) p50 enhances TGF-ß signaling in hepatic stellate cells.

Liu C(1), Chen X, Yang L, Kisseleva T, Brenner DA, Seki E.

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of
California San Diego, School of Medicine, La Jolla, California 92093 and.

TLR4 signaling induces down-regulation of the bone morphogenic protein (BMP) and 
activin membrane-bound inhibitor (BAMBI), which enhances TGF-ß signaling during
hepatic stellate cell (HSC) activation. We investigated the mechanism by which
TLR4 signaling down-regulates BAMBI expression in HSCs and found that TLR4- and
TNF-a-mediated BAMBI down-regulation is dependent on regulation of BAMBI promoter
activity through the interaction with NF-<U+03BA>Bp50 and HDAC1 in HSCs. Bambi was
predominantly expressed in HSCs, at high levels in quiescent HSCs but at low
levels in in vivo-activated and LPS-stimulated HSCs. In human HSCs, BAMBI
expression was down-regulated in response to LPS and TNF-a. A BAMBI reporter
assay demonstrated that the regulatory element to repress BAMBI transcription is 
located between 3384 and 1560 bp upstream from the transcription start site. LPS 
stimulation down-regulated BAMBI expression in cells with NF-<U+03BA>Bp65 knockdown.
However, it failed to down-regulate BAMBI in cells with inactivation of NF-<U+03BA>B or 
NF-<U+03BA>Bp50 silencing, indicating that NF-<U+03BA>Bp50 is a factor for BAMBI
down-regulation. ChIP analysis revealed that LPS and TNF-a induced binding of the
NF-<U+03BA>Bp50/p50 homodimer to the BAMBI promoter region. We also found that HDAC1 is 
bound to this region as part of the NF-<U+03BA>Bp50-HDAC1 complex, repressing
transcriptional activity of the BAMBI promoter. Finally, we confirmed that LPS
does not repress BAMBI reporter activity using a BAMBI reporter construct with a 
mutation at 3166 bp upstream of the coding region. In summary, our study
demonstrates that LPS- and TNF-a-induced NF-<U+03BA>Bp50-HDAC1 interaction represses
BAMBI transcriptional activity, which contributes to TLR4-mediated enhancement of
TGF-ß signaling in HSCs during liver fibrosis.

PMCID: PMC3945368
PMID: 24448807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. J Mol Recognit. 2014 Mar;27(3):160-72. doi: 10.1002/jmr.2345.

Thermodynamics of ligand binding to histone deacetylase like amidohydrolase from 
Bordetella/Alcaligenes.

Meyners C(1), Baud MG, Fuchter MJ, Meyer-Almes FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology, University of Applied
Sciences Darmstadt, Darmstadt, 64287, Germany.

Thermodynamic studies on ligand-protein binding have become increasingly
important in the process of drug design. In combination with structural data and 
molecular dynamics simulations, thermodynamic studies provide relevant
information about the mode of interaction between compounds and their target
proteins and therefore build a sound basis for further drug optimization. Using
the example of histone deacetylases (HDACs), particularly the histone deacetylase
like amidohydrolase (HDAH) from Bordetella/Alcaligenes, a novel sensitive
competitive fluorescence resonance energy transfer-based binding assay was
developed and the thermodynamics of interaction of both fluorescent ligands and
inhibitors to histone deacetylase like amidohydrolase were investigated. The
assay consumes only small amounts of valuable target proteins and is suitable for
fast kinetic and mechanistic studies as well as high throughput screening
applications. Binding affinity increased with increasing length of aliphatic
spacers (n = 4-7) between the hydroxamate moiety and the dansyl head group of
ligand probes. Van't Hoff plots revealed an optimum in enthalpy contribution to
the free energy of binding for the dansyl-ligand with hexyl spacer. The
selectivity in the series of dansyl-ligands against human class I HDAC1 but not
class II HDACs 4 and 6 increased with the ratio of <U+0394>H(0)/<U+0394>G(0). The data clearly 
emphasize the importance of thermodynamic signatures as useful general guidance
for the optimization of ligands or rational drug design.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 24446380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2014 Mar;7(3):351-61. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-13-0254. Epub 2014 Jan 17.

Class I HDACs are mediators of smoke carcinogen-induced stabilization of DNMT1
and serve as promising targets for chemoprevention of lung cancer.

Brodie SA(1), Li G, El-Kommos A, Kang H, Ramalingam SS, Behera M, Gandhi K,
Kowalski J, Sica GL, Khuri FR, Vertino PM, Brandes JC.

Author information: 
(1)Atlanta VAMC, Winship Cancer Institute, Atlanta, GA 30322.
johann.brandes@emory.edu.

DNA methylation is an early event in bronchial carcinogenesis and increased DNA
methyltransferase (DNMT)1 protein expression is a crucial step in the oncogenic
transformation of epithelia. Here, we investigate the role of class I histone
deacetylases (HDAC) 1 to 3 in the stabilization of DNMT1 protein and as a
potential therapeutic target for lung cancer chemoprevention. Long-term exposure 
of immortalized bronchial epithelial cells (HBEC-3KT) to low doses of
tobacco-related carcinogens led to oncogenic transformation, increased HDAC
expression, cell-cycle independent increased DNMT1 stability, and DNA
hypermethylation. Overexpression of HDACs was associated with increased DNMT1
stability and knockdown of HDACs reduced DNMT1 protein levels and induced DNMT1
acetylation. This suggests a causal relationship among increased class I HDACs
levels, upregulation of DNMT1 protein, and subsequent promoter hypermethylation. 
Targeting of class I HDACs with valproic acid (VPA) was associated with reduced
HDAC expression and a profound reduction of DNMT1 protein level. Treatment of
transformed bronchial epithelial cells with VPA resulted in reduced colony
formation, demethylation of the aberrantly methylated SFRP2 promoter, and
derepression of SFRP2 transcription. These data suggest that inhibition of HDAC
activity may reverse or prevent carcinogen-induced transformation. Finally,
immunohistochemistry on human lung cancer specimens revealed a significant
increase in DNMT1, HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3 expression, supporting our hypotheses 
that class I HDACs are mediators of DNMT1 stability. In summary, our study
provides evidence for an important role of class I HDACs in controlling the
stability of DNMT1 and suggests that HDAC inhibition could be an attractive
approach for lung cancer chemoprevention.

PMCID: PMC3955098
PMID: 24441677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2014 Mar;7(3):319-29. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-13-0313-T. Epub 2014 Jan 17.

Requirement and epigenetics reprogramming of Nrf2 in suppression of tumor
promoter TPA-induced mouse skin cell transformation by sulforaphane.

Su ZY(1), Zhang C, Lee JH, Shu L, Wu TY, Khor TO, Conney AH, Lu YP, Kong AN.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Prevention Research, Department of Pharmaceutics, Ernest
Mario School of Pharmacy, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, 160
Frelinghuysen Road, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854. KongT@pharmacy.rutgers.edu.

Nrf2 is a transcription factor that plays critical roles in regulating the
expression of cellular defensive antioxidants and detoxification enzymes.
However, the role of Nrf2 and Nrf2's epigenetics reprogramming in skin tumor
transformation is unknown. In this study, we investigated the inhibitory role and
epigenetics of Nrf2 on tumor transformation induced by
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) in mouse skin epidermal JB6 (JB6 P+)
cells and the anticancer effect of sulforaphane (SFN), an isothiocyanate found in
cruciferous vegetables. After five days of treatment, SFN significantly inhibited
TPA-induced JB6 cellular transformation and SFN enhanced the nuclear
translocation of Nrf2 and increased the mRNA and protein levels of the Nrf2
target genes HO-1, NQO1 and UGT1A1. Knockdown of Nrf2 attenuated the induction of
Nrf2, HO-1 and NQO1 by SFN, enhanced TPA-induced colony formation and dampened
the inhibitory effect of SFN on TPA-induced JB6 transformation. Epigenetics
investigation using bisulfite genomic sequencing showed that SFN decreased the
methylation ratio of the first 15 CpGs of the Nrf2 gene promoter, which was
corroborated by increased Nrf2 mRNA expression. Furthermore, SFN strongly reduced
the protein expression of DNA methyltransferases (DNMT1, DNMT3a and DNMT3b). SFN 
also inhibited the total histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity and decreased the
protein expression of HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3 and HDAC4. Collectively, these results 
suggest that the anti-cancer effect of SFN against TPA-induced neoplastic
transformation of mouse skin could involve the epigenetic reprogramming of
anti-cancer genes such as Nrf2, leading to the epigenetic reactivation of Nrf2
and the subsequent induction of downstream target genes involved in cellular
protection.

PMID: 24441674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Dev Biol. 2014 Mar 1;387(1):28-36. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.01.003. Epub 2014
Jan 17.

A potential molecular pathogenesis of cardiac/laterality defects in
Oculo-Facio-Cardio-Dental syndrome.

Tanaka K(1), Kato A(1), Angelocci C(1), Watanabe M(2), Kato Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Florida State University College of
Medicine, Tallahassee, FL 32306, USA. (2)Institute of Socio-Arts and Sciences,
The University of Tokushima, Tokushima 770-8502, Japan. (3)Department of
Biomedical Sciences, Florida State University College of Medicine, Tallahassee,
FL 32306, USA. Electronic address: yoichi.kato@med.fsu.edu.

Pitx2 is the last effector of the left-right (LR) cascade known to date and plays
a crucial role in the patterning of LR asymmetry. In Xenopus embryos, the
expression of Pitx2 gene in the left lateral plate mesoderm (LPM) is directly
regulated by Xnr1 signaling, which is mediated by Smads and FoxH1. Previous
studies suggest that the suppression of Pitx2 gene in the left LPM is a potential
cause of cardiac/laterality defects in Oculo-Facio-Cardio-Dental (OFCD) syndrome,
which is known to be caused by mutations in BCL6 co-repressor (BCOR) gene.
Recently, our work has revealed that the BCL6/BCOR complex blocks Notch-dependent
transcriptional activity to protect the expression of Pitx2 in the left LPM from 
the inhibitory activity of Notch signaling. These studies indicated that
uncontrolled Notch activity in the left LPM caused by dysfunction of BCOR may
result in cardiac/laterality defects of OFCD syndrome. However, this
Notch-dependent inhibitory mechanism of Pitx2 gene transcription still remains
unknown. Here we report that transcriptional repressor ESR1, which acts
downstream of Notch signaling, inhibits the expression of Pitx2 gene by binding
to a left side-specific enhancer (ASE) region in Pitx2 gene and recruiting
histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) to this region. Once HDAC1 is tethered, histone
acetyltransferase p300 is no longer recruited to the Xnr1-dependent
transcriptional complex on the ASE region, leading to the suppression of Pitx2
gene in the left LPM. The study presented here uncovers the regulatory mechanism 
of Pitx2 gene transcription which may contribute to an understanding of
pathogenesis of OFCD syndrome.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3951022
PMID: 24440151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Int J Oncol. 2014 Mar;44(3):812-8. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2253. Epub 2014 Jan 10.

Metastasis-associated protein 1 promotes tumor invasion by downregulation of
E-cadherin.

Weng W(1), Yin J(2), Zhang Y(1), Qiu J(3), Wang X(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200072, P.R. China. (2)Department of
Clinical Medicine, Shanghai Jiaotong University Affiliated Renji Hospital,
Shanghai 200127, P.R. China. (3)Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics,
Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai 
200072, P.R. China. (4)Phase I Clinical Trial Center, Beijing Shijitan Hospital, 
Capital Medical University, Beijing 100038, P.R. China.

Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is one of the most common malignant
tumors. Upregulation of metastasis-associated protein 1 (MTA1) has been reported 
to contribute to the development of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.
Therefore, the objective of our study was to identify the molecular mechanisms of
MTA1 underlying the invasion and metastasis of ESCC. We overexpressed MTA1 in
ESCC cells to examine the role of MTA1 in the regulation of the cell invasion. In
addition, using luciferase reporter assay and electrophoretic mobility shift
assays, we evaluated the binding of MTA1 to the promoter of E-cadherin. We found 
that MTA1 overexpression promotes invasiveness of the human esophageal carcinoma 
cell line EC-9706. This effect was accompanied by downregulation of the
epithelial cell marker E-cadherin and upregulation of vimentin and MMP-9
luciferase reporter assays showed that MTA1 inhibited the promoter activity of
E-cadherin and that this was dependent on Snail, Slug and HDAC1. We also found
that Snail and Slug bound the E-boxes in the promoter of E-cadherin and recruited
MTA1 and HDAC1 to suppress E-cadherin expression, as confirmed by electrophoretic
mobility shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. MTA1 promotes tumor
invasion by downregulation of E-cadherin. These results demonstrate a novel role 
for MTA1 in the regulation of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma invasion and
provide insight into the mechanisms involved in this process.

PMID: 24424621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Mol Endocrinol. 2014 Feb;28(2):249-59. doi: 10.1210/me.2013-1343. Epub 2014 Jan
1.

Bifunctional ligands allow deliberate extrinsic reprogramming of the
glucocorticoid receptor.

Højfeldt JW(1), Cruz-Rodríguez O, Imaeda Y, Van Dyke AR, Carolan JP, Mapp AK,
Iñiguez-Lluhí JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry (J.W.H.,Y.I., J.P.C., A.K.M.), University of Michigan,
and Department of Pharmacology (O.C.-R., J.A.I.-L.), University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109; and Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry (A.R.V.D.), Fairfield University, Fairfield, Connecticut 06824.

Therapies based on conventional nuclear receptor ligands are extremely powerful, 
yet their broad and long-term use is often hindered by undesired side effects
that are often part of the receptor's biological function. Selective control of
nuclear receptors such as the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) using conventional
ligands has proven particularly challenging. Because they act solely in an
allosteric manner, conventional ligands are constrained to act via cofactors that
can intrinsically partner with the receptor. Furthermore, effective means to
rationally encode a bias for specific coregulators are generally lacking. Using
the (GR) as a framework, we demonstrate here a versatile approach, based on
bifunctional ligands, that extends the regulatory repertoire of GR in a
deliberate and controlled manner. By linking the macrolide FK506 to a
conventional agonist (dexamethasone) or antagonist (RU-486), we demonstrate that 
it is possible to bridge the intact receptor to either positively or negatively
acting coregulatory proteins bearing an FK506 binding protein domain. Using this 
strategy, we show that extrinsic recruitment of a strong activation function can 
enhance the efficacy of the full agonist dexamethasone and reverse the antagonist
character of RU-486 at an endogenous locus. Notably, the extrinsic recruitment of
histone deacetylase-1 reduces the ability of GR to activate transcription from a 
canonical GR response element while preserving ligand-mediated repression of
nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B. By providing novel ways for the receptor to engage specific
coregulators, this unique ligand design approach has the potential to yield both 
novel tools for GR study and more selective therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC3896636
PMID: 24422633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2014 Feb;21(2):126-32. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2746. Epub 2014 Jan
12.

Temporal orchestration of repressive chromatin modifiers by circadian clock
Period complexes.

Duong HA(1), Weitz CJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA.

The mammalian circadian clock is built on a molecular feedback loop in which the 
Period (PER) proteins, acting in a large, poorly understood complex, repress
Clock-Bmal1, the transcription factor driving their expression. We found that
mouse PER complexes include the histone methyltransferase HP1<U+03B3>-Suv39h. PER
proteins recruited HP1<U+03B3>-Suv39h to the Per1 and Per2 promoters, and HP1<U+03B3>-Suv39h
proved important for circadian di- and trimethylation of histone H3 Lys9 (H3K9)
at the Per1 promoter, feedback repression and clock function. HP1<U+03B3>-Suv39h was
recruited to the Per1 and Per2 promoters ~4 h after recruitment of HDAC1, a
PER-associated protein previously implicated in clock function and H3K9
deacetylation at the Per1 promoter. PER complexes containing HDAC1 or HP1<U+03B3>-Suv39h
appeared to be physically separable. Circadian clock negative feedback by the PER
complex thus involves dynamic, ordered recruitment of repressive chromatin
modifiers to DNA-bound Clock-Bmal1.

PMCID: PMC4227600
PMID: 24413057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Cell Rep. 2014 Jan 30;6(2):325-35. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.12.021. Epub 2014
Jan 9.

The histone-H3K4-specific demethylase KDM5B binds to its substrate and product
through distinct PHD fingers.

Klein BJ(1), Piao L(2), Xi Y(3), Rincon-Arano H(4), Rothbart SB(5), Peng D(2),
Wen H(2), Larson C(6), Zhang X(2), Zheng X(3), Cortazar MA(7), Peña PV(1), Mangan
A(7), Bentley DL(8), Strahl BD(5), Groudine M(9), Li W(3), Shi X(10), Kutateladze
TG(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora,
CO 80045, USA. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (3)Dan L. 
Duncan Cancer Center, Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (4)Basic Science Division, Fred
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA 98109, USA. (5)Department of
Biochemistry and Biophysics and the Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.
(6)Genes and Development Graduate Program, The University of Texas Graduate
School of Biomedical Sciences, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (7)Molecular Biology
Program, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(8)Molecular Biology Program, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, 
CO 80045, USA; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of
Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. (9)Basic Science Division,
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA 98109, USA; Department of
Radiation Oncology, University Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA 98109, 
USA. (10)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Genes and Development
Graduate Program, The University of Texas Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences,
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Center for Cancer Epigenetics and Center for Stem Cell
and Developmental Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic address: xbshi@mdanderson.org. (11)Department 
of Pharmacology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO 80045,
USA; Molecular Biology Program, University of Colorado School of Medicine,
Aurora, CO 80045, USA. Electronic address: tatiana.kutateladze@ucdenver.edu.

The histone lysine demethylase KDM5B regulates gene transcription and cell
differentiation and is implicated in carcinogenesis. It contains multiple
conserved chromatin-associated domains, including three PHD fingers of unknown
function. Here, we show that the first and third, but not the second, PHD fingers
of KDM5B possess histone binding activities. The PHD1 finger is highly specific
for unmodified histone H3 (H3K4me0), whereas the PHD3 finger shows preference for
the trimethylated histone mark H3K4me3. RNA-seq analysis indicates that KDM5B
functions as a transcriptional repressor for genes involved in inflammatory
responses, cell proliferation, adhesion, and migration. Biochemical analysis
reveals that KDM5B associates with components of the nucleosome remodeling and
deacetylase (NuRD) complex and may cooperate with the histone deacetylase 1
(HDAC1) in gene repression. KDM5B is downregulated in triple-negative breast
cancer relative to estrogen-receptor-positive breast cancer. Overexpression of
KDM5B in the MDA-MB 231 breast cancer cells suppresses cell migration and
invasion, and the PHD1-H3K4me0 interaction is essential for inhibiting migration.
These findings highlight tumor-suppressive functions of KDM5B in triple-negative 
breast cancer cells and suggest a multivalent mechanism for KDM5B-mediated
transcriptional regulation.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3918441
PMID: 24412361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. J Med Chem. 2014 Feb 13;57(3):642-50. doi: 10.1021/jm401837e. Epub 2014 Jan 27.

Mutagenesis studies of the 14 Å internal cavity of histone deacetylase 1:
insights toward the acetate-escape hypothesis and selective inhibitor design.

Wambua MK(1), Nalawansha DA, Negmeldin AT, Pflum MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Wayne State University , 5101 Cass Avenue, Detroit,
Michigan 48202, United States.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) proteins are promising targets for cancer treatment,
as shown by the approval of two HDAC inhibitors for the treatment of cutaneous
T-cell lymphoma. HDAC1 in particular has been linked to cell growth and cell
cycle regulation and is therefore an attractive target for anticancer drugs. The 
HDAC1 active site contains a hydrophobic 11 Å active-site channel, with a 14 Å
internal cavity at the bottom of the active site. Several computational and
biochemical studies have proposed an acetate-escape hypothesis where the acetate 
byproduct of the deacetylation reaction escapes via the 14 Å internal cavity.
Selective HDAC inhibitors that bind to the 14 Å cavity have also been created. To
understand the influence of amino acids lining the HDAC1 14 Å cavity in acetate
escape and inhibitor binding, we used mutagenesis coupled with acetate
competition assays. The results indicate that amino acids lining the 14 Å cavity 
are critical for catalytic activity and acetate competition, confirming the role 
of the cavity in acetate escape. In addition, these mutagenesis studies will aid 
in HDAC1-inhibitor design that exploits the 14 Å cavity.

PMCID: PMC3983352
PMID: 24405391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. ChemMedChem. 2014 Mar;9(3):657-64. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.201300414. Epub 2014 Jan 8.

Design, synthesis, and biological activity of NCC149 derivatives as histone
deacetylase 8-selective inhibitors.

Suzuki T(1), Muto N, Bando M, Itoh Y, Masaki A, Ri M, Ota Y, Nakagawa H, Iida S, 
Shirahige K, Miyata N.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, 
13 Taishogun, Nishitakatsukasa-cho, Kita-ku, Kyoto 603-8334 (Japan); PRESTO
(Japan) Science and Technology Agency (JST), 4-1-8 Honcho, Kawaguchi, Saitama
332-0012 (Japan). suzukit@koto.kpu-m.ac.jp.

We recently discovered
N-hydroxy-3-[1-(phenylthio)methyl-1H-1,2,3-triazol-4-yl]benzamide (NCC149) as a
potent and selective histone deacetylase 8 (HDAC8) inhibitor from a 151-member
triazole compound library using a click chemistry approach. In this work, we
present a series of NCC149 derivatives bearing various aromatic linkers that were
designed and synthesized as HDAC8-selective inhibitors. A series of in vitro
assays were used to evaluate the newly synthesized compounds, four of which
showed HDAC8 inhibitory activity similar to that of NCC149, and one of which
displayed HDAC8 selectivity superior to that of NCC149. In addition, these top
four compounds induced the increase of acetylated cohesin (an HDAC8 substrate) in
HeLa cells in a dose-dependent manner, indicating inhibition of HDAC8 in the
cells. While none of these compounds enhanced the acetylation of H3K9 (a
substrate of HDAC1 and 2), only one compound refrained from increasing a-tubulin 
acetylation, a substrate of HDAC6, indicating that this compound is more
selective for HDAC8 than the other derivatives. Furthermore, this HDAC8-selective
inhibitor suppressed the growth of T-cell lymphoma cells more potently than did
NCC149. These findings are useful for the further development of HDAC8-selective 
inhibitors.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24403121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 31;8(12):e84261. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084261.
eCollection 2013.

Coordinate microRNA-mediated regulation of protein complexes in prostate cancer.

Alshalalfa M(1), Bader GD(2), Bismar TA(3), Alhajj R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta,
Canada ; Biotechnology Research Centre, Palestine Polytechnic University, Hebron,
Palestine. (2)The Donnelly Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada and the Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada. (3)Departments of Pathology, Oncology and Molecular Biology and 
Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(4)Department of Computer Science, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta,
Canada.

MicroRNAs are a class of small non-coding regulatory RNA molecules that regulate 
mRNAs post-transcriptionally. Recent evidence has shown that miRNAs target entire
functionally related proteins such as protein complexes and biological pathways. 
However, characterizing the influence of miRNAs on genes whose encoded proteins
are part of protein complexes has not been studied in the context of disease. We 
propose an entropy-based framework to identify miRNA-mediated dysregulation of
functionally related proteins during prostate cancer progression. The proposed
framework uses experimentally verified miRNA-target interactions, functionally
related proteins and expression data to identify miRNA-influenced protein
complexes in prostate cancer, and identify genes that are dysregulated as a
result. The framework constructs correlation matrixes between functionally
related proteins and miRNAs that have targets in the complex, and assesses the
changes in the Shannon entropy of the modules across different stages of prostate
cancer. Results reveal that SMAD4 and HDAC containing protein complexes are
highly affected and disrupted by miRNAs, particularly miRNA-1 and miRNA-16. Using
biological pathways to define functionally related proteins reveals that NF-kB-, 
RAS-, and Syndecan-mediated pathways are dysregulated due to miRNA-1- and
miRNA-16-mediated regulation. These results suggest that miRNA-1 and miRNA-16 are
important master regulators of miRNA-mediated regulation in prostate cancer.
Moreover, results reveal that miRNAs with high-influence on the disrupted protein
complexes are diagnostic and prognostic biomarker candidates for prostate cancer 
progression. The observation of miRNA-mediated protein complex regulation and
miRNA-mediated pathway regulation, with partial experimental verification from
previous studies, demonstrates that our framework is a promising approach for the
identification of novel miRNAs and protein complexes related to disease
progression.

PMCID: PMC3877262
PMID: 24391925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 20;8(12):e84046. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084046.
eCollection 2013.

Nuclear localization of the transcriptional regulator MIER1a requires interaction
with HDAC1/2 in breast cancer cells.

Li S(1), Paterno GD(1), Gillespie LL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Cancer Research Laboratories, Division of BioMedical Sciences,
Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John's,
Newfoundland, Canada.

MIER1a is a transcriptional regulator that functions in gene repression through
its ability to interact with various chromatin modifiers and transcription
factors. We have also shown that MIER1a interacts with ERa and inhibits
estrogen-stimulated growth. While MIER1a is localized in the nucleus of MCF7
cells, previous studies have shown that it does not contain a nuclear
localization signal. In this report, we investigate the mechanism involved in
transporting MIER1a into the nucleus. We explored the possibility that MIER1a is 
transported into the nucleus through a 'piggyback' mechanism. One obvious choice 
is via interaction with ERa, however we demonstrate that nuclear targeting of
MIER1a does not require ERa. Knockdown of ERa reduced protein expression to 22%
of control, but did not alter the percentage of cells with nuclear MIER1a (98%
nuclear with scrambled shRNA vs. 95% with ERa shRNA). Further evidence was
obtained using two stable transfectants derived from the ER-negative MDA231 cell 
line: MC2 (ERa+) and VC5 (ERa-). Confocal analysis showed no difference in MIER1a
localization (86% nuclear in MC2 vs. 89% in VC5). These data demonstrate that ERa
is not involved in nuclear localization of MIER1a. To identify the critical
MIER1a sequence, we performed a deletion analysis and determined that the ELM2
domain was necessary and sufficient for nuclear localization. This domain binds
HDAC1 & 2, therefore we investigated their role. Confocal analysis of an MIER1a
containing an ELM2 point mutation previously shown to abolish HDAC binding
revealed that this mutation results in almost complete loss of nuclear targeting:
10% nuclear vs. 97% with WT-MIER1a. Moreover, double knockdown of HDAC1 and 2
caused a reduction in percent nuclear from 86% to 44%. The results of this study 
demonstrate that nuclear targeting of MIER1a requires an intact ELM2 domain and
is dependent on interaction with HDAC1/2.

PMCID: PMC3869823
PMID: 24376786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. J Leukoc Biol. 2014 Apr;95(4):651-9. doi: 10.1189/jlb.1013565. Epub 2013 Dec 27.

Histone deacetylase isoforms regulate innate immune responses by deacetylating
mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatase-1.

Jeong Y(1), Du R, Zhu X, Yin S, Wang J, Cui H, Cao W, Lowenstein CJ.

Author information: 
(1)2.Jiangsu Key Lab of Molecular Medicine, 22 Hankou Rd., Nanjing, China,
210093. wangsencao@nju.edu.cn.

The MAPK pathway mediates TLR signaling during innate immune responses. We
discovered previously that MKP-1 is acetylated, enhancing its interaction with
its MAPK substrates and deactivating TLR signaling. As HDACs modulate
inflammation by deacetylating histone and nonhistone proteins, we hypothesized
that HDACs may regulate LPS-induced inflammation by deacetylating MKP-1. We found
that mouse macrophages expressed a subset of HDAC isoforms (HDAC1, HDAC2, and
HDAC3), which all interacted with MKP-1. Genetic silencing or pharmacologic
inhibition of HDAC1, -2, and -3 increased MKP-1 acetylation in cells.
Furthermore, knockdown or pharmacologic inhibition of HDAC1, -2, and -3 decreased
LPS-induced phosphorylation of the MAPK member p38. Also, pharmacologic
inhibition of HDAC did not decrease MAPK signaling in MKP-1 null cells. Finally, 
inhibition of HDAC1, -2, and -3 decreased LPS-induced expression of TNF-a, IL-1ß,
iNOS (NOS2), and nitrite synthesis. Taken together, our results show that HDAC1, 
-2, and -3 deacetylate MKP-1 and that this post-translational modification
increases MAPK signaling and innate immune signaling. Thus, HDAC1, -2, and -3
isoforms are potential therapeutic targets in inflammatory diseases.

PMID: 24374966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Int J Cancer. 2014 Jun 1;134(11):2560-71. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28594. Epub 2013 Dec
13.

The PI3K/AKT pathway promotes gefitinib resistance in mutant KRAS lung
adenocarcinoma by a deacetylase-dependent mechanism.

Jeannot V(1), Busser B, Brambilla E, Wislez M, Robin B, Cadranel J, Coll JL,
Hurbin A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U823, Grenoble, France; University UJF Grenoble 1, Grenoble, France.

To select the appropriate patients for treatment with epidermal growth factor
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs), it is important to gain a better
understanding of the intracellular pathways leading to EGFR-TKI resistance, which
is a common problem in patients with lung cancer. We recently reported that
mutant KRAS adenocarcinoma is resistant to gefitinib as a result of amphiregulin 
and insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor overexpression. This resistance leads
to inhibition of Ku70 acetylation, thus enhancing the BAX/Ku70 interaction and
preventing apoptosis. Here, we determined the intracellular pathways involved in 
gefitinib resistance in lung cancers and explored the impact of their inhibition.
We analyzed the activation of the phosphatidyl inositol-3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT
pathway and the mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular-signal regulated
kinase (MAPK/ERK) pathway in lung tumors. The activation of AKT was associated
with disease progression in tumors with wild-type EGFR from patients treated with
gefitinib (phase II clinical trial IFCT0401). The administration of IGF1R-TKI or 
amphiregulin-directed shRNA decreased AKT signaling and restored gefitinib
sensitivity in mutant KRAS cells. The combination of PI3K/AKT inhibition with
gefitinib restored apoptosis via Ku70 downregulation and BAX release from Ku70.
Deacetylase inhibitors, which decreased the BAX/Ku70 interaction, inhibited AKT
signaling and induced gefitinib-dependent apoptosis. The PI3K/AKT pathway is thus
a major pathway contributing to gefitinib resistance in lung tumors with KRAS
mutation, through the regulation of the BAX/Ku70 interaction. This finding
suggests that combined treatments could improve the outcomes for this subset of
lung cancer patients, who have a poor prognosis.

Copyright © 2013 UICC.

PMID: 24374738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Dec;21(6):1441-7. doi:
10.7534/j.issn.1009-2137.2013.06.014.

[Mechanism of inhibiting the cell growth in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma by
valproic acid combined with temsirolimus].

[Article in Chinese]

Zheng Z(1), Zhao Y(1), Dong LH(1), Wang L(1), Cheng S(2), Zhao WL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Shanghai Institute of Hematology, Ruijin Hospital,
Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, State Key Laboratory of Medical 
Genomics, Shanghai 200025, China. (2)Department of Hematology, Shanghai Institute
of Hematology, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, 
State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics, Shanghai 200025, China. E-mail:
orenge@medmail.com.cn.

The aim of this study was to illustrate the mechanism of inhibiting the cell
growth in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma by histone deacetylase inhibitor valproic
acid (VPA) combined with mTOR inhibitor temsirolimus (TEM). MTT assay and
Wright's stain were used to assess cell growth inhibition and to detect the cell 
morphological changes respectively. The cell apoptosis, cell cycle and cell
autophagy were determined by flow cytometry. Ultrastructure changes were
confirmed by electron microscopy. Protein changes were detected by Western blot. 
The results showed that both VPA and TEM alone inhibited cell proliferation and
the effect was more obvious in the combination group. VPA combined with TEM
induced cell arrest in G0/G1 phase and upregulated the expression of
autophagy-related protein LC3, without cell apoptosis. Moreover, typical
autophagosomes were observed, further confirming the presence of autophagy.
Western blot showed the changes of proteins involved in autophagy signaling
pathway. VPA decreased HDAC1 and HDAC3 expression and increased histone
acetylation, suggesting that VPA also affected lymphoma cell proliferation
through epigenetic modification. It is concluded that the combined treatment of
VPA and TEM induces cell cycle arrest and cell autophagy, which provides a new
clue for their clinical application in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

PMID: 24370026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Sci China Life Sci. 2014 Jan;57(1):128-36. doi: 10.1007/s11427-013-4581-2. Epub
2013 Dec 26.

Yin Yang 1 (YY1) synergizes with Smad7 to inhibit TGF-ß signaling in the nucleus.

Yan X(1), Pan J, Xiong W, Cheng M, Sun Y, Zhang S, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology,
Tsinghua-Peking Center for Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, 100084, China, yanxh@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn.

As a prototype of the TGF-ß superfamily cytokines, TGF-ß is well known for its
diverse roles in embryogenesis and adult tissue homeostasis. TGF-ß evokes
cellular responses by signaling mainly through cell membrane receptors and
transcription factor R-Smads and Co-Smad (Smad4), while an inhibitory Smad,
Smad7, acts as a critical negative regulator of TGF-ß signaling. Smad7
antagonizes TGF-ß signaling by regulating the stability or activity of the
receptors or blocking the DNA binding of the functional R-Smad-Smad4 complex in
the nucleus. However, the function of Smad7 in the nucleus is not fully
understood. Yin Yang 1 (YY1) is a ubiquitously expressed transcription factor
with multiple functions. It has been reported that YY1 can inhibit Smad-dependent
transcriptional responses and TGF-ß/BMP-induced cell differentiation
independently of its DNA binding ability. In this study, we found that Smad7
interacts with YY1 and the interaction is attenuated by TGF-ß signaling. Reporter
assays and target gene expression analyses revealed that Smad7 and YY1 act in
concert to inhibit TGF-ß-induced transcription in the nucleus. Furthermore, Smad7
could enhance the interaction of YY1 with the histone deacetylase HDAC1.
Consistently, YY1 and HDAC1 augmented the transcription repression activity of
Smad7 in Gal4-luciferase reporter analysis. Therefore, our findings define a
novel mechanism of Smad7 and YY1 to antagonize TGF-ß signaling.

PMID: 24369345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Exp Mol Pathol. 2014 Feb;96(1):61-70. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2013.12.001. Epub 2013
Dec 19.

Involvement of epigenetics and microRNA-29b in the urethane induced inception and
establishment of mouse lung tumors.

Pandey M(1), Sultana S(2), Gupta KP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Carcinogenesis Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Toxicology
Research, Mahatma Gandhi Marg, Lucknow 226001, India. (2)Dept. of Medical
Elementology and Toxicology, Jamia Hamdard, Hamdard Nagar, New Delhi, India.
(3)Environmental Carcinogenesis Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Toxicology
Research, Mahatma Gandhi Marg, Lucknow 226001, India. Electronic address:
krishnag522@yahoo.co.in.

Epigenetic changes are correlated with tumor development showing aberrations in
DNA methylation and histone modifications. To find the early changes, we
evaluated the epigenetic events from early to late stage of the urethane induced 
lung tumor development in mouse model and tried to correlate the molecular events
with the progression of tumor. We addressed the hypothesis by examining the tumor
development, status of DNMTs, HDACs and MBDs, DNA methylation and expression of
microRNA-29b during 1 to 36 weeks after urethane exposure that included the
period before and after the tumor appearance. Tumors did not appear after 1 or 4 
weeks but well defined tumors appeared after 12 weeks and larger tumors appeared 
at 36 weeks which was prevented by IP6. DNMT1, DNMT3a and DNMT3b were upregulated
after urethane exposure at the time of no tumor till the tumor developed and
showed its upregulated functional activity. DNMTs are shown to be the targets of 
microRNA-29b and we showed that microRNA-29b was downregulated in the line of
DNMT upregulation. HDAC, the histone modifier, also showed progressive
upregulation. Periodic increase in methyl binding proteins, MBD2, supported the
expression of gene silencing pathways in terms of the downregulation of tumor
suppressor genes, p16 and MLH1. All these molecular alterations were protected in
the presence of IP6. Our results showed that the key steps of epigenetics, DNMTs,
mir29b, and HDAC1, are altered both before and after the development of tumors.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24361357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Feb;34(4):765-75. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00878-13. Epub 2013 Dec
16.

ELL inhibits E2F1 transcriptional activity by enhancing E2F1 deacetylation via
recruitment of histone deacetylase 1.

Zhang W(1), Ji W, Liu X, Ouyang G, Xiao W.

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Aquatic Biodiversity and Conservation, Institute of
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, People's Republic of China.

ELL (eleven-nineteen lysine-rich leukemia protein) was first identified as a
translocation partner of MLL in acute myeloid leukemia; however, the exact
mechanism of its action has remained elusive. In this study, we identified ELL as
a direct downstream target gene of E2F1. Coimmunoprecipitation assays showed that
ELL interacted with E2F1 in vitro and in vivo, leading to inhibition of E2F1
transcriptional activity. In addition, ELL enhanced E2F1 deacetylation via
recruitment of histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1). Notably, the MLL-ELL fusion protein
lost the inhibitory role of ELL in E2F1 transcriptional activity. Furthermore,
DNA damage induced ELL in an E2F1-dependent manner and ELL protected cells
against E2F1-dependent apoptosis. Our findings not only connect ELL to E2F1
function and uncover a novel role of ELL in response to DNA damage but also
provide an insight into the mechanism for MLL-ELL-associated leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3911481
PMID: 24344198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Oncogene. 2015 Jan 8;34(2):177-87. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.530. Epub 2013 Dec 16.

CUX1 modulates polarization of tumor-associated macrophages by antagonizing NF-<U+03BA>B
signaling.

Kühnemuth B(1), Mühlberg L(1), Schipper M(2), Griesmann H(1), Neesse A(1),
Milosevic N(1), Wissniowski T(1), Buchholz M(1), Gress TM(1), Michl P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Endocrinology, University Hospital,
Philipps University, Marburg, Germany. (2)Department of Biology, Philipps
University, School of Medicine, Marburg, Germany.

Many solid cancers including pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) are
characterized by an extensive stromal reaction that is accompanied by
infiltrating tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs). The role of TAMs in malignant
tumors is only partially understood. Previously, we identified the transcription 
factor CUX1 as an important mediator of tumor progression in PDAC. Interestingly,
we found that CUX1 is highly expressed not only in tumor cells but also in TAMs. 
On the basis of these data, we aimed to elucidate the effects of CUX1 in TAMs in 
vitro and in vivo. We analyzed the effects of CUX1 on cytokine expression using
overexpression and knockdown strategies. The cytokine regulation by CUX1 was
further assessed by reporter assays, DNA pulldown experiments and
chromatin-immunoprecipitation. CUX1 expression in TAMs was analyzed in human
pancreatic cancer tissues and in a genetic mouse model. Immunohistochemical
analysis revealed strong expression levels of CUX1 in a distinct subset of TAMs
in human PDAC tissues. Furthermore, its expression increased during tumor
progression in a genetic mouse model of PDAC. Profiling experiments showed that
CUX1 downregulates several NF-<U+03BA>B-regulated chemokines such as CXCL10, which have 
been associated with M1 polarization and inhibition of angiogenesis and tumor
progression. We could demonstrate that CUX1 interacts with NF-<U+03BA>B p65, leading to 
reduced binding of NF-<U+03BA>B p65 to the chemokine promoters. In addition, CUX1
reduces acetylation of NF-<U+03BA>B p65 at K310 by recruiting HDAC1. Functionally, CUX1 
expression in TAMs antagonizes T-cell attraction and enhances angiogenesis in
vitro. We identified CUX1 as an important modulator of the TAMs phenotype and
function by modulating NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent cytokines.

PMID: 24336331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Virol. 2014 Feb;88(4):2268-78. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03278-13. Epub 2013 Dec 11.

Primary macrophages rely on histone deacetylase 1 and 2 expression to induce type
I interferon in response to gammaherpesvirus infection.

Mounce BC(1), Mboko WP, Kanack AJ, Tarakanova VL.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, 
Wisconsin, USA.

Type I interferon is induced shortly following viral infection and represents a
first line of host defense against a majority of viral pathogens. Not
surprisingly, both replication and latency of gammaherpesviruses, ubiquitous
cancer-associated pathogens, are attenuated by type I interferon, although the
mechanism of attenuation remains poorly characterized. Gammaherpesviruses also
target histone deacetylases (HDACs), a family of pleiotropic enzymes that modify 
gene expression and several cell signaling pathways. Specifically, we have
previously shown that a conserved gammaherpesvirus protein kinase interacts with 
HDAC1 and -2 to promote gammaherpesvirus replication in primary macrophages. In
the current study, we have used genetic approaches to show that expression of
HDAC1 and -2 is critical for induction of a type I interferon response following 
gammaherpesvirus infection of primary macrophages. Specifically, expression of
HDAC1 and -2 was required for phosphorylation of interferon regulatory factor 3
(IRF3) and accumulation of IRF3 at the beta interferon promoter in
gammaherpesvirus-infected primary macrophages. To our knowledge, this is the
first demonstration of a specific role for HDAC1 and -2 in the induction of type 
I interferon responses in primary immune cells following virus infection.
Furthermore, because HDAC1 and -2 are overexpressed in several types of cancer,
our findings illuminate potential side effects of HDAC1- and -2-specific
inhibitors that are currently under development as cancer therapy agents.
IMPORTANCE Gammaherpesviruses establish chronic infection in a majority of the
adult population and are associated with several malignancies. Infected cells
counteract gammaherpesvirus infection via innate immune signaling mediated
primarily through type I interferon. The induction of type I interferon
expression proceeds through several stages using molecular mechanisms that are
still incompletely characterized. In this study, we show that expression of HDAC1
and -2 by macrophages is required to mount a type I interferon response to
incoming gammaherpesvirus. The involvement of HDAC1 and -2 in the type I
interferon response highlights the pleiotropic roles of these enzymes in cellular
signaling. Interestingly, HDAC1 and -2 are deregulated in cancer and are
attractive targets of new cancer therapies. Due to the ubiquitous and chronic
nature of gammaherpesvirus infection, the role of HDAC1 and -2 in the induction
of type I interferon responses should be considered during the clinical
development of HDAC1- and -2-specific inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC3911555
PMID: 24335310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. FEBS Lett. 2014 Jan 3;588(1):184-91. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.11.034. Epub
2013 Dec 6.

Downregulation of histone deacetylase 1 by microRNA-520h contributes to the
chemotherapeutic effect of doxorubicin.

Shen Q(1), Yao Q(2), Sun J(3), Feng L(3), Lu H(1), Ma Y(3), Liu L(3), Wang F(1), 
Li J(1), Yue Y(3), Jin H(4), Wang X(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Sir Runrun Shaw Hospital, School of Medicine, 
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. (2)Department of Medical Oncology, The
First Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang Chinese Medicine University, Hangzhou,
China. (3)Laboratory of Cancer Biology, Institute of Clinical Science, Sir Runrun
Shaw Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(4)Laboratory of Cancer Biology, Institute of Clinical Science, Sir Runrun Shaw
Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. Electronic
address: jinhc@zju.edu.cn. (5)Department of Medical Oncology, Sir Runrun Shaw
Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. Electronic
address: wangxzju@163.com.

Doxorubicin induces DNA damage to exert its anti-cancer function. Histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) can protect the genome from DNA damage. We found that
doxorubicin specifically downregulates HDAC1 protein expression and identified
HDAC1 as a target of miR-520h, which was upregulated by doxorubicin.
Doxorubicin-induced cell death was impaired by exogenous HDAC1 or by miR-520h
inhibitor. Moreover, HDAC1 reduced the level of <U+03B3>H2AX by preventing the
interaction of doxorubicin with DNA. In summary, doxorubicin downregulates HDAC1 
protein expression, by inducing the expression of HDAC1-targeting miR-520h, to
exacerbate DNA-doxorubicin interaction. The upregulation of HDAC1 protein may
contribute to drug resistance of human cancer cells and targeting HDAC1 is a
promising strategy to increase the clinical efficacy of DNA damage-inducing
chemotherapeutic drugs.

Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24316511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Dec 5;4:e951. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.481.

Prognostic and therapeutic relevance of FLIP and procaspase-8 overexpression in
non-small cell lung cancer.

Riley JS(1), Hutchinson R, McArt DG, Crawford N, Holohan C, Paul I, Van
Schaeybroeck S, Salto-Tellez M, Johnston PG, Fennell DA, Gately K, O'Byrne K,
Cummins R, Kay E, Hamilton P, Stasik I, Longley DB.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Resistance Group, Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queen's
University, Belfast, Northern Ireland, UK.

Non-small cell lung carcinoma remains by far the leading cause of cancer-related 
deaths worldwide. Overexpression of FLIP, which blocks the extrinsic apoptotic
pathway by inhibiting caspase-8 activation, has been identified in various
cancers. We investigated FLIP and procaspase-8 expression in NSCLC and the effect
of HDAC inhibitors on FLIP expression, activation of caspase-8 and drug
resistance in NSCLC and normal lung cell line models. Immunohistochemical
analysis of cytoplasmic and nuclear FLIP and procaspase-8 protein expression was 
carried out using a novel digital pathology approach. Both FLIP and procaspase-8 
were found to be significantly overexpressed in tumours, and importantly, high
cytoplasmic expression of FLIP significantly correlated with shorter overall
survival. Treatment with HDAC inhibitors targeting HDAC1-3 downregulated FLIP
expression predominantly via post-transcriptional mechanisms, and this resulted
in death receptor- and caspase-8-dependent apoptosis in NSCLC cells, but not
normal lung cells. In addition, HDAC inhibitors synergized with TRAIL and
cisplatin in NSCLC cells in a FLIP- and caspase-8-dependent manner. Thus, FLIP
and procaspase-8 are overexpressed in NSCLC, and high cytoplasmic FLIP expression
is indicative of poor prognosis. Targeting high FLIP expression using HDAC1-3
selective inhibitors such as entinostat to exploit high procaspase-8 expression
in NSCLC has promising therapeutic potential, particularly when used in
combination with TRAIL receptor-targeted agents.

PMCID: PMC3877552
PMID: 24309938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Biomed Res Int. 2013;2013:162674. doi: 10.1155/2013/162674. Epub 2013 Nov 6.

Thermal and chemical stability of two homologous POZ/BTB domains of KCTD proteins
characterized by a different oligomeric organization.

Pirone L(1), Esposito C, Correale S, Graziano G, Di Gaetano S, Vitagliano L,
Pedone E.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Cristallografia, CNR, Via G. Amendola 122/O, 70126 Bari, Italy.

POZ/BTB domains are widespread modules detected in a variety of different
biological contexts. Here, we report a biophysical characterization of the
POZ/BTB of KCTD6, a protein that is involved in the turnover of the muscle small 
ankyrin-1 isoform 5 and, in combination with KCTD11, in the ubiquitination and
degradation of HDAC1. The analyses show that the domain is a tetramer made up by 
subunits with the expected a /ß structure. A detailed investigation of its
stability, carried out in comparison with the homologous pentameric POZ/BTB
domain isolated from KCTD5, highlights a number of interesting features, which
are shared by the two domains despite their different organization. Their
thermal/chemical denaturation curves are characterized by a single and sharp
inflection point, suggesting that the denaturation of the two domains is a
cooperative two-state process. Furthermore, both domains present a significant
content of secondary structure in their denatured state and a reversible
denaturation process. We suggest that the ability of these domains to fold and
unfold reversibly, a property that is somewhat unexpected for these oligomeric
assemblies, may have important implications for their biological function.
Indeed, these properties likely favor the formation of heteromeric associations
that may be essential for the intricate regulation of the processes in which
these proteins are involved.

PMCID: PMC3838848
PMID: 24307990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Korean J Intern Med. 2013 Nov;28(6):708-14. doi: 10.3904/kjim.2013.28.6.708. Epub
2013 Oct 29.

A polymorphism in the histone deacetylase 1 gene is associated with the response 
to corticosteroids in asthmatics.

Kim MH(1), Kim SH, Kim YK, Hong SJ, Min KU, Cho SH, Park HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea. ; Institute of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Seoul
National University Medical Research Center, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Recent investigations suggest that histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1)
and HDAC2 may be target molecules to predict therapeutic responses to
corticosteroids. We evaluated the effects of variation in HDAC1 and HDAC2 on the 
response to corticosteroids in asthmatics.
METHODS: Two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were selected after
resequencing HDAC1 and HDAC2. For the first analysis, we evaluated the
association between those SNPs and asthma severity in 477 asthmatics. For the
second analysis, we evaluated the effects of these SNPs on lung function
improvements in response to corticosteroid treatment in 35 independent adult
asthmatics and 70 childhood asthmatics.
RESULTS: We found that one SNP in HDAC1 (rs1741981) was significantly related to 
asthma severity in a recessive model (corrected p = 0.036). Adult asthmatics who 
were homozygous for the minor allele of rs1741981 showed significantly lower %
forced expiratory volume in 1 second (%FEV1) increases in response to systemic
corticosteroids treatment compared with the heterozygotes or those homozygous for
the major allele (12.7% ± 7.2% vs. 37.4% ± 33.7%, p = 0.018). Similarly,
childhood asthmatics who were homozygous for the minor allele of rs1741981 showed
significantly lower %FEV1 increases in response to inhaled corticosteroid
treatment compared with the heterozygotes or those homozygous for the major
allele (14.1% ± 5.9% vs. 19.4% ± 8.9%, p = 0.035).
CONCLUSIONS: The present study demonstrated that rs1741981 in HDAC1 was
significantly associated with the response to corticosteroid treatment in
asthmatics.

PMCID: PMC3846997
PMID: 24307847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Med Chem. 2013 Dec 27;56(24):9969-81. doi: 10.1021/jm401225q. Epub 2013 Dec 12.

Synthesis and structure-activity relationship of 3-hydroxypyridine-2-thione-based
histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Sodji QH(1), Patil V, Kornacki JR, Mrksich M, Oyelere AK.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Parker H. Petit Institute for
Bioengineering and Bioscience, Georgia Institute of Technology , Atlanta, Georgia
30332-0400, United States.

We previously identified 3-hydroxypyridine-2-thione (3HPT) as a novel zinc
binding group for histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibition. Early structure-activity
relationship (SAR) studies led to various small molecules possessing selective
inhibitory activity against HDAC6 or HDAC8 but devoid of HDAC1 inhibition. To
delineate further the depth of the SAR of 3HPT-derived HDAC inhibitors (HDACi),
we have extended the SAR studies to include the linker region and the surface
recognition group to optimize the HDAC inhibition. The current efforts resulted
in the identification of two lead compounds, 10d and 14e, with potent HDAC6 and
HDAC8 activities that are inactive against HDAC1. These new HDACi possess
anticancer activities against various cancer cell lines including Jurkat J.<U+03B3>1 for
which SAHA and the previously disclosed 3HPT-derived HDACi were inactive.

PMCID: PMC4029159
PMID: 24304348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2013 Nov 15;6(12):2864-71. eCollection 2013.

KAT5 and KAT6B are in positive regulation on cell proliferation of prostate
cancer through PI3K-AKT signaling.

He W(1), Zhang MG, Wang XJ, Zhong S, Shao Y, Zhu Y, Shen ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Ruijin Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiaotong 
University Shanghai, China.

Histone modifications play important roles in the tumorigenesis and progression
of prostate cancer (PCa) and genes involved in histone modifications are seemed
as ideal targets for treatment of PCa patients. However, clinical trials have
shown that those existing drugs exert the minimal antitumor activity and excess
adverse effects on PCa patients. Therefore, it is of great interest to figure out
novel specific biomarkers to guide the development of new drugs. In present
study, an RNAi screening with 44 genes involved in histone modifications was
applied to a PCa cell line, Du145. The results showed that nine genes were in
positive regulation of Du145 cell growth. Then four selected genes (KAT2B, KAT5, 
KAT6B and HDAC1) were found to exert this effect by a gene-specific manner when
silenced. And then KAT5 or KAT6B silenced cells were subjected to DNA microarray 
analysis. The common differentially expressed genes were analyzed by Ingenuity
Pathway Analysis (IPA) and found that PDEF signaling, EIF2 signaling and PI3K
signaling was suppressed following by KAT5 or KAT6B silencing. Subsequent
immunoblotting assay showed that AKT signaling was inhibited, which suggested
that KAT5 or KAT6B regulates cancer cell growth through PI3K-AKT signaling.
Together with our published data [31] that AURKA inhibitoin increased drug
sensitivity of DU145, our work demonstrated the underlying mechanism that how the
acetylation enzyme regulates cancer cells survial and might provide potential
therapeutic targets for prostate cancer patients in future epigenetic drug
development.

PMCID: PMC3843266
PMID: 24294372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Theriogenology. 2014 Feb;81(3):459-66. doi: 10.1016/j.theriogenology.2013.10.023.
Epub 2013 Nov 5.

Growth regulation, imprinting, and epigenetic transcription-related gene
expression differs in lung of deceased transgenic cloned and normal goats.

Meng L(1), Jia RX(1), Sun YY(2), Wang ZY(1), Wan YJ(1), Zhang YL(1), Zhong BS(1),
Wang F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Livestock Embryo Engineering Laboratory, Nanjing Agricultural
University, Nanjing, PR China. (2)Animal Breeding and Genomics Centre, Wageningen
University, Wageningen, The Netherlands. (3)Jiangsu Livestock Embryo Engineering 
Laboratory, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, PR China. Electronic
address: caeet@njau.edu.cn.

Somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) is a promising technique to produce
mammalian transgenic clones. Only a small proportion of manipulated embryos,
however, can develop into viable offspring. The abnormal growth and development
of cloned animals, furthermore, are accompanied by aberrant lung development. Our
objective was to investigate molecular background of lung developmental problems 
in transgenic (random insertion of exogenous DNA) cloned goats. We examined
expression of 15 genes involved in growth regulation, imprinting, and epigenetic 
transcription in lung tissue of deceased transgenic cloned and normal goats of
various ages. Compared with normal goats of the same age from conventional
reproduction, expression of 13 genes (BMP4, FGF10, GHR, HGFR, PDGFR, RABP, VEGF, 
H19, CDKNIC, PCAF, MeCP2, HDAC1, and Dnmt3b) decreased in transgenic cloned goats
that died at or shortly after birth; Expression of eight genes (FGF10, PDGFR,
RABP, VEGF, PCAF, HDAC1, MeCP2, and Dnmt3b) decreased in fetal death of
transgenic cloned goats. Expression of two epigenetic transcription genes (PCAF
and Dnmt3b) decreased in disease death of transgenic cloned goats (1-4 months
old). Disruptions in gene expression might be associated with the high neonatal
mortality in transgenic cloned animals. These findings have implications in
understanding the low efficiency of transgenic cloning.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24290662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Surg Res. 2014 Apr;187(2):559-70. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2013.10.050. Epub 2013 Oct
29.

Inhibition of histone deacetylases protects septic mice from lung and splenic
apoptosis.

Takebe M(1), Oishi H(2), Taguchi K(3), Aoki Y(2), Takashina M(3), Tomita K(3),
Yokoo H(3), Takano Y(4), Yamazaki M(2), Hattori Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, Graduate School of Medicine 
and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toyama, Toyama, Japan; Department of
Anesthesiology, Graduate School of Medicine and Pharmaceutical Sciences,
University of Toyama, Toyama, Japan. (2)Department of Anesthesiology, Graduate
School of Medicine and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toyama, Toyama,
Japan. (3)Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, Graduate School of
Medicine and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toyama, Toyama, Japan.
(4)Kanagawa Cancer Center Research Institute, Yokohama, Japan. (5)Department of
Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, Graduate School of Medicine and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toyama, Toyama, Japan. Electronic address:
yhattori@med.u-toyama.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Epigenetic programming, dynamically regulated by histone acetylation,
may play a key role in the pathophysiology of sepsis. We examined whether histone
deacetylase (HDAC) can contribute to sepsis-associated inflammation and
apoptosis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Polymicrobial sepsis was induced by cecal ligation and
puncture (CLP) in BALB/c mice. An intraperitoneal injection of CG200745
(10 mg/kg), a novel broad-spectrum HDAC inhibitor, or valproic acid (500 mg/kg), 
a predominant inhibitor of class I HDACs, was given 3 h before surgery.
RESULTS: HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3 protein levels were decreased in lungs after
CLP. Furthermore, CLP-induced sepsis increased both histone H3 and H4 acetylation
levels in lungs. When CG200745 was given, apoptosis induction was strongly
suppressed in lungs and spleens of septic mice. This antiapoptotic effect of
CG200745 was not accompanied by upregulation of antiapoptotic and downregulation 
of proapoptotic Bcl-2 family member proteins. Treatment with CG200745 failed to
inhibit elevated levels of serum cytokines and prevent lung inflammation in
septic mice. Valproic acid also showed antiapoptotic but not anti-inflammatory
effects in septic mice.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings imply that HDAC inhibitors are a unique agent to
prevent cell apoptosis in sepsis at their doses that do not improve inflammatory 
features, indicating that septic inflammation and apoptosis may not necessarily
be essential for one another's existence. This study also represents the first
report that CLP-induced sepsis downregulates HDACs. Nevertheless, the data with
HDAC inhibitors suggest that imbalance in histone acetylation may play a
contributory role in expression or repression of genes involved in septic cell
apoptosis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24290430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. CNS Neurosci Ther. 2014 Mar;20(3):209-17. doi: 10.1111/cns.12186. Epub 2013 Dec
2.

Valproic acid reduces neuritic plaque formation and improves learning deficits in
APP(Swe) /PS1(A246E) transgenic mice via preventing the prenatal hypoxia-induced 
down-regulation of neprilysin.

Wang Z(1), Zhang XJ, Li T, Li J, Tang Y, Le W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neurology, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School 
of Medicine, Shanghai, China; State Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology,
Department of Neurology, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

AIMS: Previously, we have documented that prenatal hypoxia can aggravate the
cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease (AD) neuropathology in APP(Swe)
/PS1(A246E) (APP/PS1) transgenic mice, and valproic acid (VPA) can prevent
hypoxia-induced down-regulation of ß-amyloid (Aß) degradation enzyme neprilysin
(NEP) in primary neurons. In this study, we have investigated the molecular
mechanisms of VPA's anti-AD effects and found that VPA can reduce the prenatal
hypoxia-induced neuritic plaque formation and improve the learning deficits in
the AD mouse model.
METHODS: The pregnant APP/PS1 transgenic mice were exposed in a hypobaric
chamber. Neuritic plaque staining, Morris water maze, and enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) were used to detect the effects of VPA on Aß
neuropathology, learning, and memory. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays
and real-time PCR (RT-PCR) were used to determine the effect of VPA on the
histone3 acetylation (H3-Ace).
RESULTS: We found that VPA can inhibit neuritic plaque formation and improve the 
learning and memory in the prenatal hypoxic APP/PS1 transgenic mice. In addition,
VPA treatment can decrease the soluble and insoluble Aß42 levels and increase the
NEP expression via up-regulation of H3-Ace in the APP/PS1 transgenic mice.
CONCLUSION: Valproic acid is able to attenuate the prenatal hypoxia-induced Aß
neuropathology and learning and memory deficits via inhibiting the activation of 
histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), preventing the decrease in H3-Ace in the NEP
promoter regions and reducing the down-regulation of NEP.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24289518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Pharmacopuncture. 2013 Dec;16(4):7-13. doi: 10.3831/KPI.2013.16.024.

Evidence of an Epigenetic Modification in Cell-cycle Arrest Caused by the Use of 
Ultra-highly-diluted Gonolobus Condurango Extract.

Bishayee K(1), Sikdar S(1), Khuda-Bukhsh AR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cytogenetics and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Department of Zoology,
University of Kalyani, Kalyani, India.

OBJECTIVES: Whether the ultra-highly-diluted remedies used in homeopathy can
effectively bring about modulations of gene expressions through
acetylation/deacetylation of histones has not been explored. Therefore, in this
study, we pointedly checked if the homeopathically-diluted anti-cancer remedy
Condurango 30C (ethanolic extract of Gonolobus condurango diluted 10(-60) times) 
was capable of arresting the cell cycles in cervical cancer cells HeLa by
triggering an epigenetic modification through modulation of the activity of the
key enzyme histone deacetylase 2 vis-a-vis the succussed alcohol (placebo)
control.
METHODS: We checked the activity of different signal proteins (like p21(WAF),
p53, Akt, STAT3) related to deacetylation, cell growth and differentiation by
western blotting and analyzed cell-cycle arrest, if any, by fluorescence
activated cell sorting. After viability assays had been performed with Condurango
30C and with a placebo, the activities of histone de-acetylase (HDAC) enzymes 1
and 2 were measured colorimetrically.
RESULTS: While Condurango 30C induced cytotoxicity in HeLa cells in vitro and
reduced HDAC2 activity quite strikingly, it apparently did not alter the HDAC1
enzyme; the placebo had no or negligible cytotoxicity against HeLa cells and
could not alter either the HDAC 1 or 2 activity. Data on p21(WAF), p53, Akt, and 
STAT3 activities and a cell-cycle analysis revealed a reduction in DNA synthesis 
and G1-phase cell-cycle arrest when Condurango 30C was used at a 2% dose.
CONCLUSION: Condurango 30C appeared to trigger key epigenetic events of gene
modulation in effectively combating cancer cells, which the placebo was unable to
do.

PMCID: PMC4331975
PMID: 25780677  [PubMed]


18. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 21;8(11):e74502. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074502.
eCollection 2013.

Identification of an intrinsic determinant critical for maspin subcellular
localization and function.

Dzinic SH(1), Kaplun A, Li X, Bernardo M, Meng Y, Dean I, Krass D, Stemmer P,
Shin N, Lonardo F, Sheng S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit,
Michigan, United States of America ; The Tumor and Microenvironment Program of
the Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute, Detroit, Michigan, United States of
America.

Maspin, a multifaceted tumor suppressor, belongs to the serine protease inhibitor
superfamily, but only inhibits serine protease-like enzymes such as histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1). Maspin is specifically expressed in epithelial cells and
it is differentially regulated during tumor progression. A new emerging consensus
suggests that a shift in maspin subcellular localization from the nucleus to the 
cytoplasm stratifies with poor cancer prognosis. In the current study, we
employed a rational mutagenesis approach and showed that maspin reactive center
loop (RCL) and its neighboring sequence are critical for maspin stability.
Further, when expressed in multiple tumor cell lines, single point mutation of
Aspartate(346) (D(346)) to Glutamate (E(346)), maspin(D346E), was predominantly
nuclear, whereas wild type maspin (maspin(WT)) was both cytoplasmic and nuclear. 
Evidence from cellular fractionation followed by immunological and proteomic
protein identification, combined with the evidence from fluorescent imaging of
endogenous proteins, fluorescent protein fusion constructs, as well as
bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC) showed that the increased nuclear
enrichment of maspin(D346E) was, at least in part, due to its increased affinity 
to HDAC1. Maspin(D346E) was also more potent than maspin(WT) as an HDAC
inhibitor. Taken together, our evidence demonstrates that D(346) is a critical
cis-element in maspin sequence that determines the molecular context and
subcellular localization of maspin. A mechanistic model derived from our evidence
suggests a new window of opportunity for the development of maspin-based
biologically competent HDAC inhibitors for cancer treatment.

PMCID: PMC3837015
PMID: 24278104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Eur J Nutr. 2014 Jun;53(4):1139-43. doi: 10.1007/s00394-013-0626-3. Epub 2013 Nov
26.

Pubertal supplementation of lipotropes in female rats reduces mammary cancer risk
by suppressing histone deacetylase 1.

Cho K(1), Choi WS, Crane CL, Park CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, North Dakota State University, 1300 Albrecht
Avenue, Fargo, ND, 58102, USA, kyongshin.cho@ndsu.edu.

PURPOSE: The time from puberty to the first pregnancy is known to be important
for a woman's life-time breast cancer risk. Recent studies suggest that
epigenetic mechanisms may involve pubertal maturation processes, which can affect
the risk of breast cancer in later life. Epigenetic alterations are related to
lipotropes (methionine, choline, folate, and vitamin B12), which are methyl
donors and cofactors. However, the effects of pubertal supplementation of
lipotropes in breast cancer remain largely unknown.
METHODS: Twenty female Sprague-Dawley rats, aged 6 weeks, were divided into two
groups and fed a normal control diet or a lipotrope-fortified diet formulated to 
provide five times basal levels of lipotropes during puberty. All rats were
injected intraperitoneally with N-nitroso-N-methylurea at 50 days of age to
induce mammary tumors.
RESULTS: Tumor multiplicity and tumor volume decreased significantly as a result 
of lipotrope supplementation. Interestingly, quantitative RT-PCR revealed
significantly decreased expression of histone deacetylase 1 (Hdac1) and DNA
methyltransferase 1 (Dnmt1) genes in tumor tissues of the rats supplemented with 
lipotrope-fortified diet, suggesting that reduced risk of breast cancer can be
attributed, at least in part, to decreased expression of these two genes.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that supplementation of lipotrope-fortified 
diet during puberty suppresses tumor growth, potentially through down-regulating 
Hdac1 and Dnmt1 gene expression. Our findings suggest that pubertal methyl diet
plays an important role in the etiology of breast cancer, and further studies are
warranted to develop preventative strategies against breast cancer.

PMID: 24276224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jan 10;289(2):1106-18. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.526780. Epub 2013 
Nov 22.

Age-associated change of C/EBP family proteins causes severe liver injury and
acceleration of liver proliferation after CCl4 treatments.

Hong IH(1), Lewis K, Iakova P, Jin J, Sullivan E, Jawanmardi N, Timchenko L,
Timchenko N.

Author information: 
(1)From the Huffington Center on Aging and.

The aged liver is more sensitive to the drug treatments and has a high
probability of developing liver disorders such as fibrosis, cirrhosis, and
cancer. Here we present mechanisms underlying age-associated severe liver injury 
and acceleration of liver proliferation after CCl4 treatments. We have examined
liver response to CCl4 treatments using old WT mice and young C/EBPa-S193D
knockin mice, which express an aged-like isoform of C/EBPa. Both animal models
have altered chromatin structure as well as increased liver injury and
proliferation after acute CCl4 treatments. We found that these age-related
changes are associated with the repression of key regulators of liver biology:
C/EBPa, Farnesoid X Receptor (FXR) and telomere reverse transcriptase (TERT). In 
quiescent livers of old WT and young S193D mice, the inhibition of TERT is
mediated by HDAC1-C/EBPa complexes. After CCl4 treatments, TERT, C/EBPa and FXR
are repressed by different mechanisms. These mechanisms include the increase of a
dominant negative isoform, C/EBPß-LIP, and subsequent repression of C/EBPa, FXR, 
and TERT promoters. C/EBPß-LIP also disrupts Rb-E2F1 complexes in C/EBPa-S193D
mice after CCl4 treatments. To examine if these alterations are involved in
drug-mediated liver diseases, we performed chronic treatments of mice with CCl4. 
We found that C/EBPa-S193D mice developed fibrosis much more rapidly than WT
mice. Thus, our data show that the age-associated alterations of C/EBP proteins
create favorable conditions for the increased liver proliferation after CCl4
treatments and for development of drug-mediated liver diseases.

PMCID: PMC3887178
PMID: 24273171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Structure. 2014 Jan 7;22(1):35-46. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2013.10.007. Epub 2013 Nov 
21.

Structural insights into the recruitment of SMRT by the corepressor SHARP under
phosphorylative regulation.

Mikami S(1), Kanaba T(1), Takizawa N(2), Kobayashi A(1), Maesaki R(3), Fujiwara
T(2), Ito Y(1), Mishima M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Tokyo Metropolitan University, 1-1
Minamiosawa Hachioji 192-0397, Japan. (2)Institute of Microbial Chemistry, Tokyo 
3-14-23 Kamiosaki, Shinagawa-ku 141-0021, Japan. (3)Graduate School of Science
and Engineering, Tokyo Metropolitan University, 1-1 Minamiosawa Hachioji
192-0397, Japan; Graduate School of Bioscience, Nara Institute of Science and
Technology, 8916-5 Takayama, Ikoma, Nara 630-0192, Japan. (4)Graduate School of
Science and Engineering, Tokyo Metropolitan University, 1-1 Minamiosawa Hachioji 
192-0397, Japan. Electronic address: mishima-masaki@tmu.ac.jp.

The transcriptional corepressors SMRT/NCoR, components of histone deacetylase
complexes, interact with nuclear receptors and many other transcription factors. 
SMRT is a target for the ubiquitously expressed protein kinase CK2, which is
known to phosphorylate a wide variety of substrates. Increasing evidence suggests
that CK2 plays a regulatory role in many cellular events, particularly, in
transcription. However, little is known about the precise mode of action
involved. Here, we report the three-dimensional structure of a
SMRT/HDAC1-associated repressor protein (SHARP) in complex with phosphorylated
SMRT, as determined by solution NMR. Phosphorylation of the CK2 site on SMRT
significantly increased affinity for SHARP. We also confirmed the significance of
CK2 phosphorylation by reporter assay and propose a mechanism involving the
process of phosphorylation acting as a molecular switch. Finally, we propose that
the SPOC domain functions as a phosphorylation binding module.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24268649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Cell Prolif. 2014 Feb;47(1):91-104. doi: 10.1111/cpr.12081. Epub 2013 Nov 23.

Histone deacetylase activity is required for embryonic posterior lateral line
development.

He Y(1), Wu J, Mei H, Yu H, Sun S, Shou J, Li H.

Author information: 
(1)Institutes of Biomedical Sciences of Fudan University, Shanghai, 200032,
China; Department of Otolaryngology, Affiliated Eye and ENT Hospital of Fudan
University, Shanghai, 200031, China.

OBJECTIVES: The posterior lateral line (PLL) system in zebrafish has recently
become a model for investigating tissue morphogenesis. PLL primordium
periodically deposits neuromasts as it migrates along the horizontal myoseptum
from head to tail of the embryonic fish, and this migration requires activity of 
various molecular mechanisms. Histone deacetylases (HDACs) have been implicated
in numerous biological processes of development, by regulating gene
transcription, but their roles in regulating PLL during embryonic development
have up to now remained unexplored.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: In this study, we used HDAC inhibitors to investigate the
role of HDACs in early development of the zebrafish PLL sensory system. We
further investigated development of the PLL by cell-specific immunostaining and
in situ hybridization.
RESULTS: Our analysis showed that HDACs were involved in zebrafish PLL
development as pharmacological inhibition of HDACs resulted in its defective
formation. We observed that migration of PLL primordium was altered and
accompanied by disrupted development of PLL neuromasts in HDAC inhibitor-treated 
embryos. In these, positions of PLL neuromasts were affected. In particular, the 
first PLL neuromast was displaced posteriorly in a treatment dose-dependent
manner. Primordium cell proliferation was reduced upon HDAC inhibition. Finally, 
we showed that inhibition of HDAC function reduced numbers of hair cells in PLL
neuromasts of HDAC inhibitor-treated embryos.
CONCLUSION: Here, we have revealed a novel role for HDACs in orchestrating PLL
morphogenesis. Our results suggest that HDAC activity is necessary for control of
cell proliferation and migration of PLL primordium and hair cell differentiation 
during early stages of PLL development in zebrafish.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24267956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 12;8(11):e79201. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0079201.
eCollection 2013.

Wogonin has multiple anti-cancer effects by regulating c-Myc/SKP2/Fbw7a and
HDAC1/HDAC2 pathways and inducing apoptosis in human lung adenocarcinoma cell
line A549.

Chen XM(1), Bai Y, Zhong YJ, Xie XL, Long HW, Yang YY, Wu SG, Jia Q, Wang XH.

Author information: 
(1)Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, PR China.

Wogonin is a plant monoflavonoid which has been reported to inhibit cell growth
and/or induce apoptosis in various tumors. The present study examined the
apoptosis-inducing activity and underlying mechanism of action of wogonin in A549
cells. The results showed that wogonin was a potent inhibitor of the viability of
A549 cells. Apoptotic protein changes detected after exposure to wogonin included
decreased XIAP and Mcl-1 expression, increased cleaved-PARP expression and
increased release of AIF and cytochrome C. Western blot analysis showed that the 
activity of c-Myc/Skp2 and HDAC1/HDAC2 pathways, which play important roles in
tumor progress, was decreased. Quantitative PCR identified increased levels of
c-Myc mRNA and decreased levels of its protein. Protein levels of Fbw7a, GSK3ß
and Thr58-Myc, which are involved in c-Myc ubiquitin-dependent degradation, were 
also analyzed. After exposure to wogonin, Fbw7a and GSK3ß expression decreased
and Thr58-Myc expression increased. However, MG132 was unable to prevent c-Myc
degradation. The present results suggest that wogonin has multiple anti-cancer
effects associated with degradation of c-Myc, SKP2, HDAC1 and HDAC2. Its ability 
to induce apoptosis independently of Fbw7a suggests a possible use in
drug-resistance cancer related to Fbw7 deficiency. Further studies are needed to 
determine which pathways are related to c-Myc and Fbw7a reversal and whether
Thr58 phosphorylation of c-Myc is dependent on GSK3ß.

PMCID: PMC3827163
PMID: 24265759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Mol Cancer Res. 2014 Mar;12(3):370-80. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-13-0281. Epub
2013 Nov 18.

DNA damage-binding complex recruits HDAC1 to repress Bcl-2 transcription in human
ovarian cancer cells.

Zhao R(1), Han C, Eisenhauer E, Kroger J, Zhao W, Yu J, Selvendiran K, Liu X,
Wani AA, Wang QE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, The Ohio State University, Room 1014 BRT, 460 W. 12th
Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210. qi-en.wang@osumc.edu.

Elevated expression of the antiapoptotic factor Bcl-2 is believed to be one of
the contributing factors to an increased relapse rate associated with multiple
cisplatin-resistant cancers. DNA damage-binding protein complex subunit 2 (DDB2) 
has recently been revealed to play an important role in sensitizing human ovarian
cancer cells to cisplatin-induced apoptosis through the downregulation of Bcl-2, 
but the underlying molecular mechanism remains poorly defined. Here, it is report
that DDB2 functions as a transcriptional repressor for Bcl-2 in combination with 
DDB1. Quantitative ChIP and EMSA analysis revealed that DDB2 binds to a specific 
cis-acting element at the 5'-end of Bcl-2 P1 promoter. Overexpression of DDB2
resulted in marked losses of histone H3K9,14 acetylation along the Bcl-2 promoter
and enhancer regions, concomitant with a local enrichment of HDAC1 to the Bcl-2
P1 core promoter in ovarian cancer cells. Coimmunoprecipitation and in vitro
binding analyses identified a physical interaction between DDB1 and HDAC1,
whereas downregulation of HDAC1 significantly enhanced Bcl-2 promoter activity.
Finally, in comparison with wild-type DDB2, mutated DDB2, which is unable to
repress Bcl-2 transcription, mediates a compromised apoptosis upon cisplatin
treatment. Taken together, these data support a model wherein DDB1 and DDB2
cooperate to repress Bcl-2 transcription. DDB2 recognizes and binds to the Bcl-2 
P1 promoter, and HDAC1 is recruited through the DDB1 subunit associated with DDB2
to deacetylate histone H3K9,14 across Bcl-2 regulatory regions, resulting in
suppressed Bcl-2 transcription.IMPLICATIONS: Increasing the expression of DDB
complex may provide a molecular strategy for cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC3962721
PMID: 24249678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. EMBO J. 2013 Dec 11;32(24):3176-91. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2013.243. Epub 2013 Nov
15.

Divergent roles of HDAC1 and HDAC2 in the regulation of epidermal development and
tumorigenesis.

Winter M(1), Moser MA, Meunier D, Fischer C, Machat G, Mattes K, Lichtenberger
BM, Brunmeir R, Weissmann S, Murko C, Humer C, Meischel T, Brosch G, Matthias P, 
Sibilia M, Seiser C.

Author information: 
(1)Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Department of Medical Biochemistry, Vienna
Biocenter, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

The histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2 remove acetyl moieties from lysine
residues of histones and other proteins and are important regulators of gene
expression. By deleting different combinations of Hdac1 and Hdac2 alleles in the 
epidermis, we reveal a dosage-dependent effect of HDAC1/HDAC2 activity on
epidermal proliferation and differentiation. Conditional ablation of either HDAC1
or HDAC2 in the epidermis leads to no obvious phenotype due to compensation by
the upregulated paralogue. Strikingly, deletion of a single Hdac2 allele in HDAC1
knockout mice results in severe epidermal defects, including alopecia,
hyperkeratosis, hyperproliferation and spontaneous tumour formation. These mice
display impaired Sin3A co-repressor complex function, increased levels of c-Myc
protein, p53 expression and apoptosis in hair follicles (HFs) and misregulation
of HF bulge stem cells. Surprisingly, ablation of HDAC1 but not HDAC2 in a skin
tumour model leads to accelerated tumour development. Our data reveal a crucial
function of HDAC1/HDAC2 in the control of lineage specificity and a novel role of
HDAC1 as a tumour suppressor in the epidermis.

PMCID: PMC3981143
PMID: 24240174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Mol Genet Metab. 2014 Mar;111(3):321-30. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.10.016. Epub
2013 Nov 2.

Holocarboxylase synthetase acts as a biotin-independent transcriptional repressor
interacting with HDAC1, HDAC2 and HDAC7.

Trujillo-Gonzalez I(1), Cervantes-Roldan R(1), Gonzalez-Noriega A(2), Michalak
C(2), Reyes-Carmona S(1), Barrios-Garcia T(1), Meneses-Morales I(1), Leon-Del-Rio
A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Investigación de Cáncer de Mama, Instituto de Investigaciones
Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México D.F. 04510, Mexico;
Departamento de Biología Molecular y Biotecnología, Instituto de Investigaciones 
Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México D.F. 04510, Mexico.
(2)Departamento de Biología Celular, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México D.F. 04510, Mexico. (3)Programa
de Investigación de Cáncer de Mama, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México D.F. 04510, Mexico; Departamento 
de Biología Molecular y Biotecnología, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México D.F. 04510, Mexico. Electronic
address: leon@biomedicas.unam.mx.

Comment in
    Mol Genet Metab. 2014 Mar;111(3):305-6.

In human cells, HCS catalyzes the biotinylation of biotin-dependent carboxylases 
and mediates the transcriptional control of genes involved in biotin metabolism
through the activation of a cGMP-dependent signal transduction pathway. HCS also 
targets to the cell nucleus in association with lamin-B suggesting additional
gene regulatory functions. Studies from our laboratory in Drosophila melanogaster
showed that nuclear HCS is associated with heterochromatin bands enriched with
the transcriptionally repressive mark histone 3 trimethylated at lysine 9.
Further, HCS was shown to be recruited to the core promoter of the
transcriptionally inactive hsp70 gene suggesting that it may participate in the
repression of gene expression, although the mechanism involved remained elusive. 
In this work, we expressed HCS as a fusion protein with the DNA-binding domain of
GAL4 to evaluate its effect on the transcription of a luciferase reporter gene.
We show that HCS possesses transcriptional repressor activity in HepG2 cells. The
transcriptional function of HCS was shown by in vitro pull down and in vivo
co-immunoprecipitation assays to depend on its interaction with the histone
deacetylases HDAC1, HDAC2 and HDAC7. We show further that HCS interaction with
HDACs and its function in transcriptional repression is not affected by mutations
impairing its biotin-ligase activity. We propose that nuclear HCS mediates events
of transcriptional repression through a biotin-independent mechanism that
involves its interaction with chromatin-modifying protein complexes that include 
histone deacetylases.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24239178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Biol Psychiatry. 2014 Jul 1;76(1):47-56. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.09.034.
Epub 2013 Oct 16.

Methamphetamine downregulates striatal glutamate receptors via diverse epigenetic
mechanisms.

Jayanthi S(1), McCoy MT(1), Chen B(2), Britt JP(2), Kourrich S(2), Yau HJ(2),
Ladenheim B(1), Krasnova IN(1), Bonci A(2), Cadet JL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuropsychiatry Research Branch, US Department of Health and Human
Services/National Institutes of Health/National Institute on Drug
Abuse/Intramural Research Program, Baltimore, MD. (2)Synaptic Plasticity Section,
US Department of Health and Human Services/National Institutes of Health/National
Institute on Drug Abuse/Intramural Research Program, Baltimore, MD. (3)Molecular 
Neuropsychiatry Research Branch, US Department of Health and Human
Services/National Institutes of Health/National Institute on Drug
Abuse/Intramural Research Program, Baltimore, MD. Electronic address:
jcadet@intra.nida.nih.gov.

BACKGROUND: Chronic methamphetamine (METH) exposure causes neuroadaptations at
glutamatergic synapses.
METHODS: To identify the METH-induced epigenetic underpinnings of these
neuroadaptations, we injected increasing METH doses to rats for 2 weeks and
measured striatal glutamate receptor expression. We then quantified the effects
of METH exposure on histone acetylation. We also measured METH-induced changes in
DNA methylation and DNA hydroxymethylation.
RESULTS: Chronic METH decreased transcript and protein expression of GluA1 and
GluA2 alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid receptor (AMPAR) 
and GluN1 N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor subunits. These changes were associated
with altered electrophysiological glutamatergic responses in striatal neurons.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation-polymerase chain reaction revealed that METH
decreased enrichment of acetylated histone H4 on GluA1, GluA2, and GluN1
promoters. Methamphetamine exposure also increased repressor element-1 silencing 
transcription factor (REST) corepressor 1, methylated CpG binding protein 2, and 
histone deacetylase 2 enrichment, but not of sirtuin 1 or sirtuin 2, onto GluA1
and GluA2 gene sequences. Moreover, METH caused interactions of REST corepressor 
1 and methylated CpG binding protein 2 with histone deacetylase 2 and of REST
with histone deacetylase 1. Surprisingly, methylated DNA immunoprecipitation and 
hydroxymethylated DNA immunoprecipitation-polymerase chain reaction revealed
METH-induced decreased enrichment of 5-methylcytosine and 5-hydroxymethylcytosine
at GluA1 and GluA2 promoter sequences. Importantly, the histone deacetylase
inhibitor, valproic acid, blocked METH-induced decreased expression of AMPAR and 
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor subunits. Finally, valproic acid also attenuated
METH-induced decrease H4K16Ac recruitment on AMPAR gene sequences.
CONCLUSIONS: These observations suggest that histone H4 hypoacetylation may be
the main determinant of METH-induced decreased striatal glutamate receptor
expression.

Published by Society of Biological Psychiatry on behalf of Society of Biological 
Psychiatry.

PMCID: PMC3989474
PMID: 24239129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Feb;42(3):1656-70. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt1134. Epub 2013
Nov 14.

RNA-dependent dynamic histone acetylation regulates MCL1 alternative splicing.

Khan DH(1), Gonzalez C, Cooper C, Sun JM, Chen HY, Healy S, Xu W, Smith KT,
Workman JL, Leygue E, Davie JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Medical Genetics, University of Manitoba,
Manitoba Institute of Child Health, Winnipeg, Manitoba, R3E 3P4, Canada,
Department of Biochemistry and Medical Genetics, University of Manitoba, Manitoba
Institute of Cell Biology, Winnipeg, Manitoba, R3E0V9, Canada and Stowers
Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, Missouri 64110, USA.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) and lysine acetyltransferases (KATs) catalyze
dynamic histone acetylation at regulatory and coding regions of transcribed
genes. Highly phosphorylated HDAC2 is recruited within corepressor complexes to
regulatory regions, while the nonphosphorylated form is associated with the gene 
body. In this study, we characterized the nonphosphorylated HDAC2 complexes
recruited to the transcribed gene body and explored the function of
HDAC-complex-mediated dynamic histone acetylation. HDAC1 and 2 were
coimmunoprecipitated with several splicing factors, including
serine/arginine-rich splicing factor 1 (SRSF1) which has roles in alternative
splicing. The co-chromatin immunoprecipitation of HDAC1/2 and SRSF1 to the gene
body was RNA-dependent. Inhibition of HDAC activity and knockdown of HDAC1, HDAC2
or SRSF1 showed that these proteins were involved in alternative splicing of
MCL1. HDAC1/2 and KAT2B were associated with nascent pre-mRNA in general and with
MCL1 pre-mRNA specifically. Inhibition of HDAC activity increased the occupancy
of KAT2B and acetylation of H3 and H4 of the H3K4 methylated alternative MCL1
exon 2 nucleosome. Thus, nonphosphorylated HDAC1/2 is recruited to pre-mRNA by
splicing factors to act at the RNA level with KAT2B and other KATs to catalyze
dynamic histone acetylation of the MCL1 alternative exon and alter the splicing
of MCL1 pre-mRNA.

PMCID: PMC3919583
PMID: 24234443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Development. 2013 Dec;140(24):4947-58. doi: 10.1242/dev.097642. Epub 2013 Nov 13.

Insm1 controls development of pituitary endocrine cells and requires a SNAG
domain for function and for recruitment of histone-modifying factors.

Welcker JE(1), Hernandez-Miranda LR, Paul FE, Jia S, Ivanov A, Selbach M,
Birchmeier C.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology/Signal Transduction Group, Max-Delbrück-Center for
Molecular Medicine, Robert-Rössle-Strasse 10, 13125 Berlin, Germany.

The Insm1 gene encodes a zinc finger factor expressed in many endocrine organs.
We show here that Insm1 is required for differentiation of all endocrine cells in
the pituitary. Thus, in Insm1 mutant mice, hormones characteristic of the
different pituitary cell types (thyroid-stimulating hormone, follicle-stimulating
hormone, melanocyte-stimulating hormone, adrenocorticotrope hormone, growth
hormone and prolactin) are absent or produced at markedly reduced levels. This
differentiation deficit is accompanied by upregulated expression of components of
the Notch signaling pathway, and by prolonged expression of progenitor markers,
such as Sox2. Furthermore, skeletal muscle-specific genes are ectopically
expressed in endocrine cells, indicating that Insm1 participates in the
repression of an inappropriate gene expression program. Because Insm1 is also
essential for differentiation of endocrine cells in the pancreas, intestine and
adrenal gland, it is emerging as a transcription factor that acts in a
pan-endocrine manner. The Insm1 factor contains a SNAG domain at its N-terminus, 
and we show here that the SNAG domain recruits histone-modifying factors (Kdm1a, 
Hdac1/2 and Rcor1-3) and other proteins implicated in transcriptional regulation 
(Hmg20a/b and Gse1). Deletion of sequences encoding the SNAG domain in mice
disrupted differentiation of pituitary endocrine cells, and resulted in an
upregulated expression of components of the Notch signaling pathway and ectopic
expression of skeletal muscle-specific genes. Our work demonstrates that Insm1
acts in the epigenetic and transcriptional network that controls differentiation 
of endocrine cells in the anterior pituitary gland, and that it requires the SNAG
domain to exert this function in vivo.

PMID: 24227653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Wei Sheng Yan Jiu. 2013 Sep;42(5):777-82.

[Profile of P66SHC expression and histone modifications in replicative cell
senescence and oxidative-stress induced premature senescence].

[Article in Chinese]

Xu W(1), Zhuang Z, Yang J, Yang L, Xu Y, Zhang W.

Author information: 
(1)Sichuan Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Chengdu 610041, China.
freefresh2000@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To study the profile of P66SHc expression and histone modifications in
replicatively senescenct cells and oxidative-stress inducing premature senescenct
cells.
METHODS: HPF cells were continuously cultured and subcultured in vitro to build
replicative cellular model. HPF cells were treated with 200 pmol/L H2 O2 four
times to build oxidative-stress inducing premature senescenct model. Comparative 
Q-PCR was utilized to investigate target gene (P66SHC, EP300, HDAC1) expressions 
respectively in H2O2 treated groups and normal cell groups. Then CHIP-QPCR was
conducted to analyze histone modifications of P66SHC between young cells and
aging cells.
RESULTS: P66SHC expression was positive correlation with H2O2 doses and
population doubling level (PDL) (R = 0.909, P = 0.000; R = 0.743, P = 0.006),
while EP300 was negative correlation with H2O2 (R = - 0.922, P = 0.000) and both 
EP300 and HDAC1 were negative with PDL (R = -0.709, P = 0.010, R = -0.599, P =
0.040). H3 histone modifications were declined in P66SHc gene regulating region. 
H3-Ac, H3K9-Ac and H3K4-tri-Me were dominant in the upstream region of
transcriptional site (-3.0 kb) and alternative promotor (+3.8 kb).
CONCLUSION: P66SHC, EP300 and HDAC1 probably play a role in cellular replicative 
senescence and oxidative-stress inducing premature senescence. Besides, histone
modification could regulate P66SHC gene expression.

PMID: 24218884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Nature. 2013 Nov 7;503(7474):146. doi: 10.1038/nature12727.

Retraction: Functional dissection of lysine deacetylases reveals that HDAC1 and
p300 regulate AMPK.

[No authors listed]

Retraction of
    Lin YY, Kiihl S, Suhail Y, Liu SY, Chou YH, Kuang Z, Lu JY, Khor CN, Lin CL,
Bader JS, Irizarry R, Boeke JD. Nature. 2012 Feb 9;482(7384):251-5.

PMCID: PMC3843945
PMID: 24201285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2014 Jan 1;274(1):7-16. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2013.10.022. 
Epub 2013 Nov 5.

Natural indoles, indole-3-carbinol and 3,3'-diindolymethane, inhibit T cell
activation by staphylococcal enterotoxin B through epigenetic regulation
involving HDAC expression.

Busbee PB(1), Nagarkatti M(1), Nagarkatti PS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, University of South
Carolina School of Medicine, Columbia, SC 29208, USA. (2)Department of Pathology,
Microbiology and Immunology, University of South Carolina School of Medicine,
Columbia, SC 29208, USA. Electronic address: prakash@mailbox.sc.edu.

Staphylococcal enterotoxin B (SEB) is a potent exotoxin produced by the
Staphylococcus aureus. This toxin is classified as a superantigen because of its 
ability to directly bind with MHC-II class molecules followed by activation of a 
large proportion of T cells bearing specific Vß-T cell receptors. Commonly
associated with classic food poisoning, SEB has also been shown to induce toxic
shock syndrome, and is also considered to be a potential biological warfare agent
because it is easily aerosolized. In the present study, we assessed the ability
of indole-3-carbinol (I3C) and one of its byproducts, 3,3'-diindolylmethane
(DIM), found in cruciferous vegetables, to counteract the effects of SEB-induced 
activation of T cells in mice. Both I3C and DIM were found to decrease the
activation, proliferation, and cytokine production by SEB-activated Vß8(+) T
cells in vitro and in vivo. Interestingly, inhibitors of histone deacetylase
class I (HDAC-I), but not class II (HDAC-II), showed significant decrease in
SEB-induced T cell activation and cytokine production, thereby suggesting that
epigenetic modulation plays a critical role in the regulation of SEB-induced
inflammation. In addition, I3C and DIM caused a decrease in HDAC-I but not
HDAC-II in SEB-activated T cells, thereby suggesting that I3C and DIM may inhibit
SEB-mediated T cell activation by acting as HDAC-I inhibitors. These studies not 
only suggest for the first time that plant-derived indoles are potent suppressors
of SEB-induced T cell activation and cytokine storm but also that they may
mediate these effects by acting as HDAC inhibitors.

© 2013.

PMCID: PMC3874587
PMID: 24200994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Jan;34(2):158-79. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00631-13. Epub 2013 Nov 4.

LSD1 regulates pluripotency of embryonic stem/carcinoma cells through histone
deacetylase 1-mediated deacetylation of histone H4 at lysine 16.

Yin F(1), Lan R, Zhang X, Zhu L, Chen F, Xu Z, Liu Y, Ye T, Sun H, Lu F, Zhang H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemical Genomics, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School,
Shenzhen, China.

LSD1 is essential for the maintenance of pluripotency of embryonic stem (ES) or
embryonic carcinoma/teratocarcinoma (EC) cells. We have previously developed
novel LSD1 inhibitors that selectively inhibit ES/EC cells. However, the critical
targets of LSD1 remain unclear. Here, we found that LSD1 interacts with histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) to regulate the proliferation of ES/EC cells through
acetylation of histone H4 at lysine 16 (H4K16), which we show is a critical
substrate of HDAC1. The LSD1 demethylase and HDAC1 deacetylase activities were
both inactivated if one of them in the complex was chemically inhibited in ES/EC 
cells or in reconstituted protein complexes. Loss of HDAC1 phenocopied the
selective growth-inhibitory effects and increased the levels of H3K4 methylation 
and H4K16 acetylation of LSD1 inactivation on ES/EC cells. Reduction of
acetylated H4K16 by ablation of the acetyltransferase males absent on the first
(MOF) is sufficient to rescue the growth inhibition induced by LSD1 inactivation.
While LSD1 or HDAC1 inactivation caused the downregulation of Sox2 and Oct4 and
induction of differentiation genes, such as FOXA2 or BMP2, depletion of MOF
restored the levels of Sox2, Oct4, and FoxA2 in LSD1-deficient cells. Our studies
reveal a novel mechanism by which LSD1 acts through the HDAC1- and MOF-mediated
regulation of H4K16 acetylation to maintain the pluripotency of ES/EC cells.

PMCID: PMC3911295
PMID: 24190971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. AIDS. 2013 Nov 28;27(18):2853-62. doi: 10.1097/QAD.0000000000000067.

Entinostat is a histone deacetylase inhibitor selective for class 1 histone
deacetylases and activates HIV production from latently infected primary T cells.

Wightman F(1), Lu HK, Solomon AE, Saleh S, Harman AN, Cunningham AL, Gray L,
Churchill M, Cameron PU, Dear AE, Lewin SR.

Author information: 
(1)aDepartment of Infectious Diseases, Monash University bCentre for Virology,
Burnet Institute, Melbourne, Victoria cWestmead Millennium Research Institute,
Westmead, New South Wales dDepartment of Biochemistry, Monash University, Clayton
eInfectious Diseases Unit, Alfred Hospital, Melbourne fAustralian Centre for
Blood Diseases, Department of Medicine, Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia.

OBJECTIVES: To compare the potency, toxicity and mechanism of action of multiple 
histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) in activating HIV production from latency.
DESIGN: In-vitro analysis of HDACi in a primary T-cell model of HIV latency and
latently infected cell lines.
METHODS: Latently infected chemokine ligand 19 (CCL19)-treated CD4<U+207A> T cells and
the latently infected cell lines ACH2 and J-Lat were treated with a panel of
HDACi, including entinostat, vorinostat, panonbinostat and MCT3. Viral production
and cell viability were compared. Expression of cellular HDACs was measured by
western blot and PCR. Association of HDACs with the HIV long-terminal repeat
(LTR) using latently infected CCL19-treated primary CD4<U+207A> T cells in the presence 
and absence of specific HDACi was determined by chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP).
RESULTS: We demonstrated considerable variation in the potency and toxicity of
HDACi in latently infected primary CD4<U+207A> T cells and cell lines. All HDACi tested 
activated HIV production in latently infected primary T cells with greatest
potency demonstrated with entinostat and vorinostat and greatest toxicity with
panobinostat. Following the addition of HDACi in vitro, there were no changes in 
markers of T-cell activation or expression of the HIV coreceptors chemokine
(C-X-C motif) receptor 4 (CXCR4) or chemokine (C-C motif) receptor type 5 (CCR5).
ChIP analysis of latently infected CCL19-treated primary CD4<U+207A> T cells showed
binding by HDAC1, HDAC2 and HDAC3 to the LTR with removal of HDAC1 and HDAC2
following treatment with the HDACi vorinostat and HDAC1 only following treatment 
with entinostat.
CONCLUSION: The HDACi entinostat, selective for inhibition of class I HDACs,
induced virus expression in latently infected primary CD4<U+207A> T cells making this
compound an attractive novel option for future clinical trials.

PMCID: PMC4079759
PMID: 24189584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Int J Biol Macromol. 2014 Feb;63:56-63. doi: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2013.10.041. Epub
2013 Nov 1.

Activation of p53 by spermine mediates induction of autophagy in HT1080 cells.

Chae YB(1), Kim MM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Dong-Eui University, Busan 614-714, Republic of
Korea. (2)Department of Chemistry, Dong-Eui University, Busan 614-714, Republic
of Korea. Electronic address: mmkim@deu.ac.kr.

The recent evidences indicate that autophagy is associated with a number of
pathological processes including cancer, muscular disorder and neurodegeneration 
in addition to longevity. The efficacy of spermine was investigated on induction 
of autophagy through histone deacetylation and p53 activation in human
fibrosarcoma cell line, HT1080. In this study, it was discovered that spermine
increases the activity of HAT and autophagy. It was also identified that the
transcriptional activation of p53 and the activation of p21 promoter by spermine 
are related to the induction of autophagy in reporter gene assay. Furthermore,
western blot analyses demonstrated that spermine modulates the expression of
proteins related to autophagy and apoptosis. The expression levels of Ac-histone 
H3, HDAC1, HAT1, p300 and SIRT1 were increased in HT1080 cells treated with
spermine. In addition, the expression levels of protein such as acetyl-p53,
p-p53, Bcl-2 and caspase-9 inducing apoptosis were increased in the presence of
spermine. Moreover, the levels of Mdm2 and caspase-3 expression were reduced in
the cells exposed to spermine compared to blank group. These results suggest that
activation of HAT in the presence of spermine promotes the induction of autophagy
in HT1080 cells through the enhanced activity of p-p53 and acetyl p53.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24189165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Biol Chem. 2013 Dec 6;288(49):35534-47. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.510669. Epub 2013
Nov 4.

Protein arginine methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5) inhibition induces lymphoma cell
death through reactivation of the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor pathway and
polycomb repressor complex 2 (PRC2) silencing.

Chung J(1), Karkhanis V, Tae S, Yan F, Smith P, Ayers LW, Agostinelli C, Pileri
S, Denis GV, Baiocchi RA, Sif S.

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry and.

Epigenetic regulation mediated by lysine- and arginine-specific enzymes plays an 
essential role in tumorigenesis, and enhanced expression of the type II protein
arginine methyltransferase PRMT5 as well as the polycomb repressor complex PRC2
has been associated with increased cell proliferation and survival. Here, we show
that PRMT5 is overexpressed in three different types of non-Hodgkin lymphoma cell
lines and clinical samples as well as in mouse primary lymphoma cells and that it
up-regulates PRC2 expression through inactivation of the retinoblastoma proteins 
RB1 and RBL2. Although PRMT5 epigenetically controls RBL2 expression, it
indirectly promotes RB1 phosphorylation through enhanced cyclin D1 expression.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that PRMT5 knockdown in non-Hodgkin lymphoma cell
lines and mouse primary lymphoma cells leads to RBL2 derepression and RB1
reactivation, which in turn inhibit PRC2 expression and trigger derepression of
its CASP10, DAP1, HOXA5, and HRK pro-apoptotic target genes. We also show that
reduced PRMT5 expression leads to cyclin D1 transcriptional repression via loss
of TP53K372 methylation, which results in decreased BCL3 expression and enhanced 
recruitment of NF-<U+03BA>B p52-HDAC1 repressor complexes to the cyclin D1 promoter.
These findings indicate that PRMT5 is a master epigenetic regulator that governs 
expression of its own target genes and those regulated by PRC2 and that its
inhibition could offer a promising therapeutic strategy for lymphoma patients.

PMCID: PMC3853299
PMID: 24189068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Cell Reprogram. 2013 Dec;15(6):531-42. doi: 10.1089/cell.2013.0018. Epub 2013 Nov
1.

Effect of histone deacetylase inhibitor valproic acid treatment on donor cell
growth characteristics, cell cycle arrest, apoptosis, and handmade cloned bovine 
embryo production efficiency.

Selokar NL(1), St John L, Revay T, King WA, Singla SK, Madan P.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Biomedical Sciences, Ontario Veterinary College , Guelph
Canada, N1G 2W1.

In this study, we tested the effects of valproic acid (VPA), a known histone
deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi), on the growth characteristics, apoptosis, and cell
cycle stages distribution of donor cells, as well as cloning efficiency, embryo
development, and histone methylation. Our results showed that treatment of donor 
cells with VPA (2.5<U+2009>mM, 5.0<U+2009>mM, 7.5<U+2009>mM, or 10<U+2009>mM) for 24<U+2009>h resulted in altered
cell proliferation, extent of apoptosis and necrosis, and cell cycle stage
distribution, whereas no changes in cell viability and chromosomal complements
were observed. Measurement of relative gene expression using real-time PCR of a
few developmentally important genes in treated donor cells showed decreased
expression of HDAC1 and increased expression of BAX (p<0.05). No change in
relative expression of HDAC2 and Bcl2 was noticed. Treatment of donor cells with 
VPA for 24<U+2009>h before electrofusion significantly (p<0.05) increased the blastocyst
formation rate of somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) embryos compared to the
control embryos. Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling
(TUNEL)-positive nuclei in SCNT blastocysts derived from VPA-treated donor cells 
were significantly decreased compared to the control blastocysts (p<0.05).
Immunolocalization studies revealed that the levels of histone H3 at lysine 9
(H3K9me3) were lower in VPA-treated donor cells derived cloned blastocysts than
nontreated cloned embryos, and was at the level of in vitro fertilization (IVF)
counterparts, although no effects of treatments were found in donor cells. Our
study demonstrates that the use of VPA in SCNT has been beneficial for efficient 
reprogramming of donor cells. Its effect on histone methylation in cloned embryos
correlates with their developmental potential and may be a useful epigenetic
marker to predict the efficiency of SCNT.

PMID: 24180742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Oct 31;4:e901. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.433.

Phosphorylated SATB1 is associated with the progression and prognosis of glioma.

Han S(1), Xia J, Qin X, Han S, Wu A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The First Hospital of China Medical University,
Shenyang, China.

Special AT-rich sequence-binding protein 1 (SATB1) is a global chromatin
organizer and gene regulator, and high expression of SATB1 is associated with
progression and poor prognosis in several malignancies. Here, we examine the
expression pattern of SATB1 in glioma. Microarray analysis of 127 clinical
samples showed that SATB1 mRNA was expressed at lower levels in highly malignant 
glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) than in low-grade glioma and normal brain tissue.
This result was further confirmed by real-time RT-PCR in the clinical samples,
three GBM cell lines, primary SU3 glioma cells and tumor cells harvested by
laser-capture microdissection. Consistent with the mRNA levels, SATB1 protein
expression was downregulated in high-grade glioma, as shown by western blotting. 
However, phospho-SATB1 levels showed an opposite pattern, with a significant
increase in these tumors. Immunohistochemical analysis of phospho-SATB1
expression in tissue microarrays with tumors from 122 glioma cases showed that
phospho-SATB1 expression was significantly associated with high histological
grade and poor survival by Kaplan-Meier analysis. In vitro transfection analysis 
showed that phospho-SATB1 DNA binding has a key role in regulating the
proliferation and invasion of glioma cells. The effect of SATB1 in glioma cell is
mainly histone deacetylase (HDAC1)-dependent. We conclude that phospho-SATB1, but
not SATB1 mRNA expression, is associated with the progression and prognosis of
glioma. By interaction with HDAC1, phospho-SATB1 contributes to the invasive and 
proliferative phenotype of GBM cells.

PMCID: PMC3920943
PMID: 24176859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Chromosoma. 2014 Mar;123(1-2):67-78. doi: 10.1007/s00412-013-0441-x. Epub 2013
Oct 30.

Transcription and beyond: the role of mammalian class I lysine deacetylases.

Moser MA(1), Hagelkruys A, Seiser C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Medical
University of Vienna, Dr. Bohr-Gasse 9/2, 1030, Vienna, Austria.

The Rpd3-like members of the class I lysine deacetylase family are important
regulators of chromatin structure and gene expression and have pivotal functions 
in the control of proliferation, differentiation and development. The highly
related class I deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2 have partially overlapping but also 
isoform-specific roles in diverse biological processes, whereas HDAC3 and HDAC8
have unique functions. This review describes the role of class I KDACs in the
regulation of transcription as well as their non-transcriptional functions, in
particular their contributions to splicing, mitosis/meiosis, replication and DNA 
repair. During the past years, a number of mouse loss-of-function studies
provided new insights into the individual roles of class I deacetylases in cell
cycle control, differentiation and tumorigenesis. Simultaneous ablation of HDAC1 
and HDAC2 or single deletion of Hdac3 severely impairs cell cycle progression in 
all proliferating cell types indicating that these class I deacetylases are
promising targets for small molecule inhibitors as anti-tumor drugs.

PMCID: PMC3967066
PMID: 24170248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Oncogene. 2014 Oct 23;33(43):5100-8. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.447. Epub 2013 Oct 28.

Prohibitin is required for transcriptional repression by the WT1-BASP1 complex.

Toska E(1), Shandilya J(1), Goodfellow SJ(2), Medler KF(1), Roberts SG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(2)Wellcome Trust Centre for Gene Regulation, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK.
(3)1] Department of Biological Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA 
[2] School of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol,
UK.

The Wilms' tumor-1 protein (WT1) is a transcriptional regulator that can either
activate or repress genes controlling cell growth, apoptosis and differentiation.
The transcriptional corepressor BASP1 interacts with WT1 and mediates WT1's
transcriptional repression activity. BASP1 is contained within large complexes,
suggesting that it works in concert with other factors. Here we report that the
transcriptional repressor prohibitin is part of the WT1-BASP1 transcriptional
repression complex. Prohibitin interacts with BASP1, colocalizes with BASP1 in
the nucleus, and is recruited to the promoter region of WT1 target genes to
elicit BASP1-dependent transcriptional repression. We demonstrate that prohibitin
and BASP1 cooperate to recruit the chromatin remodeling factor BRG1 to
WT1-responsive promoters and that this results in the dissociation of CBP from
the promoter region of WT1 target genes. As seen with BASP1, prohibitin can
associate with phospholipids. We demonstrate that the recruitment of PIP2 and
HDAC1 to WT1 target genes is also dependent on the concerted activity of BASP1
and prohibitin. Our findings provide new insights into the function of prohibitin
in transcriptional regulation and uncover a BASP1-prohibitin complex that plays
an essential role in the PIP2-dependent recruitment of chromatin remodeling
activities to the promoter.

PMCID: PMC4002674
PMID: 24166496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Oncogenesis. 2013 Oct 28;2:e77. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2013.40.

The histone variant MacroH2A regulates Ca(2+) influx through TRPC3 and TRPC6
channels.

Kim JM(1), Heo K, Choi J, Kim K, An W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

The histone variant macroH2A replaces canonical H2A in the designated region of
chromatin where its incorporation has the potential to establish a functionally
distinct chromatin domain. The transient receptor potential canonical (TRPC)
channels are a family of Ca(2+)-permeable cationic channels controlling changes
in the cytosolic Ca(2+) concentration. The proper regulation of Trpc gene
expression requires chromatin remodeling, but little is known about the nature of
these regulatory processes. Here, we show that macroH2A1 represses two Trpc
family genes, Trpc3 and Trpc6, and attenuates Ca(2+)-dependent proliferative
responses in bladder cancer cells. MacroH2A1 recruits histone deacetylase 1
(HDAC1) and HDAC2 to facilitate its persistent action, resulting in a compromise 
of histone acetylation across the Trpc3 and Trpc6 loci. Further, macroH2A1
depletion augments histone acetylation and Ca(2+) influx, leading to increased
cell growth and invasion. Our data provide new insights into TRPC3/TRPC6-mediated
Ca(2+) signaling and indicate a central role for macroH2A1 in regulating
transcriptional competence of Trpc3 and Trpc6 genes.

PMCID: PMC3816217
PMID: 24165580  [PubMed]


42. J Biol Chem. 2013 Dec 6;288(49):35500-10. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.479865. Epub 2013
Oct 28.

Lithium down-regulates histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and induces degradation of
mutant huntingtin.

Wu S(1), Zheng SD, Huang HL, Yan LC, Yin XF, Xu HN, Zhang KJ, Gui JH, Chu L, Liu 
XY.

Author information: 
(1)From the State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Shanghai Institute of
Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China and.

Lithium is an effective mood stabilizer that has been clinically used to treat
bipolar disorder for several decades. Recent studies have suggested that lithium 
possesses robust neuroprotective and anti-tumor properties. Thus far, a large
number of lithium targets have been discovered. Here, we report for the first
time that HDAC1 is a target of lithium. Lithium significantly down-regulated
HDAC1 at the translational level by targeting HDAC1 mRNA. We also showed that
depletion of HDAC1 is essential for the neuroprotective effects of lithium and
for the lithium-mediated degradation of mutant huntingtin through the autophagic 
pathway. Our studies explain the multiple functions of lithium and reveal a novel
mechanism for the function of lithium in neurodegeneration.

PMCID: PMC3853296
PMID: 24165128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Autism Res Treat. 2013;2013:826156. doi: 10.1155/2013/826156. Epub 2013 Sep 15.

Epigenetics and autism.

Mbadiwe T(1), Millis RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology & Biophysics, The Howard University College of
Medicine, Washington, DC 20059, USA.

This review identifies mechanisms for altering DNA-histone interactions of cell
chromatin to upregulate or downregulate gene expression that could serve as
epigenetic targets for therapeutic interventions in autism. DNA
methyltransferases (DNMTs) can phosphorylate histone H3 at T6. Aided by protein
kinase C ß 1, the DNMT lysine-specific demethylase-1 prevents demethylation of H3
at K4. During androgen-receptor-(AR-) dependent gene activation, this sequence
may produce AR-dependent gene overactivation which may partly explain the male
predominance of autism. AR-dependent gene overactivation in conjunction with a
DNMT mechanism for methylating oxytocin receptors could produce high arousal
inputs to the amygdala resulting in aberrant socialization, a prime
characteristic of autism. Dysregulation of histone methyltransferases and histone
deacetylases (HDACs) associated with low activity of methyl CpG binding protein-2
at cytosine-guanine sites in genes may reduce the capacity for condensing
chromatin and silencing genes in frontal cortex, a site characterized by
decreased cortical interconnectivity in autistic subjects. HDAC1 inhibition can
overactivate mRNA transcription, a putative mechanism for the increased number of
cerebral cortical columns and local frontal cortex hyperactivity in autistic
individuals. These epigenetic mechanisms underlying male predominance, aberrant
social interaction, and low functioning frontal cortex may be novel targets for
autism prevention and treatment strategies.

PMCID: PMC3787640
PMID: 24151554  [PubMed]


44. Dis Model Mech. 2014 Jan;7(1):107-17. doi: 10.1242/dmm.013219. Epub 2013 Oct 17.

Valproic acid silencing of ascl1b/Ascl1 results in the failure of serotonergic
differentiation in a zebrafish model of fetal valproate syndrome.

Jacob J(1), Ribes V, Moore S, Constable SC, Sasai N, Gerety SS, Martin DJ,
Sergeant CP, Wilkinson DG, Briscoe J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London, NW7 1AA, UK.

Fetal valproate syndrome (FVS) is caused by in utero exposure to the drug sodium 
valproate. Valproate is used worldwide for the treatment of epilepsy, as a mood
stabiliser and for its pain-relieving properties. In addition to birth defects,
FVS is associated with an increased risk of autism spectrum disorder (ASD), which
is characterised by abnormal behaviours. Valproate perturbs multiple biochemical 
pathways and alters gene expression through its inhibition of histone
deacetylases. Which, if any, of these mechanisms is relevant to the genesis of
its behavioural side effects is unclear. Neuroanatomical changes associated with 
FVS have been reported and, among these, altered serotonergic neuronal
differentiation is a consistent finding. Altered serotonin homeostasis is also
associated with autism. Here we have used a chemical-genetics approach to
investigate the underlying molecular defect in a zebrafish FVS model. Valproate
causes the selective failure of zebrafish central serotonin expression. It does
so by downregulating the proneural gene ascl1b, an ortholog of mammalian Ascl1,
which is a known determinant of serotonergic identity in the mammalian brainstem.
ascl1b is sufficient to rescue serotonin expression in valproate-treated embryos.
Chemical and genetic blockade of the histone deacetylase Hdac1 downregulates
ascl1b, consistent with the Hdac1-mediated silencing of ascl1b expression by
valproate. Moreover, tonic Notch signalling is crucial for ascl1b repression by
valproate. Concomitant blockade of Notch signalling restores ascl1b expression
and serotonin expression in both valproate-exposed and hdac1 mutant embryos.
Together, these data provide a molecular explanation for serotonergic defects in 
FVS and highlight an epigenetic mechanism for genome-environment interaction in
disease.

PMCID: PMC3882053
PMID: 24135485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2013 Dec;6(12):1317-27. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-13-0077. Epub 2013 Oct 15.

Black raspberries protectively regulate methylation of Wnt pathway genes in
precancerous colon tissue.

Wang LS(1), Kuo CT, Huang TH, Yearsley M, Oshima K, Stoner GD, Yu J, Lechner JF, 
Huang YW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, Medical College
of Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank Rd, TBRC, Room C4930, Milwaukee, WI 53226.
liswang@mcw.edu.

Ulcerative colitis is frequently an intermediate step to colon cancer. The
interleukin-10 knockout mouse is a genetic model of this progression. We report
that knockout mice fed 5% black raspberries (BRB) had significantly less colonic 
ulceration as compared with knockout mice that consumed the control diet.
Dysfunction of the Wnt signaling pathway is a key event in ulcerative
colitis-associated colon carcinogenesis. Therefore, we investigated the effects
of BRBs on the Wnt pathway and found that the BRB-fed knockout mice exhibited a
significantly lower level of ß-catenin nuclear translocation. We followed-up this
observation by evaluating the effect of BRBs on selected Wnt pathway antagonists.
The mRNA expression levels of wif1, sox17, and qki were diminished in the
knockout mice, whereas they were expressed at normal levels in knockout mice that
were fed BRBs. The lower mRNA expression of these genes in the colon from the
knockout mice correlated with hypermethylation of their promoter regions; BRBs
decreased their promoter methylation and increased mRNA expression of these
genes. This hypomethylation was associated with elevated protein expression of
key proteins/enzymes that augment methylation, for example, dnmt3b, hdac1, hdac2,
and mbd2 in the knockout mice; in addition, BRBs decreased the protein expression
of these proteins/enzymes. The knockout mouse model recapitulates what occurs in 
human ulcerative colitis. Promoter methylation of CDH1 and SFRP1 was
significantly higher in human ulcerative colitis tissues compared with their
adjacent normal tissues. In conclusion, our results suggest that BRBs inhibit
colonic ulceration and, ultimately, colon cancer partly through inhibiting
aberrant epigenetic events that dysregulate Wnt signaling.

PMCID: PMC3902171
PMID: 24129635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2013 Dec;31(8):804-10. doi: 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2013.10.001.
Epub 2013 Oct 10.

Exposure to caregiver maltreatment alters expression levels of epigenetic
regulators in the medial prefrontal cortex.

Blaze J(1), Roth TL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Delaware, Newark, DE 19716, United
States.

Quality of maternal care experienced during infancy is a key factor that can
confer vulnerability or resilience to psychiatric disorders later in life.
Research continues to indicate that early-life experiences can affect
developmental trajectories through epigenetic alterations capable of affecting
gene regulation and neural plasticity. Previously, our lab has shown that
experiences within an adverse caregiving environment (i.e. maltreatment) produce 
aberrant DNA methylation patterns at various gene loci in the medial prefrontal
cortex (mPFC) of developing and adult rats. This study aimed to determine whether
caregiver maltreatment likewise affects expression levels of several genes
important in regulating DNA methylation patterns (Dnmt1, Dnmt3a, MeCP2, Gadd45b, 
and Hdac1). While we observed minimal changes in gene expression within the mPFC 
of developing rats, we observed expression changes for all genes in adult
animals. Specifically, exposure to maltreatment produced a significant decrease
in mRNA levels of all epigenetic regulators in adult males and a significant
decrease in Gadd45b in adult females. Our results here provide further empirical 
support for the long-term and sex-specific epigenetic consequences of caregiver
maltreatment on the mPFC.

Copyright © 2013 ISDN. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3857092
PMID: 24120634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Gene. 2014 Jan 1;533(1):427-33. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.09.123. Epub 2013 Oct
10.

Three single nucleotide variants of the HDAC gene are associated with type 2
diabetes mellitus in a Chinese population: a community-based case-control study.

Zeng Z(1), Liao R, Yao Z, Zhou W, Ye P, Zheng X, Li X, Huang Y, Chen S, Chen Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine,
Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China; School of Public Health,
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Molecular Epidemiology, Guangdong Pharmaceutical
University, Guangzhou 510310, China.

OBJECTIVES: There are no data regarding the possible role of the single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of class I histone deacetylases (HDACs) in type 2
diabetes mellitus (DM). We designed this study to examine whether polymorphisms
of HDACs can be implicated in that disease.
METHODS: A community-based, case-control study was conducted, with a total of 568
subjects (284 patients and 284 controls) enrolled. Four polymorphisms of HDAC1
(rs1741981) and HDAC3 (rs11741808, rs2547547, rs2530223) were examined by the use
of TaqMan technology.
RESULTS: We found a significant association with risk of type 2 DM for three SNPs
of HDAC3, including rs11741808 [odds ratio (OR)=0.53, 95% confidence interval
(CI): 0.35-0.81], rs2547547 [OR=1.72, 95% CI: 1.13-2.64], and rs2530223 [OR=1.39;
95% CI: 1.01-1.91]. Subgroup analysis showed that BMI=23kg/m(2), high
triglyceride and high blood pressure, together with the rs11741808AG genotype,
were associated with a significantly decreased risk for type 2 DM, with ORs of
0.50 (95% CI: 0.27-0.91), 0.38 (95% CI: 0.20-0.71) and 0.43 (95% CI: 0.24-0.76)
compared with the AA genotype, respectively. In a population with normal total
cholesterol, the AG genotype yielded a significantly decreased risk of type 2 DM 
risk, with an OR of 0.42 (95% CI: 0.25-0.70) when compared with the persons of
the AA genotype. For rs2547547, in a population with normal total cholesterol and
triglyceride, the AG genotype was associated with a significantly increased risk 
of type 2 DM, with ORs of 1.92 (95% CI: 1.17-3.15) and 2.24 (95% CI: 1.28-3.94)
when compared with the population carrying the AA genotype.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that variants of HDAC3 contribute to an
increased prevalence of type 2 DM in the Chinese Han population.

© 2013.

PMID: 24120624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Biol Chem. 2013 Nov 22;288(47):34181-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.472563. Epub 2013
Oct 10.

The antiparasitic clioquinol induces apoptosis in leukemia and myeloma cells by
inhibiting histone deacetylase activity.

Cao B(1), Li J, Zhu J, Shen M, Han K, Zhang Z, Yu Y, Wang Y, Wu D, Chen S, Sun A,
Tang X, Zhao Y, Qiao C, Hou T, Mao X.

Author information: 
(1)From the Cyrus Tang Hematology Center.

The antiparasitic clioquinol (CQ) represents a class of novel anticancer drugs by
interfering with proteasome activity. In the present study, we found that CQ
induced blood cancer cell apoptosis by inhibiting histone deacetylases (HDACs).
CQ accumulated the acetylation levels of several key proteins including histone
H3 (H3), p53, HSP90, and a-tubulin. In the mechanistic study, CQ was found to
down-regulate HDAC1, -3, -4, and -5 in both myeloma and leukemia cells. Computer 
modeling analysis revealed that CQ was well docked into the active pocket of the 
enzyme, where the oxygen and nitrogen atoms in CQ formed stable coordinate bonds 
with the zinc ion, and the hydroxyl group from CQ formed an effective hydrogen
bond with Asp-267. Moreover, co-treatment with CQ and zinc/copper chloride led to
decreased Ac-H3. Furthermore, CQ inhibited the activity of Class I and IIa HDACs 
in the cell-free assays, demonstrating that CQ interfered with HDAC activity. By 
inhibiting HDAC activity, CQ induced expression of p21, p27, and p53, cell cycle 
arrest at G1 phase, and cell apoptosis. This study suggested that the HDAC
enzymes are targets of CQ, which provided a novel insight into the molecular
mechanism of CQ in the treatment of hematological malignancies.

PMCID: PMC3837159
PMID: 24114842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Neurochem. 2014 Mar;128(5):603-16. doi: 10.1111/jnc.12457. Epub 2013 Oct 23.

Phosphorylation of neuronal Lysine-Specific Demethylase 1LSD1/KDM1A impairs
transcriptional repression by regulating interaction with CoREST and histone
deacetylases HDAC1/2.

Toffolo E(1), Rusconi F, Paganini L, Tortorici M, Pilotto S, Heise C, Verpelli C,
Tedeschi G, Maffioli E, Sala C, Mattevi A, Battaglioli E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine, University of 
Milan, Milan, Italy.

Epigenetic mechanisms play important roles in brain development, orchestrating
proliferation, differentiation, and morphogenesis. Lysine-Specific Demethylase 1 
(LSD1 also known as KDM1A and AOF2) is a histone modifier involved in
transcriptional repression, forming a stable core complex with the corepressors
corepressor of REST (CoREST) and histone deacetylases (HDAC1/2). Importantly, in 
the mammalian CNS, neuronal LSD1-8a, an alternative splicing isoform of LSD1
including the mini-exon E8a, sets alongside LSD1 and is capable of enhancing
neurite growth and morphogenesis. Here, we describe that the morphogenic
properties of neuronal LSD1-8a require switching off repressive activity and this
negative modulation is mediated in vivo by phosphorylation of the Thr369b residue
coded by exon E8a. Three-dimensional crystal structure analysis using a
phospho-mimetic mutant (Thr369bAsp), indicate that phosphorylation affects the
residues surrounding the exon E8a-coded amino acids, causing a local
conformational change. We suggest that phosphorylation, without affecting
demethylase activity, causes in neurons CoREST and HDAC1/2 corepressors
detachment from LSD1-8a and impairs neuronal LSD1-8a repressive activity. In
neurons, Thr369b phosphorylation is required for morphogenic activity, converting
neuronal LSD1-8a in a dominant-negative isoform, challenging LSD1-mediated
transcriptional repression on target genes.

© 2013 International Society for Neurochemistry.

PMID: 24111946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2013 Dec;21(12):1987-96. doi:
10.1016/j.joca.2013.09.008. Epub 2013 Oct 6.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors increase microRNA-146a expression and enhance
negative regulation of interleukin-1ß signaling in osteoarthritis fibroblast-like
synoviocytes.

Wang JH(1), Shih KS, Wu YW, Wang AW, Yang CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei 
10051, Taiwan.

OBJECTIVE: MiR-146a exerts negative control on inflammatory responses by
suppressing cytokine-induced expression of interleukin-1 receptor-associated
kinase-1 (IRAK1) and tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6)
by impairing NF-<U+03BA>B activity and inhibiting the expression of target genes. Recent
study suggests that histone deacetylases (HDACs) are involved in the regulation
of microRNA (miRNA) expression. Therefore, we determined whether HDAC inhibitors 
can increase miR-146a expression, thereby inhibiting interleukin-1ß
(IL-1ß)-induced signaling in osteoarthritis fibroblast-like synoviocytes
(OA-FLS).
METHOD: MiRNA expression was analyzed using real-time PCR. IL-1ß-induced
downstream signals and cytokine expression were evaluated using Western blotting 
and ELISA. Transcription factors regulating promoter activation were identified
using chromatin immunoprecipitation assays.
RESULTS: IL-1ß treatment of OA-FLS induced a mild (1.7-fold) increase in miR-146a
expression that was unable to appropriately downregulate IRAK1 and TRAF6
expression. HDAC inhibitors, SAHA (vorinostat), and LBH589 (panobinostat)
significantly (6.1- and 5.4-fold) elevated miR-146a expression by increasing the 
binding of the transcription factor NF-<U+03BA>B to the miR-146a promoter, and
negatively regulated IL-1ß-induced IKK/I<U+03BA>B/p65 phosphorylation signaling and IL-6
secretion. The increase in miR-146a expression induced by the HDAC inhibitors was
prevented by transfection of miR-146a inhibitor or HDAC1 (class I HDAC), HDAC4
(class IIa HDAC), and HDAC6 (class IIb HDAC) overexpression, suggesting that they
were due to inhibition of HDAC activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrated that HDAC inhibitor treatment in OA-FLS
significantly increased miR-146a expression and mediated markedly negative
regulation to inhibit IL-1ß-induced signaling and cytokine secretion. Our results
indicate the potential rationale of anti-inflammatory effects for HDAC
inhibitors.

Copyright © 2013 Osteoarthritis Research Society International. Published by
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24107356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Stem Cells. 2014 Jan;32(1):279-89. doi: 10.1002/stem.1544.

Histone deacetylase inhibition with valproic acid downregulates osteocalcin gene 
expression in human dental pulp stem cells and osteoblasts: evidence for HDAC2
involvement.

Paino F(1), La Noce M, Tirino V, Naddeo P, Desiderio V, Pirozzi G, De Rosa A,
Laino L, Altucci L, Papaccio G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale, Sezione di Istologia (TERM Lab.), via
L. Armanni, 5, Secondo Ateneo di Napoli, Napoli, Italy.

Adult mesenchymal stem cells, such as dental pulp stem cells, are of great
interest for cell-based tissue engineering strategies because they can
differentiate into a variety of tissue-specific cells, above all, into
osteoblasts. In recent years, epigenetic studies on stem cells have indicated
that specific histone alterations and modifying enzymes play essential roles in
cell differentiation. However, although several studies have reported that
valproic acid (VPA)-a selective inhibitor of histone deacetylases (HDAC)-enhances
osteoblast differentiation, data on osteocalcin expression-a late-stage marker of
differentiation-are limited. We therefore decided to study the effect of VPA on
dental pulp stem cell differentiation. A low concentration of VPA did not reduce 
cell viability, proliferation, or cell cycle profile. However, it was sufficient 
to significantly enhance matrix mineralization by increasing osteopontin and bone
sialoprotein expression. In contrast, osteocalcin levels were decreased, an
effect induced at the transcriptional level, and were strongly correlated with
inhibition of HDAC2. In fact, HDAC2 silencing with shRNA produced a similar
effect to that of VPA treatment on the expression of osteoblast-related markers. 
We conclude that VPA does not induce terminal differentiation of osteoblasts, but
stimulates the generation of less mature cells. Moreover, specific suppression of
an individual HDAC by RNA interference could enhance only a single aspect of
osteoblast differentiation, and thus produce selective effects.

© AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC3963447
PMID: 24105979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 26;8(9):e76560. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076560. eCollection
2013.

Small RNA profiling of influenza A virus-infected cells identifies miR-449b as a 
regulator of histone deacetylase 1 and interferon beta.

Buggele WA(1), Krause KE, Horvath CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Northwestern University, Evanston,
Illinois, United States of America.

The mammalian antiviral response relies on the alteration of cellular gene
expression, to induce the production of antiviral effectors and regulate their
activities. Recent research has indicated that virus infections can induce the
accumulation of cellular microRNA (miRNA) species that influence the stability of
host mRNAs and their protein products. To determine the potential for miRNA
regulation of cellular responses to influenza A virus infection, small RNA
profiling was carried out using next generation sequencing. Comparison of miRNA
expression profiles in uninfected human A549 cells to cells infected with
influenza A virus strains A/Udorn/72 and A/WSN/33, revealed virus-induced changes
in miRNA abundance. Gene expression analysis identified mRNA targets for a cohort
of highly inducible miRNAs linked to diverse cellular functions. Experiments
demonstrate that the histone deacetylase, HDAC1, can be regulated by
influenza-inducible miR-449b, resulting in altered mRNA and protein levels.
Expression of miR-449b enhances virus and poly(I:C) activation of the IFNß
promoter, a process known to be negatively regulated by HDAC1. These findings
demonstrate miRNA induction by influenza A virus infection and elucidate an
example of miRNA control of antiviral gene expression in human cells, defining a 
role for miR-449b in regulation of HDAC1 and antiviral cytokine signaling.

PMCID: PMC3784411
PMID: 24086750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Genes Cancer. 2013 May;4(5-6):235-41. doi: 10.1177/1947601913489020.

Identification of TET1 Partners That Control Its DNA-Demethylating Function.

Cartron PF(1), Nadaradjane A, Lepape F, Lalier L, Gardie B, Vallette FM.

Author information: 
(1)Equipe Apoptose et Progression Tumorale, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie
Nantes-Angers, INSERM U892, Nantes, France ; Département de Recherche en
Cancérologie, Faculté de Médecine, Université de Nantes, Nantes, France.

Several recent reports have identified TET1 as the main enzyme modulating DNA
methylation and gene transcription via hydroxylation of 5-methylcytosine.
However, little is known about the protein network that controls TET1 activity.
By using a new proximity ligation in situ assay, we identified MeCP2, HDAC1/6/7, 
EZH2, mSin3A, PCNA, and LSD1 as TET1-interacting proteins. We also discerned that
TET1/PCNA acts as a demethylator of the cyclical methylation/demethylation
process, the perturbation of which promotes the aberrant methylation hallmarks
frequently observed in cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3782005
PMID: 24069510  [PubMed]


54. J Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Dec;5(6):416-27. doi: 10.1093/jmcb/mjt032. Epub 2013 Sep
25.

A role for paralog-specific sumoylation in histone deacetylase 1 stability.

Citro S(1), Jaffray E, Hay RT, Seiser C, Chiocca S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, IFOM-IEO 
Campus, 20139 Milan, Italy.

Histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) is an essential epigenetic regulator belonging to a
highly conserved family of deacetylases. Increased HDAC1 activity and expression 
often correlates with neoplastic transformation. Here we show how specific
modification of HDAC1 by SUMO1, but not by SUMO2, facilitates HDAC1 degradation. 
Our findings reveal that SUMO1, but not SUMO2, conjugation to HDAC1 promotes
HDAC1 ubiquitination and degradation. This is suggested by the observation that
in non-tumorigenic mammary epithelial cells HDAC1 is preferentially conjugated to
SUMO1 leading to HDAC1 proteolysis, whereas in breast cancer cells HDAC1 is more 
conjugated to SUMO2, promoting HDAC1 protein stability. SUMO E3 ligases play an
important role in paralog-specific conjugation; in particular, the SUMO E3 ligase
PIASy, which is overexpressed in breast cancer cells, selectively promotes the
conjugation of HDAC1 to SUMO2. Therefore, cell environment affects
paralog-specific sumoylation of HDAC1, whose conjugation to SUMO1 but not to
SUMO2 facilitates its protein turnover. Our findings uncover a role for
paralog-specific sumoylation of HDAC1 whose significance is emphasized by the use
of HDAC inhibitors as anticancer drugs.

PMID: 24068740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Carcinogenesis. 2013 Dec;34(12):2842-50. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgt310. Epub 2013
Sep 25.

Dietary black raspberries modulate DNA methylation in dextran sodium sulfate
(DSS)-induced ulcerative colitis.

Wang LS(1), Kuo CT, Stoner K, Yearsley M, Oshima K, Yu J, Huang TH, Rosenberg D, 
Peiffer D, Stoner G, Huang YW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology and Oncology, Medical College
of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.

Ulcerative colitis (UC) is characterized by chronic inflammation of the colon.
During inflammation, NF-<U+03BA>B is increased in colonic epithelial cells and in immune
cells, leading to increases in proinflammatory cytokines. These events then
increase DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs), which silence a subset of tumor
suppressor genes by promoter methylation. Negative regulators of the Wnt pathway 
are frequently methylated in UC, leading to dysregulation of the pathway and,
potentially, to colorectal cancer. We determined if black raspberries (BRBs)
influence promoter methylation of suppressors in the Wnt pathway in dextran
sodium sulfate (DSS)-induced UC. C57BL/6J mice received 1% DSS and were fed
either control or 5% BRB diets. Mice were euthanized on days 7, 14 and 28, and
their colons, spleen and bone marrow were collected. Berries reduced ulceration
at day 28. This was accompanied by decreased staining of macrophages and
neutrophils and decreased NF-<U+03BA>B p65 nuclear localization in the colon at all time
points. At day 7, BRBs demethylated the promoter of dkk3, leading to its
increased messenger RNA (mRNA) expression in colon, spleen and bone marrow.
ß-Catenin nuclear localization, c-Myc staining as well as protein expression of
DNMT3B, histone deacetylases 1 and 2 (HDAC1 and HDAC2) and methyl-binding domain 
2 (MBD2) were all decreased in colon; mRNA expression of these four proteins was 
decreased in bone marrow cells by BRBs. These results suggest that BRBs suppress 
colonic ulceration by correcting promoter hypermethylation of suppressor genes in
the colon, as well as in the spleen and bone marrow that systematically regulate 
inflammation.SUMMARY: Our results suggest that dietary BRBs suppress colonic
ulceration by correcting promoter hypermethylation of suppressor genes in the
colon, as well as in the spleen and bone marrow that systematically regulate
inflammation in DSS-induced UC.

PMCID: PMC3845896
PMID: 24067901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Epigenomics. 2013;5(5):501-12. doi: 10.2217/epi.13.45.

Epigenetic targets in hepatocellular carcinoma cells: identification of chaperone
protein complexes with histone deacetylases.

Farooq M(1), Wadaan MA.

Author information: 
(1)Bioproducts Research Chair, College of Science, Department of Zoology, King
Saud University, Riyadh 11451, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

AIMS: The study was designed to find out the protein complex(s) associated with
HDAC3 in liver cancer using a modified form of affinity purification coupled with
a mass spectrometry technique in HepG2 cells. The organ-specific requirement for 
HDAC1 and HDAC3 during liver formation in zebrafish and their altered expression 
in liver cancer tissues indicates they are indispensible for hepato-organogenesis
and hepatocarcinogenesis. However, how they exert their function is unknown.
MATERIAL & METHODS: HepG2 cells were transfected with either mock or
construct-containing HDAC3 using a C-terminal strepIII-HA tag as bait. The bait
proteins were purified by double affinity columns and were analyzed on a Thermo
LTQ Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA) chromatography system.
RESULTS: Affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry resulted in the
identification of 24 putative binders of HDAC3 in HepG2 cells. The majority (83%)
of these are novel interactions are reported for the first time in this study.
CONCLUSION: This is the first study reporting the affinity purification and
identification of protein complexes with two closely related proteins in one cell
line. The novel HDAC1 and HDAC3 complexes identified in HepG2 cells could serve
as a platform for the design of future therapeutic medicine for the treatment of 
liver cancer.

PMID: 24059797  [PubMed - in process]


57. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Feb 1;23(3):219-29. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0328. Epub 2013
Nov 7.

Transcriptional reprogramming and chromatin remodeling accompanies Oct4 and Nanog
silencing in mouse trophoblast lineage.

Carey TS(1), Choi I, Wilson CA, Floer M, Knott JG.

Author information: 
(1)1 Developmental Epigenetics Laboratory, Department of Animal Science, Michigan
State University , East Lansing, Michigan.

In mouse blastocysts, CDX2 plays a key role in silencing Oct4 and Nanog
expression in the trophectoderm (TE) lineage. However, the underlying
transcriptional and chromatin-based changes that are associated with
CDX2-mediated repression are poorly understood. To address this, a Cdx2-inducible
mouse embryonic stem (ES) cell line was utilized as a model system. Induction of 
Cdx2 expression resulted in a decrease in Oct4/Nanog expression, an increase in
TE markers, and differentiation into trophoblast-like stem (TS-like) cells within
48 to 120<U+2009>h. Consistent with the down-regulation of Oct4 and Nanog transcripts, a
time-dependent increase in CDX2 binding and a decrease in RNA polymerase II
(RNAPII) and OCT4 binding was observed within 48 h (P<0.05). To test whether
transcriptionally active epigenetic marks were erased during differentiation,
histone H3K9/14 acetylation and two of its epigenetic modifiers were evaluated.
Accordingly, a significant decrease in histone H3K9/14 acetylation and loss of
p300 and HDAC1 binding at the Oct4 and Nanog regulatory elements was observed by 
48 h. Accompanying these changes, there was a significant increase in total
histone H3 and a loss of chromatin accessibility at both the Oct4 and Nanog
regulatory elements (P<0.05), indicative of chromatin remodeling. Lastly, DNA
methylation analysis revealed that methylation did not occur at Oct4 and Nanog
until 96 to 120 h after induction of CDX2. In conclusion, our results show that
silencing of Oct4 and Nanog is facilitated by sequential changes in transcription
factor binding, histone acetylation, chromatin remodeling, and DNA methylation at
core regulatory elements.

PMCID: PMC3904517
PMID: 24059348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 13;8(9):e74930. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074930. eCollection
2013.

Fli1 represses transcription of the human a2(I) collagen gene by recruitment of
the HDAC1/p300 complex.

Asano Y(1), Trojanowska M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Tokyo Graduate School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

Fli1, a member of the Ets transcription factor family, is a key repressor of the 
human a2(I) collagen (COL1A2) gene. Although our previous studies have delineated
that TGF-ß induces displacement of Fli1 from the COL1A2 promoter through
sequential post-translational modifications, the detailed mechanism by which Fli1
functions as a potent transcriptional repressor of the COL1A2 gene has not been
fully investigated. To address this issue, we carried out a series of experiments
especially focusing on protein-protein interaction and epigenetic transcriptional
regulation. The combination of tandem affinity purification and mass spectrometry
identified HDAC1 as a Fli1 interacting protein. Under quiescent conditions, HDAC1
induced deacetylation of Fli1 resulting in an increase of Fli1 DNA binding
ability and p300 enhanced this process by promoting the formation of a
Fli1-HDAC1-p300 complex. TGF-ß-induced phosphorylation of Fli1 at threonine 312
led to disassembly of this protein complex. In quiescent dermal fibroblasts Fli1,
HDAC1, and p300 occupied the -404 to -237 region, including the Fli1 binding
site, of the COL1A2 promoter. TGF-ß induced Fli1 and HDAC1 dissociation from the 
COL1A2 promoter, while promoting Ets1 and p300 recruitment. Furthermore,
acetylation levels of histone H3 around the Fli1 binding site in the COL1A2
promoter inversely correlated with the DNA occupancy of Fli1 and HDAC1, while
positively correlating with that of Ets1 and p300. In the functional studies,
HDAC1 overexpression magnified the inhibitory effect of Fli1 on the COL1A2
promoter. Moreover, pharmacological blockade of HDAC1 by entinostat enhanced
collagen production in dermal fibroblasts. Collectively, these results indicate
that under quiescent conditions Fli1 recruits HDAC1/p300 to the COL1A2 promoter
and suppresses the expression of the COL1A2 gene by chromatin remodeling through 
histone deacetylation. TGF-ß-dependent phosphorylation of Fli1 at threonine 312
is a critical step regulating the remodeling of the Fli1 transcription repressor 
complex, leading to transcriptional activation of the COL1A2 gene.

PMCID: PMC3772867
PMID: 24058639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 11;8(9):e75102. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075102. eCollection
2013.

The anti-tumor effect of HDAC inhibition in a human pancreas cancer model is
significantly improved by the simultaneous inhibition of cyclooxygenase 2.

Peulen O(1), Gonzalez A, Peixoto P, Turtoi A, Mottet D, Delvenne P, Castronovo V.

Author information: 
(1)Metastasis Research Laboratory, GIGA-Cancer, University of Liege, Liege,
Belgium.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma is the fourth leading cause of cancer death
worldwide, with no satisfactory treatment to date. In this study, we tested
whether the combined inhibition of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and class I histone
deacetylase (HDAC) may results in a better control of pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma. The impact of the concomitant HDAC and COX-2 inhibition on cell
growth, apoptosis and cell cycle was assessed first in vitro on human pancreas
BxPC-3, PANC-1 or CFPAC-1 cells treated with chemical inhibitors (SAHA, MS-275
and celecoxib) or HDAC1/2/3/7 siRNA. To test the potential antitumoral activity
of this combination in vivo, we have developed and characterized, a refined chick
chorioallantoic membrane tumor model that histologically and proteomically mimics
human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. The combination of HDAC1/3 and COX-2
inhibition significantly impaired proliferation of BxPC-3 cells in vitro and
stalled entirely the BxPC-3 cells tumor growth onto the chorioallantoic membrane 
in vivo. The combination was more effective than either drug used alone.
Consistently, we showed that both HDAC1 and HDAC3 inhibition induced the
expression of COX-2 via the NF-kB pathway. Our data demonstrate, for the first
time in a Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma (PDAC) model, a significant action of 
HDAC and COX-2 inhibitors on cancer cell growth, which sets the basis for the
development of potentially effective new combinatory therapies for pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma patients.

PMCID: PMC3770617
PMID: 24040391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 5;8(9):e73785. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073785. eCollection 
2013.

HDAC1 and HDAC2 restrain the intestinal inflammatory response by regulating
intestinal epithelial cell differentiation.

Turgeon N(1), Blais M, Gagné JM, Tardif V, Boudreau F, Perreault N, Asselin C.

Author information: 
(1)Département d'anatomie et Biologie Cellulaire, Faculté de Médecine et des
Sciences de la Santé, Pavillon de recherche appliquée sur le cancer, Université
de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada.

Acetylation and deacetylation of histones and other proteins depends on histone
acetyltransferases and histone deacetylases (HDACs) activities, leading to either
positive or negative gene expression. HDAC inhibitors have uncovered a role for
HDACs in proliferation, apoptosis and inflammation. However, little is known of
the roles of specific HDACs in intestinal epithelial cells (IEC). We investigated
the consequences of ablating both HDAC1 and HDAC2 in murine IECs. Floxed Hdac1
and Hdac2 homozygous mice were crossed with villin-Cre mice. Mice deficient in
both IEC HDAC1 and HDAC2 weighed less and survived more than a year. Colon and
small intestinal sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin, or with Alcian
blue and Periodic Acid Schiff for goblet cell identification. Tissue sections
from mice injected with BrdU for 2 h, 14 h and 48 h were stained with anti-BrdU. 
To determine intestinal permeability, 4-kDa FITC-labeled dextran was given by
gavage for 3 h. Microarray analysis was performed on total colon RNAs.
Inflammatory and IEC-specific gene expression was assessed by Western blot or
semi-quantitative RT-PCR and qPCR with respectively total colon protein and total
colon RNAs. HDAC1 and HDAC2-deficient mice displayed: 1) increased migration and 
proliferation, with elevated cyclin D1 expression and phosphorylated S6 ribosomal
protein, a downstream mTOR target; 2) tissue architecture defects with cell
differentiation alterations, correlating with reduction of secretory Paneth and
goblet cells in jejunum and goblet cells in colon, increased expression of
enterocytic markers such as sucrase-isomaltase in the colon, increased expression
of cleaved Notch1 and augmented intestinal permeability; 3) loss of tissue
homeostasis, as evidenced by modifications of claudin 3 expression, caspase-3
cleavage and Stat3 phosphorylation; 4) chronic inflammation, as determined by
inflammatory molecular expression signatures and altered inflammatory gene
expression. Thus, epithelial HDAC1 and HDAC2 restrain the intestinal inflammatory
response, by regulating intestinal epithelial cell proliferation and
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3764035
PMID: 24040068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Nat Neurosci. 2013 Oct;16(10):1383-91. doi: 10.1038/nn.3514. Epub 2013 Sep 15.

Interaction of FUS and HDAC1 regulates DNA damage response and repair in neurons.

Wang WY(1), Pan L, Su SC, Quinn EJ, Sasaki M, Jimenez JC, Mackenzie IR, Huang EJ,
Tsai LH.

Author information: 
(1)1] Picower Institute for Learning and Memory, Department of Brain and
Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, USA. [2] Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, Maryland,
USA. [3].

Defects in DNA repair have been extensively linked to neurodegenerative diseases,
but the exact mechanisms remain poorly understood. We found that FUS, an
RNA/DNA-binding protein that has been linked to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
(ALS) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration, is important for the DNA damage
response (DDR). The function of FUS in DDR involved a direct interaction with
histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), and the recruitment of FUS to double-stranded
break sites was important for proper DDR signaling. Notably, FUS proteins
carrying familial ALS mutations were defective in DDR and DNA repair and showed a
diminished interaction with HDAC1. Moreover, we observed increased DNA damage in 
human ALS patients harboring FUS mutations. Our findings suggest that an impaired
DDR and DNA repair may contribute to the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative
diseases linked to FUS mutations.

PMID: 24036913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Radiat Res. 2014 Jan 1;55(1):54-60. doi: 10.1093/jrr/rrt090. Epub 2013 Sep 11.

Low-dose-rate radiation exposure leads to testicular damage with decreases in
DNMT1 and HDAC1 in the murine testis.

Gong EJ(1), Shin IS, Son TG, Yang K, Heo K, Kim JS.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center, Dongnam Institute of Radiological and Medical Sciences
(DIRAMS), 40 Jwadong-gil, Gijang-gun, Busan 619-953, Republic of Korea.

This study examined the effects of continuous low-dose-rate radiation exposure
(3.49 mGy/h) of gamma rays on mice testicles. C57BL/6 mice were divided into sham
and radiation groups (n = 8 each), and were exposed to either sham irradiation or
2 Gy for 21 days, 0.2 Gy for 2 days, or 0.02 Gy for 6 h of low-dose-rate
irradiation. Testicular weight, seminiferous tubular diameter, and seminiferous
epithelial depth were significantly decreased in the mice irradiated with 2 Gy at
1 and 9 days after exposure. Moreover, the low-dose-rate radiation exposure
induced an increase in malondialdehyde levels, and a decrease in superoxide
dismutase activity in the testis of mice irradiated with 2 Gy at 1 and 9 days
after exposure. The sperm count and motility in the epididymis also decreased in 
mice irradiated with 2 Gy at 1 and 9 days after exposure, whereas there was no
significant effect on the proportion of abnormal sperm. The expressions of DNA
methlytransferases-1 and histone deacetylases 1 in testes irradiated with 2 Gy
were significantly decreased compared with the sham group. In conclusion, the
damage exerted on the testes and epididymis largely depended on the total dose of
low-dose-rate radiation.

PMCID: PMC3885123
PMID: 24027299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Biochem J. 2013 Dec 1;456(2):195-204. doi: 10.1042/BJ20130592.

HEXIM1 down-regulates hypoxia-inducible factor-1a protein stability.

Yeh IJ(1), Ogba N, Bensigner H, Welford SM, Montano MM.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pharmacology, Division of General Medical Science and Oncology,
Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 
44106, U.S.A.

We have previously reported on the inhibition of HIF-1a (hypoxia-inducible factor
a)-regulated pathways by HEXIM1 [HMBA (hexamethylene-bis-acetamide)-inducible
protein 1]. Disruption of HEXIM1 activity in a knock-in mouse model expressing a 
mutant HEXIM1 protein resulted in increased susceptibility to the development of 
mammary tumours, partly by up-regulation of VEGF (vascular endothelial growth
factor) expression, HIF-1a expression and aberrant vascularization. We now report
on the mechanistic basis for HEXIM1 regulation of HIF-1a. We observed direct
interaction between HIF-1a and HEXIM1, and HEXIM1 up-regulated hydroxylation of
HIF-1a, resulting in the induction of the interaction of HIF-1a with pVHL (von
Hippel-Lindau protein) and ubiquitination of HIF-1a. The up-regulation of
hydroxylation involves HEXIM1-mediated induction of PHD3 (prolyl hydroxylase 3)
expression and interaction of PHD3 with HIF-1a. Acetylation of HIF-1a has been
proposed to result in increased interaction of HIF-1a with pVHL and induced
pVHL-mediated ubiquitination, which leads to the proteasomal degradation of
HIF-1a. HEXIM1 also attenuated the interaction of HIF-1a with HDAC1 (histone
deacetylase 1), resulting in acetylation of HIF-1a. The consequence of HEXIM1
down-regulation of HIF-1a protein expression is attenuated expression of HIF-1a
target genes in addition to VEGF and inhibition of HIF-1a-regulated cell
invasion.

PMCID: PMC4430322
PMID: 24015760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Zhonghua Nan Ke Xue. 2013 Aug;19(8):699-703.

[Expressions of HDAC1 and HDAC2 in prostate cancer and their clinical
implications].

[Article in Chinese]

Yin CK(1), Fu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The Affiliated Hospital of Shandong Medical College,
Linyi, Shandong 276004, China.

OBJECTIVE: To detect the expressions of HDAC1 and HDAC2 proteins in prostate
cancer and to explore their clinical significance.
METHODS: We detected the expressions of HDAC1 and HDAC2 proteins in the tissue
samples of prostate cancer from 82 patients with complete clinical data by
immunohistochemistry, and analyzed the correlation of the expressions of HDAC1
and HDAC2 with other clinicopathological parameters, such as Gleason scores,
preoperative PSA levels, and postoperative survival time.
RESULTS: HDAC1 and HDAC2 were expressed in 59.7 and 70.7% of the patients,
respectively, located in the nuclei of cancer cells, more highly in those with
higher than in those with lower Gleason scores (P < 0.05). No statistically
significant differences were found in the expressions of HDAC1 and HDAC2 among
those with different preoperative PSA levels and those of different ages (P >
0.05). Univariate analysis demonstrated that the HDAC2 expression, pre-operative 
PSA levels, Gleason scores and clinical stages of prostate cancer were important 
factors affecting the patients'survival (P < 0.05). Cox analysis indicated that
the expression of HDAC2 was an independent index for the prognosis of prostate
cancer (P = 0.017, HR = 2.265, 95% CI: 1.145 - 4.775).
CONCLUSION: The increased expression of HDAC2 in prostate cancer can serve as an 
independent prognostic indicator, which has provided a theoretical base for the
clinical application of HDACs in the diagnosis and prognosis of prostate cancer.

PMID: 24010203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 23;8(8):e73409. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073409. eCollection
2013.

NF-kappaB mediated transcriptional repression of acid modifying hormone gastrin.

Datta De D(1), Datta A, Bhattacharjya S, Roychoudhury S.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology and Inflammatory Disorder Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of
Chemical Biology, Kolkata, India.

Helicobacter pylori is a major pathogen associated with the development of
gastroduodenal diseases. It has been reported that H. pylori induced
pro-inflammatory cytokine IL1B is one of the various modulators of acid secretion
in the gut. Earlier we reported that IL1B-activated NFkB down-regulates gastrin, 
the major hormonal regulator of acid secretion. In this study, the probable
pathway by which IL1B induces NFkB and affects gastrin expression has been
elucidated. IL1B-treated AGS cells showed nine-fold activation of MyD88 followed 
by phosphorylation of TAK1 within 15 min of IL1B treatment. Furthermore, it was
observed that activated TAK1 significantly up-regulates the NFkB subunits p50 and
p65. Ectopic expression of NFkB p65 in AGS cells resulted in about nine-fold
transcriptional repression of gastrin both in the presence and absence of IL1B.
The S536A mutant of NFkB p65 is significantly less effective in repressing
gastrin. These observations show that a functional NFkB p65 is important for
IL1B-mediated repression of gastrin. ChIP assays revealed the presence of HDAC1
and NFkB p65 along with NCoR on the gastrin promoter. Thus, the study provides
mechanistic insight into the IL1B-mediated gastrin repression via NFkB.

PMCID: PMC3751843
PMID: 24009751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Theriogenology. 2013 Nov;80(8):878-86. doi: 10.1016/j.theriogenology.2013.07.013.
Epub 2013 Sep 3.

Treatment of donor cells with trichostatin A improves in vitro development and
reprogramming of buffalo (Bubalus bubalis) nucleus transfer embryos.

Luo C(1), Lu F, Wang X, Wang Z, Li X, Gong F, Jiang J, Liu Q, Shi D.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Reproduction Institute, State Key Laboratory for Conservation and
Utilization of Subtropical Agro-bioresources, Guangxi University, Nanning, China.

It has been reported that buffalo (Bubalus bubalis) embryos reconstructed by
somatic cell nucleus transfer (SCNT) can develop to the full term of gestation
and result in newborn calves. However, the developmental competence of
reconstructed embryos is still low. Recently, it has been reported that treating 
donor cells or embryos with trichostatin A (TSA) can increase the cloning
efficiency in some species. Thus, the present study was undertaken to improve the
development of buffalo SCNT embryos by treatment of donor cells (buffalo fetal
fibroblasts) with TSA and explore the relation between histone acetylation status
of donor cells and developmental competence of SCNT embryos. Treatment of donor
cells with either 0.15 or 0.3 µM TSA for 48 hours resulted in a significant
increase in the cleavage rate and blastocyst yield of SCNT embryos (P < 0.05).
Meanwhile, the expression level of HDAC1 in donor cells was also decreased
(0.4-0.6 fold, P < 0.05) by TSA treatment, although the expression level of HAT1 
was not affected. Further measurement of the epigenetic maker AcH4K8 in buffalo
IVF and SCNT embryos at the eight-cell stage revealed that the spatial
distribution of acH4K8 staining in SCNT embryos was different from the IVF
embryos. Treatment of donor cells with TSA resulted in an increase in the AcH4K8 
level of SCNT embryos and similar to fertilized counterparts. These results
suggest that treatment of donor cells with TSA can facilitate their nucleus
reprogramming by affecting the acetylated status of H4K8 and improving the in
vitro development of buffalo SCNT embryos. The AcH4K8 status at the eight-cell
stage can be used as an epigenetic marker for predicting the SCNT efficiency in
buffalos.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24007823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Korean Neurosurg Soc. 2013 Jun;53(6):337-41. doi: 10.3340/jkns.2013.53.6.337.
Epub 2013 Jun 30.

Epigenetic regulation in the brain after spinal cord injury : a comparative
study.

Park BN(1), Kim SW, Cho SR, Lee JY, Lee YH, Kim SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Wonju Christian Hospital, Yonsei
University Wonju College of Medicine, Wonju, Korea.

OBJECTIVE: After spinal cord injury (SCI), functional and structural
reorganization occurs at multiple levels of brain including motor cortex.
However, the underlying mechanism still remains unclear. The current study was
performed to investigate the alterations in the expression of the main regulators
of neuronal development, survival and death, in the brain following thoracic
contusive SCI in a mouse model.
METHODS: Eight-week-old female imprinting control region mice (n=60; 30-35 g)
were used in this study. We analyzed the expression levels of regulators such as 
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), glial cell line-derived neurotrophic
factor (GDNF), nerve growth factor (NGF) and histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1 in the 
brain following thoracic contusive SCI.
RESULTS: The expression of BDNF levels were elevated significantly compared with 
control group at 2 weeks after injury (p<0.05). The expression of NGF levels were
elevated at 2, 4 weeks compared with control group, but these difference were not
significant (p>0.05). The GDNF levels were elevated at 2 week compared with
control group, but these differences were not significant (p>0.05). The
difference of HDAC1 levels were not significant at 2, 4 and 8 weeks compared with
control group (p>0.05).
CONCLUSION: These results demonstrate that the upregulation of BDNF may play on
important role in brain reorganization after SCI.

PMCID: PMC3756125
PMID: 24003367  [PubMed]


68. Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Oct;27(10):1666-77. doi: 10.1210/me.2013-1211. Epub 2013 Sep
3.

Persistently altered epigenetic marks in the mouse uterus after neonatal estrogen
exposure.

Jefferson WN(1), Chevalier DM, Phelps JY, Cantor AM, Padilla-Banks E, Newbold RR,
Archer TK, Kinyamu HK, Williams CJ.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of
Health, US Department of Health and Human Services, PO Box 12233, MD E4-05,
Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709. williamsc5@niehs.nih.gov.

Neonatal exposure to diethylstilbestrol (DES) causes permanent alterations in
female reproductive tract gene expression, infertility, and uterine cancer in
mice. To determine whether epigenetic mechanisms could explain these phenotypes, 
we first tested whether DES altered uterine expression of chromatin-modifying
proteins. DES treatment significantly reduced expression of methylcytosine
dioxygenase TET oncogene family, member 1 (TET1) on postnatal day 5; this
decrease was correlated with a subtle decrease in DNA 5-hydroxymethylcytosine in 
adults. There were also significant reductions in histone methyltransferase
enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), histone lysine acetyltransferase 2A (KAT2A), 
and histone deacetylases HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3. Uterine chromatin
immunoprecipitation was used to analyze the locus-specific association of
modified histones with 2 genes, lactoferrin (Ltf) and sine oculis homeobox 1
(Six1), which are permanently upregulated in adults after neonatal DES treatment.
Three histone modifications associated with active transcription, histone H3
lysine 9 acetylation (H3K9ac), H3 lysine 4 trimethylation (H3K4me3), and H4
lysine 5 acetylation (H4K5ac) were enriched at specific Ltf promoter regions
after DES treatment, but this enrichment was not maintained in adults. H3K9ac,
H4K5ac, and H3K4me3 were enriched at Six1 exon 1 immediately after neonatal DES
treatment. As adults, DES-treated mice had greater differences in H4K5ac and
H3K4me3 occupancy at Six1 exon 1 and new differences in these histone marks at an
upstream region. These findings indicate that neonatal DES exposure temporarily
alters expression of multiple chromatin-modifying proteins and persistently
alters epigenetic marks in the adult uterus at the Six1 locus, suggesting a
mechanism for developmental exposures leading to altered reproductive function
and increased cancer risk.

PMCID: PMC3787132
PMID: 24002655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Leukemia. 2014 Apr;28(4):770-8. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.257. Epub 2013 Sep 4.

CBFB-MYH11/RUNX1 together with a compendium of hematopoietic regulators,
chromatin modifiers and basal transcription factors occupies self-renewal genes
in inv(16) acute myeloid leukemia.

Mandoli A(1), Singh AA(1), Jansen PW(2), Wierenga AT(3), Riahi H(1), Franci G(4),
Prange K(1), Saeed S(1), Vellenga E(5), Vermeulen M(2), Stunnenberg HG(1),
Martens JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Nijmegen Centre for
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Molecular Cancer Research, UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. (3)1] Department of Hematology, University of Groningen and
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands [2] Department of
Laboratory Medicine University of Groningen and University Medical Center
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. (4)Dipartimento di Biochimica, Biofisica e
Patologia Generale, Seconda Università degli Studi di Napoli, Napoli, Italy.
(5)Department of Hematology, University of Groningen and University Medical
Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

Different mechanisms for CBFß-MYH11 function in acute myeloid leukemia with
inv(16) have been proposed such as tethering of RUNX1 outside the nucleus,
interference with transcription factor complex assembly and recruitment of
histone deacetylases, all resulting in transcriptional repression of RUNX1 target
genes. Here, through genome-wide CBFß-MYH11-binding site analysis and
quantitative interaction proteomics, we found that CBFß-MYH11 localizes to RUNX1 
occupied promoters, where it interacts with TAL1, FLI1 and TBP-associated factors
(TAFs) in the context of the hematopoietic transcription factors ERG, GATA2 and
PU.1/SPI1 and the coregulators EP300 and HDAC1. Transcriptional analysis revealed
that upon fusion protein knockdown, a small subset of the CBFß-MYH11 target genes
show increased expression, confirming a role in transcriptional repression.
However, the majority of CBFß-MYH11 target genes, including genes implicated in
hematopoietic stem cell self-renewal such as ID1, LMO1 and JAG1, are actively
transcribed and repressed upon fusion protein knockdown. Together these results
suggest an essential role for CBFß-MYH11 in regulating the expression of genes
involved in maintaining a stem cell phenotype.

PMID: 24002588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Jan;1840(1):219-44. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2013.08.020.
Epub 2013 Aug 31.

Berberine and S allyl cysteine mediated amelioration of DEN+CCl4 induced
hepatocarcinoma.

Sengupta D(1), Chowdhury KD, Sarkar A, Paul S, Sadhukhan GC.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology and Tissue Culture Laboratory, Post Graduate Department of
Zoology, Vidyasagar College, Kolkata-700006, India.

BACKGROUND: Diethylnitrosamine (DEN) and carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) have been
used as initiator and promoter respectively to establish an animal model for
investigating molecular events appear to be involved in development of liver
cancer. Use of herbal medicine in therapeutics to avoid the recurrence of
hepatocarcinoma has already generated considerable interest among oncologists. In
this context studies involving S-allyl-cysteine (SAC) and berberine have come up 
with promising results. Here we have determined the individual effect of SAC and 
berberine on the biomolecules associated with DEN+CCl4 induced hepatocarcinoma.
Effective therapeutic value of combined treatment has also been estimated.
METHODS: ROS accumulation was analyzed by FACS following DCFDA incubation.
Bcl2-Bax and HDAC1-pMdm2 interaction were demonstrated by co-immunoprecipitation.
Immunosorbent assay was performed to analyze PP2A and caspase3 activities. MMP
was determined cytofluorimetrically by investigating JC-1 fluorescence. AnnexinV 
binding was demonstrated by labeling the cells with AnV-FITC followed by flow
cytometry.
RESULTS: CytochromeP4502E1 mediated bioactivation of DEN+CCl4 induced Akt
dependent pMdm2-HDAC1 interaction that led to p53 deacetylation, probable cause
of its degradation. In parallel, oxidative stress dependent Nrf2-HO1 activation
increased Bcl2 expression which in turn stimulated cell proliferation. SAC in
combination with berberine inhibited Akt mediated cell proliferation. Activation 
of PP2A as well as inhibition of JNK resulted in induction of apoptosis after 30 
days of treatment. Extension of combined treatment reverted tissue physiology
towards control. Co-treated group displayed normal tissue structure.
CONCLUSION AND GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: SAC and berberine mediated HDAC1/Akt
inhibition implicates the efficacy of combined treatment in the amelioration of
DEN+CCl4 induced hepatocarcinoma.

© 2013.

PMID: 23999088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Medchemcomm. 2012 Aug 1;3(8):976-981.

Discovery and activity profiling of thailandepsins A through F, potent histone
deacetylase inhibitors, from Burkholderia thailandensis E264.

Wang C(1), Flemming CJ, Cheng YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, PO Box
413, Milwaukee, WI 53201, USA.

Three new bicyclic depsipeptides, which are related to the previously reported
thailandepsins A (1), B (2) and C (3), were discovered from the culture broth of 
Burkholderia thailandensis E264 when supplemented with amino acid precursors, and
were subsequently named as thailandepsins D (4), E (5) and F (6), respectively.
Enzyme assays showed that 1-6 are potent histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors,
particularly toward HDAC1 which represents class I human HDACs.

PMCID: PMC3755959
PMID: 23997923  [PubMed]


72. FEBS J. 2013 Nov;280(22):5801-14. doi: 10.1111/febs.12500. Epub 2013 Sep 13.

PPAR<U+03B3> forms a bridge between DNA methylation and histone acetylation at the
C/EBPa gene promoter to regulate the balance between osteogenesis and
adipogenesis of bone marrow stromal cells.

Zhao QH(1), Wang SG, Liu SX, Li JP, Zhang YX, Sun ZY, Fan QM, Tian JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Shanghai First People's Hospital, School of
Medicine, Shanghai Jiaotong University, China.

The balance between osteogenesis and adipogenesis of bone marrow stromal cells is
impaired in many human diseases. Knowledge of how to fine-tune this balance is of
medical importance. CCAAT/enhancer binding protein a (C/EBPa) has been shown to
regulate the balance between osteogenesis and adipogenesis of C3H10T1/2 cells,
with epigenetic modifications of the C/EBPa promoter playing an important role.
The present study aimed to elucidate the underlying molecular mechanisms. The
results showed that peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>) binds
the -1286 bp/-1065 bp region of the C/EBPa promoter to activate C/EBPa expression
during osteogenesis and adipogenesis of C3H10T1/2 cells. DNA hypermethylation in 
the -1286 bp/-1065 bp region, observed at the terminal stage of osteogenesis,
prevented PPAR<U+03B3> binding, and then histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) occupied this
region to reduce the level of histone acetylation. We regulated the balance
between osteogenesis and adipogenesis of mouse bone marrow stromal cells through 
modulation of DNA methylation and histone acetylation status. In addition, in
bone marrow stromal cells from the glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis (GIO)
mouse, hypomethylation of CpG sites, higher binding of PPAR<U+03B3>, acetylated histones
3 and 4, and reduced binding of HDAC1 in the -1286 bp/-1065 bp region of C/EBPa
promoter were observed, compared with normal mice. This study provides a deeper
insight into the molecular mechanisms underlying the balance between osteogenesis
and adipogenesis regulated by C/EBPa in synergy with PPAR<U+03B3>, and suggests a
molecular model for how DNA methylation and histone acetylation are linked by
PPAR<U+03B3> to regulate differentiation of bone marrow stromal cells.

© 2013 FEBS.

PMID: 23981481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Brief Bioinform. 2014 Nov;15(6):963-72. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbt060. Epub 2013 Aug
23.

Systematic identification of Class I HDAC substrates.

Li T, Song B, Wu Z, Lu M, Zhu WG.

Lysine acetylation is a common post-translational modification of histone and
non-histone proteins. This process has an important function in regulating
transcriptional activities and other biological processes. Although several
computer programs have been developed to predict protein acetylation sites,
deacetylases responsible for known or predicted acetylation sites remain unknown.
In this research, Class I histone deacetylases (HDACs) substrates were manually
obtained, and sequence features of deacetylation sites were analyzed. We found
that three members of Class I HDACs (HDAC1, HDAC2 and HDAC3) shared similar
sequence features. Therefore, a method was proposed to identify the substrates of
Class I HDACs. We evaluated the efficiency of the prediction based on P-value
distribution analysis and leave-one-out test. To validate the result of the
prediction, we overexpressed Class I HDACs in cells and detected the acetylation 
levels of potential substrates. In the experiment, five of the seven predicted
proteins were deacetylated by Class I HDACs. These results suggested that our
method could effectively predict protein deacetylation sites. The work has been
integrated to the website ASEB, which was freely available at
http://cmbi.bjmu.edu.cn/huac.

© The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. For Permissions, please 
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 23975722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 14;8(8):e71323. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071323. eCollection
2013.

A selective HDAC 1/2 inhibitor modulates chromatin and gene expression in brain
and alters mouse behavior in two mood-related tests.

Schroeder FA(1), Lewis MC, Fass DM, Wagner FF, Zhang YL, Hennig KM, Gale J, Zhao 
WN, Reis S, Barker DD, Berry-Scott E, Kim SW, Clore EL, Hooker JM, Holson EB,
Haggarty SJ, Petryshen TL.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America.

Psychiatric diseases, including schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and major
depression, are projected to lead global disease burden within the next decade.
Pharmacotherapy, the primary--albeit often ineffective--treatment method, has
remained largely unchanged over the past 50 years, highlighting the need for
novel target discovery and improved mechanism-based treatments. Here, we examined
in wild type mice the impact of chronic, systemic treatment with Compound 60
(Cpd-60), a slow-binding, benzamide-based inhibitor of the class I histone
deacetylase (HDAC) family members, HDAC1 and HDAC2, in mood-related behavioral
assays responsive to clinically effective drugs. Cpd-60 treatment for one week
was associated with attenuated locomotor activity following acute amphetamine
challenge. Further, treated mice demonstrated decreased immobility in the forced 
swim test. These changes are consistent with established effects of clinical mood
stabilizers and antidepressants, respectively. Whole-genome expression profiling 
of specific brain regions (prefrontal cortex, nucleus accumbens, hippocampus)
from mice treated with Cpd-60 identified gene expression changes, including a
small subset of transcripts that significantly overlapped those previously
reported in lithium-treated mice. HDAC inhibition in brain was confirmed by
increased histone acetylation both globally and, using chromatin
immunoprecipitation, at the promoter regions of upregulated transcripts, a
finding consistent with in vivo engagement of HDAC targets. In contrast,
treatment with suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA), a non-selective
fast-binding, hydroxamic acid HDAC 1/2/3/6 inhibitor, was sufficient to increase 
histone acetylation in brain, but did not alter mood-related behaviors and had
dissimilar transcriptional regulatory effects compared to Cpd-60. These results
provide evidence that selective inhibition of HDAC1 and HDAC2 in brain may
provide an epigenetic-based target for developing improved treatments for mood
disorders and other brain disorders with altered chromatin-mediated
neuroplasticity.

PMCID: PMC3743770
PMID: 23967191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 9;8(8):e71517. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071517. eCollection 
2013.

Trichostatin A modulates thiazolidinedione-mediated suppression of tumor necrosis
factor a-induced lipolysis in 3T3-L1 adipocytes.

Lu JC(1), Chang YT, Wang CT, Lin YC, Lin CK, Wu ZS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, College of Medicine, Chang Gung
University, Taoyuan, Taiwan. juuchin@mail.cgu.edu.tw

In obesity, high levels of tumor necrosis factor a (TNFa) stimulate lipolysis in 
adipocytes, leading to hyperlipidemia and insulin resistance. Thiazolidinediones 
(TZDs), the insulin-sensitizing drugs, antagonize TNFa-induced lipolysis in
adipocytes, thereby increasing insulin sensitivity in diabetes patients. The
cellular target of TZDs is peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>), 
a nuclear receptor that controls many adipocyte functions. As a transcription
factor, PPAR<U+03B3> is closely modulated by coregulators, which include coactivators
and corepressors. Previous studies have revealed that in macrophages, the
insulin-sensitizing effect of PPAR<U+03B3> may involve suppression of proinflammatory
gene expression by recruiting the corepressor complex that contains corepressors 
and histone deacetylases (HDACs). Therefore, we investigated whether the
corepressor complex is involved in TZD-mediated suppression of TNFa-induced
lipolysis in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. Trichostatin A (TSA), a pan HDAC inhibitor
(HDACI) that inhibits class I and II HDACs, was used to examine the involvement
of HDACs in the actions of TZDs. TSA alone increased basal lipolysis and
attenuated TZD-mediated suppression of TNFa-induced lipolysis. Increased basal
lipolysis may in part result from class I HDAC inhibition because selective class
I HDACI treatment had similar results. However, attenuation of TZD-mediated TNFa 
antagonism may be specific to TSA and related hydroxamate-based HDACI rather than
to HDAC inhibition. Consistently, corepressor depletion did not affect
TZD-mediated suppression. Interestingly, TSA treatment greatly reduced PPAR<U+03B3>
levels in differentiated adipocytes. Finally, extracellular signal-related kinase
1/2 (ERK1/2) mediated TNFa-induced lipolysis, and TZDs suppressed TNFa-induced
ERK phosphorylation. We determined that TSA increased basal ERK phosphorylation, 
and attenuated TZD-mediated suppression of TNFa-induced ERK phosphorylation,
consistent with TSA's effects on lipolysis. These studies suggest that TSA,
through down-regulating PPAR<U+03B3>, attenuates TZD-mediated suppression of
TNFa-induced ERK phosphorylation and lipolysis in adipocytes.

PMCID: PMC3739734
PMID: 23951179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Leuk Res. 2013 Oct;37(10):1200-7. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2013.07.016. Epub 2013
Aug 12.

The expression of histone deacetylase 4 is associated with prednisone
poor-response in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Gruhn B(1), Naumann T, Gruner D, Walther M, Wittig S, Becker S, Beck JF,
Sonnemann J.

Author information: 
(1)Jena University Hospital, Children's Clinic, Department of Pediatric
Hematology and Oncology, Jena, Germany.

Comment in
    Leuk Res. 2013 Oct;37(10):1191-2.

This study aimed at the identification of histone deacetylase (HDAC) isoforms
relevant for childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Expression of HDAC1-11
was determined in 93 primary ALL and eight healthy donor samples. HDAC1, HDAC2
and HDAC8 showed significantly higher expressions in ALL samples. Correlation
analysis of HDAC expression with clinicopathological parameters revealed that
high HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC4 and HDAC11 levels were significantly associated with
unfavorable prognostic factors. Particularly, high HDAC4 expression was
associated with high initial leukocyte count, T cell ALL and prednisone
poor-response. siRNA-mediated inhibition of HDAC4 sensitized a T-ALL cell line to
etoposide-induced cell death. In conclusion, our data point to HDAC4 as drug
target in childhood ALL, especially in prednisone poor-responders.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23948281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Epigenetics Chromatin. 2013 Aug 15;6(1):27. doi: 10.1186/1756-8935-6-27.

Histone deacetylases 1 and 2 maintain S-phase chromatin and DNA replication fork 
progression.

Bhaskara S(1), Jacques V, Rusche JR, Olson EN, Cairns BR, Chandrasekharan MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt 
Lake City 84112, UT, USA. srividya.bhaskara@hci.utah.edu.

BACKGROUND: Histone deacetylases (HDACs) play a critical role in the maintenance 
of genome stability. Class I HDACs, histone deacetylase 1 and 2 (Hdac1 and Hdac2)
are recruited to the replication fork by virtue of their interactions with the
replication machinery. However, functions for Hdac1 and Hdac2 (Hdacs1,2) in DNA
replication are not fully understood.
RESULTS: Using genetic knockdown systems and novel Hdacs1,2-selective inhibitors,
we found that loss of Hdacs1,2 leads to a reduction in the replication fork
velocity, and an increase in replication stress response culminating in DNA
damage. These observed defects are due to a direct role for Hdacs1,2 in DNA
replication, as transcription of genes involved in replication was not affected
in the absence of Hdacs1,2. We found that loss of Hdacs1,2 functions increases
histone acetylation (ac) on chromatin in S-phase cells and affects nascent
chromatin structure, as evidenced by the altered sensitivity of newly synthesized
DNA to nuclease digestion. Specifically, H4K16ac, a histone modification involved
in chromatin decompaction, is increased on nascent chromatin upon abolishing
Hdacs1,2 activities. It was previously shown that H4K16ac interferes with the
functions of SMARCA5, an ATP-dependent ISWI family chromatin remodeler. We found 
SMARCA5 also associates with nascent DNA and loss of SMARCA5 decreases
replication fork velocity similar to the loss or inhibition of Hdacs1,2.
CONCLUSIONS: Our studies reveal important roles for Hdacs1,2 in nascent chromatin
structure maintenance and regulation of SMARCA5 chromatin-remodeler function,
which together are required for proper replication fork progression and genome
stability in S-phase.

PMCID: PMC3765969
PMID: 23947532  [PubMed]


78. Stem Cell Res. 2013 Nov;11(3):1022-36. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2013.07.002. Epub 2013 
Jul 18.

Karyotypically abnormal human ESCs are sensitive to HDAC inhibitors and show
altered regulation of genes linked to cancers and neurological diseases.

Lund RJ(1), Emani MR, Barbaric I, Kivinen V, Jones M, Baker D, Gokhale P, Nykter 
M, Lahesmaa R, Andrews PW.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Stem Cell Biology, Department of Biomedical Science, The University
of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK; Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University
of Turku and Åbo Akademi University, Turku FI-20520, Finland. Electronic address:
riikka.lund@btk.fi.

Genomic abnormalities may accumulate in human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) during
in vitro maintenance. Characterization of the mechanisms enabling survival and
expansion of abnormal hESCs is important due to consequences of genetic changes
for the therapeutic utilization of stem cells. Furthermore, these cells provide
an excellent model to study transformation in vitro. We report here that the
histone deacetylase proteins, HDAC1 and HDAC2, are increased in karyotypically
abnormal hESCs when compared to their normal counterparts. Importantly, similar
to many cancer cell lines, we found that HDAC inhibitors repress proliferation of
the karyotypically abnormal hESCs, whereas normal cells are more resistant to the
treatment. The decreased proliferation correlates with downregulation of HDAC1
and HDAC2 proteins, induction of the proliferation inhibitor, cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitor 1A (CDKN1A), and altered regulation of tumor suppressor protein 
Retinoblastoma 1 (RB1). Through genome-wide transcriptome analysis we have
identified genes with altered expression and responsiveness to HDAC inhibition in
abnormal cells. Most of these genes are linked to severe developmental and
neurological diseases and cancers. Our results highlight the importance of
epigenetic mechanisms in the regulation of genomic stability of hESCs, and
provide valuable candidates for targeted and selective growth inhibition of
karyotypically abnormal cells.

© 2013.

PMID: 23941963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Mol Cancer Ther. 2013 Oct;12(10):2078-87. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-12-1242.
Epub 2013 Aug 12.

Histone deacetylase regulation of ATM-mediated DNA damage signaling.

Thurn KT(1), Thomas S, Raha P, Qureshi I, Munster PN.

Author information: 
(1)Corresponding Author: Pamela N. Munster, Division of Hematology and Oncology, 
Department of Medicine, University of California, 1600 Divisadero, Room A719, Box
1711, San Francisco, CA 94143. pmunster@medicine.ucsf.edu.

Ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) is a major regulator of the DNA damage
response. ATM promotes the activation of BRCA1, CHK2, and p53 leading to the
induction of response genes such as CDKN1A (p21), GADD45A, and RRM2B that promote
cell-cycle arrest and DNA repair. The upregulation of these response genes may
contribute to resistance of cancer cells to genotoxic therapies. Here, we show
that histone deacetylases (HDAC) play a major role in mitigating the response of 
the ATM pathway to DNA damage. HDAC inhibition decreased ATM activation and
expression, and attenuated the activation of p53 in vitro and in vivo. Select
depletion of HDAC1 and HDAC2 was sufficient to modulate ATM activation, reduce
GADD45A and RRM2B induction, and increase sensitivity to DNA strand breaks. The
regulation of ATM by HDAC enzymes therefore suggests a vital role for HDAC1 and
HDAC2 in the DNA damage response, and the potential use of the ATM pathway as a
pharmacodynamic marker for combination therapies involving HDAC inhibitors.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3821775
PMID: 23939379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 30;8(7):e70641. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070641. Print 2013.

Silencing MED1 sensitizes breast cancer cells to pure anti-estrogen fulvestrant
in vitro and in vivo.

Zhang L(1), Cui J, Leonard M, Nephew K, Li Y, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

Pure anti-estrogen fulvestrant has been shown to be a promising ER antagonist for
locally advanced and metastatic breast cancer. Unfortunately, a significant
proportion of patients developed resistance to this type of endocrine therapy but
the molecular mechanisms governing cellular responsiveness to this agent remain
poorly understood. Here, we've reported that knockdown of estrogen receptor
coactivator MED1 sensitized fulvestrant resistance breast cancer cells to
fulvestrant treatment. We found that MED1 knockdown further promoted cell cycle
arrest induced by fulvestrant. Using an orthotopic xenograft mouse model, we
found that knockdown of MED1 significantly reduced tumor growth in mice.
Importantly, knockdown of MED1 further potentiated tumor growth inhibition by
fulvestrant. Mechanistic studies indicated that combination of fulvestrant
treatment and MED1 knockdown is able to cooperatively inhibit the expression of
ER target genes. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments further supported a
role for MED1 in regulating the recruitment of RNA polymerase II and
transcriptional corepressor HDAC1 on endogenous ER target gene promoter in the
presence of fulvestrant. These results demonstrate a role for MED1 in mediating
resistance to the pure anti-estrogen fulvestrant both in vitro and in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3728322
PMID: 23936234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Lung Cancer. 2013 Oct;82(1):24-30. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.07.015. Epub 2013 
Aug 9.

High expression of SNIP1 correlates with poor prognosis in non-small cell lung
cancer and SNIP1 interferes with the recruitment of HDAC1 to RB in vitro.

Jeon HS(1), Choi YY, Fukuoka J, Fujii M, Lyakh LA, Song SH, Travis WD, Park JY,
Jen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cell biology, School of Medicine, Kyungpook
National University, Daegu 700-422, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
jeonh@knu.ac.kr.

The Rb tumor suppressor gene performs a critical role in controlling cell
proliferation and tumorigenesis; it recruits HDAC1 protein into the E2F complexes
to repress transcription. In this study, we demonstrate that SNIP1, RB and HDAC1 
were significantly expressed in same lung cancer tissues in a tissue microarray
(TMA) containing 300 non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC). High expression level
of SNIP1 in tumor patients was significantly correlated with poor prognosis in
NSCLC (log-rank P for OS = 0.01, log-rank P for DFS = 0.001). Functionally, SNIP1
competes with HDAC1 for binding to RB and reduces HDAC activity in vitro.
Knockdown of SNIP1 reduced colony formation ability of lung cancer cells. These
findings may indicate the involvement of SNIP1 in progression of lung cancer by
regulating the RB/HDAC1 interaction.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23932364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Neuroimmunol. 2013 Oct 15;263(1-2):13-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2013.07.007.
Epub 2013 Aug 2.

Dimethyl fumarate regulates histone deacetylase expression in astrocytes.

Kalinin S(1), Polak PE, Lin SX, Braun D, Guizzetti M, Zhang X, Rubinstein I,
Feinstein DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Illinois, Chicago IL, 60612,
United States.

We previously showed that dimethyl fumarate (DMF) reduces inflammatory activation
in astrocytes, involving activation of transcription factor Nrf2. However, the
pathways causing Nrf2 activation were not examined. We now show that DMF modifies
expression of histone deacetylases (HDACs) in primary rat astrocytes. After 4h
incubation, levels of HDAC1, 2, and 4 mRNAs were increased by DMF; however, after
24h, levels returned to or were below control values. At that time, HDAC protein 
levels and overall activity were also reduced by DMF. Stimulation of astrocytes
with pro-inflammatory cytokines significantly increased HDAC mRNA levels after
24h, although protein levels were not increased at that time point. In the
presence of cytokines, DMF reduced HDAC mRNAs, proteins, and activity. Proteomic 
analysis of DMF-treated astrocytes identified 8 proteins in which lysine
acetylation was increased by DMF, including histones H2a.1 and H3.3. A role for
HDACs in mediating DMF actions is suggested by findings that the selective HDAC
inhibitor SAHA increased nuclear Nrf2:DNA binding activity, reduced inflammatory 
activation of astrocytes which was reversed by a selective inhibitor of the Nrf2 
target gene heme-oxygenase 1. These data show that DMF regulates astrocyte HDAC
expression, which could contribute to Nrf2 activation, suppression of
inflammatory responses and cause long-lasting changes in gene expression.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 23916696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Leukemia. 2014 Mar;28(3):680-9. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.231. Epub 2013 Aug 5.

Histone deacetylase 3 as a novel therapeutic target in multiple myeloma.

Minami J(1), Suzuki R(1), Mazitschek R(2), Gorgun G(1), Ghosh B(3), Cirstea D(1),
Hu Y(1), Mimura N(1), Ohguchi H(1), Cottini F(1), Jakubikova J(1), Munshi NC(1), 
Haggarty SJ(4), Richardson PG(1), Hideshima T(1), Anderson KC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Jerome Lipper Multiple Myeloma Center, Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (2)Center 
for Systems Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. (3)1]
Center for Systems Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA [2]
Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (4)Center for Human Genetic Research,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) represent novel molecular targets for the treatment 
of various types of cancers, including multiple myeloma (MM). Many HDAC
inhibitors have already shown remarkable antitumor activities in the preclinical 
setting; however, their clinical utility is limited because of unfavorable
toxicities associated with their broad range HDAC inhibitory effects.
Isoform-selective HDAC inhibition may allow for MM cytotoxicity without attendant
side effects. In this study, we demonstrated that HDAC3 knockdown and a
small-molecule HDAC3 inhibitor BG45 trigger significant MM cell growth inhibition
via apoptosis, evidenced by caspase and poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase cleavage.
Importantly, HDAC3 inhibition downregulates phosphorylation (tyrosine 705 and
serine 727) of signal transducers and activators of transcription 3 (STAT3).
Neither interleukin-6 nor bone marrow stromal cells overcome this inhibitory
effect of HDAC3 inhibition on phospho-STAT3 and MM cell growth. Moreover, HDAC3
inhibition also triggers hyperacetylation of STAT3, suggesting crosstalk
signaling between phosphorylation and acetylation of STAT3. Importantly,
inhibition of HDAC3, but not HDAC1 or 2, significantly enhances
bortezomib-induced cytotoxicity. Finally, we confirm that BG45 alone and in
combination with bortezomib trigger significant tumor growth inhibition in vivo
in a murine xenograft model of human MM. Our results indicate that HDAC3
represents a promising therapeutic target, and validate a prototype novel HDAC3
inhibitor BG45 in MM.

PMCID: PMC4165599
PMID: 23913134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Hear Res. 2013 Oct;304:167-78. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2013.07.017. Epub 2013 Aug
2.

Epigenetic alterations by NuRD and PRC2 in the neonatal mouse cochlea.

Layman WS(1), Sauceda MA, Zuo J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, MS323, 262 Danny Thomas Place, Memphis, TN 38105, USA. Electronic
address: wanda.layman@stjude.org.

Mammalian cochlear supporting cells remain quiescent at postnatal ages and
age-dependent changes in supporting cell proliferative capacity are evident.
Ectopic Atoh1 expression in neonatal supporting cells converts only a small
percentage of these cells into hair cell-like cells. Despite tremendous potential
for therapeutics, cellular reprogramming in the mammalian inner ear remains a
slow inefficient process that requires weeks, with most cells failing to
reprogram. Cellular reprogramming studies in other tissues have shown that
epigenetic inhibitors can significantly improve reprogramming efficiency. Very
little is known about epigenetic regulation in the mammalian inner ear, and
almost nothing is known about the histone modifications. Histone modifications
are vital for proper transcriptional regulation, and aberrant histone
modifications can cause defects in the regulation of genes required for normal
tissue development and maintenance. Our data indicate that cofactors of
repressive complexes such as NuRD and PRC2 are present in the neonatal organ of
Corti. These NuRD cofactors are present throughout most of the organ of Corti
from E18.5 until P4. By P6, these NuRD cofactors are mostly undetectable by
immunofluorescence and completely lost by P7, but are detectable again at P8 and 
continue to be present through P21. The PRC2 enzymatic subunit, EZH2 is also
highly present from E18.5 to P0 in the organ of Corti, but lost between P2 and
P4. However, EZH2 staining is evident again throughout the organ of Corti by P6
and persists through P21. Our data provide evidence that HDACs, DNA
methyltransferases, histone methyltransferases, and histone demethylases are
expressed postnatally within the organ of Corti, and may be targets for drug
inhibition to increase the capacity, speed, and efficiency of reprogramming a
supporting cell into a hair cell.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3784354
PMID: 23911933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Aug 13;110(33):13522-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1310067110. Epub 2013 Jul 29.

RARa-PLZF oncogene inhibits C/EBPa function in myeloid cells.

Girard N(1), Tremblay M, Humbert M, Grondin B, Haman A, Labrecque J, Chen B, Chen
Z, Chen SJ, Hoang T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Research in Immunology and Cancer (IRIC), Molecular Biology
Program, and Department of Pharmacology, University of Montreal, Montreal, QC,
Canada H3C 3J7.

In acute promyelocytic leukemia, granulocytic differentiation is arrested at the 
promyelocyte stage. The variant t(11;17) translocation produces two fusion
proteins, promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger-retinoic acid receptor a (PLZF-RARa)
and RARa-PLZF, both of which participate in leukemia development. Here we provide
evidence that the activity of CCAAT/enhancer binding protein a (C/EBPa), a master
regulator of granulocytic differentiation, is severely impaired in leukemic
promyelocytes with the t(11;17) translocation compared with those associated with
the t(15;17) translocation. We show that RARa-PLZF inhibits myeloid cell
differentiation through interactions with C/EBPa tethered to DNA, using ChIP and 
DNA capture assays. Furthermore, RARa-PLZF recruits HDAC1 and causes histone H3
deacetylation at C/EBPa target loci, thereby decreasing the expression of C/EBPa 
target genes. In line with these results, HDAC inhibitors restore in part C/EBPa 
target gene expression. These findings provide molecular evidence for a mechanism
through which RARa-PLZF acts as a modifier oncogene that subverts differentiation
in the granulocytic lineage by associating with C/EBPa and inhibiting its
activity.

PMCID: PMC3746863
PMID: 23898169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Comput Chem. 2013 Oct 5;34(26):2270-83. doi: 10.1002/jcc.23390. Epub 2013 Jul
27.

Ligand release mechanisms and channels in histone deacetylases.

Kalyaanamoorthy S(1), Chen YP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science and Computer Engineering, La Trobe University, 
Melbourne, Australia; CSIRO Ecosystem Sciences, Canberra, Australia.

Exploring the molecular channels of class I histone deacetylases (HDACs) with
buried active sites are important to understand their structures and
functionalities. In this work, we perform hybrid classical molecular dynamics and
random acceleration molecular dynamics simulations to explore the B3N [i.e.,
(4-(dimethylamino)N-[7(hydroxyamino)-7-oxoheptyle] benzamide)] exit channels in
the x-ray crystal structures of HDAC3 and HDAC8 enzymes. Our simulations identify
B3N release through four different channels in HDAC3 (denoted as A1, A2, B1, and 
B2) and HDAC8 (referred as A1, B1, B2, and B3) enzymes, among which egression
through channel A1 is more predominant in both the enzymes. This mechanism is
similar to ligand release in HDAC1 and HDAC2 described in our previous study and 
can be the fingerprint ligand release mechanisms in class I HDACs. Ligand release
events through B channels, on the other hand, are different among HDAC3 and
HDAC8, highlighting the significances of substituted residues in controlling the 
access to these channels This study reveals a novel aromatic gating mechanism
elicited by TYR154-TRP141-TYR111 that controls the B3N access to all the B
channels in HDAC8. The TRP141 in HDAC8 is substituted by LEU133 in HDAC3, which
do not hinder the access to B channels in HDAC3. However, two hydrogen bonded
barricades formed as ARG28-GLY297-GLY295-GLY131 and
TRP129-ARG28-ALA130-LEU29-TRP129 obstruct the B3N from exploring the B channels
in HDAC3. The structural and dynamical characterizations of molecular channels
and ligand unbinding mechanisms reported in this study provide novel structural
insights and atomic level perspectives on HDAC3 and HDAC8 enzymes, thereby
potentially aiding in the design of more specific HDAC inhibitors.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23893931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Orthop Res. 2013 Dec;31(12):1999-2005. doi: 10.1002/jor.22447. Epub 2013 Jul
24.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors as potential therapeutic approaches for chordoma: 
an immunohistochemical and functional analysis.

Scheipl S(1), Lohberger B, Rinner B, Froehlich EV, Beham A, Quehenberger F,
Lazáry A, Pal Varga P, Haybaeck J, Leithner A, Liegl B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics and Orthopaedic Surgery, Medical University of
Graz, Auenbruggerplatz 5, 8036, Graz, Austria.

Chordomas are rare malignancies of the axial skeleton. Therapy is mainly
restricted to surgery. This study investigates histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors as potential therapeutics for chordomas. Immunohistochemistry (IHC)
was performed using the HDAC 1-6 antibodies on 50 chordoma samples (34 primary
tumors, 16 recurrences) from 44 patients (27 male, 17 female).
Pan-HDAC-inhibitors Vorinostat (SAHA), Panobinostat (LBH-589), and Belinostat
(PXD101) were tested for their efficacy in the chordoma cell line MUG-Chor1 via
Western blot, cell cycle analysis, caspase 3/7 activity (MUG-Chor1, UCh-1),
cleaved caspase-3, and PARP cleavage. p-Values below 0.05 were considered
significant. IHC was negative for HDAC1, positive for HDAC2 in most (n = 36;
72%), and for HDACs 3-6 in all specimens available (n = 43; 86%). HDAC6
expression was strongest. SAHA and LBH-589, but not PXD101 caused a significant
increase of G2/M phase cells and of cleaved caspase-3 (p = 0.0003, and p = 0.0014
after 72 h, respectively), and a peak of caspase 3/7 activity. PARP cleavage
confirmed apoptosis. The presented chordoma series expressed HDACs 2-6 with
strongest expression of HDAC6. SAHA and LBH-589 significantly increased apoptosis
and changed cell cycle distribution in vitro. HDAC-inhibitors should be further
evaluated as therapeutic options for chordoma.

© 2013 Orthopaedic Research Society.

PMID: 23893747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Cell Cycle. 2013 Jul 15;12(14):2219-32. doi: 10.4161/cc.25267.

The multi zinc-finger protein Trps1 acts as a regulator of histone deacetylation 
during mitosis.

Wuelling M(1), Pasdziernik M, Moll CN, Thiesen AM, Schneider S, Johannes C,
Vortkamp A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Biotechnology, Department of Developmental Biology,
University Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.

TRPS1, the gene mutated in human "Tricho-Rhino-Phalangeal syndrome," encodes a
multi zinc-finger nuclear regulator of chondrocyte proliferation and
differentiation. Here, we have identified a new function of Trps1 in controlling 
mitotic progression in chondrocytes. Loss of Trps1 in mice leads to an increased 
proportion of cells arrested in mitosis and, subsequently, to chromosome
segregation defects. Searching for the molecular basis of the defect, we found
that Trps1 acts as regulator of histone deacetylation. Trps1 interacts with two
histone deacetylases, Hdac1 and Hdac4, thereby increasing their activity. Loss of
Trps1 results in histone H3 hyperacetylation, which is maintained during mitosis.
Consequently, chromatin condensation and binding of HP1 is impaired, and
Trps1-deficient chondrocytes accumulate in prometaphase. Overexpression of Hdac4 
rescues the mitotic defect of Trps1-deficient chondrocytes, identifying Trps1 as 
an important regulator of chromatin deacetylation during mitosis in chondrocytes.
Our data provide the first evidence that the control of mitosis can be linked to 
the regulation of chondrocyte differentiation by epigenetic consequences of
altered Hdac activity.

PMCID: PMC3755072
PMID: 23892436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Toxicology. 2013 Oct 4;312:30-5. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2013.07.011. Epub 2013 Jul
26.

Inhibition of monomethylarsonous acid (MMA(III))-induced cell malignant
transformation through restoring dysregulated histone acetylation.

Ge Y(1), Gong Z, Olson JR, Xu P, Buck MJ, Ren X.

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Gene Engineering of Education Ministry, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou 510275, PR China; Department of Social and Preventive
Medicine, School of Public Health and Health Professions, The State University of
New York, Buffalo, NY 14214, USA; Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of
Occupational Disease Prevention and Treatment, Guangdong Prevention and Treatment
Center for Occupational Diseases, Guangzhou 510300, PR China.

Inorganic arsenic (iAs) and its high toxic metabolite, monomethylarsonous acid
(MMA(III)), are able to induce malignant transformation of human cells. Chronic
exposure to these chemicals is associated with an increased risk of developing
multiple cancers in human. However, the mechanisms contributing to
iAs/MMA(III)-induced cell malignant transformation and carcinogenesis are not
fully elucidated. We recently showed that iAs/MMA(III) exposure to human cells
led to a decreased level of histone acetylation globally, which was associated
with an increased sensitivity to arsenic cytotoxicity. In the current study, it
demonstrated that prolonged exposure to low-level MMA(III) in human urothelial
cells significantly increased the expression and activity of histone deacetylases
(HDACs) with an associated reduction of histone acetylation levels both globally 
and lysine specifically. Administration of the HDAC inhibitor, suberoylanilide
hydroxamic acid (SAHA), at 4 weeks after the initial MMA(III) treatment inhibited
the MMA(III)-mediated up-regulation of the expression and activities of HDACs,
leading to increase histone acetylation and prevention of MMA(III)-induced
malignant transformation. These new findings suggest that histone acetylation
dysregulation may be a key mechanism in MMA(III)-induced malignant transformation
and carcinogenesis, and that HDAC inhibitors could be targeted to prevent or
treat iAs-related cancers.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23891734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Curr Pharm Des. 2014;20(11):1772-7.

Expression of histone acetyltransferase GCN5 and histone deacetylase 1 in the
cultured mouse preimplantation embryos.

Liu X, Zhao D, Zheng Y, Wang L, Qian Y, Xu C, Huang H, Hwa YL, Jin F(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Xueshi Road, Hangzhou, 310006, China. jinfan@zju.edu.cn.

To investigate the possible mechanisms of the abnormal expression patterns of
many genes in the embryos in vitro, the expression of histone acetyltransferase
GCN5 and histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) were detected in mouse preimplantation
embryos. For the in vitro group, the pronucleus embryos were obtained from
superovulated mice, and cultured in vitro to get the two-cell, four-cell,
eightcell, morula and blastocyst stages embryos. For the in vivo group, embryos
at different stages were obtained from pregnant mice directly. Reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and immunocytochemistry were
used to detect the mRNA and protein expression levels of GCN5 and HDAC1. Compared
with the embryos in vivo, the expression levels of Gcn5 in the embryos in vitro
significantly increased except those in four-cell embryos. The expression of Gcn5
in eight-cell embryos in vivo and in four-cell and eight-cell embryos in vitro
was higher than those at other stages within the same group. Compared with the
expressions of Hdac1 in embryo in vivo, only those at two-cell embryo in vitro
showed decreased level. The expression of Hdac1 enhanced after two-cell embryo
stage in vitro, but no difference showed in vivo. The protein expression of
GCN5and HDAC1 in the embryo in vitro at every stage showed a lower level with the
control of those in the embryos in vivo. Our studies indicated that in vitro
culture could induce the expressed alteration of GCN5 and HDAC1, which might be
related to the expression patterns of many other epigenetically regulated genes.

PMID: 23888963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Yao Xue Xue Bao. 2013 May;48(5):668-74.

[Effect of downregulation the expression of HDAC1 on cells differentiation of
HL-60 cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Lu SL(1), Huang YQ, Ma XD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Zhangzhou Affiliated Hospital of Fujian Medical
University, Zhangzhou 363000, China.

This study is to investigate the effect of downregulation histone deacetylases 1 
(HDAC1) gene by the technology of RNA interference on the differentiation of
HL-60 cells line. The optimal segment targeting HDAC1 gene was designed and
transfected into HL-60 cells by Lipofectamine 2000. The HDAC1 mRNA and protein
level were detected by RT-PCR and Western blotting. The morphologic change of
HL-60 cells was detected by an optical microscope with Wright-Giemsa. Cell
differentiation was tested by NBT reduction assay. Expression of CD13, CD33 and
CD14 was measured by flow cytometry. The results indicated that HDAC1 mRNA and
protein were markedly suppressed by the siRNA targeting HDAC1 in a
concentration-dependent manner. HDAC1 siRNA promoted cell differentiation. HL-60 
cells became more mature in morphology after transfected to HDAC1 siRNA at a
concentration of 30-60 nmol x L(-1) for 24 h. NBT reduction ability of HDAC1
siRNA with 30 nmol x L(-1) was 0.31 +/- 0.09, compared with negative control
(0.20 +/- 0.02) (t = -3.1, P < 0.01), and with 60 nmol x L(-1) was 0.25 +/- 0.02 
in comparison with negative control (0.21 +/- 0.04) (t = -2.12, P < 0.05). But it
has no change in HDAC1 siRNA > or = 120 nmol x L(-1). After transfection with 60 
nmol x L(-1) HDAC1 siRNA to HL-60 cells, the expression of CD13 was (96.50 +/-
0.70)% in compared to siRNA-NC (3.39 +/- 0.68) % (t = 164.9, P < 0.000 5), CD33
was (66.73 +/- 0.50) % in compared to siRNA-NC (96.80 +/- 1.70) % (t = 43.4, P < 
0.000 5). CD14 was (0.53 +/- 0.00) % by comparison with siRNA-NC (0.49 +/- 0.02) 
% (t = -0.97, P > 0.1). HDAC1 siRNA promoted cell differentiation in indicated
concentration. HDAC1 might be one of the targets of gene therapy for leukemia.

PMID: 23888688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Biol Chem. 2013 Aug 30;288(35):25593-602. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.480574. Epub
2013 Jul 22.

The novel orally active proteasome inhibitor K-7174 exerts anti-myeloma activity 
in vitro and in vivo by down-regulating the expression of class I histone
deacetylases.

Kikuchi J(1), Yamada S, Koyama D, Wada T, Nobuyoshi M, Izumi T, Akutsu M, Kano Y,
Furukawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Stem Cell Regulation, Center for Molecular Medicine, Jichi Medical
University, Shimotsuke, Tochigi, Japan.

Bortezomib therapy is now indispensable for multiple myeloma, but is associated
with patient inconvenience due to intravenous injection and emerging drug
resistance. The development of orally active proteasome inhibitors with distinct 
mechanisms of action is therefore eagerly awaited. Previously, we identified
homopiperazine derivatives as a novel class of proteasome inhibitors with a
different mode of proteasome binding from bortezomib. In this study, we show that
K-7174, one of proteasome inhibitory homopiperazine derivatives, exhibits a
therapeutic effect, which is stronger when administered orally than
intravenously, without obvious side effects in a murine myeloma model. Moreover, 
K-7174 kills bortezomib-resistant myeloma cells carrying a ß5-subunit mutation in
vivo and primary cells from a patient resistant to bortezomib. K-7174 induces
transcriptional repression of class I histone deacetylases (HDAC1, -2, and -3)
via caspase-8-dependent degradation of Sp1, the most potent transactivator of
class I HDAC genes. HDAC1 overexpression ameliorates the cytotoxic effect of
K-7174 and abrogates histone hyperacetylation without affecting the accumulation 
of ubiquitinated proteins in K-7174-treated myeloma cells. Conversely, HDAC
inhibitors enhance the activity of K-7174 with an increase in histone
acetylation. These results suggest that class I HDACs are critical targets of
K-7174-induced cytotoxicity. It is highly anticipated that K-7174 increases the
tolerability and convenience of patients by oral administration and has the
clinical utility in overcoming bortezomib resistance as a single agent or in
combination with HDAC inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC3757220
PMID: 23878197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 10;8(7):e66710. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066710. Print 2013.

TdIF1 recognizes a specific DNA sequence through its Helix-Turn-Helix and AT-hook
motifs to regulate gene transcription.

Kubota T(1), Koiwai O, Hori K, Watanabe N, Koiwai K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biological Science, Faculty of Science and Technology,
Tokyo University of Science, Noda, Chiba, Japan.

TdIF1 was originally identified as a protein that directly binds to DNA
polymerase TdT. TdIF1 is also thought to function in transcription regulation,
because it binds directly to the transcriptional factor TReP-132, and to histone 
deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2. Here we show that TdIF1 recognizes a specific DNA
sequence and regulates gene transcription. By constructing TdIF1 mutants, we
identify amino acid residues essential for its interaction with DNA. An in vitro 
DNA selection assay, SELEX, reveals that TdIF1 preferentially binds to the
sequence 5'-GNTGCATG-3' following an AT-tract, through its Helix-Turn-Helix and
AT-hook motifs. We show that four repeats of this recognition sequence allow
TdIF1 to regulate gene transcription in a plasmid-based luciferase reporter
assay. We demonstrate that TdIF1 associates with the RAB20 promoter, and RAB20
gene transcription is reduced in TdIF1-knocked-down cells, suggesting that TdIF1 
stimulates RAB20 gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC3707907
PMID: 23874396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Tumour Biol. 2014 Jan;35(1):61-71. doi: 10.1007/s13277-013-1007-5. Epub 2013 Jul 
20.

Clinical significance of histone deacetylase (HDAC)-1, HDAC-2, HDAC-4, and HDAC-6
expression in human malignant and benign thyroid lesions.

Giaginis C(1), Alexandrou P, Delladetsima I, Giannopoulou I, Patsouris E,
Theocharis S.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Pathology, Medical School, University of Athens, 75 M.
Asias str., Goudi, Athens, GR11527, Greece.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) have been associated with human malignant tumor
development and progression, and HDAC inhibitors are currently being explored as 
anticancer agents in clinical trials. The present study aimed to evaluate the
clinical significance of HDAC-1, HDAC-2, HDAC-4, and HDAC-6 proteins' expression 
in human malignant and benign thyroid lesions. HDAC-1, HDAC-2, HDAC-4, and HDAC-6
proteins' expression was assessed immunohistochemically on paraffin-embedded
thyroid tissues obtained from 74 patients with benign and malignant thyroid
lesions. Enhanced HDAC-2 and HDAC-6 expression was significantly more frequently 
observed in malignant, compared to benign, thyroid lesions (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0042 and
p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0069, respectively). Enhanced HDAC-2, HDAC-4, and HDAC-6 expression was
significantly more frequently observed in cases with papillary carcinoma compared
to hyperplastic nodules (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0065, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0394, and p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0061, respectively).
In malignant thyroid lesions, HDAC-1, HDAC-4, and HDAC-6 expression was
significantly associated with tumor size (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0169, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0056, and p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0234,
respectively); HDAC-2 expression with lymphatic and vascular invasion (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0299
and p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0391, respectively); and HDAC-4 expression with capsular invasion
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0464). The cellular pattern of HDAC-1 and HDAC-2 distribution (nuclear vs.
nuclear and cytoplasmic) presented a distinct discrimination between malignant
and benign thyroid lesions (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0030 and p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0028, respectively) as well as
between papillary carcinoma and hyperplastic nodules (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0036 and p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0028, 
respectively). HDAC-1, HDAC-2, HDAC-4, and HDAC-6 may be associated with the
malignant thyroid transformation and could be considered as useful biomarkers and
possible therapeutic targets in this neoplasia.

PMID: 23873102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Hematol Oncol. 2013 Jul 18;6:53. doi: 10.1186/1756-8722-6-53.

Histone deacetylase inhibitor potentiated the ability of MTOR inhibitor to induce
autophagic cell death in Burkitt leukemia/lymphoma.

Dong LH(1), Cheng S, Zheng Z, Wang L, Shen Y, Shen ZX, Chen SJ, Zhao WL.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics, Shanghai Institute of Hematology,
Shanghai Rui Jin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Burkitt leukemia/lymphoma is a major subtype of aggressive B-cell
lymphoma. Biological targeted therapies on this disease need to be further
investigated and may help to improve the clinical outcome of the patients.
METHODS: This study examined the anti-tumor activity of the histone deacetylases 
(HDAC) inhibitor valproic acid (VPA) combined with the mammalian target of
rapamycin (MTOR) inhibitor temsirolimus in Burkitt leukemia/lymphoma cell lines, 
as well as in primary tumor cells and a murine xenograft model.
RESULTS: Co-treatment of VPA and temsirolimus synergistically inhibited the tumor
cell growth and triggered the autophagic cell death, with a significant
inhibition of MTOR signaling and MYC oncoprotein. Functioned as a class I HDAC
inhibitor, VPA potentiated the effect of temsirolimus on autophagy through
inhibiting HDAC1. Molecular silencing of HDAC1 using small interfering RNA
(siRNA) attenuated VPA-mediated regulation of CDKN1A, CDKN1B and LC3-I/II,
regression of tumor cell growth and induction of autophagy. Meanwhile, VPA
counteracted temsirolimus-induced AKT activation via HDAC3 inhibition. HDAC3
siRNA abrogated the ability of VPA to modulate AKT phosphorylation, to suppress
tumor cell growth and to induce autophagy. Strong antitumor effect was also
observed on primary tumor cells while sparing normal hematopoiesis ex vivo. In a 
murine xenograft model established with subcutaneous injection of Namalwa cells, 
dual treatment efficiently blocked tumor growth, inhibited MYC and induced in
situ autophagy.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings confirmed the synergistic effect of the HDAC and MTOR
inhibitors on Burkitt leukemia/lymphoma, and provided an insight into clinical
application of targeting autophagy in treating MYC-associated lymphoid
malignancies.

PMCID: PMC3722002
PMID: 23866964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Transcription. 2013 Jul-Aug;4(4):167-71. Epub 2013 Jul 1.

A new role for an old player: steroid receptor RNA Activator (SRA) represses
hormone inducible genes.

Beato M, Vicent GP.

In breast cancer cells the Steroid Receptor ¬RNA Activator (SRA) acts as scaffold
of a complex containing HP1<U+03B3>, LSD1, HDAC1/2 and CoREST, which contributes to
repression of key hormone-inducible genes that must be kept silent in the absence
of hormone.

PMCID: PMC3977916
PMID: 23863201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Nat Neurosci. 2013 Aug;16(8):1008-15. doi: 10.1038/nn.3460. Epub 2013 Jul 14.

SIRT1 collaborates with ATM and HDAC1 to maintain genomic stability in neurons.

Dobbin MM(1), Madabhushi R, Pan L, Chen Y, Kim D, Gao J, Ahanonu B, Pao PC, Qiu
Y, Zhao Y, Tsai LH.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.

Defects in DNA repair have been linked to cognitive decline with age and
neurodegenerative disease, yet the mechanisms that protect neurons from genotoxic
stress remain largely obscure. We sought to characterize the roles of the
NAD(+)-dependent deacetylase SIRT1 in the neuronal response to DNA double-strand 
breaks (DSBs). We found that SIRT1 was rapidly recruited to DSBs in postmitotic
neurons, where it showed a synergistic relationship with ataxia telangiectasia
mutated (ATM). SIRT1 recruitment to breaks was ATM dependent; however, SIRT1 also
stimulated ATM autophosphorylation and activity and stabilized ATM at DSB sites. 
After DSB induction, SIRT1 also bound the neuroprotective class I histone
deacetylase HDAC1. We found that SIRT1 deacetylated HDAC1 and stimulated its
enzymatic activity, which was necessary for DSB repair through the nonhomologous 
end-joining pathway. HDAC1 mutations that mimic a constitutively acetylated state
rendered neurons more susceptible to DNA damage, whereas pharmacological SIRT1
activators that promoted HDAC1 deacetylation also reduced DNA damage in two mouse
models of neurodegeneration. We propose that SIRT1 is an apical transducer of the
DSB response and that SIRT1 activation offers an important therapeutic avenue in 
neurodegeneration.

PMCID: PMC4758134
PMID: 23852118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Comp Biochem Physiol Part D Genomics Proteomics. 2013 Sep;8(3):244-9. doi:
10.1016/j.cbd.2013.06.003. Epub 2013 Jun 29.

Identification of candidate genes involved in marble color pattern formation in
genus Salmo.

Sivka U(1), Snoj A, Palandacic A, Sunik Bajec S.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnical Faculty, Department of Animal Science, University of Ljubljana,
Groblje 3, SI-1230 Domale, Slovenia. urska.sivka@bf.uni-lj.si

Salmonids are known for their variety in skin color and color patterning, which
depends on reaction-diffusion mechanism or/and cell-cell interaction. One of the 
visually most prominent characteristics found in the genus Salmo is the marble
color pattern, distinctive for marble trout (Salmo marmoratus). In order to
identify and characterize genes potentially involved in skin coloration and color
pattern formation in marble trout, a salmonid 32K cDNA microarray was applied to 
compare skin transcriptome profiles from marble trout, brown trout (Salmo
trutta), and marble trout×brown trout hybrids exhibiting the marble color
pattern. Microarray results were validated by qRT-PCR and revealed four
differentially expressed informative genes (hdac1, vps18, dct and scg2a) involved
in animal pigmentation. hdac1 and dct were associated with the wnt signaling
pathway, vps18 was involved in melanosome biogenesis and scg2a was observed to
act as physiological factor in skin pigmentation and thus could be regarded as a 
helper protein in prohormone Pomc packaging. We propose that the formation of the
marble color pattern is at least partially based upon a reaction-diffusion
mechanism and depends upon wnt signaling pathway.

© 2013.

PMID: 23850874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Agric Food Chem. 2013 Aug 7;61(31):7507-14. doi: 10.1021/jf401019b. Epub 2013
Jul 24.

Systematic mining of generally recognized as safe (GRAS) flavor chemicals for
bioactive compounds.

Martinez-Mayorga K(1), Peppard TL, López-Vallejo F, Yongye AB, Medina-Franco JL.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Química, UNAM , Avenida Universidad 3000, Mexico City 04510,
Mexico.

Bioactive food compounds can be both therapeutically and nutritionally relevant. 
Screening strategies are widely employed to identify bioactive compounds from
edible plants. Flavor additives contained in the so-called FEMA GRAS (generally
recognized as safe) list of approved flavoring ingredients is an additional
source of potentially bioactive compounds. This work used the principles of
molecular similarity to identify compounds with potential mood-modulating
properties. The ability of certain GRAS molecules to inhibit histone
deacetylase-1 (HDAC1), proposed as an important player in mood modulation, was
assayed. Two GRAS chemicals were identified as HDAC1 inhibitors in the micromolar
range, results similar to what was observed for the structurally related mood
prescription drug valproic acid. Additional studies on bioavailability, toxicity 
at higher concentrations, and off-target effects are warranted. The methodology
described in this work could be employed to identify potentially bioactive flavor
chemicals present in the FEMA GRAS list.

PMID: 23848473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Sep 1;19(17):4599-610. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-3675. 
Epub 2013 Jul 11.

GKN1-miR-185-DNMT1 axis suppresses gastric carcinogenesis through regulation of
epigenetic alteration and cell cycle.

Yoon JH(1), Choi YJ, Choi WS, Ashktorab H, Smoot DT, Nam SW, Lee JY, Park WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul, South Korea.

PURPOSE: Gastrokine 1 (GKN1) functions to protect the gastric antral mucosa and
promotes healing by facilitating restoration and proliferation after injury. GKN1
is downregulated in Helicobacter pylori-infected gastric epithelial cells and
loss of GKN1 expression is closely associated with gastric carcinogenesis, but
underlying mechanisms of the tumor-suppressing effects of GKN1 remain largely
unknown.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: AGS, MKN1, MKN28 gastric cancer cells and HFE-145
immortalized non-neoplastic gastric mucosal cells were transfected with GKN1 or
shGKN1. We conducted molecular and functional studies of GKN1 and miR-185 and
investigated the mechanisms of alteration. We also analyzed epigenetic
alterations in 80 gastric cancer tissues.
RESULTS: Restoration of GKN1 protein suppressed gastric cancer cell growth by
inducing endogenous miR-185 that directly targets epigenetic effectors DNMT1 and 
EZH2 in gastric cancer cells. In addition, ectopic expression of GKN1 upregulated
Tip60 and downregulated HDAC1 in an miR-185-independent manner, thereby inducing 
cell-cycle arrest by regulating cell-cycle proteins in gastric cancer cells.
Notably, GKN1 expression was inversely correlated with DNMT1 and EZH2 expression 
in a subset of 80 gastric cancer tissues and various gastric cancer cell lines.
Interestingly, it was found that GKN1 exerted a synergistic anti-cancerous effect
with 5-fluorouracil on tumor cell growth, which suggests a possible therapeutic
intervention method for gastric cancer.
CONCLUSION: Our results show that GKN1 has an miR-185-dependent and -independent 
mechanism for chromatic and DNA epigenetic modification, thereby regulating the
cell cycle. Thus, the loss of GKN1 function contributes to malignant
transformation and proliferation of gastric epithelial cells in gastric
carcinogenesis.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 23846337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Biol Chem. 2013 Aug 9;288(32):22915-29. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.484337. Epub 2013
Jul 7.

Detrimental effect of class-selective histone deacetylase inhibitors during
tissue regeneration following hindlimb ischemia.

Spallotta F(1), Tardivo S, Nanni S, Rosati JD, Straino S, Mai A, Vecellio M,
Valente S, Capogrossi MC, Farsetti A, Martone J, Bozzoni I, Pontecorvi A, Gaetano
C, Colussi C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio di Biologia Vascolare e Medicina Rigenerativa, Centro Cardiologico
Monzino, 20138 Milano, Italy.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (DIs) are promising drugs for the treatment of
several pathologies including ischemic and failing heart where they demonstrated 
efficacy. However, adverse side effects and cardiotoxicity have also been
reported. Remarkably, no information is available about the effect of DIs during 
tissue regeneration following acute peripheral ischemia. In this study, mice made
ischemic by femoral artery excision were injected with the DIs MS275 and MC1568, 
selective for class I and IIa histone deacetylases (HDACs), respectively. In
untreated mice, soon after damage, class IIa HDAC phosphorylation and nuclear
export occurred, paralleled by dystrophin and neuronal nitric-oxide synthase
(nNOS) down-regulation and decreased protein phosphatase 2A activity. Between 14 
and 21 days after ischemia, dystrophin and nNOS levels recovered, and class IIa
HDACs relocalized to the nucleus. In this condition, the MC1568 compound
increased the number of newly formed muscle fibers but delayed their terminal
differentiation, whereas MS275 abolished the early onset of the regeneration
process determining atrophy and fibrosis. The selective DIs had differential
effects on the vascular compartment: MC1568 increased arteriogenesis whereas
MS275 inhibited it. Capillarogenesis did not change. Chromatin
immunoprecipitations revealed that class IIa HDAC complexes bind promoters of
proliferation-associated genes and of class I HDAC1 and 2, highlighting a
hierarchical control between class II and I HDACs during tissue regeneration. Our
findings indicate that class-selective DIs interfere with normal mouse ischemic
hindlimb regeneration and suggest that their use could be limited by alteration
of the regeneration process in peripheral ischemic tissues.

PMCID: PMC3743470
PMID: 23836913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Mol Ther. 2013 Sep;21(9):1678-86. doi: 10.1038/mt.2013.148. Epub 2013 Jun 18.

TP53-independent function of miR-34a via HDAC1 and p21(CIP1/WAF1.).

Zhao J(1), Lammers P, Torrance CJ, Bader AG.

Author information: 
(1)Mirna Therapeutics, Inc., Austin, Texas 78744, USA.

The tumor suppressor, microRNA-34 (miR-34), a transcriptional target of TP53,
functions in a positive feedback loop to activate TP53. Although miR-34 can
inhibit cancer cells carrying TP53 mutations, this feedback to TP53 may be a
prerequisite for full miR-34 function and may restrict its therapeutic
application to patients with intact TP53. To investigate the functional
relationships between TP53 and miR-34, and that of other TP53-regulated miRNAs
including miR-215/192, we have used a panel of isogenic cancer cell lines that
differ only with respect to their endogenous TP53 status. miR-34-induced
inhibition of cancer cell growth is the same in TP53-positive and TP53-negative
cells. In contrast, miR-215/192 functions through TP53. In the absence of TP53,
miR-34, but not miR-215/192, is sufficient to induce an upregulation of the cell 
cycle-dependent kinase inhibitor p21(CIP1/WAF1). We identify histone deacetylase 
1 (HDAC1) as a direct target of miR-34 and demonstrate that repression of HDAC1
leads to an induction of p21(CIP1/WAF1) and mimics the miR-34 cellular phenotype.
Depletion of p21(CIP1/WAF1) specifically interferes with the ability of miR-34 to
inhibit cancer cell proliferation. The data suggest that miR-34 controls a tumor 
suppressor pathway previously reserved for TP53 and provides an attractive
therapeutic strategy for cancer patients irrespective of TP53 status.

PMCID: PMC3776635
PMID: 23836017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Cardiovasc Diabetol. 2013 Jul 9;12:101. doi: 10.1186/1475-2840-12-101.

Exercise and diabetes have opposite effects on the assembly and O-GlcNAc
modification of the mSin3A/HDAC1/2 complex in the heart.

Cox EJ, Marsh SA.

BACKGROUND: Exercise causes physiological cardiac hypertrophy and benefits the
diabetic heart. Mammalian switch-independent 3A (mSin3A) and histone deacetylases
(HDACs) 1 and 2 regulate hypertrophic genes through associations with the DNA
binding proteins repressor element-1 silencing transcription factor (REST) and
O-linked ß-N-acetylglucosamine transferase (OGT). O-linked ß-N-acetylglucosamine 
(O-GlcNAc) is a glucose derivative that is chronically elevated in diabetic
hearts, and a previous study showed that exercise reduces cardiac O-GlcNAc. We
hypothesized that O-GlcNAc and OGT would physically associate with mSin3A/HDAC1/2
in the heart, and that this interaction would be altered by diabetes and
exercise.
METHODS: 8-week-old type 2 diabetic db/db (db) and non-diabetic C57 mice were
randomized to treadmill exercise or sedentary groups for 1 or 4 weeks.
RESULTS: O-GlcNAc was significantly higher in db hearts and increased with
exercise. Db hearts showed lower levels of mSin3A, HDAC1, and HDAC2 protein, but 
higher levels of HDAC2 mRNA and HDAC1/2 deacetylase activity. Elevated HDAC
activity was associated with significantly blunted expression of a-actin and
brain natriuretic peptide in db hearts. In sedentary db hearts,
co-immunoprecipitation assays showed that mSin3A and OGT were less associated
with HDAC1 and HDAC2, respectively, compared to sedentary C57 controls; however, 
exercise removed these differences.
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that diabetes and exercise oppositely affect
interactions between pro-hypertrophic transcription factors, and suggest that an 
increase in total cardiac O-GlcNAc is a mechanism by which exercise benefits type
2 diabetic hearts.

PMCID: PMC3708830
PMID: 23835259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Immunol. 2013 Aug 15;191(4):1916-26. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300714. Epub 2013
Jul 5.

Regulation of dendritic cell differentiation in bone marrow during emergency
myelopoiesis.

Liu H(1), Zhou J, Cheng P, Ramachandran I, Nefedova Y, Gabrilovich DI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute,
Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

Although accumulation of dendritic cell (DC) precursors occurs in bone marrow,
the terminal differentiation of these cells takes place outside bone marrow. The 
signaling, regulating this process, remains poorly understood. We demonstrated
that this process could be differentially regulated by Notch ligands: Jagged-1
(Jag1) and Delta-like ligand 1 (Dll1). In contrast to Dll1, Jag1, in vitro and
during induced myelopoiesis in vivo, prevented DC differentiation by promoting
the accumulation of their precursors. Although both ligands activated Notch in
hematopoietic progenitor cells, they had an opposite effect on Wnt signaling.
Dll1 activated Wnt pathways, whereas Jag1 inhibited it via downregulation of the 
expression of the Wnt receptors Frizzled (Fzd). Jag1 suppressed fzd expression by
retaining histone deacetylase 1 in the complex with the transcription factor
CSL/CBF-1 on the fzd promoter. Our results suggest that DC differentiation,
during induced myelopoiesis, can be regulated by the nature of the Notch ligand
expressed on adjacent stroma cells.

PMCID: PMC3787311
PMID: 23833236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Med Chem. 2013 Aug 8;56(15):6156-74. doi: 10.1021/jm400634n. Epub 2013 Jul 23.

Discovery of potent, isoform-selective inhibitors of histone deacetylase
containing chiral heterocyclic capping groups and a N-(2-aminophenyl)benzamide
binding unit.

Marson CM(1), Matthews CJ, Yiannaki E, Atkinson SJ, Soden PE, Shukla L, Lamadema 
N, Thomas NS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University College London, Christopher Ingold
Laboratories, 20 Gordon Street, London WC1H OAJ, UK. c.m.marson@ucl.ac.uk

The synthesis of a novel series of potent chiral inhibitors of histone
deacetylase (HDAC) is described that contain a heterocyclic capping group and a
N-(2-aminophenyl)benzamide unit that binds in the active site. In vitro assays
for the inhibition of HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3-NCoR1, and HDAC8 by the
N-(2-aminophenyl)benzamide 24a gave respective IC50 values of 930, 85, 12, and
4100 nM, exhibiting class I selectivity and potent inhibition of HDAC3-NCoR1.
Both imidazolinone and thiazoline rings are shown to be effective replacements
for the pyrimidine ring present in many other 2-(aminophenyl)benzamides
previously reported, an example of each ring system at 1 µM causing an increase
in histone H3K9 acetylation in the human cell lines Jurkat and HeLa and an
increase in cell death consistent with induction of apoptosis. Inhibition of the 
growth of MCF-7, A549, DU145, and HCT116 cell lines by 24a was observed, with
respective IC50 values of 5.4, 5.8, 6.4, and 2.2 mM.

PMID: 23829483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Bioorg Med Chem. 2013 Sep 1;21(17):5339-54. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2013.06.009. Epub 
2013 Jun 15.

Novel N-hydroxyfurylacrylamide-based histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors with
branched CAP group (Part 2).

Feng T(1), Wang H, Su H, Lu H, Yu L, Zhang X, Sun H, You Q.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Drug Design and Optimization, China Pharmaceutical
University, Nanjing 210009, China.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are significant enzymes involved in tumor genesis
and development. Herein, we report a series of novel
N-hydroxyfurylacryl-amide-based HDAC inhibitors, which are marked by introducing 
branched hydrophobic groups as the capping group. The inhibitory activity of the 
synthesized compounds against HDACs and several tumor cell lines are firstly
determined. Fifteen compounds with promising activities are selected for further 
evaluation of target selectivity profile against recombinant human HDAC1, HDAC4
and HDAC6. Compounds 10a, 10b, 10d and 16a exhibit outstanding selectivity
against HDAC6. Analysis of HDAC4 X-ray structure and HDAC1, HDAC6 homology model 
indicates that these enzyme differ significantly in the rim near the surface of
the active site. Although TSA has been known as a pan-HDAC inhibitor, it exhibits
outstanding selectivity for HDAC6 over HDAC4. For further physicochemical
properties study, six compounds are chosen for determination of their
physicochemical properties including logD7.4 and aqueous solubility. The results 
suggest that compounds with a smaller framework and with hydrophilicgroups are
likely to have better aqueous solubility.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23820574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2013 Sep;45(9):1987-96. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2013.06.017. Epub 2013 Jun 29.

Unraveling the complexity of hepatitis B virus: from molecular understanding to
therapeutic strategy in 50 years.

Liu B(1), Wen X, Huang C, Wei Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu 610041, China.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a well-known hepadnavirus with a double-stranded
circular DNA genome. Although HBV was first described approximately 50 years ago,
the precise mechanisms of HBV infection and effective therapeutic strategies
remain unclear. Here, we focus on summarizing the complicated mechanisms of HBV
replication and infection, as well as genomic factors and epigenetic regulation. 
Additionally, we discuss in vivo models of HBV, as well as diagnosis, prevention 
and therapeutic drugs for HBV. Together, the data in this 50-year review may
provide new clues to elucidate molecular mechanisms of HBV pathogenesis and shed 
new light on the future HBV therapies.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23819994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Prostate. 2013 Sep;73(12):1270-80. doi: 10.1002/pros.22641. Epub 2013 Jun 28.

A novel hydroxysuberamide derivative potentiates MG132-mediated anticancer
activity against human hormone refractory prostate cancers--the role of histone
deacetylase and endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Chen YC(1), Huang WJ, Hsu JL, Yu CC, Wang WT, Guh JH.

Author information: 
(1)College of Medicine, School of Pharmacy, National Taiwan University, Taipei,
Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are successful for treatment of
advanced cutaneous T-cell lymphoma but only show modest effect in solid tumors.
Approaches for HDAC inhibitors to improve activity against solid tumors are
necessary.
METHODS: Sulforhodamine B assay and flow cytometric analysis detected cell
proliferation and cell-cycle progression, respectively. Protein expression was
determined by Western blotting. Comet assay and DNA end-binding activity of Ku
proteins detected DNA damage and DNA repair activity, respectively. siRNA
technique was used for knockdown of specific cellular target.
RESULTS: WJ25591 displayed inhibitory activity against HDAC1 and cell
proliferation in human hormone-refractory prostate cancers PC-3 and DU-145.
WJ25591 caused an arrest of cell-cycle at both G1- and G2-phase and increased
protein expressions of p21 and cyclin E, followed by cell apoptosis.
WJ25591-induced Bcl-2 down-regulation and activation of caspase-9, -8, and -3,
suggesting apoptotic execution through both intrinsic and extrinsic apoptotic
pathways. WJ25591 also significantly inhibited DNA repair activity but not
directly induced DNA damage. Moreover, the proteasome inhibitor MG-132
dramatically sensitized WJ25591-induced cell apoptosis. The siRNA technique
demonstrated that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, in particular CHOP/GADD153
up-regulation, contributed to the synergistic effect.
CONCLUSIONS: The data suggest that WJ25591 inhibited HDAC activity, leading to
cell-cycle arrest and inhibition of DNA repair. Caspase cascades are subsequently
triggered to execute cell apoptosis. MG-132 dramatically sensitizes
WJ25591-mediated apoptosis, at least partly, through ER stress response. The data
also reveal that combination of HDAC inhibitors and proteasome inhibitors may be 
a potential strategy against hormone-refractory prostate cancers.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23813634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Clin Epigenetics. 2013 Jun 28;5(1):9. doi: 10.1186/1868-7083-5-9.

Specific inhibition of one DNMT1-including complex influences tumor initiation
and progression.

Cheray M(1), Pacaud R, Nadaradjane A, Vallette FM, Cartron PF.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie Nantes-Angers, INSERM, U892, Equipe
Apoptose et progression tumorale, Equipe labellisée Ligue Nationale Contre le
Cancer, 8 quai moncousu, BP7021, Nantes, 44007, France.
pierre-francois.cartron@univ-nantes.fr.

BACKGROUND: Reactivation of silenced tumor suppressor genes by DNMT inhibitors
has provided an alternative approach to cancer therapy. However, DNMT inhibitors 
have also been shown to induce or enhance tumorigenesis via DNA
hypomethylation-induced oncogene activation and chromosomal instability. To
develop more specific DNMT inhibitors for efficient cancer therapy, we compared
the effects of peptides designed to specifically disrupt the interaction of DNMT1
with different proteins.
FINDINGS: Our data indicated that the use of an unspecific DNMT inhibitor
(5aza-2deoxycytidine), a DNMT1 inhibitor (procainamide) or peptides disrupting
the DNMT1/PCNA, DNMT1/EZH2, DNMT1/HDAC1, DNMT1/DNMT3b and DNMT1/HP1 interactions 
promoted or enhanced in vivo tumorigenesis in a mouse glioma model. In contrast, 
a peptide disrupting the DNMT1/DMAP1 interaction, which per se did not affect
tumor growth, sensitized cancer cells to chemotherapy/irradiation-induced cell
death. Finally, our data indicated that the peptide disrupting the DNMT1/DMAP1
interaction increased the efficiency of temozolomide treatment.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that the DNMT1/DMAP1 interaction could be an
effective anti-cancer target and opens a new avenue for the development of new
strategies to design DNMT inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC3727981
PMID: 23809695  [PubMed]


110. Epigenetics. 2013 Jul;8(7):756-64. doi: 10.4161/epi.25202. Epub 2013 Jun 11.

Class I HDAC imaging using [ (3)H]CI-994 autoradiography.

Wang Y(1), Zhang YL, Hennig K, Gale JP, Hong Y, Cha A, Riley M, Wagner F,
Haggarty SJ, Holson E, Hooker J.

Author information: 
(1)Athinoula A. Martinos Center, Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA, USA.

[ (3)H]CI-994, a radioactive isotopologue of the benzamide CI-994, a class I
histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi), was evaluated as an autoradiography probe 
for ex vivo labeling and localizing of class I HDAC (isoforms 1-3) in the rodent 
brain. After protocol optimization, up to 80% of total binding was attributed to 
specific binding. Notably, like other benzamide HDACi, [ (3)H]CI-994 exhibits
slow binding kinetics when measured in vitro with isolated enzymes and ex vivo
when used for autoradiographic mapping of HDAC1-3 density. The regional
distribution and density of HDAC1-3 was determined through a series of saturation
and kinetics experiments. The binding properties of [ (3)H]CI-994 to HDAC1-3 were
characterized and the data were used to determine the regional Bmax of the target
proteins. Kd values, determined from slice autoradiography, were between 9.17 and
15.6 nM. The HDAC1-3 density (Bmax), averaged over whole brain sections, was of
12.9 picomol · mg(-1) protein. The highest HDAC1-3 density was found in the
cerebellum, followed by hippocampus and cortex. Moderate to low receptor density 
was found in striatum, hypothalamus and thalamus. These data were correlated with
semi-quantitative measures of each HDAC isoform using western blot analysis and
it was determined that autoradiographic images most likely represent the sum of
HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3 protein density. In competition experiments, [
(3)H]CI-994 binding can be dose-dependently blocked with other HDAC inhibitors,
including suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA). In summary, we have developed
the first known autoradiography tool for imaging class I HDAC enzymes. Although
validated in the CNS, [ (3)H]CI-994 will be applicable and beneficial to other
target tissues and can be used to evaluate HDAC inhibition in tissues for novel
therapies being developed. [ (3)H]CI-994 is now an enabling imaging tool to study
the relationship between diseases and epigenetic regulation.

PMCID: PMC3781195
PMID: 23803584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. G3 (Bethesda). 2013 Aug 7;3(8):1363-74. doi: 10.1534/g3.113.006999.

Caenorhabditis elegans histone deacetylase hda-1 is required for morphogenesis of
the vulva and LIN-12/Notch-mediated specification of uterine cell fates.

Ranawade AV(1), Cumbo P, Gupta BP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON L8S 4K1 Canada.

Chromatin modification genes play crucial roles in development and disease. In
Caenorhabditis elegans, the class I histone deacetylase family member hda-1, a
component of the nucleosome remodeling and deacetylation complex, has been shown 
to control cell proliferation. We recovered hda-1 in an RNA interference screen
for genes involved in the morphogenesis of the egg-laying system. We found that
hda-1 mutants have abnormal vulva morphology and vulval-uterine connections
(i.e., no uterine-seam cell). We characterized the vulval defects by using cell
fate-specific markers and found that hda-1 is necessary for the specification of 
all seven vulval cell types. The analysis of the vulval-uterine connection defect
revealed that hda-1 is required for the differentiation of the gonadal anchor
cell (AC), which in turn induces ventral uterine granddaughters to adopt p fates,
leading to the formation of the uterine-seam cell. Consistent with these results,
hda-1 is expressed in the vulva and AC. A search for hda-1 target genes revealed 
that fos-1 (fos proto-oncogene family) acts downstream of hda-1 in vulval cells, 
whereas egl-43 (evi1 proto-oncogene family) and nhr-67 (tailless homolog, NHR
family) mediate hda-1 function in the AC. Furthermore, we showed that AC
expression of hda-1 plays a crucial role in the regulation of the lin-12/Notch
ligand lag-2 to specify p cell fates. These results demonstrate the pivotal role 
of hda-1 in the formation of the vulva and the vulval-uterine connection. Given
that hda-1 homologs are conserved across the phyla, our findings are likely to
provide a better understanding of HDAC1 function in development and disease.

PMCID: PMC3737176
PMID: 23797102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Invest Dermatol. 2014 Jan;134(1):24-32. doi: 10.1038/jid.2013.283. Epub 2013
Jun 21.

Disrupted ectodermal organ morphogenesis in mice with a conditional histone
deacetylase 1, 2 deletion in the epidermis.

Hughes MW(1), Jiang TX(1), Lin SJ(1), Leung Y(1), Kobielak K(1), Widelitz RB(1), 
Chuong CM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, California, USA.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are present in the epidermal layer of the skin,
outer root sheath, and hair matrix. To investigate how histone acetylation
affects skin morphogenesis and homeostasis, mice were generated with a K14
promoter-mediated reduction of Hdac1 or Hdac2. The skin of HDAC1 null (K14-Cre
Hdac1(cKO/cKO)) mice exhibited a spectrum of lesions, including irregularly
thickened interfollicular epidermis, alopecia, hair follicle dystrophy, claw
dystrophy, and abnormal pigmentation. Hairs are sparse, short, and intermittently
coiled. The distinct pelage hair types are lost. During the first hair cycle,
hairs are lost and replaced by dystrophic hair follicles with dilated
infundibulae. The dystrophic hair follicle epithelium is stratified and is
positive for K14, involucrin, and TRP63, but negative for keratin 10. Some
dystrophic follicles are K15 positive, but mature hair fiber keratins are absent.
The digits form extra hyperpigmented claws on the lateral sides.
Hyperpigmentation is observed in the interfollicular epithelium, the tail, and
the feet. Hdac1 and Hdac2 dual transgenic mice (K14-Cre Hdac1(cKO/cKO)
Hdac2(+/cKO)) have similar but more obvious abnormalities. These results show
that suppression of epidermal HDAC activity leads to improper ectodermal organ
morphogenesis and disrupted hair follicle regeneration and homeostasis, as well
as indirect effects on pigmentation.

PMCID: PMC3843967
PMID: 23792463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Eur J Med Chem. 2013 Aug;66:56-68. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2013.05.017. Epub 2013
May 31.

Design, synthesis and preliminary evaluation of a series of histone deacetylase
inhibitors carrying a benzodiazepine ring.

Guandalini L(1), Balliu M, Cellai C, Martino MV, Nebbioso A, Mercurio C, Carafa
V, Bartolucci G, Dei S, Manetti D, Teodori E, Scapecchi S, Altucci L, Paoletti F,
Romanelli MN.

Author information: 
(1)NEUROFARBA, Department of Neuroscience, Psychology, Drug Research and Child
Health, Section of Pharmaceutical and Nutraceutical Sciences, University of
Florence, Via Ugo Schiff 6, 50019 Sesto Fiorentino, Italy.

A series of new histone deacetylase inhibitors were designed and synthesized
based on hybridization between SAHA or oxamflatin and
5-phenyl-1,4-benzodiazepines. The compounds were tested for their enzyme
inhibitory activity on HeLa nuclear extracts, and on human recombinant HDAC1 and 
HDAC6. Antiproliferative activity was tested on different cancer cells types,
while proapoptotic activity was primarily tested on NB4 cells. The compounds
showed IC50 values similar to those of SAHA. Compound (S)-8 displayed interesting
activity against hematological and solid malignancies.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23792316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Mol Cell. 2013 Jul 11;51(1):57-67. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.05.020. Epub 2013
Jun 20.

Class I HDACs share a common mechanism of regulation by inositol phosphates.

Millard CJ(1), Watson PJ, Celardo I, Gordiyenko Y, Cowley SM, Robinson CV,
Fairall L, Schwabe JW.

Author information: 
(1)Henry Wellcome Laboratories of Structural Biology, Department of Biochemistry,
University of Leicester, UK.

Class I histone deacetylases (HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3) are recruited by cognate
corepressor proteins into specific transcriptional repression complexes that
target HDAC activity to chromatin resulting in chromatin condensation and
transcriptional silencing. We previously reported the structure of HDAC3 in
complex with the SMRT corepressor. This structure revealed the presence of
inositol-tetraphosphate [Ins(1,4,5,6)P4] at the interface of the two proteins. It
was previously unclear whether the role of Ins(1,4,5,6)P4 is to act as a
structural cofactor or a regulator of HDAC3 activity. Here we report the
structure of HDAC1 in complex with MTA1 from the NuRD complex. The ELM2-SANT
domains from MTA1 wrap completely around HDAC1 occupying both sides of the active
site such that the adjacent BAH domain is ideally positioned to recruit
nucleosomes to the active site of the enzyme. Functional assays of both the HDAC1
and HDAC3 complexes reveal that Ins(1,4,5,6)P4 is a bona fide conserved regulator
of class I HDAC complexes.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3710971
PMID: 23791785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Oncogene. 2014 May 29;33(22):2826-35. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.225. Epub 2013 Jun
17.

Hepatitis C virus core protein epigenetically silences SFRP1 and enhances HCC
aggressiveness by inducing epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Quan H(1), Zhou F(1), Nie D(1), Chen Q(1), Cai X(1), Shan X(1), Zhou Z(1), Chen
K(1), Huang A(1), Li S(1), Tang N(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Second Affiliated Hospital and the Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology of 
Infectious Diseases designated by the Chinese Ministry of Education, Chongqing
Medical University, Chongqing, China.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most deadly cancers. Aberrant
oncogenic activation of the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway contributes to
hepatocellular carcinogenesis. Various epigenetic modifications of the Wnt
antagonist secreted frizzled-related protein (SFRP) family have been implicated
in regulating Wnt signaling. Here, we report that Hepatitis C virus (HCV) core
protein downregulates SFRP1 expression when it is expressed in Huh7 and HepG2
cells. SFRP1 expression can be effectively restored by using either a DNA
methylation inhibitor alone or in combination with a histone deacetylase
inhibitor. DNA methylation analysis of the SFRP1 promoter revealed that
cytosine-phosphate-guanine (CpG) islands close to the transcriptional start site 
(TSS) in the SFRP1 promoter were hypermethylated in core-expressing Huh7 cells,
suggesting that HCV core protein may downregulate SFRP1 expression by inducing
hypermethylation of the SFRP1 promoter. Chromatin immunoprecipitation revealed
that HCV core protein markedly increased the expression level and binding of DNA 
methyltransferase-1 (Dnmt1) and histone deacetylase-1 (HDAC1) to the TSS of the
SFRP1 promoter region, resulting in repression of acetyl-histone H3-binding
capacity to SFRP1 promoter and the eventual epigenetic silencing of SFRP1
expression. Furthermore, the core protein-promoted cell proliferation, migration 
and invasiveness were effectively abrogated either by Dnmt1 knockdown or
restoration of SFRP1 expression in hepatoma cells. Dnmt1 knockdown or SFRP1
overexpression also inhibited HCV core-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition 
(EMT) and significantly decreased the expression levels of activated ß-catenin
and Wnt/ß-catenin target genes, c-Myc and cyclin D1. We further showed that
knockdown of Dnmt1 and restoration of SFRP1 inhibited core-induced in vivo tumor 
growth and aggressiveness in a xenograft HCC model. Taken together, our results
strongly suggest that the HCV core-induced epigenetic silencing of SFRP1 may lead
to the activation of the Wnt signaling pathway and thus contribute to HCC
aggressiveness through induction of EMT.

PMID: 23770846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Gastroenterology. 2013 Oct;145(4):853-64.e9. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2013.06.008.
Epub 2013 Jun 13.

Decreased levels of miR-224 and the passenger strand of miR-221 increase MBD2,
suppressing maspin and promoting colorectal tumor growth and metastasis in mice.

Yuan K(1), Xie K, Fox J, Zeng H, Gao H, Huang C, Wu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of North Dakota, 
Grand Forks, North Dakota; The State Key Laboratory for Biotherapy, West China
Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Little is known about functions of microRNA (miR) passenger
strands (miR*) or their roles in tumor development or progression. We screened
for miRs and miR* with levels that were altered in metastatic colorectal cancer
(CRC) cells and human tumor samples and investigated their targets and effects on
cell function and tumor progression in mice.
METHODS: We performed array-based profile analysis to identify miRs with levels
that were increased more than 2-fold in metastatic (SW620) CRC cells compared
with nonmetastatic (SW480) cells. Quantitative polymerase chain reaction and in
situ hybridization analyses were used to measure miRNA levels in CRC cell lines
and human tumor samples. We used miRNA duplex mimics or inhibitors to increase
and decrease levels of miRNA in CRC cells and assessed their activities and
ability to form metastatic xenograft tumors in nude mice.
RESULTS: Levels of miR-221* and miR-224 were reduced in metastatic compared with 
nonmetastatic CRC cells; levels in human tumor samples correlated inversely with 
tumor stage and metastasis to lymph nodes as well as patient survival times.
SW480 cells transfected with miR-221* or miR-224 inhibitors had increased
motility in vitro compared with SW480 control cells and formed larger, more
metastatic tumors when injected into mice. SW620 cells transfected with miR-221* 
or miR-224 mimics had reduced migration and motility in vitro and formed smaller 
tumors with fewer metastases in mice compared with control SW620 cells. We
identified the 3' untranslated region of MBD2 messenger RNA as a target of
miR-221* and miR-224. MBD2 silences the gene encoding maspin, a suppressor of
metastasis. In CRC cells, we found that miR-221* and miR-224 increase the
expression of maspin through MBD2 down-regulation.
CONCLUSIONS: In metastatic CRC cells, reduced levels of miR-221* and miR-224
increase levels of MBD2, thereby decreasing expression of the metastasis
suppressor maspin. Increased activities of miR-221* and miR-224 reduce growth and
metastasis of CRC xenograft tumors in mice; these miRs might be developed as
therapeutic reagents or biomarkers of CRC progression.

Copyright © 2013 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3783518
PMID: 23770133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. BMC Cancer. 2013 Jun 13;13:286. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-13-286.

The histone deacetylase inhibitor SAHA acts in synergism with fenretinide and
doxorubicin to control growth of rhabdoid tumor cells.

Kerl K(1), Ries D, Unland R, Borchert C, Moreno N, Hasselblatt M, Jürgens H, Kool
M, Görlich D, Eveslage M, Jung M, Meisterernst M, Frühwald M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University Childrens'
Hospital Muenster, Muenster, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Rhabdoid tumors are highly aggressive malignancies affecting infants 
and very young children. In many instances these tumors are resistant to
conventional type chemotherapy necessitating alternative approaches.
METHODS: Proliferation assays (MTT), apoptosis (propidium iodide/annexin V) and
cell cycle analysis (DAPI), RNA expression microarrays and western blots were
used to identify synergism of the HDAC (histone deacetylase) inhibitor SAHA with 
fenretinide, tamoxifen and doxorubicin in rhabdoidtumor cell lines.
RESULTS: HDAC1 and HDAC2 are overexpressed in primary rhabdoid tumors and
rhabdoid tumor cell lines. Targeting HDACs in rhabdoid tumors induces cell cycle 
arrest and apoptosis. On the other hand HDAC inhibition induces deregulated gene 
programs (MYCC-, RB program and the stem cell program) in rhabdoid tumors. These 
programs are in general associated with cell cycle progression. Targeting these
activated pro-proliferative genes by combined approaches of HDAC-inhibitors plus 
fenretinide, which inhibits cyclinD1, exhibit strong synergistic effects on
induction of apoptosis. Furthermore, HDAC inhibition sensitizes rhabdoid tumor
cell lines to cell death induced by chemotherapy.
CONCLUSION: Our data demonstrate that HDAC inhibitor treatment in combination
with fenretinide or conventional chemotherapy is a promising tool for the
treatment of chemoresistant rhabdoid tumors.

PMCID: PMC3693872
PMID: 23764045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Cancer Cell Int. 2013 Jun 7;13(1):57. doi: 10.1186/1475-2867-13-57.

The effects of a histone deacetylase inhibitor on biological behavior of diffuse 
large B-cell lymphoma cell lines and insights into the underlying mechanisms.

Cai Y(1), Cui W, Chen W, Wei P, Chi Y, Zhang P, Bi R, Zhou X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, Shanghai, PR
China. xyzhou100@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Epigenetic control using histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors is a
promising therapy for lymphomas. Insights into the anti-proliferative effects of 
HDAC inhibitors on diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and further
understanding of the underlying mechanisms, which remain unclear to date, are of 
great importance.
METHODS: Three DLBCL cell lines (DoHH2, LY1 and LY8) were used to define the
potential epigenetic targets for Trichostatin A (TSA)-mediated anti-proliferative
effects via CCK-8 assay. Cell cycle distribution and apoptosis were detected by
flow cytometry. We further investigated the underlying molecular mechanisms by
examining expression levels of relevant proteins using western blot analysis.
RESULTS: TSA treatment inhibited the growth of all three DLBCL cell lines and
enhanced cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Molecular analysis revealed upregulated
acetylation of histone H3, a-tubulin and p53, and dephosphorylation of pAkt with 
altered expression of its main downstream effectors (p21, p27, cyclin D1 and
Bcl-2). HDAC profiling revealed that all three cell lines had varying HDAC1-6
expression levels, with the highest expression of all six isoforms, in DoHH2
cells, which displayed the highest sensitivity to TSA.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrated that the HDAC inhibitor TSA inhibited DLBCL 
cell growth, and that cell lines with higher expression of HDACs tended to be
more sensitive to TSA. Our data also suggested that inhibition of pAkt and
activation of p53 pathway are the main molecular events involved in inhibitory
effects of TSA.

PMCID: PMC3681717
PMID: 23758695  [PubMed]


119. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol. 2013 Apr-Jun;26(2):371-81.

Histone modifications of Notch1 promoter affect lung CD4+ T cell differentiation 
in asthmatic rats.

Cui ZL(1), Gu W, Ding T, Peng XH, Chen X, Luan CY, Han RC, Xu WG, Guo XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, XinHua Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Asthma is an inflammatory disease of the airways, and the current treatment in
managing asthma is the control of inflammation. Notch signaling pathway has been 
linked to T-cell imbalance. The present study aimed to explore the histone
modifications of Notch1 promoter in normal and asthmatic lung CD4+ T cells.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis showed that the acetylation levels of
total H3, H4, site-specific H3K9, H3K14, H3K27, H3K18, H4K16, and the
trimethylation levels of H3K4, H3K79 of Notch1 gene promoter were increased
significantly in asthmatic lung CD4+ T cells compared to the control group, which
correlated with increased P300, PCAF activity and decreased HDAC1, HDAC2
activity. After intervention of garcinol, a potent inhibitor of histone
acetyltransferases, in asthmatic lung CD4+ T cells, HAT activity decreased
significantly and the increased Notch1 and hes-1 expression was reversed. The
total H3ac, H4ac, site-specific H3K9ac, H3K14ac, H3K27ac, H3K18ac, H4K16ac and
H3K79me3 levels of Notch1 gene promoter decreased significantly, and the H3K4me3,
H3K9me3, H4K20me3 levels had no significant difference. We further investigated
the suppressive effects of GAR on asthmatic parameters. Results showed that the
levels of IL-4, IL-5 and IL-13 were significantly reduced and a small reverse
trend was found in the level of IFN-g after GAR treatment. Furthermore, the
expression of NF-&#954;B and AP-1 reduced significantly. These results suggest
that asthma is associated with changes in the epigenetic status of Notch1
promoter, including abnormal histone acetylation and methylation, and GAR may
have applications in the treatment of asthma.

PMID: 23755752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Mol Syst Biol. 2013;9:672. doi: 10.1038/msb.2013.26.

The functional interactome landscape of the human histone deacetylase family.

Joshi P(1), Greco TM, Guise AJ, Luo Y, Yu F, Nesvizhskii AI, Cristea IM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA.

Comment in
    Mol Syst Biol. 2013;9:671.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are a diverse family of essential transcriptional
regulatory enzymes, that function through the spatial and temporal recruitment of
protein complexes. As the composition and regulation of HDAC complexes are only
partially characterized, we built the first global protein interaction network
for all 11 human HDACs in T cells. Integrating fluorescence microscopy,
immunoaffinity purifications, quantitative mass spectrometry, and bioinformatics,
we identified over 200 unreported interactions for both well-characterized and
lesser-studied HDACs, a subset of which were validated by orthogonal approaches. 
We establish HDAC11 as a member of the survival of motor neuron complex and
pinpoint a functional role in mRNA splicing. We designed a complementary
label-free and metabolic-labeling mass spectrometry-based proteomics strategy for
profiling interaction stability among different HDAC classes, revealing that
HDAC1 interactions within chromatin-remodeling complexes are largely stable,
while transcription factors preferentially exist in rapid equilibrium. Overall,
this study represents a valuable resource for investigating HDAC functions in
health and disease, encompassing emerging themes of HDAC regulation in cell cycle
and RNA processing and a deeper functional understanding of HDAC complex
stability.

PMCID: PMC3964310
PMID: 23752268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Mol Syst Biol. 2013;9:671. doi: 10.1038/msb.2013.33.

The HDAC interaction network.

Livyatan I(1), Meshorer E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, The Alexander Silberman Institute of Life Sciences,
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Edmond J. Safra Campus, Jerusalem, Israel.

Comment on
    Mol Syst Biol. 2013;9:672.

PMCID: PMC3964317
PMID: 23752267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Exp Med. 2013 Jul 1;210(7):1369-87. doi: 10.1084/jem.20122394. Epub 2013 Jun
10.

The human papillomavirus type 16 E7 oncoprotein induces a transcriptional
repressor complex on the Toll-like receptor 9 promoter.

Hasan UA(1), Zannetti C, Parroche P, Goutagny N, Malfroy M, Roblot G, Carreira C,
Hussain I, Müller M, Taylor-Papadimitriou J, Picard D, Sylla BS, Trinchieri G,
Medzhitov R, Tommasino M.

Author information: 
(1)Infections and Cancer Biology Group, International Agency for Research on
Cancer, Lyon 69008, France. uzma.hasan@inserm.fr

Human papillomavirus type 16 (HPV16) and other oncogenic viruses have been
reported to deregulate immunity by suppressing the function of the
double-stranded DNA innate sensor TLR9. However, the mechanisms leading to these 
events remain to be elucidated. We show that infection of human epithelial cells 
with HPV16 promotes the formation of an inhibitory transcriptional complex
containing NF-<U+03BA>Bp50-p65 and ERa induced by the E7 oncoprotein. The E7-mediated
transcriptional complex also recruited the histone demethylase JARID1B and
histone deacetylase HDAC1. The entire complex bound to a specific region on the
TLR9 promoter, which resulted in decreased methylation and acetylation of
histones upstream of the TLR9 transcriptional start site. The involvement of
NF-<U+03BA>B and ERa in the TLR9 down-regulation by HPV16 E7 was fully confirmed in
cervical tissues from human patients. Importantly, we present evidence that the
HPV16-induced TLR9 down-regulation affects the interferon response which
negatively regulates viral infection. Our studies highlight a novel
HPV16-mediated mechanism that combines epigenetic and transcriptional events to
suppress a key innate immune sensor.

PMCID: PMC3698525
PMID: 23752229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Hepatology. 2013 Dec;58(6):2089-98. doi: 10.1002/hep.26542. Epub 2013 Oct 7.

Loss of histone deacetylases 1 and 2 in hepatocytes impairs murine liver
regeneration through Ki67 depletion.

Xia J(1), Zhou Y, Ji H, Wang Y, Wu Q, Bao J, Ye F, Shi Y, Bu H.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Transplant Engineering and Immunology, Ministry of Health,
Chengdu, China; State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, Chengdu, China.

Histone deacetylases 1 and 2 (HDAC1 and HDAC2) are ubiquitously expressed in
tissues, including the liver, and play critical roles in numerous
physiopathological processes. Little is known regarding the role of HDAC1 and
HDAC2 in liver regeneration. In this study we generated mice in which Hdac1,
Hdac2 or both genes were selectively knocked out in hepatocytes to investigate
the role of these genes in liver regeneration following hepatic injury induced by
partial hepatectomy or carbon tetrachloride administration. The loss of HDAC1
and/or HDAC2 (HDAC1/2) protein resulted in impaired liver regeneration. HDAC1/2
inactivation did not decrease hepatocytic 5-bromo-2-deoxyuridine uptake or the
expression of proliferating cell nuclear antigen, cyclins, or cyclin-dependent
kinases. However, the levels of Ki67, a mitotic marker that is expressed from the
mid-G1 phase to the end of mitosis and is closely involved in the regulation of
mitotic progression, were greatly decreased, and abnormal mitosis lacking Ki67
expression was frequently observed in HDAC1/2-deficient livers. The
down-regulation of either HDAC1/2 or Ki67 in the mouse liver cancer cell line
Hepa1-6 resulted in similar mitotic defects. Finally, both HDAC1 and HDAC2
proteins were associated with the Ki67 gene mediated by CCAAT/enhancer-binding
protein ß.CONCLUSION: Both HDAC1 and HDAC2 play crucial roles in the regulation
of liver regeneration. The loss of HDAC1/2 inhibits Ki67 expression and results
in defective hepatocyte mitosis and impaired liver regeneration.

© 2013 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 23744762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. PLoS One. 2013 May 30;8(5):e63941. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063941. Print 2013.

An integrative proteomics and interaction network-based classifier for prostate
cancer diagnosis.

Jiang FN(1), He HC, Zhang YQ, Yang DL, Huang JH, Zhu YX, Mo RJ, Chen G, Yang SB, 
Chen YR, Zhong WD, Zhou WL.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China.

AIM: Early diagnosis of prostate cancer (PCa), which is a clinically
heterogeneous-multifocal disease, is essential to improve the prognosis of
patients. However, published PCa diagnostic markers share little overlap and are 
poorly validated using independent data. Therefore, we here developed an
integrative proteomics and interaction network-based classifier by combining the 
differential protein expression with topological features of human protein
interaction networks to enhance the ability of PCa diagnosis.
METHODS AND RESULTS: By two-dimensional fluorescence difference gel
electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) coupled with MS using PCa and adjacent benign tissues
of prostate, a total of 60 proteins with the differential expression in PCa
tissues were identified as the candidate markers. Then, their networks were
analyzed by GeneGO Meta-Core software and three hub proteins (PTEN, SFPQ and
HDAC1) were chosen. After that, a PCa diagnostic classifier was constructed by
support vector machine (SVM) modeling based on the microarray gene expression
data of the genes which encode the hub proteins mentioned above. Validations of
diagnostic performance showed that this classifier had high predictive accuracy
(85.96~90.18%) and area under ROC curve (approximating 1.0). Furthermore, the
clinical significance of PTEN, SFPQ and HDAC1 proteins in PCa was validated by
both ELISA and immunohistochemistry analyses. More interestingly, PTEN protein
was identified as an independent prognostic marker for biochemical
recurrence-free survival in PCa patients according to the multivariate analysis
by Cox Regression.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicated that the integrative proteomics and interaction
network-based classifier which combines the differential protein expression and
topological features of human protein interaction network may be a powerful tool 
for the diagnosis of PCa. We also identified PTEN protein as a novel prognostic
marker for biochemical recurrence-free survival in PCa patients.

PMCID: PMC3667836
PMID: 23737958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. PLoS One. 2013 May 28;8(5):e64600. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0064600. Print 2013.

HDAC up-regulation in early colon field carcinogenesis is involved in cell
tumorigenicity through regulation of chromatin structure.

Stypula-Cyrus Y(1), Damania D, Kunte DP, Cruz MD, Subramanian H, Roy HK, Backman 
V.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Engineering Department, Northwestern University, Evanston,
Illinois, United States of America.

Normal cell function is dependent on the proper maintenance of chromatin
structure. Regulation of chromatin structure is controlled by histone
modifications that directly influence chromatin architecture and genome function.
Specifically, the histone deacetylase (HDAC) family of proteins modulate
chromatin compaction and are commonly dysregulated in many tumors, including
colorectal cancer (CRC). However, the role of HDAC proteins in early colorectal
carcinogenesis has not been previously reported. We found HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3,
HDAC5, and HDAC7 all to be up-regulated in the field of human CRC. Furthermore,
we observed that HDAC2 up-regulation is one of the earliest events in CRC
carcinogenesis and observed this in human field carcinogenesis, the
azoxymethane-treated rat model, and in more aggressive colon cancer cell lines.
The universality of HDAC2 up-regulation suggests that HDAC2 up-regulation is a
novel and important early event in CRC, which may serve as a biomarker. HDAC
inhibitors (HDACIs) interfere with tumorigenic HDAC activity; however, the
precise mechanisms involved in this process remain to be elucidated. We confirmed
that HDAC inhibition by valproic acid (VPA) targeted the more aggressive cell
line. Using nuclease digestion assays and transmission electron microscopy
imaging, we observed that VPA treatment induced greater changes in chromatin
structure in the more aggressive cell line. Furthermore, we used the novel
imaging technique partial wave spectroscopy (PWS) to quantify nanoscale
alterations in chromatin. We noted that the PWS results are consistent with the
biological assays, indicating a greater effect of VPA treatment in the more
aggressive cell type. Together, these results demonstrate the importance of HDAC 
activity in early carcinogenic events and the unique role of higher-order
chromatin structure in determining cell tumorigenicity.

PMCID: PMC3665824
PMID: 23724067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Hepatol. 2013 Oct;59(4):797-804. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2013.05.028. Epub 2013 May
25.

Gender matters: estrogen receptor alpha (ERa) and histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1
and 2 control the gender-specific transcriptional regulation of human uridine
diphosphate glucuronosyltransferases genes (UGT1A).

Kalthoff S(1), Winkler A, Freiberg N, Manns MP, Strassburg CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Endocrinology, Hannover Medical
School, Hannover, Germany.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Gender influences incidence, progression, and therapy of
hepatogastrointestinal diseases. The aim of this study was to elucidate the
molecular mechanism of gender-specific UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGT1A)
regulation, representing important hepatogastrointestinal detoxification enzymes 
for xenobiotics, drugs, and endobiotics.
METHODS: UGT1A-gene activation was studied by reporter gene experiments and
estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1/ERa) co-transfection using KYSE70- and HepG2 cells 
(male origin), and SW403 cells (female origin). Cell lines, and humanized
transgenic UGT1A (htgUGT1A) mice (female/male) were treated with the ERa
inhibitor tamoxifen. UGT1A mRNA expression was analyzed by TaqMan PCR, the
recruitment of ERa, histone deacetylases (HDAC), and the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AhR) by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP), and ERa expression in
gastrointestinal mouse tissues by Western blot and immunofluorescence.
RESULTS: In KYSE70 cells (male), UGT1A gene expression was induced 5-10 fold, and
inhibited in the presence of ERa by 55-77%. In SW403 (female) cells, absent
inducibility was restored after tamoxifen treatment. In the jejunum and colon of 
tgUGT1A mice, UGT1A induction that was exclusively detected in male mice could be
restored in female mice after tamoxifen pre-treatment. ChIP assays demonstrated
the recruitment of ERa and HDACs to the xenobiotic response elements of UGT1A
promoters during gene repression. Western blot showed higher ERa expression in
the female jejunum and colon.
CONCLUSIONS: We show gender-specific transcriptional control of UGT1A genes in
jejunum and colon, which is repressed by ERa and the recruitment of HDCAs to the 
UGT1A promoter sequence in females. A molecular mechanism controlling
gender-specific drug metabolism and its therapeutic reversal is demonstrated.

Copyright © 2013 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23714156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Int J Oncol. 2013 Aug;43(2):495-502. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2013.1960. Epub 2013 May
24.

Inhibition of DNA methyltransferases, histone deacetylases and lysine-specific
demethylase-1 suppresses the tumorigenicity of the ovarian cancer ascites cell
line SKOV3.

Meng F(1), Sun G, Zhong M, Yu Y, Brewer MA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gynecologic Oncology, University of Connecticut Health Center,
Farmington, CT 06032, USA.

Ovarian cancer is one of the most lethal female malignancies and epigenetic
abnormalities are thought to play a vital role in the pathogenesis, development
and progression of ovarian cancer. Our goal was to investigate whether the
combination of trichostatin A (TSA) and 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (decitabine) was
superior to single agent on tumorigenicity of ovarian cancer cells. We found that
tumorigenicity and metastasis of SKOV3 cells were significantly suppressed by the
combination of TSA and decitabine in xenograft mouse models. Migration capacity
was markedly suppressed through the induction of E-cadherin and suppression of
N-cadherin when treated with TSA and decitabine. Invasion was also suppressed at 
least partially through inhibition of MMP-2 and MMP-9 with the combined
treatment. The combination drugs markedly inhibited spheroid formation and
significantly impaired migration and invasion capacity of spheroid derived cells 
through inhibition of Twist, N-cadherin, MMP-2, MMP-9 and induction of
E-cadherin. Epigenetically, the activity of DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) and
histone deacetylases (HDACs) were markedly inhibited when TSA was used in
combination with decitabine, especially the expression of DNMT3A/3B and HDAC1/2. 
Acetylation of histone H3 and H4 were more markedly stimulated with the
combination than with either agent alone. The expression level of lysine-specific
demethylase-1 (LSD1) was also suppressed. The transcription activity marker
dimethylated-H3K4 was induced, but the dimethylated-H3K9 was suppressed by
exposure to the combined drugs. These results suggest that the combination of TSA
and decitabine significantly suppresses tumorigenicity by inhibiting migration
and invasion of ovarian cancer cells via regulating the expression of the
cadherins and MMPs, which may be epigenetically regulated by DNA methylation and 
histone modification.

PMID: 23709006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Oncogene. 2014 Apr 24;33(17):2157-68. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.178. Epub 2013 May
27.

The NuRD complex cooperates with DNMTs to maintain silencing of key colorectal
tumor suppressor genes.

Cai Y(1), Geutjes EJ(2), de Lint K(2), Roepman P(3), Bruurs L(2), Yu LR(4), Wang 
W(1), van Blijswijk J(2), Mohammad H(1), de Rink I(5), Bernards R(2), Baylin
SB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology and The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA. (2)Division of Molecular
Carcinogenesis, Center for Biomedical Genetics and Cancer Genomics Centre, The
Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (3)Department of
Research and Development, Agendia NV, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (4)Division of 
Systems Biology, Center of Excellence for Proteomics, National Center for
Toxicological Research, US Food and Drug Administration, Jefferson, AR, USA.
(5)Central Microarray and Deep Sequencing Core Facility, The Netherlands Cancer
Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Many tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) are silenced through synergistic layers of
epigenetic regulation including abnormal DNA hypermethylation of promoter CpG
islands, repressive chromatin modifications and enhanced nucleosome deposition
over transcription start sites. The protein complexes responsible for silencing
of many of such TSGs remain to be identified. Our previous work demonstrated that
multiple silenced TSGs in colorectal cancer cells can be partially reactivated by
DNA demethylation in cells disrupted for the DNA methyltransferases 1 and 3B
(DNMT1 and 3B) or by DNMT inhibitors (DNMTi). Herein, we used proteomic and
functional genetic approaches to identify additional proteins that cooperate with
DNMTs in silencing these key silenced TSGs in colon cancer cells. We discovered
that DNMTs and the core components of the NuRD (Mi-2/nucleosome remodeling and
deacetylase) nucleosome remodeling complex, chromo domain helicase DNA-binding
protein 4 (CHD4) and histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) occupy the promoters of
several of these hypermethylated TSGs and physically and functionally interact to
maintain their silencing. Consistent with this, we find an inverse relationship
between expression of HDAC1 and 2 and these TSGs in a large panel of primary
colorectal tumors. We demonstrate that DNMTs and NuRD cooperate to maintain the
silencing of several negative regulators of the WNT and other signaling pathways.
We find that depletion of CHD4 is synergistic with DNMT inhibition in reducing
the viability of colon cancer cells in correlation with reactivation of TSGs,
suggesting that their combined inhibition may be beneficial for the treatment of 
colon cancer. Since CHD4 has ATPase activity, our data identify CHD4 as a
potentially novel drug target in cancer.

PMCID: PMC3883927
PMID: 23708667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Chem Biol. 2013 May 23;20(5):713-25. doi: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2013.03.020.

Selective HDAC1/HDAC2 inhibitors induce neuroblastoma differentiation.

Frumm SM(1), Fan ZP, Ross KN, Duvall JR, Gupta S, VerPlank L, Suh BC, Holson E,
Wagner FF, Smith WB, Paranal RM, Bassil CF, Qi J, Roti G, Kung AL, Bradner JE,
Tolliday N, Stegmaier K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02215, USA.

While cytotoxic chemotherapy remains the hallmark of cancer treatment, intensive 
regimens fall short in many malignancies, including high-risk neuroblastoma. One 
alternative strategy is to therapeutically promote tumor differentiation. We
created a gene expression signature to measure neuroblast maturation, adapted it 
to a high-throughput platform, and screened a diversity oriented
synthesis-generated small-molecule library for differentiation inducers. We
identified BRD8430, containing a nine-membered lactam, an ortho-amino anilide
functionality, and three chiral centers, as a selective class I histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor (HDAC1 > 2 > 3). Further investigation demonstrated 
that selective HDAC1/HDAC2 inhibition using compounds or RNA interference induced
differentiation and decreased viability in neuroblastoma cell lines. Combined
treatment with 13-cis retinoic acid augmented these effects and enhanced
activation of retinoic acid signaling. Therefore, by applying a chemical genomic 
screening approach, we identified selective HDAC1/HDAC2 inhibition as a strategy 
to induce neuroblastoma differentiation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3919449
PMID: 23706636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Genes Dev. 2013 May 15;27(10):1179-97. doi: 10.1101/gad.215293.113.

Unliganded progesterone receptor-mediated targeting of an RNA-containing
repressive complex silences a subset of hormone-inducible genes.

Vicent GP(1), Nacht AS, Zaurin R, Font-Mateu J, Soronellas D, Le Dily F, Reyes D,
Beato M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Genomic Regulation CRG, E-08003 Barcelona, Spain.
guillermo.vicent@crg.es

A close chromatin conformation precludes gene expression in eukaryotic cells.
Genes activated by external cues have to overcome this repressive state by
locally changing chromatin structure to a more open state. Although much is known
about hormonal gene activation, how basal repression of regulated genes is
targeted to the correct sites throughout the genome is not well understood. Here 
we report that in breast cancer cells, the unliganded progesterone receptor (PR) 
binds genomic sites and targets a repressive complex containing HP1<U+03B3>
(heterochromatin protein 1<U+03B3>), LSD1 (lysine-specific demethylase 1), HDAC1/2,
CoREST (corepressor for REST [RE1 {neuronal repressor element 1} silencing
transcription factor]), KDM5B, and the RNA SRA (steroid receptor RNA activator)
to 20% of hormone-inducible genes, keeping these genes silenced prior to hormone 
treatment. The complex is anchored via binding of HP1<U+03B3> to H3K9me3 (histone H3
tails trimethylated on Lys 9). SRA interacts with PR, HP1<U+03B3>, and LSD1, and its
depletion compromises the loading of the repressive complex to target
chromatin-promoting aberrant gene derepression. Upon hormonal treatment, the
HP1<U+03B3>-LSD1 complex is displaced from these constitutively poorly expressed genes
as a result of rapid phosphorylation of histone H3 at Ser 10 mediated by MSK1,
which is recruited to the target sites by the activated PR. Displacement of the
repressive complex enables the loading of coactivators needed for chromatin
remodeling and activation of this set of genes, including genes involved in
apoptosis and cell proliferation. These results highlight the importance of the
unliganded PR in hormonal regulation of breast cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3672650
PMID: 23699411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2013 Aug 1;305(3):F244-54. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00126.2013. Epub 2013 May 22.

Class I histone deacetylase activity is required for proliferation of renal
epithelial cells.

Tang J(1), Yan Y, Zhao TC, Bayliss G, Yan H, Zhuang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Shanghai East Hospital, Tongji University School of 
Medicine, Shanghai, China.

The process of renal regeneration after acute kidney injury is thought to
recapitulate renal development, and proliferation of renal proximal tubular cells
(RPTCs) is a critical step in the regenerative response. Recent studies indicate 
that class I histone deacetylases (HDACs) are required for embryonic kidney gene 
expression, growth, and differentiation. The role and underlying mechanisms of
class I HDAC activation in RPTC proliferation, however, remain unclear. In this
study, we used cultured RPTCs to examine this issue since four class I HDAC
isoforms (1, 2, 3, and 8) are abundantly expressed in this cell type. Blocking
class I HDAC activity with a highly selective inhibitor, MS-275, induced global
histone H3 hyperacetylation, reduced RPTC proliferation, and diminished
expression of cyclin D1 and proliferating cell nuclear antigen. Silencing HDAC1, 
3, or 8 with small interfering RNA resulted in similar biological effects.
Activation of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and signal transducers and 
activators of transcription 3 (STAT3) was required for RPTC proliferation, and
STAT3 functioned downstream of EGFR. Treatment with MS-275 or knockdown of HDAC1,
3, or 8 suppressed EGFR expression and phosphorylation, and silencing HDAC1 and 3
also reduced STAT3 phosphorylation. However, HDAC2 downregulation did not affect 
RPTC proliferation and phosphorylation of EGFR and STAT3. Collectively, these
data reveal a critical role of class I HDACs in mediating proliferation of renal 
epithelial cells through activation of the EGFR/STAT3 signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC3742866
PMID: 23698124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Biochem Soc Trans. 2013 Jun;41(3):741-9. doi: 10.1042/BST20130010.

The physiological roles of histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1 and 2: complex co-stars
with multiple leading parts.

Kelly RD(1), Cowley SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Leicester, Henry Welcome Building,
Lancaster Road, Leicester LE1 9HN, U.K.

HDACs (histone deacetylases) 1 and 2 are ubiquitous long-lived proteins, which
are often found together in three major multiprotein co-repressor complexes:
Sin3, NuRD (nucleosome remodelling and deacetylation) and CoREST (co-repressor
for element-1-silencing transcription factor). Although there is a burgeoning
number of non-histone proteins within the acetylome, these complexes contain
multiple DNA/chromatin-recognition motifs, which, in combination with
transcription factors, target HDAC1/2 to chromatin. Their physiological roles
should therefore be viewed within the framework of chromatin manipulation.
Classically, HDACs were thought to be recruited predominantly by transcriptional 
repressors to facilitate local histone deacetylation and transcriptional
repression. More recently, genome-wide assays have mapped HDAC1/2 and their
associated proteins to transcriptionally active loci and have provided
alternative context-specific functions, whereby their repressive functions are
subtly exerted to balance transcriptional activation and repression. With a few
significant exceptions (early embryogenesis, brain development), HDAC1 and HDAC2 
are functionally redundant. In most mouse knockout studies, deletion of both
enzymes is required in order to produce a substantial phenotype. HDAC1/2 activity
has been implicated in the development of numerous tissue and cell types,
including heart, skin, brain, B-cells and T-cells. A common feature in all
HDAC1/2-knockout, -knockdown and small-molecule inhibitor studies is a reduction 
in cell proliferation. A generic role in cell cycle progression could be
exploited in cancer cells, by blocking HDAC1/2 activity with small-molecule
inhibitors, making them potentially useful drug targets.

PMID: 23697933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2013 Jun 12;54(6):4072-80. doi: 10.1167/iovs.12-11529.

Inhibition of HDAC2 protects the retina from ischemic injury.

Fan J(1), Alsarraf O, Dahrouj M, Platt KA, Chou CJ, Rice DS, Crosson CE.

Author information: 
(1)Storm Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29425, USA. fan@musc.edu

PURPOSE: Protein acetylation is an essential mechanism in regulating
transcriptional and inflammatory events. Studies have shown that nonselective
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors can protect the retina from ischemic injury
in rats. However, the role of specific HDAC isoforms in retinal degenerative
processes remains obscure. The purpose of this study was to investigate the role 
of HDAC2 isoform in a mouse model of ischemic retinal injury.
METHODS: Localization of HDAC2 in mice retinas was evaluated by
immunohistochemical analyses. To investigate whether selective reduction in HDAC2
activity can protect the retina from ischemic injury, Hdac2<U+207A>/<U+207B> mice were
utilized. Electroretinographic (ERG) and morphometric analyses were used to
assess retinal function and morphology.
RESULTS: Our results demonstrated that HDAC2 is primarily localized in nuclei in 
inner nuclear and retinal ganglion cell layers, and HDAC2 activity accounted for 
approximately 35% of the total activities of HDAC1, 2, 3, and 6 in the retina. In
wild-type mice, ERG a- and b-waves from ischemic eyes were significantly reduced 
when compared to pre-ischemia baseline values. Morphometric examination of these 
eyes revealed significant degeneration of inner retinal layers. In Hdac2<U+207A>/<U+207B> mice,
ERG a- and b-waves from ischemic eyes were significantly greater than those
measured in ischemic eyes from wild-type mice. Morphologic measurements
demonstrated that Hdac2<U+207A>/<U+207B> mice exhibit significantly less retinal degeneration
than wild-type mice.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated that suppressing HDAC2 expression can
effectively reduce ischemic retinal injury. Our results support the idea that the
development of selective HDAC2 inhibitors may provide an efficacious treatment
for ischemic retinal injury.

PMCID: PMC3681476
PMID: 23696608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Pain. 2013 Sep;154(9):1668-79. doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2013.05.021. Epub 2013 May 18.

HDAC inhibitors attenuate the development of hypersensitivity in models of
neuropathic pain.

Denk F(1), Huang W, Sidders B, Bithell A, Crow M, Grist J, Sharma S, Ziemek D,
Rice AS, Buckley NJ, McMahon SB.

Author information: 
(1)King's College London, Wolfson Centre for Age-Related Diseases, London SE1
1UL, United Kingdom. franziska.denk@kcl.ac.uk

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs) interfere with the epigenetic process of 
histone acetylation and are known to have analgesic properties in models of
chronic inflammatory pain. The aim of this study was to determine whether these
compounds could also affect neuropathic pain. Different class I HDACIs were
delivered intrathecally into rat spinal cord in models of traumatic nerve injury 
and antiretroviral drug-induced peripheral neuropathy (stavudine, d4T).
Mechanical and thermal hypersensitivity was attenuated by 40% to 50% as a result 
of HDACI treatment, but only if started before any insult. The drugs globally
increased histone acetylation in the spinal cord, but appeared to have no
measurable effects in relevant dorsal root ganglia in this treatment paradigm,
suggesting that any potential mechanism should be sought in the central nervous
system. Microarray analysis of dorsal cord RNA revealed the signature of the
specific compound used (MS-275) and suggested that its main effect was mediated
through HDAC1. Taken together, these data support a role for histone acetylation 
in the emergence of neuropathic pain.

Copyright © 2013 International Association for the Study of Pain. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3763368
PMID: 23693161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Bioorg Med Chem. 2013 Jul 1;21(13):3795-807. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2013.04.036. Epub
2013 Apr 22.

Structural basis for the design and synthesis of selective HDAC inhibitors.

Di Micco S(1), Chini MG, Terracciano S, Bruno I, Riccio R, Bifulco G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Farmacia, Università degli Studi di Salerno, Via Ponte Don
Melillo, 84084 Fisciano, Salerno, Italy.

Histone Deacetylases are considered promising targets for cancer epigenetic
therapy, and small molecules able to modulate their biological function have
recently gained an increasing interest as potential anticancer agents. In spite
of their potential application in cancer therapy, most HDAC inhibitors
unselectively bind the several HDAC isoforms, giving rise to different
side-effects. In this context, we have traced out the structural elements
responsible of selective binding for the therapeutically relevant different HDAC 
isoforms. The structural analysis has been carried out by molecular modeling,
docking in the binding pockets of HDAC1-4 and HDAC6-8, 36 inhibitors presenting a
well defined selectivity for the different isoforms. As quick proof of evidence, 
we have designed, synthesized and experimentally tested three selective ligands. 
The experimental data suggest that the obtained structural guidelines can be
useful tools for the rational design of new potent inhibitors against selected
HDAC isoforms.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23693069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Reprod Sci. 2013 Dec;20(12):1416-22. doi: 10.1177/1933719113488450. Epub 2013 May
20.

The expression of histone deacetylase 1, but not other class I histone
deacetylases, is significantly increased in endometriosis.

Samartzis EP(1), Noske A, Samartzis N, Fink D, Imesch P.

Author information: 
(1)1Division of Gynecology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Class I histone deacetylases (HDACs-1-3) play an important role in steroid
hormone-dependent gene expression and in modulating cell survival and
proliferation. We analyzed their expression in a tissue microarray including 74
endometriosis samples and 30 normal endometrium controls. The mean HDAC-1
immunoreactivity score (IRS ± standard deviation) was 7.6 ± 2.5 in endometriosis 
and 5.3 ± 2.3 in normal endometrium (P < .001). In contrast, the IRSs of HDAC-2
and -3 were 11.7 ± 0.7 and 11.8 ± 1.1 in endometriosis and 11.6 ± 1.0 and 11.9 ± 
0.4 in normal endometrium (P = .7 and P = .2), respectively. Significant
correlations were found between HDAC-1 and estrogen (-alpha/-beta) and
progesterone receptor expression. In conclusion, HDAC-1, but not HDAC-2/-3, was
significantly increased in endometriosis and associated with steroid hormone
receptor expression that may reflect interdependence. In context with the
literature, specific inhibitors of HDAC-1 may have inhibitory activities similar 
to those of broad-spectrum HDAC inhibitors and may be clinically tolerated, which
would increase their chance as an option in the treatment of endometriosis.

PMCID: PMC3817669
PMID: 23690335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Neurosci Res. 2013 Sep;91(9):1133-42. doi: 10.1002/jnr.23221. Epub 2013 May 17.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors suppress immune activation in primary mouse
microglia.

Kannan V(1), Brouwer N, Hanisch UK, Regen T, Eggen BJ, Boddeke HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Section of Medical Physiology, University of
Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

Neuroinflammation is required for tissue clearance and repair after infections or
insults. To prevent excessive damage, it is crucial to limit the extent of
neuroinflammation and thereby the activation of its principal effector cell,
microglia. The two main major innate immune cell types in the CNS are astrocytes 
and microglia. Histone deacetylases (HDACs) have been implicated in regulating
the innate inflammatory response, and here we addressed their role in pure
astrocyte and microglia cultures. Endogenous HDAC expression levels were
determined in microglia and astrocytes and after treatment with
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or LPS and interferon <U+03B3> (IFN<U+03B3>). The relative expression 
level of HDACs was reduced in LPS- or LPS/IFN<U+03B3> (with the exception of HDAC1 and
-7)-stimulated astrocytes and increased in microglia after LPS treatment both in 
primary cultures and in microglia acutely isolated from LPS-treated mice, so we
focused on the inflammatory response in microglia. Primary microglia cultures
were treated with LPS in the presence or absence of HDAC inhibitors (HDACi).
Expression and release of inflammatory cytokines was determined by quantitative
RT-PCR, flow cytometry, and ELISA. HDACi strongly suppressed LPS-induced cytokine
expression and release by microglia. Furthermore, expression of M1- and
M2-associated activation markers was suppressed, and the migratory behavior of
microglia was attenuated. Our findings strongly suggest that HDACi suppress
innate immune activation in microglia.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23686642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Formos Med Assoc. 2014 Aug;113(8):513-20. doi: 10.1016/j.jfma.2013.04.007. Epub
2013 May 16.

Baicalin ameliorates neuropathic pain by suppressing HDAC1 expression in the
spinal cord of spinal nerve ligation rats.

Cherng CH(1), Lee KC(2), Chien CC(3), Chou KY(4), Cheng YC(5), Hsin ST(6), Lee
SO(3), Shen CH(7), Tsai RY(8), Wong CS(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Tri-Service General Hospital and National
Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan. (2)Department of Anesthesiology, Changhua
Christian Hospital, Changhua, Taiwan. (3)Department of Anesthesiology, Cathay
General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (4)General Education Center, National Taipei
University of Nursing and Health Sciences, Taipei, Taiwan. (5)Department of
Medical Research, Cathay General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; Institute of
Biomedical Engineering, National Central University, Jhongli, Taiwan. (6)Graduate
Institute of Medical Science, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Anesthesiology, Veterans General Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.
(8)Department of Anesthesiology, Cathay General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan;
Department of Health Care Management, National Taipei University of Nursing and
Health Sciences, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address: iris8084@gmail.com.
(9)Department of Anesthesiology, Cathay General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan;
Department of Medical Research, Cathay General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; Graduate
Institute of Medical Science, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan;
School of Medicine, Fu-Jen Catholic University, New Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic
address: w82556@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: In a recent study, we found that baicalin exhibited a potent 
analgesic effect on carrageenan-evoked thermal hyperalgesia. The underlining
mechanisms may be associated with inhibition of inflammatory mediator
overproduction, including proinflammatory cytokines, nitric oxide (NO), and
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2). In the present study, we examined the effect of baicalin
on the antinociceptive effect of morphine and histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1)
expression in the spinal cord dorsal horn in neuropathic pain rats.
METHODS: Neuropathic pain was induced by tight ligation of the left L5 spinal
nerve of the rats. An intrathecal catheter was implanted for drug administration.
Nociception was assessed by using the plantar test with the Hargreaves radiant
heat apparatus, and the von Frey test with the dynamic plantar anesthesiometer.
Spinal cords were removed for histone acetyl-H3 and HDAC1 western blot analysis
at the end of the nociceptive assessment.
RESULTS: The results showed that hyperalgesia and allodynia were observed in the 
spinal nerve ligated (SNL) left hindlimb; it was companied by histone-H3
deacetylation and HDAC1 overexpression on the ipsilateral side of the spinal cord
dorsal horn. Intrathecal injection of baicalin (10 µg) significantly attenuated
the allodynia and hyperalgesia, and enhanced the antinociceptive effect of
morphine (15 µg). Moreover, baicalin reversed the histone-H3 acetylation and
suppressed HDAC1 expression on the ipsilateral side of the spinal cord dorsal
horn of SNL rats.
CONCLUSION: The present findings suggest that baicalin can ameliorate neuropathic
pain by suppressing HDAC1 expression and preventing histone-H3 acetylation in the
spinal cord dorsal horn of SNL rats.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 23684218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Jul;27(7):1142-52. doi: 10.1210/me.2013-1079. Epub 2013 May 
13.

Dexamethasone induces a putative repressor complex and chromatin modifications in
the CRH promoter.

Sharma D(1), Bhave S, Gregg E, Uht R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Aging and Alzheimer's Disease, Department of Pharmacology &
Neuroscience, University of North Texas Health Science Center, CBH 469, 3500 Camp
Bowie Boulevard, Fort Worth, Texas 76107, USA.

Glucocorticoids down-regulate expression of hypothalamic CRH; however, mechanisms
by which they do so are not fully understood. The proximal promoter cAMP response
element, negative glucocorticoid response element (nGRE), and methylated CpG
islands all play a role in crh down-regulation. Dexamethasone (Dex)-repressed crh
expression is associated with glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) recruitment to the region of the crh promoter. Given that
HDAC1 may be present in methylated CpG binding protein 2 (MeCP2) complexes, and
that MeCP2 is known to play a role in regulating crh expression, we sought to
determine whether or not HDAC1 and/or MeCP2 could interact with the GR. Dex
enhanced GR interactions with both proteins. Glucocorticoid regulation of crh has
also been associated with CpG methylation; thus we assessed whether GR could
interact with a DNA methyltransferase (DnMT). Indeed, the GR interacted with
DnMT3b, but not DnMT3a. In addition, Dex-induced occupancy of the crh promoter by
HDAC1, MeCP2, and DnMT3b was associated with an increased level of promoter
methylation, which appeared to be CpG site specific. Lastly, to extend previous
assessment of chromatin modifications in this promoter region, the degree of
histone methylation was measured. Dex increased trimethylation of histone
3-lysine 9, a marker of gene suppression; however, levels of di- and
trimethylated histone 3-lysine 4, markers of gene activation, were not
significantly changed. Taken together, the data suggest that Dex-mediated crh
suppression involves formation of a repressor complex consisting of GR, MeCP2,
and HDAC1, recruitment of DnMT3b, and associated changes in proximal promoter CpG
methylation.

PMCID: PMC3706841
PMID: 23671328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Sep 1;22(17):3568-82. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt211. Epub 2013 May 
12.

Bcl6a function is required during optic cup formation to prevent p53-dependent
apoptosis and colobomata.

Lee J(1), Lee BK, Gross JM.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Cell and Developmental Biology, Institute for Cellular
and Molecular Biology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA.

Mutations in BCOR (Bcl6 corepressor) are found in patients with
oculo-facio-cardio-dental (OFCD) syndrome, a congenital disorder affecting visual
system development, and loss-of-function studies in zebrafish and Xenopus
demonstrate a role for Bcor during normal optic cup development in preventing
colobomata. The mechanism whereby BCOR functions during eye development to
prevent colobomata is not known, but in other contexts it serves as a
transcriptional corepressor that potentiates transcriptional repression by B cell
leukemia/lymphoma 6 (BCL6). Here, we have explored the function of the zebrafish 
ortholog of Bcl6, Bcl6a, during eye development, and our results demonstrate that
Bcl6a, like Bcor, is required to prevent colobomata during optic cup formation.
Our data demonstrate that Bcl6a acts downstream of Vax1 and Vax2, known
regulators of ventral optic cup formation and choroid fissure closure, and that
bcl6a is a direct target of Vax2. Together, this regulatory network functions to 
repress p53 expression and thereby suppress apoptosis in the developing optic
cup. Furthermore, our data demonstrate that Bcl6a functions cooperatively with
Bcor, Rnf2 and Hdac1 in a common gene regulatory network that acts to repress p53
and prevent colobomata. Together, these data support a model in which
p53-dependent apoptosis needs to be tightly regulated for normal optic cup
formation and that Bcl6a, Bcor, Rnf2 and Hdac1 activities mediate this
regulation.

PMCID: PMC3736873
PMID: 23669349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. PLoS One. 2013 May 7;8(5):e63218. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063218. Print 2013.

Distinct functional and temporal requirements for zebrafish Hdac1 during neural
crest-derived craniofacial and peripheral neuron development.

Ignatius MS(1), Unal Eroglu A, Malireddy S, Gallagher G, Nambiar RM, Henion PD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology Program, Ohio State University, 
Columbus, Ohio, United States of America.

The regulation of gene expression is accomplished by both genetic and epigenetic 
means and is required for the precise control of the development of the neural
crest. In hdac1(b382) mutants, craniofacial cartilage development is defective in
two distinct ways. First, fewer hoxb3a, dlx2 and dlx3-expressing posterior
branchial arch precursors are specified and many of those that are consequently
undergo apoptosis. Second, in contrast, normal numbers of progenitors are present
in the anterior mandibular and hyoid arches, but chondrocyte precursors fail to
terminally differentiate. In the peripheral nervous system, there is a disruption
of enteric, DRG and sympathetic neuron differentiation in hdac1(b382) mutants
compared to wildtype embryos. Specifically, enteric and DRG-precursors
differentiate into neurons in the anterior gut and trunk respectively, while
enteric and DRG neurons are rarely present in the posterior gut and tail.
Sympathetic neuron precursors are specified in hdac1(b382) mutants and they
undergo generic neuronal differentiation but fail to undergo noradrenergic
differentiation. Using the HDAC inhibitor TSA, we isolated enzyme activity and
temporal requirements for HDAC function that reproduce hdac1(b382) defects in
craniofacial and sympathetic neuron development. Our study reveals distinct
functional and temporal requirements for zebrafish hdac1 during neural
crest-derived craniofacial and peripheral neuron development.

PMCID: PMC3646935
PMID: 23667588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Biol Psychiatry. 2013 Nov 1;74(9):696-705. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.03.020.
Epub 2013 May 7.

Prefrontal cortical dysfunction after overexpression of histone deacetylase 1.

Jakovcevski M(1), Bharadwaj R, Straubhaar J, Gao G, Gavin DP, Jakovcevski I,
Mitchell AC, Akbarian S.

Author information: 
(1)Brudnick Neuropsychiatric Research Institute, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester Massachusetts.

BACKGROUND: Postmortem brain studies have shown that HDAC1-a lysine deacetylase
with broad activity against histones and nonhistone proteins-is frequently
expressed at increased levels in prefrontal cortex (PFC) of subjects diagnosed
with schizophrenia and related disease. However, it remains unclear whether
upregulated expression of Hdac1 in the PFC could affect cognition and behavior.
METHODS: Using adeno-associated virus, an Hdac1 transgene was expressed in young 
adult mouse PFC, followed by behavioral assays for working and long-term memory, 
repetitive activity, and response to novelty. Prefrontal cortex transcriptomes
were profiled by microarray. Antipsychotic drug effects were explored in mice
treated for 21 days with haloperidol or clozapine.
RESULTS: Hdac1 overexpression in PFC neurons and astrocytes resulted in robust
impairments in working memory, increased repetitive behaviors, and abnormal
locomotor response profiles in novel environments. Long-term memory remained
intact. Over 300 transcripts showed subtle but significant changes in
Hdac1-overexpressing PFC. Major histocompatibility complex class II (MHC
II)-related transcripts, including HLA-DQA1/H2-Aa, HLA-DQB1/H2-Ab1, and
HLA-DRB1/H2-Eb1, located in the chromosome 6p21.3-22.1 schizophrenia and bipolar 
disorder risk locus, were among the subset of genes with a more robust
(>1.5-fold) downregulation in expression. Hdac1 levels declined during the course
of normal PFC development. Antipsychotic drug treatment, including the atypical
clozapine, did not affect Hdac1 levels in PFC but induced expression of multiple 
MHC II transcripts.
CONCLUSIONS: Excessive HDAC1 activity, due to developmental defects or other
factors, is associated with behavioral alterations and dysregulated expression of
MHC II and other gene transcripts in the PFC.

© 2013 Society of Biological Psychiatry.

PMCID: PMC3797203
PMID: 23664640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 30;8(4):e63205. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063205. Print 2013.

Ablation of C/EBP homologous protein does not protect T17M RHO mice from retinal 
degeneration.

Nashine S(1), Bhootada Y, Lewin AS, Gorbatyuk M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of North Texas Health
Science Center, Fort Worth, Texas, United States of America.

Despite the proposed link between ablation of the CHOP protein and delay of the
onset of ER stress-mediated disorders including diabetes, Alzheimer Disease, and 
cardiac hypertrophy, the role of CHOP protein in photoreceptor cell death
associated with Autosomal Dominant Retinitis Pigmentosa (ADRP) has not been
investigated. T17M RHO transgenic mice carry a mutated human rhodopsin transgene,
the expression of which in retina leads to protein misfolding, activation of UPR 
and progressive retinal degeneration. The purpose of this study is to investigate
the role of CHOP protein in T17M RHO retina. Wild-type, CHOP-/-, T17M RHO and
T17M RHO CHOP-/-mice were used in the study. Evaluation of the impact of CHOP
ablation was performed using electroretinography (ERG), spectral-domain optical
coherence tomography (SD-OCT), quantitative Real-Time PCR (qRT-PCR) and western
blot analysis. Dark-adapted ERG analysis demonstrated that by 1 month, the T17M
RHO CHOP-/- mice had a 70% reduction of the a-wave amplitude compared to the T17M
RHO mice. The loss of function in T17M RHO CHOP-/- photoreceptors was associated 
with a 22-24% decline in the thickness of the outer nuclear layer. These mice had
significant reduction in the expression of transcription factors, Crx and Nrl,
and also in mouse Rho, and human RHO. The reduction was associated with an 8-fold
elevation of the UPR marker, p-eIf2a protein and 30% down-regulation of sXbp1
protein. In addition, the histone deacetylase 1 (Hdac1) protein was 2-fold
elevated in the T17M RHO CHOP-/- retina. The ablation of CHOP led to a reduction 
in the expression of photoreceptor-specific transcriptional factors, and both
endogenous and exogenous RHO mRNA. Thus, despite its role in promoting apoptosis,
CHOP protects rod photoreceptors carrying an ADRP mutation.

PMCID: PMC3640035
PMID: 23646198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Neoplasia. 2013 May;15(5):511-22.

Epigenetic silencing of the proapoptotic gene BIM in anaplastic large cell
lymphoma through an MeCP2/SIN3a deacetylating complex.

Piazza R(1), Magistroni V, Mogavero A, Andreoni F, Ambrogio C, Chiarle R, Mologni
L, Bachmann PS, Lock RB, Collini P, Pelosi G, Gambacorti-Passerini C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences, University of Milano, Bicocca, Monza, Italy.
rocco.piazza@unimib.it

BIM is a proapoptotic member of the Bcl-2 family. Here, we investigated the
epigenetic status of the BIM locus in NPM/ALK+ anaplastic large cell lymphoma
(ALCL) cell lines and in lymph node biopsies from NPM/ALK+ ALCL patients. We show
that BIM is epigenetically silenced in cell lines and lymph node specimens and
that treatment with the deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A restores the histone
acetylation, strongly upregulates BIM expression, and induces cell death. BIM
silencing occurs through recruitment of MeCP2 and the SIN3a/histone deacetylase
1/2 (HDAC1/2) corepressor complex. This event requires BIM CpG
methylation/demethylation with 5-azacytidine that leads to detachment of the
MeCP2 corepressor complex and reacetylation of the histone tails. Treatment with 
the ALK inhibitor PF2341066 or with an inducible shRNA targeting NPM/ALK does not
restore BIM locus reacetylation; however, enforced expression of NPM/ALK in an
NPM/ALK-negative cell line significantly increases the methylation at the BIM
locus. This study demonstrates that BIM is epigenetically silenced in
NPM/ALK-positive cells through recruitment of the SIN3a/HDAC1/2 corepressor
complex and that NPM/ALK is dispensable to maintain BIM epigenetic silencing but 
is able to act as an inducer of BIM methylation.

PMCID: PMC3638354
PMID: 23633923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2013 Jul 15;270(2):87-96. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2013.04.014. Epub 2013 Apr 28.

Largazole, a class I histone deacetylase inhibitor, enhances TNF-a-induced ICAM-1
and VCAM-1 expression in rheumatoid arthritis synovial fibroblasts.

Ahmed S(1), Riegsecker S, Beamer M, Rahman A, Bellini JV, Bhansali P,
Tillekeratne LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Pharmacy & Pharmaceutical Sciences, The
University of Toledo, Health Science Campus, Toledo, OH 43614, USA.
Salah.Ahmed@utoledo.edu

In the present study, we evaluated the effect of largazole (LAR), a
marine-derived class I HDAC inhibitor, on tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a)-induced
expression of intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) and vascular cell
adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1), and matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) activity.
LAR (1-5 µM) had no adverse effect on the viability of RA synovial fibroblasts.
Among the different class I HDACs screened, LAR (0.5-5 µM) inhibited the
constitutive expression of HDAC1 (0-30%). Surprisingly, LAR increased class II
HDAC [HDAC6] by ~220% with a concomitant decrease in HDAC5 [30-58%] expression in
RA synovial fibroblasts. SAHA (5 µM), a pan-HDAC inhibitor, also induced HDAC6
expression in RA synovial fibroblasts. Pretreatment of RA synovial fibroblasts
with LAR further enhanced TNF-a-induced ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 expression. However,
LAR inhibited TNF-a-induced MMP-2 activity in RA synovial fibroblasts by 35% when
compared to the TNF-a-treated group. Further, the addition of HDAC6 specific
inhibitor Tubastatin A with LAR suppressed TNF-a+LAR-induced ICAM-1 and VCAM-1
expression and completely blocked MMP-2 activity, suggesting a role of HDAC6 in
LAR-induced ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 expression. LAR also enhanced TNF-a-induced
phospho-p38 and phospho-AKT expression, but inhibited the expression of
phospho-JNK and nuclear translocation of NF-<U+03BA>Bp65 in RA synovial fibroblasts.
These results suggest that LAR activates p38 and Akt pathways and influences
class II HDACs, in particular HDAC6, to enhance some of the detrimental effects
of TNF-a in RA synovial fibroblasts. Understanding the exact role of different
HDAC isoenzymes in RA pathogenesis is extremely important in order to develop
highly effective HDAC inhibitors for the treatment of RA.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3766723
PMID: 23632129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Cell Biol. 2013 Apr 29;201(3):427-37. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201205064.

Deacetylation of p53 induces autophagy by suppressing Bmf expression.

Contreras AU(1), Mebratu Y, Delgado M, Montano G, Hu CA, Ryter SW, Choi AM, Lin
Y, Xiang J, Chand H, Tesfaigzi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Program, Lovelace Respiratory Research
Institute, Albuquerque, NM 87108, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2013 Nov 15;12(22):3453-4.

Interferon <U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>)-induced cell death is mediated by the BH3-only domain
protein, Bik, in a p53-independent manner. However, the effect of IFN-<U+03B3> on p53
and how this affects autophagy have not been reported. The present study
demonstrates that IFN-<U+03B3> down-regulated expression of the BH3 domain-only protein,
Bmf, in human and mouse airway epithelial cells in a p53-dependent manner. p53
also suppressed Bmf expression in response to other cell death-stimulating
agents, including ultraviolet radiation and histone deacetylase inhibitors. IFN-<U+03B3>
did not affect Bmf messenger RNA half-life but increased nuclear p53 levels and
the interaction of p53 with the Bmf promoter. IFN-<U+03B3>-induced interaction of HDAC1 
and p53 resulted in the deacetylation of p53 and suppression of Bmf expression
independent of p53's proline-rich domain. Suppression of Bmf facilitated
IFN-<U+03B3>-induced autophagy by reducing the interaction of Beclin-1 and Bcl-2.
Furthermore, autophagy was prominent in cultured bmf(-/-) but not in bmf(+/+)
cells. Collectively, these observations show that deacetylation of p53 suppresses
Bmf expression and facilitates autophagy.

PMCID: PMC3639396
PMID: 23629966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Viruses. 2013 Apr 29;5(5):1208-18. doi: 10.3390/v5051208.

The role of the CoREST/REST repressor complex in herpes simplex virus 1
productive infection and in latency.

Zhou G(1), Du T, Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)Marjorie B. Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, The University of Chicago, 910
East 58th Street, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

REST is a key component of the HDAC1 or 2, CoREST, LSD1, REST (HCLR) repressor
complex. The primary function of the HCLR complex is to silence neuronal genes in
non-neuronal cells. HCLR plays a role in regulating the expression of viral genes
in productive infections as a donor of LDS1 for expression of a genes and as a
repressor of genes expressed later in infection. In sensory neurons the HCLR
complex is involved in the silencing of viral genome in the course of
establishment of latency. The thesis of this article is that (a) sensory neurons 
evolved a mechanism to respond to the presence and suppress the transmission of
infectious agents from the periphery to the CNS and (b) HSV evolved subservience 
to the HCLR with at least two objectives: to maintain a level of replication
consistent with maximal person-to-person spread and to enable it to take
advantage of neuronal innate immune responses to survive and be available for
reactivation shielded from adaptive immune responses of the host.

PMCID: PMC3712303
PMID: 23628827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. BMC Cancer. 2013 Apr 30;13:215. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-13-215.

Differential expression of histone deacetylases HDAC1, 2 and 3 in human breast
cancer--overexpression of HDAC2 and HDAC3 is associated with clinicopathological 
indicators of disease progression.

Müller BM(1), Jana L, Kasajima A, Lehmann A, Prinzler J, Budczies J, Winzer KJ,
Dietel M, Weichert W, Denkert C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Charité University Hospital, Campus Mitte,
Charitéplatz 1, 10117 Berlin, Germany. berit.mueller@charite.de

BACKGROUND: In breast cancer, the role of epigenetic alterations including
modifications of the acetylation status of histones in carcinogenesis has been an
important research focus during the last years. An increased deacetylation of
histones leads to increased cell proliferation, cell migration, angiogenesis and 
invasion. Class 1 histone deacetylases (HDAC) seem to be most important during
carcinogenesis.
METHODS: The immunhistochemical expression of HDAC1, 2 and 3 was analyzed on
tissue microarrays (TMAs) from 238 patients with primary breast cancer. We
analyzed the nuclear staining intensity (negative, weak, moderate, strong) as
well as the percentage of positive tumor cells and calculated the
immunoreactivity score (0-12). Expression was correlated with clinicopathological
parameters and patient survival.
RESULTS: In this cohort, we found a differential positive expression of HDAC1,
HDAC2 and HDAC3. HDAC2 and HDAC3 expression was significantly higher in less
differentiated tumors: HDAC2 (n=207), p<0.001 and HDAC3 (n=220), p<0.001 and
correlated with negative hormone receptor status: HDAC2 (n=206), p=0.02 and HDAC3
(n=219), p=0.04. Additionally, a high HDAC2 expression was significantly
associated with an overexpression of HER2 (n=203, p=0.005) and the presence of
nodal metastasis (n=200, p=0.04).HDAC1 was highly expressed in hormone receptor
positive tumors (n=203; p<0.001).
CONCLUSION: As a conclusion, our results show that the class-1 HDAC isoenzymes 1,
2 and 3 are differentially expressed in breast cancer. HDAC2 and HDAC3 are
strongly expressed in subgroups of tumor with features of a more aggressive tumor
type.

PMCID: PMC3646665
PMID: 23627572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Childs Nerv Syst. 2013 Aug;29(8):1245-51. doi: 10.1007/s00381-013-2087-7. Epub
2013 Apr 28.

Epigenetic modification after inhibition of IGF-1R signaling in human central
nervous system atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumor (AT/RT).

Shim KW(1), Xi G, Farnell BM, Kim DS, Tsurubuchi T, Tomita T, Mayanil CS.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Neurosurgery Research Lab, Developmental Biology Program, Division
of Pediatric Neurosurgery, Children's Hospital of Chicago Research Center and
Department of Neurosurgery, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Chicago, IL 60614, USA.

OBJECTIVE: This study investigated epigenetic modifications in human central
nervous system atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumors (AT/RTs), in response to
inhibition of insulin-like growth factor receptor 1 (IGF-1R).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Tumor tissue was obtained from two pediatric patients,
tissue was dissociated, and primary cultures were established. Cultured cells
were treated with picropodophyllin (PPP; 0, 1, and 2 µM for 48 h), a selective
IGF-1R inhibitor. Histone acetylation and methylation patterns (H3K9ac, H3K18ac, 
H3K4me3, H3K27me3) and levels of histone deacetylases (HDACs; HDAC1, HDAC3, and
SirT1) and histone acetyl transferases (GCN5 and p300) were examined. H3K9ac and 
H3K18ac decreased in response to treatment with PPP. HDAC levels showed a
biphasic response, increasing with 1 µM PPP, but then decreasing with 2 µM PPP.
CONCLUSION: Inhibition of IGF-1R modified epigenetic status in AT/RT. Determining
the mechanisms behind these modifications will guide the development of novel
therapeutic targets for this malignant embryonal cancer.

PMID: 23624780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2013;14(2):915-21.

Identification of histone deacetylase 1 protein complexes in liver cancer cells.

Farooq M(1), Hozzein WN, Elsayed EA, Taha NA, Wadaan MA.

Author information: 
(1)Bioproducts Research Group, Department of Zoology, College of Science, King
Saud University, Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. fmuhammad@ksu.edu.sa

BACKGROUND: Hepatocellular carcinoma is one of the leading causes of mortalities 
worldwide. The search for new therapeutic targets is of utmost importance for
improved treatment. Altered expression of HDAC1 in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
and its requirement for liver formation in zebrafish, suggest that it may
regulate key events in liver carcinogenesis and organogenesis. However, molecular
mechanisms of HDAC1 action in liver carcinogenesis are largely unknown. The
present study was conducted to identify HDAC1 interacting proteins in HepG2 cells
using modified SH-double-affinity purification coupled with liquid mass
spectrophotemetery.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: HepG2 cells were transfected with a construct containing
HDAC1 with a C-terminal strepIII-HA tag as bait. Bait proteins were confirmed to 
be expressed in HepG2 cells by western blotting and purified by double affinity
columns and protein complexes for analysis on a Thermo LTQ Orbitrap XL using a
C18 nano flow ESI liquid chromatography system.
RESULTS: There were 27 proteins which showed novel interactions with HDAC1
identified only in this study, while 14 were among the established interactors.
Various subunits of T complex proteins (TCP1) and prefoldin proteins (PFDN) were 
identified as interacting partners that showed high affinity with HDAC1 in HepG2 
cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The double affinity purification method adopted in this study was
very successful in terms of specificity and reproducibility. The novel HDAC1
complex identified in this study could be better therapeutic target for treatment
of hepatocellular carcinoma.

PMID: 23621261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2013 May;24(6):943-53. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2012111055. Epub 2013
Apr 25.

Histone deacetylase inhibitor enhances recovery after AKI.

Cianciolo Cosentino C(1), Skrypnyk NI, Brilli LL, Chiba T, Novitskaya T, Woods C,
West J, Korotchenko VN, McDermott L, Day BW, Davidson AJ, Harris RC, de
Caestecker MP, Hukriede NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,PA, 
USA.

At present, there are no effective therapies to ameliorate injury, accelerate
recovery, or prevent postinjury fibrosis after AKI. Here, we sought to identify
candidate compounds that accelerate recovery after AKI by screening for small
molecules that increase proliferation of renal progenitor cells in zebrafish
embryos. One compound identified from this screen was the histone deacetylase
inhibitor methyl-4-(phenylthio)butanoate, which we subsequently administered to
zebrafish larvae and mice 24-48 hours after inducing AKI. In zebrafish, treatment
with the compound increased larval survival and proliferation of renal tubular
epithelial cells. In mice, treatment accelerated recovery, reduced postinjury
tubular atrophy and interstitial fibrosis, and increased the regenerative
capacity of actively cycling renal tubular cells by decreasing the number of
cells in G2/M arrest. These data suggest that accelerating recovery may be a
viable approach to treating AKI and provide proof of concept that a screen in
zebrafish embryos can identify therapeutic candidates for kidney injury.

PMCID: PMC3665399
PMID: 23620402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Gene. 2013 Jul 25;524(2):214-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.04.024. Epub 2013 Apr
22.

Oxidative stress causes epigenetic alteration of CDX1 expression in colorectal
cancer cells.

Zhang R(1), Kang KA, Kim KC, Na SY, Chang WY, Kim GY, Kim HS, Hyun JW.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medical Science and Laboratory Medicine, Jiangsu University, Jiangsu
212013, PR China.

The intestine-specific transcription factor, caudal type homeobox-1 (CDX1), is a 
candidate tumor suppressor gene that plays key roles in regulating intestinal
epithelial differentiation and proliferation. It is aberrantly down-regulated in 
colorectal cancers and colon cancer-derived cell lines by promoter
hypermethylation. Since the effects of oxidative stress on the transcription of
tumor suppressor genes are largely unknown, this study explored the epigenetic
alterations that occur during reactive oxygen species (ROS)-induced silencing of 
CDX1 in colorectal cancer cells. Oxidative stress by hydrogen peroxide (H2O2)
down-regulated CDX1 mRNA levels and protein expression in the human colorectal
cancer cell line, T-84. This down-regulation was abolished by pretreatment with
the ROS scavenger, N-acetylcysteine. In addition, the DNA methylation inhibitor, 
5-aza-2-deoxycytidine (5-Aza-dC) markedly attenuated the decrease in mRNA and
protein expression levels induced by H2O2. Moreover, methylation-specific PCR
data revealed that H2O2 treatment increased CDX1 promoter methylation, and
treatment with 5-Aza-dC reversed this effect, suggesting that an epigenetic
regulatory mechanism triggered by ROS-induced methylation may be involved in CDX1
expression. Furthermore, H2O2 treatment resulted in up-regulation of DNA
methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) and histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) expression and
activity, and enhanced the association between DNMT1 and HDAC1. Taken together,
these results suggest that ROS-induced oxidative stress silences the tumor
suppressor CDX1 through epigenetic regulation, and may therefore be associated
with the progression of colorectal cancer.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23618814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Virol. 2013 Jul;87(13):7393-408. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02825-12. Epub 2013 Apr 24.

Human cytomegalovirus pUL97 regulates the viral major immediate early promoter by
phosphorylation-mediated disruption of histone deacetylase 1 binding.

Bigley TM(1), Reitsma JM, Mirza SP, Terhune SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, USA.

Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is a common agent of congenital infection and causes
severe disease in immunocompromised patients. Current approved therapies focus on
inhibiting viral DNA replication. The HCMV kinase pUL97 contributes to multiple
stages of viral infection including DNA replication, controlling the cell cycle, 
and virion maturation. Our studies demonstrate that pUL97 also functions by
influencing immediate early (IE) gene expression during the initial stages of
infection. Inhibition of kinase activity using the antiviral compound maribavir
or deletion of the UL97 gene resulted in decreased expression of viral immediate 
early genes during infection. Expression of pUL97 was sufficient to transactivate
IE1 gene expression from the viral genome, which was dependent on viral kinase
activity. We observed that pUL97 associates with histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1).
HDAC1 is a transcriptional corepressor that acts to silence expression of viral
genes. We observed that inhibition or deletion of pUL97 kinase resulted in
increased HDAC1 and decreased histone H3 lysine 9 acetylation associating with
the viral major immediate early (MIE) promoter. IE expression during pUL97
inhibition or deletion was rescued following inhibition of deacetylase activity. 
HDAC1 associates with chromatin by protein-protein interactions. Expression of
active but not inactive pUL97 kinase decreased HDAC1 interaction with the
transcriptional repressor protein DAXX. Finally, using mass spectrometry, we
found that HDAC1 is uniquely phosphorylated upon expression of pUL97. Our results
support the conclusion that HCMV pUL97 kinase regulates viral immediate early
gene expression by phosphorylation-mediated disruption of HDAC1 binding to the
MIE promoter.

PMCID: PMC3700266
PMID: 23616659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Virol. 2013 Jul;87(13):7314-25. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02713-12. Epub 2013 Apr 24.

A conserved gammaherpesvirus protein kinase targets histone deacetylases 1 and 2 
to facilitate viral replication in primary macrophages.

Mounce BC(1), Mboko WP, Bigley TM, Terhune SS, Tarakanova VL.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, 
Wisconsin, USA.

Gammaherpesviruses are ubiquitious pathogens that establish lifelong infection
and are associated with several malignancies. All gammaherpesviruses encode a
conserved protein kinase that facilitates viral replication and chronic infection
and thus represents an attractive therapeutic target. In this study, we identify 
a novel function of gammaherpesvirus protein kinase as a regulator of class I
histone deacetylases (HDAC). Mouse gammaherpesvirus 68 (MHV68)-encoded protein
kinase orf36 interacted with HDAC1 and 2 and prevented association of these HDACs
with the viral promoter driving expression of RTA, a critical immediate early
transcriptional activator. Furthermore, the ability to interact with HDAC1 and 2 
was not limited to the MHV68 orf36, as BGLF4, a related viral protein kinase
encoded by Epstein-Barr virus, interacted with HDAC1 in vitro. Importantly,
targeting of HDAC1 and 2 by orf36 was independent of the kinase's enzymatic
activity. Additionally, orf36 expression, but not its enzymatic activity, induced
changes in the global deacetylase activity observed in infected primary
macrophages. Combined deficiency of HDAC1 and 2 rescued attenuated replication
and viral DNA synthesis of the orf36 null MHV68 mutant, indicating that the
regulation of HDAC1 and 2 by orf36 was relevant for viral replication.
Understanding the mechanism by which orf36 facilitates viral replication,
including through HDAC targeting, will facilitate the development of improved
therapeutics against gammaherpesvirus kinases.

PMCID: PMC3700300
PMID: 23616648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Genes Immun. 2013 Jul-Aug;14(5):317-24. doi: 10.1038/gene.2013.24. Epub 2013 Apr 
25.

Polymorphisms in histone deacetylases improve the predictive value of IL-28B for 
chronic hepatitis C therapy.

López-Rodríguez R(1), Hernández-Bartolomé Á, Borque MJ, Rodríguez-Muñoz Y,
Martín-Vílchez S, Trapero-Marugán M, García-Buey L, Muñoz de Rueda P, Rodrigo L, 
Vidal-Castiñeira JR, Salmerón J, Moreno-Otero R, Sanz-Cameno P.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Unit, Gastroenterology Service, Hospital Universitario de La Princesa,
Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Princesa (IIS-IP), Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid and CIBERehd, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) influence many cellular processes, including the
modulation of signal transducer and activator of transcription activity (STAT) in
response to interferon (IFN). To identify genetic markers that help optimize the 
IL-28B prediction of chronic hepatitis C (CHC) sustained virological response
(SVR), we evaluated 27 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in HDAC1-11. Three 
SNPs, rs3778216, rs976552 and rs368328 in HDAC2, HDAC3 and HDAC5, respectively,
were independently associated with SVR (P<0.05). The addition of these three
HDAC's SNPs to the IL-28B predictive model (area under the curve (AUC)=0.630)
rendered an important improvement of AUC-receiver operating characteristic value 
(AUC=0.747, P=0.021). Chi-squared Automatic Interaction Detector (CHAID) analysis
denoted the significance of the rs3778216 C/C genotype in identifying a group of 
good responders despite carrying IL-28B T allele (79.2% of SVR), whereas HDAC5 G 
allele characterized a subgroup with poor response rate (25.5%). However, HDAC3
rs976552 did not display a relevant role for the hierarchical classification of
patients. Variables related to SVR in hepatitis C virus genotype 1 (HCV-1) cohort
were the same of those obtained for the overall population. Interestingly, in
non-HCV-1 patients (n=56) the HDAC2 C/C genotype was the unique predictive
variable related to SVR (AUC=0.733, P<0.007). Thus, these preliminary results
suggest the potential usefulness of combined IL-28B and HDAC genotyping for the
CHC patients' classification by likelihood of an SVR.

PMID: 23615070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jun 7;288(23):16518-28. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.440446. Epub 2013
Apr 23.

Protein kinase CK2 regulates the dimerization of histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1)
and HDAC2 during mitosis.

Khan DH(1), He S, Yu J, Winter S, Cao W, Seiser C, Davie JR.

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Child Health, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba
R3E 3P4, Canada.

Histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and HDAC2 are components of corepressor complexes
that are involved in chromatin remodeling and regulation of gene expression by
regulating dynamic protein acetylation. HDAC1 and -2 form homo- and heterodimers,
and their activity is dependent upon dimer formation. Phosphorylation of HDAC1
and/or HDAC2 in interphase cells is required for the formation of HDAC
corepressor complexes. In this study, we show that during mitosis, HDAC2 and, to 
a lesser extent, HDAC1 phosphorylation levels dramatically increase. When HDAC1
and -2 are displaced from the chromosome during metaphase, they dissociate from
each other, but each enzyme remains in association with components of the HDAC
corepressor complexes Sin3, NuRD, and CoREST as homodimers. Enzyme inhibition
studies and mutational analyses demonstrated that protein kinase CK2-catalyzed
phosphorylation of HDAC1 and -2 is crucial for the dissociation of these two
enzymes. These results suggest that corepressor complexes, including HDAC1 or
HDAC2 homodimers, might target different cellular proteins during mitosis.

PMCID: PMC3675587
PMID: 23612983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2013 Jun 1;23(11):3295-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2013.03.102. 
Epub 2013 Apr 4.

Design, synthesis, and biological evaluation of novel histone deacetylase 1
inhibitors through click chemistry.

Sun Q(1), Yao Y, Liu C, Li H, Yao H, Xue X, Liu J, Tu Z, Jiang S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Medicinal Chemistry, Guangzhou Institute of Biomedicine and
Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510530, PR China.

We report the design, synthesis, and biological evaluation of a new series of
HDAC1 inhibitors using click chemistry. Compound 17 bearing a phenyl ring at
meta-position was identified to show much better selectivity for HDAC1 over HDAC7
than SAHA. The compond 17 also showed better in vitro anticancer activities
against several cancer cell lines than that of SAHA. This work could serve as a
foundation for further exploration of selective HDAC inhibitors using the
compound 17 molecular scaffold.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23601706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Breast Cancer. 2013 Mar;16(1):23-31. doi: 10.4048/jbc.2013.16.1.23. Epub 2013
Mar 31.

Expression of DNA methyltransferases in breast cancer patients and to analyze the
effect of natural compounds on DNA methyltransferases and associated proteins.

Mirza S(1), Sharma G, Parshad R, Gupta SD, Pandya P, Ralhan R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, India.

PURPOSE: The DNA methylation mediated by specific DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs),
results in the epigenetic silencing of multiple genes which are implicated in
human breast cancer. We hypothesized that the natural compounds modulate the
expression of DNMTs and their associated proteins in the breast cancer cell lines
and affect the methylation mediated gene silencing.
METHODS: The DNMTs transcript expression was analyzed by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) in the tumors and the adjacent
normal breast tissues of the patients with invasive ductal breast carcinoma. We
tested the hypothesis that the natural compounds, viz., epigallocatechin gallate 
(EGCG), genistein, withaferin A, curcumin, resveratrol, and guggulsterone, have
demethylation potential. To investigate this hypothesis, we analyzed the DNMTs
expression at the transcript levels, followed by the analysis of DNMT1 and its
associated proteins (HDAC1, MeCP2, and MBD2).
RESULTS: The increased DNMTs transcripts expression, viz., DNMT1, DNMT3a, and
DNMT3b, in the breast cancer tissues suggest involvement of the DNMTs in the
breast carcinogenesis. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis revealed that the treatment
with natural compounds, viz., EGCG, genistein, withaferin A, curcumin,
resveratrol, and guggulsterone, resulted in a significant decrease in the
transcript levels of all the DNMTs investigated. Importantly, these natural
compounds decreased the protein levels of DNMT1, HDAC1, and MeCP2.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate that the natural compounds, EGCG, genistein, 
withaferin A, curcumin, resveratrol, and guggulsterone, have the potential to
reverse the epigenetic changes. Moreover, their lack of toxicity makes these
natural compounds promising candidates for the chemoprevention of the breast
cancer. In-depth future mechanistic studies aimed to elucidate how these
compounds affect the gene transcription are warranted.

PMCID: PMC3625766
PMID: 23593078  [PubMed]


159. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2013 Jun 15;304(12):H1662-9. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00093.2013. Epub 2013 Apr 12.

Epigenetic regulation of canonical TNFa pathway by HDAC1 determines survival of
cardiac myocytes.

Gang H(1), Shaw J, Dhingra R, Davie JR, Kirshenbaum LA.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences, St. Boniface General Hospital
Research Centre, Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.

Gene transcription is regulated by post-translation modifications. Histone
deacetylases (HDACs) remove acetyl groups from histone and non-histone factors
inhibiting transcription. Proinflammatory cytokines such as TNFa activate the
canonical nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) pathway. Earlier we established a
cytoprotective role for NF-<U+03BA>B in the heart. Though a causal relationship for
HDAC1 and NF-<U+03BA>B has been established, the impact of HDAC1 on TNFa signaling is
unknown. Herein, we demonstrate that HDAC1 provides a molecular switch for
determining cell survival in the TNFa pathway. In contrast to vehicle-treated
control cells, TNFa-treated cells displayed a marked increase in NF-<U+03BA>B gene
transcription. Notably, cells treated with TNFa were indistinguishable from
vehicle controls cells with respect to viability. Interestingly, HDAC activity
was reduced in cells treated with TNFa. Conversely, in the presence of HDAC1,
NF-<U+03BA>B gene transcription by TNFa was repressed, resulting in mitochondrial
perturbations and widespread cell death. Heterologous fusion proteins comprised
of yeast Gal4 DNA binding domain fused in frame to the NF-<U+03BA>B p65 transactivation 
domain were preferentially repressed by HDAC1. Moreover, transcription mediated
by Gal4VP16 protein from herpes virus was unaffected by HDAC1 in cardiac
myocytes. Mutations that abrogate known catalytic activities of HDAC1, small
interference RNA, or pharmacological inhibition of HDAC1 restored NF-<U+03BA>B signaling
and suppressed cell death induced by TNFa. These data provide the first evidence 
for an obligate link between HDAC1 and canonical TNFa pathway for cell survival
of cardiac myocytes.

PMID: 23585133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J Neurosci. 2013 Apr 10;33(15):6401-11. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1001-12.2013.

Loss of histone deacetylase 2 improves working memory and accelerates extinction 
learning.

Morris MJ(1), Mahgoub M, Na ES, Pranav H, Monteggia LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75390-9070, USA.

Histone acetylation and deacetylation can be dynamically regulated in response to
environmental stimuli and play important roles in learning and memory.
Pharmacological inhibition of histone deacetylases (HDACs) improves performance
in learning tasks; however, many of these classical agents are "pan-HDAC"
inhibitors, and their use makes it difficult to determine the roles of specific
HDACs in cognitive function. We took a genetic approach using mice lacking the
class I HDACs, HDAC1 or HDAC2, in postmitotic forebrain neurons to investigate
the specificity or functional redundancy of these HDACs in learning and synaptic 
plasticity. We show that selective knock-out of Hdac2 led to a robust
acceleration of the extinction rate of conditioned fear responses and a
conditioned taste aversion as well as enhanced performance in an attentional
set-shifting task. Hdac2 knock-out had no impact on episodic memory or motor
learning, suggesting that the effects are task-dependent, with the predominant
impact of HDAC2 inhibition being an enhancement in an animal's ability to rapidly
adapt its behavioral strategy as a result of changes in associative
contingencies. Our results demonstrate that the loss of HDAC2 improves
associative learning, with no effect in nonassociative learning tasks, suggesting
a specific role for HDAC2 in particular types of learning. HDAC2 may be an
intriguing target for cognitive and psychiatric disorders that are characterized 
by an inability to inhibit behavioral responsiveness to maladaptive or no longer 
relevant associations.

PMCID: PMC3773986
PMID: 23575838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Biol Chem. 2013 May 17;288(20):14451-62. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.460840. Epub
2013 Apr 5.

Transcriptional and translational regulation of C/EBPß-HDAC1 protein complexes
controls different levels of p53, SIRT1, and PGC1a proteins at the early and late
stages of liver cancer.

Jin J(1), Iakova P, Jiang Y, Lewis K, Sullivan E, Jawanmardi N, Donehower L,
Timchenko L, Timchenko NA.

Author information: 
(1)Huffington Center on Aging and Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor 
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Cancer changes biological processes in the liver by altering gene expression at
the levels of transcription, translation, and protein modification. The RNA
binding protein CUGBP1 is a key regulator of translation of CCAAT enhancer
binding protein ß and histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1). These proteins form
complexes that are involved in the regulation of liver biology. Here we show a
critical role of the translational activation of CCAAT/enhancer binding protein
ß-HDAC1 complexes in the development of liver cancer mediated by
diethylnitrosamine. We found that diethylnitrosamine increases the levels of
CUGBP1 and activates CUGBP1 by phosphorylation, leading to the formation of the
CUGBP1-eIF2 complex, which is an activator of translation of CUGBP1-dependent
mRNAs. The elevation of the CUGBP1-eIF2 complex increases translation of C/EBPß
and HDAC1, resulting in an increase of C/EBPß-HDAC1 complexes at later stages of 
liver cancer. We found that C/EBPß-HDAC1 complexes repress promoters of three key
regulators of liver functions: p53, SIRT1, and PGC1a. As the result of this
suppression, the p53-, SIRT1-, and PGC1a-dependent downstream pathways are
reduced, leading to increased liver proliferation. We also found that the proper 
regulation of C/EBPß-HDAC1 complexes is required for the maintenance of
biological levels of p53, SIRT1, and PGC1a in quiescent livers and at early
stages of liver cancer. Taken together, these studies showed that the development
of liver cancer includes a tight regulation of levels of C/EBPß-HDAC1 complexes
on the levels of transcription, translation, and posttranslational modifications.

PMCID: PMC3656300
PMID: 23564453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Carcinogenesis. 2013 Aug;34(8):1708-16. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgt109. Epub 2013 Apr
4.

The PML isoform IV is a negative regulator of nuclear EGFR's transcriptional
activity in lung cancer.

Kuo HY(1), Chen YC, Chang HY, Jeng JC, Lin EH, Pan CM, Chang YW, Wang ML, Chou
YT, Shih HM, Wu CW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Science, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a membrane-bound receptor tyrosine
kinase, which can transduce intracellular signals responsible for cell
proliferation. It is frequently overexpressed and/or constitutively activated in 
non-small cell lung cancer and thus is considered as a major cause of this
disease. Recently, EGFR has been found in the nucleus where the nuclear EGFR
(nEGFR) can function as a transcription factor activating the transcription of
genes such as cyclin D1 gene (CCND1), which is essential for cell proliferation. 
Nevertheless, how nEGFR's transcriptional activity is regulated remains unclear. 
Promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) is a tumor suppressor, which is lost in
various cancers including lung cancer. However, the role of PML in the
suppression of lung cancer growth is still unclear. When we investigated the role
of PML in the regulation of lung cancer cell growth, we found that PML isoform IV
(PMLIV) preferentially represses the growth of lung cancer cells bearing
constitutively active EGFR. Besides, when growing in the EGFR activating
conditions, the growth of EGFR wild-type bearing A549 cells has been repressed by
PMLIV overexpression. We also found that PMLIV can interact physically with nEGFR
and represses the transcription of nEGFR target genes. We showed that PMLIV is
recruited by nEGFR to the target promoters and reduces the promoter histone
acetylation level via HDAC1. Together, our results suggest that PMLIV interacts
with nEGFR upon EGFR activation and represses the transcription of nEGFR target
genes such as CCND1 and thus leading to inhibition of the lung cancer cell
growth.

PMID: 23563092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Br J Cancer. 2013 Apr 30;108(8):1648-58. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2013.122. Epub 2013 Apr
4.

Tumour-suppressive microRNA-874 contributes to cell proliferation through
targeting of histone deacetylase 1 in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Nohata N(1), Hanazawa T, Kinoshita T, Inamine A, Kikkawa N, Itesako T, Yoshino H,
Enokida H, Nakagawa M, Okamoto Y, Seki N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Functional Genomics, Chiba University Graduate School of
Medicine, Chiba, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Our recent studies of microRNA (miRNA) expression signature
demonstrated that microRNA-874 (miR-874) was significantly downregulated in
maxillary sinus squamous cell carcinoma (MSSCC), and a putative
tumour-suppressive miRNA in human cancers. Our aim of this study was to
investigate the functional significance of miR-874 in cancer cells and to
identify novel miR-874-mediated cancer pathways and responsible genes in head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC).
METHODS: Gain-of-function studies using mature miR-874 were performed to
investigate cell proliferation and cell cycle distribution in HNSCC cell lines
(SAS and FaDu). To identify miR-874-mediated molecular pathways and targets, we
utilised gene expression analysis and in silico database analysis.
Loss-of-function assays were performed to investigate the functional significance
of miR-874 target genes.
RESULTS: Expression levels of miR-874 were significantly downregulated in HNSCC
tissues (including oral, pharyngeal and laryngeal SCCs) compared with normal
counterpart epithelia. Restoration of miR-874 in SAS and FaDu cell lines revealed
significant inhibition of cell proliferation and induction of G2/M arrest and
cell apoptosis. Our expression data and in silico analysis demonstrated that
miR-874 modulated the cell cycle pathway. Moreover, histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1)
was a candidate target of miR-874 regulation. Luciferase reporter assays showed
that miR-874 directly regulated HDAC1. Silencing of the HDAC1 gene significantly 
inhibited cell proliferation and induced G2/M arrest and cell apoptosis in SAS
cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Downregulation of miR-874 was a frequent event in HNSCC. miR-874
acted as a tumour suppressor and directly targeted HDAC1. Recognition of
tumour-suppressive miRNA-mediated cancer pathways provides new insights into the 
potential mechanisms of HNSCC oncogenesis and suggests novel therapeutic
strategies for the disease.

PMCID: PMC3668462
PMID: 23558898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Neurosci. 2013 Apr 3;33(14):5924-9. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3162-12.2013.

Histone deacetylase 2 cell autonomously suppresses excitatory and enhances
inhibitory synaptic function in CA1 pyramidal neurons.

Hanson JE(1), Deng L, Hackos DH, Lo SC, Lauffer BE, Steiner P, Zhou Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Genentech, South San Francisco, California 94080, 
USA.

Histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) negatively regulates excitatory synapse number and 
memory performance. However, whether HDAC2 regulation of excitatory synapses
occurs in a cell-autonomous manner and whether HDAC2 regulates inhibitory
synaptic functions are not well understood. To examine these aspects of HDAC2
function, we used sparse transfection of rat hippocampal slice cultures and
whole-cell recordings in pyramidal neurons. HDAC2 knockdown (KD) in single
postsynaptic pyramidal neurons enhanced, whereas HDAC2 overexpression (OE)
reduced, excitatory synaptic transmission. Postsynaptic KD of HDAC2 also
facilitated expression of long-term potentiation induced by subthreshold
induction stimuli, without altering long-term depression. In contrast, HDAC2 KD
reduced, whereas HDAC2 OE enhanced, inhibitory synaptic transmission. Alterations
of postsynaptic GABA(A) receptors (GABA(A)Rs) likely underlie the impact of HDAC2
on inhibitory transmission. Consistent with this, we observed reduced transcript 
and protein levels of the GABA(A)R <U+03B3>2 subunit and reduced surface expression of
the a2 subunit after HDAC2 KD. Furthermore, we observed a reduction in synaptic
but not tonic GABA(A)R currents by HDAC2 KD, suggesting that HDAC2 selectively
affects synaptic abundance of functional GABA(A)Rs. Immunostaining for
postsynaptic GABA(A)Rs confirmed that HDAC2 KD and OE can regulate the synaptic
abundance of these receptors. Together, these results highlight a role for HDAC2 
in suppressing synaptic excitation and enhancing synaptic inhibition of
hippocampal neurons. Therefore, a shift in the balance of synaptic excitation
versus inhibition favoring excitation could contribute to the beneficial effects 
of reducing HDAC2 function in wild-type mice or of inhibiting HDACs in models of 
cognitive impairment.

PMID: 23554474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2013 Jun 1;304(11):C1080-90. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00359.2012. Epub 2013 Apr 3.

Distinct patterns of histone modifications at cardiac-specific gene promoters
between cardiac stem cells and mesenchymal stem cells.

Wang M(1), Yu Q, Wang L, Gu H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular and Thoracic Surgery, Department of Surgery,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA. meiwang@iupui.edu

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) and cardiac stem cells (CSCs) possess different
potential to develop into cardiomyocytes. The mechanism underlying cardiomyogenic
capacity of MSCs and CSCs remains elusive. It is well established that histone
modifications correlate with gene expression and contribute to cell fate
commitment. Here we hypothesize that specific histone modifications accompany
cardiac-specific gene expression, thus determining the differentiation capacity
of MSCs and CSCs toward heart cells. Our results indicate that, at the promoter
regions of cardiac-specific genes (Myh6, Myl2, Actc1, Tnni3, and Tnnt2), the
levels of histone acetylation of H3 (acH3) and H4 (acH4), as a mark indicative of
gene activation, were higher in CSCs (Sca-1(+)CD29(+)) than MSCs. Additionally,
lower binding levels of histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1 and HDAC2 at promoter
regions of cardiac-specific genes were noticed in CSCs than MSCs. Treatment with 
trichostatin A, an HDAC inhibitor, upregulated cardiac-specific gene expression
in MSCs. Suppression of HDAC1 or HDAC2 expression by small interfering RNAs led
to increased cardiac gene expression and was accompanied by enhanced acH3 and
acH4 levels at gene loci. We conclude that greater levels of histone acetylation 
at cardiac-specific gene loci in CSCs than MSCs reflect a stronger potential for 
CSCs to develop into cardiomyocytes. These lineage-differential histone
modifications are likely due to less HDAC recruitment at cardiac-specific gene
promoters in CSCs than MSCs.

PMID: 23552285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Fertil Steril. 2013 Jul;100(1):256-61. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2013.03.009.
Epub 2013 Mar 30.

Effect of vitrification on promoter CpG island methylation patterns and
expression levels of DNA methyltransferase 1o, histone acetyltransferase 1, and
deacetylase 1 in metaphase II mouse oocytes.

Zhao XM(1), Ren JJ, Du WH, Hao HS, Wang D, Qin T, Liu Y, Zhu HB.

Author information: 
(1)Embryo Biotechnology and Reproduction Laboratory, Institute of Animal Science,
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of vitrification on Dnmt1o, Hat1, and Hdac1 
promoter CpG island methylation patterns and messenger RNA (mRNA) expression
levels in mouse metaphase II (MII) oocytes.
DESIGN: In vitro study.
SETTING: Academic institution.
ANIMAL(S): Kunming white mice.
INTERVENTION(S): After vitrification, surviving mouse MII oocytes subjected to
methylation and expression analysis with fresh oocytes used as a control.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Expression levels of mRNA as measured by real-time
reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction of methylation patterns of the
CpG islands in the Dnmt1o, Hat1, and Hdac1 promoters analyzed by bisulfite
mutagenesis and sequencing.
RESULT(S): The methylation patterns of the promoter CpG islands in Dnmt1o, Hat1, 
and Hdac1 were not statistically significantly when comparing vitrified oocytes
and fresh oocytes. The expression levels of Hat1 and Hdac1 mRNA were not
statistically significantly different in comparing in vitrified oocytes and fresh
oocytes. The expression of Dnmt1o mRNA was statistically significantly lower in
vitrified oocytes compared with fresh oocytes.
CONCLUSION(S): Vitrification did not statistically significantly alter the
methylation patterns of the promoter CpG islands in Dnmt1o, Hat1, or Hdac1, but
did statistically significantly decrease the expression of Dnmt1o mRNA in mouse
MII oocytes.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23548937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Anat Physiol. 2012 Apr 26;(S3). pii: 002.

The Dynamics of Global Chromatin Remodeling are Pivotal for Tracking the Normal
Pluripotency of Human Embryonic Stem Cells.

Parsons XH(1).

Author information: 
(1)San Diego Regenerative Medicine Institute, San Diego, CA 92109, USA ;
Xcelthera, San Diego, CA 92109, USA.

Pluripotent Human Embryonic Stem Cells (hESCs) have the unconstrained capacity
for long-term stable undifferentiated growth in culture and unrestricted
developmental capacity. Packaging of the eukaryotic genome into chromatin confers
higher order structural control over maintaining stem cell plasticity and
directing differentiation. We recently reported the establishment of a defined
culture system for sustaining the epiblast pluripotence of hESCs, serving as a
platform for de novo derivation of clinically-suitable hESCs and effectively
directing such hESCs uniformly towards functional lineages. To unveil the
epigenetic mechanism in maintaining the epiblast pluripotence of hESCs, in this
study, the global chromatin dynamics in the pluripotent hESCs maintained under
the defined culture were examined. This study shows that the genomic plasticity
of pluripotent hESCs is enabled by an acetylated globally active chromatin
maintained by Oct-4. The pluripotency of hESCs that display normal stable
expansion is associated with high levels of expression and nuclear localization
of active chromatin remodeling factors that include acetylated histone H3 and H4,
Brg-1, hSNF2H, HAT p300, and HDAC1; weak expression or cytoplasmic localization
of repressive chromatin remodeling factors that are implicated in transcriptional
silencing; and residual H3 K9 methylation. A dynamic progression from acetylated 
to transient hyperacetylated to hypoacetylated chromatin states correlates with
loss-of-Oct4-associated hESC differentiation. RNA interference directed against
Oct-4 and HDAC inhibitor analysis support this pivotal link between chromatin
dynamics and hESC differentiation. These findings reveal an epigenetic mechanism 
for placing global chromatin dynamics as central to tracking the normal
pluripotency and lineage progression of hESCs.

PMCID: PMC3609651
PMID: 23543848  [PubMed]


168. J Regen Med Tissue Eng. 2012 Sep 23;1(1). pii: 3.

An Engraftable Human Embryonic Stem Cell Neuronal Lineage-Specific Derivative
Retains Embryonic Chromatin Plasticity for Scale-Up CNS Regeneration.

Parsons XH(1).

Author information: 
(1)San Diego Regenerative Medicine Institute, and Xcelthera, San Diego, CA 92109.

BACKGROUND: Pluripotent human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) proffer cures for a
wide range of neurological disorders by supplying the diversity of human neuronal
cell types in the developing CNS for repair. However, realizing the therapeutic
potential of hESC derivatives has been hindered by generating neuronal cells from
pluripotent cells through uncontrollable and inefficient multi-lineage
differentiation. Previously, we used a defined platform to identify retinoic acid
as sufficient to induce the specification of neuroectoderm direct from the
pluripotent state of hESCs and trigger uniform neuronal lineage-specific
progression to human neuronal progenitors (hESC-I hNuPs) and neurons (hESC-I
hNus) in the developing CNS with high efficiency.
METHODS: Having achieved uniformly conversion of pluripotent hESCs to a neuronal 
lineage, in this study, the expression and intracellular distribution patterns of
a set of chromatin modifiers in hESC-I hNuPs were examined and compared to the
two prototypical neuroepithelial-like human neural stem cells (hNSCs) either
derived from hESCs or isolated directly from the human fetal neuroectoderm in
vivo.
RESULTS: These hESC-I hNuPs expressed high levels of active chromatin modifiers, 
including acetylated histone H3 and H4, HDAC1, Brg-1, and hSNF2H, retaining an
embryonic acetylated globally active chromatin state. Consistent with this
observation, several repressive chromatin remodeling factors regulating histone
H3K9 methylation, including SIRT1, SUV39H1, and Brm, were inactive in hESC-I
hNuPs. These Nurr1-positive hESC-I hNuPs, which did not express the canonical
hNSC markers, yielded neurons efficiently and exclusively, as they did not
differentiate into glial cells. Following engraftment in the brain, hESC-I hNuPs 
yielded well-dispersed and well-integrated human neurons at a high prevalence.
CONCLUSIONS: These observations suggest that, unlike the prototypical
neuroepithelial-like nestin-positive hNSCs, these in vitro neuroectoderm-derived 
Nurr1-positive hESC-I hNuPs are a more neuronal lineage-specific and plastic
human stem cell derivative, providing an engraftable human embryonic neuronal
progenitor in high purity and large supply with adequate neurogenic potential for
scale-up CNS regeneration as stem cell therapy to be translated to patients in
clinical trials.

PMCID: PMC3609668
PMID: 23542901  [PubMed]


169. FEBS Lett. 2013 May 21;587(10):1510-7. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.03.029. Epub
2013 Mar 29.

HDAC inhibitors prevent the induction of the immediate-early gene FOSL1, but do
not alter the nucleosome response.

Khan DH(1), Davie JR.

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Child Health, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
Manitoba, Canada.

Dynamic histone acetylation, catalyzed by lysine acetyltransferases and HDACs, is
critical to IEG expression. Expression of IEGs, such as FOSL1, is induced by
several signal transduction pathways resulting in activation of the protein
kinase MSK and phosphorylation of histone H3 at serine 10 of nucleosomes (the
nucleosome response) at the upstream promoter and regulatory region of target
genes. HDAC inhibitors prevent FOSL1 gene induction and the association of HDAC1,
2 and 3 with the gene body. However, HDAC inhibitors did not prevent the
nucleosome response. Thus HDAC inhibitors perturb events downstream of the
nucleosome response required for FOSL1 transcription initiation.

Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23542037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2013 Oct;31(6):434-47. doi: 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2013.03.008.
Epub 2013 Mar 27.

HDAC inhibitors dysregulate neural stem cell activity in the postnatal mouse
brain.

Foti SB(1), Chou A, Moll AD, Roskams AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Life Sciences Institute and Brain Research Centre,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z3, Canada.

The mammalian central nervous system (CNS) undergoes significant expansion
postnatally, producing astrocytes, oligodendrocytes and inhibitory neurons to
modulate the activity of neural circuits. This is coincident in humans with the
emergence of pediatric epilepsy, a condition commonly treated with
valproate/valproic acid (VPA), a potent inhibitor of histone deacetylases
(HDACs). The sequential activity of specific HDACs, however, may be essential for
the differentiation of distinct subpopulations of neurons and glia. Here, we show
that different subsets of CNS neural stem cells (NSCs) and progenitors switch
expression of HDAC1 and HDAC2 as they commit to a neurogenic lineage in the
subventricular zone (SVZ) and dentate gyrus (DG). The administration of VPA for
only one week from P7-P14, combined with sequential injections of thymidine
analogs reveals that VPA stimulates a significant and differential decrease in
the production and differentiation of progeny of NSCs in the DG, rostral
migratory stream (RMS), and olfactory bulb (OB). Cross-fostering VPA-treated mice
revealed, however, that a postnatal failure to thrive induced by VPA treatment
had a greater effect on DG neurogenesis than VPA action directly. By one month
after VPA, OB interneuron genesis was significantly and differentially reduced in
both periglomerular and granule neurons. Using neurosphere assays to test if VPA 
directly regulates NSC activity, we found that short term treatment with VPA in
vivo reduced neurosphere numbers and size, a phenotype that was also obtained in 
neurospheres from control mice treated with VPA and an alternative HDAC
inhibitor, Trichostatin A (TSA) at 0 and 3 days in vitro (DIV). Collectively,
these data show that clinically used HDAC inhibitors like VPA and TSA can perturb
postnatal neurogenesis; and their use should be carefully considered, especially 
in individuals whose brains are actively undergoing key postnatal time windows of
development.

Copyright © 2013 ISDN. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23542004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e60185. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060185. Epub 2013 Mar 22.

Transcriptional suppression, DNA methylation, and histone deacetylation of the
regulator of G-protein signaling 10 (RGS10) gene in ovarian cancer cells.

Ali MW(1), Cacan E, Liu Y, Pierce JY, Creasman WT, Murph MM, Govindarajan R,
Eblen ST, Greer SF, Hooks SB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Sciences, University of Georgia,
Athens, Georgia, United States of America.

RGS10 regulates ovarian cancer cell growth and survival, and RGS10 expression is 
suppressed in cell models of ovarian cancer chemoresistance. However, the
mechanisms governing RGS10 expression in ovarian cancer are poorly understood.
Here we report RGS10 suppression in primary ovarian cancer and CAOV-3 ovarian
cancer cells compared to immortalized ovarian surface epithelial (IOSE) cells,
and in A2780-AD chemoresistant cells compared to parental A2780 cells. RGS10-1
and RGS10-2 transcripts are expressed in ovarian cancer cells, but only RGS10-1
is suppressed in A2780-AD and CAOV-3 cells, and the RGS10-1 promoter is uniquely 
enriched in CpG dinucleotides. Pharmacological inhibition of DNA
methyl-transferases (DNMTs) increased RGS10 expression, suggesting potential
regulation by DNA methylation. Bisulfite sequencing analysis identified a region 
of the RGS10-1 promoter with significantly enhanced DNA methylation in
chemoresistant A2780-AD cells relative to parental A2780 cells. DNA methylation
in CAOV-3 and IOSE cells was similar to A2780 cells. More marked differences were
observed in histone acetylation of the RGS10-1 promoter. Acetylated histone H3
associated with the RGS10-1 promoter was significantly lower in A2780-AD cells
compared to parental cells, with a corresponding increase in histone deacetylase 
(HDAC) enzyme association. Similarly, acetylated histone levels at the RGS10-1
promoter were markedly lower in CAOV-3 cells compared to IOSE cells, and HDAC1
binding was doubled in CAOV-3 cells. Finally, we show that pharmacological
inhibition of DNMT or HDAC enzymes in chemoresistant A2780-AD cells increases
RGS10 expression and enhances cisplatin toxicity. These data suggest that histone
de-acetylation and DNA methylation correlate with RGS10 suppression and
chemoresistance in ovarian cancer. Markers for loss of RGS10 expression may
identify cancer cells with unique response to therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC3606337
PMID: 23533674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. ChemMedChem. 2013 May;8(5):800-11. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.201300005. Epub 2013 Mar 25.

tert-Butylcarbamate-containing histone deacetylase inhibitors: apoptosis
induction, cytodifferentiation, and antiproliferative activities in cancer cells.

Valente S(1), Trisciuoglio D, Tardugno M, Benedetti R, Labella D, Secci D,
Mercurio C, Boggio R, Tomassi S, Di Maro S, Novellino E, Altucci L, Del Bufalo D,
Mai A, Cosconati S.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Pasteur-Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti, Dipartimento di Chimica e
Tecnologie del Farmaco, Sapienza Università di Roma, P.le A. Moro 5, 00185 Roma, 
Italy.

Herein we report novel pyrrole- and benzene-based hydroxamates (8, 10) and
2'-aminoanilides (9, 11) bearing the tert-butylcarbamate group at the CAP moiety 
as histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors. Compounds 8<U+2009>b and 10<U+2009>c selectively
inhibited HDAC6 at the nanomolar level, whereas the other hydroxamates effected
an increase in acetyl-a-tubulin levels in human acute myeloid leukemia U937
cells. In the same cell line, compounds 8<U+2009>b and 10<U+2009>c elicited 18.4 and 21.4<U+2009>%
apoptosis, respectively (SAHA: 16.9<U+2009>%), and the pyrrole anilide 9<U+2009>c displayed the
highest cytodifferentiating effect (90.9<U+2009>%). In tests against a wide range of
various cancer cell lines to determine its antiproliferative effects, compound
10<U+2009>c exhibited growth inhibition from sub-micromolar (neuroblastoma LAN-5 and
SH-SY5Y cells, chronic myeloid leukemia K562 cells) to low-micromolar (lung H1299
and A549, colon HCT116 and HT29 cancer cells) concentrations. In HT29 cells, 10<U+2009>c
increased histone H3 acetylation, and decreased the colony-forming potential of
the cancer cells by up to 60<U+2009>%.

Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23526814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Nat Immunol. 2013 May;14(5):461-9. doi: 10.1038/ni.2566. Epub 2013 Mar 24.

Suppression of inflammation and acute lung injury by Miz1 via repression of
C/EBP-d.

Do-Umehara HC(1), Chen C, Urich D, Zhou L, Qiu J, Jang S, Zander A, Baker MA,
Eilers M, Sporn PH, Ridge KM, Sznajder JI, Budinger GR, Mutlu GM, Lin A, Liu J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Inflammation is essential for host defense but can cause tissue damage and organ 
failure if unchecked. How the inflammation is resolved remains elusive. Here we
report that the transcription factor Miz1 was required for terminating
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced inflammation. Genetic disruption of the Miz1 POZ
domain, which is essential for the transactivation or repression activity of
Miz1, resulted in hyperinflammation, lung injury and greater mortality in
LPS-treated mice but a lower bacterial load and mortality in mice with
Pseudomonas aeruginosa pneumonia. Loss of the Miz1 POZ domain prolonged the
expression of proinflammatory cytokines. After stimulation, Miz1 was
phosphorylated at Ser178, which was required for recruitment of the histone
deacetylase HDAC1 to repress transcription of the gene encoding C/EBP-d, an
amplifier of inflammation. Our data provide a long-sought mechanism underlying
the resolution of LPS-induced inflammation.

PMCID: PMC3631447
PMID: 23525087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Bone Miner Res. 2013 Sep;28(9):1950-61. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.1932.

Chd4 and associated proteins function as corepressors of Sox9 expression during
BMP-2-induced chondrogenesis.

Sun F(1), Yang Q, Weng W, Zhang Y, Yu Y, Hong A, Ji Y, Pan Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Tenth People's Hospital of Tongji 
University, Shanghai, China.

Mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) differentiate into fully functional
chondrocytes in response to bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2). However, the
comprehensive proteomic aspect of BMP-2-induced chondrogenesis remains unknown.
We took advantage of quantitative proteomic analysis based on isobaric tag for
relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) and on-line 2D nano-liquid
chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS) to identify proteins
differentially expressed during BMP-2-induced chondrogenic differentiation of
MEFs. We found 85 downregulated proteins, and ingenuity pathways analysis (IPA)
revealed a protein-protein network with chromodomain-helicase-DNA-binding protein
4 (Chd4) in the center. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and nuclease
hypersensitivity assays showed that Chd4, interacting with Hdac1/2, cooperates
with its related proteins Kap1 and Cbx1 to bind at -207/-148 of the Sox9
promoter. We also provided evidence that let-7a targets the 3'UTR of Chd4 to
promote chondrogenesis of MEFs. Together, our findings indicate that BMP-2
induced the upregulation of let-7a, targeting Chd4 and positively controlling the
chondrogenic differentiation of MEFs. These findings illustrate epigenetic
regulation of the chondrogenic differentiation process and also expand the
understanding of the involved intracellular mechanisms.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMID: 23519980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Fly (Austin). 2013 Apr-Jun;7(2):87-91. doi: 10.4161/fly.24018. Epub 2013 Mar 21.

Sex-switching of the Drosophila brain by two antagonistic chromatin factors.

Ito H(1), Sato K, Yamamoto D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurogenetics, Tohoku University Graduate School of Life Sciences,
Sendai, Japan. hiro-san@m.tohoku.ac.jp

In Drosophila melanogaster, the fruitless (fru) gene encoding BTB-Zn-finger
transcription factors organizes male sexual behavior by controlling the
development of sexually dimorphic neuronal circuitry. However, the molecular
mechanism by which fru controls the sexual fate of neurons has been unknown. Our 
recent study represents a first step toward clarification of this mechanism. We
have shown that: (1) Fru forms a complex with the transcriptional cofactor Bonus 
(Bon), which recruits either of two chromatin regulators, Histone deacetylase 1
(HDAC1) or Heterochromatin protein 1a (HP1a), to Fru-target sites; (2) the
Fru-Bon complex has a masculinizing effect on single sexually-dimorphic neurons
when it recruits HDAC1, whereas it has a demasculinizing effect when it recruits 
HP1a; (3) HDAC1 or HP1a thus recruited to Fru-target sites determines the sexual 
fate of single neurons in an all-or-none manner, as manipulations of HDAC1 or
HP1a expression levels affect the proportion of male-typical neurons and
female-typical neurons without producing neurons of intersexual characteristics. 
Here, we hypothesize that chromatin landscape changes induced by ecdysone surges 
direct the HDAC1- or HP1a-containing Fru complex to distinct targets, thereby
allowing them to switch the neuronal sexual fate in the brain.

PMCID: PMC3732336
PMID: 23519136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2013 May 15;269(1):61-71. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2013.03.006. Epub 2013 Mar 19.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition during oncogenic transformation induced by
hexavalent chromium involves reactive oxygen species-dependent mechanism in lung 
epithelial cells.

Ding SZ(1), Yang YX, Li XL, Michelli-Rivera A, Han SY, Wang L, Pratheeshkumar P, 
Wang X, Lu J, Yin YQ, Budhraja A, Hitron AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Henan Provincial People's Hospital, Zhengzhou
University, Wei-Wu Road, Zhengzhou, Henan 450000, PR China.
dingsongze@hotmail.com

Hexavalent chromium [Cr(VI)] is an important human carcinogen associated with
pulmonary diseases and lung cancer. Exposure to Cr(VI) induces DNA damage, cell
morphological change and malignant transformation in human lung epithelial cells.
Despite extensive studies, the molecular mechanisms remain elusive, it is also
not known if Cr(VI)-induced transformation might accompany with invasive
properties to facilitate metastasis. We aimed to study Cr(VI)-induced
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and invasion during oncogenic
transformation in lung epithelial cells. The results showed that Cr(VI) at low
doses represses E-cadherin mRNA and protein expression, enhances mesenchymal
marker vimentin expression and transforms the epithelial cell into fibroblastoid 
morphology. Cr(VI) also increases cell invasion and promotes colony formation.
Further studies indicated that Cr(VI) uses multiple mechanisms to repress
E-cadherin expression, including activation of E-cadherin repressors such as
Slug, ZEB1, KLF8 and enhancement the binding of HDAC1 in E-cadherin gene
promoter, but DNA methylation is not responsible for the loss of E-cadherin.
Catalase reduces Cr(VI)-induced E-cadherin and vimentin protein expression,
attenuates cell invasion in matrigel and colony formation on soft agar. These
results demonstrate that exposure to a common human carcinogen, Cr(VI), induces
EMT and invasion during oncogenic transformation in lung epithelial cells and
implicate in cancer metastasis and prevention.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3664092
PMID: 23518002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(3):e1003377. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003377. Epub 2013 Mar 
14.

Histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) regulates chromosome segregation and kinetochore
function via H4K16 deacetylation during oocyte maturation in mouse.

Ma P(1), Schultz RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
United States of America.

Changes in histone acetylation occur during oocyte development and maturation,
but the role of specific histone deacetylases in these processes is poorly
defined. We report here that mice harboring Hdac1(-/+)/Hdac2(-/-) or Hdac2(-/-)
oocytes are infertile or sub-fertile, respectively. Depleting maternal HDAC2
results in hyperacetylation of H4K16 as determined by immunocytochemistry--normal
deacetylation of other lysine residues of histone H3 or H4 is observed--and
defective chromosome condensation and segregation during oocyte maturation occurs
in a sub-population of oocytes. The resulting increased incidence of aneuploidy
likely accounts for the observed sub-fertility of mice harboring Hdac2(-/-)
oocytes. The infertility of mice harboring Hdac1(-/+)/Hdac2(-/-)oocytes is
attributed to failure of those few eggs that properly mature to metaphase II to
initiate DNA replication following fertilization. The increased amount of
acetylated H4K16 likely impairs kinetochore function in oocytes lacking HDAC2
because kinetochores in mutant oocytes are less able to form cold-stable
microtubule attachments and less CENP-A is located at the centromere. These
results implicate HDAC2 as the major HDAC that regulates global histone
acetylation during oocyte development and, furthermore, suggest HDAC2 is largely 
responsible for the deacetylation of H4K16 during maturation. In addition, the
results provide additional support that histone deacetylation that occurs during 
oocyte maturation is critical for proper chromosome segregation.

PMCID: PMC3597510
PMID: 23516383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Hepatology. 2013 Aug;58(2):692-705. doi: 10.1002/hep.26398.

PROX1 promotes hepatocellular carcinoma metastasis by way of up-regulating
hypoxia-inducible factor 1a expression and protein stability.

Liu Y(1), Zhang JB, Qin Y, Wang W, Wei L, Teng Y, Guo L, Zhang B, Lin Z, Liu J,
Ren ZG, Ye QH, Xie Y.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology (MOE & MOH), Institute of
Biomedical Sciences, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common cancers and the third
leading cause of death from cancer worldwide. HCC has a very poor prognosis
because of tumor invasiveness, frequent intrahepatic spread, and extrahepatic
metastasis. The molecular mechanism of HCC invasiveness and metastasis is poorly 
understood. The homeobox protein PROX1 is required for hepatocyte migration
during mouse embryonic liver development. In this study, we show that high PROX1 
protein expression in primary HCC tissues is associated with significantly worse 
survival and early tumor recurrence in postoperative HCC patients. Knockdown of
PROX1 expression in HCC cells inhibited cell migration and invasiveness in vitro 
and HCC metastasis in nude mice while overexpression of PROX1 in HCC cells
promoted these processes. PROX1's pro-metastasis activity is most likely
attributed to its up-regulation of hypoxia-inducible factor 1a (HIF-1a)
transcription and stabilization of HIF-1a protein by recruiting histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) to prevent the acetylation of HIF-1a, which subsequently
induces an epithelial-mesenchymal transition response in HCC cells. We further
demonstrated the prognostic value of using the combination of PROX1 and HDAC1
levels to predict postoperative survival and early recurrence of HCC.CONCLUSION: 
PROX1 is a critical factor that promotes HCC metastasis.

Copyright © 2013 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 23505027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Transplant Proc. 2013 Mar;45(2):463-73. doi: 10.1016/j.transproceed.2012.06.063.

Gender-dependent histone deacetylases injury may contribute to differences in
liver recovery rates of male and female mice.

Wang Y(1), Ye F, Ke Q, Wu Q, Yang R, Bu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Ministry of Health, West China Hospital, Sichuan
University, Chengdu, China.

BACKGROUND: Hepatocytes undergo DNA synthesis shortly after liver damage
triggered by partial hepatectomy (PH). This study revealed that the rate of liver
damage recovery is gender-dependent. Furthermore, histone deacetylase (HDAC)
epigenetic factors were discovered, at least in part, to govern the different
liver recovery rates that were observed for male and female mice.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Experimental mice were divided into the following three
groups: wild-type male mice, wild-type female mice, and HDAC1(flox/flox)
HDAC2(flox/flox) Alb-Cre male mice. The different groups underwent a 2/3 PH
surgery and were sacrificed after the PH.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemical analysis showed that the peak of
5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine and the number of proliferating cell nuclear
antigen-positive cells is delayed in female livers relative to male livers.
Consistent with these results, the expression of cyclin D1, cyclin-dependent
kinase 2 (CDK2) and cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4) in females is lower than
that in males. Western blot analysis examining HDAC1 and HDAC2 expression in the 
male and female liver showed the same trend as the cyclin products listed above
or decreased protein expression in females relative to males. The results of
immunohistochemistry and Western blot analysis of the HDAC1(flox/flox)
HDAC2(flox/flox) Alb-Cre liver are consistent with the interesting phenomenon
observed in the female mouse liver. Additionally, the hepatocyte proliferation
inhibitor B-myc was evaluated as an HDAC1 and HDAC2 target gene. The mRNA levels 
of B-myc were increased in the female liver compared with the male liver. A
chromatin immunoprecipitation assay showed the HDACs directly occupied the B-myc 
promoter.
CONCLUSIONS: The processes of hepatocyte replication and liver mass
reconstruction differed in male and female mice. Female subjects show a
significantly delayed or decreased rate in these processes, which could be
explained by differences in HDAC regulation.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 23498780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Blood. 2013 Mar 14;121(11):1930-1. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-02-480400.

Too much or too little, how much HDAC activity is good for you?

Matthias P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute For Biomedical Research, Switzerland.

Comment on
    Blood. 2013 Mar 14;121(11):2038-50.

In this issue of Blood, Heideman and colleagues show that the major class I
histone deacetylases (HDACs) HDAC1 and HDAC2 can act to suppress tumors in mouse 
thymocytes.

PMID: 23493769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Nutr Metab. 2013;2013:821082. doi: 10.1155/2013/821082. Epub 2013 Feb 11.

Plant polyphenols and oxidative metabolites of the herbal alkenylbenzene
methyleugenol suppress histone deacetylase activity in human colon carcinoma
cells.

Groh IA(1), Chen C, Lüske C, Cartus AT, Esselen M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Food Chemistry and Toxicology, Department of Chemistry, University
of Kaiserslautern, Erwin-Schroedinger-Straße 52, 67663 Kaiserslautern, Germany.

Evidence has been provided that diet and environmental factors directly influence
epigenetic mechanisms associated with cancer development in humans. The
inhibition of histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity and the disruption of the HDAC 
complex have been recognized as a potent strategy for cancer therapy and
chemoprevention. In the present study, we investigated whether selected plant
constituents affect HDAC activity or HDAC1 protein status in the human colon
carcinoma cell line HT29. The polyphenols (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG)
and genistein (GEN) as well as two oxidative methyleugenol (ME) metabolites were 
shown to inhibit HDAC activity in intact HT29 cells. Concomitantly, a significant
decrease of the HDAC1 protein level was observed after incubation with EGCG and
GEN, whereas the investigated ME metabolites did not affect HDAC1 protein status.
In conclusion, dietary compounds were found to possess promising HDAC-inhibitory 
properties, contributing to epigenetic alterations in colon tumor cells, which
should be taken into account in further risk/benefit assessments of polyphenols
and alkenylbenzenes.

PMCID: PMC3583079
PMID: 23476753  [PubMed]


182. Nat Neurosci. 2013 Apr;16(4):434-40. doi: 10.1038/nn.3354. Epub 2013 Mar 10.

Class I HDAC inhibition blocks cocaine-induced plasticity by targeted changes in 
histone methylation.

Kennedy PJ(1), Feng J, Robison AJ, Maze I, Badimon A, Mouzon E, Chaudhury D,
Damez-Werno DM, Haggarty SJ, Han MH, Bassel-Duby R, Olson EN, Nestler EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Fishberg Department of Neuroscience and Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn School
of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA.

Induction of histone acetylation in the nucleus accumbens (NAc), a key brain
reward region, promotes cocaine-induced alterations in gene expression. Histone
deacetylases (HDACs) tightly regulate the acetylation of histone tails, but
little is known about the functional specificity of different HDAC isoforms in
the development and maintenance of cocaine-induced plasticity, and previous
studies of HDAC inhibitors report conflicting effects on cocaine-elicited
behavioral adaptations. Here we demonstrate that specific and prolonged blockade 
of HDAC1 in NAc of mice increased global levels of histone acetylation, but also 
induced repressive histone methylation and antagonized cocaine-induced changes in
behavior, an effect mediated in part through a chromatin-mediated suppression of 
GABAA receptor subunit expression and inhibitory tone on NAc neurons. Our
findings suggest a new mechanism by which prolonged and selective HDAC inhibition
can alter behavioral and molecular adaptations to cocaine and inform the
development of therapeutics for cocaine addiction.

PMCID: PMC3609040
PMID: 23475113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e58473. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058473. Epub 2013 Mar 4.

Monoaminergic and neuropeptidergic neurons have distinct expression profiles of
histone deacetylases.

Takase K(1), Oda S, Kuroda M, Funato H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Toho University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Monoaminergic and neuropeptidergic neurons regulate a wide variety of behaviors, 
such as feeding, sleep/wakefulness behavior, stress response, addiction, and
social behavior. These neurons form neural circuits to integrate different
modalities of behavioral and environmental factors, such as stress, maternal
care, and feeding conditions. One possible mechanism for integrating
environmental factors through the monoaminergic and neuropeptidergic neurons is
through the epigenetic regulation of gene expression via altered acetylation of
histones. Histone deacetylases (HDACs) play an important role in altering
behavior in response to environmental factors. Despite increasing attention and
the versatile roles of HDACs in a variety of brain functions and disorders, no
reports have detailed the localization of the HDACs in the monoaminergic and
neuropeptidergic neurons. Here, we examined the expression profile of the HDAC
protein family from HDAC1 to HDAC11 in corticotropin-releasing hormone, oxytocin,
vasopressin, agouti-related peptide (AgRP), pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC), orexin, 
histamine, dopamine, serotonin, and noradrenaline neurons. Immunoreactivities for
HDAC1,-2,-3,-5,-6,-7,-9, and -11 were very similar among the monoaminergic and
neuropeptidergic neurons, while the HDAC4, -8, and -10 immunoreactivities were
clearly different among neuronal groups. HDAC10 expression was found in AgRP
neurons, POMC neurons, dopamine neurons and noradrenaline neurons but not in
other neuronal groups. HDAC8 immunoreactivity was detected in the cytoplasm of
almost all histamine neurons with a pericellular pattern but not in other
neuropeptidergic and monoaminergic neurons. Thus, the differential expression of 
HDACs in monoaminergic and neuropeptidergic neurons may be crucial for the
maintenance of biological characteristics and may be altered in response to
environmental factors.

PMCID: PMC3587588
PMID: 23469282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Endocrinology. 2013 Apr;154(4):1454-64. doi: 10.1210/en.2012-2061. Epub 2013 Mar 
1.

A positive regulatory domain in CCAAT/enhancer binding protein ß (C/EBP<U+0392>) is
required for the glucocorticoid-mediated displacement of histone deacetylase 1
(HDAC1) from the C/ebpa promoter and maximum adipogenesis.

Abdou HS(1), Atlas E, Haché RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Reproduction, Mother and Youth Health, CHUQ Research Centre, Quebec City,
Quebec, Canada.

Glucocorticoids promote adipogenesis and contribute to the metabolic syndrome
through a number of mechanisms. One of the effectors of glucocorticoid action is 
the CCAAT/enhancer binding protein ß (C/EBPß). C/EBPß is a basic leucine-zipper
transcription factor involved in diverse processes including differentiation,
cellular proliferation, and inflammation. C/EBPß transcriptional activity is
regulated, in part, by its acetylation profile resulting from its dynamic
interaction with either acetylases general control nonrepressed protein
5/p300/CBP associated factor (GCN5/PCAF) or deacetylase complexes (mSin3A/histone
deacetylase 1 [HDAC1]). Glucocorticoid treatment of preadipocytes promotes C/EBPß
acetylation, leading to mSin3A/HDAC1 dissociation from C/EBPß and resulting in
C/ebpa promoter activation at the onset of adipogenesis, thus increasing the
differentiation rate. We recently showed that the regulatory domain 1 (RD1) of
C/EBPß contains four residues (153-156) required for its interaction with HDAC1, 
therefore supporting RD1 proposed inhibitory role. In an attempt to further
elucidate the intrinsic regulatory property of RD1, we sought to characterize the
regulatory potential of the N terminus region of RD1 (residues 141-149). In this 
study, we show that C/EBPß<U+0394>141-149 transcriptional activity was compromised on
the C/ebpa, but not on the Ppar<U+03B3>, promoter. Additionally, the ability of
C/EBPß<U+0394>141-149 to induce adipogenesis in NIH 3T3 cells was compromised when
compared with C/EBPßwt owing to a delayed expression of C/ebpa at the onset of
differentiation. Furthermore, the data suggest that the reduced expression of
C/ebpa in cells expressing C/EBPß<U+0394>141-149 was due to a persistent recruitment of 
HDAC1 to the C/ebpa promoter after glucocorticoid treatment. Together, these
results suggest that amino acids 141-149 of C/EBPß act as a positive regulatory
domain required for maximum transcriptional activity.

PMID: 23456364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. EMBO J. 2013 Apr 3;32(7):982-95. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2013.37. Epub 2013 Mar 1.

Interplay between Homeobox proteins and Polycomb repressive complexes in p16INK4a
regulation.

Martin N(1), Popov N, Aguilo F, O'Loghlen A, Raguz S, Snijders AP, Dharmalingam
G, Li S, Thymiakou E, Carroll T, Zeisig BB, So CW, Peters G, Episkopou V, Walsh
MJ, Gil J.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Proliferation Group, MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial College
London, London, UK.

The INK4/ARF locus regulates senescence and is frequently altered in cancer. In
normal cells, the INK4/ARF locus is found silenced by Polycomb repressive
complexes (PRCs). Which are the mechanisms responsible for the recruitment of
PRCs to INK4/ARF and their other target genes remains unclear. In a genetic
screen for transcription factors regulating senescence, we identified the
homeodomain-containing protein HLX1 (H2.0-like homeobox 1). Expression of HLX1
extends cellular lifespan and blunts oncogene-induced senescence. Using
quantitative proteomics, we identified p16(INK4a) as the key target mediating the
effects of HLX1 in senescence. HLX1 represses p16(INK4a) transcription by
recruiting PRCs and HDAC1. This mechanism has broader implications, as HLX1 also 
regulates a subset of PRC targets besides p16(INK4a). Finally, sampling members
of the Homeobox family, we identified multiple genes with ability to repress
p16(INK4a). Among them, we found HOXA9 (Homeobox A9), a putative oncogene in
leukaemia, which also recruits PRCs and HDAC1 to regulate p16(INK4a). Our results
reveal an unexpected and conserved interplay between homeodomain-containing
proteins and PRCs with implications in senescence, development and cancer.

PMCID: PMC3616285
PMID: 23455154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56997. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056997. Epub 2013 Feb 25.

Involvement of crosstalk between Oct4 and Meis1a in neural cell fate decision.

Yamada T(1), Urano-Tashiro Y, Tanaka S, Akiyama H, Tashiro F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science and Technology, Faculty of Industrial Science
and Technology, Tokyo University of Science, Noda-shi, Chiba, Japan.

Oct4 plays a critical role both in maintaining pluripotency and the cell fate
decision of embryonic stem (ES) cells. Nonetheless, in the determination of the
neuroectoderm (NE) from ES cells, the detailed regulation mechanism of the Oct4
gene expression is poorly understood. Here, we report that crosstalk between Oct4
and Meis1a, a Pbx-related homeobox protein, is required for neural
differentiation of mouse P19 embryonic carcinoma (EC) cells induced by retinoic
acid (RA). During neural differentiation, Oct4 expression was transiently
enhanced during 6-12 h of RA addition and subsequently disappeared within 48 h.
Coinciding with up-regulation of Oct4 expression, the induction of Meis1a
expression was initiated and reached a plateau at 48 h, suggesting that
transiently induced Oct4 activates Meis1a expression and the up-regulated Meis1a 
then suppresses Oct4 expression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and
luciferase reporter analysis showed that Oct4 enhanced Meis1a expression via
direct binding to the Meis1 promoter accompanying histone H3 acetylation and
appearance of 5-hydoxymethylcytosine (5hmC), while Meis1a suppressed Oct4
expression via direct association with the Oct4 promoter together with histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1). Furthermore, ectopic Meis1a expression promoted neural
differentiation via formation of large neurospheres that expressed Nestin, GLAST,
BLBP and Sox1 as neural stem cell (NSC)/neural progenitor markers, whereas its
down-regulation generated small neurospheres and repressed neural
differentiation. Thus, these results imply that crosstalk between Oct4 and Meis1a
on mutual gene expressions is essential for the determination of NE from EC
cells.

PMCID: PMC3581578
PMID: 23451132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Dev Cell. 2013 Feb 25;24(4):345-58. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2013.01.012.

Development and regeneration of Sox2+ endoderm progenitors are regulated by a
Hdac1/2-Bmp4/Rb1 regulatory pathway.

Wang Y(1), Tian Y, Morley MP, Lu MM, Demayo FJ, Olson EN, Morrisey EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The mechanisms that govern the maintenance and differentiation of tissue-specific
progenitors in development and tissue regeneration are poorly understood. We show
that development of Sox2+ progenitors in the lung endoderm is regulated by
histone deacetylases 1 and 2 (Hdac1/2). Hdac1/2 deficiency leads to a loss of
Sox2 expression and a block in proximal airway development. This is mediated in
part by derepression of Bmp4 and the tumor suppressor Rb1, which are direct
transcriptional targets of Hdac1/2. In contrast to development, postnatal loss of
Hdac1/2 in airway epithelium does not affect the expression of Sox2 or Bmp4.
However, postnatal loss of Hdac1/2 leads to increased expression of the
cell-cycle regulators Rb1, p21/Cdkn1a, and p16/Ink4a, resulting in a loss of
cell-cycle progression and defective regeneration of Sox2+ lung epithelium. Thus,
Hdac1/2 have both common and unique targets that differentially regulate
tissue-specific progenitor activity during development and regeneration.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3586315
PMID: 23449471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Blood. 2013 Apr 25;121(17):3459-68. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-10-461988. Epub 2013 
Feb 25.

A dual role for Hdac1: oncosuppressor in tumorigenesis, oncogene in tumor
maintenance.

Santoro F(1), Botrugno OA, Dal Zuffo R, Pallavicini I, Matthews GM, Cluse L,
Barozzi I, Senese S, Fornasari L, Moretti S, Altucci L, Pelicci PG, Chiocca S,
Johnstone RW, Minucci S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology at the IFOM-IEO Campus, European Institute
of Oncology, via Adamello 16, Milan, Italy.

Aberrant recruitment of histone deacetylases (HDACs) by the oncogenic fusion
protein PML-RAR is involved in the pathogenesis of acute promyelocytic leukemia
(APL). PML-RAR, however, is not sufficient to induce disease in mice but requires
additional oncogenic lesions during the preleukemic phase. Here, we show that
knock-down of Hdac1 and Hdac2 dramatically accelerates leukemogenesis in
transgenic preleukemic mice. These events are not restricted to APL because
lymphomagenesis driven by deletion of p53 or, to a lesser extent, by c-myc
overexpression, was also accelerated by Hdac1 knock-down. In the preleukemic
phase of APL, Hdac1 counteracts the activity of PML-RAR in (1) blocking
differentiation; (2) impairing genomic stability; and (3) increasing self-renewal
in hematopoietic progenitors, as all of these events are affected by the
reduction in Hdac1 levels. This led to an expansion of a subpopulation of
PML-RAR-expressing cells that is the major source of leukemic stem cells in the
full leukemic stage. Remarkably, short-term treatment of preleukemic mice with an
HDAC inhibitor accelerated leukemogenesis. In contrast, knock-down of Hdac1 in
APL mice led to enhanced survival duration of the leukemic animals. Thus, Hdac1
has a dual role in tumorigenesis: oncosuppressive in the early stages, and
oncogenic in established tumor cells.

PMID: 23440245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Mar 12;110(11):4315-20. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1300959110. Epub 2013 Feb 25.

Bisphenol A delays the perinatal chloride shift in cortical neurons by epigenetic
effects on the Kcc2 promoter.

Yeo M(1), Berglund K, Hanna M, Guo JU, Kittur J, Torres MD, Abramowitz J,
Busciglio J, Gao Y, Birnbaumer L, Liedtke WB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine/Neurology, Duke University, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

Comment in
    Epigenetics. 2013 Nov;8(11):1128-32.

Bisphenol A (BPA) is a ubiquitous compound that is emerging as a possible
toxicant during embryonic development. BPA has been shown to epigenetically
affect the developing nervous system, but the molecular mechanisms are not clear.
Here we demonstrate that BPA exposure in culture led to delay in the perinatal
chloride shift caused by significant decrease in potassium chloride cotransporter
2 (Kcc2) mRNA expression in developing rat, mouse, and human cortical neurons.
Neuronal chloride increased correspondingly. Treatment with epigenetic compounds 
decitabine and trichostatin A rescued the BPA effects as did knockdown of histone
deacetylase 1 and combined knockdown histone deacetylase 1 and 2. Furthermore,
BPA evoked increase in tangential interneuron migration and increased chloride in
migrating neurons. Interestingly, BPA exerted its effect in a sexually dimorphic 
manner, with a more accentuated effect in females than males. By chromatin
immunoprecipitation, we found a significant increase in binding of methyl-CpG
binding protein 2 to the "cytosine-phosphate-guanine shores" of the Kcc2
promoter, and decrease in binding of acetylated histone H3K9 surrounding the
transcriptional start site. Methyl-CpG binding protein 2-expressing neurons were 
more abundant resulting from BPA exposure. The sexually dimorphic effect of BPA
on Kcc2 expression was also demonstrated in cortical neurons cultured from the
offspring of BPA-fed mouse dams. In these neurons and in cortical slices,
decitabine was found to rescue the effect of BPA on Kcc2 expression. Overall, our
results indicate that BPA can disrupt Kcc2 gene expression through epigenetic
mechanisms. Beyond increase in basic understanding, our findings have relevance
for identifying unique neurodevelopmental toxicity mechanisms of BPA, which could
possibly play a role in pathogenesis of human neurodevelopmental disorders.

PMCID: PMC3600491
PMID: 23440186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e52736. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052736. Epub 2013 Feb 20.

The dynamics of stress p53-Mdm2 network regulated by p300 and HDAC1.

Arora A(1), Gera S, Maheshwari T, Raghav D, Alam MJ, Singh RK, Agarwal SM.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics Division, Institute of Cytology and Preventive Oncology, Noida,
India.

We construct a stress p53-Mdm2-p300-HDAC1 regulatory network that is activated
and stabilised by two regulatory proteins, p300 and HDAC1. Different activation
levels of [Formula: see text] observed due to these regulators during stress
condition have been investigated using a deterministic as well as a stochastic
approach to understand how the cell responds during stress conditions. We found
that these regulators help in adjusting p53 to different conditions as identified
by various oscillatory states, namely fixed point oscillations, damped
oscillations and sustain oscillations. On assessing the impact of p300 on
p53-Mdm2 network we identified three states: first stabilised or normal condition
where the impact of p300 is negligible, second an interim region where p53 is
activated due to interaction between p53 and p300, and finally the third regime
where excess of p300 leads to cell stress condition. Similarly evaluation of
HDAC1 on our model led to identification of the above three distinct states. Also
we observe that noise in stochastic cellular system helps to reach each
oscillatory state quicker than those in deterministic case. The constructed model
validated different experimental findings qualitatively.

PMCID: PMC3577848
PMID: 23437037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Cerebellum. 2013 Aug;12(4):534-46. doi: 10.1007/s12311-013-0459-x.

The expression of HDAC1 and HDAC2 during cerebellar cortical development.

Yoo JY(1), Larouche M, Goldowitz D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Centre for Molecular Medicine and
Therapeutics, University of British Columbia, 950 W. 28th Avenue, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are epigenetic regulatory proteins that repress gene
transcription by changing DNA conformation. The regulation of gene expression
through histone deacetylation is an important mechanism for the development of
the central nervous system. Although the disruption of the balance in epigenetic 
gene regulation has been implicated in many CNS developmental abnormalities and
diseases, the expression pattern of HDACs in various cell types in the brain
during its maturation process has had limited exploration. Therefore, in this
study, we investigate the cell type-specific and developmental stage-specific
expression pattern of HDAC1 and HDAC2 in the mouse cerebellum. Our experimental
results show that the cerebellar progenitors and glial cells express high levels 
of HDAC1 and low levels of HDAC2. On the other hand, the post-mitotic migrating
neuronal cells of the cerebellar cortex show strong HDAC2 and weak HDAC1
expressions. In more differentiated neuronal cells, including Purkinje cells,
granule cells, unipolar brush cells, and GABAergic interneurons, we found a
consistent expression pattern, high levels of HDAC2 and low levels of HDAC1.
Therefore, our data provide support for the potential important roles of HDAC1 in
cell proliferation and HDAC2 in migration and differentiation.

PMID: 23436026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Diabetes. 2013 Mar;62(3):685-7. doi: 10.2337/db12-1354.

Improving insulin sensitivity with HDAC inhibitor.

Ye J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Antioxidant and Gene Regulation Laboratory, Pennington Biomedical Research
Center, Louisiana State University System, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, USA.
yej@pbrc.edu

Comment on
    Diabetes. 2013 Mar;62(3):732-42.

PMCID: PMC3581218
PMID: 23431009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Carcinogenesis. 2013 Jul;34(7):1442-9. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgt070. Epub 2013 Feb 
21.

Pure curcumin increases the expression of SOCS1 and SOCS3 in myeloproliferative
neoplasms through suppressing class I histone deacetylases.

Chen CQ(1), Yu K, Yan QX, Xing CY, Chen Y, Yan Z, Shi YF, Zhao KW, Gao SM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Internal Medicine and 2Department of Hematology, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical College, 2 FuXue Road, Wenzhou 325000,
China.

Suppressors of cytokine signaling, SOCS1 and SOCS3, are important negative
regulators of Janus kinase 2/signal transducers and activators of transcription
signaling, which is constitutively activated in myeloproliferative neoplasms
(MPNs) and leukemia. Curcumin has been shown to possess anticancer activity
through different mechanisms. However, whether curcumin can regulate the
expression of SOCS1 and SOCS3 is still unknown. Here, we found that curcumin
elevated the expression of SOCS1 and SOCS3 via triggering acetylation of histone 
in the regions of SOCS1 and SOCS3 promoter in K562 and HEL cells. As a novel
histone deacetylases (HDACs) inhibitor, curcumin inhibited HDAC enzyme activities
and decreased the levels of HDAC1, 3 and 8 but not HDAC2. Knockdown of HDAC8 by
small interfering RNA markedly elevated the expression of SOCS1 and SOCS3.
Moreover, ectopic expression of HDAC8 decreased the levels of SOCS1 and SOCS3.
Thus, HDAC8 plays an important role in the modulation of SOCS1 and SOCS3 by
curcumin. Also, trichostatin A (TSA), an inhibitor of HDACs, increased the levels
of SOCS1 and SOCS3. Furthermore, curcumin increased the transcript levels of
SOCS1 and SOCS3 and significantly inhibited the clonogenic activity of
hematopoietic progenitors from patients with MPNs. Finally, curcumin markedly
inhibited HDAC activities and decreased HDAC8 levels in primary MPN cells. Taken 
together, our data uncover a regulatory mechanism of SOCS1 and SOCS3 through
inhibition of HDAC activity (especially HDAC8) by curcumin. Thus, being a
relative non-toxic agent, curcumin may offer a therapeutic advantage in the
clinical treatment for MPNs.

PMID: 23430957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. BMC Cancer. 2013 Feb 19;13:81. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-13-81.

Negative transcriptional control of ERBB2 gene by MBP-1 and HDAC1: diagnostic
implications in breast cancer.

Contino F(1), Mazzarella C, Ferro A, Lo Presti M, Roz E, Lupo C, Perconti G,
Giallongo A, Feo S.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Molecolari e Biomolecolari, Università di
Palermo, Viale delle Scienze, Ed. 16, Palermo I-90128, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The human ERBB2 gene is frequently amplified in breast tumors, and
its high expression is associated with poor prognosis. We previously reported a
significant inverse correlation between Myc promoter-binding protein-1 (MBP-1)
and ERBB2 expression in primary breast invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC). MBP-1 is 
a transcriptional repressor of the c-MYC gene that acts by binding to the P2
promoter; only one other direct target of MBP-1, the COX2 gene, has been
identified so far.
METHODS: To gain new insights into the functional relationship linking MBP-1 and 
ERBB2 in breast cancer, we have investigated the effects of MBP-1 expression on
endogenous ERBB2 transcript and protein levels, as well as on transcription
promoter activity, by transient-transfection of SKBr3 cells. Reporter gene and
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays were used to dissect the ERBB2 promoter and 
identify functional MBP-1 target sequences. We also investigated the relative
expression of MBP-1 and HDAC1 in IDC and normal breast tissues by immunoblot
analysis and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Transfection experiments and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays in
SKBr3 cells indicated that MBP-1 negatively regulates the ERBB2 gene by binding
to a genomic region between nucleotide -514 and -262 of the proximal promoter;
consistent with this, a concomitant recruitment of HDAC1 and loss of acetylated
histone H4 was observed. In addition, we found high expression of MBP-1 and HDAC1
in normal tissues and a statistically significant inverse correlation with ErbB2 
expression in the paired tumor samples.
CONCLUSIONS: Altogether, our in vitro and in vivo data indicate that the ERBB2
gene is a novel MBP-1 target, and immunohistochemistry analysis of primary tumors
suggests that the concomitant high expression of MBP-1 and HDAC1 may be
considered a diagnostic marker of cancer progression for breast IDC.

PMCID: PMC3599235
PMID: 23421821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Oncol Lett. 2013 Feb;5(2):452-458. Epub 2012 Dec 3.

Investigation of the expression patterns and correlation of DNA
methyltransferases and class I histone deacetylases in ovarian cancer tissues.

Gu Y(1), Yang P, Shao Q, Liu X, Xia S, Zhang M, Xu H, Shao Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Medical Science and Laboratory Medicine,
Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 212013;

Recent studies have reported that DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) and histone
deacetylases (HDACs) are involved in the epigenetic regulation of cancer, as well
as promoting cell proliferation and tumorigenesis. These mechanisms also play
important roles in ovarian cancer, but little is known concerning the correlation
of DNMTs and HDACs in ovarian cancer. In the present study, we used quantitative 
real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) and
immunohistochemical staining to examine the mRNA and protein expression of DNMTs 
and class I HDACs of tissues from 22 cases of ovarian cancer and 8 normal ovaries
as a control. Furthermore, we assessed the correlation with clinicopathological
stages and the mRNA expression of these genes. The results indicated that the
mRNA expression of DNMT1, DNMT3b and class I HDACs was increased in ovarian
cancers, while the expression of DNMT3a was not different between cancer tissues 
and normal ovaries. Additionally, the results of immunohistochemical staining
demonstrated that DNMT1 and DNMT3b were significantly increased in ovarian cancer
samples. Furthermore, the expression of DNMT1, DNMT3b, HDAC1 and HDAC2 was
significantly higher in stage III/IV compared with stage I/II ovarian carcinomas.
The expression of HDAC2 was positively correlated with HDCA1, HDAC3 and HDAC8,
and DNMT1 was positively correlated with DNMT3b. Simultaneously, DNMT3b was
correlated with HDAC1 and HDAC2. HDAC1 may upregulate the expression of DNMTs,
but this requires confirmation by in vitro and in vivo experiments. The overall
high rate of expression for class I HDACs, DNMT1 and DNMT3b suggested that these 
mRNAs should be explored as predictive factors in ovarian cancer. In addition,
HDAC1, HDAC2 and DNMT3b cooperated in controlling ovarian cancer progression.
Determining the correlations between HDACs and DNMTs in ovarian cancer will not
only further clarify the mechanisms of genesis and development, but also guide
clinical therapy using the inhibitors of HDACs and DNMTs.

PMCID: PMC3573157
PMID: 23420051  [PubMed]


196. Beilstein J Org Chem. 2013;9:81-8. doi: 10.3762/bjoc.9.11. Epub 2013 Jan 15.

Thioester derivatives of the natural product psammaplin A as potent histone
deacetylase inhibitors.

Baud MG(1), Leiser T, Petrucci V, Gunaratnam M, Neidle S, Meyer-Almes FJ, Fuchter
MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, United
Kingdom.

There has been significant interest in the bioactivity of the natural product
psammaplin A, most recently as a potent and isoform selective HDAC inhibitor.
Here we report our preliminary studies on thioester HDAC inhibitors derived from 
the active monomeric (thiol) form of psammaplin A, as a means to improve compound
delivery into cells. We have discovered that such compounds exhibit both potent
cytotoxicity and enzymatic inhibitory activity against recombinant HDAC1. The
latter effect is surprising since previous SAR suggested that modification of the
thiol functionality should detrimentally affect HDAC potency. We therefore also
report our preliminary studies on the mechanism of action of this observed
effect.

PMCID: PMC3566764
PMID: 23400330  [PubMed]


197. Epigenetics. 2013 Mar;8(3):268-80. doi: 10.4161/epi.23861. Epub 2013 Feb 5.

Epigenetic repression of LEDGF during UVB exposure by recruitment of SUV39H1 and 
HDAC1 to the Sp1-responsive elements within LEDGF promoter CpG island.

Bhargavan B(1), Chhunchha B, Fatma N, Kubo E, Kumar A, Singh DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.

Expression level of lens epithelial derived growth factor (LEDGF) is vital for
LEDGF-mediated cell survival and cytoprotection against proapoptotic stimuli. We 
previously demonstrated that LEDGF is transcriptionally regulated by
Sp1-responsive elements within a CpG island in the LEDGF promoter. Herein, we
report on the existence of epigenetic signaling involved in the repression of
LEDGF transcription in lens epithelial cells (LECs) facing UVB. UVB exposure led 
to histone H3 dimethylation and deacetylation at its CpG island, where a histone 
deacetylase/histone methylase (HDAC1/SUV39H1) complex was recruited. Exposure of 
LECs to UVB stress altered LEDGF protein and mRNA expression as well as promoter 
activity, while failing to methylate the CpG island. These events were correlated
with increased reactive oxygen species (ROS) and increased cell death. LEDGF
promoter activity and expression remained unaltered after 5-Aza treatment, but
were relieved with tricostatin A, an inhibitor of HDACs. Expression analysis
disclosed that UVB radiation altered the global expression levels of acetylated
histone proteins, diminished total histone acetyltransferase (HAT) activity and
increased HDAC activity and HDAC1 expression. In silico analysis of LEDGF
proximal promoter and ChIP analyses disclosed HDAC1/SUV39H1 complex anchored to
the -170/-10 nt promoter regions at Sp1-responsive elements and also attenuated
Sp1 binding, resulting in HDAC1- and SUV39H1-dependent deacetylation and
dimethylation of H3 at K9. Acetylation of H3K9 was essential for LEDGF active
transcription, while enrichment of H3K9me2 at Sp1-responsive elements within CpGs
(-170/-10) by UVB radiation repressed LEDGF transcription. Our study may
contribute to understanding diseases associated with LEDGF aberrant expression
due to specific epigenetic modifications, including blinding disorders.

PMCID: PMC3669119
PMID: 23386123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Mol Cancer. 2013 Feb 4;12:9. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-12-9.

Epigenetic reactivation of estrogen receptor-a (ERa) by genistein enhances
hormonal therapy sensitivity in ERa-negative breast cancer.

Li Y(1), Meeran SM, Patel SN, Chen H, Hardy TM, Tollefsbol TO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL,
USA. lyy@uab.edu

BACKGROUND: Estrogen receptor-a (ERa)-negative breast cancer is clinically
aggressive and normally does not respond to conventional estrogen target-directed
therapies. The soybean isoflavone, genistein (GE), has been shown to prevent and 
inhibit breast cancer and recent studies have suggested that GE can enhance the
anticancer capacity of an estrogen antagonist, tamoxifen (TAM), especially in
ERa-positive breast cancer cells. However, the role of GE in ERa-negative breast 
cancer remains unknown.
METHODS: We have evaluated the in vitro and in vivo epigenetic effects of GE on
ERa reactivation by using MTT assay, real-time reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay, western-blot assay, immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
assay, immunohistochemistry and epigenetic enzymatic activity analysis.
Preclinical mouse models including xenograft and spontaneous breast cancer mouse 
models were used to test the efficacy of GE in vivo.
RESULTS: We found that GE can reactivate ERa expression and this effect was
synergistically enhanced when combined with a histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitor, trichostatin A (TSA), in ERa-negative MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. 
GE treatment also re-sensitized ERa-dependent cellular responses to activator
17ß-estradiol (E2) and antagonist TAM. Further studies revealed that GE can lead 
to remodeling of the chromatin structure in the ERa promoter thereby contributing
to ERa reactivation. Consistently, dietary GE significantly prevented cancer
development and reduced the growth of ERa-negative mouse breast tumors. Dietary
GE further enhanced TAM-induced anti-cancer efficacy due at least in part to
epigenetic ERa reactivation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our studies suggest that soybean genistein can epigenetically
restore ERa expression, which in turn increases TAM-dependent anti-estrogen
therapeutic sensitivity in vitro and in vivo. The results from our studies reveal
a novel therapeutic combination approach using bioactive soybean product and
anti-hormone therapy in refractory ERa-negative breast cancer which will provide 
more effective options in breast cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC3577460
PMID: 23379261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Biol Chem. 2013 Mar 15;288(11):7727-37. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.429522. Epub 2013
Jan 29.

TAp73 protein stability is controlled by histone deacetylase 1 via regulation of 
Hsp90 chaperone function.

Zhang J(1), Xu E, Chen X.

Author information: 
(1)Comparative Oncology Laboratory, University of California at Davis, Davis,
California 95616, USA.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) play important roles in fundamental cellular
processes, and HDAC inhibitors are emerging as promising cancer therapeutics.
p73, a member of the p53 family, plays a critical role in tumor suppression and
neural development. Interestingly, p73 produces two classes of proteins with
opposing functions: the full-length TAp73 and the N-terminally truncated <U+0394>Np73.
In the current study, we sought to characterize the potential regulation of p73
by HDACs and found that histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) is a key regulator of TAp73
protein stability. Specifically, we showed that HDAC1 inhibition by HDAC
inhibitors or by siRNA shortened the half-life of TAp73 protein and subsequently 
decreased TAp73 expression under normal and DNA damage-induced conditions.
Mechanistically, we found that HDAC1 knockdown resulted in hyperacetylation and
inactivation of heat shock protein 90, which disrupted the interaction between
heat shock protein 90 and TAp73 and thus promoted the proteasomal degradation of 
TAp73. Functionally, we found that down-regulation of TAp73 was required for the 
enhanced cell migration mediated by HDAC1 knockdown. Together, we uncover a novel
regulation of TAp73 protein stability by HDAC1-heat shock protein 90 chaperone
complex, and our data suggest that TAp73 is a critical downstream mediator of
HDAC1-regulated cell migration.

PMCID: PMC3597813
PMID: 23362263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Blood. 2013 Mar 14;121(11):2038-50. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-08-450916. Epub 2013 
Jan 17.

Dosage-dependent tumor suppression by histone deacetylases 1 and 2 through
regulation of c-Myc collaborating genes and p53 function.

Heideman MR(1), Wilting RH, Yanover E, Velds A, de Jong J, Kerkhoven RM, Jacobs
H, Wessels LF, Dannenberg JH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gene Regulation, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Blood. 2013 Mar 14;121(11):1930-1.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are epigenetic erasers of lysine-acetyl marks.
Inhibition of HDACs using small molecule inhibitors (HDACi) is a potential
strategy in the treatment of various diseases and is approved for treating
hematological malignancies. Harnessing the therapeutic potential of HDACi
requires knowledge of HDAC-function in vivo. Here, we generated a
thymocyte-specific gradient of HDAC-activity using compound conditional knockout 
mice for Hdac1 and Hdac2. Unexpectedly, gradual loss of HDAC-activity engendered 
a dosage-dependent accumulation of immature thymocytes and correlated with the
incidence and latency of monoclonal lymphoblastic thymic lymphomas. Strikingly,
complete ablation of Hdac1 and Hdac2 abrogated lymphomagenesis due to a block in 
early thymic development. Genomic, biochemical and functional analyses of
pre-leukemic thymocytes and tumors revealed a critical role for
Hdac1/Hdac2-governed HDAC-activity in regulating a p53-dependent barrier to
constrain Myc-overexpressing thymocytes from progressing into lymphomas by
regulating Myc-collaborating genes. One Myc-collaborating and p53-suppressing
gene, Jdp2, was derepressed in an Hdac1/2-dependent manner and critical for the
survival of Jdp2-overexpressing lymphoma cells. Although reduced HDAC-activity
facilitates oncogenic transformation in normal cells, resulting tumor cells
remain highly dependent on HDAC-activity, indicating that a critical level of
Hdac1 and Hdac2 governed HDAC-activity is required for tumor maintenance.

PMCID: PMC3596963
PMID: 23327920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2013 May;57(5):840-53. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201200560. Epub 2013 
Jan 16.

In vitro mechanism for downregulation of ER-a expression by epigallocatechin
gallate in ER+/PR+ human breast cancer cells.

De Amicis F(1), Russo A, Avena P, Santoro M, Vivacqua A, Bonofiglio D, Mauro L,
Aquila S, Tramontano D, Fuqua SA, Andò S.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Sanitario, University of Calabria, Arcavacata di Rende (CS), Italy.

SCOPE: Exposure of the breast to estrogens and other sex hormones is an important
cancer risk factor and estrogen receptor downregulators are attracting
significant clinical interest. Epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG), a polyphenolic
compound found in green tea, has gained considerable attention for its antitumor 
properties. Here we aimed to investigate the molecular mechanisms through which
EGCG regulates ER-a expression in ER+ PR+ breast cancer cells.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Western blotting analysis, real-time PCR, and transient
transfections of deletion fragments of the ER-a gene promoter show that EGCG
downregulates ER-a protein, mRNA, and gene promoter activity with a concomitant
reduction of ER-a genomic and nongenomic signal. These events occur through
p38(MAPK) /CK2 activation, causing the release from Hsp90 of progesterone
receptor B (PR-B) and its consequent nuclear translocation as evidenced by
immunofluorescence studies. EMSA, and ChIP assay reveal that, upon EGCG
treatment, PR-B is recruited at the half-PRE site on ER-a promoter. This is
concomitant with the formation of a corepressor complex containing NCoR and HDAC1
while RNA polymerase II is displaced. The events are crucially mediated by PR-B
isoform, since they are abrogated with PR-B siRNA.
CONCLUSION: Our data provide evidence for a mechanism by which EGCG downregulates
ER-a and explains the inhibitory action of EGCG on the proliferation of ER+ PR+
cancer cells tested. We suggest that the EGCG/PR-B signaling should be further
exploited for clinical approach.

© 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC4642730
PMID: 23322423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2013 Feb 15;23(4):929-33. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2012.12.067. 
Epub 2013 Jan 3.

A novel two-step QSAR modeling work flow to predict selectivity and activity of
HDAC inhibitors.

Zhao L(1), Xiang Y, Song J, Zhang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Capital Normal University, Beijing 100048, China.

A two-step modeling approach was employed to study the selectivity and activity
of histone deacetylase inhibitors. First, according to the activity difference
against HDAC1 and HDAC6, a binary classification model was established to
classify two kinds of inhibitors. Then two continuous models were built for each 
subclass to predict the activity value of HDAC1 and HDAC6 inhibitors. The three
models were all built with the GA-kNN method combined with dragon descriptors.
They were external validated by using external prediction set and Y-randomization
test. The highly predictive models were generated for all three data sets. For
the classification model, the classification accuracies of the models were as
high as 100% for the external test set. For HDAC1 and HDAC6 inhibitor consecutive
models, external R(2) values are 0.947 and 0.911, respectively. The results
proved the reliability of these models. All models were used to screen 1000
compounds included in PubMed dataset. Virtual screening resulted in 8 and 13
structurally unique consensus hits that were considered novel putative HDAC1 and 
HDAC6 inhibitors, respectively.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23321563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Mol Oncol. 2013 Jun;7(3):452-63. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2012.11.004. Epub 2012 Dec
21.

HDAC1-mSin3a-NCOR1, Dnmt3b-HDAC1-Egr1 and Dnmt1-PCNA-UHRF1-G9a regulate the
NY-ESO1 gene expression.

Cartron PF(1), Blanquart C, Hervouet E, Gregoire M, Vallette FM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie Nantes-Angers, INSERM U892, Equipe
Apoptose et Progression Tumorale, Equipe labellisée Ligue Nationale Contre le
Cancer, 8 Quai Moncousu, BP 7021, 44007 Nantes, France.
pierre-francois.cartron@univ-nantes.fr

The NY-ESO1 gene is a cancer/testis antigen considered to be suitable target for 
the immunotherapy of human malignancies. Despite the identification of the
epigenetical silencing of the NY-ESO1 gene in a large variety of tumors, the
molecular mechanism involved in this phenomenon is not fully elucidated. In two
non epithelial cancers (glioma and mesothelioma), we found that the epigenetic
regulation of the NY-ESO1 gene requires the sequential recruitment of the
HDAC1-mSin3a-NCOR, Dnmt3b-HDAC1-Egr1 and Dnmt1-PCNA-UHRF1-G9a complexes. Thus,
our data illustrate the orchestration of a sequential epigenetic mechanism
including the histone deacetylation and methylation, and the DNA methylation
processes.

Copyright © 2012 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23312906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. ACS Med Chem Lett. 2012 Dec 5;4(1):132-6. doi: 10.1021/ml300371t. eCollection
2013.

Biological evaluation of new largazole analogues: alteration of macrocyclic
scaffold with click chemistry.

Li X(1), Tu Z(1), Li H(1), Liu C(1), Li Z(2), Sun Q(1), Yao Y(1), Liu J(1), Jiang
S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Regenerative Biology, Guangzhou Institute of Biomedicine and
Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences , Guangzhou, 510530, China. (2)The Methodist 
Hospital Research Institute , Houston, Texas, 77030, United States.

We report the design, synthesis, and biological evaluation of a new series of
largazole analogues in which a 4-methylthiazoline moiety was replaced with a
triazole and tetrazole ring, respectively. Compound 7 bearing a tetrazole ring
was identified to show much better selectivity for HDAC1 over HDAC9 than
largazole (10-fold). This work could serve as a foundation for further
exploration of selective HDAC inhibitors using a largazole molecular scaffold.

PMCID: PMC4027506
PMID: 24900575  [PubMed]


205. J Biol Chem. 2013 Mar 1;288(9):6704-16. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.440602. Epub 2013
Jan 7.

Regulation of GTP-binding protein (Gas) expression in human myometrial cells: a
role for tumor necrosis factor in modulating Gas promoter acetylation by
transcriptional complexes.

Webster SJ(1), Waite SL, Cookson VJ, Warren A, Khan R, Gandhi SV, Europe-Finner
GN, Chapman NR.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Unit of Reproductive and Developmental Medicine, Department of Human 
Metabolism, University of Sheffield, Level 4, Jessop Wing, Tree Root Walk,
Sheffield S10 2SF, United Kingdom.

The onset of parturition is associated with a number of proinflammatory mediators
that are themselves regulated by the nuclear factor <U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) family of
transcription factors. In this context, we previously reported that the RelA
NF-<U+03BA>B subunit represses transcription and mRNA expression of the proquiescent Gas
gene in human myometrial cells following stimulation with the proinflammatory
cytokine TNF. In the present study, we initially defined the functional
consequence of this on myometrial contractility. Here we show that, contrary to
our initial expectations, TNF did not induce myometrial contractility but did
inhibit the relaxation produced by the histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin
A, an effect that in turn was abolished by the NF-<U+03BA>B inhibitor
N(4)-[2-(4-phenoxyphenyl)ethyl]-4,6-quinazolinediamine. This result suggested a
role for TNF in regulating Gas expression via activating NF-<U+03BA>B and modifying
histone acetylation associated with the promoter region of the gene. In this
context, we show that the -837 to -618 region of the endogenous Gas promoter is
occupied by cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB), Egr-1, and Sp1
transcription factors and that CREB-binding protein (CBP) transcriptional
complexes form within this region where they induce histone acetylation,
resulting in increased Gas expression. TNF, acting via NF-<U+03BA>B, did not change the 
levels of CREB, Sp1, or Egr-1 binding to the Gas promoter, but it induced a
significant reduction in the level of CBP. This was associated with increased
levels of histone deacetylase-1 and surprisingly an increase in H4K8 acetylation.
The latter is discussed herein.

PMCID: PMC3585108
PMID: 23297421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. ChemMedChem. 2013 Feb;8(2):272-9. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.201200529. Epub 2013 Jan 4.

Discovery of pyridone-based histone deacetylase inhibitors: approaches for
metabolic stability.

Cho M(1), Choi E, Yang JS, Lee C, Seo JJ, Kim BS, Oh SJ, Kim HM, Lee K, Park SK, 
Kwon HJ, Han G.

Author information: 
(1)Translational Research Center for Protein Function Control (TRCP), Department 
of Biotechnology and Department of Biomedical Sciences (WCU Program), Yonsei
University, Seoul 120-749, Republic of Korea.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are important enzymes in epigenetic regulation and
are therapeutic targets for cancer. Most zinc-dependent HDACs induce
proliferation, dedifferentiation, and anti-apoptotic effects in cancer cells. We 
designed and synthesized a new series of pyridone-based HDAC inhibitors that have
a pyridone ring in the core structure and a conjugated system with an olefin
connecting the hydroxamic acid moiety. Consequently, most of the selected
pyridone-based HDAC inhibitors showed similar or higher inhibition profiles in
addition to remarkable metabolic stability against hydrolysis relative to the
corresponding lactam-based HDAC inhibitors. Furthermore, the selectivity of the
novel pyridine-based compounds was evaluated across all of the HDAC isoforms. One
of these compounds,
(E)-N-hydroxy-3-{1-[3-(naphthalen-2-yl)propyl]-2-oxo-1,2-dihydropyridin-3-yl}acry
lamide, exhibited the highest level of HDAC inhibition (IC(50) =0.07 µM), highly 
selective inhibition of class I HDAC1 and class II HDAC6 enzymes, metabolic
stability in mouse liver microsomal studies, and effective growth inhibition of
various cancer cell lines. Docking studies indicated that a long alkyl linker and
bulky hydrophobic cap groups affect in vitro activities. Overall, the findings
reported herein regarding pyridone-based HDAC inhibitors can be used to guide
future research efforts to develop new and effective anticancer therapeutics.

Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23292995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Blood. 2013 Feb 21;121(8):1335-44. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-07-441949. Epub 2013
Jan 3.

Histone deacetylase 1 and 2 are essential for normal T-cell development and
genomic stability in mice.

Dovey OM(1), Foster CT, Conte N, Edwards SA, Edwards JM, Singh R, Vassiliou G,
Bradley A, Cowley SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Leicester, Leicester, UK.

Histone deacetylase 1 and 2 (HDAC1/2) regulate chromatin structure as the
catalytic core of the Sin3A, NuRD and CoREST co-repressor complexes. To better
understand the key pathways regulated by HDAC1/2 in the adaptive immune system
and inform their exploitation as drug targets, we have generated mice with a
T-cell specific deletion. Loss of either HDAC1 or HDAC2 alone has little effect, 
while dual inactivation results in a 5-fold reduction in thymocyte cellularity,
accompanied by developmental arrest at the double-negative to double-positive
transition. Transcriptome analysis revealed 892 misregulated genes in Hdac1/2
knock-out thymocytes, including down-regulation of LAT, Themis and Itk, key
components of the T-cell receptor (TCR) signaling pathway. Down-regulation of
these genes suggests a model in which HDAC1/2 deficiency results in defective
propagation of TCR signaling, thus blocking development. Furthermore, mice with
reduced HDAC1/2 activity (Hdac1 deleted and a single Hdac2 allele) develop a
lethal pathology by 3-months of age, caused by neoplastic transformation of
immature T cells in the thymus. Tumor cells become aneuploid, express increased
levels of c-Myc and show elevated levels of the DNA damage marker, <U+03B3>H2AX. These
data demonstrate a crucial role for HDAC1/2 in T-cell development and the
maintenance of genomic stability.

PMCID: PMC3836254
PMID: 23287868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Blood. 2013 Feb 21;121(8):1413-21. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-04-424275. Epub 2013
Jan 3.

Targeting transcription factor SALL4 in acute myeloid leukemia by interrupting
its interaction with an epigenetic complex.

Gao C(1), Dimitrov T, Yong KJ, Tatetsu H, Jeong HW, Luo HR, Bradner JE, Tenen DG,
Chai L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Joint Program in Transfusion Medicine, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

An exciting recent approach to targeting transcription factors in cancer is to
block formation of oncogenic complexes. We investigated whether interfering with 
the interaction of the transcription factor SALL4, which is critical for leukemic
cell survival, and its epigenetic partner complex represents a novel therapeutic 
approach. The mechanism of SALL4 in promoting leukemogenesis is at least in part 
mediated by its repression of the tumor suppressor phosphatase and tensin homolog
deleted on chromosome 10 (PTEN) through its interaction with a histone
deacetylase (HDAC) complex. In this study, we demonstrate that a peptide can
compete with SALL4 in interacting with the HDAC complex and reverse its effect on
PTEN repression. Treating SALL4-expressing malignant cells with this peptide
leads to cell death that can be rescued by a PTEN inhibitor. The antileukemic
effect of this peptide can be confirmed on primary human leukemia cells in
culture and in vivo, and is identical to that of down-regulation of SALL4 in
these cells using an RNAi approach. In summary, our results demonstrate a novel
peptide that can block the specific interaction between SALL4 and its epigenetic 
HDAC complex in regulating its target gene, PTEN. Furthermore, targeting SALL4
with this approach could be an innovative approach in treating leukemia.

PMCID: PMC3578956
PMID: 23287862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Cell Biosci. 2013 Jan 3;3(1):1. doi: 10.1186/2045-3701-3-1.

The MTA family proteins as novel histone H3 binding proteins.

Wu M(1), Wang L, Li Q, Li J, Qin J, Wong J.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Regulatory Biology, Institute of Biomedical
Sciences and School of Life Sciences, East China Normal University, Shanghai,
200241, China. jmweng@bio.ecnu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: The nucleosome remodeling and histone deacetylase complex
(Mi2/NRD/NuRD/NURD) has a broad role in regulation of transcription, DNA repair
and cell cycle. Previous studies have revealed a specific interaction between
NURD and histone H3N-terminal tail in vitro that is not observed for another
HDAC1/2-containing complex, Sin3A. However, the subunit(s) responsible for
specific binding of H3 by NURD has not been defined.
RESULTS: In this study, we show among several class I HDAC-containing corepressor
complexes only NURD exhibits a substantial H3 tail-binding activity in vitro. We 
present the evidence that the MTA family proteins within the NURD complex
interact directly with H3 tail. Extensive in vitro binding assays mapped the H3
tail-binding domain to the C-terminal region of MTA1 and MTA2. Significantly,
although the MTA1 and MTA2 mutant proteins with deletion of the C-terminal H3
tail binding domain were assembled into the endogenous NURD complex when
expressed in mammalian cells, the resulting NURD complexes were deficient in
binding H3 tail in vitro, indicating that the MTA family proteins are required
for the observed specific binding of H3 tail peptide by NURD in vitro. However,
chromatin fractionation experiments show that the NURD complexes with impaired
MTA1/2-H3 tail binding activity remained to be associated with chromatin in
cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Together our study reveals a novel histone H3-binding activity for
the MTA family proteins and provides evidence that the MTA family proteins
mediate the in vitro specific binding of H3 tail peptide by NURD complex.
However, multiple mechanisms are likely to contribute to the chromatin
association of NURD complex in cells. Our finding also raises the possibility
that the MTA family proteins may exert their diverse biological functions at
least in part through their direct interaction with H3 tail.

PMCID: PMC3562248
PMID: 23286669  [PubMed]


210. J Cell Physiol. 2013 Jul;228(7):1525-35. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24311.

Dynamic distribution of HDAC1 and HDAC2 during mitosis: association with F-actin.

He S(1), Khan DH, Winter S, Seiser C, Davie JR.

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Child Health, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
Manitoba, Canada.

During mitosis, histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) becomes highly phosphorylated
through the action of CK2, and HDAC1 and 2 are displaced from mitotic
chromosomes. HDAC1 and 2 are components of corepressor complexes, which function 
with lysine acetyltransferases to catalyze dynamic protein acetylation and
regulate gene expression. In this study, we show that HDAC1 and 2 associate with 
F-actin in mitotic cells. Inhibition of Aurora B or protein kinase CK2 did not
prevent the displacement of HDAC1 and 2 from mitotic chromosomes in HeLa cells.
Further, proteins of the HDAC1 and 2 corepressor complexes and transcription
factors recruiting these corepressors to chromatin were dissociated from mitotic 
chromosomes independent of Aurora B activity. HDAC1 and 2 returned to the nuclei 
of daughter cells during lamin A/C reassembly and before Sp1, Sp3, and RNA
polymerase II. Our results show that HDAC1 and 2 corepressor complexes are
removed from the mitotic chromosomes and are available early in the events
leading to the re-establishment of the gene expression program in daughter cells.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23280436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Liver Int. 2013 Apr;33(4):504-15. doi: 10.1111/liv.12034. Epub 2012 Dec 26.

A histone deacetylase inhibitor, largazole, decreases liver fibrosis and
angiogenesis by inhibiting transforming growth factor-ß and vascular endothelial 
growth factor signalling.

Liu Y(1), Wang Z, Wang J, Lam W, Kwong S, Li F, Friedman SL, Zhou S, Ren Q, Xu Z,
Wang X, Ji L, Tang S, Zhang H, Lui EL, Ye T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biology & Chemical Technology, The Hong Kong Polytechnic
University, Hong Kong SAR, China.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Largazole is a novel histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor.
This study investigated the effects of largazole against liver fibrosis.
METHODS: The in vitro effects of largazole were examined using hepatic stellate
cells (HSCs). In vivo effects of largazole were studied using a mouse liver
fibrotic model induced by CCl4 .
RESULTS: Largazole augmented acetylation of histone H3 (H3) and histone H4 (H4)
in HSCs. It directly inhibited the activation of HSCs owing to HDAC inhibitory
activity as the antifibrotic effect of largazole was significantly decreased in
cells with HDAC1, HDAC2 and HDAC3 knockdown. Largazole also induced apoptosis of 
HSCs. Largazole not only inhibited the expression of TGFßR2, but also reduced
phosphorylation of Smad2 and Akt induced by TGF-ß1. Largazole also inhibited the 
expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and its receptor.
VEGF-induced proliferation of HSCs and activation of Akt and p38MAPK were also
suppressed by largazole. In vivo, largazole reduced the expression of collagen I,
a-smooth muscle actin and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 in CCl4
-induced fibrosis, and these antifibrotic effects were associated with increased 
acetylation of H3 and H4. Largazole also induced HSCs to undergo apoptosis in
vivo, which was correlated with downregulation of bcl-2 and bcl-xL. Furthermore, 
largazole inhibited angiogenesis in vivo as evidenced by reduced expression of
CD34, VEGF and VEGFR. In addition to its antifibrotic activity, the drug reduced 
inflammatory activity in CCl4 -induced liver fibrosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings revealed a novel role of largazole in the treatment of 
liver fibrosis. Through multiple mechanisms, largazole could be a potentially
effective antifibrotic agent.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 23279742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Immunogenetics. 2013 Apr;65(4):239-53. doi: 10.1007/s00251-012-0674-5. Epub 2012 
Dec 28.

Lipopolysaccharide induces epididymal and testicular antimicrobial gene
expression in vitro: insights into the epigenetic regulation of sperm-associated 
antigen 11e gene.

Biswas B(1), Yenugu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Hyderabad, P.O. Central
University, Hyderabad, 500046, Andhra Pradesh, India.

Erratum in
    Immunogenetics. 2013 Apr;65(4):255-6.

Infections of the male reproductive tract lead to infertility, and the molecular 
mechanisms that operate under these conditions are not well studied. Using
epididymal and testicular tissues cultured in vitro, we demonstrate that
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) induces the mRNA expression of beta-defensins, Spag11s, 
and pro-inflammatory cytokines in the rat caput, cauda, and testes. LPS-induced
antimicrobial gene expression involved NF-kB activation and decreased levels of
histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and DNA methyltransferase (DNMT), all of which
possibly allow antimicrobial gene transcription. Inhibition of endogenous HDAC1
and DNMT1 resulted in higher antimicrobial gene expression when compared to the
LPS alone treated conditions. Increased trimethylation of histone 3, its binding 
to the upstream region of Spag11e gene, and demethylation of this region were
observed during endotoxin challenge. We demonstrate that antimicrobial gene
expression in the male reproductive tract tissues during endotoxin challenge
involves NF-kB activation and epigenetic changes.

PMID: 23271618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Mol Biol Rep. 2013 Jun;40(6):3925-33. doi: 10.1007/s11033-012-2469-z. Epub 2012
Dec 27.

Combination of AT-101/cisplatin overcomes chemoresistance by inducing apoptosis
and modulating epigenetics in human ovarian cancer cells.

Karaca B(1), Atmaca H, Bozkurt E, Kisim A, Uzunoglu S, Karabulut B, Sezgin C,
Sanli UA, Uslu R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Tulay Aktas Oncology Hospital, School of
Medicine, Ege University, 35100, Bornova, Izmir, Turkey. karacaburcak@hotmail.com

We investigated the effects of AT-101/cisplatin combination treatment on the
expression levels of apoptotic proteins and epigenetic events such as DNA
methyltransferase (DNMT) and histone deacetylase (HDAC) enzyme activities in
OVCAR-3 and MDAH-2774 ovarian cancer cells. XTT cell viability assay was used to 
evaluate cytotoxicity. For showing apoptosis, both DNA Fragmentation and caspase 
3/7 activity measurements were performed. The expression levels of apoptotic
proteins were assessed by human apoptosis antibody array. DNMT and HDAC
activities were evaluated by ELISA assay and mRNA levels of DNMT1 and HDAC1 genes
were quantified by qRT-PCR. Combination of AT-101/cisplatin resulted in strong
synergistic cytotoxicity and apoptosis in human ovarian cancer cells. Combination
treatment reduced some pivotal anti-apoptotic proteins such as Bcl-2, HIF-1A,
cIAP-1, XIAP in OVCAR-3 cells, whereas p21, Bcl-2, cIAP-1, HSP27, Clusterin and
XIAP in MDAH-2774 cells. Among the pro-apoptotic proteins, Bad, Bax, Fas,
phospho-p53 (S46), Cleaved caspase-3, SMAC/Diablo, TNFR1 and Cytochrome c were
induced in OVCAR-3 cells, whereas, Bax, TRAILR2, FADD, p27, phospho-p53 (S46),
Cleaved caspase-3, Cytochrome c, SMAC/Diablo and TNFR1 were induced in MDAH-2774 
cells. Combination treatment also inhibited both DNMT and HDAC activities and
also mRNA levels in both ovarian cancer cells. AT-101 exhibits great potential in
sensitization of human ovarian cancer cells to cisplatin treatment in vitro,
suggesting that the combination of AT-101 with cisplatin may hold great promise
for development as a novel chemotherapeutic approach to overcome
platinum-resistance in human ovarian cancer.

PMID: 23269627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Mar;1833(3):663-71. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2012.12.002.
Epub 2012 Dec 12.

Histone deacetylase inhibitor induction of epithelial-mesenchymal transitions via
up-regulation of Snail facilitates cancer progression.

Jiang GM(1), Wang HS, Zhang F, Zhang KS, Liu ZC, Fang R, Wang H, Cai SH, Du J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The First Affiliated Hospital of University
of South China, Hengyang, 421001, PR China.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs) are now emerging as a new class of
anticancer drugs. Some of them have been used in clinical treatment for tumors,
most impressively in the hematological tumors. But their single-agent activities 
in epithelial-derived tumors are limited. The mechanisms of these actions of
HDACIs are not yet well understood. In this study, it was found for the first
time that HDACIs were able to induce epithelial-mesenchymal transitions (EMT)
which is believed to trigger tumor cell invasion and metastasis. We show that
HDACIs induce fibroblast-like morphology, up-regulate Snail and Vimentin and
down-regulate E-cadherin in epithelial cell-derived tumor cell lines. It
demonstrates that HDACI treatment enhances further Snail acetylation and reduces 
its ubiquitylation, and induces Snail transcription as well as Snail nuclear
translocation in CNE2 cells. Snail knockdown by siRNAs prevents the change in
cell morphology and Vimentin up-regulation in response to HDACIs. The results
suggested that Snail plays an important role in the HDACI-induced EMT. It is very
crucial for a better understanding of clinical therapeutical failure of HDACIs in
the patients with epithelial cell-derived cancers. Therefore, our results
indicate that more attention should be paid to the cancer treatment using HDACIs 
due to the fact that it will enhance the spread risks of cancer cells to
facilitate cancer progression and it is very important to select appropriate
drugs for different tumors.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23246564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Mol Biol Rep. 2013 Mar;40(3):2617-25. doi: 10.1007/s11033-012-2348-7. Epub 2012
Dec 15.

Mutant p53 binds to estrogen receptor negative promoter via DNMT1 and HDAC1 in
MDA-MB-468 breast cancer cells.

Arabsolghar R(1), Azimi T, Rasti M.

Author information: 
(1)Recombinant Protein Lab, Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine,
Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.

DNA methylation and histone deacetylation are two epigenetic mechanisms involved 
in the lack of estrogen receptor (ER) expression. Our previous studies
demonstrated that mutant p53 along with repression complex proteins including
DNMT1, HDAC1 and MeCP2 is associated with ER-negative promoter in MDA-MB-468
cells. To elucidate the molecular mechanism of estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) gene
silencing in these cells, we down-regulated DNMT1 and HDAC1 expression using
siRNAs and studied the ability of DNMT1, HDAC1, MeCP2 and p53 in binding to ESR1 
promoter CpG island. Our results showed that DNMT1 or HDAC1 down-regulation
disassembled the repression complex proteins and mutant p53 from ER-negative
promoter. The partial demethylation of ESR1 promoter and ER re-expression in
down-regulated cells supports these findings. In vivo binding studies
demonstrated that mutation of p53 protein in this cell line did not affect its
binding capacity to DNMT1, HDAC1 and MeCP2 proteins. Our observations suggest
that not only histone deacetylase activity of HDAC1 contributes to inactivation
of methylated ESR1 gene but also HDAC1 presence on ESR1 promoter is important for
assembly of DNMT1 in repression complex. In addition, our data revealed that
mutant p53 protein binds to the promoter of ESR1 through direct interaction with 
HDAC1 and indirect interaction with DNMT1, MeCP2 proteins in the ER-negative
MDA-MB-468 cells.

PMID: 23242655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Clin Epigenetics. 2012 Dec 17;4(1):23. doi: 10.1186/1868-7083-4-23.

Putative molecular mechanism underlying sperm chromatin remodelling is regulated 
by reproductive hormones.

Gill-Sharma MK(1), Choudhuri J, Ansari MA, D'Souza S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroendocrinology, National Institute for Research in
Reproductive Health, J,M, Street, Parel, Mumbai 400012, India.
manjitgill_sharma@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The putative regulatory role of the male reproductive hormones in the
molecular mechanism underlying chromatin condensation remains poorly understood. 
In the past decade, we developed two adult male rat models wherein functional
deficits of testosterone or FSH, produced after treatments with 20<U+2009>mg/Kg/d of
cyproterone acetate (CPA) per os, for a period of 15<U+2009>days or 3<U+2009>mg/Kg/d of
fluphenazine decanoate (FD) subcutaneously, for a period of 60<U+2009>days,
respectively, affected the rate of sperm chromatin decondensation in vitro. These
rat models have been used in the current study in order to delineate the putative
roles of testosterone and FSH in the molecular mechanism underlying remodelling
of sperm chromatin.
RESULTS: We report that deficits of both testosterone and FSH affected the
turnover of polyubiquitylated histones and led to their accumulation in the
testis. Functional deficits of testosterone reduced expression of MIWI, the
5-methyl cap binding RNA-binding protein (PIWIlike murine homologue of the
Drosophila protein PIWI/P-element induced wimpy testis) containing a
PAZ/Piwi-Argonaut-Zwille domain and levels of histone deacetylase1 (HDAC1),
ubiquitin ligating enzyme (URE-B1/E3), 20S proteasome a1 concomitant with reduced
expression of ubiquitin activating enzyme (ube1), conjugating enzyme (ube2d2),
chromodomain Y like protein (cdyl), bromodomain testis specific protein (brdt),
hdac6 (histone deacetylase6), androgen-dependent homeobox placentae embryonic
protein (pem/RhoX5), histones h2b and th3 (testis-specific h3). Functional
deficits of FSH reduced the expression of cdyl and brdt genes in the testis,
affected turnover of ubiquitylated histones, stalled the physiological DNA repair
mechanism and culminated in spermiation of DNA damaged sperm.
CONCLUSIONS: We aver that deficits of both testosterone and FSH differentially
affected the process of sperm chromatin remodelling through subtle changes in the
'chromatin condensation transcriptome and proteome', thereby stalling the
replacement of 'dynamic' histones with 'inert' protamines, and altering the
epigenetic state of condensed sperm chromatin. The inappropriately condensed
chromatin affected the sperm chromatin cytoarchitecture, evident from subtle
ultrastructural changes in the nuclei of immature caput epididymal sperm of CPA- 
or FD-treated rats, incubated in vitro with dithiothreitol.

PMCID: PMC3549752
PMID: 23241214  [PubMed]


217. Curr Clin Pharmacol. 2014 May;9(2):165-70.

Cardio-hepatic metabolic derangements and valproic acid.

Mazzoccoli G, Longhitano C, Vinciguerra M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hepatology, The Foundation for Liver Research, 69-75 Cheney Mews,
London, WC1E 6HX, United Kingdom. m.vinciguerra@researchinliver.org.uk.

Valproic acid (VPA) is an anti-epileptic and mood-stabilizing compound
successfully used in the clinics since many decades. During the last few years,
research on VPA revitalized. VPA has profound impact on nuclear chromatin
structure in target cells by impinging on epigenetic mechanisms such as
inhibition of histone deacetylase HDAC1, with implications for HIV and cancer
treatment, and for the direct reprogramming in generation of induced pluripotent 
stem (iPS) cells. VPA can thus act at multiple levels and in several cellular
systems. In addition to its established applications for the treatment of
neurological and psychiatric disorders, and its newly discovered epigenetic
mechanisms of action, the peripheral metabolic effects of VPA administration, in 
particular impinging on the heart and on the liver, are now starting to be
understood. These have important consequences for the management of therapy and
also for investigation purposes. The aim of this article is on one hand to
summarize the emerging knowledge on the role of VPA during the occurrence of
cardio-metabolic dysfunctions and on the other hand to describe concisely the
VPA-induced epigenetic modifications in target cells.

PMID: 23237609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e49692. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049692. Epub 2012 Nov 30.

Role of histone deacetylases in gene regulation at nuclear lamina.

Milon BC(1), Cheng H, Tselebrovsky MV, Lavrov SA, Nenasheva VV, Mikhaleva EA,
Shevelyov YY, Nurminsky DI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Maryland
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Theoretical models suggest that gene silencing at the nuclear periphery may
involve "closing" of chromatin by transcriptional repressors, such as histone
deacetylases (HDACs). Here we provide experimental evidence confirming these
predictions. Histone acetylation, chromatin compactness, and gene repression in
lamina-interacting multigenic chromatin domains were analyzed in Drosophila S2
cells in which B-type lamin, diverse HDACs, and lamina-associated proteins were
downregulated by dsRNA. Lamin depletion resulted in decreased compactness of the 
repressed multigenic domain associated with its detachment from the lamina and
enhanced histone acetylation. Our data reveal the major role for HDAC1 in
mediating deacetylation, chromatin compaction, and gene silencing in the
multigenic domain, and an auxiliary role for HDAC3 that is required for retention
of the domain at the lamina. These findings demonstrate the manifold and central 
involvement of class I HDACs in regulation of lamina-associated genes,
illuminating a mechanism by which these enzymes can orchestrate normal and
pathological development.

PMCID: PMC3511463
PMID: 23226217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Science. 2013 Jan 11;339(6116):211-4. doi: 10.1126/science.1227166. Epub 2012 Dec
6.

Suppression of oxidative stress by ß-hydroxybutyrate, an endogenous histone
deacetylase inhibitor.

Shimazu T(1), Hirschey MD, Newman J, He W, Shirakawa K, Le Moan N, Grueter CA,
Lim H, Saunders LR, Stevens RD, Newgard CB, Farese RV Jr, de Cabo R, Ulrich S,
Akassoglou K, Verdin E.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Virology and Immunology, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2013 Jan 11;339(6116):148-50.

Concentrations of acetyl-coenzyme A and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
(NAD(+)) affect histone acetylation and thereby couple cellular metabolic status 
and transcriptional regulation. We report that the ketone body
d-ß-hydroxybutyrate (ßOHB) is an endogenous and specific inhibitor of class I
histone deacetylases (HDACs). Administration of exogenous ßOHB, or fasting or
calorie restriction, two conditions associated with increased ßOHB abundance, all
increased global histone acetylation in mouse tissues. Inhibition of HDAC by ßOHB
was correlated with global changes in transcription, including that of the genes 
encoding oxidative stress resistance factors FOXO3A and MT2. Treatment of cells
with ßOHB increased histone acetylation at the Foxo3a and Mt2 promoters, and both
genes were activated by selective depletion of HDAC1 and HDAC2. Consistent with
increased FOXO3A and MT2 activity, treatment of mice with ßOHB conferred
substantial protection against oxidative stress.

PMCID: PMC3735349
PMID: 23223453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Clin Invest Med. 2012 Dec 1;35(6):E340-50.

Vascular endothelial growth factor production is induced by histone deacetylase 1
and suppressed by von Hippel-Lindau protein in HaCaT cells.

Reynoso-Roldán A(1), Roldán ML, Cancino-Diaz JC, Rodríguez-Martínez S,
Cancino-Diaz ME.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Department of the Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Escuela Nacional 
de Ciencias Biológicas, Mexico City, Mexico.

PURPOSE: In hypoxic tumoral tissues, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
expression is positively regulated by histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and
negatively regulated by the tumour suppressor protein von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) via
transforming growth factor-alpha (HIF-1alpha). It has been reported that VEGF,
HDAC1 and LL-37, but not VHL, are over-expressed in psoriatic skin. Although
HIF-1alpha is constitutively expressed in normal keratinocytes, it is not known
if HDAC1 and VHL can regulate VEGF production in these cells.
METHODS: The participation of HDAC1 and VHL in the regulation of VEGF expression 
in HDAC-, VHL- and LL-37-transfected HaCaT cells, and in HaCaT cells treated with
HDAC1 inhibitors, was studied.
RESULTS: The production of VEGF was increased in HDAC1- and LL-37-transfected
HaCaT cells and maintained in VHL-transfected cells under hypoxic conditions;
meanwhile, VEGF production decreased in HaCaT cells treated with TSA, in cells
transfected with HDAC1-siRNA, in cells co-transfected with HIF-1alpha-siRNA and
pHDAC-1 and in VHL-transfected HaCaT cells. The levels of cytoplasmic HIF-1alpha 
were high in pLL37-transfected cells and low in pVHL- and pHDAC1-transfected
cells; however, HIF-1alpha was detected in the nucleus of the HDAC1-transfected
cells. The expression of VEGF was high in cells co-transfected with pHDAC1- and
pLL-37, and the expression decreased when pVHL was present.
CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate that HDAC1, LL-37 and VHL can modulate the
production of VEGF via HIF-1alpha in HaCaT cells.

PMID: 23217559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Oncogene. 2013 Oct 17;32(42):5066-77. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.527. Epub 2012 Dec 3.

ß-arrestin-1 is a nuclear transcriptional regulator of endothelin-1-induced
ß-catenin signaling.

Rosanò L(1), Cianfrocca R, Tocci P, Spinella F, Di Castro V, Spadaro F, Salvati
E, Biroccio AM, Natali PG, Bagnato A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Regina Elena National Cancer Institute,
Rome, Italy.

Despite the fundamental pathophysiological importance of ß-catenin in tumor
progression, the mechanism underlying its final transcriptional output has been
partially elucidated. Here, we report that ß-arrestin-1 (ß-arr1) is an epigenetic
regulator of endothelin (ET)-1-induced ß-catenin signaling in epithelial ovarian 
cancer (EOC). In response to ET A receptor (ETAR) activation by ET-1, ß-arr1
increases its nuclear translocation and direct binding to ß-catenin. This in turn
enhanced ß-catenin nuclear accumulation and transcriptional activity, which was
prevented by expressing a mutant ß-arr1 incapable of nuclear distribution.
ß-arr1-ß-catenin interaction controls ß-catenin target gene expressions, such as 
ET-1, Axin 2, Matrix metalloproteinase 2, and Cyclin D1, by promoting histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) dissociation and the recruitment of p300 acetyltransferase 
on these promoter genes, resulting in enhanced H3 and H4 histone acetylation, and
gene transcription, required for cell migration, invasion and
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. These effects are abrogated by ß-arr1
silencing or by mutant ß-arr1, as well as by ß-catenin or p300 silencing,
confirming that nuclear ß-arr1 forms a functional complex capable of regulating
epigenetic changes in ß-catenin-driven invasive behavior. In a murine orthotopic 
model of metastatic human EOC, silencing of ß-arr1 or mutant ß-arr1 expression,
as well as ETAR blockade, inhibits metastasis. In human EOC tissues,
ß-arr1-ß-catenin nuclear complexes are selectively enriched at ß-catenin target
gene promoters, correlating with tumor grade, confirming a direct in vivo
ß-arr1-ß-catenin association at specific set of genes involved in EOC
progression. Collectively, our study provides insights into how a ß-arr1-mediated
epigenetic mechanism controls ß-catenin activity, unraveling new components
required for its nuclear function in promoting metastasis.

PMID: 23208497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Jan 15;19(2):404-14. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-2799.
Epub 2012 Nov 30.

PLK1 inhibitors synergistically potentiate HDAC inhibitor lethality in imatinib
mesylate-sensitive or -resistant BCR/ABL+ leukemia cells in vitro and in vivo.

Dasmahapatra G(1), Patel H, Nguyen T, Attkisson E, Grant S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Virginia Commonwealth
University, Richmond, VA 23298, USA.

PURPOSE: To determine whether Polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1) inhibitors (e.g., BI2536)
and histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors (e.g., vorinostat) interact
synergistically in the BCR/ABL(+) leukemia cells sensitive or resistant to
imatinib mesylate (IM) in vitro and in vivo.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: K562 and LAMA84 cells sensitive or resistant to imatinib
mesylate and primary CML cells were exposed to BI2536 and vorinostat. Effects on 
cell viability and signaling pathways were determined using flow cytometry,
Western blotting, and gene transfection. K562 and BV173/E255K animal models were 
used to test in vivo efficacy.
RESULTS: Cotreatment with BI2536 and vorinostat synergistically induced cell
death in parental or imatinib mesylate-resistant BCR/ABL(+) cells and primary
CD34(+) bone marrow cells but was minimally toxic to normal cells.
BI2536/vorinostat cotreatment triggered pronounced mitochondrial dysfunction,
inhibition of p-BCR/ABL, caspase activation, PARP cleavage, reactive oxygen
species (ROS) generation, and DNA damage (manifest by increased expression of
<U+03B3>H2A.X, p-ATM, p-ATR), events attenuated by the antioxidant TBAP. PLK1 short
hairpin RNA (shRNA) knockdown significantly increased HDACI lethality, whereas
HDAC1-3 shRNA knockdown reciprocally increased BI2536-induced apoptosis. Genetic 
interruption of the DNA damage linker H1.2 partially but significantly reduced
PLK1/HDAC inhibitor-mediated cell death, suggesting a functional role for DNA
damage in lethality. Finally, BI2536/vorinostat cotreatment dramatically reduced 
tumor growth in both subcutaneous and systemic BCR/ABL(+) leukemia xenograft
models and significantly enhanced animal survival.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that concomitant PLK1 and HDAC inhibition is 
active against imatinib mesylate-sensitive or refractory CML and ALL cells both
in vitro and in vivo and that this strategy warrants further evaluation in the
setting of BCR/ABL(+) leukemias.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3548959
PMID: 23204129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2013 Jan 7;54(1):96-102. doi: 10.1167/iovs.12-10850.

Inhibition of histone deacetylases 1 and 3 protects injured retinal ganglion
cells.

Chindasub P(1), Lindsey JD, Duong-Polk K, Leung CK, Weinreb RN.

Author information: 
(1)Hamilton Glaucoma Center and Department of Ophthalmology, University of
California-San Diego, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

PURPOSE: Thy-1 is a marker of retinal ganglion cell (RGC) differentiation. Optic 
nerve injury triggers reduction of Thy-1 promoter activation followed by retinal 
ganglion cell (RGC) death. This study determined whether MS-275, an inhibitor of 
the histone deacetylases 1 and 3, can inhibit these changes.
METHODS: Mice expressing cyan fluorescent protein (CFP) under control of the
Thy-1 promoter received MS-275 (subcutaneous) or vehicle three times per week
starting 1 week before optic nerve crush and continuing for 6 weeks. The same
retinal area was imaged using the blue-light confocal scanning laser
ophthalmoscope before and after optic nerve crush every week, and fluorescent
spots were counted manually. The eyes were then processed for histopathologic
analysis.
RESULTS: The mean proportions of fluorescent retinal neurons remaining in the
vehicle group following optic nerve crush were 36 ± 8, 18 ± 6, 13 ± 10, 12 ± 4,
13 ± 5, and 13 ± 5% at weeks 1 through 6, respectively (n = 6). In contrast, the 
mean proportions of fluorescent retinal neurons remaining in the group treated
with MS-275 were 59 ± 19, 39 ± 11, 34 ± 12, 33 ± 15, 32 ± 13, and 27 ± 15% at
weeks 1 through 6, respectively (n = 7, P < 0.05 at weeks 1 through 5). Rate
analysis showed that MS-275 slowed the rate of loss during the first 2 weeks by
23% (P < 0.05) and subsequently was similar. Histopathologic analysis revealed 27
± 13% greater ganglion cell layer (GCL) neurons in the eyes from mice that
received MS-275 treatment (P < 0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that treatment with MS-275 protects against
the loss of RGC differentiation and promotes RGC survival following optic nerve
injury.

PMCID: PMC3544425
PMID: 23197683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2013 Feb 15;304(4):C334-41. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00361.2012. Epub 2012 Nov 28.

Regulation of intestinal serotonin transporter expression via epigenetic
mechanisms: role of HDAC2.

Gill RK(1), Kumar A, Malhotra P, Maher D, Singh V, Dudeja PK, Alrefai W, Saksena 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Digestive Diseases and Nutrition, Department of Medicine,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60612, USA. rgill@uic.edu

The serotonin (5-HT) transporter (SERT) facilitates clearance of extracellular
5-HT by its uptake and internalization. Decreased expression of SERT and
consequent high 5-HT levels have been implicated in various diarrheal disorders. 
Thus, appropriate regulation of SERT is critical for maintenance of 5-HT
homeostasis in health and disease. Previous studies demonstrated that SERT is
regulated via posttranslational and transcriptional mechanisms. However, the role
of epigenetic mechanisms in SERT regulation is not known. Current studies
investigated the effects of histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibition on SERT
expression and delineated the mechanisms. Treatment of Caco-2 cells with the
pan-HDAC inhibitors butyrate (5 mM) and trichostatin (TSA, 1 µM) decreased SERT
mRNA and protein levels. Butyrate- or TSA-induced decrease in SERT was associated
with decreased activity of human SERT (hSERT) promoter 1 (upstream of exon 1a),
but not hSERT promoter 2 (upstream of exon 2). Butyrate + TSA did not show an
additive effect on SERT expression, indicating that mechanisms involving histone 
hyperacetylation may be involved. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
demonstrated enrichment of the hSERT promoter 1 (flanking nt -250/+2) with
tetra-acetylated histone H3 or H4, which was increased (~3-fold) by butyrate.
Interestingly, specific inhibition of HDAC2 (but not HDAC1) utilizing small
interfering RNA decreased SERT mRNA and protein levels. The decrease in SERT
expression by HDAC inhibition was recapitulated in an in vivo model. SERT mRNA
levels were decreased in the ileum and colon of mice fed pectin (increased
availability of butyrate) compared with controls fed a fiber-free diet (~50-60%).
Our results identify a novel role of HDAC2 as a regulator of SERT gene expression
in intestinal epithelial cells.

PMCID: PMC3566538
PMID: 23195070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e50000. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0050000. Epub 2012 Nov 20.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1 controls the expression of beta defensin 1 in human 
lung epithelial cells.

Kallsen K(1), Andresen E, Heine H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Innate Immunity, Research Center Borstel, Airway Research Center
North, Member of the German Center for Lung Research, Borstel, Germany.

Deregulation of the expression human beta defensin 1 (DEFB1), an antimicrobial
peptide, has been implicated in the pathogenesis of COPD and asthma. Since the
molecular mechanisms that regulate DEFB1 gene expression are widely unknown, the 
epigenetic processes involved in the regulation of the constitutive expression of
DEFB1 in lung epithelial cells (A549) were investigated. The data demonstrate
that histone deacetylases (HDACs) participate in the regulation of DEFB1 gene
expression. Inhibition of the class I HDACs, HDACs 1-3, increases DEFB1 gene
expression in A549 cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays revealed
that the inhibition of the class I HDACs also results in modifications of the
chromatin at the DEFB1 promoter. Histone modifications, histone H3 acetylation
and H3K4 trimethylation, that are associated with transcriptional activation,
were found to increase after inhibition of HDACs 1-3. Finally, RNAi knockdown
experiments identified HDAC1 as the sole HDAC responsible for maintaining the
constitutive level of DEFB1 transcription. Taken together, our data reveal
epigenetic mechanisms which are the basis of the maintenance of the constitutive 
gene expression of human beta defensin 1.

PMCID: PMC3502185
PMID: 23185513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. ChemMedChem. 2013 Jan;8(1):149-56. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.201200450. Epub 2012 Nov 26.

Highly ligand efficient and selective N-2-(Thioethyl)picolinamide histone
deacetylase inhibitors inspired by the natural product psammaplin A.

Baud MG(1), Haus P, Leiser T, Meyer-Almes FJ, Fuchter MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ (UK).

Novel picolinamide-based histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors were developed,
drawing inspiration from the natural product psammaplin A. We found that the HDAC
potency and isoform selectivity provided by the oxime unit of psammaplin A could 
be reproduced by using carefully chosen heterocyclic frameworks. The resulting
(hetero)aromatic amide based compounds displayed very high potency and isoform
selectivity among the HDAC family, in addition to excellent ligand efficiency
relative to previously reported HDAC inhibitors. In particular, the high HDAC1
isoform selectivity provided by the chloropyridine motif represents a valuable
design criterion for the development of new lead compounds and chemical probes
that target HDAC1.

Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23184734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Eur J Pharmacol. 2013 Jan 5;698(1-3):137-44. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2012.11.016.
Epub 2012 Nov 21.

Omentin-1, a new adipokine, promotes apoptosis through regulating Sirt1-dependent
p53 deacetylation in hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Zhang YY(1), Zhou LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, West China School of Preclinical and Forensic
Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China.

Omentin-1, a new adipokine released from adipose tissue, is associated with
several key aspects of metabolic syndrome such as insulin sensitivity. However,
it is not known whether omentin-1 affects cancer cell growth. In this study, we
studied the influence of omentin-1 on two types of human hepatocellular carcinoma
cells: HepG2 and HuH-7 cells. Cell viability assay showed that omentin-1 (1 and 2
µg/ml) significantly inhibited the proliferation of HepG2 and HuH-7 cells. Both
annexin+PI staining and TUNEL assay showed that omentin-1 induced apoptosis in
these cells. Moreover, omentin-1 treatment upregulated protein levels of p53 and 
p21, a main transcriptional target of p53. Interestingly, omentin-1 did not
affect p53 mRNA level. Further mechanism study showed that omentin-1 upregulated 
p53 protein level through decreasing p53 deacetylation and thereby increasing the
stability of p53 protein. Using small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated knockdown,
we found that Sirt1 deacetylase, but not histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), was
required for the effect of omentin-1 on p53 deacetylation and cancer cell
proliferation. In omentin-1 treated HepG2 cells, the bax/bcl-2 protein ratio was 
increased, while the caspase-3 signaling pathway was also activated. Omentin-1
triggered JNK signaling but not p38 and ERK1/2 signaling pathways. Collectively, 
our data suggests that the novel adipokine omentin-1 may contribute to the
therapeutic strategy for hepatocellular carcinoma.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23178529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Hepatology. 2013 Mar;57(3):1098-106. doi: 10.1002/hep.26146. Epub 2013 Feb 15.

Farnesoid X receptor inhibits gankyrin in mouse livers and prevents development
of liver cancer.

Jiang Y(1), Iakova P, Jin J, Sullivan E, Sharin V, Hong IH, Anakk S, Mayor A,
Darlington G, Finegold M, Moore D, Timchenko NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology & Immunology, Huffington Center on Aging, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

One of the early events in the development of liver cancer is a neutralization of
tumor suppressor proteins Rb, p53, hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a), and
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) a. The elimination of these proteins is
mediated by a small subunit of proteasome, gankyrin, which is activated by
cancer. The aim of this study was to determine the mechanisms that repress
gankyrin in quiescent livers and mechanisms of activation of gankyrin in liver
cancer. We found that farnesoid X receptor (FXR) inhibits expression of gankyrin 
in quiescent livers by silencing the gankyrin promoter through HDAC1-C/EBPß
complexes. C/EBPß is a key transcription factor that delivers HDAC1 to gankyrin
promoter and causes epigenetic silencing of the promoter. We show that
down-regulation of C/EBPß in mouse hepatoma cells and in mouse livers reduces
C/EBPß-HDAC1 complexes and activates the gankyrin promoter. Deletion of FXR
signaling in mice leads to de-repression of the gankyrin promoter and to
spontaneous development of liver cancer at 12 months of age. Diethylnitrosoamine 
(DEN)-mediated liver cancer in wild-type mice also involves the reduction of FXR 
and activation of gankyrin. Examination of liver cancer in old mice and liver
cancer in human patients revealed that FXR is reduced, while gankyrin is elevated
during spontaneous development of liver cancer. Searching for animal models with 
altered levels of FXR, we found that long-lived Little mice have high levels of
FXR and do not develop liver cancer with age and after DEN injections due to
failure to activate gankyrin and eliminate Rb, p53, HNF4a and C/EBPa
proteins.CONCLUSION: FXR prevents liver cancer by inhibiting the gankyrin
promoter via C/EBPß-HDAC1 complexes, leading to subsequent protection of tumor
suppressor proteins from degradation.

Copyright © 2012 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC3649861
PMID: 23172628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2013 Jan 5;368(1609):20110329. doi:
10.1098/rstb.2011.0329.

Recent advancements in cloning by somatic cell nuclear transfer.

Ogura A(1), Inoue K, Wakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN BioResource Center, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan. ogura@rtc.riken.go.jp

Somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) cloning is the sole reproductive engineering
technology that endows the somatic cell genome with totipotency. Since the first 
report on the birth of a cloned sheep from adult somatic cells in 1997, many
technical improvements in SCNT have been made by using different epigenetic
approaches, including enhancement of the levels of histone acetylation in the
chromatin of the reconstructed embryos. Although it will take a considerable time
before we fully understand the nature of genomic programming and totipotency, we 
may expect that somatic cell cloning technology will soon become broadly
applicable to practical purposes, including medicine, pharmaceutical
manufacturing and agriculture. Here we review recent progress in somatic cell
cloning, with a special emphasis on epigenetic studies using the laboratory mouse
as a model.

PMCID: PMC3539358
PMID: 23166393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Jan 4;430(1):381-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.11.018. Epub 2012 Nov 14.

Protocatechualdehyde possesses anti-cancer activity through downregulating cyclin
D1 and HDAC2 in human colorectal cancer cells.

Jeong JB(1), Lee SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food Science, University of Maryland, College
Park, MD 20742, USA.

Protocatechualdehyde (PCA) is a naturally occurring polyphenol found in barley,
green cavendish bananas, and grapevine leaves. Although a few studies reported
growth-inhibitory activity of PCA in breast and leukemia cancer cells, the
underlying mechanisms are still poorly understood. Thus, we performed in vitro
study to investigate if treatment of PCA affects cell proliferation and apoptosis
in human colorectal cancer cells and define potential mechanisms by which PCA
mediates growth arrest and apoptosis of cancer cells. Exposure of PCA to human
colorectal cancer cells (HCT116 and SW480 cells) suppressed cell growth and
induced apoptosis in dose-dependent manner. PCA decreased cyclin D1 expression in
protein and mRNA level and suppressed luciferase activity of cyclin D1 promoter, 
indicating transcriptional downregulation of cyclin D1 gene by PCA. We also
observed that PCA treatment attenuated enzyme activity of histone deacetylase
(HDAC) and reduced expression of HDAC2, but not HDAC1. These findings suggest
that cell growth inhibition and apoptosis by PCA may be a result of
HDAC2-mediated cyclin D1 suppression.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23159608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Int J Med Sci. 2012;9(10):881-93. doi: 10.7150/ijms.5011. Epub 2012 Nov 7.

Molecular mechanism of SAHA on regulation of autophagic cell death in
tamoxifen-resistant MCF-7 breast cancer cells.

Lee YJ(1), Won AJ, Lee J, Jung JH, Yoon S, Lee BM, Kim HS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Toxicology, College of Pharmacy, Pusan National
University, Jangjeon-dong, Geumjeung-gu, Busan, Republic of Korea.

OBJECTIVE: Tamoxifen is currently used for the treatment of estrogen
receptor-positive breast cancer patients, but acquired resistance to tamoxifen is
a critical problem in breast cancer therapy. Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid
(SAHA) is a prototype of the newly developed HDAC inhibitor. The aim of this
study is to investigate the anticancer effects of SAHA in tamoxifen-resistant
MCF-7 (TAMR/MCF-7) cells.
METHODS: Cytotoxicity, apoptosis and autophagic cell death induced by SAHA were
studied. A TAMR/MCF-7 cells xenograft model was established to investigate the
inhibitory effect of SAHA on tumor growth in vivo.
RESULTS: SAHA inhibited the proliferation of TAMR/MCF-7 cells in a dose-dependent
manner. SAHA significantly reduced the expression of HDAC1, 2, 3, 4 and 7 and
increased acetylated histone H3 and H4. Although SAHA induced G2/M phase arrest
of cell cycle, apoptotic cell death was very low, which is correlated with the
slight change in the activation of caspases and PARP cleavage. Interestingly,
expression of the autophagic cell death markers, LC3-II and beclin-1, was
significantly increased in TAMR/MCF-7 cells treated with SAHA. Autophagic cell
death induced by SAHA was confirmed by acridine orange staining and transmission 
electron microscopy (TEM) in TAMR/MCF-7 cells. In mice bearing the TAMR/MCF-7
cell xenografts, SAHA significantly reduced the tumor growth and weight, without 
apparent side effects.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that SAHA can induce caspase-independent
autophagic cell death rather than apoptotic cell death in TAMR/MCF-7 cells.
SAHA-mediated autophagic cell death is a promising new strategy to treatment of
tamoxifen-resistant human breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3498753
PMID: 23155362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2013 Jan 15;266(2):233-44. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2012.11.002. Epub 2012 Nov 9.

Vorinostat, an HDAC inhibitor attenuates epidermoid squamous cell carcinoma
growth by dampening mTOR signaling pathway in a human xenograft murine model.

Kurundkar D(1), Srivastava RK, Chaudhary SC, Ballestas ME, Kopelovich L, Elmets
CA, Athar M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Skin Diseases Research Center, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, 1530 3rd Avenue South, VH 509, Birmingham, AL 35294-0019, 
USA.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are potent anticancer agents and show
efficacy against various human neoplasms. Vorinostat is a potent HDAC inhibitor
and has shown potential to inhibit growth of human xenograft tumors. However, its
effect on the growth of skin neoplasm remains undefined. In this study, we show
that vorinostat (2 µM) reduced expression of HDAC1, 2, 3, and 7 in epidermoid
carcinoma A431 cells. Consistently, it increased acetylation of histone H3 and
p53. Vorinostat (100mg/kg body weight, IP) treatment reduced human xenograft
tumor growth in highly immunosuppressed nu/nu mice. Histologically, the
vorinostat-treated tumor showed features of well-differentiation with large
necrotic areas. Based on proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) staining and
expression of cyclins D1, D2, E, and A, vorinostat seems to impair proliferation 
by down-regulating the expression of these proteins. However, it also induced
apoptosis. The mechanism by which vorinostat blocks proliferation and makes tumor
cells prone to apoptosis, involved inhibition of mTOR signaling which was
accompanied by reduction in cell survival AKT and extracellular-signal regulated 
kinase (ERK) signaling pathways. Our data provide a novel mechanism-based
therapeutic intervention for cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). Vorinostat 
may be utilized to cure skin neoplasms in organ transplant recipient (OTR). These
patients have high morbidity and surgical removal of these lesions which
frequently develop in these patients, is difficult.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3534787
PMID: 23147569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Childs Nerv Syst. 2013 Jan;29(1):5-9. doi: 10.1007/s00381-012-1965-8. Epub 2012
Nov 10.

Histone deacetylases expression in atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumors.

Sredni ST(1), Halpern AL, Hamm CA, Bonaldo Mde F, Tomita T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Neurosurgery, Ann and Robert H. Lurie Children's
Hospital of Chicago, 225 E. Chicago Avenue, Box # 28, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.
ssredni@northwestern.edu

PURPOSE: Atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumors (ATRTs) are rare, highly malignant
central nervous system tumors that occur during infancy and early childhood.
Their poor outcome and resistance to conventional chemotherapies and
radiotherapy, urges the development of new therapies. Recent studies have
evaluated the effects of histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) as a new
potential treatment for ATRTs. However, most HDACi act unselectively against all,
or at least several, histone deacetylase (HDAC) family members. We hypothesized
that specific HDAC family members are deregulated in ATRT and therefore a more
selective class of HDACi would be beneficial to patients with ATRT.
METHODS: To test our hypothesis, we evaluated the expression level of different
HDAC family members in ATRTs. Eight ATRTs were compared to six medulloblastoma
samples in regards to the level of expression of the 18 HDAC family members as
determined by microarray gene expression profiling.
RESULTS: HDAC1 was the only member of the HDAC family to be significantly
differentially expressed in ATRTs (FC<U+2009>=<U+2009>4.728; p value<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.00003).
CONCLUSIONS: A class of HDACi specifically targeting HDAC1 may allow for the
desired therapeutic benefits with fewer side effects for children with ATRT.

PMID: 23143003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Crit Rev Eukaryot Gene Expr. 2012;22(3):249-58.

Tumor suppressor maspin as a rheostat in HDAC regulation to achieve the
fine-tuning of epithelial homeostasis.

Kaplun A(1), Dzinic S, Bernardo M, Sheng S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University
School of Medicine, 4100 John R Street, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

Maspin, a class II tumor suppressor, is often downregulated during tumor
progression and its depletion from the nucleus is associated with poor prognosis.
Recently, we reported that reintroduction of maspin is sufficient for
redifferentiation of prostate cancer cells to epithelial phenotype, a reversal of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. We have linked this effect of maspin with
its ability to directly inhibit HDAC1, thereby influencing the acetylation state 
of transcription factors and other proteins. Maspin overexpression leads to
changes in the expression level of a large number of proteins and these changes
are often microenvironment specific. In this review, we summarize the epigenetic 
effects of maspin and provide comprehensive bioinformatic analysis of
microarray-derived gene expression changes caused by maspin in different
microenvironments. The analysis was performed on multiple levels, including
identification of statistically enriched gene ontology groups, detection of
overreprepresented transcription factors binding sites in promoters of
differentially expressed genes, followed by searching for key nodes of regulatory
networks controlling these transcription factors. The results are consistent with
our hypothesis that maspin serves as an endogenous regulator of HDAC activity and
suggest that the effect of maspin is primarily mediated by TGFß,
ß-catenin/E-cadherin pathways, and network key nodes such as Abl kinase, p62,
IL1, and caspases 6 and 8.

PMCID: PMC3612174
PMID: 23140166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Dev Biol. 2013 Jan 15;373(2):359-72. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.10.026. Epub 2012 
Nov 1.

Depletion of Suds3 reveals an essential role in early lineage specification.

Zhang K(1), Dai X, Wallingford MC, Mager J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, University of Massachusetts at
Amherst, 455, 661 N. Pleasant Street, Amherst, MA 01003, USA.

Preimplantation development culminates with the emergence of three distinct
populations: the inner cell mass, primitive endoderm and trophectoderm. Here, we 
define the mechanisms underlying the requirement of Suds3 in
pre/peri-implantation development. Suds3 knockdown blastocysts exhibit a failure 
of both trophectoderm proliferation as well as a conspicuous lack of primitive
endoderm. Expression of essential lineage factors Nanog, Sox2, Cdx2, Eomes, Elf5 
and Sox17 are severely reduced in the absence of Suds3. Importantly, we document 
deficient FGF4/ERK signaling and show that exogenous FGF4 rescues primitive
endoderm formation and trophectoderm proliferation in Suds3 knockdown
blastocysts. We also show that Hdac1 knockdown reduces Sox2/FGF4/ERK signaling in
blastocysts. Collectively, these data define a role for Suds3 in activation of
FGF4/ERK signaling and determine an essential molecular role of Suds3/Sin3/HDAC
complexes in lineage specification in vivo.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23123966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Dev Biol. 2013 Jan 15;373(2):442-52. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.10.025. Epub 2012 
Nov 1.

The Retinoblastoma pathway regulates stem cell proliferation in freshwater
planarians.

Zhu SJ(1), Pearson BJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Hospital for Sick Children, Program in Developmental and Stem Cell
Biology, 101 College St. MaRS East Rm 11-704, Toronto, ON, Canada M5G1L7.

Freshwater planarians are flatworms of the Lophotrochozoan superphylum and are
well known for their regenerative abilities, which rely on a large population of 
pluripotent adult stem cells. However, the mechanisms by which planarians
maintain a precise population of adult stem cells while balancing proliferation
and cell death, remain to be elucidated. Here we have identified, characterized, 
and functionally tested the core Retinoblastoma (Rb) pathway components in
planarian adult stem cell biology. The Rb pathway is an ancient and conserved
mechanism of proliferation control from plants to animals and is composed of
three core components: an Rb protein, and a transcription factor heterodimer of
E2F and DP proteins. Although the planarian genome contains all components of the
Rb pathway, we found that they have undergone gene loss from the ancestral state,
similar to other species in their phylum. The single Rb homolog (Smed-Rb) was
highly expressed in planarian stem cells and was required for stem cell
maintenance, similar to the Rb-homologs p107 and p130 in vertebrates. We show
that planarians and their phylum have undergone the most severe reduction in E2F 
genes observed thus far, and the single remaining E2F was predicted to be a
repressive-type E2F (Smed-E2F4-1). Knockdown of either Smed-E2F4-1 or its
dimerization partner Dp (Smed-Dp) by RNAi resulted in temporary
hyper-proliferation. Finally, we showed that known Rb-interacting genes in other 
systems, histone deacetylase 1 and cyclinD (Smed-HDAC1; Smed-cycD), were similar 
to Rb in expression and phenotypes when knocked down by RNAi, suggesting that
these established interactions with Rb may also be conserved in planarians.
Together, these results showed that planarians use the conserved components of
the Rb tumor suppressor pathway to control proliferation and cell survival.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23123964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Radiat Oncol. 2012 Oct 31;7:183. doi: 10.1186/1748-717X-7-183.

X-radiation inhibits histone deacetylase 1 and 2, upregulates Axin expression and
induces apoptosis in non-small cell lung cancer.

Han Y(1), Zhang Y, Yang LH, Mi XY, Dai SD, Li QC, Xu HT, Yu JH, Li G, Zhao J, Han
C, Yuan XM, Wang EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Basic Medical Sciences, First Affiliated
Hospital of China Medical University, North 2nd Road 92, Heping Ward, Shenyang,
110001, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Histone deacetylase (HDAC) plays an important role in the
deacetylation of histone, which can alter gene expression patterns and affect
cell behavior associated with malignant transformation. The aims of this study
were to investigate the relationships between HDAC1, HDAC2, clinicopathologic
characteristics, patient prognosis and apoptosis, to clarify the mechanism of
upregulation of the Axis inhibitor Axin (an important regulator of the Wnt
pathway) by X-radiation and to elucidate the effect of siRNA on radiation therapy
of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: HDAC1 and HDAC2 expression levels were measured by immunohistochemistry 
and reverse transcription PCR. Apoptosis was determined by terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP-nick end labeling and fluorescence
activated cell sorting. BE1 cells expressing Axin were exposed to 2 Gy of
X-radiation.
RESULTS: Expression of HDAC1 and that of HDAC2 were correlated, and significantly
higher in NSCLC tissues than in normal lung tissues (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). HDAC1 and HDAC2
expression was correlated with pTNM stage and negatively correlated with
differentiation of NSCLC and apoptotic index (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). The prognosis of
patients with low expression of HDAC1 and HDAC2 was better than that of those
with high expression. X-radiation and siRNA inhibited HDAC1 and HDAC2 expression 
in NSCLC cells and Axin levels were significantly higher in BE1 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: X-radiation and siRNA inhibit expression of HDAC1 and HDAC2, weaken 
the inhibitory effect of HDAC on Axin, upregulate Axin expression and induce
apoptosis of lung cancer cells. Inhibition of HDAC1 and HDAC2 is a means of
enhancing the radiosensitivity of NSCLC.

PMCID: PMC3542190
PMID: 23110995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Korean J Pathol. 2012 Aug;46(4):324-30. doi: 10.4132/KoreanJPathol.2012.46.4.324.
Epub 2012 Aug 23.

Expressional Difference of RHEB, HDAC1, and WEE1 Proteins in the Stromal Tumors
of the Breast and Their Significance in Tumorigenesis.

Eom M(1), Han A, Lee MJ, Park KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yonsei University Wonju College of Medicine, Wonju,
Korea.

BACKGROUND: Fibroadenoma (FA) and phyllodes tumor (PT) are stromal tumors of
breast and are histologically similar. There are no established differences in
tumorigenesis and oncogene expression among them. Ras homolog enriched in brain
(RHEB) plays an important role in cell growth and cell-cycle control, histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) is an important factor in breast tumor progression and
prognosis, and WEE1 homolog (WEE1) functions as a tumor suppressor. No studies on
the expressional differences of these proteins in FA and PT have been reported to
date.
METHODS: The expression of these proteins in FA, PT, and normal breast was
compared. We used 102 cases of FA and 25 cases of benign PT.
RESULTS: In epithelial cells, the expression of RHEB, HDAC1, and WEE1 was lowest 
in PT, higher in FA, and most enhanced in normal breast. In addition, the
expression of RHEB and HDAC1 was higher in the stromal cells of PT than in FA and
normal breast.
CONCLUSIONS: Both epithelial and stromal cells of FA and PT express these
proteins, which indicates that epithelial cells play an important role in the
development of stromal tumors. In addition, the expressional differences of these
proteins may be associated with the tumorigenesis of breast stromal tumors.

PMCID: PMC3479826
PMID: 23110024  [PubMed]


239. Korean J Pathol. 2012 Aug;46(4):311-7. doi: 10.4132/KoreanJPathol.2012.46.4.311. 
Epub 2012 Aug 23.

HDAC1 Expression in Invasive Ductal Carcinoma of the Breast and Its Value as a
Good Prognostic Factor.

Eom M(1), Oh SS, Lkhagvadorj S, Han A, Park KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yonsei University Wonju College of Medicine, Wonju,
Korea.

BACKGROUND: Histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) is associated with the expression and
function of estrogen receptors and the proliferation of tumor cells, and has been
considered a very important factor in breast tumor progression and prognosis.
Several studies have reported an association between HDAC1 expression and poorer 
prognosis in cancers including breast cancer, with a few exceptions. However,
because of the dearth of studies on HDAC1 expression in breast cancer, its
significance for breast cancer prognosis has not been well defined. Therefore, we
examined HDAC1 expression in invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC), the most common
breast cancer, and investigated its potential prognostic significance.
METHODS: We used 203 IDC tissue samples. Immunohistochemical stains for HDAC1 and
real-time polymerase chain reaction for HDAC1 mRNA were performed and the results
were compared to generally well-established prognostic factors in breast cancer
and patient survival rates.
RESULTS: HDAC1 expression was significantly reduced in proportion to higher
histologic grade, higher nuclear pleomorphism score, and higher mitotic counts,
and with lower estrogen receptor expression. Furthermore, it was significantly
associated with the survival rate.
CONCLUSIONS: HDAC1 expression is a good prognostic indicator in IDC.

PMCID: PMC3479820
PMID: 23110022  [PubMed]


240. Korean J Pathol. 2012 Apr;46(2):142-50. doi: 10.4132/KoreanJPathol.2012.46.2.142.
Epub 2012 Apr 25.

Expression of HAT1 and HDAC1, 2, 3 in Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphomas, Peripheral 
T-Cell Lymphomas, and NK/T-Cell Lymphomas.

Min SK(1), Koh YH, Park Y, Kim HJ, Seo J, Park HR, Cho SJ, Kim IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hallym University Sacred Heart Hospital, Hallym
University College of Medicine, Anyang, Korea.

BACKGROUND: It has generally been proven that histone acetylation and
deacetylation are involved in the malignant transformation. To date, however,
this has rarely been studied in cases of malignant lymphoma.
METHODS: We studied nine cases of reactive lymphoid hyperplasia, 78 cases of
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), 13 cases of peripheral T-cell lymphoma,
not otherwise specified (PTCL-NOS), and 13 cases of extranodal NK/T-cell
lymphoma, nasal type (NKTCL). Thus, we attempted to elucidate the associations of
the degree of the expression of histone acetyltransferase 1 (HAT1), histone
deacetylase (HDAC) 1, HDAC2, and HDAC3 with the clinical behaviors of above
malignant lymphomas using the immunohistochemistry and a western blot analysis.
RESULTS: The degree of the expression of HAT1 was higher in cases of DLBCL,
PTCL-NOS or NKTCL as compared with reactive lymphoid hyperplasia (p<0.05). The
degree of the expression of HAT1 was correlated with that of HDAC1 in cases of
DLBCL or NKTCL (p<0.05). The degree of the expression of HAT1 and HDAC1 was
correlated with a poor survival in cases of DLBCL or PTCL-NOS (p>0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: HAT1, HDAC1, and HDAC2 play a critical role in the development of
malignant lymphomas. Both HAT1 and HDAC1 might be indicators for a poor prognosis
in cases of DLBCL as cooperating factors.

PMCID: PMC3479788
PMID: 23109994  [PubMed]


241. Carcinogenesis. 2013 Jan;34(1):58-67. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgs336. Epub 2012 Oct
26.

Acetylated Sp1 inhibits PTEN expression through binding to PTEN core promoter and
recruitment of HDAC1 and promotes cancer cell migration and invasion.

Kou XX(1), Hao T, Meng Z, Zhou YH, Gan YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics, Peking University School and Hospital of
Stomatology, 22 Zhongguancun Avenue South, Haidian District, Beijing 100081,
China.

Specificity protein 1 (Sp1) is often overexpressed in cancer cells. Its binding
sites are known to exist in the phosphatase and tension homolog deleted on
chromosome 10 (PTEN) promoter. In this study, we hypothesized that Sp1 negatively
regulates PTEN expression. We used several cell lines to determine the effects of
Sp1. The results showed that Sp1 overexpression inhibited the expression and
promoter activity of PTEN and correspondingly upregulated AKT phosphorylation,
whereas Sp1 knockdown upregulated the expression and promoter ability of PTEN and
downregulated AKT phosphorylation. Moreover, a series of deletion and
site-directed mutations of the PTEN promoter indicated that Sp1 can inhibit PTEN 
promoter activity through a specific Sp1-binding site at the PTEN core promoter
in vivo. Meanwhile, non-acetylated Sp1, with its loss of DNA binding activity,
failed to inhibit the expression and promoter activity of PTEN. Histone
deacetylase 1 was necessary for Sp1 to inhibit PTEN expression. The inverse
expression of Sp1 and PTEN was found in tongue cancer cells and salivary adenoid 
cystic cancer (SACC)-LM cells (possessing higher potential for lung metastasis
than SACC-83) as compared with that in adjacent normal tissue and SACC-83 cells, 
respectively. Sp1 knockdown decreased the migration and invasion of SACC-LM
cells, whereas Sp1 overexpression increased the migration and invasion of SACC-83
cells. Overall, these results suggest that Sp1 is involved in the development and
invasiveness of cancer through inhibition of PTEN.

PMID: 23104175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. J Cell Biochem. 2013 Apr;114(4):854-63. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24422.

Sodium valproate potentiates staurosporine-induced apoptosis in neuroblastoma
cells via Akt/survivin independently of HDAC inhibition.

Shah RD(1), Jagtap JC, Mruthyunjaya S, Shelke GV, Pujari R, Das G, Shastry P.

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Cell Science (NCCS), Ganeshkhind, Pune 411007, India.

Sodium valproate (VPA) has been recently identified as a selective class I
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor and explored for its potential as an
anti-cancer agent. The anti-cancer properties of VPA are generally attributed to 
its HDAC inhibitory activity indicating a clear overlap of these two actions, but
the underlying mechanisms of its anti-tumor effects are not clearly elucidated.
The present study aimed to delineate the molecular mechanism of VPA in
potentiating cytotoxic effects of anti-cancer drugs with focus on inhibition of
HDAC activity. Using human neuroblastoma cell lines, SK-N-MC, SH-SY5Y, and
SK-N-SH, we show that non-toxic dose (2 mM) of VPA enhanced staurosporine
(STS)-induced cell death as assessed by MTT assay, PARP cleavage, hypodiploidy,
and caspase 3 activity. Mechanistically, the effect of VPA was mediated by down
regulation of survivin, an anti-apoptotic protein crucial in resistance to
STS-mediated cytotoxicity, through Akt pathway. Knock down of class I HDAC
isoforms remarkably inhibited HDAC activity comparable with that of VPA but had
no effect on STS-induced apoptosis. Moreover, MS-275, a structurally distinct
class I HDAC inhibitor did not affect STS-mediated apoptosis, nor decrease the
levels of survivin and Akt. Valpromide (VPM), an amide analog of VPA that does
not inhibit HDAC also potentiated cell death in NB cells associated with
decreased survivin and Akt levels suggesting that HDAC inhibition might not be
crucial for STS-induced apoptosis. The study provides new information on the
possible molecular mechanism of VPA in apoptosis that can be explored in
combination therapy in cancer.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23097134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Nov-Dec;1819(11-12):1208-16. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2012.10.005. Epub 2012 Oct 22.

aNAC interacts with histone deacetylase corepressors to control Myogenin and
Osteocalcin gene expression.

Jafarov T(1), Alexander JW, St-Arnaud R.

Author information: 
(1)Shriners Hospital for Children, Canada.

In the nucleus of differentiated osteoblasts, the DNA-binding aNAC protein acts
as a transcriptional coactivator of the Osteocalcin gene. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation-microarray assays (ChIP-chip) showed that aNAC binds the
Osteocalcin promoter but also identified the Myogenin promoter as an aNAC target.
Here, we confirm these array data using quantitative ChIP and further detected
that aNAC binds to these promoters in myoblasts. Since these genes are
differentially regulated during osteoblastogenesis or myogenesis, these results
suggest cell- and promoter-context specific functions for aNAC. We hypothesized
that aNAC dynamically recruits corepressors to inhibit Myogenin expression in
cells committing to the osteoblastic lineage or to inhibit Osteocalcin
transcription in differentiating myoblasts. Using co-immunoprecipitation assays, 
we detected complexes between aNAC and the corepressors HDAC1 and HDAC3, in
myoblasts and osteoblasts. Sequential ChIP confirmed HDAC1 recruitment by aNAC at
the Osteocalcin and Myogenin promoters. Interaction with the corepressors was
detectable in pre-osteoblasts and in myoblasts but disappeared as the cells
differentiate. Treatment with an HDAC inhibitor caused de-repression of
Osteocalcin expression in myoblasts. Overexpression of aNAC in myoblasts inhibits
expression of Myogenin and differentiation. However, overexpression of an
N-terminus truncated aNAC mutant allowed myoblasts to express Myogenin and
differentiate, and this mutant did not interact with HDAC1 or HDAC3. This study
identified an additional DNA-binding target and novel protein-protein
interactions for aNAC. We propose that aNAC plays a role in regulating gene
transcription during mesenchymal cell differentiation by differentially
recruiting corepressors at target promoters.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23092676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Biol Chem. 2012 Dec 14;287(51):42574-87. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.376590. Epub
2012 Oct 18.

Neuron-restrictive silencer factor (NRSF) represses cocaine- and
amphetamine-regulated transcript (CART) transcription and antagonizes
cAMP-response element-binding protein signaling through a dual NRSE mechanism.

Zhang J(1), Wang S, Yuan L, Yang Y, Zhang B, Liu Q, Chen L, Yue W, Li Y, Pei X.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine Laboratory, Beijing Institute of
Transfusion Medicine, Beijing 100850, China.

Cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript (CART) peptide plays a pivotal role
in neuroprotection against stroke-related brain injury. However, the regulatory
mechanism on CART transcription, especially the repression mechanism, is not
fully understood. Here, we show that the transcriptional repressor
neuron-restrictive silencer elements (NRSF, also known as REST) represses CART
expression through direct binding to two NRSF-binding elements (NRSEs) in the
CART promoter and intron 1 (named pNRSE and iNRSE, respectively). EMSA show that 
NRSF binds to pNRSE and iNRSE directly in vitro. ChIP assays show that NRSF
recruits differential co-repressor complexes including CoREST and HDAC1 to these 
NRSEs. The presence of both NRSEs is required for efficient repression of CART
transcription as indicated by reporter gene assays. NRSF overexpression
antagonizes forskolin-mediated up-regulation of CART mRNA and protein. Ischemia
insult triggered by oxygen-glucose deprivation (OGD) enhances NRSF mRNA levels
and then NRSF antagonizes the CREB signaling on CART activation, leading to
augmented cell death. Depletion of NRSF in combination with forskolin treatment
increases neuronal survival after ischemic insult. These findings reveal a novel 
dual NRSE mechanism by which NRSF represses CART expression and suggest that NRSF
may serve as a therapeutic target for stroke treatment.

PMCID: PMC3522259
PMID: 23086924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Nov 16;428(2):271-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.10.044. Epub 2012 Oct 16.

Chemical and genetic blockade of HDACs enhances osteogenic differentiation of
human adipose tissue-derived stem cells by oppositely affecting osteogenic and
adipogenic transcription factors.

Maroni P(1), Brini AT, Arrigoni E, de Girolamo L, Niada S, Matteucci E,
Bendinelli P, Desiderio MA.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Ortopedico Galeazzi, Milano, Italy.

The human adipose-tissue derived stem/stromal cells (hASCs) are an interesting
source for bone-tissue engineering applications. Our aim was to clarify in hASCs 
the role of acetylation in the control of Runt-related transcription factor 2
(Runx2) and Peroxisome proliferator activated receptor (PPAR) <U+03B3>. These key
osteogenic and adipogenic transcription factors are oppositely involved in
osteo-differentiation. The hASCs, committed or not towards bone lineage with
osteoinductive medium, were exposed to HDACs chemical blockade with Trichostatin 
A (TSA) or were genetically silenced for HDACs. Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and
collagen/calcium deposition, considered as early and late osteogenic markers,
were evaluated concomitantly as index of osteo-differentiation. TSA pretreatment,
useful experimental protocol to analyse pan-HDAC-chemical inhibition, and switch 
to osteogenic medium induced early-osteoblast maturation gene Runx2, while
transiently decreased PPAR<U+03B3> and scarcely affected late-differentiation markers.
Time-dependent effects were observed after knocking-down of HDAC1 and 3: Runx2
and ALP underwent early activation, followed by late-osteogenic markers increase 
and by PPAR<U+03B3>/ALP activity diminutions mostly after HDAC3 silencing. HDAC1 and 3
genetic blockade increased and decreased Runx2 and PPAR<U+03B3> target genes,
respectively. Noteworthy, HDACs knocking-down favoured the commitment effect of
osteogenic medium. Our results reveal a role for HDACs in orchestrating
osteo-differentiation of hASCs at transcriptional level, and might provide new
insights into the modulation of hASCs-based regenerative therapy.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23085045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Infect Disord Drug Targets. 2012 Oct;12(5):380-7.

Lessons from Anaplasma phagocytophilum: chromatin remodeling by bacterial
effectors.

Rennoll-Bankert KE(1), Dumler JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Bacterial pathogens can alter global host gene expression via histone
modifications and chromatin remodeling in order to subvert host responses,
including those involved with innate immunity, allowing for bacterial survival.
Shigella flexneri, Listeria monocytogenes, Chlamydia trachomatis, and Anaplasma
phagocytophilum express effector proteins that modify host histones and chromatin
structure. A. phagocytophilum modulates granulocyte respiratory burst in part by 
dampening transcription of several key phagocyte oxidase genes. The A.
phagocytophilum protein AnkA localizes to the myeloid cell nucleus where it binds
AT-rich regions in the CYBB promoter and decreases its transcription. AT-rich
regions of DNA are characteristic of matrix attachment regions (MARs) which are
critical for chromatin structure and transcription. MAR-binding proteins, such as
SATB1, interact with histone modifying enzymes resulting in altered gene
expression. With A. phagocytophilum infection, histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1)
expression is increased and histone H3 acetylation is decreased at the CYBB
promoter, suggesting a role for AnkA in altering host epigenetics and modulating 
gene transcription, at this, and perhaps other loci. This review will focus on
how bacterial pathogens alter host epigenetics, by specifically examining A.
phagocytophilum AnkA cis-regulation of CYBB transcription and epigenetic changes 
associated with infection.

PMCID: PMC3664514
PMID: 23082961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2013 Mar;287(3):487-94. doi: 10.1007/s00404-012-2591-0. Epub
2012 Oct 19.

Aberrant histone acetylation and methylation levels in woman with endometriosis.

Xiaomeng X(1), Ming Z, Jiezhi M, Xiaoling F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Second Xiangya Hospital, Central
South University, #139 Renmin Middle Rd, Changsha 410011, Hunan, People's
Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the alterations in histone modifications in woman with 
endometriosis.
METHODS: Global histone H3/H4 acetylation and H3K4/H3K9 methylation in eutopic
and ectopic endometrium from 15 endometriosis patients were assayed using the
EpiQuik global histone H3/H4 acetylation and H3K4/H3K9 methylation assay kits.
Quantitative real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction was
applied to measure mRNA levels of 12 members of histone-related chromatin
modifier genes.
RESULTS: Histone H4 hypoacetylation was detected both in eutopic and ectopic
endometrium. There were no difference between patients with endometriosis and
controls on global levels of H3 acetylation. Furthermore, global histone H3K4
hypomethylation and H3K9 hypomethylation were detected both in ectopic and
eutopic endometrium (p < 0.001), and in ectopic endometrium (p < 0.001),
respectively. SIRT1 mRNA level was significantly decreased in eutopic
endometrium, while mRNA levels of HDAC1, SUV39H1, SUV39H2 and G9a were
significantly downregulated in ectopic endometrium. HDAC2 mRNA level was
significantly increased in eutopic endometrium. PCAF mRNA level was significantly
increased in ectopic endometrium.
CONCLUSIONS: Aberrant histone modification may play an important role in the
pathogenesis of endometriosis.

PMID: 23080547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Diabetes. 2013 Mar;62(3):732-42. doi: 10.2337/db12-0548. Epub 2012 Oct 15.

Inhibition of class I histone deacetylases unveils a mitochondrial signature and 
enhances oxidative metabolism in skeletal muscle and adipose tissue.

Galmozzi A(1), Mitro N, Ferrari A, Gers E, Gilardi F, Godio C, Cermenati G,
Gualerzi A, Donetti E, Rotili D, Valente S, Guerrini U, Caruso D, Mai A, Saez E, 
De Fabiani E, Crestani M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio Giovanni Galli di Biochimica e Biologia Molecolare del Metabolismo
e Spettrometria di Massa, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy.

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2013 Mar;62(3):685-7.

Chromatin modifications are sensitive to environmental and nutritional stimuli.
Abnormalities in epigenetic regulation are associated with metabolic disorders
such as obesity and diabetes that are often linked with defects in oxidative
metabolism. Here, we evaluated the potential of class-specific synthetic
inhibitors of histone deacetylases (HDACs), central chromatin-remodeling enzymes,
to ameliorate metabolic dysfunction. Cultured myotubes and primary brown
adipocytes treated with a class I-specific HDAC inhibitor showed higher
expression of Pgc-1a, increased mitochondrial biogenesis, and augmented oxygen
consumption. Treatment of obese diabetic mice with a class I- but not a class
II-selective HDAC inhibitor enhanced oxidative metabolism in skeletal muscle and 
adipose tissue and promoted energy expenditure, thus reducing body weight and
glucose and insulin levels. These effects can be ascribed to increased Pgc-1a
action in skeletal muscle and enhanced PPAR<U+03B3>/PGC-1a signaling in adipose tissue. 
In vivo ChIP experiments indicated that inhibition of HDAC3 may account for the
beneficial effect of the class I-selective HDAC inhibitor. These results suggest 
that class I HDAC inhibitors may provide a pharmacologic approach to treating
type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3581211
PMID: 23069623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Vet Res Commun. 2013 Mar;37(1):19-28. doi: 10.1007/s11259-012-9542-x. Epub 2012
Oct 13.

Epigenetic modification of fetal fibroblasts improves developmental competency
and gene expression in porcine cloned embryos.

Kumar BM(1), Maeng GH, Lee YM, Lee JH, Jeon BG, Ock SA, Kang T, Rho GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Theriogenology and Biotechnology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Gyeongsang National University, 501, Jinju-daero, Jinju, 660-701,
Republic of Korea.

Treatment of somatic cells with DNA methylation and histone deacetylation
inhibitors has been hypothesized to improve the potential reprogramming after
nuclear transfer (NT). The objective of this study was to investigate the
developmental competence and gene expression during the porcine preimplantation
development of in vitro fertilized (IVF) and embryos cloned with porcine fetal
fibroblasts (pFF) (pFF-NT), and pFF treated by 0.5 µM 5-azacytidine (5-azaC)
(pFF+5-azaC-NT) or 1.0 mM sodium butyrate (NaB) (pFF+NaB-NT). IVF embryos had
significantly (P < 0.05) higher blastocyst rates (27.7 ± 2.6 %) and total cell
numbers (46.7 ± 3.9). However, NT embryos from pFF+5-azaC and pFF+NaB showed
enhanced developmental potential with significantly (P < 0.05) higher rates of
blastocysts (21.3 ± 2.9 % and 22.4 ± 1.7 %, respectively) than those from pFF
(15.1 ± 2.5 %). Further, NT embryos from pFF+5-azaC and pFF+NaB (33.8 ± 4.1 and
35.7 ± 5.2, respectively) had significantly (P < 0.05) higher total cell numbers 
than those from pFF (24.6 ± 3.5). Differential expression pattern of genes
involved in DNA methylation (DNA methyltransferases- DNMT1, DNMT2, DNMT3A and
DNMT3B), histone acetylation (histone acetyltransferase 1- HAT1) and histone
deacetylation (histone deacetylases- HDAC1, HDAC2 and HDAC3) were observed in NT 
embryos when compared to IVF counterparts. However, the relative expressions of
genes in pFF+5-azaC-NT and pFF+NaB-NT groups were largely comparable to those of 
IVF embryos than pFF-NT embryos. In conclusion, modification of the epigenetic
status by reducing DNA methylation or enhancing histone acetylation levels in pFF
improved the developmental rates, total cell number and the transcription profile
of porcine NT embryos. Thus, somatic cells with relatively hypomethylated or
hyperacetylated genome may enhance reprogramming efficiency in porcine NT.

PMID: 23065456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2013 Jan;17(1):29-41. doi:
10.1517/14728222.2013.729042. Epub 2012 Oct 15.

Targeting class I histone deacetylases in cancer therapy.

Delcuve GP(1), Khan DH, Davie JR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Manitoba, Manitoba Institute of Child Health, 715 McDermot
Avenue, Room 600A, Winnipeg, Manitoba, R3E 3P4, Canada.

INTRODUCTION: Class I histone deacetylases (HDACs) are often overexpressed in
cancer, and their inhibition typically leads cancer cells, but not normal cells, 
to apoptosis. Hence, the field of cancer therapy has experienced a continued
surge in the development of HDAC inhibitors.
AREAS COVERED: Class I comprises of HDAC1, 2, 3 and 8. HDAC1, 2 and 3 are active 
as subunits of multiprotein complexes while an HDAC8 complex has not been
identified. Besides being a major contributor to poor prognosis in childhood
neuroblastoma, little is known of HDAC8 functions and substrates. The targeting
and activities of HDAC1 - 3 are modulated by post-translational modifications and
association with numerous proteins. The composition of the various HDAC complexes
is cell type dependent and fluctuates with intra- and intercellular stimuli.
These HDAC complexes play roles at multiple levels in gene expression and genome 
stability. The application of isoform-specific HDAC inhibitors has met with
varying success in clinical trials.
EXPERT OPINION: To elucidate the mechanism and cellular impact of HDAC
inhibitors, we need to identify the spectrum of class I HDAC complexes and their 
functions. In the cases of HDAC1 - 3, selectivity of HDAC inhibitors should be
directed against relevant complexes. HDAC8 active site unique features facilitate
the design of selective inhibitors.

PMID: 23062071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Med Chem. 2012 Oct 25;55(20):8903-25. doi: 10.1021/jm3011838. Epub 2012 Oct 12.

Pharmacokinetic optimization of class-selective histone deacetylase inhibitors
and identification of associated candidate predictive biomarkers of
hepatocellular carcinoma tumor response.

Wong JC(1), Tang G, Wu X, Liang C, Zhang Z, Guo L, Peng Z, Zhang W, Lin X, Wang
Z, Mei J, Chen J, Pan S, Zhang N, Liu Y, Zhou M, Feng L, Zhao W, Li S, Zhang C,
Zhang M, Rong Y, Jin TG, Zhang X, Ren S, Ji Y, Zhao R, She J, Ren Y, Xu C, Chen
D, Cai J, Shan S, Pan D, Ning Z, Lu X, Chen T, He Y, Chen L.

Author information: 
(1)Roche R&D Center-China Ltd., 720 Cai Lun Road, Building 5, Pudong, Shanghai
201203, P. R. China. jwong@alum.mit.edu

Herein, we describe the pharmacokinetic optimization of a series of
class-selective histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors and the subsequent
identification of candidate predictive biomarkers of hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) tumor response for our clinical lead using patient-derived HCC tumor
xenograft models. Through a combination of conformational constraint and scaffold
hopping, we lowered the in vivo clearance (CL) and significantly improved the
bioavailability (F) and exposure (AUC) of our HDAC inhibitors while maintaining
selectivity toward the class I HDAC family with particular potency against HDAC1,
resulting in clinical lead 5 (HDAC1 IC50 = 60 nM, mouse CL = 39 mL/min/kg, mouse 
F = 100%, mouse AUC after single oral dose at 10 mg/kg = 6316 h·ng/mL). We then
evaluated 5 in a biomarker discovery pilot study using patient-derived tumor
xenograft models, wherein two out of the three models responded to treatment. By 
comparing tumor response status to compound tumor exposure, induction of
acetylated histone H3, candidate gene expression changes, and promoter DNA
methylation status from all three models at various time points, we identified
preliminary candidate response prediction biomarkers that warrant further
validation in a larger cohort of patient-derived tumor models and through
confirmatory functional studies.

PMID: 23061376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. J Biol Chem. 2012 Nov 23;287(48):40106-18. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.380865. Epub
2012 Oct 11.

Tripartite motif containing 28 (Trim28) can regulate cell proliferation by
bridging HDAC1/E2F interactions.

Chen L(1), Chen DT, Kurtyka C, Rawal B, Fulp WJ, Haura EB, Cress WD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Program, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

BACKGROUND: Trim28 appears up-regulated in many cancers.
RESULTS: In early stage lung tumors high Trim28 correlates with increased overall
survival and Trim28 reduces cell proliferation in model lung cancer cell lines
through E2F interactions.
CONCLUSION: Trim28 may have a tumor suppressing role in the early stages of lung 
cancer.
SIGNIFICANCE: These results suggest a complex role for Trim28 in lung cancer.
Trim28 is a poorly understood transcriptional co-factor with pleiotropic
biological activities. Although Trim28 mRNA is found in many studies to be
up-regulated in both lung and breast cancer tissues relative to normal adjacent
tissue, we found that within a panel of early-stage lung adenocarcinomas high
levels of Trim28 protein correlate with better overall survival. This surprising 
observation suggests that Trim 28 may have anti-proliferative activity within
tumors. To test this hypothesis, we used shRNAi to generate Trim28-knockdown
breast and lung cancer cell lines and found that Trim28 depletion led to
increased cell proliferation. Likewise, overexpression of Trim28 led to decreased
cell proliferation. Confocal microscopy indicated co-localization of E2F3 and
E2F4 with Trim28 within the cell nucleus, and co-immunoprecipitation assays
demonstrated that Trim28 can bind both E2F3 and E2F4. Trim28 overexpression
inhibited the transcriptional activity of E2F3 and E2F4, whereas Trim28
deficiency enhanced their activity. Co-immunoprecipitations further indicated
that Trim28 bridges an interaction between E2Fs 3 and 4 and HDAC1.
Promoter-reporter assays demonstrated that the ability of HDAC1 to repress E2F3
and E2F4-driven transcription is dependent on Trim28. Trim28 depletion increased 
E2F3 and E2F4 DNA binding activity, as measured by chromatin-immunoprecipitation 
(ChIP) assays while simultaneously reducing HDAC1 binding. Finally, ChIP-ReChIP
experiments demonstrated that Trim/E2F complexes exist on several E2F-regulated
promoters. Taken together, these results suggest that Trim28 has
anti-proliferative activity in lung cancers via repression of members of the E2F 
family that are critical for cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC3504725
PMID: 23060449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Carcinogenesis. 2012 Dec;33(12):2477-87. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgs299. Epub 2012
Oct 1.

CXCL1/GROa increases cell migration and invasion of prostate cancer by decreasing
fibulin-1 expression through NF-<U+03BA>B/HDAC1 epigenetic regulation.

Kuo PL(1), Shen KH, Hung SH, Hsu YL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical
University, Kaohsiung 807, Taiwan.

Inflammatory tumor microenvironments play pivotal roles in the development of
cancer. Inflammatory cytokines such as CXCL1/GROa exert cancer-promoting
activities by increasing tumor angiogenesis. However, whether CXCL1/GROa also
plays a role in the progression of prostate cancer, particularly in highly
invasive castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC), has not been investigated. 
We explored whether CXCL1/GROa enhances cell migration and invasion in PC-3 and
DU145 CRPC. Induction of PC-3 and DU145 cancer progression by CXCL1/GROa is
associated with increased AKT activation and I<U+03BA>B kinase a (IKKa) phosphorylation,
resulting in nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-<U+03BA>B) activation. Activated NF-<U+03BA>B interacts 
with histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) to form a gene-silencing complex, which
represses the expression of fibulin-1D by decreasing the acetylation of histone
H3 and H4 on the NF-<U+03BA>B-binding site of the fibulin-1D promoter. Blockade of AKT2 
by small hairpin RNA (shRNA) decreases IKKa phosphorylation, NF-<U+03BA>B nuclear
translocation and cell migration, indicating that AKT is required in
CXCL1/GROa-mediated NF-<U+03BA>B activation and cell migration. In addition, NF-<U+03BA>B and
HDAC1 shRNA decrease the effect of CXCL1/GROa on fibulin-1D downregulation,
migration and invasion, suggesting that the NF-<U+03BA>B/HDAC1 complex is also involved 
in CXCL1/GROa-mediated cancer progression. Our findings provide the first
evidence that CXCL1/GROa decreases fibulin-1D expression in prostate cancer cells
and also reveals novel insights into the mechanism by which CXCL1/GROa regulates 
NF-<U+03BA>B activation through the AKT pathway. Our results also clearly establish that
co-operation of NF-<U+03BA>B and HDAC1 regulates fibulin-1D expression by epigenetic
modification. Our study suggests that inhibition of CXCL1/GROa-mediated AKT/NF-<U+03BA>B
signaling may be an attractive therapeutic target for CRPC.

PMID: 23027620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Oncol Rep. 2012 Dec;28(6):1997-2002. doi: 10.3892/or.2012.2064. Epub 2012 Sep 27.

UHRF1 expression is upregulated and associated with cellular proliferation in
colorectal cancer.

Kofunato Y(1), Kumamoto K, Saitou K, Hayase S, Okayama H, Miyamoto K, Sato Y,
Katakura K, Nakamura I, Ohki S, Koyama Y, Unoki M, Takenoshita S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organ Regulatory Surgery, Fukushima Medical University School of
Medicine, Fukushima 960-1295, Japan.

Ubiquitin-like with PHD and ring-finger domain 1 (UHRF1) binds to methylated
promoters of a number of tumor-suppressor genes, including p16INK4A and p14ARF,
by forming complexes with DNA methyltransferases and HDAC1, resulting in the
induction of carcinogenesis. Altered UHRF1 expression has been demonstrated in
various types of cancers. Previous reports indicate that UHRF1 expression is
regulated by E2F-1 expression. We investigated UHRF1 expression using
immunohistochemical staining in 231 colorectal cancer and 40 adenoma specimens,
analyzed the relationship between UHRF1 expression and clinicopathological
findings and the association between UHRF1 and E2F-1 expression. To better
understand the biological function of UHRF1 in colorectal cancer, knockdown of
UHRF1 expression was performed using siRNA methods. High UHRF1 expression was
observed in 152 of 231 (65.8%) colorectal cancer patients, and was detected in 35
of 40 adenoma specimens samples (87.5%). UHRF1 staining was detected in the
nucleus of cancer cells, while it was not detected in colonic normal mucosa. High
UHRF1 expression was significantly observed in right compared with left hemicolon
cancer (p=0.008). Moreover, high UHRF1 expression tended to be associated with
depth of invasion (p=0.051). UHRF1 expression was significantly associated with
E2F-1 expression (p<0.0001). Knockdown of UHRF1 expression suppressed cellular
growth in colon cancer cell lines, HCT116 and SW620. In conclusion, we
demonstrated that UHRF1 expression was upregulated in approximately two-thirds of
colorectal cancer specimens and was particularly expressed in right compared with
left hemicolon cancer. Moreover, knockdown of UHRF1 expression induced growth
inhibition in colon cancer cell lines. UHRF1 may be involved in cellular
proliferation and molecular pathogenesis of colorectal cancer in the right
hemicolon.

PMID: 23023523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Cell Cycle. 2012 Oct 15;11(20):3779-91. doi: 10.4161/cc.21985. Epub 2012 Sep 28.

Suppression of centrosome duplication and amplification by deacetylases.

Ling H(1), Peng L, Seto E, Fukasawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Program, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, Tampa, FL, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2012 Dec 1;11(23):4304.

Centrosome duplication is controlled both negatively and positively by a number
of proteins. The activities and stabilities of those regulatory proteins are in
many cases controlled by posttranslational modifications. Although acetylation
and deacetylation are highly common posttranslational modifications, their roles 
in the regulation of centrosome duplication had not been closely examined. Here, 
through focusing on the deacetylases, we investigated the role of
acetylation/deacetylation in the regulation of centrosome duplication and
induction of abnormal amplification of centrosomes. We found that the
deacetylation event negatively controls centrosome duplication and amplification.
Of the 18 total known deacetylases (HDAC1-11, SIRT1-7), ten deacetylases possess 
the activity to suppress centrosome amplification, and their centrosome
amplification suppressing activities are strongly associated with their abilities
to localize to centrosomes. Among them, HDAC1, HDAC5 and SIRT1 show the highest
suppressing activities, but each of them suppresses centrosome duplication and/or
amplification with its unique mechanism.

PMCID: PMC3495821
PMID: 23022877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Histochem Cytochem. 2013 Jan;61(1):75-89. doi: 10.1369/0022155412463923. Epub
2012 Sep 26.

H3K9 trimethylation precedes DNA methylation during sheep oogenesis: HDAC1,
SUV39H1, G9a, HP1, and Dnmts are involved in these epigenetic events.

Russo V(1), Bernabò N, Di Giacinto O, Martelli A, Mauro A, Berardinelli P, Curini
V, Nardinocchi D, Mattioli M, Barboni B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Biomedical Sciences, University of Teramo, Teramo,
Italy. vrusso@unite.it

The oocyte, to become a fully mature gamete, has to acquire a correct pattern of 
DNA methylation on its genome; this epigenetic event represents the major point
of the molecular mechanisms that occur during postnatal oogenesis. It is known
that an intimate link exists between DNA methylation and histone
posttranslational modifications, such as trimethylation of lysine 9 on histone 3 
(H3K9me3), that is essential in the silencing of gene transcription. What remains
unclear is the precise sequence of these two epigenetic events and the protein
expression of the enzymes that catalyze this epigenetic maturation during
oogenesis. To identify the key molecules involved in global DNA methylation and
H3K9me3, a biological network-based computational model was realized. Then, the
spatiotemporal distribution of the proteins, identified from the biological
network, was assessed during postnatal oogenesis. The results obtained suggest
the existence of a sequential cascade of events in which H3K9me3 is the primary
step followed by DNA methylation. These two epigenetic marks are realized due to 
the recruitment of the HDAC1, SUV39H1, G9a, HP1, and Dnmt3a, which were always
localized in the nuclei of the oocytes and were dependent on chromatin
configuration. These results involving DNA methylation and H3K9me3 are crucial in
defining the oocyte developmental competence.

PMCID: PMC3534319
PMID: 23019017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Biol Chem. 2012 Nov 23;287(48):40279-91. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.349704. Epub
2012 Sep 25.

Acetylation of histone deacetylase 1 regulates NuRD corepressor complex activity.

Yang T(1), Jian W, Luo Y, Fu X, Noguchi C, Bungert J, Huang S, Qiu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, University of
Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

BACKGROUND: HDAC1-containing NuRD complex is required for GATA-1-mediated
repression and activation.
RESULTS: GATA-1 associated with acetylated HDAC1-containing NuRD complex, which
has no deacetylase activity, for gene activation.
CONCLUSION: Acetylated HDAC1 converts NuRD complex from a repressor to an
activator during GATA-1-directed erythroid differentiation program.
SIGNIFICANCE: HDAC1 acetylation may function as a master regulator for the
activity of HDAC1 containing complexes. Histone deacetylases (HDACs) play
important roles in regulating cell proliferation and differentiation. The
HDAC1-containing NuRD complex is generally considered as a corepressor complex
and is required for GATA-1-mediated repression. However, recent studies also show
that the NuRD complex is involved in GATA-1-mediated gene activation. We tested
whether the GATA-1-associated NuRD complex loses its deacetylase activity and
commits the GATA-1 complex to become an activator during erythropoiesis. We found
that GATA-1-associated deacetylase activity gradually decreased upon induction of
erythroid differentiation. GATA-1-associated HDAC1 is increasingly acetylated
after differentiation. It has been demonstrated earlier that acetylated HDAC1 has
no deacetylase activity. Indeed, overexpression of an HDAC1 mutant, which mimics 
acetylated HDAC1, promotes GATA-1-mediated transcription and erythroid
differentiation. Furthermore, during erythroid differentiation, acetylated HDAC1 
recruitment is increased at GATA-1-activated genes, whereas it is significantly
decreased at GATA-1-repressed genes. Interestingly, deacetylase activity is not
required for Mi2 remodeling activity, suggesting that remodeling activity may be 
required for both activation and repression. Thus, our data suggest that NuRD can
function as a coactivator or repressor and that acetylated HDAC1 converts the
NuRD complex from a repressor to an activator during GATA-1-directed erythroid
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3504744
PMID: 23014989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Med Chem. 2012 Nov 26;55(22):9891-9. doi: 10.1021/jm301098e. Epub 2012 Oct 23.

Selective histone deacetylase 6 inhibitors bearing substituted urea linkers
inhibit melanoma cell growth.

Bergman JA(1), Woan K, Perez-Villarroel P, Villagra A, Sotomayor EM, Kozikowski
AP.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Discovery Program, Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacognosy,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.

The incidence of malignant melanoma has dramatically increased in recent years
thus requiring the need for improved therapeutic strategies. In our efforts to
design selective histone deactylase inhibitors (HDACI), we discovered that the
aryl urea 1 is a modestly potent yet nonselective inhibitor. Structure-activity
relationship studies revealed that adding substituents to the nitrogen atom of
the urea so as to generate compounds bearing a branched linker group results in
increased potency and selectivity for HDAC6. Compound 5 g shows low nanomolar
inhibitory potency against HDAC6 and a selectivity of ~600-fold relative to the
inhibition of HDAC1. These HDACIs were evaluated for their ability to inhibit the
growth of B16 melanoma cells with the most potent and selective HDAC6I being
found to decrease tumor cell growth. To the best of our knowledge, this work
constitutes the first report of HDAC6-selective inhibitors that possess
antiproliferative effects against melanoma cells.

PMCID: PMC3562128
PMID: 23009203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Int J Mol Med. 2012 Dec;30(6):1505-11. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2012.1138. Epub 2012 Sep
21.

Gemcitabine reactivates epigenetically silenced genes and functions as a DNA
methyltransferase inhibitor.

Gray SG(1), Baird AM, O'Kelly F, Nikolaidis G, Almgren M, Meunier A, Dockry E,
Hollywood D, Ekström TJ, Perry AS, O'Byrne KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Oncology Research Group, Institute of Molecular Medicine, Trinity
College Dublin, Dublin 2, Republic of Ireland. sgray@stjames.ie

Gemcitabine is indicated in combination with cisplatin as first-line therapy for 
solid tumours including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), bladder cancer and
mesothelioma. Gemcitabine is an analogue of pyrimidine cytosine and functions as 
an anti-metabolite. Structurally, however, gemcitabine has similarities to
5-aza-2-deoxycytidine (decitabine/Dacogen®), a DNA methyltransferase inhibitor
(DNMTi). NSCLC, mesothelioma and prostate cancer cell lines were treated with
decitabine and gemcitabine. Reactivation of epigenetically silenced genes was
examined by RT-PCR/qPCR. DNA methyltransferase activity in nuclear extracts and
recombinant proteins was measured using a DNA methyl-transferase assay, and
alterations in DNA methylation status were examined using methylation-specific
PCR (MS-PCR) and pyrosequencing. We observe a reactivation of several
epigenetically silenced genes including GSTP1, IGFBP3 and RASSF1A. Gemcitabine
functionally inhibited DNA methyltransferase activity in both nuclear extracts
and recombinant proteins. Gemcitabine dramatically destabilised DNMT1 protein.
However, DNA CpG methylation was for the most part unaffected by gemcitabine. In 
conclusion, gemcitabine both inhibits and destabilises DNA methyltransferases and
reactivates epigenetically silenced genes having activity equivalent to
decitabine at concentrations significantly lower than those achieved in the
treatment of patients with solid tumours. This property may contribute to the
anticancer activity of gemcitabine.

PMID: 23007409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Biomol NMR Assign. 2013 Oct;7(2):267-70. doi: 10.1007/s12104-012-9424-8. Epub
2012 Sep 18.

NMR assignments of SPOC domain of the human transcriptional corepressor SHARP in 
complex with a C-terminal SMRT peptide.

Mikami S(1), Kanaba T, Ito Y, Mishima M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Tokyo Metropolitan University, 1-1
Minamiosawa, Hachioji 192-0397, Japan.

The transcriptional corepressor SMRT/HDAC1-associated repressor protein (SHARP)
recruits histone deacetylases. Human SHARP protein is thought to function in
processes involving steroid hormone responses and the Notch signaling pathway.
SHARP consists of RNA recognition motifs (RRMs) in the N-terminal region and the 
spen paralog and ortholog C-terminal (SPOC) domain in the C-terminal region. It
is known that the SPOC domain binds the LSD motif in the C-terminal tail of
corepressors silencing mediator for retinoid and thyroid receptor (SMRT)/nuclear 
receptor corepressor (NcoR). We are interested in delineating the mechanism by
which the SPOC domain recognizes the LSD motif of the C-terminal tail of
SMRT/NcoR. To this end, we are investigating the tertiary structure of the
SPOC/SMRT peptide using NMR. Herein, we report on the (1)H, (13)C and (15)N
resonance assignments of the SPOC domain in complex with a SMRT peptide, which
contributes towards a structural understanding of the SPOC/SMRT peptide and its
molecular recognition.

PMID: 22987228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2012 Dec;53(6):820-8. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2012.09.004. Epub 
2012 Sep 15.

Anti-apoptotic function of the E2F transcription factor 4 (E2F4)/p130, a member
of retinoblastoma gene family in cardiac myocytes.

Dingar D(1), Konecny F, Zou J, Sun X, von Harsdorf R.

Author information: 
(1)University Health Network, Toronto, Canada. ddingar@uhnresearch.ca

The E2F4-p130 transcriptional repressor complex is a cell-cycle inhibitor in
mitotic cells. However, the role of E2F4/p130 in differentiated cells is largely 
unknown. We investigated the role of E2F4/p130 in the regulation of apoptosis in 
postmitotic cardiomyocytes. Here we demonstrate that E2F4 can inhibit
hypoxia-induced cell death in isolated ventricular cardiomyocytes. As analyzed by
chromatin immunoprecipitation, the E2F4-p130-repressor directly blocks
transcription of essential apoptosis-related genes, E2F1, Apaf-1, and p73a
through recruitment of histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1). In contrast, diminution of 
the E2F4-p130-HDAC1-repressor and recruitment of E2F1 and histone acetylase
activity to these E2F-regulated promoters is required for the execution of cell
death. Expression of kinase-dead HDAC1.H141A or HDAC-binding deficient p130<U+0394>HDAC1
abolishes the antiapoptotic effect of E2F4. Moreover, histological examination of
E2F4(-/-) hearts revealed a markedly enhanced degree of cardiomyocyte apoptosis. 
Taken together, our genetic and biochemical data delineate an essential negative 
function of E2F4 in cardiac myocyte apoptosis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22985930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e45046. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045046. Epub 2012 Sep 12.

Elucidation of a novel pathway through which HDAC1 controls cardiomyocyte
differentiation through expression of SOX-17 and BMP2.

Hoxha E(1), Lambers E, Wasserstrom JA, Mackie A, Ramirez V, Abramova T, Verma SK,
Krishnamurthy P, Kishore R.

Author information: 
(1)Feinberg Cardiovascular Research Institute, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.

Embryonic Stem Cells not only hold a lot of potential for use in regenerative
medicine, but also provide an elegant and efficient way to study specific
developmental processes and pathways in mammals when whole animal gene knock out 
experiments fail. We have investigated a pathway through which HDAC1 affects
cardiovascular and more specifically cardiomyocyte differentiation in ES cells by
controlling expression of SOX17 and BMP2 during early differentiation. This data 
explains current discrepancies in the role of HDAC1 in cardiovascular
differentiation and sheds light into a new pathway through which ES cells
determine cardiovascular cell fate.

PMCID: PMC3440419
PMID: 22984607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Agric Food Chem. 2012 Oct 3;60(39):9882-9. doi: 10.1021/jf302527p. Epub 2012
Sep 21.

Brazilin induces apoptosis and G2/M arrest via inactivation of histone
deacetylase in multiple myeloma U266 cells.

Kim B(1), Kim SH, Jeong SJ, Sohn EJ, Jung JH, Lee MH, Kim SH.

Author information: 
(1)College of Oriental Medicine, Kyung Hee University , Seoul 130-701, South
Korea.

Although brazilin [7,11b-dihydrobenz(b)indeno[1,2-d]pyran-3,6a,9,10(6H)-tetrol]
isolated from Caesalpinia sappan was known to have various biological activities,
including anti-inflammation, antibacteria, and antiplatelet aggregation, there is
no report yet on its anticancer activity. In the present study, the anticancer
mechanism of brazilin was elucidated in human multiple myeloma U266 cells. We
found that brazilin significantly inhibited the activity of histone deacetylases 
(HDACs), transcription factors involved in the regulation of apoptosis and cell
cycle arrest in U266 cells. Consistently, brazilin enhanced acetylation of
histone H3 at Lys 23, indicating activation of histone acetyltransferase (HAT),
and also suppressed the expressions of HDAC1 and HDAC2 at both protein and mRNA
levels. Additionally, brazilin significantly increased the number of sub-G1 cell 
population and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling
(TUNEL)-positive cells undergoing apoptosis and also activated caspase-3 and
regulated the expression of Bcl-2 family proteins, including Bax, Bcl-x(L), and
Bcl-2 in U266 cells, indicating that brazilin induces apoptosis through the
mitochondria-dependent pathway. Interestingly, cell cycle analysis revealed that 
brazilin induced G2/M phase arrest along with apoptosis induction. Consistently, 
brazilin attenuated the expression of cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs), such as
cyclin D1, cyclin B1, and cyclin E, and also activated p21 and p27 in U266 cells.
Furthermore, HAT inhibitor anacardic acid reversed activation of acetyl-histone
H3 and cleavage of PARP induced by brazilin, while pan-caspase inhibitor
Z-VAD-FMK001 did not affect the expression of HDAC induced by brazilin that
brazilin mediates apoptosis via inactivation of HDAC in U266 cells. Notably,
brazilin significantly potentiated the cytotoxic effect of standard
chemotherapeutic agents, such as bortezomib or doxorubicin, in U266 cells. When
our findings are taken together, they suggest that brazilin has potential as a
chemotherapeutic agent alone or in combination with an anticancer agent for
multiple myeloma treatment.

PMID: 22967175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Dec 15;21(24):5280-93. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds379. Epub 2012 Sep
10.

Selective histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibition imparts beneficial effects in
Huntington's disease mice: implications for the ubiquitin-proteasomal and
autophagy systems.

Jia H(1), Kast RJ, Steffan JS, Thomas EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 
92037, USA.

We previously demonstrated that the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, 4b,
which preferentially targets HDAC1 and HDAC3, ameliorates Huntington's disease
(HD)-related phenotypes in different HD model systems. In the current study, we
investigated extensive behavioral and biological effects of 4b in N171-82Q
transgenic mice and further explored potential molecular mechanisms of 4b action.
We found that 4b significantly prevented body weight loss, improved several
parameters of motor function and ameliorated Huntingtin (Htt)-elicited cognitive 
decline in N171-82Q transgenic mice. Pathways analysis of microarray data from
the mouse brain revealed gene networks involving post-translational modification,
including protein phosphorylation and ubiquitination pathways, associated with 4b
drug treatment. Using real-time qPCR analysis, we validated differential
regulation of several genes in these pathways by 4b, including Ube2K, Ubqln,
Ube2e3, Usp28 and Sumo2, as well as several other related genes. Additionally, 4b
elicited increases in the expression of genes encoding components of the
inhibitor of kappaB kinase (IKK) complex. IKK activation has been linked to
phosphorylation, acetylation and clearance of the Htt protein by the proteasome
and the lysosome, and accordingly, we found elevated levels of phosphorylated
endogenous wild-type (wt) Htt protein at serine 16 and threonine 3, and increased
AcK9/pS13/pS16 immunoreactivity in cortical samples from 4b-treated mice. We
further show that HDAC inhibitors prevent the formation of nuclear Htt aggregates
in the brains of N171-82Q mice. Our findings suggest that one mechanism of 4b
action is associated with the modulation of the ubiquitin-proteasomal and
autophagy pathways, which could affect accumulation, stability and/or clearance
of important disease-related proteins, such as Htt.

PMCID: PMC3510756
PMID: 22965876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Epigenetics. 2012 Oct;7(10):1161-72. doi: 10.4161/epi.22070. Epub 2012 Sep 10.

Epigenetic modifications and p21-cyclin B1 nexus in anticancer effect of histone 
deacetylase inhibitors in combination with silibinin on non-small cell lung
cancer cells.

Mateen S(1), Raina K, Jain AK, Agarwal C, Chan D, Agarwal R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Skaggs School of Pharmacy and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Aurora, CO, USA.

There is a renewed focus on targeted therapy against epigenetic events that are
altered during the pathogenesis of lung cancer. However, the use of epigenomic
modifiers as monotherapy lacks efficacy; thus, there is a need to develop safe
and effective drug combinatorial regimens, which reverse epigenetic modifications
and exhibit profound anticancer activity. Based on these perspectives, we
evaluated, for the first time, the efficacy and associated mechanisms of a novel 
combinatorial regimen of histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi)-trichostatin A
(TSA) and suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA)-with silibinin (a flavonolignan 
with established pre-clinical anti-lung cancer efficacy) against non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC). Silibinin inhibited HDAC activity and decreased HDAC1-3
levels in NSCLC cells, leading to an overall increase in global histone
acetylation states of histones H3 and H4. Combinations of HDCAi with silibinin
synergistically augmented the cytotoxic effects of these single agents, which was
associated with a dramatic increase in p21 (Cdkn1a). Subsequent ChIP assay
indicated increased acetylated histone H3 and H4 levels on p21 promoter region,
resulting in its increased transcription. The enhanced p21 levels promoted
proteasomal degradation of cyclin B1, the limited supply of which halts the
progression of cells into mitosis. Indeed, the resultant biological effect was a 
significant G 2/M arrest by the combination treatment, followed by apoptotic cell
death. Similar epigenetic modulations were observed in vivo, together with a
marked reduction in xenograft growth. These findings are both novel and highly
significant in establishing that HDACi with silibinin would be safe and effective
to suppress NSCLC growth.

PMCID: PMC3469458
PMID: 22965008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Cell Rep. 2012 Sep 27;2(3):462-9. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2012.08.005. Epub 2012
Aug 30.

Repression of transcription by WT1-BASP1 requires the myristoylation of BASP1 and
the PIP2-dependent recruitment of histone deacetylase.

Toska E(1), Campbell HA, Shandilya J, Goodfellow SJ, Shore P, Medler KF, Roberts 
SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14260,
USA.

The Wilms' tumor 1 protein WT1 is a transcriptional regulator that is involved in
cell growth and differentiation. The transcriptional corepressor BASP1 interacts 
with WT1 and converts WT1 from a transcriptional activator to a repressor. Here, 
we demonstrate that the N-terminal myristoylation of BASP1 is required in order
to elicit transcriptional repression at WT1 target genes. We show that
myristoylated BASP1 binds to nuclear PIP2, which leads to the recruitment of PIP2
to the promoter regions of WT1-dependent target genes. BASP1's myristoylation and
association with PIP2 are required for the interaction of BASP1 with HDAC1, which
mediates the recruitment of HDAC1 to the promoter and elicits transcriptional
repression. Our findings uncover a role for myristoylation in transcription, as
well as a critical function for PIP2 in gene-specific transcriptional repression 
through the recruitment of histone deacetylase.

Copyright © 2012 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3500702
PMID: 22939983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2012 Oct 1;22(19):6200-4. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2012.08.006. 
Epub 2012 Aug 9.

Amide-based derivatives of ß-alanine hydroxamic acid as histone deacetylase
inhibitors: attenuation of potency through resonance effects.

Liao V(1), Liu T, Codd R.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medical Sciences (Pharmacology) and Bosch Institute, University of
Sydney, New South Wales 2006, Australia.

A library of amide-linked derivatives of ß-alanine hydroxamic acid were prepared 
(2-7) and the activity as inhibitors of Zn(II)-containing histone deacetylases
(HDACs) determined in vitro against HDAC1 and the anti-proliferative activity
determined in BE(2)-C neuroblastoma cells. The IC(50) values of the
best-performing compounds (3-7) against HDAC1 ranged between 38 and 84µM. The
least potent compound (2) inhibited a maximum of only 40% HDAC1 activity at
250µM. The anti-proliferative activity of 2-7 at 50µM against BE(2)-C
neuroblastoma cells ranged between 57.0% and 88.6%. The structural similarity
between the potent HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA, 1; HDAC1, IC(50) 12nM) and
the present compounds (2-7) was high at the Zn(II) coordinating hydroxamic acid
head group; and in selected compounds (2, 5), at the 4-(dimethylamino)phenyl
tail. The significantly reduced potency of 2-7 relative to 1 underscores the rank
importance of the linker region as part of the HDAC inhibitor pharmacophore.
Molecular modeling of 1-7 using HDAC8 as the template suggested that the
conformationally constrained 4'-methyl group of 1 may contribute to HDAC
inhibitor potency through a sandwich-like interaction with a hydrophobic region
containing F152 and F208; and that the absence of this group in 2-7 may reduce
potency. The close proximity of the 5'-carbonyl oxygen atom in 2-7 to the sulfur 
atom of Met274 in HDAC8 or the corresponding isobutyl group of Leu274 in HDAC1
may attenuate potency through repulsive steric and dipole-dipole forces. In a
unique resonance stabilized form of 2, this interaction could manifest as
stronger ion-dipole repulsive forces, resulting in a further decrease in potency.
This work suggests that resonance structures of HDAC inhibitors could modulate
intermolecular interactions with HDAC targets, and potency.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22932316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Int J Biol Macromol. 2012 Dec;51(5):1003-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2012.08.013. 
Epub 2012 Aug 25.

Spermidine inhibits MMP-2 via modulation of histone acetyltransferase and histone
deacetylase in HDFs.

Park IH(1), Kim MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Dong-Eui University, Busan 614-714, Republic of
Korea.

In recent years, aging has been reported to be regulated by HAT. In this study,
the inhibitory effects of spermidine on the matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2)
activity and expression were investigated in human dermal fibroblasts (HDFs). It 
was observed that spermidine inhibits MMP-2 activity and expression. In addition,
the expression levels of histone acetyltransferase (HAT),
phospho-extracellular-signal related kinase (p-ERK), phospho-c-jun N-terminal
kinase (p-JNK), and nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B
cells (NF-<U+03BA>B) are decreased in the presence of spermidine. In contrast, the
expression levels of histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), sirtuin 1 (SIRT1),
phospho-p38 (p-p38) are increased by spermidine. In conclusion, our results
suggest that spermidine could have a therapeutic potential in inhibition of
metastasis through the inhibitory effects on activity and expression of MMP-2 via
regulation of HAT and HDAC.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22925630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Cell Prolif. 2012 Oct;45(5):438-44. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2184.2012.00838.x.

Comparison of cell proliferation and epigenetic modification of gene expression
patterns in canine foetal fibroblasts and adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stem
cells.

Oh HJ(1), Park EJ, Lee SY, Soh JW, Kong IS, Choi SW, Ra JC, Kang SK, Lee BC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Theriogenology and Biotechnology, Seoul National University,
Seoul, South Korea.

OBJECTIVES: This study compared rate of cell proliferation, viability, cell size,
expression patterns of genes related to pluripotency and epigenetic modification 
between canine foetal fibroblasts (cFF) and canine adipose tissue-derived
mesenchymal stem cells (cAd-MSC).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Proliferation pattern, cell viability as well as cell size
at each passage of cFF and cAd-MSC were measured when cultures reached
confluence. In addition, real-time PCR was performed to investigate expression of
Dnmt1, HDAC1, OCT4, SOX2, BAX, BCL2 genes with reference to ß-actin gene
expression as an endogenous control in both cell lines.
RESULTS: cFF and cAd-MSC differed in number of generations, but not in doubling
times, at all passages. Mean cell size of cAd-MSC was significantly smaller than 
that of cFF. Cell viability was significantly lower in cFFs and apoptotic level
was significantly lower in cAd-MSC compared to passage-matched cFF. In the
expression of genes related to pluripotency and epigenetic modification, level of
HDAC1 in cAd-MSC was significantly higher than in cFF, but expression of Dnmt1
did not differ between the two groups. OCT4 and SOX2 were significantly more
highly expressed in cAd-MSC compared to cFF.
CONCLUSIONS: cAd-MSC have higher stem-cell potential than cFF in terms of
proliferation patterns, epigenetic modification and pluripotency, thus cAd-MSC
could be more appropriate than cFF as donors of nuclei in somatic cell nuclear
transfer for transgenesis.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22925503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. J Biol Chem. 2012 Oct 12;287(42):35444-53. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.394544. Epub
2012 Aug 23.

Histone deacetylase-1 (HDAC1) is a molecular switch between neuronal survival and
death.

Bardai FH(1), Price V, Zaayman M, Wang L, D'Mello SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Texas at Dallas,
Richardson, Texas 75080, USA.

Both neuroprotective and neurotoxic roles have previously been described for
histone deacetylase-1 (HDAC1). Here we report that HDAC1 expression is elevated
in vulnerable brain regions of two mouse models of neurodegeneration, the R6/2
model of Huntington disease and the Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase
(CaMK)/p25 double-transgenic model of tauopathic degeneration, suggesting a role 
in promoting neuronal death. Indeed, elevating HDAC1 expression by ectopic
expression promotes the death of otherwise healthy cerebellar granule neurons and
cortical neurons in culture. The neurotoxic effect of HDAC1 requires interaction 
and cooperation with HDAC3, which has previously been shown to selectively induce
the death of neurons. HDAC1-HDAC3 interaction is greatly elevated under
conditions of neurodegeneration both in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, the
knockdown of HDAC3 suppresses HDAC1-induced neurotoxicity, and the knockdown of
HDAC1 suppresses HDAC3 neurotoxicity. As described previously for HDAC3, the
neurotoxic effect of HDAC1 is inhibited by treatment with IGF-1, the expression
of Akt, or the inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase 3ß (GSK3ß). In addition to 
HDAC3, HDAC1 has been shown to interact with histone deacetylase-related protein 
(HDRP), a truncated form of HDAC9, whose expression is down-regulated during
neuronal death. In contrast to HDAC3, the interaction between HDRP and HDAC1
protects neurons from death, an effect involving acquisition of the deacetylase
activity of HDAC1 by HDRP. We find that elevated HDRP inhibits HDAC1-HDAC3
interaction and prevents the neurotoxic effect of either of these two proteins.
Together, our results suggest that HDAC1 is a molecular switch between neuronal
survival and death. Its interaction with HDRP promotes neuronal survival, whereas
interaction with HDAC3 results in neuronal death.

PMCID: PMC3471765
PMID: 22918830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Stem Cells. 2012 Nov;30(11):2412-22. doi: 10.1002/stem.1209.

Histone deacetylase 1 deficiency impairs differentiation and electrophysiological
properties of cardiomyocytes derived from induced pluripotent cells.

Hoxha E(1), Lambers E, Xie H, De Andrade A, Krishnamurthy P, Wasserstrom JA,
Ramirez V, Thal M, Verma SK, Soares MB, Kishore R.

Author information: 
(1)Feinberg Cardiovascular Research Institute, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Epigenetic and chromatin modifications play particularly important roles in
embryonic and induced pluripotent stem cells (ESCs and iPSCs) allowing for the
cells to both differentiate and dedifferentiate back to a pluripotent state. We
analyzed how the loss of a key chromatin-modifying enzyme, histone deacetylase 1 
(HDAC1), affects early and cardiovascular differentiation of both ESCs and iPSCs.
We also investigated potential differences between these two cell types when
differentiation is induced. Our data indicate an essential role for HDAC1 in
deacetylating regulatory regions of key pluripotency-associated genes during
early differentiation. Although HDAC1 functions primarily as a HDAC, its loss
also affects DNA methylation in ESCs and iPSCs both during pluripotency and
differentiation. We show that HDAC1 plays a crucial, nonredundant role in
cardiomyocyte differentiation and maturation. Our data also elucidate important
differences between ESCs and iPSCs, when levels of this enzyme are reduced, that 
affect their ability to differentiate into functional cardiomyocytes. As varying 
levels of chromatin-modifying enzymes are likely to exist in patient-derived
iPSCs, understanding the molecular circuitry of these enzymes in ESCs and iPSCs
is critical for their potential use in cardiovascular therapeutic applications

Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC3479375
PMID: 22915496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Biochem J. 2012 Nov 1;447(3):457-64. doi: 10.1042/BJ20120811.

Evidence for a link between histone deacetylation and Ca²+ homoeostasis in
sphingosine-1-phosphate lyase-deficient fibroblasts.

Ihlefeld K(1), Claas RF, Koch A, Pfeilschifter JM, Meyer Zu Heringdorf D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Allgemeine Pharmakologie und Toxikologie, Klinikum der
Goethe-Universität, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

Embryonic fibroblasts from S1P (sphingosine-1-phosphate) lyase-deficient mice
[Sgpl1-/- MEFs (mouse embryonic fibroblasts)] are characterized by intracellular 
accumulation of S1P, elevated cytosolic [Ca2+]i and enhanced Ca2+ storage. Since 
S1P, produced by sphingosine kinase 2 in the nucleus of MCF-7 cells, inhibited
HDACs (histone deacetylases) [Hait, Allegood, Maceyka, Strub, Harikumar, Singh,
Luo, Marmorstein, Kordula, Milstein et al. (2009) Science 325, 1254-1257], in the
present study we analysed whether S1P accumulated in the nuclei of S1P
lyase-deficient MEFs and caused HDAC inhibition. Interestingly, nuclear
concentrations of S1P were disproportionally elevated in Sgpl1-/- MEFs. HDAC
activity was reduced, acetylation of histone 3-Lys9 was increased and the
HDAC-regulated gene p21 cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor was up-regulated in
these cells. Furthermore, the expression of HDAC1 and HDAC3 was reduced in
Sgpl1-/- MEFs. In wild-type MEFs, acetylation of histone 3-Lys9 was increased by 
the S1P lyase inhibitor 4-deoxypyridoxine. The non-specific HDAC inhibitor
trichostatin A elevated basal [Ca2+]i and enhanced Ca2+ storage, whereas the
HDAC1/2/3 inhibitor MGCD0103 elevated basal [Ca2+]i without influence on Ca2+
storage in wild-type MEFs. Overexpression of HDAC1 or HDAC2 reduced the elevated 
basal [Ca2+]i in Sgpl1-/- MEFs. Taken together, S1P lyase-deficiency was
associated with elevated nuclear S1P levels, reduced HDAC activity and
down-regulation of HDAC isoenzymes. The decreased HDAC activity in turn
contributed to the dysregulation of Ca2+ homoeostasis, particularly to the
elevated basal [Ca2+]i, in Sgpl1-/- MEFs.

PMID: 22908849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Biol Chem. 2012 Oct 12;287(42):35496-505. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.400697. Epub
2012 Aug 20.

HIF1a protein stability is increased by acetylation at lysine 709.

Geng H(1), Liu Q, Xue C, David LL, Beer TM, Thomas GV, Dai MS, Qian DZ.

Author information: 
(1)Oregon Health & Science University Knight Cancer Institute, Oregon Health &
Science University, Portland, Oregon 97239, USA.

Lysine acetylation regulates protein stability and function. p300 is a component 
of the HIF-1 transcriptional complex and positively regulates the transactivation
of HIF-1. Here, we show a novel molecular mechanism by which p300 facilitates
HIF-1 activity. p300 increases HIF-1a (HIF1a) protein acetylation and stability. 
The regulation can be opposed by HDAC1, but not by HDAC3, and is abrogated by
disrupting HIF1a-p300 interaction. Mechanistically, p300 specifically acetylates 
HIF1a at Lys-709, which increases the protein stability and decreases
polyubiquitination in both normoxia and hypoxia. Compared with the wild-type
protein, a HIF1a K709A mutant protein is more stable, less polyubiquitinated, and
less dependent on p300. Overexpression of the HIF1a wild-type or K709A mutant in 
cancer cells lacking the endogenous HIF1a shows that the K709A mutant is
transcriptionally more active toward the HIF-1 reporter and some endogenous
target genes. Cancer cells containing the K709A mutant are less sensitive to
hypoxia-induced growth arrest than the cells containing the HIF1a wild-type.
Taken together, these data demonstrate a novel biological consequence upon
HIF1a-p300 interaction, in which HIF1a can be stabilized by p300 via Lys-709
acetylation.

PMCID: PMC3471753
PMID: 22908229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e43137. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043137. Epub 2012 Aug 14.

SUMO modification of Stra13 is required for repression of cyclin D1 expression
and cellular growth arrest.

Wang Y(1), Rao VK, Kok WK, Roy DN, Sethi S, Ling BM, Lee MB, Taneja R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, National University of Singapore, Singapore,
Singapore.

Stra13, a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor is involved in
myriad biological functions including cellular growth arrest, differentiation and
senescence. However, the mechanisms by which its transcriptional activity and
function are regulated remain unclear. In this study, we provide evidence that
post-translational modification of Stra13 by Small Ubiquitin-like Modifier (SUMO)
dramatically potentiates its ability to transcriptionally repress cyclin D1 and
mediate G(1) cell cycle arrest in fibroblast cells. Mutation of SUMO acceptor
lysines 159 and 279 located in the C-terminal repression domain has no impact on 
nuclear localization; however, it abrogates association with the co-repressor
histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), attenuates repression of cyclin D1, and prevents
Stra13-mediated growth suppression. HDAC1, which promotes cellular proliferation 
and cell cycle progression, antagonizes Stra13 sumoylation-dependent growth
arrest. Our results uncover an unidentified regulatory axis between Stra13 and
HDAC1 in progression through the G(1)/S phase of the cell cycle, and provide new 
mechanistic insights into regulation of Stra13-mediated transcriptional
repression by sumoylation.

PMCID: PMC3419196
PMID: 22905217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Sep 7;425(4):908-11. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.08.009. Epub 2012 Aug 9.

UHRF2, another E3 ubiquitin ligase for p53.

Bai L(1), Wang X, Jin F, Yang Y, Qian G, Duan C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Medical Genetics, Chongqing Medical University,
Chongqing, China.

Retraction in
    Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Nov 1;440(4):803.

UHRF2, ubiquitin-like with PHD and ring finger domains 2, is a nuclear E3
ubiquitin ligase, which is involved in cell cycle and epigenetic regulation.
UHRF2 interacts with multiple cell cycle proteins, including cyclins (A2, B1, D1,
and E1), CDK2, and pRb; moreover, UHRF2 could ubiquitinate cyclin D1 and cyclin
E1. Also, UHRF2 has been shown to be implicated in epigenetic regulation by
associating with DNMTs, G9a, HDAC1, H3K9me2/3 and hemi-methylated DNA. We found
that UHRF2 associates with tumor suppressor protein p53, and p53 is ubiquitinated
by UHRF2 in vivo and in vitro. Given that both UHRF2 and p53 are involved in cell
cycle regulation, this study may suggest a novel signaling pathway on cell
proliferation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22902639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e42152. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042152. Epub 2012 Aug 6.

AP-1 mediated transcriptional repression of matrix metalloproteinase-9 by
recruitment of histone deacetylase 1 in response to interferon ß.

Mittelstadt ML(1), Patel RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of South Carolina, Columbia,
South Carolina, United States of America.

Matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) is a 92 kDa zinc-dependant endopeptidase that 
degrades components of the extracellular matrix. Increased expression of MMP-9 is
implicated in many pathological conditions including metastatic cancer, multiple 
sclerosis, and atherosclerosis. Although it has been widely noted that
interferon-ß (IFNß) downregulates both the basal and phorbol 12-myristate
13-acetate (PMA)-induced MMP-9 expression at the transcriptional level, the
molecular mechanism of this repression is poorly understood. In the present study
we identify a novel mechanism for repression of MMP-9 transcription by IFNß in
HT1080 fibrosarcoma cells. Using reporter assays with promoter deletion
constructs we show that IFNß's inhibitory effects require a region of the
promoter between -154 and -72, which contains an AP-1 binding site. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) studies indicate that IFNß increases histone
deacetylase (HDAC)-1 recruitment to the MMP-9 promoter and reduces histone H3
acetylation, in addition to reduced NF-<U+03BA>B recruitment. ChIP analysis shows that
IFNß induced HDAC1 recruitment to the MMP-9 promoter and IFNß mediated
transcriptional repression is lost when the AP-1 binding site is inactivated by a
point mutation. Altogether, our results establish that the repression of MMP-9
transcription in response to IFNß occurs by the recruitment of HDAC1 via the
proximal AP-1 binding site.

PMCID: PMC3412826
PMID: 22879913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Med Hypotheses. 2012 Oct;79(4):531-4. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2012.07.012. Epub 2012 
Aug 4.

HPV16 activates the promoter of Oct4 gene by sequestering HDAC1 from repressor
complex to target it to proteasomal degradation.

Liu D(1), Zhou P, Zhang L, Zheng Y, He F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Third Military Medical
University, 30 Gaotanyan Street, Shapingba, Chongqing 400038, China.

Human papillomavirus 16 (HPV16) is the key factor to initiate cervical
carcinogenesis and development. Octamer-binding transcription factor 4 (Oct4) is 
an important transcriptional factor which is up-regulated in some cancer cells.
Our study showed that the expression of Oct4 might be activated by HPV16
infection. Both the levels of histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and DNA
methyltransferase 3A (DNMT3A) were negatively correlated with the level of Oct4
in cervical cancer cells. Moreover, HDAC1 and DNMT3A proteins were in the same
complex, the level of which was higher in the presence of HPV16. The treatment
with HDAC1 inhibitor reduced the level of this complex, followed by the
upregulation of Oct4 expression. Based on these findings and previous reports, we
hypothesize that a repressor complex containing methyl CpG-binding domain protein
2 (MBD2), DNMT3A and HDAC1 binds to the hyper-methylated regulatory regions of
Oct4 gene to facilitate forming a close chromatin which results in the
suppression of Oct4 transcription in cervical cells. The oncoproteins of HPV16
synergistically sequester HDAC1 protein from repressor complex, and target it to 
ubiquitin mediated proteasome degradation. The repressor complex is thus
destroyed and the close chromatin is relaxed, which eventually lead to the
upregulation of Oct4 expression.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22867868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2013 Feb;29(2):289-98. doi: 10.1089/AID.2012.0227.
Epub 2012 Sep 4.

Selective targeting of the repressive transcription factors YY1 and cMyc to
disrupt quiescent human immunodeficiency viruses.

Barton K(1), Margolis D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, North Carolina 27599-7042, USA.

Quiescent HIV-1 infection of resting CD4(+) T cells is an obstacle to eradication
of HIV-1 infection. These reservoirs are maintained, in part, by repressive
complexes that bind to the HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR) and recruit histone
deacetylases (HDACs). cMyc and YY1 are two transcription factors that are
recruited as part of well-described, distinct complexes to the HIV-1 LTR and in
turn recruit HDACs. In prior studies, depletion of single factors that recruit
HDAC1 in various cell lines was sufficient to upregulate LTR activity. We used
short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) to test the effect of targeted disruption of a single
transcription factor on quiescent proviruses in T cell lines. In this study, we
found that depletion of YY1 significantly increases mRNA and protein expression
from the HIV-1 promoter in some contexts, but does not affect HDAC1, HDAC2,
HDAC3, or acetylated histone 3 occupancy of the HIV-1 LTR. Conversely, depletion 
of cMyc or cMyc and YY1 does not significantly alter the level of transcription
from the LTR or affect recruitment of HDACs to the HIV-1 LTR. Furthermore, global
inhibition of HDACs with the HDAC inhibitor suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid
(SAHA) enhanced the increase in LTR transcription in cells that were depleted of 
YY1.These findings show that despite prior isolated findings, redundancy in
repressors of HIV-1 LTR expression will require selective targeting of multiple
restrictive mechanisms to comprehensively induce the escape of quiescent
proviruses from latency.

PMCID: PMC3552162
PMID: 22866663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Biol Chem. 2012 Sep 21;287(39):32346-53. Epub 2012 Aug 3.

Family with sequence similarity 60A (FAM60A) protein is a cell cycle-fluctuating 
regulator of the SIN3-HDAC1 histone deacetylase complex.

Muñoz IM(1), MacArtney T, Sanchez-Pulido L, Ponting CP, Rocha S, Rouse J.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Protein Phosphorylation Unit, College of Life
Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland, United Kingdom.

The SIN3A-HDAC complex deacetylates histones thereby repressing gene
transcription. Here we describe family with sequence similarity 60A (FAM60A), a
cell cycle-regulated protein that binds to the SIN3-HDAC complex. FAM60A
expression peaks during G(1) and S phases of the cell cycle in U2OS cells, in a
manner similar to the G(1) regulator cyclin D1, which is a known target of
SIN3-HDAC. In this light we found that FAM60A binds to SIN3-HDAC-regulated
promoters such as cyclin D1 in G(1) and S phases. Cells depleted of FAM60A show
increased histone acetylation at the cyclin D1 promoter and elevated levels of
cyclin D1 mRNA and protein. Furthermore, depletion of FAM60A altered the periodic
association of HDAC1 with the cyclin D1 promoter, increased cyclin D1 expression 
at all cell cycle phases, and caused premature S phase entry. The data in this
study introduce FAM60A as a novel regulator of SIN3-HDAC function and gene
expression.

PMCID: PMC3463326
PMID: 22865885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Biochemistry (Mosc). 2012 Aug;77(8):934-40. doi: 10.1134/S0006297912080159.

HDAC1/DNMT3A-containing complex is associated with suppression of Oct4 in
cervical cancer cells.

Liu D(1), Zhou P, Zhang L, Gong W, Huang G, Zheng Y, He F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Third Military Medical
University, 400038 Chongqing, China. liu.db1980@yahoo.com.cn

Octamer-binding transcription factor 4 (Oct4), an important embryonic
transcriptional factor, is highly expressed in several tumors and is considered
as a hallmark of cancer stem cells. Knowledge about the expression and regulatory
mechanisms of Oct4 can contribute to the treatment of cancers. As for cervical
cancer, however, details remain obscure about Oct4 expression and its regulatory 
mechanism. In this study, we found that the level of Oct4 in human papillomavirus
16 (HPV16)- positive cervical cancer cells (CaSki cells) was higher than that in 
HPV-negative cervical cancer cells (C-33A cells), whereas both the level of
histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and DNA methyltransferase 3A (DNMT3A) were lower in
CaSki cells than those in C-33A cells. Treatment with valproic acid, an HDAC
inhibitor, could significantly increase the expression of Oct4 in C-33A cells,
but only slightly increased Oct4 in CaSki cells. Co-immunoprecipitation assays
showed that HDAC1 and DNMT3A existed in a common complex. The
co-immunoprecipitated DNMT3A or HDAC1 was dose-dependently decreased with
valproic acid treatment. These results indicated that HDAC1/DNMT3A-containing
complex is associated with the suppression of Oct4 in cervical cancer cells, and 
the activity of HDAC1 is required in the repression of Oct4.

PMID: 22860916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Oct;40(19):9441-54. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks720. Epub 2012
Aug 2.

Interaction of nucleolin with ribosomal RNA genes and its role in RNA polymerase 
I transcription.

Cong R(1), Das S, Ugrinova I, Kumar S, Mongelard F, Wong J, Bouvet P.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Lyon, Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, CNRS USR 3010,
Laboratoire Joliot-Curie, 69364 Lyon, France.

Nucleolin is a multi-functional nucleolar protein that is required for ribosomal 
RNA gene (rRNA) transcription in vivo, but the mechanism by which nucleolin
modulates RNA polymerase I (RNAPI) transcription is not well understood.
Nucleolin depletion results in an increase in the heterochromatin mark H3K9me2
and a decrease in H4K12Ac and H3K4me3 euchromatin histone marks in rRNA genes.
ChIP-seq experiments identified an enrichment of nucleolin in the ribosomal DNA
(rDNA) coding and promoter region. Nucleolin is preferentially associated with
unmethylated rRNA genes and its depletion leads to the accumulation of RNAPI at
the beginning of the transcription unit and a decrease in UBF along the coding
and promoter regions. Nucleolin is able to affect the binding of transcription
termination factor-1 on the promoter-proximal terminator T0, thus inhibiting the 
recruitment of TIP5 and HDAC1 and the establishment of a repressive
heterochromatin state. These results reveal the importance of nucleolin for the
maintenance of the euchromatin state and transcription elongation of rDNA.

PMCID: PMC3479187
PMID: 22859736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e42076. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042076. Epub 2012 Jul 27.

Ischemia/reperfusion-induced MKP-3 impairs endothelial NO formation via
inactivation of ERK1/2 pathway.

Yang D(1), Xie P, Liu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medicinal Plant Development, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 
& Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatases (MKPs) are a family of
dual-specificity phosphatases. Endothelial cells express multiple MKP family
members, such as MKP-3. However, the effects of MKP-3 on endothelial biological
processes have not yet been fully elucidated. Here, we address the association
between MKP-3 and endothelial Nitric oxide (NO) formation under
ischemia/reperfusion (IS/RP) condition. Human umbilical vein endothelial cells
(HUVECs) were subjected to IS/RP treatment. The MKP-3 expression and NO formation
were examined. IS/RP induced endothelial MKP-3 expression and inhibited eNOS
expression and NO formation, accompanied by an increase of endothelial apoptosis.
The siRNA experiments showed that MKP-3 was an important mediator in impairing
eNOS expression and NO production in endothelial cells. Transfection of HUVECs
with constitutively active ERK plasmids suggested that the above mentioned effect
of MKP-3 was via inactivation of ERK1/2 pathway. Furthermore, impairment of eNOS 
expression was restored by treatment of histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor and 
related to histone deacetylation and recruitment of HDAC1 to the eNOS promoter.
Finally, Salvianolic acid A (SalA) markedly attenuated induction of MKP-3 and
inhibition of eNOS expression and NO formation under endothelial IS/RP condition.
Overall, these results for the first time demonstrated that IS/RP inhibited eNOS 
expression by inactivation of ERK1/2 and recruitment of HDAC1 to the gene
promoter, leading to decreased NO formation through a MKP-3-dependent mechanism
in endothelial cells, and SalA has therapeutic significance in protecting
endothelial cells from impaired NO formation in response to IS/RP.

PMCID: PMC3407110
PMID: 22848708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Biol Chem. 2012 Sep 14;287(38):32006-16. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.362467. Epub
2012 Jul 20.

Stimulation of histone deacetylase activity by metabolites of intermediary
metabolism.

Vogelauer M(1), Krall AS, McBrian MA, Li JY, Kurdistani SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry,UCLA, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) function in a wide range of molecular processes,
including gene expression, and are of significant interest as therapeutic
targets. Although their native complexes, subcellular localization, and
recruitment mechanisms to chromatin have been extensively studied, much less is
known about whether the enzymatic activity of non-sirtuin HDACs can be regulated 
by natural metabolites. Here, we show that several coenzyme A (CoA) derivatives, 
such as acetyl-CoA, butyryl-CoA, HMG-CoA, and malonyl-CoA, as well as NADPH but
not NADP(+), NADH, or NAD(+), act as allosteric activators of recombinant HDAC1
and HDAC2 in vitro following a mixed activation kinetic. In contrast, free CoA,
like unconjugated butyrate, inhibits HDAC activity in vitro. Analysis of a large 
number of engineered HDAC1 mutants suggests that the HDAC activity can
potentially be decoupled from "activatability" by the CoA derivatives. In vivo,
pharmacological inhibition of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) to
decrease NADPH levels led to significant increases in global levels of histone H3
and H4 acetylation. The similarity in structures of the identified metabolites
and the exquisite selectivity of NADPH over NADP(+), NADH, and NAD(+) as an HDAC 
activator reveal a previously unrecognized biochemical feature of the HDAC
proteins with important consequences for regulation of histone acetylation as
well as the development of more specific and potent HDAC inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC3442532
PMID: 22822071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Leuk Res. 2012 Oct;36(10):1304-10. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2012.07.002. Epub 2012 
Jul 20.

Induction of differentiation and apoptosis in leukaemic cell lines by the novel
benzamide family histone deacetylase 2 and 3 inhibitor MI-192.

Boissinot M(1), Inman M, Hempshall A, James SR, Gill JH, Selby P, Bowen DT, Grigg
R, Cockerill PN.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Haematology, Leeds Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of
Leeds, UK.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs) are in advanced clinical development as
cancer therapeutic agents. However, first generation HDACIs such as butyrate and 
valproate are simple short chain aliphatic compounds with moieties resembling
acetyl groups, and have a broad spectrum of activity against HDACs. More complex 
second generation HDACIs undergoing clinical trials, such as the benzamide group 
compounds MS-275 and MGCD0103, are specific primarily for HDAC1 and HDAC2. To
expand the repertoire of available HDACIs and HDAC specificities we created a
novel benzamide-based compound named MI-192. When tested against purified
recombinant HDACs, MI-192 had marked selectivity for the class I enzymes, HDAC2
and HDAC3. Screening in the NCI60 screen demonstrated that MI-192 had greatly
enhanced efficacy against cells of leukaemic origin. When tested in culture
against the acute myeloid leukaemic cell lines U937, HL60 and Kasumi-1, MI-192
induced differentiation and was cytotoxic through promotion of apoptosis. MI-192 
therefore justifies further investigation and development as a potential
therapeutic agent for use in leukaemia.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22818799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Cell Death Differ. 2012 Dec;19(12):2015-28. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2012.91. Epub 2012
Jul 20.

CITED2 functions as a molecular switch of cytokine-induced proliferation and
quiescence.

Chou YT(1), Hsieh CH, Chiou SH, Hsu CF, Kao YR, Lee CC, Chung CH, Wang YH, Hsu
HS, Pang ST, Shieh YS, Wu CW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, ROC.

Transforming growth factor-a (TGF-a)-induced proliferation and transforming
growth factor-ß (TGF-ß)-mediated quiescence are intricately balanced in normal
lung-tissue homeostasis but are deregulated during neoplastic progression of lung
cancer. Here, we show that Cbp/p300-interacting transactivator with Glu/Asp-rich 
carboxy-terminal domain 2 (CITED2), a novel MYC-interacting transcriptional
modulator, responds to TGF-a induction and TGF-ß suppression to orchestrate
cellular proliferation and quiescence, respectively. Upon TGF-a induction, CITED2
was induced by MYC and further modulated MYC-mediated transcription in a
feed-forward manner. CITED2 recruited p300 to promote MYC-p300-mediated
transactivation of E2F3, leading to increased G1/S cell cycle progression.
Moreover, CITED2 inhibited cellular quiescence by enhancing MYC-mediated
suppression of p21(CIP1). CITED2 interacted with histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1)
and potentiated MYC-HDAC1 complex formation. TGF-ß stimulation provoked
downregulation of CITED2, which abrogated MYC-HDAC1-mediated p21(CIP1)
suppression, causing cellular quiescence. Ectopic CITED2 expression enhanced
tumor growth in nude mice; furthermore, CITED2 knockdown caused tumor shrinkage
and increased overall host mouse survival rates. Expression of
CITED2/MYC/E2F3/p21(CIP1) signaling molecules was associated with poor prognosis 
of lung cancer patients. Thus, CITED2 functions as a molecular switch of TGF-a
and TGF-ß-induced growth control, and MYC-CITED2 signaling axis provides a new
index for predicting clinical outcome.

PMCID: PMC3504715
PMID: 22814619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Oct;1821(10):1334-40. doi:
10.1016/j.bbalip.2012.07.007. Epub 2012 Jul 17.

Mechanism and stereoselectivity of HDAC I inhibition by (R)-9-hydroxystearic acid
in colon cancer.

Parolin C(1), Calonghi N, Presta E, Boga C, Caruana P, Naldi M, Andrisano V,
Masotti L, Sartor G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry "G. Moruzzi", Alma Mater Studiorum, University of
Bologna, Via Irnerio 48, 40126, Bologna, Italy.

9-Hydroxystearic acid (9-HSA) belongs to the endogenous lipid peroxidation
by-products that decrease in tumors, causing as a consequence the loss of one of 
the control mechanisms on cell division. It acts as a histone deacetylase (HDAC, 
E.C 3.5.1.98) inhibitor, and the interaction of the two enantiomers of 9-HSA with
the catalytic site of the enzyme, investigated by using a molecular modelling
approach, has been reported to be different. In this work we tested out this
prediction by synthesizing the two enantiomers (R)-9-HSA (R-9) and (S)-9-HSA
(S-9) starting from the natural source methyl dimorphecolate obtained from
Dimorphotheca sinuata seeds and investigating their biological activity in HT29
cells. Both enantiomers inhibit the enzymatic activity of HDAC1, HDAC2 and HDAC3,
R-9 being more active; R-9 and S-9 inhibitory effect induces an increase in
histone H4 acetylation. We also demonstrate that the antiproliferative effect
brought about by R-9 is more pronounced as well as we observe increase of p21
transcription and protein content, while the expression of cyclin D1 is
decreased. Starting from these observations it can be hypothesized that the
interaction of R-9 with HDAC1 induce conformational changes in the enzyme causing
loss of its interaction with other proteins, like cyclin D1 itself.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22814230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2012 Jul 18;12:101. doi: 10.1186/1472-6882-12-101.

Pharmacological modulation of histone demethylase activity by a small molecule
isolated from subcritical water extracts of Sasa senanensis leaves prolongs the
lifespan of Drosophila melanogaster.

Nakagawa-Yagi Y(1), Sato Y, Matsumoto E, Nakatsuka S, Sakaki T, Muramatsu Y, Hara
T, Aigaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Hakuju Institute for Health Science Co, Ltd, 37-5, Tomigaya 1-chome,
Shibuya-ku, Tokyo, 151-0063, Japan. yagi@hakuju.co.jp

BACKGROUND: Extracts of Sasa senanensis Rehder are used in traditional Japanese
medicine; however, little is known about the underlying mechanisms of their
potential health benefits.
METHODS: S. senanensis leaves were extracted with subcritical water. An active
small-molecule was isolated using reversed-phase high-performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC), and identified as 3,4-dihydroxybenzaldehyde
(protocatechuic aldehyde or PA). The effects of PA on the activity of histone
demethylase, the Drosophila melanogaster lifespan and gene expression in
Drosophila S2 cells were investigated.
RESULTS: PA inhibited the activity of Jumonji domain-containing protein 2A
(JMJD2A) histone demethylase in a dose-dependent manner with a half-maximal
inhibitory concentration (IC50) of 11.6 µM. However, there was no effect on
lysine-specific demethylase 1 (LSD1), histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) or HDAC8. PA 
significantly extended the lifespan of female, but not male, Drosophila. In
Drosophila S2 cells, the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E binding
protein (4E-BP) was up-regulated by PA exposure.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings provide insight into the possible relationship between 
the pharmacological modulation of histone demethylation and lifespan extension by
PA; they might also be important in the development of alternative therapies for 
age-related disorders.

PMCID: PMC3551771
PMID: 22809229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40684. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040684. Epub 2012 Jul 12.

Identification of a novel function for the chromatin remodeling protein ING2 in
muscle differentiation.

Eapen SA(1), Netherton SJ, Sarker KP, Deng L, Chan A, Riabowol K, Bonni S.

Author information: 
(1)Southern Alberta Cancer Research Institute, Departments of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology and Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Calgary,
Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

The inhibitor of growth (ING) family of zinc-finger plant homeodomain
(PHD)-containing chromatin remodeling protein controls gene expression and has
been implicated in the regulation of cell proliferation and death. However, the
role of ING proteins in cell differentiation remains largely unexplored. Here, we
identify an essential function for ING2 in muscle differentiation. We find that
knockdown of ING2 by RNA interference (RNAi) blocks the differentiation of C2C12 
cells into myotubes, suggesting that ING2 regulates the myogenic differentiation 
program. We also characterize a mechanism by which ING2 drives muscle
differentiation. In structure-function analyses, we find that the leucine zipper 
motif of ING2 contributes to ING2-dependent muscle differentiation. By contrast, 
the PHD domain, which recognizes the histone H3K4me3 epigenetic mark, inhibits
the ability of ING2 to induce muscle differentiation. We also find that the
Sin3A-HDAC1 chromatin remodeling complex, which interacts with ING2, plays a
critical role in ING2-dependent muscle differentiation. These findings define a
novel function for ING2 in muscle differentiation and bear significant
implications for our understanding of the role of the ING protein family in cell 
differentiation and tumor suppression.

PMCID: PMC3395697
PMID: 22808232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2012 Sep 15;263(3):345-51. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2012.07.007. Epub 2012 Jul 16.

3,3'-Diindolylmethane, but not indole-3-carbinol, inhibits histone deacetylase
activity in prostate cancer cells.

Beaver LM(1), Yu TW, Sokolowski EI, Williams DE, Dashwood RH, Ho E.

Author information: 
(1)Linus Pauling Institute, Oregon State University, 307 Linus Pauling Science
Center, Corvallis, OR 97331, USA. beaverl@onid.orst.edu

Increased consumption of cruciferous vegetables is associated with a reduced risk
of developing prostate cancer. Indole-3-carbinol (I3C) and 3,3'-diindolylmethane 
(DIM) are phytochemicals derived from cruciferous vegetables that have shown
promise in inhibiting prostate cancer in experimental models. Histone deacetylase
(HDAC) inhibition is an emerging target for cancer prevention and therapy. We
sought to examine the effects of I3C and DIM on HDACs in human prostate cancer
cell lines: androgen insensitive PC-3 cells and androgen sensitive LNCaP cells.
I3C modestly inhibited HDAC activity in LNCaP cells by 25% but no inhibition of
HDAC activity was detected in PC-3 cells. In contrast, DIM significantly
inhibited HDAC activity in both cell lines by as much as 66%. Decreases in HDAC
activity correlated with increased expression of p21, a known target of HDAC
inhibitors. DIM treatment caused a significant decrease in the expression of
HDAC2 protein in both cancer cell lines but no significant change in the protein 
levels of HDAC1, HDAC3, HDAC4, HDAC6 or HDAC8 was detected. Taken together, these
results show that inhibition of HDAC activity by DIM may contribute to the
phytochemicals' anti-proliferative effects in the prostate. The ability of DIM to
target aberrant epigenetic patterns, in addition to its effects on detoxification
of carcinogens, may make it an effective chemopreventive agent by targeting
multiple stages of prostate carcinogenesis.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3428467
PMID: 22800507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Cell Sci. 2012 Oct 15;125(Pt 20):4800-11. doi: 10.1242/jcs.106542. Epub 2012
Jul 13.

PKD2 and PKD3 promote prostate cancer cell invasion by modulating NF-<U+03BA>B- and
HDAC1-mediated expression and activation of uPA.

Zou Z(1), Zeng F, Xu W, Wang C, Ke Z, Wang QJ, Deng F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, China.

Although protein kinase D3 (PKD3) has been shown to contribute to prostate cancer
cell growth and survival, the role of PKD in prostate cancer cell motility
remains unclear. Here, we show that PKD2 and PKD3 promote nuclear factor kappa B 
(NF-<U+03BA>B) signaling and urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA)
expression/activation, which are crucial for prostate cancer cell invasion.
Silencing of endogenous PKD2 and/or PKD3 markedly decreased prostate cancer cell 
migration and invasion, reduced uPA and uPA receptor (uPAR) expression and
increased plasminogen activator inhibitor-2 (PAI-2) expression. These results
were further substantiated by the finding that PKD2 and PKD3 promoted the
activity of uPA and matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9). Furthermore, depletion of 
PKD2 and/or PKD3 decreased the level of binding of the p65 subunit of NF-<U+03BA>B to
the promoter of the gene encoding uPA (PLAU), suppressing transcriptional
activation of uPA. Endogenous PKD2 and PKD3 interacted with inhibitor of NF-<U+03BA>B
(I<U+03BA>B) kinase ß (IKKß); PKD2 mainly regulated the phosphorylated IKK
(pIKK)-phosphorylated I<U+03BA>B (pI<U+03BA>B)-I<U+03BA>B degradation cascade, p65 nuclear
translocation, and phosphorylation of Ser276 on p65, whereas PKD3 was responsible
for the phosphorylation of Ser536 on p65. Conversely, inhibition of uPA
transactivation by PKD3 silencing was rescued by constitutive Ser536 p65
phosphorylation, and reduced tumor cell invasion resulting from PKD2 or PKD3
silencing was rescued by ectopic expression of p65. Interestingly, PKD3
interacted with histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), suppressing HDAC1 expression and
decreasing its binding to the uPA promoter. Moreover, depletion of HDAC1 resulted
in recovery of uPA transactivation in PKD3-knockdown cells. Taken together, these
data suggest that PKD2 and PKD3 coordinate to promote prostate cancer cell
invasion through p65 NF-<U+03BA>B- and HDAC1-mediated expression and activation of uPA.

PMCID: PMC4074284
PMID: 22797919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Alcohol. 2012 Nov;46(7):635-42. doi: 10.1016/j.alcohol.2012.03.005. Epub 2012 Jul
12.

Alcohol-induced serotonergic modulation: the role of histone deacetylases.

Agudelo M(1), Yoo C, Nair MP.

Author information: 
(1)Florida International University, Miami, 33199, USA.

Previous studies have demonstrated that alcohol use disorders (AUDs) are
regulated by multiple mechanisms such as neurotransmitters and enzymes. The
neurotransmitter, serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) may contribute to alcohol
effects and serotonin receptors, including 5-HT3, play an important role in AUDs.
Recent studies have also implicated histone deacetylases (HDACs) and
acetyltransferases (HATS) in regulation of drug addiction, and HDAC inhibitors
(HDACi) have been reported as transcriptional modulators of monoaminergic
neurotransmission. Therefore, we hypothesize that HDACs may play a role in
ethanol-induced serotonergic modulation. The effects of ethanol on serotonin and 
5-HT3, and the role HDACs, HDAC activity and the HDACi, trichostatin A (TSA),
play in alcohol-induced serotonergic effects were studied. Human SK-N-MC and
neurons, were treated with ethanol (0.05, 0.1 and 0.2%), and/or TSA (50 nM), and 
5-HT3 levels were assessed at 24-72 h. Gene expression was evaluated by qRT-PCR
and protein by western blot and flow cytometry. Serotonin release was assessed by
ELISA and HDAC activity by fluorometric assay. Our results show an increase in
5-HT3 gene after ethanol treatment. Further, ethanol significantly increased
HDACs 1 and 3 genes accompanied by an increased in HDAC activity while TSA
significantly inhibited HDACs. Studies with TSA show a significant upregulation
of ethanol effects on 5-HT3, while surprisingly TSA inhibited ethanol-induced
serotonin production. These results suggest that ethanol affects 5-HT3 and
serotonin through mechanisms involving HDACs and HATs. In summary, our studies
demonstrate some of the novel properties of HDAC inhibitors and contribute to the
understanding of the mechanisms involve in alcohol-serotonergic modulation in the
CNS.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3455143
PMID: 22796363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Biol Chem. 2012 Sep 21;287(39):32367-80. Epub 2012 Jul 12.

Protein kinase D1 mediates anchorage-dependent and -independent growth of tumor
cells via the zinc finger transcription factor Snail1.

Eiseler T(1), Köhler C, Nimmagadda SC, Jamali A, Funk N, Joodi G, Storz P,
Seufferlein T.

Author information: 
(1)Department for Internal Medicine I, University Clinic Halle, Martin Luther
University Halle-Wittenberg, Ernst-Grube Strasse 40, 06120 Halle (Saale),
Germany.

We here identify protein kinase D1 (PKD1) as a major regulator of
anchorage-dependent and -independent growth of cancer cells controlled via the
transcription factor Snail1. Using FRET, we demonstrate that PKD1, but not PKD2, 
efficiently interacts with Snail1 in nuclei. PKD1 phosphorylates Snail1 at
Ser-11. There was no change in the nucleocytoplasmic distribution of Snail1 using
wild type Snail1 and Ser-11 phosphosite mutants in different tumor cells.
Regardless of its phosphorylation status or following co-expression of
constitutively active PKD, Snail1 was predominantly localized to cell nuclei. We 
also identify a novel mechanism of PKD1-mediated regulation of Snail1
transcriptional activity in tumor cells. The interaction of the co-repressors
histone deacetylases 1 and 2 as well as lysyl oxidase-like protein 3 with Snail1 
was impaired when Snail1 was not phosphorylated at Ser-11, which led to reduced
Snail1-associated histone deacetylase activity. Additionally, lysyl oxidase-like 
protein 3 expression was up-regulated by ectopic PKD1 expression, implying a
synergistic regulation of Snail1-driven transcription. Ectopic expression of PKD1
also up-regulated proliferation markers such as Cyclin D1 and Ajuba. Accordingly,
Snail1 and its phosphorylation at Ser-11 were required and sufficient to control 
PKD1-mediated anchorage-independent growth and anchorage-dependent proliferation 
of different tumor cells. In conclusion, our data show that PKD1 is crucial to
support growth of tumor cells via Snail1.

PMCID: PMC3463335
PMID: 22791710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. J Vet Med Sci. 2012 Nov;74(11):1409-15. Epub 2012 Jun 18.

Trichostatin a improves preimplantation development of bovine cloned embryos and 
alters expression of epigenetic and pluripotency genes in cloned blastocysts.

Oh HJ(1), Lee TH, Lee JH, Lee BC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Theriogenology and Biotechnology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.

We investigated the effects of exposure time and concentration of trichostatin A 
(TSA) on in vitro development and quality of bovine SCNT embryos. At multiple
time points, the relative expression of genes related to pluripotency and
reprogramming was analyzed in order to assess the quality of preimplantation
embryos cultured in media with TSA using real-time PCR. Development into
blastocysts was higher in 100 nM TSA than in controls (35.96 vs. 28.30%, P<0.05).
Study of 100 nM TSA exposure time showed development into blastocysts was higher 
during both short-term and long-term exposure than in controls (36.17 and 34.04
vs. 23.45%), but there was no significant difference between TSA groups. Nanog
expression in blastocysts after long-term TSA exposure was similar to that in IVF
blastocysts and greater than in controls and short-term exposed embryos. The Oct4
levels in the short-term exposure group were similar to those of IVF blastocysts,
while Oct4 expression in long-term exposed embryos was significantly higher than 
in other groups. Measurement of DNMT1 and HDAC1 in blastocysts showed a similar
expression profile among IVF and TSA groups regardless of treatment duration. In 
conclusion, this study suggests that TSA treatment after SCNT in bovine embryos
can improve in vitro development of embryos by increasing the blastocysts
formation and positive reprogramming of the reconstructed embryo genome caused by
downregulation of DNA methylation and up-regulation of pluripotency.

PMID: 22785124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Med Chem. 2013 Feb;9(1):126-32.

Discovering the binding modes of natural products with histone deacetylase 1.

Zhang L(1), Li M, Zhang L, Xu W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, School of Pharmacy, Shandong University,
Jinan, Shandong, 250012, China.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) belong to a superfamily of enzymes responsible for
deacetylating the Nterminal tails of histones. Overproduction of HDACs has a
significant role in tumorigenesis. Accordingly, inhibition of HDACs has been
widely applied for cancer therapy. It is encouraging that some natural products
showed promising potency and selectivity against HDACs. In order to uncover their
keys of good performance, the binding patterns of several natural HDAC1
inhibitors in the active site of HDAC1 were navigated by homology modeling,
docking and molecular dynamic simulations. Evaluation of the binding poses
allowed us to recognize the roles of different residues around the active site,
and to understand the core features in the structure of the inhibitor molecule.
Hydrophobic and H-bond interactions formed between the ligand and residues were
discovered to make significant contributions to the ligand-receptor binding.
Finally, the structural requirement of inhibitors for binding to HDAC1 was well
proposed. Our results are beneficial to the design of potent HDAC1 inhibitors.

PMID: 22779791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Oncogene. 2013 May 16;32(20):2565-75. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.274. Epub 2012 Jul 9.

Histone arginine methylation keeps RUNX1 target genes in an intermediate state.

Herglotz J(1), Kuvardina ON, Kolodziej S, Kumar A, Hussong H, Grez M, Lausen J.

Author information: 
(1)Georg-Speyer-Haus, Institute for Biomedical Research, Frankfurt am Main,
Germany.

The coordinated recruitment of epigenetic regulators of gene expression by
transcription factors such as RUNX1 (AML1, acute myeloid leukemia 1) is crucial
for hematopoietic differentiation. Here, we identify protein arginine
methyltransferase 6 (PRMT6) as a central functional component of a RUNX1
corepressor complex containing Sin3a and HDAC1 in human hematopoietic progenitor 
cells. PRMT6 is recruited by RUNX1 and mediates asymmetric histone H3 arginine-2 
dimethylation (H3R2me2a) at megakaryocytic genes in progenitor cells. H3R2me2a
keeps RUNX1 target genes in an intermediate state with concomitant H3K27me3 and
H3K4me2 but not H3K4me3. Upon megakaryocytic differentiation PRMT6 binding is
lost, the H3R2me2a mark decreases and a coactivator complex containing WDR5/MLL
and p300/pCAF is recruited. This leads to an increase of H3K4me3 and H3K9ac,
which result in augmented gene expression. Our results provide novel mechanistic 
insight into how RUNX1 activity in hematopoietic progenitor cells maintains
differentiation genes in a suppressed state but poised for rapid transcriptional 
activation.

PMID: 22777353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Diabetologia. 2012 Sep;55(9):2421-31. doi: 10.1007/s00125-012-2615-0. Epub 2012
Jul 7.

Histone deacetylases 1 and 3 but not 2 mediate cytokine-induced beta cell
apoptosis in INS-1 cells and dispersed primary islets from rats and are
differentially regulated in the islets of type 1 diabetic children.

Lundh M(1), Christensen DP, Damgaard Nielsen M, Richardson SJ, Dahllöf MS,
Skovgaard T, Berthelsen J, Dinarello CA, Stevenazzi A, Mascagni P, Grunnet LG,
Morgan NG, Mandrup-Poulsen T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Research Methodology, Department of Biomedical Sciences,
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3, 
2200 Copenhagen, Denmark. morlun@sund.ku.dk

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are promising pharmacological
targets in cancer and autoimmune diseases. All 11 classical HDACs (HDAC1-11) are 
found in the pancreatic beta cell, and HDAC inhibitors (HDACi) protect beta cells
from inflammatory insults. We investigated which HDACs mediate inflammatory beta 
cell damage and how the islet content of these HDACs is regulated in recent-onset
type 1 diabetes.
METHODS: The rat beta cell line INS-1 and dispersed primary islets from rats,
either wild type or HDAC1-3 deficient, were exposed to cytokines and HDACi.
Molecular mechanisms were investigated using real-time PCR, chromatin
immunoprecipitation and ELISA assays. Pancreases from healthy children and
children with type 1 diabetes were assessed using immunohistochemistry and
immunofluorescence.
RESULTS: Screening of 19 compounds with different HDAC selectivity revealed that 
inhibitors of HDAC1, -2 and -3 rescued INS-1 cells from inflammatory damage.
Small hairpin RNAs against HDAC1 and -3, but not HDAC2, reduced pro-inflammatory 
cytokine-induced beta cell apoptosis in INS-1 and primary rat islets. The
protective properties of specific HDAC knock-down correlated with attenuated
cytokine-induced iNos expression but not with altered expression of the
pro-inflammatory mediators Il1a, Il1ß, Tnfa or Cxcl2. HDAC3 knock-down reduced
nuclear factor <U+03BA>B binding to the iNos promoter and HDAC1 knock-down restored
insulin secretion. In pancreatic sections from children with type 1 diabetes of
recent onset, HDAC1 was upregulated in beta cells whereas HDAC2 and -3 were
downregulated in comparison with five paediatric controls.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: These data demonstrate non-redundant functions of
islet class I HDACs and suggest that targeting HDAC1 and HDAC3 would provide
optimal protection of beta cell mass and function in clinical islet
transplantation and recent-onset type 1 diabetic patients.

PMID: 22772764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Epigenetics. 2012 Aug;7(8):914-29. doi: 10.4161/epi.21113. Epub 2012 Jul 9.

Hepatic ontogeny and tissue distribution of mRNAs of epigenetic modifiers in mice
using RNA-sequencing.

Lu H(1), Cui JY, Gunewardena S, Yoo B, Zhong XB, Klaassen CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY,
USA. luh@upstate.edu

Developmental regulation of gene expression is controlled by distinct epigenetic 
signatures catalyzed by various epigenetic modifiers. Little is known about the
ontogeny and tissue distribution of these epigenetic modifiers. In the present
study, we used a novel approach of RNA-sequencing to elucidate hepatic ontogeny
and tissue distribution of mRNA expression of 142 epigenetic modifiers, including
enzymes involved in DNA methylation/demethylation, histone
acetylation/deacetylation, histone methylation/demethylation, histone
phosphorylation and chromosome remodeling factors in male C57BL/6 mice. Livers
from male C57BL/6 mice were collected at 12 ages from prenatal to adulthood. Many
of these epigenetic modifiers were expressed at much higher levels in perinatal
livers than adult livers, such as Dnmt1, Dnmt3a, Dnmt3b, Apobec3, Kat1, Ncoa4,
Setd8, Ash2l, Dot1l, Cbx1, Cbx3, Cbx5, Cbx6, Ezh2, Suz12, Eed, Suv39h1, Suv420h2,
Dek, Hdac1, Hdac2, Hdac7, Kdm2b, Kdm5c, Kdm7, Prmt1-5, Prmt7, Smarca4, Smarcb1,
Chd4 and Ino80e. In contrast, hepatic mRNA expression of a few epigenetic
modifiers increased during postnatal liver development, such as Smarca2, Kdm1b,
Cbx7 and Chd3. In adult mice (60 d of age), most epigenetic modifiers were
expressed at moderately (1-3-fold) higher levels in kidney and/or small intestine
than liver. In conclusion, this study, for the first time, unveils developmental 
changes in mRNA abundance of all major known epigenetic modifiers in mouse liver.
These data suggest that ontogenic changes in mRNA expression of epigenetic
modifiers may play important roles in determining the addition and/or removal of 
corresponding epigenetic signatures during liver development.

PMCID: PMC3427287
PMID: 22772165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Mol Cell. 2012 Aug 10;47(3):457-68. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.05.046. Epub 2012 
Jul 5.

Snail regulates MyoD binding-site occupancy to direct enhancer switching and
differentiation-specific transcription in myogenesis.

Soleimani VD(1), Yin H, Jahani-Asl A, Ming H, Kockx CE, van Ijcken WF, Grosveld
F, Rudnicki MA.

Author information: 
(1)Sprott Centre for Stem Cell Research, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute,
Ottawa, ON K1H 8L6, Canada.

In skeletal myogenesis, the transcription factor MyoD activates distinct
transcriptional programs in progenitors compared to terminally differentiated
cells. Using ChIP-Seq and gene expression analyses, we show that in primary
myoblasts, Snail-HDAC1/2 repressive complex binds and excludes MyoD from its
targets. Notably, Snail binds E box motifs that are G/C rich in their central
dinucleotides, and such sites are almost exclusively associated with genes
expressed during differentiation. By contrast, Snail does not bind the A/T-rich E
boxes associated with MyoD targets in myoblasts. Thus, Snai1-HDAC1/2 prevent MyoD
occupancy on differentiation-specific regulatory elements, and the change from
Snail to MyoD binding often results in enhancer switching during differentiation.
Furthermore, we show that a regulatory network involving myogenic regulatory
factors (MRFs), Snai1/2, miR-30a, and miR-206 acts as a molecular switch that
controls entry into myogenic differentiation. Together, these results reveal a
regulatory paradigm that directs distinct gene expression programs in progenitors
versus terminally differentiated cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4580277
PMID: 22771117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2012 Aug 1;22(15):5025-30. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2012.06.017.
Epub 2012 Jun 18.

Design, synthesis, modeling, biological evaluation and photoaffinity labeling
studies of novel series of photoreactive benzamide probes for histone deacetylase
2.

Vaidya AS(1), Karumudi B, Mendonca E, Madriaga A, Abdelkarim H, van Breemen RB,
Petukhov PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacognosy, College of Pharmacy,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

The design, modeling, synthesis, biological evaluation of a novel series of
photoreactive benzamide probes for class I HDAC isoforms is reported. The probes 
are potent and selective for HDAC1 and 2 and are efficient in crosslinking to
HDAC2 as demonstrated by photolabeling experiments. The probes exhibit a
time-dependent inhibition of class I HDACs. The inhibitory activities of the
probes were influenced by the positioning of the aryl and alkyl azido groups
necessary for photocrosslinking and attachment of the biotin tag. The probes
inhibited the deacetylation of H4 in MDA-MB-231 cell line, indicating that they
are cell permeable and target the nuclear HDACs.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3401313
PMID: 22771007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Cell Stem Cell. 2012 Sep 7;11(3):319-32. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2012.06.002. Epub
2012 Jul 5.

The polycomb group protein L3mbtl2 assembles an atypical PRC1-family complex that
is essential in pluripotent stem cells and early development.

Qin J(1), Whyte WA, Anderssen E, Apostolou E, Chen HH, Akbarian S, Bronson RT,
Hochedlinger K, Ramaswamy S, Young RA, Hock H.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

L3mbtl2 has been implicated in transcriptional repression and chromatin
compaction but its biological function has not been defined. Here we show that
disruption of L3mbtl2 results in embryonic lethality with failure of
gastrulation. This correlates with compromised proliferation and abnormal
differentiation of L3mbtl2(-/-) embryonic stem (ES) cells. L3mbtl2 regulates
genes by recruiting a Polycomb Repressive Complex1 (PRC1)-related complex,
resembling the previously described E2F6-complex, and including G9A, Hdac1, and
Ring1b. The presence of L3mbtl2 at target genes is associated with H3K9
dimethylation, low histone acetylation, and H2AK119 ubiquitination, but the
latter is neither dependent on L3mbtl2 nor sufficient for repression. Genome-wide
studies revealed that the L3mbtl2-dependent complex predominantly regulates genes
not bound by canonical PRC1 and PRC2. However, some developmental regulators are 
repressed by the combined activity of all three complexes. Together, we have
uncovered a highly selective, essential role for an atypical PRC1-family complex 
in ES cells and early development.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3647456
PMID: 22770845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Oncogene. 2013 May 16;32(20):2510-20. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.273. Epub 2012 Jul 2.

Cell-penetrating H4 tail peptides potentiate p53-mediated transactivation via
inhibition of G9a and HDAC1.

Heo K(1), Kim JS, Kim K, Kim H, Choi J, Yang K, An W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles,
CA 90089, USA.

Histone acetylation has a central role in establishing an active chromatin
environment. The functional contribution of histone acetylation to chromatin
transcription is accomplished by a dominant action of histone acetyltransferases 
over repressive histone-modifying activities at gene promoters; misregulation of 
these dynamic events can lead to various diseases. Here, we describe the
synthesis and characterization of transducible peptides derived from histone H4
N-terminal tail as a molecular tool to establish and maintain the active state of
p53 target genes. Cellular experiments demonstrate a distinct increase in p53
transactivation by acetylated H4 tail peptides, but only a modest change by
unmodified H4 tail peptides. The molecular basis underlying the observed effects 
involves the selective interaction of the tail peptides with G9a histone
methyltransferase and histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and the disruption of their
occupancy at p53 target promoters. Furthermore, treatment of xenograft models and
cancer cell lines with the tail peptides sharply decline tumor cell growth and
enhances apoptosis in response to DNA damage. These results indicate that H4 tail
peptide mimics upregulate p53 transcription pathway and may be used as a novel
strategy for anticancer therapy.

PMID: 22751130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. FEBS Lett. 2012 Sep 21;586(19):3013-7. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.06.025. Epub
2012 Jun 27.

STAT3 repressed USP7 expression is crucial for colon cancer development.

Yang Z(1), Huo S, Shan Y, Liu H, Xu Y, Yao K, Li X, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Central Hospital of Fengxian District,
Shanghai, China.

Interleukin-6 (IL-6) induced STAT3 activation is viewed as crucial for multiple
tumor growth and metastasis, including colon cancer. However, the molecular
mechanisms remain largely unexplored. Here, we show that expression of
ubiquitin-specific protease 7 (USP7), a deubiquitylating enzyme, is decreased in 
STAT3-positive tumors. IL-6 administration or transfection of a constitutively
activated STAT3 in SW480 cells also repressed USP mRNA expression. Using
luciferase reporter and ChIP assay, we found that STAT3 bound to the promoter
region of USP7 and inhibited its activity through recruiting HDAC1. As a result
of the decline of USP7 expression, endogenous P53 protein level was decreased.
Thus, our results suggest a previously unknown STAT3-USP7-P53 molecular network
controlling colon cancer development.

Copyright © 2012 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22750444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Genes Cancer. 2011 Nov;2(11):1009-22. doi: 10.1177/1947601912440170.

Maspin reprograms the gene expression profile of prostate carcinoma cells for
differentiation.

Bernardo MM(1), Meng Y, Lockett J, Dyson G, Dombkowski A, Kaplun A, Li X, Yin S, 
Dzinic S, Olive M, Dean I, Krass D, Moin K, Bonfil RD, Cher M, Sakr W, Sheng S.

Author information: 
(1)Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA.

Maspin is an epithelial-specific tumor suppressor gene. Previous data suggest
that maspin expression may redirect poorly differentiated tumor cells to better
differentiated phenotypes. Further, maspin is the first and only endogenous
polypeptide inhibitor of histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) identified thus far. In
the current study, to address what central program of tumor cell
redifferentiation is regulated by maspin and how tumor microenvironments further 
define the effects of maspin, we conducted a systematic and extensive comparison 
of prostate tumor cells grown in 2-dimensional culture, in 3-dimensional collagen
I culture, and as in vivo bone tumors. We showed that maspin was sufficient to
drive prostate tumor cells through a spectrum of temporally and spatially
polarized cellular processes of redifferentiation, a reversal of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Genes commonly regulated by maspin
were a small subset of HDAC target genes that are closely associated with
epithelial differentiation and TGFß signaling. These results suggest that a
specific endogenous HDAC inhibitor may regulate one functionally related subset
of HDAC target genes, although additional maspin-induced changes of gene
expression may result from tumor interaction with its specific microenvironments.
Currently, EMT is recognized as a critical step in tumor progression. To this
end, our current study uncovered a link between maspin and a specific mechanism
of prostate epithelial differentiation that can reverse EMT.

PMCID: PMC3379563
PMID: 22737267  [PubMed]


304. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Sep;32(17):3403-13. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00174-12. Epub 2012 Jun 
25.

Alternative splicing regulates Prdm1/Blimp-1 DNA binding activities and
corepressor interactions.

Morgan MA(1), Mould AW, Li L, Robertson EJ, Bikoff EK.

Author information: 
(1)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom.

Prdm1/Blimp-1 is a master regulator of gene expression in diverse tissues of the 
developing embryo and adult organism. Its C-terminal zinc finger domain mediates 
nuclear import, DNA binding, and recruitment of the corepressors G9a and HDAC1/2.
Alternatively spliced transcripts lacking exon 7 sequences encode a structurally 
divergent isoform (Blimp-1<U+0394>exon7) predicted to have distinct functions. Here we
demonstrate that the short Blimp-1<U+0394>exon7 isoform lacks DNA binding activity and
fails to bind G9a or HDAC1/2 but retains the ability to interact with PRMT5. To
investigate functional roles of alternative splicing in vivo, we engineered novel
mouse strains via embryonic stem (ES) cell technology. Like null mutants, embryos
carrying a targeted deletion of exon 7 and exclusively expressing Blimp-1<U+0394>exon7
die at around embryonic day 10.5 (E10.5) due to placental defects. In
heterozygous <U+0394>exon7 mice, there is no evidence of dominant-negative effects. Mice
carrying a knock-in allele with an exon 6-exon 7 fusion express full-length
Blimp-1 only, develop normally, are healthy and fertile as adults, and
efficiently generate mature plasma cells. These findings strongly suggest that
the short Blimp-1<U+0394>exon7 isoform is dispensable. We propose that developmentally
regulated alternative splicing is influenced by chromatin structure at the locus 
and fine-tunes Blimp-1's functional capabilities.

PMCID: PMC3422002
PMID: 22733990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. BMC Mol Biol. 2012 Jun 25;13:20. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-13-20.

SPRR2A enhances p53 deacetylation through HDAC1 and down regulates p21 promoter
activity.

Mizuguchi Y(1), Specht S, Lunz JG 3rd, Isse K, Corbitt N, Takizawa T, Demetris
AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Thomas E, Starzl Transplantation Institute, University of Pittsburgh Medical
Center, Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA.

BACKGROUND: Small proline rich protein (SPRR) 2A is one of 14 SPRR genes that
encodes for a skin cross-linking protein, which confers structural integrity to
the cornified keratinocyte cell envelope. New evidence, however, shows that
SPRR2A is also a critical stress and wound repair modulator: it enables a variety
of barrier epithelia to transiently acquire mesenchymal characteristics (EMT) and
simultaneously quench reactive oxygen species during wound repair responses. p53 
is also widely recognized as the node in cellular stress responses that inhibits 
EMT and triggers cell-cycle arrest, apoptosis, and cellular senescence. Since
some p53-directed processes would seem to impede wound repair of barrier
epithelia, we hypothesized that SPRR2A up regulation might counteract these
effects and enable/promote wound repair under stressful environmental conditions.
RESULTS: Using a well characterized cholangiocarcinoma cell line we show that
levels of SPRR2A expression, similar to that seen during stressful biliary wound 
repair responses, disrupts acetylation and subsequent p53 transcriptional
activity. p53 deacetylation is accomplished via two distinct, but possibly
related, mechanisms: 1) a reduction of p300 acetylation, thereby interfering with
p300-p53 binding and subsequent p300 acetylation of K382 in p53; and 2) an
increase in histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) mRNA and protein expression. The p300
CH3 domain is essential for both the autoacetylation of p300 and transference of 
the acetyl group to p53 and HDAC1 is a component of several non-p300 complexes
that enhance p53 deacetylation, ubiquitination, and proteosomal degradation.
HDAC1 can also bind the p300-CH3 domain, regulating p300 acetylation and
interfering with p300 mediated p53 acetylation. The importance of this pathway is
illustrated by showing complete restoration of p53 acetylation and partial
restoration of p300 acetylation by treating SPRR2A expressing cells with HDAC1
siRNA.
CONCLUSION: Up-regulation of SPRR2A, similar to that seen during barrier
epithelia wound repair responses reduces p53 acetylation by interfering with
p300-p53 interactions and by increasing HDAC1 expression. SPRR2A, therefore,
functions as a suppressor of p53-dependent transcriptional activity, which
otherwise might impede cellular processes needed for epithelial wound repair
responses such as EMT.

PMCID: PMC3495018
PMID: 22731250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Chem Biol. 2012 Jun 22;19(6):669-73. doi: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2012.05.010.

Inhibition of histone deacetylase 3 protects beta cells from cytokine-induced
apoptosis.

Chou DH(1), Holson EB, Wagner FF, Tang AJ, Maglathlin RL, Lewis TA, Schreiber SL,
Wagner BK.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Biology Program, Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

Cytokine-induced beta-cell apoptosis is important to the etiology of type-1
diabetes. Although previous reports have shown that general inhibitors of histone
deacetylase (HDAC) activity, such as suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid and
trichostatin A, can partially prevent beta-cell death, they do not fully restore 
beta-cell function. To understand HDAC isoform selectivity in beta cells, we
measured the cellular effects of 11 structurally diverse HDAC inhibitors on
cytokine-induced apoptosis in the rat INS-1E cell line. All 11 compounds restored
ATP levels and reduced nitrite secretion. However, caspase-3 activity was reduced
only by MS-275 and CI-994, both of which target HDAC1, 2, and 3. Importantly,
both MS-275 and genetic knockdown of Hdac3 alone were sufficient to restore
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in the presence of cytokines. These results 
suggest that HDAC3-selective inhibitors may be effective in preventing
cytokine-induced beta-cell apoptosis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3383610
PMID: 22726680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Proteome Res. 2012 Aug 3;11(8):4326-37. doi: 10.1021/pr3004369. Epub 2012 Jul
3.

PHF6 interacts with the nucleosome remodeling and deacetylation (NuRD) complex.

Todd MA(1), Picketts DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Regenerative Medicine Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Department 
of Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1H 8L6.

Mutations in PHF6 are the cause of Börjeson-Forssman-Lehman syndrome (BFLS), an
X-linked intellectual disability (XLID) disorder, and both T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML). The PHF6 gene
encodes a protein with two plant homeodomain (PHD)-like zinc finger domains. As
many PHD-like domains function to target chromatin remodelers to
post-translationally modified histones, this suggests a role for PHF6 in
chromatin regulation. However, PHD domains are usually found in association with 
a catalytic domain, a feature that is lacking in PHF6. This distinct domain
structure and the minimal information on its cellular function prompted us to
perform a proteomic screen to identify PHF6 binding partners. We expressed
recombinant Flag-tagged PHF6 in HEK 293T cells for coimmunoprecipitation, and
analyzed the purified products by mass spectrometry. We identified proteins
involved in ribosome biogenesis, RNA splicing, and chromatin regulation,
consistent with PHF6 localization to both the nucleoplasm and nucleolus. Notably,
PHF6 copurified with multiple constituents of the nucleosome remodeling and
deacetylation (NuRD) complex, including CHD4, HDAC1, and RBBP4. We demonstrate
that this PHF6-NuRD complex is not present in the nucleolus but is restricted to 
the nucleoplasm. The association with NuRD represents the first known interaction
for PHF6 and implicates it in chromatin regulation.

PMID: 22720776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e38246. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038246. Epub 2012 Jun 8.

Phosphorylation of p65(RelA) on Ser(547) by ATM represses NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent
transcription of specific genes after genotoxic stress.

Sabatel H(1), Di Valentin E, Gloire G, Dequiedt F, Piette J, Habraken Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virology and Immunology, GIGA-R, Signal Transduction Unit,
University of Liège, Liège, Belgium.

The NF-<U+03BA>B pathway is involved in immune and inflammation responses,
proliferation, differentiation and cell death or survival. It is activated by
many external stimuli including genotoxic stress. DNA double-strand breaks
activate NF-<U+03BA>B in an ATM-dependent manner. In this manuscript, a direct
interaction between p65(RelA) and the N-terminal extremity of ATM is reported. We
also report that only one of the five potential ATM-(S/T)Q target sites present
in p65, namely Ser(547), is specifically phosphorylated by ATM in vitro. A
comparative transcriptomic analysis performed in HEK-293 cells expressing either 
wild-type HA-p65 or a non-phosphorylatable mutant HA-p65(S547A) identified
several differentially transcribed genes after an etoposide treatment (e.g. IL8, 
A20, SELE). The transcription of these genes is increased in cells expressing the
mutant. Substitution of Ser(547) to alanine does not affect p65 binding abilities
on the <U+03BA>B site of the IL8 promoter but reduces p65 interaction with HDAC1. Cells 
expressing p65(S547A) have a higher level of histone H3 acetylated on Lys(9) at
the IL8 promoter, which is in agreement with the higher gene induction observed. 
These results indicate that ATM regulates a sub-set of NF-<U+03BA>B dependent genes
after a genotoxic stress by direct phosphorylation of p65.

PMCID: PMC3371017
PMID: 22715377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. J Biol Chem. 2012 Aug 10;287(33):28122-31. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.368381. Epub
2012 Jun 18.

Kruppel-associated Box (KRAB)-associated co-repressor (KAP-1) Ser-473
phosphorylation regulates heterochromatin protein 1ß (HP1-ß) mobilization and DNA
repair in heterochromatin.

Bolderson E(1), Savage KI, Mahen R, Pisupati V, Graham ME, Richard DJ, Robinson
PJ, Venkitaraman AR, Khanna KK.

Author information: 
(1)Signal Transduction Laboratory, Queensland Institute of Medical Research,
Brisbane, Queensland 4029, Australia.

The DNA damage response encompasses a complex series of signaling pathways that
function to regulate and facilitate the repair of damaged DNA. Recent studies
have shown that the repair of transcriptionally inactive chromatin, named
heterochromatin, is dependent upon the phosphorylation of the co-repressor,
Krüppel-associated box (KRAB) domain-associated protein (KAP-1), by the ataxia
telangiectasia-mutated (ATM) kinase. Co-repressors, such as KAP-1, function to
regulate the rigid structure of heterochromatin by recruiting histone-modifying
enzymes, such HDAC1/2, SETDB1, and nucleosome-remodeling complexes such as CHD3. 
Here, we have characterized a phosphorylation site in the HP1-binding domain of
KAP-1, Ser-473, which is phosphorylated by the cell cycle checkpoint kinase Chk2.
Expression of a nonphosphorylatable S473A mutant conferred cellular sensitivity
to DNA-damaging agents and led to defective repair of DNA double-strand breaks in
heterochromatin. In addition, cells expressing S473A also displayed defective
mobilization of the HP1-ß chromodomain protein. The DNA repair defect observed in
cells expressing S473A was alleviated by depletion of HP1-ß, suggesting that
phosphorylation of KAP-1 on Ser-473 promotes the mobilization of HP1-ß from
heterochromatin and subsequent DNA repair. These results suggest a novel
mechanism of KAP-1-mediated chromatin restructuring via Chk2-regulated HP1-ß
exchange from heterochromatin, promoting DNA repair.

PMCID: PMC3431694
PMID: 22715096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2012 Oct 15;362(1-2):165-75. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2012.06.005.
Epub 2012 Jun 17.

The role for runt related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2) as a transcriptional
repressor in luteinizing granulosa cells.

Park ES(1), Park J, Franceschi RT, Jo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Chandler Medical Center, University
of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536-0298, USA.

Transcription factors induced by the LH surge play a vital role in reprogramming 
the gene expression in periovulatory follicles. The present study investigated
the role of RUNX2 transcription factor in regulating the expression of Runx1,
Ptgs2, and Tnfaip6 using cultured granulosa cells isolated from PMSG-primed
immature rats. hCG or forskolin+PMA induced the transient increase in Runx1,
Ptgs2, and Tnfaip6 expression, while the expression of Runx2 continued to
increase until 48 h. The knockdown of the agonist-stimulated Runx2 expression
increased Runx1, Ptgs2, and Tnfaip6 expression and PGE(2) levels in luteinizing
granulosa cells. Conversely, the over-expression of RUNX2 inhibited the
expression of these genes and PGE(2) levels. The mutation of RUNX binding motifs 
in the Runx1 promoter enhanced transcriptional activity of the Runx1 promoter.
The knockdown and overexpression of Runx2 increased and decreased Runx1 promoter 
activity, respectively. ChIP assays revealed the binding of RUNX2 in the Runx1
and Ptgs2 promoters. Together, these novel findings provide support for the role 
of RUNX2 in down-regulation of Runx1, Ptgs2, and Tnfaip6 during the late
ovulatory period to support proper ovulation and/or luteinization.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3864655
PMID: 22713854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Circulation. 2012 Jul 24;126(4):455-67. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.112.103176.
Epub 2012 Jun 18.

Histone deacetylation inhibition in pulmonary hypertension: therapeutic potential
of valproic acid and suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid.

Zhao L(1), Chen CN, Hajji N, Oliver E, Cotroneo E, Wharton J, Wang D, Li M,
McKinsey TA, Stenmark KR, Wilkins MR.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Experimental Medicine, Imperial
College London, Du Cane Rd, London W12 ONN, UK. l.zhao@imperial.ac.uk

Comment in
    Circulation. 2013 Apr 9;127(14):e539.
    Circulation. 2013 Apr 9;127(14):e540.

BACKGROUND: Epigenetic programming, dynamically regulated by histone acetylation,
is a key mechanism regulating cell proliferation and survival. Little is known
about the contribution of histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity to the development 
of pulmonary arterial hypertension, a condition characterized by profound
structural remodeling of pulmonary arteries and arterioles.
METHODS AND RESULTS: HDAC1 and HDAC5 protein levels were elevated in lungs from
human idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension and in lungs and right
ventricles from rats exposed to hypoxia. Immunohistochemistry localized increased
expression to remodeled vessels in the lung. Both valproic acid, a class I HDAC
inhibitor, and suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (vorinostat), an inhibitor of
class I, II, and IV HDACs, mitigated the development of and reduced established
hypoxia-induced pulmonary hypertension in the rat. Both valproic acid and
suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid inhibited the imprinted highly proliferative
phenotype of fibroblasts and R-cells from pulmonary hypertensive bovine vessels
and platelet-derived growth factor-stimulated growth of human vascular smooth
muscle cells in culture. Exposure to valproic acid and suberoylanilide hydroxamic
acid was associated with increased levels of p21 and FOXO3 and reduced expression
of survivin. The significantly higher levels of expression of cKIT, monocyte
chemoattractant protein-1, interleukin-6, stromal-derived factor-1,
platelet-derived growth factor-b, and S100A4 in R-cells were downregulated by
valproic acid and suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Increased HDAC activity contributes to the vascular pathology of
pulmonary hypertension. The effectiveness of HDAC inhibitors, valproic acid, and 
suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid, in models of pulmonary arterial hypertension
supports a therapeutic strategy based on HDAC inhibition in pulmonary arterial
hypertension.

PMCID: PMC3799888
PMID: 22711276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Haematologica. 2012 Nov;97(11):1632-40. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2012.061937. Epub
2012 Jun 11.

The role of WDR5 in silencing human fetal globin gene expression.

Xu Z(1), He Y, Ju J, Rank G, Cerruti L, Ma C, Simpson RJ, Moritz RL, Jane SM,
Zhao Q.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology and Cancer Research Center, The State Key Laboratory of
Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of Life Sciences, Nanjing University,
Nanjing 210093, China.

BACKGROUND: Histone H3 lysine 4 (K4) methylation has been linked with
transcriptional activity in mammalian cells. The WD40-repeat protein, WDR5, is an
essential component of the MLL complex that induces histone H3 K4 methylation,
but the role of WDR5 in human globin gene regulation has not yet been
established.
DESIGN AND METHODS: To study the role of WDR5 in human globin gene regulation, we
performed knockdown experiments in both K562 cells and primary human bone marrow 
erythroid progenitor cells (BMC). The effects of WDR5 knockdown on <U+03B3>-globin gene 
expression were determined. Biochemical approaches were also employed to
investigate WDR5 interaction molecules. Chromosomal marks in the globin locus
were analyzed by ChIP.
RESULTS: We found that WDR5 interacted with protein arginine methyltransferase 5 
(PRMT5), a known repressor of <U+03B3>-globin gene expression, and was essential for
generating tri-methylated H3K4 (H3K4me3) at the <U+03B3>-globin promoter in K562 cells. 
Enforced expression of WDR5 in K562 cells reduced <U+03B3>-globin gene expression,
whereas knockdown of WDR5 increased <U+03B3>-globin gene expression in both K562 cells
and primary human bone marrow erythroid progenitor cells. Consistent with this,
both histone H3 and H4 acetylation at the <U+03B3>-globin promoter were increased, while
histone H4R3 and H3K9 methylation were decreased, in WDR5 knockdown cells
compared to controls. We found that WDR5 interacted with HDAC1 and a PHD
domaincontaining protein, ING2 (inhibitor of growth), an H3K4me3 mark reader, to 
enhance <U+03B3>-globin gene transcriptional repression. In human BMC, levels of WDR5
were highly enriched on the <U+03B3>-promoter relative to levels on other globin
promoters and compared to the <U+03B3>-promoter in cord blood erythroid progenitors,
suggesting that WDR5 is important in the developmental globin gene expression
program.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data are consistent with a model in which WDR5 binds the
<U+03B3>-globin promoter in a PRMT5-dependent manner; H3K4me3 induced at the <U+03B3>-globin
promoter by WDR5 may result in the recruitment of the ING2-associated HDAC1
component and consequent silencing of <U+03B3>-globin gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3487434
PMID: 22689669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Biomed Sci. 2012 Jun 11;19:57. doi: 10.1186/1423-0127-19-57.

Epigeneitc silencing of ribosomal RNA genes by Mybbp1a.

Tan BC(1), Yang CC, Hsieh CL, Chou YH, Zhong CZ, Yung BY, Liu H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences and Department of Biomedical
Sciences, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Kwei-San, Tao-Yuan 333,
Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Transcription of the ribosomal RNA gene repeats by Pol I occurs in
the nucleolus and is a fundamental step in ribosome biogenesis and protein
translation. Due to tight coordination between ribosome biogenesis and cell
proliferation, transcription of rRNA and stable maintenance of rDNA clusters are 
thought to be under intricate control by intercalated mechanisms, particularly at
the epigenetic level.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Here we identify the nucleolar protein Myb-binding protein
1a (Mybbp1a) as a novel negative regulator of rRNA expression. Suppression of
rDNA transcription by Mybbp1a was linked to promoter regulation as illustrated by
its binding to the chromatin around the hypermethylated, inactive rDNA gene
promoters. Our data further showed that downregulation of Mybbp1a abrogated the
local DNA methylation levels and histone marks associated with gene silencing,
and altered the promoter occupancy of various factors such UBF and HDACs,
consequently leading to elevated rRNA expression. Mechanistically, we propose
that Mybbp1a maintains rDNA repeats in a silenced state while in association with
the negative epigenetic modifiers HDAC1/2.
CONCLUSIONS: Results from our present work reveal a previously unrecognized
co-repressor role of Mybbp1a in rRNA expression. They are further consistent with
the scenario that Mybbp1a is an integral constituent of the rDNA epigenetic
regulation that underlies the balanced state of rDNA clusters.

PMCID: PMC3407492
PMID: 22686419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Int J Oncol. 2012 Sep;41(3):862-8. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2012.1507. Epub 2012 Jun 6.

Characterization of cells resistant to the potent histone deacetylase inhibitor
spiruchostatin B (SP-B) and effect of overexpressed p21waf1/cip1 on the SP-B
resistance or susceptibility of human leukemia cells.

Kanno S(1), Maeda N, Tomizawa A, Yomogida S, Katoh T, Ishikawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacotherapeutics, Tohoku Pharmaceutical University,
Aoba-ku, Sendai 981-8558, Japan. syu-kan@tohoku-pharm.ac.jp

We previously showed that the B cell leukemia cell line NALM-6 had the highest
susceptibility among a number of leukemia cell lines to spiruchostatin B (SP-B), 
a potent histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor. We also showed that SP-B-induced
cytotoxicity depended on induction of apoptosis that was mediated by p21waf1/cip1
expression. In the present study, we generated and characterized a stable,
SP-B-resistant NALM-6 cell line (NALM-6/SP-B) by continuous exposure to SP-B,
starting with a low SP-B concentration. NALM-6/SP-B cells were also more
resistant to FK228, which has a similar chemical structure to SP-B, and were
slightly more resistant to the P-gp substrates doxorubicin and vincristine than
parental cells, but displayed similar susceptibility to other HDAC inhibitors and
to paclitaxel as the parental cells. There was little change in the basal mRNA
expression of HDAC1, p53, Bax, Bcl-2, Fas, caspase-3, c-Myc and MDR1 in
NALM-6/SP-B compared to parental cells, but the mRNA expression of p21waf1/cip1
was decreased. The introduction of an exogenous p21waf1/cip1 expression vector
restored SP-B induction of NALM-6/SP-B cell apoptosis. Moreover, overexpressed
p21waf1/cip1 enhanced SP-B induction of the apoptosis of the human
erythroleukemia leukemia cell line K562 which is less susceptible to SP-B than
NALM-6 cells. These results suggest that downregulation of p21waf1/cip1, which is
a characteristic feature of NALM-6/SP-B cells, was important for their resistance
to SP-B, and that this SP-B resistance could be overcome by the introduction of
exogenous p21waf1/cip1. Furthermore, introduction of p21waf1/cip1 to other
leukemia cells such as K562 may enhance their susceptibility to SP-B. This is the
first report of the characterization of SP-B-resistant cells and of the effect of
overexpressed p21waf1/cip1 on the resistance or susceptibility of human leukemia 
cells to SP-B.

PMCID: PMC3582725
PMID: 22684370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Neuropharmacology. 2012 Sep;63(4):750-60. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2012.05.042. 
Epub 2012 Jun 6.

Class I histone deacetylase inhibition ameliorates social cognition and cell
adhesion molecule plasticity deficits in a rodent model of autism spectrum
disorder.

Foley AG(1), Gannon S, Rombach-Mullan N, Prendergast A, Barry C, Cassidy AW,
Regan CM.

Author information: 
(1)Berand Neuropharmacology, NovaUCD, Belfield Innovation Park, University
College Dublin, Dublin 4, Ireland.

In utero exposure of rodents to valproic acid (VPA), a histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitor, has been proposed to induce an adult phenotype with behavioural
characteristics reminiscent of those observed in autism spectrum disorder (ASD). 
We have evaluated the face validity of this model in terms of social cognition
deficits which are a major core symptom of ASD. We employed the social approach
avoidance paradigm as a measure of social reciprocity, detection of biological
motion that is crucial to social interactions, and spatial learning as an
indicator of dorsal stream processing of social cognition and found each
parameter to be significantly impaired in Wistar rats with prior in utero
exposure to VPA. We found no significant change in the expression of neural cell 
adhesion molecule polysialylation state (NCAM PSA), a measure of construct
validity, but a complete inability to increase its glycosylation state which is
necessary to mount the neuroplastic response associated with effective spatial
learning. Finally, in all cases, we found chronic HDAC inhibition, with either
pan-specific or HDAC1-3 isoform-specific inhibitors, to significantly ameliorate 
deficits in both social cognition and its associated neuroplastic response. We
conclude that in utero exposure to VPA provides a robust animal model for the
social cognitive deficits of ASD and a potential screen for the development of
novel therapeutics for this condition.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22683514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Cell. 2012 Jun 8;149(6):1327-38. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.04.025.

Fruitless recruits two antagonistic chromatin factors to establish single-neuron 
sexual dimorphism.

Ito H(1), Sato K, Koganezawa M, Ote M, Matsumoto K, Hama C, Yamamoto D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurogenetics, Tohoku University Graduate School of Life Sciences,
Sendai, Japan.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurosci. 2012 Aug;13(8):516.

The Drosophila fruitless (fru) gene encodes a set of putative transcription
factors that promote male sexual behavior by controlling the development of
sexually dimorphic neuronal circuitry. However, the mechanism whereby fru
establishes the sexual fate of neurons remains enigmatic. Here, we show that Fru 
forms a complex with the transcriptional cofactor Bonus (Bon), which, in turn,
recruits either of two chromatin regulators, Histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), which
masculinizes individual sexually dimorphic neurons, or Heterochromatin protein 1a
(HP1a), which demasculinizes them. Manipulations of HDAC1 or HP1a expression
change the proportion of male-typical neurons and female-typical neurons rather
than producing neurons with intersexual characteristics, indicating that on a
single neuron level, this sexual switch operates in an all-or-none manner.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22682252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Biofactors. 2012 Sep-Oct;38(5):329-37. doi: 10.1002/biof.1030. Epub 2012 Jun 7.

Sphingosine-1-phosphate signaling in physiology and diseases.

Takuwa Y(1), Okamoto Y, Yoshioka K, Takuwa N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Kanazawa University School of Medicine, Kanazawa,
Ishikawa, Japan. ytakuwa@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

Sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P), which acts as both the extracellular and
intracellular messenger, exerts pleiotropic biological activities including
regulation of formation of the vasculature, vascular barrier integrity, and
lymphocyte trafficking. Many of these S1P actions are mediated by five members of
the G protein-coupled S1P receptors (S1P(1) -S1P(5) ) with overlapping but
distinct coupling to heterotrimeric G proteins. The biological activities of S1P 
are based largely on the cellular actions of S1P on migration, adhesion, and
proliferation. Notably, S1P often exhibits receptor subtype-specific, bimodal
effects in these cellular actions. For example, S1P(1) mediates cell migration
toward S1P, that is, chemotaxis, via G(i) /Rac pathway whereas S1P(2) mediates
inhibition of migration toward a chemoattractant, that is, chemorepulsion, via
G(12/13) /Rho pathway, which induces Rac inhibition. In addition, S1P(1) mediates
stimulation of cell proliferation through the G(i) -mediated signaling pathways
including phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt and ERK whereas S1P(2)
mediates inhibition of cell proliferation through mechanisms involving G(12/13)
/Rho/Rho kinase/PTEN-dependent Akt inhibition. These differential effects of S1P 
receptor subtypes on migration and proliferation lead to bimodal regulation of
various biological responses. An observed biological response is likely
determined by an integrated outcome of the counteracting signals input by S1P
receptor subtypes. More recent studies identified the new intracellular targets
of S1P including the inflammatory signaling molecule TRAF2 and histone
deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2. These interactions of S1P regulate NF-<U+03BA>B activity
and gene expression, respectively. Development of S1P receptor agonists and
antagonists with improved receptor subtype-selectivity, inhibitors, or modulators
of sphingolipid-metabolizing enzymes, and their optimal drug delivery system
provide novel therapeutic tactics.

Copyright © 2012 International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMID: 22674845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. FEBS Lett. 2012 Jun 4;586(11):1570-83. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.04.038. Epub
2012 Apr 30.

NIRF/UHRF2 occupies a central position in the cell cycle network and allows
coupling with the epigenetic landscape.

Mori T(1), Ikeda DD, Yamaguchi Y, Unoki M; NIRF Project.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Lifesciences, Fukushima Medical University School of
Nursing, Fukushima, Japan.

As predicted by systems biology, a paradigm shift will emerge through the
integration of information about different layers of cellular processes. The cell
cycle network is at the heart of the cellular computing system, and orchestrates 
versatile cellular functions. The NIRF/UHRF2 ubiquitin ligase is an "intermodular
hub" that occupies a central position in the network, and facilitates
coordination among the cell cycle machinery, the ubiquitin-proteasome system, and
the epigenetic system. NIRF interacts with cyclins, CDKs, p53, pRB, PCNA, HDAC1, 
DNMTs, G9a, methylated histone H3 lysine 9, and methylated DNA. NIRF
ubiquitinates cyclins D1 and E1, and induces G1 arrest. The NIRF gene is
frequently lost in tumors and is a candidate tumor suppressor, while its paralog,
the UHRF1 gene, is hardly altered. Thus, investigations of NIRF are essential to 
understand the entire biological systems. Through integration of the enormous
information flows, NIRF may contribute to the coupling between the cell cycle
network and the epigenetic landscape. We propose the new paradigm that NIRF
produces the extreme diversity in the network wiring that helps the diversity of 
Waddington's canals.

Copyright © 2012 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22673569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 2012 Sep;39(9):751-8. doi:
10.1111/j.1440-1681.2012.05729.x.

Expression patterns of histone deacetylases in experimental stroke and potential 
targets for neuroprotection.

Chen YT(1), Zang XF, Pan J, Zhu XL, Chen F, Chen ZB, Xu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Affiliated Drum Tower Hospital of Nanjing University 
Medical School, Nanjing, China.

1. Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors exert neuroprotection in both cellular
and animal models of ischaemic stroke. However, which HDAC isoform (or isoforms) 
mediates this beneficial effect has not yet been determined. 2. In the present
study, gene levels of the HDAC isoforms were determined in the mouse cortex using
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), whereas changes in the 
expression of individual zinc-dependent HDAC family members were evaluated by
western blotting, 3, 12, 24 and 48 h after cerebral ischaemia induced by
transient middle cerebral artery occlusion in male Kunming mice. 3. The HDAC
isoforms HDAC1-11 were all expressed in the mouse cortex and differentially
affected by cerebral ischaemia. Notably, there was a substantial increase in
HDAC3, HDAC6 and HDAC11 expression during the early phases of experimental
stroke, indicating their contribution to stroke pathogenesis. Furthermore,
induction of HDAC3 and HDAC6 in cortical neurons by ischaemic stroke was
confirmed in vivo and in vitro using double-labelled immunostaining and RT-PCR,
respectively. Therefore, small hairpin (sh) RNAs were used to selectively knock
down HDAC3 or HDAC6. This knockdown appreciably promoted the survival of cortical
neurons subjected to oxygen and glucose deprivation. 4. The findings of the
present study demonstrate the expression patterns of HDAC isoforms during
experimental ischaemic stroke. Furthermore, HDAC3 and HDAC6 were identified as
potential mediators in the neurotoxicity of ischaemic stroke, suggesting that
specific therapeutic approaches may be considered according to HDAC subtype.

© 2012 The Authors Clinical and Experimental Pharmacology and Physiology © 2012
Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 22651689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Biol Reprod. 2012 Aug 9;87(2):34. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.112.100743. Print 2012 
Aug.

Male mice produced by in vitro culture have reduced fertility and transmit
organomegaly and glucose intolerance to their male offspring.

Calle A(1), Miranda A, Fernandez-Gonzalez R, Pericuesta E, Laguna R,
Gutierrez-Adan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department de Reproducción Animal y Conservación de Recursos Zoogenéticos,
INIA, Madrid, Spain.

It has been reported that suboptimal in vitro culture (IVC) of mouse embryos can 
affect the postnatal expression of epigenetically sensitive alleles, resulting in
altered postnatal growth, organ dimensions, health, and behavior in the
offspring. Although these detrimental impacts on the offspring are well
described, the relative contribution of the IVC-produced fathers is unclear. In
this work, we have analyzed if suboptimal IVC (achieved by altering the culture
medium by the addition of FCS) can affect male fertility and if organ size and
glucose clearance, two of the adverse effects produced by suboptimal IVC
conditions, were transmitted to the next two generations. IVC-produced males had 
lower sperm concentrations (5.8 × 10(6) spermatozoa in IVC vs. 14.5 × 10(6)
spermatozoa in control), and these sperm exhibited decreased overall motility
(49.6% vs. 72.8% in control) and progressive motility (22.6% vs. 32.2% in
control). Fertility tests demonstrated that the percentage of pregnancies was
reduced for IVC males (35% for IVC-produced males vs. 86% for in vivo controls). 
These features were related to a modified gene expression pattern in adult male
testes, showing an altered gene expression in genes involved in DNA repair and
apoptosis that was confirmed by TUNEL assay. Regarding the IVC related adverse
phenotype transmitted to offspring, male glucose intolerance was shown only in F1
and F2 male but not female offspring. The same occurred with male abnormalities
in the organ size of the liver, which were transmitted to F1 and F2 males but not
to F1 females; moreover, analysis of the F0, F1, and F2 males revealed greater
coefficients of variance in body weight and glucose intolerance than the control 
group. Finally, we analyzed, through gene silencing, the effect of IVC on the
mRNA expression at the blastocyst stage for 11 known gene expression modifiers of
epigenetic reprogramming. Suboptimal IVC reduced the expression of Kap1, Sox2,
Hdac1, Dnmt1, and Dnmt3a, suggesting a molecular epigenetic role for gene
expression modifiers in the origin and transmission of these abnormal phenotypes.

PMID: 22649070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Cell Cycle. 2012 Jun 1;11(11):2206-15. doi: 10.4161/cc.20765. Epub 2012 Jun 1.

The tumor suppressor HINT1 regulates MITF and ß-catenin transcriptional activity 
in melanoma cells.

Genovese G(1), Ghosh P, Li H, Rettino A, Sioletic S, Cittadini A, Sgambato A.

Author information: 
(1)Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbia University Medical
Center, New York, NY, USA.

Histidine triad nucleotide-binding protein 1 (HINT1) is a haploinsufficient tumor
suppressor gene that inhibits the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway in colon cancer cells and
Microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF) activity in human mast
cells. MITF and ß-catenin play a central role in melanocyte and melanoma cell
survival, and this study aimed to investigate the effects of HINT1 on the MITF
and ß-catenin pathways in malignant melanoma cells. We found that HINT1 inhibits 
MITF and ß-catenin transcriptional activity, and both proteins can be
co-immunoprecipitated with an anti-HINT1-specific antibody in melanoma cell
lines. Stable, constitutive overexpression of the HINT1 protein in human melanoma
cells significantly impaired cell proliferation in vitro and tumorigenesis in
vivo. These effects were associated with a decreased expression of cyclin D1 and 
BCL2, well known MITF and ß-catenin transcription targets, respectively. We also 
demonstrated that BCL2 and cyclin D1 can partially rescue the HINT1-driven
phenotype. Moreover, we found in ChIP assays that HINT1 binds the chromatin at
MITF and ß-catenin sites in BCL2 and cyclin D1 promoters, respectively, and that 
mSIN3a and HDAC1, well known transcriptional repressors, can be
co-immunoprecipitated with an anti-HINT1-specific antibody. These findings
support the tumor suppressor activity of HINT1 gene in melanoma cells by
promoting the formation of non-functional complexes with oncogenic transcription 
factors like MITF and ß-catenin.

PMID: 22647378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Gastroenterology. 2012 Sep;143(3):811-20.e1-15. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2012.05.033. Epub 2012 May 26.

Histone deacetylases activate hepatocyte growth factor signaling by repressing
microRNA-449 in hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Buurman R(1), Gürlevik E, Schäffer V, Eilers M, Sandbothe M, Kreipe H, Wilkens L,
Schlegelberger B, Kühnel F, Skawran B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell and Molecular Pathology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, 
Germany.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Histone deacetylation regulates chromatin remodeling and
transcriptional down-regulation of specific genomic regions; it is altered in
many types of cancer cells. We searched for microRNAs (miRs) that are affected by
histone deacetylation and investigated the effects in hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) cells.
METHODS: HCC cell lines (HepG2, HLE, HLF, and Huh7) and immortalized liver cell
lines (THLE-2 and THLE-3) were incubated with the histone deacetylase inhibitor
trichostatin A. Differentially expressed messenger RNAs (mRNAs) and miRs were
identified by expression profiling. Small interfering RNAs were used to reduce
levels of histone deacetylases (HDAC)1-3, and HCC cell lines were transfected
with miR-449. We evaluated growth of xenograft tumors from modified cells in nude
mice. Cells were analyzed by immunoblot and luciferase reporter assays. We
analyzed HCC samples from 23 patients.
RESULTS: HDAC1-3 were up-regulated in HCC samples from patients. In cell lines,
inhibition of HDAC significantly increased levels of hsa-miR-449a. c-MET mRNA,
which encodes the receptor tyrosine kinase for hepatocyte growth factor, is a
target of miR-449. Incubation of HCC cells with trichostatin A or transfection
with miR-449 reduced expression of c-MET and phosphorylation of extracellular
signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 (downstream effectors of c-MET), increased
apoptosis, and reduced proliferation. Huh-7 cells transfected with miR-449 formed
tumors more slowly in mice than cells expressing control miRs. HCC samples from
patients had lower levels of miR-449 and higher levels of c-MET than human
reference.
CONCLUSIONS: In HCC cells, up-regulation of HDAC1-3 reduces expression of
miR-449. miR-449 binds c-MET mRNA to reduce its levels, promoting apoptosis and
reducing proliferation of liver cells. Expression of miR-449 slows growth of HCC 
xenograft tumors in mice; this miR might function as a tumor suppressor.

Copyright © 2012 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22641068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2012 Aug;25(4):286-92. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2012.05.003. Epub
2012 May 18.

Smoke exposure of human macrophages reduces HDAC3 activity, resulting in enhanced
inflammatory cytokine production.

Winkler AR(1), Nocka KN, Williams CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Inflammation and Remodeling, BioTherapeutics Research and
Development, Pfizer, Inc., 200 Cambridge Park Dr., Cambridge, MA 02474, USA.
aaron.winkler@pfizer.com

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a debilitating condition
resulting from exposure to pollutants such as cigarette smoke. Pulmonary
macrophages secrete a plethora of inflammatory mediators that are increased in
the lungs of COPD patients, but whether this phenotype results directly from
smoke exposure remains unknown. Using an in vitro model for alveolar macrophages 
(AM) derived from human peripheral blood monocytes with granulocyte-macrophage
stimulating factor (GM-MØ), we analyzed the mechanistic connection between
cigarette smoke exposure and histone deacetylase (HDAC) regulation, hypothesized 
to be a contributing factor in COPD pathophysiology. Here we show that acute
smoke exposure inhibits HDAC enzymatic activity in GM-MØ. Analysis of mRNA and
total cellular proteins for expression of class I (1, 2, 3 and 8), class II (4,
5, 6, 7, 9, 10), and class IV (11) HDAC revealed no effect of smoke exposure,
whereas nuclear HDAC3 protein content was reduced. To better understand the
physiological significance of reduced HDAC3 activity, we utilized siRNA to
knockdown HDAC1, 2 and 3 individually. Interestingly, siRNA-mediated reduction of
HDAC3 resulted in increased production of IL8 and IL1ß in response to LPS
stimulation, while HDAC2 knockdown had no effect on either cytokine. Lower
nuclear content of HDAC3 in the context of equivalent total HDAC protein levels
following smoke exposure may reflect increased nuclear export of HDAC3, allowing 
increased nuclear factor kappa b (NF-<U+03BA>B ) driven cytokine expression that can
contribute to inflammation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22613758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Mol Cells. 2012 Jun;33(6):575-81. doi: 10.1007/s10059-012-0002-9. Epub 2012 May
18.

Differentiated embryo chondrocyte 1 (DEC1) represses PPAR<U+03B3>2 gene through
interacting with CCAAT/enhancer binding protein ß (C/EBPß).

Park YK(1), Park H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, University of Seoul, Seoul 130-743, Korea.

DEC1 is a transcription repressor that is induced by Hypoxia-Inducible Factor-a/ß
(HIF-a/ß). In this study, we found that either hypoxic treatment or ectopic
expression of DEC1 blocks induction of a master adipogenic transactivator,
peroxisome proliferative activated receptor-<U+03B3>2 (PPAR<U+03B3>2) in 3T3-L1 cells. DEC1 did
not prevent C/EBPß, which is an upstream transactivator for PPAR<U+03B3>2, from
occupying the PPAR<U+03B3>2 promoter. DEC1 occupied the PPAR<U+03B3>2 promoter by interacting
with DNA-bound C/EBPß. DEC1 occupancy was accompanied by a reduction of
acetylated histones and an increase in histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) occupancy on
the PPAR<U+03B3>2 promoter. Based on the fact that DEC1 interacts with HDAC1, this study
suggests that DEC1 blocks adipogenesis by reinforcing HDAC1 recruitment to the
PPAR<U+03B3>2 promoter. This study implies that DEC1 is one of the mediators that reset 
the pattern of PPAR<U+03B3>2 expression in response to hypoxia.

PMCID: PMC3887761
PMID: 22610404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Neurobiol Dis. 2012 May;46(2):351-61.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors targeting HDAC3 and HDAC1 ameliorate
polyglutamine-elicited phenotypes in model systems of Huntington's disease.

Jia H(1), Pallos J, Jacques V, Lau A, Tang B, Cooper A, Syed A, Purcell J, Chen
Y, Sharma S, Sangrey GR, Darnell SB, Plasterer H, Sadri-Vakili G, Gottesfeld JM, 
Thompson LM, Rusche JR, Marsh JL, Thomas EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 
92037, USA.

We have previously demonstrated amelioration of Huntington's disease (HD)-related
phenotypes in R6/2 transgenic mice in response to treatment with the novel
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor 4b. Here we have measured the selectivity
profiles of 4b and related compounds against class I and class II HDACs and have 
tested their ability to restore altered expression of genes related to HD
pathology in mice and to rescue disease effects in cell culture and Drosophila
models of HD. R6/2 transgenic and wild-type (wt) mice received daily injections
of HDAC inhibitors for 3 days followed by real-time PCR analysis to detect
expression differences for 13 HD-related genes. We find that HDACi 4b and 136,
two compounds showing high potency for inhibiting HDAC3 were most effective in
reversing the expression of genes relevant to HD, including Ppp1r1b, which
encodes DARPP-32, a marker for medium spiny striatal neurons. In contrast,
compounds targeting HDAC1 were less effective at correcting gene expression
abnormalities in R6/2 transgenic mice, but did cause significant increases in the
expression of selected genes. An additional panel of 4b-related compounds was
tested in a Drosophila model of HD and in STHdhQ111 striatal cells to further
distinguish HDAC selectivity. Significant improvement in huntingtin-elicited
Drosophila eye neurodegeneration in the fly was observed in response to treatment
with compounds targeting human HDAC1 and/or HDAC3. In STHdhQ111 striatal cells,
the ability of HDAC inhibitors to improve huntingtin-elicited metabolic deficits 
correlated with the potency at inhibiting HDAC1 and HDAC3, although the IC50
values for HDAC1 inhibition were typically 10-fold higher than for inhibition of 
HDAC3. Assessment of HDAC protein localization in brain tissue by Western blot
analysis revealed accumulation of HDAC1 and HDAC3 in the nucleus of HD transgenic
mice compared to wt mice, with a concurrent decrease in cytoplasmic localization,
suggesting that these HDACs contribute to a repressive chromatin environment in
HD. No differences were detected in the localization of HDAC2, HDAC4 or HDAC7.
These results suggest that inhibition of HDACs 1 and 3 can relieve HD-like
phenotypes in model systems and that HDAC inhibitors targeting these isotypes
might show therapeutic benefit in human HD.

PMCID: PMC3528106
PMID: 22590724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. J Neurosci. 2012 May 9;32(19):6651-64. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4876-11.2012.

Differential modulation of the oligodendrocyte transcriptome by sonic hedgehog
and bone morphogenetic protein 4 via opposing effects on histone acetylation.

Wu M(1), Hernandez M, Shen S, Sabo JK, Kelkar D, Wang J, O'Leary R, Phillips GR, 
Cate HS, Casaccia P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Friedman Brain Institute, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Differentiation of oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) into mature
oligodendrocytes is regulated by the interplay between extrinsic signals and
intrinsic epigenetic determinants. In this study, we analyze the effect that the 
extracellular ligands sonic hedgehog (Shh) and bone morphogenetic protein 4
(BMP4), have on histone acetylation and gene expression in cultured OPCs. Shh
treatment favored the progression toward oligodendrocytes by decreasing histone
acetylation and inducing peripheral chromatin condensation. BMP4 treatment, in
contrast, inhibited the progression toward oligodendrocytes and favored
astrogliogenesis by favoring global histone acetylation and retaining
euchromatin. Pharmacological treatment or silencing of histone deacetylase 1
(Hdac1) or histone deacetylase 2 (Hdac2) in OPCs did not affect BMP4-dependent
astrogliogenesis, while it prevented Shh-induced oligodendrocyte differentiation 
and favored the expression of astrocytic genes. Transcriptional profiling of
treated OPCs, revealed that BMP4-inhibition of oligodendrocyte differentiation
was accompanied by increased levels of Wnt (Tbx3) and Notch-target genes (Jag1,
Hes1, Hes5, Hey1, and Hey2), decreased recruitment of Hdac and increased histone 
acetylation at these loci. Similar upregulation of Notch-target genes and
increased histone acetylation were observed in the corpus callosum of mice
infused with BMP4 during cuprizone-induced demyelination. We conclude that Shh
and Bmp4 differentially regulate histone acetylation and chromatin structure in
OPCs and that BMP4 acts as a potent inducer of gene expression, including Notch
and Wnt target genes, thereby enhancing the crosstalk among signaling pathways
that are known to inhibit myelination and repair.

PMCID: PMC3412138
PMID: 22573687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. PLoS Comput Biol. 2012;8(4):e1002486. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002486. Epub
2012 Apr 26.

Microarray analysis of LTR retrotransposon silencing identifies Hdac1 as a
regulator of retrotransposon expression in mouse embryonic stem cells.

Reichmann J(1), Crichton JH, Madej MJ, Taggart M, Gautier P, Garcia-Perez JL,
Meehan RR, Adams IR.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine,
University of Edinburgh, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.

Retrotransposons are highly prevalent in mammalian genomes due to their ability
to amplify in pluripotent cells or developing germ cells. Host mechanisms that
silence retrotransposons in germ cells and pluripotent cells are important for
limiting the accumulation of the repetitive elements in the genome during
evolution. However, although silencing of selected individual retrotransposons
can be relatively well-studied, many mammalian retrotransposons are seldom
analysed and their silencing in germ cells, pluripotent cells or somatic cells
remains poorly understood. Here we show, and experimentally verify, that cryptic 
repetitive element probes present in Illumina and Affymetrix gene expression
microarray platforms can accurately and sensitively monitor repetitive element
expression data. This computational approach to genome-wide retrotransposon
expression has allowed us to identify the histone deacetylase Hdac1 as a
component of the retrotransposon silencing machinery in mouse embryonic stem
cells, and to determine the retrotransposon targets of Hdac1 in these cells. We
also identify retrotransposons that are targets of other retrotransposon
silencing mechanisms such as DNA methylation, Eset-mediated histone modification,
and Ring1B/Eed-containing polycomb repressive complexes in mouse embryonic stem
cells. Furthermore, our computational analysis of retrotransposon silencing
suggests that multiple silencing mechanisms are independently targeted to
retrotransposons in embryonic stem cells, that different genomic copies of the
same retrotransposon can be differentially sensitive to these silencing
mechanisms, and helps define retrotransposon sequence elements that are targeted 
by silencing machineries. Thus repeat annotation of gene expression microarray
data suggests that a complex interplay between silencing mechanisms represses
retrotransposon loci in germ cells and embryonic stem cells.

PMCID: PMC3343110
PMID: 22570599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Dig Dis Sci. 2012 Aug;57(8):2055-62. doi: 10.1007/s10620-012-2152-1. Epub 2012
May 6.

Correlation of epigenetic aberrance with STAT3 signaling pathway in gastric
carcinogenesis.

Gao F(1), Lv Y, Zhu Y, Chen M, Shen S, Cao J, Zou X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The Drum Tower Hospital Affiliated to Medical 
School of Nanjing University, No. 321 Zhongshan Road, Nanjing 210008, People's
Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: It has been suggested that STAT3 signaling plays important roles in
regulating epigenetic aberrance during tumorigenesis, especially in the
expression of certain key epigenetic enzymes such as DNMTs, HDACs, and HMTs.
However, there has been no report on the relationship of STAT3 signaling and
epigenetic aberrance in gastrocarcinogenesis.
AIM: The purpose of this study was to explore the interrelationship of STAT3
signaling pathway and epigenetic aberrance in gastrocarcinogenesis.
METHODS: Immunohistochemistry was utilized to examine the protein expressions of 
pSTAT3, DNMT1, HDAC1, and EZH2 in 153 tissue specimens, including 20 of normal
gastric epithelium tissue, 21 of intestinal metaplasia (IM), 24 of dysplasia
(DYS), 23 of early gastric cancer (EGC) and 65 of advanced gastric cancer (AGC), 
and then analyze their possible relationship with clinicopathological factors.
RESULTS: We found that the four protein expressions were obviously enhanced
following the malignant process of gastric carcinogenesis. Pearson correlation
analysis of all the pathological groups showed that expression of pSTAT3 was
highly associated with DNMT1, but not with HADC1 and EZH2. However, significant
correlations were detected among the expression of DNMT1, HDAC1, and EZH2.
Further analysis of each pathological group demonstrated that pSTAT3's expression
was dramatically related with DNTM1 in the IM (P = 0.021) and EGC groups (P =
0.013) and correlated with EZH2 in the DYS group (P = 0.020). Furthermore,
pSTAT3's expression was associated with T staging (P = 0.015) in the AGC group,
whereas DNMT1 was associated with gender (P = 0.021), HDAC1 with Lauren
classification (P = 0.007), and EZH2 with T staging (P = 0.003) and lymphatic
staging (P = 0.038).
CONCLUSIONS: The STAT3 signaling pathway may correlate with epigenetic aberrance 
during gastrocarcinogenesis.

PMID: 22562532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Int J Oncol. 2012 Jul;41(1):353-61. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2012.1449. Epub 2012 Apr 26.

Green tea polyphenols increase p53 transcriptional activity and acetylation by
suppressing class I histone deacetylases.

Thakur VS(1), Gupta K, Gupta S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology and Nutrition, Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

Acetylation of the tumor suppressor gene p53 at the carboxy-terminal lysine (Lys)
residues enhances its transcriptional activity associated with cell cycle arrest 
and apoptosis. Histone deacetylases (HDACs), a family of evolutionarily conserved
enzymes, counterbalance the acetylation of lysine residues on histone and
non-histone proteins. In this study, we demonstrate that green tea polyphenols
(GTPs) and their major constituent, (-) epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG),
activate p53 through acetylation at the Lys373 and Lys382 residues by inhibiting 
class I HDACs in LNCaP human prostate cancer cells. Treatment of cells with GTPs 
(2.5-10 µg/ml) and EGCG (5-20 µM) resulted in dose- and time-dependent inhibition
of class I HDACs (HDAC1, 2, 3 and 8), albeit at varying levels. Discontinuation
of treatment with GTP/EGCG resulted in the loss of p53 acetylation at both the
sites in these cells. GTP/EGCG treatment also resulted in increased expression of
p21/waf1 and Bax at the protein and message levels in these cells. The increased 
GTP/EGCG-mediated p53 acetylation enhanced its binding on the promoters of
p21/waf1 and Bax, which was associated with increased accumulation of cells in
the G0/G1 phase of the cell cycle and induction of apoptosis. Our findings
indicate that GTP/EGCG causes acetylation of p53 by inhibiting class I HDACs, a
function that is likely to be part of the mechanisms that control the
physiological activity of p53.

PMCID: PMC3580388
PMID: 22552582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2012 Aug;25(4):312-8. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2012.04.001. Epub 
2012 Apr 21.

Long-acting ß2 agonists and corticosteroids restore the reduction of histone
deacetylase activity and inhibit H2O2-induced mediator release from alveolar
macrophages.

Perng DW(1), Su KC, Chou KT, Wu YC, Chen CS, Hsiao YH, Tseng CM, Chen YH, Hsueh
TY, Lee YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chest Medicine, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan, ROC. dwperng@vghtpe.gov.tw

BACKGROUND: Treatment of COPD with a combination of long-acting ß(2) agonists and
corticosteroids is currently used worldwide. The mechanisms of the
anti-inflammatory effects and their associations with histone deacetylase (HDAC) 
activity remain unclear.
METHODS: Human alveolar macrophages were isolated and stimulated with H(2)O(2) in
the presence of varying concentrations of long-acting ß(2) agonists and
corticosteroids. Supernatants were collected for IL-8 and MMP-9 measurements.
Cell lysates were analyzed for HDAC (mainly HDAC1/HDAC2) activity. Quantitative
real-time PCR was performed to determine the levels of IL-8 and MMP-9 mRNA.
RESULTS: Both long-acting ß(2) agonists, salmeterol and formoterol, and
corticosteroids, fluticasone and budesonide, showed anti-inflammatory effects to 
a certain extent on H(2)O(2)-induced IL-8 and MMP-9 release in alveolar
macrophages. Combinations of long-acting ß(2) agonists and corticosteroids
exerted greater effects to suppress mediator release, and both transcription and 
translation of IL-8 and MMP-9 were inhibited. It seemed that the levels of IL-8
and MMP-9 after H(2)O(2) stimulation were inversely associated with the activity 
of HDAC. H(2)O(2) stimulation resulted in a significant decrease in HDAC activity
and was associated with an increase in mediator release. In contrast, treatment
with long-acting ß(2) agonists, corticosteroids or theophylline restored the
H(2)O(2)-induced decrease in HDAC activity and inhibited mediator release.
CONCLUSION: Combinations of long-acting ß(2) agonists and corticosteroids exerted
greater effects on the suppression of mediator release in relation to the
enhancement of HDAC activity. This supports at least in part the likely
contribution of anti-inflammatory effects of long-acting ß(2) agonists and
corticosteroids to the clinical benefits seen in COPD patients.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22546485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol. 2012 May;318(3):224-34. doi: 10.1002/jez.b.22440.

Embryonic development and gene expression of porcine SCNT embryos treated with
sodium butyrate.

Liu L(1), Liu Y, Gao F, Song G, Wen J, Guan J, Yin Y, Ma X, Tang B, Li Z.

Author information: 
(1)Jilin Provincial Key Laboratory of Animal Embryo Engineering, Centre for
Animal Embryo Engineering of Jilin Province, College of Animal Science and
Veterinary Medicine, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin, China.

Incomplete epigenetic modification is one of important reasons of inefficient
reprogramming of the donor cell nuclei in ooplasm after somatic cell nuclear
transfer (SCNT). It may also underlie the observed reduced viability of cloned
embryos. Sodium butyrate (NaBu) is a natural histone deacetylase inhibitor that
is produced in the intestine. In the current study, we evaluated the effects of
NaBu on preimplantation development, histone acetylation, and gene expression in 
porcine SCNT embryos. Our results showed that the blastocyst rate (24.88 ± 2.09) 
of cloned embryos treated with 1.0 mM NaBu for 12 hr after activation was
significantly higher (P < 0.05) than that of untreated cloned embryos (13.15 ±
3.07). In addition, treated embryos displayed a global acetylated histone H3 at
lysine 14 profile similar to that of in vitro fertilized (IVF) embryos during
preimplantation development. Lower levels of Oct4 and Bcl-2, but higher levels of
Hdac1, in SCNT embryos at the two-cell and blastocyst stages were observed,
compared with those in the IVF counterparts. The four-cell embryos showed no
differences in the levels of these genes among IVF embryos or SCNT embryos
treated with or without NaBu; however, the levels of Dnmt3b were significantly
different. NaBu-treated SCNT embryos showed similar levels of Oct4, Bcl-2, and
Dnmt3b as in IVF blastocysts. These results indicated that NaBu treatment in SCNT
embryos alters their histone acetylation pattern to provide beneficial effects on
in vitro developmental competence and gene expression.

© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22544719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 May 18;421(4):665-70. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.04.057. Epub 2012 Apr 17.

Lysine-specific demethylase 1 (LSD1) and histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1)
synergistically repress proinflammatory cytokines and classical complement
pathway components.

Janzer A(1), Lim S, Fronhoffs F, Niazy N, Buettner R, Kirfel J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Bonn, Sigmund-Freud-Str. 25, 53127 Bonn,
Germany.

Histone modifying enzymes confer epigenetic marks, directing the changes in gene 
expression required for diverse cellular processes. Lysine-specific demethylase 1
(LSD1) functions as a transcriptional coregulator by demethylating histone H3 on 
lysine 4 and lysine 9. Analyzing transcriptomes on microarrays, we identified
genes which represent inflammatory-related targets of LSD1. We demonstrate a
repressive role of LSD1 in proinflammatory cytokine expression such as IL1a,
IL1ß, IL6 and IL8 and classical complement components. Consistently, LSD1
occupies and regulates the promoter of these genes. In addition, we demonstrate
that HDAC1 and LSD1 synergistically regulate these inflammatory-related genes.
Our data reveal a novel role for LSD1 in suppressing immune responses.

Crown Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22542627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Theriogenology. 2012 Sep 1;78(4):784-92. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2012.03.026. Epub 2012 Apr 26.

Changes in histone acetylation during oocyte meiotic maturation in the diabetic
mouse.

Ding L(1), Pan R, Huang X, Wang JX, Shen YT, Xu L, Zhang Y, Liu Y, He XQ, Yang
XJ, Qi ZQ, Wang HL.

Author information: 
(1)Organ Transplantation Institute, Xiamen University, Xiamen City, Fujian
Province, China.

Although there is considerable evidence that diabetes can adversely affect
meiosis in mammalian oocytes, acetylation status of oocytes in a diabetic
environment remains unclear. The objective was to determine acetylation or
deacetylation patterns (based on immunostaining) of H3K9, H3K14, H4K5, H4K8,
H4K12, and H4K16 sites at various stages during meiosis in murine oocytes from
control and diabetic mice. According to quantitative real time polymerase chain
reaction (qPCR), mean ± SEM relative expression of Gcn5 (1.70 ± 0.14 at metaphase
[M]I and 1.27 ± 0.01 at MII, respectively), Ep300 (1.74 ± 0.04 at MI and 1.80 ±
0.001 at MII), and Pcaf (2.01 ± 0.03 at MI and 1.41 ± 0.18 at MII) mRNA in
oocytes from diabetic mice were higher than those from controls (P < 0.05),
whereas there was no difference (P > 0.05) during the germinal vesicle (GV) stage
between the two groups (1.23 ± 0.04 for Gcn5, 0.82 ± 0.06 for Ep300, and 0.80 ±
0.07 for Pcaf). Conversely, relative mRNA expression concentrations of Hdac1,
Hdac2, Hdac3, Sirt1 and Sirt2 during the germinal vesicle stage were lower in
oocytes of diabetic mice (0.24 ± 0.03 for Hdac1, 0.11 ± 0.001 for Hdac2, 0.31 ±
0.03 for Hdac3, 0.28 ± 0.02 for Sirt1, and 0.55 ± 0.02 for Sirt2; P < 0.05).
Similarly, the expression concentrations of these genes at the MI stage were
lower in oocytes from diabetic mice (0.79 ± 0.12 for Hdac1, 0.72 ± 0.001 for
Hdac2, 0.02 ± 0.001 for Sirt1, and 0.84 ± 0.08 for Sirt2; P < 0.05). Their
expression concentrations at the MII stage were also lower in oocytes from
diabetic mice (0.46 ± 0.03 for Hdac1, 0.93 ± 0.01 for Hdac2, 0.56 ± 0.01 for
Hdac3, 0.01 ± 0.002 for Sirt1, and 0.84 ± 0.04 for Sirt2; P < 0.05). At the MI
stage, however, there was no difference in the expression of Hdac3 between the
two groups of oocytes (0.96 ± 0.03; P > 0.05). Taken together, diabetes altered
the intracellular histone modification system, which may have contributed to
changes in histone acetylation, and may be involved in the compromised maturation
rate of oocytes in diabetic humans.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22541329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Biomol Ther (Seoul). 2012 May;20(3):280-5. doi: 10.4062/biomolther.2012.20.3.280.

Suppression of HIF-1a by Valproic Acid Sustains Self-Renewal of Mouse Embryonic
Stem Cells under Hypoxia In Vitro.

Lee HJ(1), Kim KW.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Inje University, Gimhae 621-749.

The developing embryo naturally experiences relatively low oxygen conditions in
vivo. Under in vitro hypoxia, mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) lose their
self-renewal activity and display an early differentiated morphology mediated by 
the hypoxia-inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a). Previously, we demonstrated that
histone deacetylase (HDAC) is activated by hypoxia and increases the protein
stability and transcriptional activity of HIF-1a in many human cancer cells.
Furthermore HDAC1 and 3 mediate the differentiation of mECSs and hematopoietic
stem cells. However, the role of HDACs and their inhibitors in hypoxia-induced
early differentiation of mESCs remains largely unknown. Here, we examined the
effects of several histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDA-CIs) on the self-renewal
properties of mESCs under hypoxia. Inhibition of HDAC under hypoxia effectively
decreased the HIF-1a protein levels and substantially improved the expression of 
the LIF-specific receptor (LIFR) and phosphorylated-STAT3 in mESCs. In
particular, valproic acid (VPA), a pan HDACI, showed dramatic changes in HIF-1a
protein levels and LIFR protein expression levels compared to other HDACIs,
including sodium butyrate (SB), trichostatin A (TSA), and apicidin (AP).
Importantly, our RT-PCR data and alkaline phosphatase assays indicate that VPA
helps to maintain the self-renewal activity of mESCs under hypoxia. Taken
together, these results suggest that VPA may block the early differentiation of
mESCs under hypoxia via the destabilization of HIF-1a.

PMCID: PMC3794524
PMID: 24130924  [PubMed]


335. Gynecol Obstet Invest. 2012;74(1):50-5. doi: 10.1159/000336409. Epub 2012 Apr 26.

Elevated immunoreactivity against class I histone deacetylases in adenomyosis.

Liu X(1), Nie J, Guo SW.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Fudan University Shanghai College
of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Adenomyosis is a common condition with a poorly understood
pathogenesis. Recent data suggest that it may be an epigenetic disease. This
study investigated the expression and localization of class I histone
deacetylases (HDACs) in women with and without adenomyosis.
METHODS: The ectopic and homologous eutopic endometrium of 50 women with
adenomyosis and the endometrium of 18 age- and menstrual phase-matched women
without adenomyosis were used for immunohistochemical analysis. Tissue sections
were immunostained with HDAC1, -2, and -3. Microscopic evaluation to assess the
presence and localization of HDAC1-3 throughout the menstrual cycle in both
eutopic endometrial and endometriotic tissues of women with adenomyosis was
performed and compared with the normal endometrium.
RESULTS: We found that, compared with the normal endometrium, immunoreactivity
against HDAC1 and HDAC3 was higher in both the eutopic and the ectopic
endometrium. Increased HDAC2 in the eutopic endometrium was found to be
associated with the severity of dysmenorrhea.
CONCLUSION: Given the potential wide-ranging effect of histone deacetylation on
gene expression, these findings suggest that HDACs may be involved in
adenomyosis. They also suggest the possibility that HDAC2 may be involved in
dysmenorrhea and its severity and that HDACs may be potential therapeutic targets
in adenomyosis.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22539030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. EMBO J. 2012 Jun 13;31(12):2810-23. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2012.112. Epub 2012 Apr
24.

A transcriptional repressor co-regulatory network governing androgen response in 
prostate cancers.

Chng KR(1), Chang CW, Tan SK, Yang C, Hong SZ, Sng NY, Cheung E.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology and Pharmacology, Genome Institute of Singapore, A*STAR,
Singapore.

Transcriptional corepressors are frequently aberrantly over-expressed in prostate
cancers. However, their crosstalk with the Androgen receptor (AR), a key player
in prostate cancer development, is unclear. Using ChIP-Seq, we generated
extensive global binding maps of AR, ERG, and commonly over-expressed
transcriptional corepressors including HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3, and EZH2 in prostate 
cancer cells. Surprisingly, our results revealed that ERG, HDACs, and EZH2 are
directly involved in androgen-regulated transcription and wired into an AR
centric transcriptional network via a spectrum of distal enhancers and/or
proximal promoters. Moreover, we showed that similar to ERG, these corepressors
function to mediate repression of AR-induced transcription including cytoskeletal
genes that promote epithelial differentiation and inhibit metastasis.
Specifically, we demonstrated that the direct suppression of Vinculin expression 
by ERG, EZH2, and HDACs leads to enhanced invasiveness of prostate cancer cells. 
Taken together, our results highlight a novel mechanism by which, ERG working
together with oncogenic corepressors including HDACs and the polycomb protein,
EZH2, could impede epithelial differentiation and contribute to prostate cancer
progression, through directly modulating the transcriptional output of AR.

PMCID: PMC3380210
PMID: 22531786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2012 Jun 15;302(12):G1405-15. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00543.2011. Epub 2012 Apr 19.

Butyrate suppresses colonic inflammation through HDAC1-dependent Fas upregulation
and Fas-mediated apoptosis of T cells.

Zimmerman MA(1), Singh N, Martin PM, Thangaraju M, Ganapathy V, Waller JL, Shi H,
Robertson KD, Munn DH, Liu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Georgia Health Sciences University, Augusta,
Georgia 30912, USA.

Butyrate, an intestinal microbiota metabolite of dietary fiber, has been shown to
exhibit protective effects toward inflammatory diseases such as ulcerative
colitis (UC) and inflammation-mediated colorectal cancer. Recent studies have
shown that chronic IFN-<U+03B3> signaling plays an essential role in
inflammation-mediated colorectal cancer development in vivo, whereas genome-wide 
association studies have linked human UC risk loci to IFNG, the gene that encodes
IFN-<U+03B3>. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the butyrate-IFN-<U+03B3>-colonic
inflammation axis are not well defined. Here we showed that colonic mucosa from
patients with UC exhibit increased signal transducer and activator of
transcription 1 (STAT1) activation, and this STAT1 hyperactivation is correlated 
with increased T cell infiltration. Butyrate treatment-induced apoptosis of
wild-type T cells but not Fas-deficient (Fas(lpr)) or FasL-deficient (Fas(gld)) T
cells, revealing a potential role of Fas-mediated apoptosis of T cells as a
mechanism of butyrate function. Histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) was found to bind
to the Fas promoter in T cells, and butyrate inhibits HDAC1 activity to induce
Fas promoter hyperacetylation and Fas upregulation in T cells. Knocking down
gpr109a or slc5a8, the genes that encode for receptor and transporter of
butyrate, respectively, resulted in altered expression of genes related to
multiple inflammatory signaling pathways, including inducible nitric oxide
synthase (iNOS), in mouse colonic epithelial cells in vivo. Butyrate effectively 
inhibited IFN-<U+03B3>-induced STAT1 activation, resulting in inhibition of iNOS
upregulation in human colon epithelial and carcinoma cells in vitro. Our data
thus suggest that butyrate delivers a double-hit: induction of T cell apoptosis
to eliminate the source of inflammation and suppression of IFN-<U+03B3>-mediated
inflammation in colonic epithelial cells, to suppress colonic inflammation.

PMCID: PMC3378095
PMID: 22517765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Br J Dermatol. 2012 Sep;167(3):523-31. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2012.11007.x.
Epub 2012 Aug 10.

Aberrant epigenetic modifications in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from
patients with pemphigus vulgaris.

Zhao M(1), Huang W, Zhang Q, Gao F, Wang L, Zhang G, Su Y, Xiao R, Zhang J, Tang 
M, Cheng W, Tan Y, Lu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Hunan Key Laboratory of Medical Epigenomics, Department of Dermatology, Second
Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 139 Renmin Middle Road, Changsha,
Hunan 410011, China.

BACKGROUND: Pemphigus vulgaris (PV) is an autoimmune blistering disorder with a
complex aetiology involving genetic and environmental factors, most of which
remain unknown. It has become increasingly evident that aberrant epigenetic
modifications are associated with the occurrence and development of autoimmune
skin disorders. However, it is not known whether epigenetic modifications play a 
role in the development of PV.
OBJECTIVES: To analyse DNA methylation and histone modification patterns in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of patients with PV.
METHODS: PBMC samples were isolated from 24 patients with PV and 20 healthy
controls. Skin lesion biopsies and control skin specimens were obtained from 25
patients with PV and 15 healthy controls. Global DNA methylcytosine levels, as
well as histone acetylation and methylation levels, were measured by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. mRNA expression levels were determined using
real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Genomic DNA methylation in PBMCs of patients with PV was increased
relative to controls. DNMT1 expression levels were significantly higher in PV
PBMCs than in controls. MBD3 expression was repressed in PV PBMCs compared with
healthy controls. Global histone H3/H4 acetylation and H3K4/H3K27 methylation
levels were significantly decreased in patient PBMCs compared with healthy
controls. These changes were accompanied by increased HDAC1, HDAC2 and SUV39H2
and decreased SUV39H1 and EZH2 in PV PBMCs.
CONCLUSIONS: Aberrant DNA methylation and histone modifications occur in PBMCs of
patients with PV, possibly due to the deregulation of epigenetic modifier genes. 
These changes may contribute to the pathological immune responses in PV.

© 2012 The Authors. BJD © 2012 British Association of Dermatologists.

PMID: 22512277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Cell Cycle. 2012 May 1;11(9):1743-5. doi: 10.4161/cc.20183. Epub 2012 May 1.

Context-dependent dual and opposite roles of nemo-like kinase in the
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling.

Ishitani T.

PMCID: PMC3372392
PMID: 22510562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. J Cell Sci. 2012 Jul 15;125(Pt 14):3320-32. doi: 10.1242/jcs.095125. Epub 2012
Apr 14.

ARNT controls the expression of epidermal differentiation genes through HDAC- and
EGFR-dependent pathways.

Robertson ED(1), Weir L, Romanowska M, Leigh IM, Panteleyev AA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Division of Medical Sciences,
College of Medicine, Dentistry and Nursing, Ninewells Hospital, University of
Dundee, UK.

Previously we showed that spatial and developmental modulation of ARNT (HIF1ß)
expression in mouse epidermis is essential for maintenance of keratinocyte
differentiation, proper formation of the barrier and normal desquamation. Here,
using lentiviral suppression or induction of ARNT in TERT-immortalized (N-TERT)
and HaCaT cells we assessed the nature and mechanisms of ARNT involvement in
control of differentiation in human epidermal keratinocytes. ARNT depletion did
not affect the levels of basal keratins K5 and K14, but significantly induced
expression of several key differentiation markers (an effect abolished by EGF
supplementation). Furthermore, ARNT deficiency resulted in the downregulation of 
amphiregulin (AREG) - the most highly expressed EGFR ligand in human
keratinocytes - whereas upregulation of ARNT showed the opposite. In
ARNT-deficient monolayer cultures and 3D epidermal equivalents, the
downregulation of AREG was concurrent with a decline of EGFR and ERK1/2
phosphorylation. TSA, a potent suppressor of HDAC activity, abolished the effects
of ARNT deficiency, implying a role for HDACs in ARNT-dependent modulation of the
AREG-EGFR pathway and downstream epidermal genes. Total HDAC activity was
significantly increased in ARNT-depleted cells and decreased with ARNT
overexpression. ARNT-dependent shifts in HDAC activity were specifically
attributed to significant changes in the levels of HDAC1, HDAC2 and HDAC3
proteins (but not mRNA) in both monolayer and 3D cultures. Collectively, our
results suggest that ARNT controls AREG expression and the downstream EGFR-ERK
pathway in keratinocytes, at least in part, by modulating HDAC activity. This
novel regulatory pathway targeting advanced stages of epidermal differentiation
might have important implications for skin pathology such as psoriasis, atopic
dermatitis and cancer.

PMID: 22505606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e34265. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034265. Epub 2012 Apr 4.

HDAC1 inactivation induces mitotic defect and caspase-independent autophagic cell
death in liver cancer.

Xie HJ(1), Noh JH, Kim JK, Jung KH, Eun JW, Bae HJ, Kim MG, Chang YG, Lee JY,
Park H, Nam SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul, Korea.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are known to play a central role in the regulation
of several cellular properties interlinked with the development and progression
of cancer. Recently, HDAC1 has been reported to be overexpressed in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), but its biological roles in hepatocarcinogenesis 
remain to be elucidated. In this study, we demonstrated overexpression of HDAC1
in a subset of human HCCs and liver cancer cell lines. HDAC1 inactivation
resulted in regression of tumor cell growth and activation of caspase-independent
autophagic cell death, via LC3B-II activation pathway in Hep3B cells. In cell
cycle regulation, HDAC1 inactivation selectively induced both p21(WAF1/Cip1) and 
p27(Kip1) expressions, and simultaneously suppressed the expression of cyclin D1 
and CDK2. Consequently, HDAC1 inactivation led to the hypophosphorylation of pRb 
in G1/S transition, and thereby inactivated E2F/DP1 transcription activity. In
addition, we demonstrated that HDAC1 suppresses p21(WAF1/Cip1) transcriptional
activity through Sp1-binding sites in the p21(WAF1/Cip1) promoter. Furthermore,
sustained suppression of HDAC1 attenuated in vitro colony formation and in vivo
tumor growth in a mouse xenograft model. Taken together, we suggest the aberrant 
regulation of HDAC1 in HCC and its epigenetic regulation of gene transcription of
autophagy and cell cycle components. Overexpression of HDAC1 may play a pivotal
role through the systemic regulation of mitotic effectors in the development of
HCC, providing a particularly relevant potential target in cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC3319574
PMID: 22496786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Neurosci. 2012 Apr 11;32(15):5062-73. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0079-12.2012.

HDAC1 regulates fear extinction in mice.

Bahari-Javan S(1), Maddalena A, Kerimoglu C, Wittnam J, Held T, Bähr M, Burkhardt
S, Delalle I, Kügler S, Fischer A, Sananbenesi F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Medical Center
Göttingen, 37075 Göttingen, Germany.

Histone acetylation has been implicated with the pathogenesis of neuropsychiatric
disorders and targeting histone deacetylases (HDACs) using HDAC inhibitors was
shown to be neuroprotective and to initiate neuroregenerative processes. However,
little is known about the role of individual HDAC proteins during the
pathogenesis of brain diseases. HDAC1 was found to be upregulated in patients
suffering from neuropsychiatric diseases. Here, we show that virus-mediated
overexpression of neuronal HDAC1 in the adult mouse hippocampus specifically
affects the extinction of contextual fear memories, while other cognitive
abilities were unaffected. In subsequent experiments we show that under
physiological conditions, hippocampal HDAC1 is required for extinction learning
via a mechanism that involves H3K9 deacetylation and subsequent trimethylation of
target genes. In conclusion, our data show that hippocampal HDAC1 has a specific 
role in memory function.

PMID: 22496552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. J Cell Biochem. 2012 Jun;113(6):2167-77. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24090.

HDAC2 overexpression confers oncogenic potential to human lung cancer cells by
deregulating expression of apoptosis and cell cycle proteins.

Jung KH(1), Noh JH, Kim JK, Eun JW, Bae HJ, Xie HJ, Chang YG, Kim MG, Park H, Lee
JY, Nam SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine and Functional RNomics Research
Center, The Catholic University of Korea, Banpo-dong, Seocho-gu, Seoul, Korea.

Histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) is crucial for embryonic development, affects
cytokine signaling relevant for immune responses, and is often significantly
overexpressed in solid tumors, but little is known of its role in human lung
cancer. In this study, we demonstrated the aberrant expression of HDAC2 in lung
cancer tissues and investigated oncogenic properties of HDAC2 in human lung
cancer cell lines. HDAC2 inactivation resulted in regression of tumor cell growth
and activation of cellular apoptosis via p53 and Bax activation and Bcl2
suppression. In cell cycle regulation, HDAC2 inactivation caused induction of
p21WAF1/CIP1 expression, and simultaneously suppressed the expressions of cyclin 
E2, cyclin D1, and CDK2, respectively. Consequently, this led to the
hypophosphorylation of pRb protein in G1/S transition and thereby inactivated
E2F/DP1 target gene transcriptions of A549 cells. In addition, we demonstrated
that HDAC2 directly regulated p21WAF1/CIP1 expression in a p53-independent
manner. However, HDAC1 was not related to p21WAF1/CIP1 expression and
tumorigenesis of lung cancer. Lastly, we observed that sustained-suppression of
HDAC2 in A549 lung cancer cells attenuated in vitro tumorigenic properties and in
vivo tumor growth of the mouse xenograft model. Taken together, we suggest that
the aberrant regulation of HDAC2 and its epigenetic regulation of gene
transcription in apoptosis and cell cycle components play an important role in
the development of lung cancer.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22492270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e34236. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034236. Epub 2012 Mar 28.

Methamphetamine causes differential alterations in gene expression and patterns
of histone acetylation/hypoacetylation in the rat nucleus accumbens.

Martin TA(1), Jayanthi S, McCoy MT, Brannock C, Ladenheim B, Garrett T, Lehrmann 
E, Becker KG, Cadet JL.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuropsychiatry Research Branch, NIH/NIDA Intramural Research
Program, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

Methamphetamine (METH) addiction is associated with several neuropsychiatric
symptoms. Little is known about the effects of METH on gene expression and
epigenetic modifications in the rat nucleus accumbens (NAC). Our study
investigated the effects of a non-toxic METH injection (20 mg/kg) on gene
expression, histone acetylation, and the expression of the histone
acetyltransferase (HAT), ATF2, and of the histone deacetylases (HDACs), HDAC1 and
HDAC2, in that structure. Microarray analyses done at 1, 8, 16 and 24 hrs after
the METH injection identified METH-induced changes in the expression of genes
previously implicated in the acute and longterm effects of psychostimulants,
including immediate early genes and corticotropin-releasing factor (Crf). In
contrast, the METH injection caused time-dependent decreases in the expression of
other genes including Npas4 and cholecystokinin (Cck). Pathway analyses showed
that genes with altered expression participated in behavioral performance,
cell-to-cell signaling, and regulation of gene expression. PCR analyses confirmed
the changes in the expression of c-fos, fosB, Crf, Cck, and Npas4 transcripts. To
determine if the METH injection caused post-translational changes in histone
markers, we used western blot analyses and identified METH-mediated decreases in 
histone H3 acetylated at lysine 9 (H3K9ac) and lysine 18 (H3K18ac) in nuclear
sub-fractions. In contrast, the METH injection caused time-dependent increases in
acetylated H4K5 and H4K8. The changes in histone acetylation were accompanied by 
decreased expression of HDAC1 but increased expression of HDAC2 protein levels.
The histone acetyltransferase, ATF2, showed significant METH-induced increased in
protein expression. These results suggest that METH-induced alterations in global
gene expression seen in rat NAC might be related, in part, to METH-induced
changes in histone acetylation secondary to changes in HAT and HDAC expression.
The causal role that HATs and HDACs might play in METH-induced gene expression
needs to be investigated further.

PMCID: PMC3314616
PMID: 22470541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. FASEB J. 2012 Jul;26(7):3032-41. doi: 10.1096/fj.11-201855. Epub 2012 Mar 29.

MicroRNA-224 is up-regulated in hepatocellular carcinoma through epigenetic
mechanisms.

Wang Y(1), Toh HC, Chow P, Chung AY, Meyers DJ, Cole PA, Ooi LL, Lee CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National
University of Singapore, Singapore.

MicroRNA-224 (miR-224) is one of the most commonly up-regulated microRNAs in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), which affects crucial cellular processes such as 
apoptosis and cell proliferation. In this study, we aim to elucidate the
molecular mechanism that leads to the overexpression of miR-224 in HCC. We
examined the transcript expression of miR-224 and neighboring miR-452 and genes
on chromosome Xq28 in tumor and paired adjacent nontumorous tissues from 100
patients with HCC and found that miR-224 is coordinately up-regulated with its
neighboring microRNA (miRNA) and genes. This coordinated up-regulation of miRNAs 
and genes at the Xq28 locus can be mimicked in nontransformed immortalized human 
liver cells by the introduction of histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors, which
resulted in a corresponding increase in histone H3 acetylation in this region.
This miR-224-residing locus in Xq28 is reciprocally regulated by HDAC1, HDAC3,
and histone acetylase protein, E1A binding protein p300 (EP300). Notably, in HCC 
tumors that significantly overexpress microRNA-224, EP300 is also overexpressed
and displays increased binding to the Xq28 locus. In transformed HCC cells, high 
miR-224 expression can be attenuated through the inhibition of EP300, using
either siRNA or the specific drug C646. In summary, overexpression of EP300 may
account, in part, for the up-regulation of miR-224 expression in patients with
HCC.

PMCID: PMC3382089
PMID: 22459148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e33352. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033352. Epub 2012 Mar 21.

Induction of the GABA cell phenotype: an in vitro model for studying
neurodevelopmental disorders.

Subburaju S(1), Benes FM.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Structural and Molecular Neuroscience, McLean Hospital, Belmont,
Massachusetts, United States of America.

Recent studies of the hippocampus have suggested that a network of genes is
associated with the regulation of the GAD67 (GAD1) expression and may play a role
in <U+03B3>-amino butyric acid (GABA) dysfunction in schizophrenia (SZ) and bipolar
disorder (BD). To obtain a more detailed understanding of how GAD67 regulation
may result in GABAergic dysfunction, we have developed an in vitro model in which
GABA cells are differentiated from the hippocampal precursor cell line, HiB5.
Growth factors, such as PDGF, and BDNF, regulate the GABA phenotype by inducing
the expression of GAD67 and stimulating the growth of cellular processes, many
with growth cones that form appositions with the cell bodies and processes of
other GAD67-positive cells. These changes are associated with increased
expression of acetylated tubulin, microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP2) and the
post-synaptic density protein 95 (PSD95). The addition of BDNF, together with
PDGF, increases the levels of mRNA and protein for GAD67, as well as the high
affinity GABA uptake protein, GAT1. These changes are associated with increased
concentrations of GABA in the cytoplasm of "differentiated" HiB5 neurons. In the 
presence of Ca²<U+207A> and K<U+207A>, newly synthesized GABA is released extracellularly. When
the HiB5 cells appear to be fully differentiated, they also express GAD65,
parvalbumin and calbindin, and GluR subtypes as well as HDAC1, DAXX, PAX5, Runx2,
associated with GAD67 regulation. Overall, these results suggest that the HiB5
cells can differentiate into functionally mature GABA neurons in the presence of 
gene products that are associated with GAD67 regulation in the adult hippocampus.

PMCID: PMC3310062
PMID: 22457755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Diagn Pathol. 2012 Mar 29;7:33. doi: 10.1186/1746-1596-7-33.

The expression patterns and correlations of claudin-6, methy-CpG binding protein 
2, DNA methyltransferase 1, histone deacetylase 1, acetyl-histone H3 and
acetyl-histone H4 and their clinicopathological significance in breast invasive
ductal carcinomas.

Xu X(1), Jin H, Liu Y, Liu L, Wu Q, Guo Y, Yu L, Liu Z, Zhang T, Zhang X, Dong X,
Quan C.

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Pathobiology, Ministry of Education, Bethune Medical
College, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin, China.

BACKGROUND: Claudin-6 is a candidate tumor suppressor gene in breast cancer, and 
has been shown to be regulated by DNA methylation and histone modification in
breast cancer lines. However, the expression of claudin-6 in breast invasive
ductal carcinomas and correlation with clinical behavior or expression of other
markers is unclear. We considered that the expression pattern of claudin-6 might 
be related to the expression of DNA methylation associated proteins (methyl-CpG
binding protein 2 (MeCP2) and DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1)) and histone
modification associated proteins (histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), acetyl-histone
H3 (H3Ac) and acetyl- histone H4 (H4Ac)).
METHODS: We have investigated the expression of claudin-6, MeCP2, HDAC1, H3Ac and
H4Ac in 100 breast invasive ductal carcinoma tissues and 22 mammary gland
fibroadenoma tissues using immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Claudin-6 protein expression was reduced in breast invasive ductal
carcinomas (P < 0.001). In contrast, expression of MeCP2 (P < 0.001), DNMT1 (P = 
0.001), HDAC1 (P < 0.001) and H3Ac (P = 0.004) expressions was increased.
Claudin-6 expression was inversely correlated with lymph node metastasis (P =
0.021). Increased expression of HDAC1 was correlated with histological grade (P <
0.001), age (P = 0.004), clinical stage (P = 0.007) and lymph node metastasis (P 
= 0.001). H3Ac expression was associated with tumor size (P = 0.044) and clinical
stage of cancers (P = 0.034). MeCP2, DNMT1 and H4Ac expression levels did not
correlate with any of the tested clinicopathological parameters (P > 0.05). We
identified a positive correlation between MeCP2 protein expression and H3Ac and
H4Ac protein expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that claudin-6 protein is significantly
down-regulated in breast invasive ductal carcinomas and is an important correlate
with lymphatic metastasis, but claudin-6 down-regulation was not correlated with 
upregulation of the methylation associated proteins (MeCP2, DNMT1) or histone
modification associated proteins (HDAC1, H3Ac, H4Ac). Interestingly, the
expression of MeCP2 was positively correlated with the expression of H3Ac and
H3Ac protein expression was positively correlated with the expression of H4Ac in 
breast invasive ductal carcinoma
VIRTUAL SLIDES: The virtual slide(s) for this article can be found here:
http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/4549669866581452.

PMCID: PMC3349567
PMID: 22455563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Ageing Res Rev. 2012 Sep;11(4):442-9. doi: 10.1016/j.arr.2012.02.007. Epub 2012
Mar 14.

The role of CUGBP1 in age-dependent changes of liver functions.

Jones K(1), Timchenko L, Timchenko NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of Medicine,
One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Aging liver is characterized by alterations of liver biology and by a reduction
of many functions which are important for the maintenance of body homeostasis.
The main dysfunctions include appearance of enlarged hepatocytes, impaired liver 
regeneration after partial hepatectomy (PH), development of hepatic steatosis,
reduction of secretion of proteins and alterations in the hepatic sinusoid. RNA
binding proteins are involved in the regulation of gene expression in all tissues
including regulation of biological processes in the liver. This review is focused
on the role of a conserved, multi-functional RNA-binding protein, CUGBP1, in the 
development of aging phenotype in the liver. CUGBP1 has been identified as a
protein which binds to RNA CUG repeats expanded in Myotonic Dystrophy type 1
(DM1). CUGBP1 is highly expressed in the liver and regulates translation of
proteins which are critical for maintenance of liver functions. In livers of
young mice, CUGBP1 forms complexes with eukaryotic translation initiation factor 
eIF2 and supports translation of C/EBPß and HDAC1 proteins, which are involved in
liver growth, differentiation and liver cancer. Aging changes several signaling
pathways which lead to the elevation of the CUGBP1-eIF2a complex and to an
increase of translation of C/EBPß and HDAC1. These proteins form multi-protein
complexes with additional transcription factors and with chromatin remodeling
proteins causing epigenetic alterations of gene expression in livers of old mice.
It appears that CUGBP1-mediated translational elevation of HDAC1 is one of the
key events in the epigenetic changes in livers of old mice, leading to the
development of age-associated dysfunctions of the liver. This review will also
discuss a possible role of CUGBP1 in liver dysfunction in patients affected with 
DM1.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3610417
PMID: 22446383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. J Hypertens. 2012 May;30(5):917-25. doi: 10.1097/HJH.0b013e3283525124.

Regulation of mouse-renin gene by apurinic/apyrimidinic-endonuclease 1
(APE1/Ref-1) via recruitment of histone deacetylase 1 corepressor complex.

Sengupta S(1), Chattopadhyay R, Mantha AK, Mitra S, Bhakat KK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, TX 77555-1079, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Apurinic/apyrimidinic-endonuclease 1 (APE1) heterozygous mice have
chronically elevated blood pressure. Renin of the renin-angiotensin (ANG) system 
for blood pressure maintenance regulates production of ANG II, a vasoactive
hormone. Renin expression and secretion from kidney juxtaglomerular cells are
regulated by intracellular calcium. Our objective in this study is to investigate
APE1's regulatory role in renin expression.
METHODS: Effect of APE1 on calcium-mediated modulation of renin expression was
examined by real-time reverse transcriptase-PCR, Western analysis and renin
promoter-dependent luciferase activity in APE1-knockdown, APE1-overexpressing or 
control mouse kidney As4.1 cells. Furthermore, coimmunoprecipitation and
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays were utilized to examine the association of 
APE1 with histone deacetylase (HDAC)1 corepressor complex and their recruitment
to renin enhancer. Finally, kidney renin mRNA level and plasma-renin activity
were measured in wild-type and APE1-heterozygous mice.
RESULTS: Here we show that APE1 is involved in calcium-mediated repression of
renin gene. Our results further indicate that APE1 is a component of HDAC1
corepressor complex bound to renin-enhancer region. Increase in intracellular
calcium ion concentration enhances the association of APE1 with HDAC1 corepressor
complex and their recruitment to the enhancer region. Furthermore, APE1's
N-terminal region is critical for formation and recruitment of the enhancer-bound
corepressor complex. Increased renin expression in kidneys and higher
plasma-renin activity in APE1 heterozygous mice further supports APE1's
corepressor role in vivo.
CONCLUSION: This study uncovers APE1's function as a novel negative regulator of 
renin expression, and thereby in blood pressure maintenance.

PMCID: PMC4108083
PMID: 22441348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e33249. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033249. Epub 2012 Mar 15.

Age-related memory impairment is associated with disrupted multivariate
epigenetic coordination in the hippocampus.

Castellano JF(1), Fletcher BR, Kelley-Bell B, Kim DH, Gallagher M, Rapp PR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Gerontology, National Institute on Aging,
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

Mounting evidence linking epigenetic regulation to memory-related synaptic
plasticity raises the possibility that altered chromatin modification dynamics
might contribute to age-dependent cognitive decline. Here we show that the
coordinated orchestration of both baseline and experience-dependent epigenetic
regulation seen in the young adult hippocampus is lost in association with
cognitive aging. Using a well-characterized rat model that reliably distinguishes
aged individuals with significant memory impairment from others with normal
memory, no single epigenetic mark or experience-dependent modification in the
hippocampus uniquely predicted differences in the cognitive outcome of aging. The
results instead point to a multivariate pattern in which modification-specific,
bidirectional chromatin regulation is dependent on recent behavioral experience, 
chronological age, cognitive status, and hippocampal region. Whereas many
epigenetic signatures were coupled with memory capacity among young adults and
aged rats with preserved cognitive function, such associations were absent among 
aged rats with deficits in hippocampal memory. By comparison with the emphasis in
current preclinical translational research on promoting chromatin modifications
permissive for gene expression, our findings suggest that optimally successful
hippocampal aging may hinge instead on enabling coordinated control across the
epigenetic landscape.

PMCID: PMC3305324
PMID: 22438904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Carcinogenesis. 2012 May;33(5):1106-12. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgs125. Epub 2012 Mar
19.

Maternal high-methyl diet suppresses mammary carcinogenesis in female rat
offspring.

Cho K(1), Mabasa L, Bae S, Walters MW, Park CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, North Dakota State University, 1300 Albrecht
Avenue, Fargo, ND 58102, USA.

Maternal nutrition during pregnancy influences the development and metabolism of 
the fetus. Recent studies suggest that the cancer risk of offspring later in life
is associated with maternal diet, but little is known about the effect of a
maternal diet high in methyl nutrients on breast cancer risk. Lipotropes are
methyl group-containing essential nutrients (methionine, choline, folate and
vitamin B(12)) that play key roles in one-carbon metabolism. In this study, we
investigated the long-term effects of maternal dietary high-dose lipotropes (five
times higher than in the control diet) on the development and progression of
mammary tumors in rat offspring using two separate experiments (in utero exposure
with and without postnatal supplementation). In both experiments, the female
offspring were injected intraperitoneally with a single dose (50 mg/kg body wt)
of N-nitroso-N-methylurea during puberty to induce mammary tumors. Tumor growth
and development were recorded, and at the end of the study, tissues were
collected for analysis. For both experiments, the offspring from dams fed a
high-dose lipotropes showed significantly decreased tumor incidence, tumor
multiplicity and tumor volume, while also displaying a significant increase in
survival rate and tumor latency. Gene transcription analysis, as measured by
quantitative real-time PCR, revealed a significant decrease of histone
deacetylase 1 (Hdac1) messenger RNA in mammary tumors in both experiments. Our
findings provide evidence that maternal dietary high-dose lipotropes reduce
mammary carcinogenesis in offspring in association with long-term alterations in 
gene expression and may be useful in developing maternal dietary strategies to
prevent breast cancer.

PMID: 22431720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Cancer Lett. 2012 Aug 1;321(1):45-54. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2012.03.013. Epub
2012 Mar 16.

Inhibition of LDH-A by lentivirus-mediated small interfering RNA suppresses
intestinal-type gastric cancer tumorigenicity through the downregulation of Oct4.

Zhang Y(1), Zhang X, Wang X, Gan L, Yu G, Chen Y, Liu K, Li P, Pan J, Wang J, Qin
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Changzheng Hospital, Shanghai, China.

Many tumors metabolise the majority of the glucose that they take up through
glycolysis even in the presence of an adequate oxygen supply. Lactate
dehydrogenase A (LDH-A) is the critical enzyme that catalyses the transformation 
of pyruvate to lactate. We demonstrate that LDH-A reduction can suppress the
tumorigenicity of intestinal-type gastric cancer (ITGC) cells by downregulating
Oct4 both in vitro and in vivo. A statistical analysis of 661 ITGC specimens
showed a significant correlation between LDH-A and Oct4 expression. Moreover,
patients with low LDH-A/negative Oct4 expression exhibited better overall
survival than patients with other combinations. We conclude that the close
correlation of LDH-A and Oct4 may offer a promising therapeutic strategy for
ITGC.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22429998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Cancer Res. 2012 May 1;72(9):2251-61. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3386. Epub
2012 Mar 15.

Chromatin remodeling underlies the senescence-associated secretory phenotype of
tumor stromal fibroblasts that supports cancer progression.

Pazolli E(1), Alspach E, Milczarek A, Prior J, Piwnica-Worms D, Stewart SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Age is a major risk factor for the development of cancer. Senescent fibroblasts, 
which accumulate with age, secrete protumorigenic factors collectively referred
to as the senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP). Here, we examined the
molecular mechanisms that control SASP activation, focusing on the known SASP
factor osteopontin (OPN). We found that expression of the canonical SASP members 
interleukin (IL)-6 and IL-8, but not OPN, were dependent upon a persistent DNA
damage response (DDR) as evidenced by ATM and NF-<U+03BA>B activation. Treatment with
several histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors robustly activated SASP in the
absence of DNA breaks, suggesting that DDR-dependent SASP activation occurs in
response to chromatin remodeling rather than physical breaks in DNA. In the
setting of HDAC inhibition, IL-6 and IL-8 expression remained dependent upon ATM 
and NF-<U+03BA>B, while OPN expression remained independent of these factors. Further
analysis revealed that HDAC1 inhibition was sufficient to induce OPN expression, 
which is interesting given that loss of HDAC1 expression correlates with
increased OPN expression within the stromal compartment of invasive breast
cancers. Importantly, fibroblasts treated with HDAC inhibitors promoted tumor
growth in vivo. Our findings therefore indicate that HDAC modulation plays an
important role in stromal cell activation, with important implications for the
use of HDAC inhibitors in the treatment of cancer.

©2012 AACR

PMCID: PMC3605047
PMID: 22422937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Mol Endocrinol. 2012 May;26(5):798-808. doi: 10.1210/me.2011-1287. Epub 2012 Mar 
15.

Down-regulation of type I Runx2 mediated by dexamethasone is required for 3T3-L1 
adipogenesis.

Zhang YY(1), Li X, Qian SW, Guo L, Huang HY, He Q, Liu Y, Ma CG, Tang QQ.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, the Ministry of Education; Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Fudan University Shanghai Medical College,
Shanghai 200032, PR China.

Runx2, a runt-related transcriptional factor family member, is involved in the
regulation of osteoblast differentiation. Interestingly, it is abundant in
growth-arrested 3T3-L1 preadipocytes and was dramatically down-regulated during
adipocyte differentiation. Knockdown of Runx2 expression promoted 3T3-L1
adipocyte differentiation, whereas overexpression inhibited adipocyte
differentiation and promoted the trans-differentiation of 3T3-L1 preadipocytes to
bone cells. Runx2 was down-regulated specifically by dexamethasone (DEX). Only
type I Runx2 was expressed in 3T3-L1 preadipocytes. Using luciferase assay and
chromatin immunoprecipitation-quantitative PCR analysis, it was found that DEX
repressed this type of Runx2 at the transcriptional level through direct binding 
of the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) to a GR-binding element in the Runx2 P2
promoter. Further studies indicated that GR recruited histone deacetylase 1 to
the Runx2 P2 promoter which then mediated the deacetylation of histone H4 and
down-regulated Runx2 expression. Runx2 might play its repressive role through the
induction of p27 expression, which blocked 3T3-L1 adipocyte differentiation by
inhibiting mitotic clonal expansion. Taken together, we identified Runx2 as a new
downstream target of DEX and explored a new pathway between DEX, Runx2, and p27
which contributed to the mechanism of the 3T3-L1 adipocyte differentiation.

PMID: 22422618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Epigenetics. 2012 Apr;7(4):390-9. doi: 10.4161/epi.19373. Epub 2012 Apr 1.

CD1d induction in solid tumor cells by histone deacetylase inhibitors through
inhibition of HDAC1/2 and activation of Sp1.

Yang PM(1), Lin PJ, Chen CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan.

CD1d is a MHC class-like molecule that presents glycolipids to natural killer T
(NKT) cells, then regulates innate and adaptive immunity. The regulation of CD1d 
gene expression in solid tumors is still largely unknown. Gene expression can be 
epigenetically regulated by DNA methylation and histone acetylation. We found
that histone deacetylase inhibitors, trichostatin A (TSA) and suberoylanilide
hydroxamic acid (SAHA), induced CD1d gene expression in human (A549 and NCI-H292)
and mouse (TC-1 and B16/F0) cancer cells. Simultaneous knockdown of HDAC1 and 2
induced CD1d gene expression. Sp1 inhibitor mitramycin A (MTM) blocked TSA- and
SAHA-induced CD1d mRNA expression and Sp1 luciferase activity. Co-transfection of
GAL4-Sp1 and Fc-luciferase reporters demonstrated that TSA and SAHA induced Sp1
luciferase reporter activity by enhancing Sp1 transactivation activity. The
binding of Sp1 to CD1d promoter and histone H3 acetylation on Sp1 sites were
increased by TSA and SAHA. These results indicate that TSA and SAHA could
up-regulate CD1d expression in tumor cells through inhibition of HDAC1/2 and
activation of Sp1.

PMCID: PMC3368821
PMID: 22419072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. J Biol Chem. 2012 Apr 27;287(18):14494-501. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.324921. Epub
2012 Mar 14.

Neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL) expression is dependent on the 
tumor-associated sigma-2 receptor S2RPgrmc1.

Mir SU(1), Jin L, Craven RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Biomedical Pharmacology, Markey Cancer Center,
University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky 40536, USA.

Tumor invasion is a critical step in the spread of cancer. S2R (sigma-2
receptor)/Pgrmc1 (progesterone receptor membrane component 1) is a cytochrome
b(5)-related drug-binding orphan receptor essential for tumor formation and
invasion. Secretory proteins drive these processes, so we screened for
S2R(Pgrmc1)-dependent secreted proteins using antibody arrays. S2R(Pgrmc1)
markedly regulated the expression of NGAL/LCN2 (neutrophil gelatinase-associated 
lipocalin/lipocalin 2), a secreted glycoprotein that binds to MMP-9 (matrix
metalloproteinase 9) and protects it from degradation. S2R(Pgrmc1) knock-down
blocked NGAL/LCN2 expression at the protein and RNA levels and decreased MMP9
activity. NGAL expression was required for MMP-9 activity and tumor formation.
S2R(Pgrmc1) associates with EGFR and increases EGFR levels at the plasma
membrane, and the EGFR inhibitors erlotinib and AG1478, as well as Akt and ERK
inhibitors, suppressed the NGAL/LCN2 RNA and protein levels. NGAL is
transcriptionally regulated by NF<U+03BA>B, and S2R(Pgrmc1) knock-down decreased the
NF<U+03BA>B subunit p65/RelA acetylation, phosphorylation, and activation. In
S2R(Pgrmc1) knock-down cells, p65 acetylation was reversed by inhibitors of
histone deacetylase 1, and the inhibitors partially restored NGAL levels. Our
results are consistent with a model in which S2R(Pgrmc1) increases NGAL/LCN2
levels by activating NF<U+03BA>B via EGFR.

PMCID: PMC3340276
PMID: 22418433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Clin Epigenetics. 2012 Mar 12;4(1):5. doi: 10.1186/1868-7083-4-5.

Roles of histone deacetylases in epigenetic regulation: emerging paradigms from
studies with inhibitors.

Delcuve GP(1), Khan DH, Davie JR.

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Cell Biology, University of Manitoba, 675 McDermot
Avenue, Winnipeg, MB, R3E 0V9, Canada. davie@cc.umanitoba.ca.

The zinc-dependent mammalian histone deacetylase (HDAC) family comprises 11
enzymes, which have specific and critical functions in development and tissue
homeostasis. Mounting evidence points to a link between misregulated HDAC
activity and many oncologic and nononcologic diseases. Thus the development of
HDAC inhibitors for therapeutic treatment garners a lot of interest from academic
researchers and biotechnology entrepreneurs. Numerous studies of HDAC inhibitor
specificities and molecular mechanisms of action are ongoing. In one of these
studies, mass spectrometry was used to characterize the affinities and
selectivities of HDAC inhibitors toward native HDAC multiprotein complexes in
cell extracts. Such a novel approach reproduces in vivo molecular interactions
more accurately than standard studies using purified proteins or protein domains 
as targets and could be very useful in the isolation of inhibitors with superior 
clinical efficacy and decreased toxicity compared to the ones presently tested or
approved. HDAC inhibitor induced-transcriptional reprogramming, believed to
contribute largely to their therapeutic benefits, is achieved through various and
complex mechanisms not fully understood, including histone deacetylation,
transcription factor or regulator (including HDAC1) deacetylation followed by
chromatin remodeling and positive or negative outcome regarding transcription
initiation. Although only a very low percentage of protein-coding genes are
affected by the action of HDAC inhibitors, about 40% of noncoding microRNAs are
upregulated or downregulated. Moreover, a whole new world of long noncoding RNAs 
is emerging, revealing a new class of potential targets for HDAC inhibition. HDAC
inhibitors might also regulate transcription elongation and have been shown to
impinge on alternative splicing.

PMCID: PMC3320549
PMID: 22414492  [PubMed]


358. Epigenetics. 2012 Feb;7(2):183-90. doi: 10.4161/epi.7.2.18972.

Histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3) participates in the transcriptional repression of
the p16 (INK4a) gene in mammary gland of the female rat offspring exposed to an
early-life high-fat diet.

Zheng S(1), Li Q, Zhang Y, Balluff Z, Pan YX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA.

Maternal exposure to environmental agents throughout pregnancy and lactation may 
affect offspring's mammary gland growth and alter the epigenome. This may
predispose the offspring's mammary glands to be more susceptible to
carcinogenesis. The purpose of this study was to examine the effect of a maternal
high-fat diet on the regulation of p16 (INK4a) gene expression in the mammary
gland of rat offspring. Timed-pregnant Sprague-Dawley rats were fed one of the
two diets, a control (C, 16% of fat) or a high fat (HF, 45% of fat) diet,
throughout gestation and lactation and sacrificed at 12 weeks of age. Compared
with C, HF offspring showed a decrease of p16 (INK4a) gene expression in the
mammary gland at both mRNA and protein levels. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) assay demonstrated that the downregulation of p16 (INK4a) transcription in
HF offspring was associated with reduced acetylation of histone H4 and increased 
recruitment of histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3) within the p16 (INK4a) promoter
region, but was not associated with acetylation of histone H3 or HDAC1.
Methylated DNA immunoprecipitation (MeDIP) did not detect differences in
methylation at different regions of the p16 (INK4a) gene between C and HF
offspring. We conclude that maternal high fat exposure represses p16 (INK4a) gene
expression in the mammary gland of offspring through changes of histone
modifications and HDAC3 binding activity within the regulatory regions of the p16
(INK4a) gene.

PMCID: PMC3335911
PMID: 22395468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Cell Sci. 2012 Jun 1;125(Pt 11):2732-9. doi: 10.1242/jcs.100909. Epub 2012 Mar 
5.

A RUNX2-HDAC1 co-repressor complex regulates rRNA gene expression by modulating
UBF acetylation.

Ali SA(1), Dobson JR, Lian JB, Stein JL, van Wijnen AJ, Zaidi SK, Stein GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Cancer Center, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, MA 01655, USA.

The osteogenic and oncogenic transcription factor RUNX2 downregulates the RNA
polymerase I (RNA Pol I)-mediated transcription of rRNAs and changes histone
modifications associated with the rDNA repeat. However, the mechanisms by which
RUNX2 suppresses rRNA transcription are not well understood. RUNX2 cofactors such
as histone deacetylases (HDACs) play a key role in chromatin remodeling and
regulation of gene transcription. Here, we show that RUNX2 recruits HDAC1 to the 
rDNA repeats in osseous cells. This recruitment alters the histone modifications 
associated with active rRNA-encoding genes and causes deacetylation of the
protein upstream binding factor (UBF, also known as UBTF). Downregulation of
RUNX2 expression reduces the localization of HDAC1 to the nucleolar periphery and
also decreases the association between HDAC1 and UBF. Functionally, depletion of 
HDAC1 relieves the RUNX2-mediated repression of rRNA-encoding genes and
concomitantly increases cell proliferation and global protein synthesis in
osseous cells. Our findings collectively identify a RUNX2-HDAC1-dependent
mechanism for the regulation of rRNA-encoding genes and suggest that there is
plasticity to RUNX2-mediated epigenetic control, which is mediated through
selective mitotic exclusion of co-regulatory factors.

PMCID: PMC3403236
PMID: 22393235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Vitam Horm. 2012;88:211-27. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-394622-5.00009-2.

Hedgehog/Gli control by ubiquitination/acetylation interplay.

Gulino A(1), Di Marcotullio L, Canettieri G, De Smaele E, Screpanti I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.

Hedgehog is a key morphogen regulating development and leading to tumorigenesis, 
when hyperactivated. Hedgehog signaling is mediated by transcriptional effectors 
belonging to the Gli family. Ubiquitination-related posttranslational
modifications of the Gli transcription factors, leading to proteasome-dependent
proteolytic cleavage or massive degradation, represent an important mechanism of 
regulation of the pathway. Gli ubiquitination is controlled by a number of E3
ligases belonging to the RING/Cullin and HECT families. These E3 ligases are
regulated by several members of the Hh pathway itself (e.g., Smo-activated
kinases) as well as by proteins belonging to other signaling cascades (i.e.,
Numb-activated Itch). These proteolytic signals finally suppress Gli function
either directly or indirectly (i.e., suppression of HDAC1-mediated Gli
deacetylation). The complex of these regulatory circuitries finely tunes Hedgehog
signaling providing a tight control of developmental processes, the subversion of
which leads to tumorigenesis. To this regard, these ubiquitination processes
represent promising targets for novel therapeutic strategies.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22391305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Biochem Pharmacol. 2012 Jul 1;84(1):1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2012.02.009. Epub
2012 Feb 22.

Searching for molecular targets in sarcoma.

Teicher BA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pharmacology Branch, Developmental Therapeutics Program, National
Cancer Institute, 6130 Executive Boulevard, Rockville, MD 20852, USA.
Beverly.Teicher@nih.gov

Sarcoma are about 1% of cancers. Within that 1% are widely varied tumors now
divided into types and subtypes. Sarcoma occur in patients of all ages with
frequency spread evenly over the human age range. Although the specific cell of
origin of many sarcoma remains unclear, sarcoma are all tumors of mesenchymal
origin. The mesenchymal stem cell, a pluripotent cell, which gives rise to varied
differentiated cells including osteocytes, adipocytes, chondrocytes, muscle
cells, fibroblasts, neural cells and stromal cells, is the most likely ultimate
cell of origin for sarcoma. When mesenchymal stem cell genetics go awry and
malignant transformation occurs sarcoma including osteosarcoma, Ewing's sarcoma, 
chondrosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, synovial sarcoma fibrosarcoma, liposarcoma and 
many others can initiate. Our knowledge of sarcoma genetics is increasing
rapidly. Two general groups, sarcoma arising from chromosomal translocations and 
sarcoma with very complex genetics, can be identified. Genes that are frequently 
mutated in sarcoma include TP53, NF1, PIK3CA, HDAC1, IDH1 and 2, KDR, KIT and
MED12. Genes that are frequently amplified in sarcoma include CDK4, YEATS4,
HMGA2, MDM2, JUN, DNM3, FLT4, MYCN, MAP3K5, GLI1 and the microRNAs miR-214 and
miR-199a2. Genes that are upregulated in sarcoma include MUC4, CD24, FOXL1,
ANGPTL2, HIF1a, MDK, cMET, TIMP-2, PRL, PCSK1, IGFR-1, TIE1, KDR, TEK, FLT1 and
several microRNAs. While some alterations occur in specific subtypes of sarcoma, 
others cross several sarcoma types. Discovering and developing new therapeutic
approaches for these relentless diseases is critical. The detailed knowledge of
sarcoma genetics may allow development of sarcoma subtype-targeted therapeutics.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 22387046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Proteome Res. 2012 Apr 6;11(4):2091-102. doi: 10.1021/pr300155r. Epub 2012 Mar 
15.

Quantitative proteomic analysis of mouse embryonic fibroblasts and induced
pluripotent stem cells using 16O/18O labeling.

Huang X(1), Tian C, Liu M, Wang Y, Tolmachev AV, Sharma S, Yu F, Fu K, Zheng J,
Ding SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics
Core Facility, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska 68198,
United States.

Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) hold great promise for regenerative
medicine as well as for investigations into the pathogenesis and treatment of
various diseases. Understanding of key intracellular signaling pathways and
protein targets that control development of iPSC from somatic cells is essential 
for designing new approaches to improve reprogramming efficiency. Here, we report
the development and application of an integrated quantitative proteomics platform
for investigating differences in protein expressions between mouse embryonic
fibroblasts (MEF) and MEF-derived iPSC. This platform consists of 16O/18O
labeling, multidimensional peptide separation coupled with tandem mass
spectrometry, and data analysis with UNiquant software. With this platform, a
total of 2481 proteins were identified and quantified from the 16O/18O-labeled
MEF-iPSC proteome mixtures with a false discovery rate of 0.01. Among them, 218
proteins were significantly upregulated, while 247 proteins were significantly
downregulated in iPSC compared to MEF. Many nuclear proteins, including Hdac1,
Dnmt1, Pcna, Ccnd1, Smarcc1, and subunits in DNA replication and RNA polymerase
II complex, were found to be enhanced in iPSC. Protein network analysis revealed 
that Pcna functions as a hub orchestrating complicated mechanisms including DNA
replication, epigenetic inheritance (Dnmt1), and chromatin remodeling (Smarcc1)
to reprogram MEF and maintain stemness of iPSC.

PMID: 22375802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2012 Jun;51(6):606-17. doi: 10.1002/gcc.21948. Epub
2012 Feb 27.

Delineation of commonly deleted chromosomal regions in meningiomas by
high-density single nucleotide polymorphism genotyping arrays.

Tabernero MD(1), Maíllo A, Nieto AB, Diez-Tascón C, Lara M, Sousa P, Otero A,
Castrillo A, Patino-Alonso Mdel C, Espinosa A, Mackintosh C, de Alava E, Orfao A.

Author information: 
(1)IECSCYL, Soria, Spain. mdtabernero@iecscyl.com

Despite recent advances in the identification of the cytogenetic profiles of
meningiomas, a significant group of tumors still show normal karyotypes or few
chromosomal changes. The authors analyzed the cytogenetic profile of 50
meningiomas using fluorescence in situ hybridization and high-density (500 K)
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays. Our results confirm that del(22q)
(52%) and del(1p) (16%) (common deleted regions: 22q11.21-22q13.3. and
1p31.2-p36.33) are the most frequent alterations. Additionally, recurrent
monosomy 14 (8%), del(6q) (10%), del(7p) (10%), and del(19q) (4%) were observed, 
while copy number patterns consistent with recurrent chromosomal gains, gene
amplification, and copy number neutral loss of heterozygosity (cnLOH) were either
absent or rare. Based on their overall SNP profiles, meningiomas could be
classified into: (i) diploid cases, (ii) meningiomas with a single chromosomal
change [e.g., monosomy 22/del(22q)] and (iii) tumors with =2 altered chromosomes.
In summary, our results confirm and extend on previous observations showing that 
the most recurrent chromosomal abnormalities in meningiomas correspond to
chromosome losses localized in chromosomes 1, 22 and less frequently in
chromosomes 6, 7, 14, and 19, while chromosomal gains and cnLOH are restricted to
a small proportion of cases. Finally, a set of cancer-associated candidate genes 
associated with the TP53, MYC, CASP3, HDAC1, and TERT signaling pathways was
identified, in cases with coexisting monosomy 14 and del(1p).

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22371336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Zygote. 2013 May;21(2):178-86. doi: 10.1017/S0967199411000797. Epub 2012 Feb 22.

Methylation characteristics and developmental potential of Guangxi Bama minipig
(Sus scrofa domestica) cloned embryos from donor cells treated with trichostatin 
A and 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine.

Ning SF(1), Li QY, Liang MM, Yang XG, Xu HY, Lu YQ, Lu SS, Lu KH.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical
Agro-bioresources, Animal Reproduction Institute, Guangxi University, Nanning,
Guangxi 530004, China.

Summary Reprogramming of DNA methylation in somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) 
embryos is incomplete, and aberrant DNA methylation patterns are related to the
inefficiency of SCNT. To facilitate nuclear reprogramming, this study
investigated the effect of treating Guangxi Bama minipig donor cells with
trichostatin A (TSA), 5-aza-2'-deoxycytine (5-aza-dC), or combination of TSA and 
5-aza-dC prior to nuclear transfer. Analyses showed that there were no major
changes in cell-cycle status among all groups. We monitored the transcription of 
DNMT1, DNMT3a, HDAC1 and IGF2 genes in donor cells. Transcription levels of HDAC1
were decreased significantly after treatment with a combination of TSA and
5-aza-dC, along with a significantly increased level of IGF2 (P < 0.05). Although
treatment of donor cells with either TSA or 5-aza-dC alone resulted in
non-significant effects in blastocyst formation rate and DNA methylation levels, 
a combination of TSA and 5-aza-dC significantly improved the development rates of
minipig SCNT embryos to blastocyst (25.6% vs. 16.0%, P < 0.05). This change was
accompanied by decreased levels of DNA methylation in somatic cells and
blastocyst (P < 0.05). Thus in combination with TSA, lower concentrations of
5-aza-dC may produce a potent demethylating activity, and lead to the
significantly enhanced blastocyst development percentage of Bama minipig SCNT
embryos.

PMID: 22355002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Am J Transl Res. 2012;4(1):24-43. Epub 2012 Jan 5.

An atlas of histone deacetylase expression in breast cancer: fluorescence
methodology for comparative semi-quantitative analysis.

Ververis K, Karagiannis TC.

The histone deacetylase inhibitors, suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (Vorinostat, 
Zolinza) and depsipeptide (Romidepsin, Istodax) have been approved by the US
Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of refractory cutaneous T-cell
lymphoma. Numerous histone deacetylase inhibitors are currently undergoing
clinical trials, predominantly in combination with other cancer modalities, for
the treatment of various haematological and solid malignancies. Most of the
traditional compounds are known as broad-spectrum or pan-histone deacetylase
inhibitors, possessing activity against a number of the 11 metal-dependent
enzymes. One of the main questions in the field is whether class- or
isoform-specific compounds would offer a therapeutic benefit compared to
broad-spectrum inhibitors. Therefore, analysis of the relative expression of the 
different histone deacetylase enzymes in cancer cells and tissues is important to
determine whether there are specific targets. We used a panel of antibodies
directed against the 11 known mammalian histone deacetylases to determine
expression levels in MCF7 breast cancer cells and in tissue representative of
invasive ductal cell carcinoma and ductal carcinoma in situ. Firstly, we utilized
a semi-quantitative method based on immunofluorescence staining to examine
expression of the different histone deacetylases in MCF7 cells. Our findings
indicate high expression levels of HDAC1, 3 and 6 in accordance with findings
from others using RT-PCR and immunoblotting. Following validation of our approach
we examined the expression of the different isoforms in representative control
and breast cancer tissue. In general, our findings indicate higher expression of 
class I histone deacetylases compared to class II enzymes in breast cancer
tissue. Analysis of individual cancer cells in the same tissue indicated marked
heterogeneity in the expression of most class I enzymes indicating potential
complications with the use of class- or isoform-specific compounds. Overall, our 
approach can be utilized to rapidly compare, in an unbiased semi-quantitative
manner, the differential levels of expression of histone deacetylase enzymes in
cells and tissues using widely available imaging software. It is anticipated that
such analysis will become increasingly important as class- or isoform-specific
histone deacetylase inhibitors become more readily available.

PMCID: PMC3276375
PMID: 22347520  [PubMed]


366. Reprod Sci. 2012 May;19(5):483-92. doi: 10.1177/1933719111432870. Epub 2012 Feb
16.

HDAC1 and HDAC2 are differentially expressed in endometriosis.

Colón-Díaz M(1), Báez-Vega P, García M, Ruiz A, Monteiro JB, Fourquet J, Bayona
M, Alvarez-Garriga C, Achille A, Seto E, Flores I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Ponce School of Medicine and Health Sciences,
Ponce, PR 00731, USA.

Epigenetic mechanisms have been ascribed important roles in endometriosis.
Covalent histone modifications at lysine residues have been shown to regulate
gene expression and thus contribute to pathological states in many diseases. In
endometriosis, histone deacetylase inhibition (HDACi) resulted in reactivation of
E-cadherin, attenuation of invasion, decreased proliferation of endometriotic
cells, and caused lesion regression in an animal model. This study was conducted 
to assess basal and hormone-regulated gene expression levels of HDAC1 and HDAC2
(HDAC1/2) in cell lines and protein expression levels in tissues. Basal and
steroid hormone-regulated HDAC1/2 gene expression levels were determined by
quantitative polymerase chain reaction in cell lines and tissues. Protein levels 
were measured by immunohistochemistry (IHC) in tissues on an endometriosis tissue
microarray (TMA). Basal HDAC1/2 gene expression levels were significantly higher 
in endometriotic versus endometrial stromal cells, which was confirmed by Western
blot analysis. Estradiol (E2) and progesterone (P4) significantly downregulated
HDAC1 expression in endometrial epithelial cells. Levels of HDAC2 were
upregulated by E2 and downregulated by E2 + P4 in endometrial stromal cells.
Hormone modulation of HDAC1/2 gene expression was lost in the endometriotic cell 
line. Immunohistochemistry showed that HDAC1/2 proteins were expressed in a
substantial proportion of lesions and endometrium from patients, and their
expression levels varied according to lesion localization. The highest proportion
of strong HDAC1 immunostaining was seen in ovarian, skin, and gastrointestinal
lesions, and of HDAC2 in skin lesions and endometrium from patients with
endometriosis. These studies suggest that endometriosis etiology may be partially
explained by epigenetic regulation of gene expression due to dysregulations in
the expression of HDACs.

PMCID: PMC3343094
PMID: 22344732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2012 May;130(1-2):96-104. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2012.01.009. Epub 2012 Feb 10.

A differentially methylated single CpG-site is correlated with estrogen receptor 
alpha transcription.

Fürst RW(1), Kliem H, Meyer HH, Ulbrich SE.

Author information: 
(1)Physiology Weihenstephan, Technische Universität München, 85354
Freising-Weihenstephan, Germany.

DNA methylation of the promoter region of estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) is
recognized as an epigenetic mechanism that regulates its mRNA abundance. We
questioned whether tissues in male growing piglets were influenced in terms of
DNA methylation by the developmentally occurring distinct plasma estradiol-17ß
(E2) concentrations. Additionally, we aimed at broadening the currently limited
understanding of the epigenetic regulation of ESR1 in physiological settings.
Three distinct genetic regions of ESR1 were analyzed using a combination of
methylation-sensitive high resolution melting (MS-HRM) and pyrosequencing.
Unexpectedly, major E2 concentration differences were only marginally associated 
with minor variations in DNA methylation and mRNA abundance. However, by
analyzing two tissues showing the greatest differences in transcript abundance,
we were able to find one single CpG site in the +1kb intragenic region of ESR1
strikingly differently methylated between heart vs. epididymis. Interestingly,
this single CpG-site was identified as a putative binding site for the
transcriptional repressor TG-interacting factor 1 (TGIF) which can recruit
histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) leading to chromatin condensation. Indeed,
chromatin immunoprecipitation confirmed a reduced histone H3 presence at the
specific ESR1 location in case of higher DNA methylation. We therefore
hypothesize that ESR1 expression may be manifested by a single-CpG-site based
methylation difference impairing transcription factor binding.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22342840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. EMBO J. 2012 Apr 4;31(7):1739-51. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2012.24. Epub 2012 Feb 14.

Epigenetic silencing of myogenic gene program by Myb-binding protein 1a
suppresses myogenesis.

Yang CC(1), Liu H, Chen SL, Wang TH, Hsieh CL, Huang Y, Chen SJ, Chen HC, Yung
BY, Chin-Ming Tan B.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, Chang Gung
University, Kwei-San, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan, ROC.

Skeletal myogenesis involves highly coordinated steps that integrate
developmental cues at the chromatin of muscle progenitors. Here, we identify
Myb-binding protein 1a (Mybbp1a) as a novel negative regulator of muscle-specific
gene expression and myoblast differentiation. The mode of action of Mybbp1a was
linked to promoter regulation as illustrated by its interaction with MyoD at the 
genomic regions of silent muscle-specific genes as well as its negative effect on
MyoD-mediated transcriptional activity. We propose that Mybbp1a exerts its
repressive role by inducing a less permissible chromatin structure following
recruitment of negative epigenetic modifiers such as HDAC1/2 and Suv39h1. At the 
onset of differentiation, Mybbp1a undergoes a promoter disengagement that may be 
due to the differentiation-responsive, miR-546-mediated downregulation of Mybbp1a
expression. Moreover, such alteration gave rise to promoter enrichment of
activators and histone acetylation, an epigenetic status amenable to gene
activation. Together, these findings unveil a hitherto unrecognized
transcriptional co-repressor role of Mybbp1a in proliferating muscle progenitor
cells, and highlight an epigenetic mechanism by which Mybbp1a and miR-546
interplay to control myoblast differentiation transition.

PMCID: PMC3321204
PMID: 22333916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Cancer Discov. 2011 Dec;1(7):587-97. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-11-0181.

Frequent alterations and epigenetic silencing of differentiation pathway genes in
structurally rearranged liposarcomas.

Taylor BS(1), DeCarolis PL, Angeles CV, Brenet F, Schultz N, Antonescu CR,
Scandura JM, Sander C, Viale AJ, Socci ND, Singer S.

Author information: 
(1)Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, NY 10065, USA. taylorb@cbio.mskcc.org

Comment in
    Cancer Discov. 2011 Dec;1(7):555-6.

We explored diverse alterations contributing to liposarcomagenesis by sequencing 
the genome, exome, transcriptome, and cytosine methylome of a primary and
recurrent dedifferentiated liposarcoma (DLPS) from distinct
chemotherapy/radiotherapy-naïve patients. The liposarcoma genomes had complex
structural rearrangements, but in different patterns, and with varied effects on 
the structure and expression of affected genes. While the point mutation rate was
modest, integrative analyses and additional screening identified somatic
mutations in HDAC1 in 8.3% of DLPS. Liposarcoma methylomes revealed alterations
in differentiation pathway genes, including CEBPA methylation in 24% of DLPS.
Treatment with demethylating agents, which restored CEBPA expression in DLPS
cells, was anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic in vitro and reduced tumor growth
in vivo. Both genetic and epigenetic abnormalities established a role for small
RNAs in liposarcomagenesis, typified by methylation-induced silencing of
microRNA-193b in DLPS but not its well-differentiated counterpart. These findings
reveal an unanticipated role for epigenetic abnormalities in DLPS tumors and
suggest demethylating agents as potential therapeutics.SIGNIFICANCE:
Multimodality sequence analysis of DLPS revealed recurrent mutations and
epigenetic abnormalities critical to liposarcomagenesis and to the suppression of
adipocyte differentiation. Pharmacologic inhibition of DNA methylation promoted
apoptosis and differentiated DLPS cells in vitro and inhibited tumor growth in
vivo, providing a rationale for investigating methylation inhibitors in this
disease.

PMCID: PMC3274776
PMID: 22328974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2012 Mar 1;22(5):1926-30. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2012.01.053. 
Epub 2012 Jan 26.

Anti-tumor activity of new orally bioavailable
2-amino-5-(thiophen-2-yl)benzamide-series histone deacetylase inhibitors,
possessing an aqueous soluble functional group as a surface recognition domain.

Hirata Y(1), Hirata M, Kawaratani Y, Shibano M, Taniguchi M, Yasuda M, Ohmomo Y, 
Nagaoka Y, Baba K, Uesato S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science and Biotechnology, Faculty of Chemistry, Materials 
and Bioengineering, Kansai University, Suita, Osaka 564-8680, Japan.

New orally bioavailable 5-(thiophen-2-yl)-substituted 2-aminobenzamide-series
histone deacetylase inhibitors were synthesized. These compounds possess a
morpholine or piperadine-derived moiety as an aqueous soluble functional group.
Among them, 8b, having a 4-ethyl-2,3-dioxopiperazine-1-carboxamide group as a
surface recognition domain, showed promising inhibitory activities against HCT116
cell growth and HDAC1/2. Notably, unlike MS-275, this compound did not induce
apoptosis in the cell cycle tests. We therefore conducted antitumor tests of 8b
and MS-275 against HCT116 cell xenografts in nude mice. Compound 8b reduced the
volume of tumor mass to T/C: 60% and 47% at 45 and 80mg/kg over 16days,
respectively. These values were comparable to the rate (T/C: 51% at 45mg/kg) for 
MS-275. Furthermore, 8b, at neither 45 nor 80mg/kg, induced the weight loss which
was observed in the mice given MS-275 at 45mg/kg.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22321215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Nature. 2012 Feb 8;482(7384):251-5. doi: 10.1038/nature10804.

Functional dissection of lysine deacetylases reveals that HDAC1 and p300 regulate
AMPK.

Lin YY(1), Kiihl S, Suhail Y, Liu SY, Chou YH, Kuang Z, Lu JY, Khor CN, Lin CL,
Bader JS, Irizarry R, Boeke JD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, National
Taiwan University, Taipei 100, Taiwan. yuyilin@ntu.edu.tw

Retraction in
    Nature. 2013 Nov 7;503(7474):146.

First identified as histone-modifying proteins, lysine acetyltransferases (KATs) 
and deacetylases (KDACs) antagonize each other through modification of the side
chains of lysine residues in histone proteins. Acetylation of many non-histone
proteins involved in chromatin, metabolism or cytoskeleton regulation were
further identified in eukaryotic organisms, but the corresponding enzymes and
substrate-specific functions of the modifications are unclear. Moreover,
mechanisms underlying functional specificity of individual KDACs remain
enigmatic, and the substrate spectra of each KDAC lack comprehensive definition. 
Here we dissect the functional specificity of 12 critical human KDACs using a
genome-wide synthetic lethality screen in cultured human cells. The genetic
interaction profiles revealed enzyme-substrate relationships between individual
KDACs and many important substrates governing a wide array of biological
processes including metabolism, development and cell cycle progression. We
further confirmed that acetylation and deacetylation of the catalytic subunit of 
the adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK), a critical cellular 
energy-sensing protein kinase complex, is controlled by the opposing catalytic
activities of HDAC1 and p300. Deacetylation of AMPK enhances physical interaction
with the upstream kinase LKB1, leading to AMPK phosphorylation and activation,
and resulting in lipid breakdown in human liver cells. These findings provide new
insights into previously underappreciated metabolic regulatory roles of HDAC1 in 
coordinating nutrient availability and cellular responses upstream of AMPK, and
demonstrate the importance of high-throughput genetic interaction profiling to
elucidate functional specificity and critical substrates of individual human
KDACs potentially valuable for therapeutic applications.

PMCID: PMC3277212
PMID: 22318606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jan 31;109(5):1649-54. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1121159109. Epub 2012 Jan 17.

Histone deacetylases 1 and 2 regulate autophagy flux and skeletal muscle
homeostasis in mice.

Moresi V(1), Carrer M, Grueter CE, Rifki OF, Shelton JM, Richardson JA,
Bassel-Duby R, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular Biology, Internal Medicine, and Pathology, University
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA.

Maintenance of skeletal muscle structure and function requires efficient and
precise metabolic control. Autophagy plays a key role in metabolic homeostasis of
diverse tissues by recycling cellular constituents, particularly under conditions
of caloric restriction, thereby normalizing cellular metabolism. Here we show
that histone deacetylases (HDACs) 1 and 2 control skeletal muscle homeostasis and
autophagy flux in mice. Skeletal muscle-specific deletion of both HDAC1 and HDAC2
results in perinatal lethality of a subset of mice, accompanied by mitochondrial 
abnormalities and sarcomere degeneration. Mutant mice that survive the first day 
of life develop a progressive myopathy characterized by muscle degeneration and
regeneration, and abnormal metabolism resulting from a blockade to autophagy.
HDAC1 and HDAC2 regulate skeletal muscle autophagy by mediating the induction of 
autophagic gene expression and the formation of autophagosomes, such that
myofibers of mice lacking these HDACs accumulate toxic autophagic intermediates. 
Strikingly, feeding HDAC1/2 mutant mice a high-fat diet from the weaning age
releases the block in autophagy and prevents myopathy in adult mice. These
findings reveal an unprecedented and essential role for HDAC1 and HDAC2 in
maintenance of skeletal muscle structure and function and show that, at least in 
some pathological conditions, myopathy may be mitigated by dietary modifications.

PMCID: PMC3277131
PMID: 22307625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Histochem Cell Biol. 2012 May;137(5):697-702. doi: 10.1007/s00418-012-0920-9.
Epub 2012 Feb 2.

Histone deacetylases 2 and 9 are coexpressed and nuclear localized in human molar
odontoblasts in vivo.

Klinz FJ(1), Korkmaz Y, Bloch W, Raab WH, Addicks K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy I, University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9, 50931
Cologne, Germany. franzjosef.klinz@uni-koeln.de

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are components of nuclear multiprotein complexes
that deacetylate histones and perform important roles in repression of
transcription.Using specific rabbit mAbs, we analyzed by immune histochemistry
and confocal immunofluorescence analysis the expression and subcellular
localization of HDAC14 and HDAC9 in sections of adult human third molars. HDAC2 
and HDAC9 were expressed in some pulpal cells and strongly expressed in the
majority of mature odontoblasts.In contrast, only weak expression of HDAC1, HDAC3
and HDAC4 was observed. Confocal immunofluorescence analysis together with the
DNA stain DRAQ5 revealed that HDAC2 and HDAC9 were coexpressed within the
odontoblast nucleus, but localized to distinct subnuclear structures.In contrast 
to the current point of view, HDAC2 is strongly expressed in a terminally
differentiated cell type.Our results imply that class I and II HDACs are involved
in the transcriptional regulation of human odontoblasts in vivo.

PMID: 22297573  [PubMed - in process]


374. Leukemia. 2012 Jun;26(6):1329-37. doi: 10.1038/leu.2011.376. Epub 2012 Jan 13.

Chromatin modifications induced by the AML1-ETO fusion protein reversibly silence
its genomic targets through AML1 and Sp1 binding motifs.

Maiques-Diaz A(1), Chou FS, Wunderlich M, Gómez-López G, Jacinto FV,
Rodriguez-Perales S, Larrayoz MJ, Calasanz MJ, Mulloy JC, Cigudosa JC, Alvarez S.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cytogenetics Group, Human Cancer Genetics programme, Centro Nacional
Investigaciones Oncologicas, Centro de Investigaciones de Enfermedades Raras,
Madrid, Spain.

The AML1-ETO fusion protein, which is present in 10-15% of cases of acute myeloid
leukemia, is known to repress myeloid differentiation genes through DNA binding
and recruitment of chromatin-modifying proteins and transcription factors in
target genes. ChIP-chip analysis of human hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells
transduced with the AML1-ETO fusion gene enabled us to identify 1168 AML1-ETO
target genes, 103 of which were co-occupied by histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and 
had lost the hyperacetylation mark at histone H4, and 264 showed a K9
trimethylation at histone H3. Enrichment of genes involved in hematopoietic
differentiation and in specific signaling pathways was observed in the presence
of these epigenetic modifications associated with an 'inactive' chromatin status.
Furthermore, AML1-ETO target genes had a significant correlation between the
chromatin marks studied and transcriptional silencing. Interestingly, AML1
binding sites were absent on a large number of selected AML1-ETO promoters and an
Sp1 binding site was found in over 50% of them. Reversible silencing induced by
the fusion protein in the presence of AML1 and/or Sp1 transcription factor
binding site was confirmed. Therefore, this study provides a global analysis of
AML1-ETO functional chromatin modifications and identifies the important role of 
Sp1 in the DNA binding pattern of AML1-ETO, suggesting a role for Sp1-targeted
therapy in this leukemia subtype.

PMID: 22289984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Oncogene. 2012 Dec 6;31(49):5099-107. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.2. Epub 2012 Jan 30.

Poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation of p53 induces gene-specific transcriptional repression of
MTA1.

Lee MH(1), Na H, Kim EJ, Lee HW, Lee MO.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy and Bio-MAX Institute, Seoul National University, Seoul,
Republic of Korea.

The metastasis-associated protein 1 (MTA1) is overexpressed in various human
cancers and is closely connected with aggressive phenotypes; however, little is
known about the transcriptional regulation of the MTA1 gene. This study
identified the MTA1 gene as a target of p53-mediated transrepression. The MTA1
promoter contains two putative p53 response elements (p53REs), which were
repressed by the p53-inducing drug 5-fluorouracil (5-FU). Notably, 5-FU treatment
decreased MTA1 expression only in p53 wild-type cells. p53 and histone
deacetylases 1/2 were recruited, and acetylation of H3K9 was decreased on the
promoter region including the p53REs after 5-FU treatment. Proteomics analysis of
the p53 repressor complex, which was pulled down by the MTA1 promoter, revealed
that the poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP-1) was part of the complex.
Interestingly, p53 was poly(ADP-ribose)ylated by PARP-1, and the p53-mediated
transrepression of the MTA1 gene required poly(ADP-ribose)ylation of p53. In
summary, we report a novel function for poly(ADP-ribose)ylation of p53 in the
gene-specific regulation of the transcriptional mode of p53 on the promoter of
MTA1.

PMID: 22286760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Mol Cells. 2012 Feb;33(2):195-201. doi: 10.1007/s10059-012-2268-3.

pVHL-mediated transcriptional repression of c-Myc by recruitment of histone
deacetylases.

Hwang IY(1), Roe JS, Seol JH, Kim HR, Cho EJ, Youn HD.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Laboratory for Metabolic Checkpoint, Departments of
Biomedical Sciences and Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Korea.

The biological functions of Myc are to regulate cell growth,apoptosis, cell
differentiation and stem-cell self-renewal. Abnormal accumulation of c-Myc is
able to induce excessive proliferation of normal cells. von Hippel-Lindau
protein(pVHL) is a key regulator of hypoxia-inducible factor 1a(HIF1a), thus
accumulation and hyperactivation of HIF1a is the most prominent feature of
VHL-mutated renal cell carcinoma. Interestingly, the Myc pathway is reported to
be activated in renal cell carcinoma even though the precise molecular mechanism 
still remains to be established. Here, we demonstrated that pVHL locates at the
c-Myc promoter region through physical interaction with Myc. Furthermore, pVHL
reinforces HDAC1/2 recruitment to the Myc promoter, which leads to the
auto-suppression of Myc. Therefore, one possible mechanism of Myc
auto-suppression by pVHL entails removing histone acetylation. Our study
identifies a novel mechanism for pVHL-mediated negative regulation of c-Myc
transcription.

PMCID: PMC3887712
PMID: 22286234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2012 Jul;69(13):2173-87. doi: 10.1007/s00018-012-0921-9.

Multiple roles of class I HDACs in proliferation, differentiation, and
development.

Reichert N(1), Choukrallah MA, Matthias P.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Novartis Research
Foundation, Basel, Switzerland.

Class I Histone deacetylases (HDACs) play a central role in controlling cell
cycle regulation, cell differentiation, and tissue development. These enzymes
exert their function by deacetylating histones and a growing number of
non-histone proteins, thereby regulating gene expression and several other
cellular processes. Class I HDACs comprise four members: HDAC1, 2, 3, and 8.
Deletion and/or overexpression of these enzymes in mammalian systems has provided
important insights about their functions and mechanisms of action which are
reviewed here. In particular, unique as well as redundant functions have been
identified in several paradigms. Studies with small molecule inhibitors of HDACs 
have demonstrated the medical relevance of these enzymes and their potential as
therapeutic targets in cancer and other pathological conditions. Going forward,
better understanding the specific role of individual HDACs in normal physiology
as well as in pathological settings will be crucial to exploit this protein
family as a useful therapeutic target in a range of diseases. Further dissection 
of the pathways they impinge on and of their targets, in chromatin or otherwise, 
will form important avenues of research for the future.

PMID: 22286122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. J Med Chem. 2012 Feb 23;55(4):1731-50. doi: 10.1021/jm2016182. Epub 2012 Feb 9.

Defining the mechanism of action and enzymatic selectivity of psammaplin A
against its epigenetic targets.

Baud MG(1), Leiser T, Haus P, Samlal S, Wong AC, Wood RJ, Petrucci V, Gunaratnam 
M, Hughes SM, Buluwela L, Turlais F, Neidle S, Meyer-Almes FJ, White AJ, Fuchter 
MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, United
Kingdom.

Psammaplin A (11c) is a marine metabolite previously reported to be a potent
inhibitor of two classes of epigenetic enzymes: histone deacetylases and DNA
methyltransferases. The design and synthesis of a focused library based on the
psammaplin A core has been carried out to probe the molecular features of this
molecule responsible for its activity. By direct in vitro assay of the free thiol
generated upon reduction of the dimeric psammaplin scaffold, we have
unambiguously demonstrated that 11c functions as a natural prodrug, with the
reduced form being highly potent against HDAC1 in vitro (IC(50) 0.9 nM).
Furthermore, we have shown it to have high isoform selectivity, being 360-fold
selective for HDAC1 over HDAC6 and more than 1000-fold less potent against HDAC7 
and HDAC8. SAR around our focused library revealed a number of features, most
notably the oxime functionality to be important to this selectivity. Many of the 
compounds show significant cytotoxicity in A549, MCF7, and W138 cells, with the
SAR of cytotoxicity correlating to HDAC inhibition. Furthermore, compound
treatment causes upregulation of histone acetylation but little effect on tubulin
acetylation. Finally, we have found no evidence for 11c functioning as a DNMT
inhibitor.

PMID: 22280363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Tumour Biol. 2012 Apr;33(2):403-12. doi: 10.1007/s13277-012-0322-6. Epub 2012 Jan
25.

Epigenetic changes induced by oxidative stress in colorectal cancer cells:
methylation of tumor suppressor RUNX3.

Kang KA(1), Zhang R, Kim GY, Bae SC, Hyun JW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Radiation Cancer Research, Korea Institute of Radiological and
Medical Sciences, Seoul, 139-706, Republic of Korea.

Runt domain transcription factor 3 (RUNX3) is a tumor suppressor that is silenced
in cancer via hypermethylation of its promoter. This study investigated the
mechanisms involved in reactive oxygen species (ROS)-induced silencing of RUNX3
in terms of epigenetic alteration since the effects of oxidative stress in tumor 
suppressor gene transcription are largely unknown. RUNX3 mRNA and protein
expressions were down-regulated in response to hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)) in
the human colorectal cancer cell line SNU-407. This down-regulation was abolished
with pretreatment of the ROS scavenger, N-acetylcysteine (NAC). Moreover,
methylation-specific PCR data revealed that H(2)O(2) treatment increased RUNX3
promoter methylation; however, NAC and the cytosine methylation inhibitor,
5-aza-2-deoxycytidine (5-Aza-dC), decreased it, suggesting that an epigenetic
regulatory mechanism by ROS-induced methylation may be involved in RUNX3
silencing. H(2)O(2) treatment resulted in DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) and
histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) up-regulation with increased expression and
activity, increased binding of DNMT1 to HADC1, and increased DNMT1 binding to the
RUNX3 promoter. In addition, 5-Aza-dC treatment prevented the decrease in RUNX3
mRNA and protein levels by H(2)O(2) treatment. Additionally, H(2)O(2) treatment
inhibited the nuclear localization and expression of RUNX3, which was abolished
by NAC treatment. Furthermore, the down-regulation of RUNX3 expression by
H(2)O(2) also influenced cell proliferation. Taken together, the data suggested
that ROS silenced the tumor suppressor, RUNX3, by epigenetic regulation and may
therefore be associated with the progression of colorectal cancer.

PMID: 22274925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Pathol Oncol Res. 2012 Jul;18(3):713-20. doi: 10.1007/s12253-012-9499-7. Epub
2012 Jan 20.

SAHA inhibits the growth of colon tumors by decreasing histone deacetylase and
the expression of cyclin D1 and survivin.

Jin JS(1), Tsao TY, Sun PC, Yu CP, Tzao C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tungs' Taichung MetroHarbor Hospital, Wuqi Township, 
Taichung County, Taiwan, Republic of China.

We studied the effects of suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA), a histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, on colon cancer. The expression of HDACs in
colorectal cancer specimens and the effects of SAHA on colon cancer cells and
tumors of nude mice were assessed. Treatment with SAHA (3 µm) for 72 h induced
downregulation of different subtypes of HDAC proteins and also induced
acetylation of histone 3 and histone 4. SAHA significantly inhibited the
expression of the oncogenic protein c-myc and also increased the expression of
the p53 and Rb proteins. The immunohistochemical staining of HDACs, including
HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3, and HDAC4, was significantly increased in colorectal
adenocarcinoma specimens compared to healthy control tissues. In addition, murine
studies showed that 100 mg/kg SAHA administered by intraperitoneal injection
significantly induced tumor necrosis and inhibited the growth of colon tumors.
Immunohistochemistry of the tumor tissues from nude mice revealed that SAHA
inhibited the expression of different subtypes of histone deacetylase, the
anti-apoptotic proteins cyclin D1, survivin, and also inhibited cell
proliferative as determined by Ki67 expression. SAHA inhibited the growth of
colon tumors by decreasing histone deacetylases and the expression of cyclin D1
and survivin in nude mice.

PMID: 22270866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. J Neurooncol. 2012 May;107(3):503-16. doi: 10.1007/s11060-011-0791-2. Epub 2012
Jan 20.

P53-dependent antiproliferative and pro-apoptotic effects of trichostatin A (TSA)
in glioblastoma cells.

Bajbouj K(1), Mawrin C, Hartig R, Schulze-Luehrmann J, Wilisch-Neumann A,
Roessner A, Schneider-Stock R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Magdeburg, 39120 Magdeburg, Germany.

Glioblastomas are known to be highly chemoresistant, but HDAC inhibitors (HDACi) 
have been shown to be of therapeutic relevance for this aggressive tumor type. We
treated U87 glioblastoma cells with trichostatin A (TSA) to define potential
epigenetic targets for HDACi-mediated antitumor effects. Using a cDNA array
analysis covering 96 cell cycle genes, cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor
p21(WAF1) was identified as the major player in TSA-induced cell cycle arrest.
TSA slightly inhibited proliferation and viability of U87 cells, cumulating in a 
G1/S cell cycle arrest. This effect was accompanied by a significant
up-regulation of p53 and its transcriptional target p21(WAF1) and by
down-regulation of key G1/S regulators, such as cdk4, cdk6, and cyclin D1.
Nevertheless, TSA did not induce apoptosis in U87 cells. As expected, TSA
promoted the accumulation of total acetylated histones H3 and H4 and a decrease
in endogenous HDAC activity. Characterizing the chromatin modulation around the
p21(WAF1) promoter after TSA treatment using chromatin immunoprecipitation, we
found (1) a release of HDAC1, (2) an increase of acetylated H4 binding, and (3)
enhanced recruitment of p53. p53-depleted U87 cells showed an abrogation of the
G1/S arrest and re-entered the cell cycle. Immunofluorescence staining revealed
that TSA induced the nuclear translocation of p21(WAF1) verifying a cell cycle
arrest. On the other hand, a significant portion of p21(WAF1) was present in the 
cytoplasmic compartment causing apoptosis resistance. Furthermore, TSA-treated
p53-mutant cell line U138 failed to show an induction in p21(WAF1), showed a
deficient G2/M checkpoint, and underwent mitotic catastrophe. We suggest that
HDAC inhibition in combination with other clinically used drugs may be considered
an effective strategy to overcome chemoresistance in glioblastoma cells.

PMID: 22270849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. J Immunol. 2012 Mar 1;188(5):2244-53. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1101614. Epub 2012
Jan 20.

Interaction of Ets-1 with HDAC1 represses IL-10 expression in Th1 cells.

Lee CG(1), Kwon HK, Sahoo A, Hwang W, So JS, Hwang JS, Chae CS, Kim GC, Kim JE,
So HS, Hwang ES, Grenningloh R, Ho IC, Im SH.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Immune Synapse Research Center, Gwangju Institute 
of Science and Technology, Gwangju 500-712, The Republic of Korea.

Erratum in
    J Immunol. 2012 Dec 15;189(12):5996.

IL-10 is a multifunctional cytokine that plays a crucial role in immunity and
tolerance. IL-10 is produced by diverse immune cell types, including B cells and 
subsets of T cells. Although Th1 produce IL-10, their expression levels are much 
lower than Th2 cells under conventional stimulation conditions. The potential
role of E26 transformation-specific 1 (Ets-1) transcription factor as a negative 
regulator for Il10 gene expression in CD4(+) T cells has been implicated
previously. In this study, we investigated the underlying mechanism of
Ets-1-mediated Il10 gene repression in Th1 cells. Compared with wild type Th1
cells, Ets-1 knockout Th1 cells expressed a significantly higher level of IL-10, 
which is comparable with that of wild type Th2 cells. Upregulation of IL-10
expression in Ets-1 knockout Th1 cells was accompanied by enhanced chromatin
accessibility and increased recruitment of histone H3 acetylation at the Il10
regulatory regions. Reciprocally, Ets-1 deficiency significantly decreased
histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) enrichment at the Il10 regulatory regions.
Treatment with trichostatin A, an inhibitor of HDAC family, significantly
increased Il10 gene expression by increasing histone H3 acetylation recruitment. 
We further demonstrated a physical interaction between Ets-1 and HDAC1.
Coexpression of Ets-1 with HDAC1 synergistically repressed IL-10 transcription
activity. In summary, our data suggest that an interaction of Ets-1 with HDAC1
represses the Il10 gene expression in Th1 cells.

PMID: 22266280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Cancer Lett. 2012 Jul 1;320(1):14-22. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2012.01.018. Epub
2012 Jan 20.

Impairment of p53 acetylation by EWS-Fli1 chimeric protein in Ewing family
tumors.

Li Y(1), Li X, Fan G, Fukushi J, Matsumoto Y, Iwamoto Y, Zhu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital, China
Medical University, Shenyang, People's Republic of China.

The chromosomal translocation t(11;22)(q24;q12) yields the EWS-Fli1 fusion gene, 
which contributes to the development of Ewing Family Tumors (EFTs). Previous
studies have shown the ability of EWS-Fli1 chimeric protein to silence p53
activity. Here we demonstrate that the introduction of EWS-Fli1 significantly
inhibited p300-mediated acetylation of p53 at Lys-382 and depletion of EWS-Fli1
protein by small interfering RNAs (siRNA) in EFTs cells facilitated it in
response to DNA damage. Furthermore, the deacetylation of p53 by EWS-Fli1
suppressed its transcriptional activity and enhanced mdm2-mediated p53
degradation. On the other hand, immunoprecipitation study shows that N-terminal
region of EWS-Fli1 associated with histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) to forms a
complex with p53. Knockdown of HDAC1, but not HDAC2 or HDAC3 protein restored the
expression of p53 Lys-382 in EFTs cells. Overexpression of HDAC1 also
significantly inhibited p53 transcriptional activity. Pharmacologic inhibitor of 
HDAC, trichostatin A (TSA) promoted p53-p300 interaction and recruitment of p53
Lys-382 to promoter regions of its target genes p21 and Puma, consequently
inducing apoptosis and stabilizing the acetylation of p53 at Lys-382 together
with the upregulation of p21 and Puma, which were impaired in EFTs cells after
the knockdown of p53 expression. Our data indicate EWS-Fli1 might deacetylate p53
to inhibit its transcriptional function and protein stability via the recruitment
of HDAC1. These results might elucidate a novel molecular mechanism about the
abrogation of p53 pathway by EWS-Fli1 in EFTs pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22266186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Int Immunopharmacol. 2012 Apr;12(4):643-50. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2011.12.022.
Epub 2012 Jan 20.

Effect of erythromycin on cigarette-induced histone deacetylase protein
expression and nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B activity in human macrophages in vitro.

Li M(1), Zhong X, He Z, Wen M, Li J, Peng X, Liu G, Deng J, Zhang J, Bai J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi
Medical University, 6 Shuangyong Road, Nanning, Guangxi 530021, China.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are families of enzymes that regulate chromatin
structure and thus affect inflammatory gene expression. The anti-inflammatory
properties of macrolides are well documented. However, the effects of macrolides 
on HDAC protein expression have not been studied. This study aimed to examine the
molecular mechanism of the inflammatory responses caused by cigarette smoke
extract (CSE) and the effects of erythromycin (EM) on CSE-induced HDAC protein
expression in human macrophages in vitro. The cells were preincubated with EM and
were then exposed to CSE. Levels of interleukin-8 (IL-8) and tumor necrosis
factor-a (TNF-a) were assayed by enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
Nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) activity was assessed by an electrophoretic mobility
shift assay. HDAC activity was measured with a colorimetric assay kit, and
Western blotting was used for HDAC1, -2, -3 and NF-<U+03BA>B protein expression assays. 
The results showed that CSE causes decreases in HDAC activity and HDAC1, -2, -3
levels and upregulates NF-<U+03BA>B activity, resulting in increased NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent
proinflammatory cytokine release in human macrophage cells. Moreover, EM was able
to reverse the CSE-induced decline in HDAC1, -2, -3 protein expression, which was
most prominent for HDAC2; these changes were associated with the suppression of
both NF-<U+03BA>B protein expression and the production of inflammatory mediators. These
results suggest that relieving inflammation with EM can be useful in therapeutic 
approaches for modulating intracellular nuclear signaling in chronic airway
inflammatory diseases such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22265969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. J Chem Inf Model. 2012 Feb 27;52(2):589-603. doi: 10.1021/ci200584f. Epub 2012
Feb 7.

Exploring inhibitor release pathways in histone deacetylases using random
acceleration molecular dynamics simulations.

Kalyaanamoorthy S(1), Chen YP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science and Computer Engineering, Faculty of Science,
Technology and Engineering, La Trobe University, Melbourne, Australia.

Molecular channel exploration perseveres to be the prominent solution for
eliciting structure and accessibility of active site and other internal spaces of
macromolecules. The volume and silhouette characterization of these channels
provides answers for the issues of substrate access and ligand swapping between
the obscured active site and the exterior of the protein. Histone deacetylases
(HDACs) are metal-dependent enzymes that are involved in the cell growth, cell
cycle regulation, and progression, and their deregulations have been linked with 
different types of cancers. Hence HDACs, especially the class I family, are
widely recognized as the important cancer targets, and the characterizations of
their structures and functions have been of special interest in cancer drug
discovery. The class I HDACs are known to possess two different protein channels,
an 11 Å and a 14 Å (named channels A and B1, respectively), of which the former
is a ligand or substrate occupying tunnel that leads to the buried active site
zinc ion and the latter is speculated to be involved in product release. In this 
work, we have carried out random acceleration molecular dynamics (RAMD)
simulations coupled with the classical molecular dynamics to explore the release 
of the ligand, N-(2-aminophenyl) benzamide (LLX) from the active sites of the
recently solved X-ray crystal structure of HDAC2 and the computationally modeled 
HDAC1 proteins. The RAMD simulations identified significant structural and
dynamic features of the HDAC channels, especially the key 'gate-keeping' amino
acid residues that control these channels and the ligand release events. Further,
this study identified a novel and unique channel B2, a subchannel from channel
B1, in the HDAC1 protein structure. The roles of water molecules in the LLX
release from the HDAC1 and HDAC2 enzymes are also discussed. Such structural and 
dynamic properties of the HDAC protein channels that govern the ligand escape
reactions will provide further mechanistic insights into the HDAC enzymes, which,
in the long run, have a potential to bring new ideas for developing more
promising HDAC inhibitors as well as extend our atomic level understandings on
their mechanisms of action.

PMID: 22263580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. J Neurosci. 2012 Jan 18;32(3):989-94. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0175-11.2012.

The Rett syndrome protein MeCP2 regulates synaptic scaling.

Qiu Z(1), Sylwestrak EL, Lieberman DN, Zhang Y, Liu XY, Ghosh A.

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiology Section, Division of Biological Sciences, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093-0366, USA.

Synaptic scaling is a form of homeostatic synaptic plasticity characterized by
cell-wide changes in synaptic strength in response to changes in overall levels
of neuronal activity. Here we report that bicuculline-induced increase in
neuronal activity leads to a decrease in mEPSC amplitude and a decrease in
expression of the AMPA receptor subunit GluR2 in rat hippocampal cultures.
Bicuculline treatment also leads to an increase in the levels of the
transcriptional repressor MeCP2, which binds to the GluR2 promoter along with the
corepressors HDAC1 and mSin3A. Downregulation of MeCP2 by shRNA expression or
genetic deletion blocks the bicuculline-induced decrease in GluR2 expression and 
mEPSC amplitude. These observations indicate that MeCP2 mediates
activity-dependent synaptic scaling, and suggest that the pathophysiology of Rett
syndrome, which is caused by mutations in MeCP2, may involve defects in
activity-dependent regulation of synaptic currents.

PMCID: PMC3711796
PMID: 22262897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Nat Med. 2012 Jan 15;18(2):235-43. doi: 10.1038/nm.2614.

Cidea is an essential transcriptional coactivator regulating mammary gland
secretion of milk lipids.

Wang W(1), Lv N, Zhang S, Shui G, Qian H, Zhang J, Chen Y, Ye J, Xie Y, Shen Y,
Wenk MR, Li P.

Author information: 
(1)Tsinghua-Peking Center for Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China.

Adequate lipid secretion by mammary glands during lactation is essential for the 
survival of mammalian offspring. However, the mechanism governing this process is
poorly understood. Here we show that Cidea is expressed at high levels in
lactating mammary glands and its deficiency leads to premature pup death as a
result of severely reduced milk lipids. Furthermore, the expression of xanthine
oxidoreductase (XOR), an essential factor for milk lipid secretion, is markedly
lower in Cidea-deficient mammary glands. Conversely, ectopic Cidea expression
induces the expression of XOR and enhances lipid secretion in vivo. Unexpectedly,
as Cidea has heretofore been thought of as a cytoplasmic protein, we detected it 
in the nucleus and found it to physically interact with transcription factor
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß (C/EBPß) in mammary epithelial cells. We also
observed that Cidea induces XOR expression by promoting the association of C/EBPß
onto, and the dissociation of HDAC1 from, the promoter of the Xdh gene encoding
XOR. Finally, we found that Fsp27, another CIDE family protein, is detected in
the nucleus and interacts with C/EBPß to regulate expression of a subset of
C/EBPß downstream genes in adipocytes. Thus, Cidea acts as a previously unknown
transcriptional coactivator of C/EBPß in mammary glands to control lipid
secretion and pup survival.

PMID: 22245780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e29498. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029498. Epub 2011 Dec 29.

Stress-induced C/EBP homology protein (CHOP) represses MyoD transcription to
delay myoblast differentiation.

Alter J(1), Bengal E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Rappaport Institute for Research in the Medical
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa,
Israel.

When mouse myoblasts or satellite cells differentiate in culture, the expression 
of myogenic regulatory factor, MyoD, is downregulated in a subset of cells that
do not differentiate. The mechanism involved in the repression of MyoD expression
remains largely unknown. Here we report that a stress-response pathway repressing
MyoD transcription is transiently activated in mouse-derived C2C12 myoblasts
growing under differentiation-promoting conditions. We show that phosphorylation 
of the a subunit of the translation initiation factor 2 (eIF2a) is followed by
expression of C/EBP homology protein (CHOP) in some myoblasts. ShRNA-driven
knockdown of CHOP expression caused earlier and more robust differentiation,
whereas its constitutive expression delayed differentiation relative to wild type
myoblasts. Cells expressing CHOP did not express the myogenic regulatory factors 
MyoD and myogenin. These results indicated that CHOP directly repressed the
transcription of the MyoD gene. In support of this view, CHOP associated with
upstream regulatory region of the MyoD gene and its activity reduced histone
acetylation at the enhancer region of MyoD. CHOP interacted with histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) in cells. This protein complex may reduce histone
acetylation when bound to MyoD regulatory regions. Overall, our results suggest
that the activation of a stress pathway in myoblasts transiently downregulate the
myogenic program.

PMCID: PMC3248460
PMID: 22242125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Oncology. 2011;81(5-6):325-9. doi: 10.1159/000334577. Epub 2012 Jan 10.

Histone deacetylase in chronic lymphocytic leukemia.

Wang JC(1), Kafeel MI, Avezbakiyev B, Chen C, Sun Y, Rathnasabapathy C, Kalavar
M, He Z, Burton J, Lichter S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Brookdale University Hospital Medical Center,
Brooklyn, NY 11212, USA. jcwang5@aol.com

BACKGROUND: Elevated histone deacetylase (HDAC) isoenzyme levels have been
described in patients with carcinomas and leukemias. HDAC inhibitors (HDACi) have
shown promise in the treatment of carcinomas and are currently under intense
research. To make better use of HDACi in treating chronic lymphocytic leukemia
(CLL), HDAC isoenzyme levels were studied.
METHODS: Quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction for HDAC
isoenzyme was measured in 32 patients with CLL and compared with 17 normal
volunteer controls. ZAP-70, CD38 and CD44 were also assayed and correlated to
HDAC isoenzyme levels.
RESULTS: The results showed: (1) HDAC isoenzyme levels in CLL were significantly 
increased in class I including HDAC1 and HDAC3, in class II including HADC6,
HDAC7, HDAC9 and HDAC10, and in class III including SIRT1 and SIRT6; (2) higher
expression of HDAC isoenzyme levels was found in ZAP-70+ compared to ZAP-70-
patients, and CD44 expression levels were correlated with HDAC isoenzyme
expression levels in the majority of HDAC classes.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest: (1) in CLL, elevated HDAC isoenzyme activity 
is not restricted to one class, and therefore, HDACi therapy may need to be
directed to more than one specific class of HDAC; (2) higher HDAC expression
activity may indicate a poor prognosis and more advanced disease stage (through
indirect evidence), since higher values were found in patients with ZAP-70+ and
higher CD44 expression levels.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22237050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Bull Exp Biol Med. 2011 Mar;150(5):603-6.

Time course of histone deacetylase 1 and acetylated H3 and H4 histones in the
brain of rats treated with ladasten.

Salimgareeva MKh(1), Sadovnikov SV, Yamidanov RS, Vakhitova YV, Seredenin SB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology and Pharmacology, Institute of Biochemistry
and Genetics, Research Center of Russian Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russia.
miph@anrb.ru

We studied the effects of single intragastric administration of ladasten in a
dose of 50 mg/kg on the time course of histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and levels
of acetylated histones H3 (Lys9) and H4 (Lys8) in the striatum, hippocampus, and 
hypothalamus. Ladasten reduced HDAC1 level in rat striatum and hippocampus and
modified H3acK9 and H4acK8 levels in various structures of rat brain.

PMID: 22235395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2012 Mar;52(3):587-95. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2011.12.005. Epub
2011 Dec 20.

OxLDL causes both epigenetic modification and signaling regulation on the
microRNA-29b gene: novel mechanisms for cardiovascular diseases.

Chen KC(1), Liao YC, Hsieh IC, Wang YS, Hu CY, Juo SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Research, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

Comment in
    J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2012 Mar;52(3):584-6.

MicroRNA-29b has been reported to epigenetically regulate proatherogenic genes in
response to oxLDL. Since transcription factors and epigenetic regulations are
important mechanisms to regulate gene expression, we investigated whether these
mechanisms are involved in oxLDL-induced microRNA-29b upregulation. First, we
confirmed that microRNA-29b expression was increased in the aorta of mice fed
with a high-fat diet, which was consistent with our previous in vitro findings.
Next, we found that oxLDL only activated the microRNA-29b-1/microRNA-29a cluster 
gene on chromosome 7 but not the other distinct microRNA-29b gene located on
chromosome 1. Using the promoter reporter assay and chromatin
immunoprecipitation, activator protein-1 (AP-1) was shown to bind to the
microRNA-29b-1 promoter. We further identified the signaling pathway of
LOX-1/Ca(2+)/ROS/ERK/c-Fos was involved in oxLDL-mediated microRNA-29b
overexpression after treating with the MAPTAM (Ca(2+) chelator), NAC (ROS
scavenger), U0126 (ERK inhibitor) and c-Fos (one of the AP-1 proteins) shRNA,
respectively. To investigate epigenetic regulations, we found that microRNA-29b
promoter contained no CpG islands for DNA methylation. Therefore we investigated 
whether histone modifications influence microRNA-29b promoter activity. We showed
that down-regulation of HDAC1 and the modifications on histone 3 lysine 4 (H3K4) 
and H3K9 significantly affected microRNA-29b expression. Furthermore, knockdown
of c-Fos expression attenuated the effect of oxLDL-induced histone modifications 
on the microRNA-29b gene expression. Taken together, our data suggest that both
transcription factor activation and histone modifications are important
regulatory mechanisms of oxLDL-induced atherogenic process. This article is part 
of a Special Issue entitled OxLDL causes both epigenetic modification and
signaling regulation on the microRNA-29b gene: Novel mechanisms for
cardiovascular diseases.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22226905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Feb 21;109(8):E481-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1118403109. Epub 2012 Jan 5.

Compensatory functions of histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and HDAC2 regulate
transcription and apoptosis during mouse oocyte development.

Ma P(1), Pan H, Montgomery RL, Olson EN, Schultz RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104,
USA.

Dramatic changes in chromatin structure and histone modification occur during
oocyte growth, as well as a global cessation of transcription. The role of
histone modifications in these processes is poorly understood. We report the
effect of conditionally deleting Hdac1 and Hdac2 on oocyte development. Deleting 
either gene has little or no effect on oocyte development, whereas deleting both 
genes results in follicle development arrest at the secondary follicle stage.
This developmental arrest is accompanied by substantial perturbation of the
transcriptome and a global reduction in transcription even though histone
acetylation is markedly increased. There is no apparent change in histone
repressive marks, but there is a pronounced decrease in histone H3K4 methylation,
an activating mark. The decrease in H3K4 methylation is likely a result of
increased expression of Kdm5b because RNAi-mediated targeting of Kdm5b in
double-mutant oocytes results in an increase in H3K4 methylation. An increase in 
TRP53 acetylation also occurs in mutant oocytes and may contribute to the
observed increased incidence of apoptosis. Taken together, these results suggest 
seminal roles of acetylation of histone and nonhistone proteins in oocyte
development.

PMCID: PMC3286984
PMID: 22223663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. EMBO Rep. 2012 Feb 1;13(2):142-9. doi: 10.1038/embor.2011.247.

Histone deacetylase 1 enhances microRNA processing via deacetylation of DGCR8.

Wada T(1), Kikuchi J, Furukawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Stem Cell Regulation, Center for Molecular Medicine, Jichi Medical
School, Shimotsuke, Tochigi 329-0498, Japan.

Relatively little is known about the regulatory mechanisms of the Drosha/DGCR8
complex, which processes miRNAs at the initial step of biogenesis. We found that 
histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) increases the expression levels of mature miRNAs
despite repressing the transcription of host genes. HDAC1 is an integral
component of the Drosha/DGCR8 complex and enhances miRNA processing by increasing
the affinity of DGCR8 to primary miRNA transcripts via deacetylation of critical 
lysine residues in the RNA-binding domains of DGCR8. This finding suggests that
HDACs have two arms for gene silencing: transcriptional repression by promoter
histone deacetylation and post-transcriptional inhibition by increasing miRNA
abundance.

PMCID: PMC3271337
PMID: 22222205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Sci Signal. 2012 Jan 3;5(205):ra1. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2001906.

Inhibition of PP1 phosphatase activity by HBx: a mechanism for the activation of 
hepatitis B virus transcription.

Cougot D(1), Allemand E, Rivière L, Benhenda S, Duroure K, Levillayer F, Muchardt
C, Buendia MA, Neuveut C.

Author information: 
(1)Oncogenèse et Virologie Moléculaire, Institut Pasteur, 28 Rue du Dr. Roux,
75724 Paris Cedex 15, France.

The regulatory protein HBx is essential for hepatitis B virus (HBV) replication
in vivo and for transcription of the episomal HBV genome. We previously reported 
that in infected cells HBx activates genes targeted by the transcription factor
CREB [cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) response element-binding protein].
cAMP induces phosphorylation and activation of CREB, and CREB inactivation is
promoted by protein phosphatase 1 (PP1), which binds to CREB through histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1). We showed that CREB was recruited to HBV DNA.
Phosphorylation induced by cAMP had a longer half-life when CREB was bound to the
episomal HBV genome compared to when it was bound to the promoter of a host
target gene not regulated by HBx, suggesting that the virus has developed a
mechanism to favor its own transcription. This mechanism required HBx, which
interacted with and inhibited PP1 to extend the half-life of CREB
phosphorylation. Silencing of PP1 rescued replication of an HBx-deficient HBV
genome, suggesting that HBx enhances viral transcription in part by neutralizing 
PP1 activity. Our results illustrate a previously unknown mechanism of HBV
transcriptional activation by HBx in which HBx interferes with the inactivation
of CREB by the PP1 and HDAC1 complex.

PMID: 22215732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Jul;32(7):458-62.

[Inhibitory effect of valproic acid on xenografted Kasumi-1 tumor growth in nude 
mouse and its mechanism].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu P(1), Tian X, Shi GR, Jiang FY, Liu BQ, Zhang ZH, Zhao L, Yan LN, Liang ZQ,
Hao CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Affiliated Hospital of Chengde Medical College,
Chengde 067000, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate in vivo inhibitory effect of histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitor valproic acid (VPA) on xenografted Kasumi-1 tumor in nude mice and its 
mechanism.
METHODS: Xenografted Kasumi-1 tumor mouse model was established by subcutaneous
inoculation of Kasumi-1 cells. Xenotransplanted nude mice were assigned into
control or VPA treatment groups. Volume of the xenografted tumors was measured
and compared between the two groups. Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase
biotin-dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) was applied to detection of tumor cell
apoptosis. The gene expression of GM-CSF, HDAC1, Ac-H3 and survivin was studied
with semi-quantitative RT-PCR and Western blotting. ChIP method was used to assay
the effects of VPA on acetylation of histone H3 within GM-CSF promoter region.
RESULTS: (1) VAP significantly inhibited xenografted Kasumi-1 tumor growth. The
calculated inhibition rate was 57.25%. (2) Morphologic study showed that VPA
induced differentiation and apoptosis of Kasumi-1 tumor cells. The apoptosis
index of VAP treatment group [(3.661 +/- 0.768)%] was significantly higher than
that of control group [(0.267 +/- 0.110)%]. (3) Comparing to those in control
group, the level of nuclear HDAC1 protein was significantly decreased, the Ac-H3 
protein expression level was increased, the mRNA and protein expression levels of
GM-CSF and acetylation of histone H3 were remarkably increased, and the gene
expression level of survivin significantly decreased in VPA treatment group.
CONCLUSION: VAP significantly inhibits xenografted Kasumi-1 tumor growth and
induces tumor cell differentiation and apoptosis. The mechanism may be decrease
of survivin gene expression, inhibition of nuclear expression of HDAC, promotion 
of histone protein acetylation level and acetylation of histone H3 within GM-CSF 
promoter region, and increase of GM-CSF transcription.

PMID: 22213865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. J Cell Physiol. 2012 Oct;227(10):3389-96. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24039.

Organosulfur derivatives of the HDAC inhibitor valproic acid sensitize human lung
cancer cell lines to apoptosis and to cisplatin cytotoxicity.

Tesei A(1), Brigliadori G, Carloni S, Fabbri F, Ulivi P, Arienti C, Sparatore A, 
Del Soldato P, Pasini A, Amadori D, Silvestrini R, Zoli W.

Author information: 
(1)Biosciences Laboratory, IRCCS Istituto Scientifico Romagnolo per lo Studio e
la Cura dei Tumori (I.R.S.T.), Meldola, Italy. anna.tesei@irst.emr.it

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer mortality worldwide and despite
efforts made to improve clinical results, continuing poor survival rates indicate
that novel therapeutic approaches are needed. Valproic acid (VPA), a short-chain 
branched fatty acid used mainly for the treatment of epilepsy and bipolar
disorder, has been shown to inhibit class I histone deacetylases (HDAC-I), a
group of enzymes involved in chromatin remodeling and which are thought to play a
role in tumor development. Although evidence of VPA's therapeutic efficacy has
also been observed in patients with solid tumors, the very high concentration
required to induce antitumor activity limits its clinical usefulness. We used a
panel of NSCLC cell lines to evaluate the activity and mechanisms of action of
organosulfur valproic acid derivatives, a promising new class of compounds
designed to improve the safety and efficacy of the valproic acid molecule and
created by coupling it with a hydrogen sulfide (H(2) S)-releasing moiety. Our
results highlighted the increased cytotoxic activity of the novel organosulfur
derivatives, ACS33 and ACS2, with respect to VPA, starting from low
concentrations. In particular, ACS2 exhibited important pro-apoptotic activity
triggered by the mitochondrial pathway and also showed anti-invasion potential.
Furthermore, our in vitro results identified a highly effective combination
schedule of ACS2 and cisplatin capable of inducing a synergistic interaction even
when the two drugs were used at low concentrations, which could prove a valid
alternative to traditional chemotherapeutic regimens used for advanced lung
cancer. Further studies are needed to confirm these preliminary findings.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22212895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Int J Oncol. 2012 May;40(5):1391-6. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2011.1323. Epub 2011 Dec 30.

Involvement of p21waf1/cip1 expression in the cytotoxicity of the potent histone 
deacetylase inhibitor spiruchostatin B towards susceptible NALM-6 human B cell
leukemia cells.

Kanno S(1), Maeda N, Tomizawa A, Yomogida S, Katoh T, Ishikawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacotherapeutics, Tohoku Pharmaceutical University,
Aoba-ku, Sendai 981-8558, Japan. syu-kan@tohoku-pharm.ac.jp

Spiruchostatin B (SP-B) is a potent histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor that has
potential for the chemotherapy of leukemia. The aim of this study was to study
the susceptibility of human leukemia cell lines to SP-B. We found that NALM-6
human B cell leukemia cells are the most susceptible to SP-B. There was a low
correlation between the expression of HDAC1 mRNA and HDI susceptibility of
leukemia cells. NALM-6 has higher endogenous p21waf1/cip1 mRNA expression than
other leukemia cells. SP-B-induced cytotoxicity was mediated by induction of
histone acetylation via inhibition of HDACs, and this effect of SP-B was
associated with apoptosis, which was mediated by caspase activation in NALM-6
cells. SP-B time-dependently increased the size of the sub-G1 (apoptotic) peak,
and this effect correlated with SP-B induction of cellular apoptotic features
such as changes in nuclear morphology. SP-B significantly increased p21waf1/cip1 
expression prior to induction of apoptosis. In conclusion, NALM-6 cells, which
have a higher expression of p21waf1/cip1 mRNA than other leukemia cell lines,
were susceptible to SP-B-induced cytotoxicity that resulted in induction of
apoptosis. Our findings may be useful when establishing a therapeutic strategy
based on SP-B.

PMID: 22211246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Schizophr Res. 2012 Feb;134(2-3):260-6. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2011.11.029. Epub
2011 Dec 27.

Epigenetic regulation on GABRB2 isoforms expression: developmental variations and
disruptions in psychotic disorders.

Zhao C(1), Wang F, Pun FW, Mei L, Ren L, Yu Z, Ng SK, Chen J, Tsang SY, Xue H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Life Science, Applied Genomics Center and Fok Ying Tung Graduate
School, The Hong Kong University of Science & Technology, Clear Water Bay, Hong
Kong, China.

INTRODUCTION: To improve the understanding of psychotic abnormalities and their
non-Mendelian inheritance patterns, the epigenetic regulation of the psychotic
disorder-associated GABRB2, gene for the type A <U+03B3>-aminobutyric acid receptor
ß(2)-subunit, was investigated.
METHODS: Expression of GABRB2, and the epigenetic regulatory enzymes histone
deacetylases (HDACs) and DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) in mouse and postmortem
human brains was analyzed using real-time PCR.
RESULTS: Results showed that expression of GABRB2 isoforms significantly
increased over time in both mouse and human, especially for the long splicing
isoform. In the brains of non-psychiatric controls (CON), a significant positive 
correlation of GABRB2 expression with age was observed in individuals with MM
genotypes of the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) rs187269 and rs1816072.
This was reversed to a significant negative correlation in schizophrenics (SCZ). 
A similar reversal was also displayed by bipolar disorder (BPD) patients. In
parallel, a significant co-variation of HDAC1 with GABRB2 expression observed in 
CON remained significant in BPD but not in SCZ; comparably, a significant
co-variation of HDAC2 with GABRB2 expression observed in CON became
non-significant in both SCZ and BPD. Moreover, co-variations of DNMT1 and DNMT3B 
with GABRB2, not observable in CON, became significant in BPD.
CONCLUSION: These findings demonstrated that GABRB2 expression was under
epigenetic regulation that varied with development, genotype and disease status, 
and these regulatory mechanisms were observably disrupted in SCZ and BPD. This
study provided insight into the complex inheritance patterns of psychiatric
disorders, and pointed to the involvement of epigenetic dysregulation in the
disease process of major psychotic disorders.

Crown Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22206711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Anticancer Res. 2011 Dec;31(12):4115-25.

Histone-modifier gene expression profiles are associated with pathological and
clinical outcomes in human breast cancer.

Patani N(1), Jiang WG, Newbold RF, Mokbel K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, The London Breast Institute, The Princess Grace 
Hospital, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Epigenetic regulation of gene expression is under normal
circumstances tightly controlled by the specific methylation of cytosine residues
in CpG dinucleotides and coordinated by adjustments in the histone-dependent
configuration of chromatin. Following our original report, providing the first
description of potential tumor suppressor function associated with the histone
methyltransferase SET domain containing 2 (SETD2) in breast cancer, the objective
of this study was to determine the expression profiles of 16 further
histone-modifier genes in a well annotated cohort of patients with primary
operable breast cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Breast cancer tissues (n=127) and normal tissues (n=33)
underwent RNA extraction and reverse transcription, and histone-modifier gene
transcript levels were determined using real-time quantitative PCR. The
histone-modifier genes included: histone acetyltransferases (cAMP response
element-binding protein-binding protein (CREBBP)); class I (histone deacetylase 1
(HDAC1) and histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2)), II (histone deacetylase 5 (HDAC5))
and III (sirtuin 1 (SIRT1)) histone deacetylases; and histone methyltransferases 
(SET domain containing suppressor of variegation 3-9 homolog 1 (SUV39H1) and
suppressor of variegation 3-9 homolog 2 (SUV39H2)) amongst others. Expression
levels were analysed against tumor size, grade, nodal involvement, histological
subtype, receptor status, TNM stage, Nottingham Prognostic Index, and
disease-free and overall survival over a 10-year follow-up period.
RESULTS: Expression of histone-modifier genes in breast cancer differed
significantly from those in normal tissue (HDAC5, HDAC1, lysine (K)-specific
demethylase 4A (KDM4A) and lysine (K)-specific demethylase 6A (KDM6A)).
Differences in expression profiles were also found to exist between individual
breast tumors and, in some cases, were significantly associated with conventional
pathological parameters and prognostic indices: tumor grade (K (lysine)
acetyltransferase 5 (KAT5), HDAC1, KDM4A, SUV39H1 and KDM6A)); TNM stage
(SUV39H1, K (lysine) acetyltransferase 2B (KAT2B), lysine (K)-specific
demethylase 1A (KDM1A), KDM4A, lysine (K)-specific demethylase 5C (KDM5C), K
(lysine) acetyltransferase 8 (KAT8), HDAC5 and KAT5)); Nottingham Prognostic
Index (KDM5C, myeloid/lymphoid or mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL), KAT8 and SET and 
MYND domain containing 3 (SMYD3)); receptor status (KAT5, SMYD3 and KDM1A);
histological type (KAT5, KDM5C, KAT8, KDM4A and MLL); disease-free survival
(SUV39H1, SMYD3, HDAC5, KDM6A, HDAC1, KDM1A, KDM4A, KAT8, KDM5C, KAT5 and MLL)
and overall survival (KAT8). Significant correlations were identified between the
differential expression profiles of particular histone-modifying genes.
CONCLUSION: Expression levels of histone-modifier genes in breast cancer differ
significantly from normal tissue. Differences in expression profiles exist
between breast tumors and are significantly associated with conventional
pathological parameters and clinical outcomes. Further study is warranted to
determine the consequences of altered expression for each specific
histone-modifier gene and the biological and clinical implications of
combinatorial variations in expression profiles. Histone-modifier enzymes offer
utility as biomarkers and potential for targeted therapeutic strategies.

PMID: 22199269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2012;723:107-13. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-0631-0_15.

HDAC inhibition prevents Rd1 mouse photoreceptor degeneration.

Sancho-Pelluz J(1), Paquet-Durand F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.
fjs2115@columbia.edu

PMID: 22183322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. EMBO Mol Med. 2012 Feb;4(2):78-92. doi: 10.1002/emmm.201100189. Epub 2011 Dec 19.

Concerted functions of HDAC1 and microRNA-574-5p repress alternatively spliced
ceramide synthase 1 expression in human cancer cells.

Meyers-Needham M(1), Ponnusamy S, Gencer S, Jiang W, Thomas RJ, Senkal CE,
Ogretmen B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical University of South 
Carolina, SC, USA.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) and microRNAs (miRs) have pro-survival roles, but
the mechanism behind this is unclear. Repression of ceramide synthase 1 (CerS1), 
altering C(18) -ceramide generation, was linked to drug resistance and
metastasis. Here we report that the CerS1 promoter was repressed by
HDAC1-dependent inhibition of Sp1 recruitment to two specific GC-boxes spanning
the -177 and -139 region. Moreover, an alternatively spliced variant CerS1 mRNA
(CerS1-2) was detected mainly in cancer cells or primary tumour tissues compared 
to controls, which was targeted by miR-574-5p for degradation. A specific
3'UTR-targeting site, localized within the retained intron between exons 6 and 7,
was identified, and its mutation, or miR-574-5p knockdown prevented the
degradation of CerS1-2 mRNA. Interference with HDAC1 and miR-574-5p reconstituted
CerS1-2 expression and C(18) -ceramide generation in multiple human cancer cell
lines, which subsequently inhibited proliferation and anchorage-independent
growth. Accordingly, knockdown of CerS1 partially protected cancer cells from
MS-275/miR-574-5p siRNA-mediated growth inhibition. Thus, these data suggest that
the HDAC1/miR-574-5p axis might provide a novel therapeutic target to
reconstitute tumour suppressor CerS1/ceramide signalling.

Copyright © 2012 EMBO Molecular Medicine.

PMCID: PMC3376837
PMID: 22180294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. J Med Chem. 2012 Jan 26;55(2):639-51. doi: 10.1021/jm200773h. Epub 2012 Jan 5.

Second-generation histone deacetylase 6 inhibitors enhance the immunosuppressive 
effects of Foxp3+ T-regulatory cells.

Kalin JH(1), Butler KV, Akimova T, Hancock WW, Kozikowski AP.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Discovery Program, Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacognosy,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60612, United States.

Second-generation Tubastatin A analogues were synthesized and evaluated for their
ability to inhibit selectively histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6). Substitutions to
the carboline cap group were well-tolerated with substitution at the 2-position
of both ß- and <U+03B3>-carbolines being optimal for HDAC6 activity and selectivity.
Some compounds in this series were determined to have subnanomolar activity at
HDAC6 with more than 7000 fold selectivity for HDAC6 versus HDAC1. Selected
compounds were then evaluated for their ability to augment the immunosuppressive 
effect of Foxp3+ regulatory T cells. All compounds tested were found to enhance
the ability of regulatory T cells to inhibit the mitotic division of effector T
cells both in vitro and in vivo, suggesting that further investigation into the
use of these compounds for the treatment of autoimmune disorders is warranted.

PMID: 22165909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program. 2011;2011:459-65. doi:
10.1182/asheducation-2011.1.459.

Targeted therapeutic strategies for fetal hemoglobin induction.

Sankaran VG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital Boston, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
sankaran@broadinstitute.org

Increased levels of fetal hemoglobin (HbF) can ameliorate the severity of the
ß-hemoglobin disorders, sickle cell disease (SCD) and ß-thalassemia, which are
major sources of morbidity and mortality worldwide. As a result, there has been a
longstanding interest in developing therapeutic approaches for inducing HbF. For 
more than 3 decades, the majority of HbF inducers developed were based on empiric
observations and have had limited success. Recently, human genetic approaches
have provided insight into previously unappreciated regulators of the
fetal-to-adult hemoglobin switch and HbF silencing, revealing molecular targets
to induce HbF. This article reviews these developments and discusses how
molecules including BCL11A, KLF1, MYB, SOX6, miRNAs 15a and 16-1, and histone
deacetylase 1 and 2 (HDAC1/2) could be important targets for HbF induction in
humans. The current understanding of how these molecules function and the
benefits and drawbacks of each of these potential therapeutic targets are also
examined. The identification of these regulators of HbF expression is extremely
promising and suggests that rationally designed approaches targeting the very
mechanisms mediating this switching process could lead to better, less toxic, and
more effective strategies for HbF induction.

PMID: 22160074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Thorax. 2012 May;67(5):392-8. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2011-200760. Epub 2011 Dec
8.

Glucocorticoid receptor ß and histone deacetylase 1 and 2 expression in the
airways of severe asthma.

Butler CA(1), McQuaid S, Taggart CC, Weldon S, Carter R, Skibinski G, Warke TJ,
Choy DF, McGarvey LP, Bradding P, Arron JR, Heaney LG.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Infection and Immunity, Queens University Belfast, Level 8, Belfast
City Hospital, Lisburn Road, Belfast BT9 7AB, Northern Ireland, UK.

RATIONALE: Upregulation of glucocorticoid receptor ß (GRß) has been implicated in
steroid resistance in severe asthma, although previous studies are conflicting.
GRß has been proposed as a dominant negative isoform of glucocorticoid receptor a
(GRa) but it has also been suggested that GRß can cause steroid resistance via
reduced expression of histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2), a key regulator of steroid
responsiveness in the airway.
OBJECTIVES: To examine GRß, GRa, HDAC1 and HDAC2 expression at transcript and
protein levels in bronchial biopsies from a large series of patients with severe 
asthma, and to compare the findings with those of patients with mild to moderate 
asthma and healthy volunteers.
METHODS: Bronchoscopic study in two UK centres with real-time PCR and
immunohistochemistry performed on biopsies, western blotting of bronchial
epithelial cells and immunoprecipitation with anti-GRß antibody.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Protein and mRNA expression for GRa and HDAC2 did 
not differ between groups. GRß mRNA was detected in only 13 of 73 samples (seven 
patients with severe asthma), however immunohistochemistry showed widespread
epithelial staining in all groups. Western blotting of bronchial epithelial cells
with GRß antibody detected an additional 'cross-reacting' protein, identified as 
clathrin. HDAC1 expression was increased in patients with severe asthma compared 
with healthy volunteers.
CONCLUSIONS: GRß mRNA is expressed at low levels in a minority of patients with
severe asthma. HDAC1 and HDAC2 expression was not downregulated in severe asthma.
These data do not support upregulated GRß and resultant reduced HDAC expression
as the principal mechanism of steroid resistance in severe asthma. Conflicting
GRß literature may be explained in part by clathrin cross-reactivity with
commercial antibodies.

PMID: 22156779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Apr;40(7):2925-39. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr1151. Epub 2011
Dec 10.

HDAC1 regulates pluripotency and lineage specific transcriptional networks in
embryonic and trophoblast stem cells.

Kidder BL(1), Palmer S.

Author information: 
(1)EMD Serono Research Institute, Billerica, MA 01821, USA.
Benjamin.kidder@nih.gov

Epigenetic regulation of gene expression is important in maintaining self-renewal
of embryonic stem (ES) and trophoblast stem (TS) cells. Histone deacetylases
(HDACs) negatively control histone acetylation by removing covalent acetylation
marks from histone tails. Because histone acetylation is a known mark for active 
transcription, HDACs presumably associate with inactive genes. Here, we used
genome-wide chromatin immunoprecipitation to investigate targets of HDAC1 in ES
and TS cells. Through evaluation of genes associated with acetylated histone H3
marks, and global expression analysis of Hdac1 knockout ES and trichostatin
A-treated ES and TS cells, we found that HDAC1 occupies mainly active genes,
including important regulators of ES and TS cells self-renewal. We also observed 
occupancy of methyl-CpG binding domain protein 3 (MBD3), a subunit of the
nucleosome remodeling and histone deacetylation (NuRD) complex, at a subset of
HDAC1-occupied sequences in ES cells, including the pluripotency regulators Oct4,
Nanog and Kfl4. By mapping HDAC1 targets on a global scale, our results describe 
further insight into epigenetic mechanisms of ES and TS cells self-renewal.

PMCID: PMC3326306
PMID: 22156375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Exp Cell Res. 2012 Feb 1;318(3):177-86. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2011.11.010. Epub
2011 Nov 28.

Role for Class I histone deacetylases in multidrug resistance.

Xu Y(1), Jiang Z, Yin P, Li Q, Liu J.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Bioreactor Engineering & Shanghai Key Laboratory of
Chemical Biology, School of Pharmacy, East China University of Science and
Technology, #268, 130 Meilong Road, Shanghai 200237, PR China.

Recent reports have showed that histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor resulted in 
multidrug resistance (MDR) to other chemotherapeutic agents. However, the
molecular mechanisms of Class I HDACs on MDR regulation are poorly understood. In
this study, HDAC1 and HDAC2 acted as enhancers to intensify the
chemosensitivities of anti-cancer drugs via reducing the expression levels of
P-gp, MRP1 and MRP2. Furthermore, the dissociation of HDAC1 and HDAC2 led to
transcriptional regulation of P-gp expression via the recruitment of p300, PCAF
and NF-Y to the P-gp promoter region, which subsequently increased the level of
the active gene marker, hyperacetylated histone H3. In parallel, selective
inhibition of HDAC1 and HDAC2 induced the recruitment of p300, PCAF, NF-Y via
acetylation of Sp1. Thus, our findings showed HDAC1 and 2 regulated P-gp
expression through dynamic changes in chromatin structure and transcription
factor association within the promoter region.

Crown Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22154511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Gut. 2012 Mar;61(3):439-48. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2011-300060. Epub 2011 Dec 5.

Recruitment of histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2 by the transcriptional
repressor ZEB1 downregulates E-cadherin expression in pancreatic cancer.

Aghdassi A(1), Sendler M, Guenther A, Mayerle J, Behn CO, Heidecke CD, Friess H, 
Büchler M, Evert M, Lerch MM, Weiss FU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine A, Ernst-Moritz-Arndt Universität Greifswald,
Friedrich-Loefler-Str. 23a, 17475 Greifswald, Germany.

Comment in
    Gut. 2012 Mar;61(3):329-30.

OBJECTIVE: Pancreatic cancer is characterised by invasive tumour spread and early
metastasis formation. During epithelial-mesenchymal transition, loss of the cell 
adhesion molecule E-cadherin is frequent and can be caused by genetic or
epigenetic modifications, recruitment of transcriptional activators/repressors or
post-translational modifications. A study was undertaken to investigate how
E-cadherin expression in human pancreatic adenocarcinoma and pancreatic cancer
cell lines is regulated.
METHODS: In 25 human pancreatic cancer resection specimens, the coding region of 
the E-cadherin gene (CDH1) was sequenced for somatic mutations. The tumour
samples and 11 established human pancreatic cancer cell lines were analysed by
immunohistochemistry, western blot analysis, chromatin immunoprecipitation and
methylation-specific PCR. The role of specific histone deacetylase inhibitors
(HDACi) on pancreatic tumour cell migration and proliferation was studied in
vitro.
RESULTS: Neither somatic mutations nor CDH1 promoter hypermethylation were found 
to be responsible for downregulation of E-cadherin in pancreatic cancer. In the
transcriptionally active CDH1 promoter, acetylation of histones H3 and H4 was
detected whereas HDAC1 and HDAC2 were found attached only to a silent promoter.
Expression of ZEB1, a transcription factor known to recruit HDACs, was seen in
E-cadherin-deficient cell lines in which ZEB1/HDAC complexes were found attached 
to the CDH1 promoter. Moreover, knockdown of ZEB1 prevented HDAC from binding to 
the CDH1 promoter, resulting in histone acetylation and expression of E-cadherin.
HDACi treatment attenuated tumour cell migration and proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings imply an important role for histone deacetylation in 
the downregulation of E-cadherin in human pancreatic cancer. Recruitment of HDACs
to the CDH1 promoter is regulated by the transcription factor ZEB1, and
inhibition of HDACs may be a promising antitumour therapy for pancreatic cancer.

PMID: 22147512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Gut. 2012 Mar;61(3):329-30. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2011-301576. Epub 2011 Dec 5.

A ZEB1-HDAC pathway enters the epithelial to mesenchymal transition world in
pancreatic cancer.

Schneider G(1), Krämer OH, Saur D.

Author information: 
(1)II Medizinische Klinik, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universität
München, München, Germany. guenter.schneider@lrz.tum.de

Comment on
    Gut. 2012 Mar;61(3):439-48.

PMID: 22147511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Exp Eye Res. 2012 Jan;94(1):98-108. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2011.11.013. Epub 2011
Nov 28.

Valproic acid-mediated neuroprotection in retinal ischemia injury via histone
deacetylase inhibition and transcriptional activation.

Zhang Z(1), Qin X, Tong N, Zhao X, Gong Y, Shi Y, Wu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Shanghai Jiaotong University affiliated Shanghai 
First People's Hospital, Wujin Road 85, Shanghai 200080, China.

Retinal ischemia plays a central role in several retinal diseases. The
pathogenesis of retinal ischemia involves changes in gene expression. Valproic
acid (VPA), a broad-spectrum histone deacetylase inhibitor, is an anticonvulsant 
and mood-stabilizing drug with neuroprotective effects. Here, we investigated
whether VPA protects the retina and optic nerve axon from ischemic damage in a
rat model and determined a possible protective mechanism. Adult male Wistar rats 
were randomized into sham, ischemia/reperfusion (I/R)-plus-vehicle, and
I/R-plus-VPA groups. Rats received subcutaneous injections of 300 mg/kg VPA or
phosphate-buffered saline twice a day after retinal ischemia induced by acute
high intraocular pressure. Twenty-four hours after I/R, retinal neuron apoptosis 
was evaluated using the TUNEL assay. The expression of heat-shock protein 70
(Hsp70), activated-caspase-3, and apoptotic-protease-activating factor-1
(apaf-1), acetylation levels of histone H3, release of cytochrome c, and
interaction between Hsp70 and apaf-1 were analyzed by immunoblotting analysis in 
all groups; the transcriptional activation of the Hsp70 gene and interaction
between the Hsp70 promoter with p300 or HDAC1 were analyzed using chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay. Seven days after I/R, the histological changes in the 
retina were evaluated using hematoxylin and eosin staining, and optic nerve axon 
damage was evaluated using toluidine blue staining and transmission electron
microscopy. The density of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) was analyzed using
Fluoro-Gold retrograde labeling at 7, 14, 21 days after I/R. VPA markedly
attenuated I/R-induced retinal neuron apoptosis, damage to RGCs, and
morphological injury to the retina and optic nerve axons. VPA resulted in the
upregulation of Hsp70 and hyperacetylation of histone H3, accompanied by Hsp70
promoter hyperacetylation, which may result from increased p300 recruitment to
the Hsp70 promoter. Furthermore, VPA increased the binding between Hsp70 and
apaf-1 to block apoptosome formation and reduced the release of cytochrome c and 
activation of caspase-3 in the retina after I/R. Therefore, VPA-mediated
neuroprotection against I/R injury in the retina may involve cytoprotective Hsp70
induction via transcriptional activation and inhibition of the
mitochondria-mediated apoptosis pathway.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22143029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Nucleus. 2011 Nov-Dec;2(6):580-90. doi: 10.4161/nucl.2.6.17960. Epub 2011 Nov 1.

Barrier-to-Autointegration Factor influences specific histone modifications.

Montes de Oca R(1), Andreassen PR, Wilson KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA.

Defects in the nuclear envelope or nuclear 'lamina' networks cause disease and
can perturb histone posttranslational (epigenetic) regulation.
Barrier-to-Autointegration Factor (BAF) is an essential but enigmatic lamina
component that binds lamins, LEM-domain proteins, DNA and histone H3 directly. We
report that BAF copurified with nuclease-digested mononucleosomes and associated 
with modified histones in vivo. BAF overexpression significantly reduced global
histone H3 acetylation by 18%. In cells that stably overexpressed BAF 3-fold,
silencing mark H3-K27-Me1/3 and active marks H4-K16-Ac and H4-Ac5 decreased
significantly. Significant increases were also seen for silencing mark H3-K9-Me3,
active marks H3-K4-Me2, H3-K9/K14-Ac and H4-K5-Ac and a mark (H3-K79-Me2)
associated with both active and silent chromatin. Other increases (H3-S10-P,
H3-S28-P and silencing mark H3-K9-Me2) did not reach statistical significance.
BAF overexpression also significantly influenced cell cycle distribution.
Moreover, BAF associated in vivo with SET/I2PP2A (protein phosphatase 2A
inhibitor; blocks H3 dephosphorylation) and G9a (H3-K9 methyltransferase), but
showed no detectable association with HDAC1 or HATs. These findings reveal BAF as
a novel epigenetic regulator and are discussed in relation to BAF deficiency
phenotypes, which include a hereditary progeria syndrome and loss of pluripotency
in embryonic stem cells.

PMCID: PMC3324346
PMID: 22127260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Oncogene. 2012 Aug 16;31(33):3807-17. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.533. Epub 2011 Nov
28.

Acetylation controls Notch3 stability and function in T-cell leukemia.

Palermo R(1), Checquolo S, Giovenco A, Grazioli P, Kumar V, Campese AF, Giorgi A,
Napolitano M, Canettieri G, Ferrara G, Schininà ME, Maroder M, Frati L, Gulino A,
Vacca A, Screpanti I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.

Post-translational modifications of Notch3 and their functional role with respect
to Notch3 overexpression in T-cell leukemia are still poorly understood. We
identify here a specific novel property of Notch3 that is acetylated and
deacetylated at lysines 1692 and 1731 by p300 and HDAC1, respectively, a balance 
impaired by HDAC inhibitors (HDACi) that favor hyperacetylation. By using HDACi
and a non-acetylatable Notch3 mutant carrying K/R(1692-1731) mutations in the
intracellular domain, we show that Notch3 acetylation primes ubiquitination and
proteasomal-mediated degradation of the protein. As a consequence, Notch3 protein
expression and its transcriptional activity are decreased both in vitro and in
vivo in Notch3 transgenic (tg) mice, thus impairing downstream signaling upon
target genes. Consistently, Notch3-induced T-cell proliferation is inhibited by
HDACi, whereas it is enhanced by the non-acetylatable Notch3-K/R(1692-1731)
mutant. Finally, HDACi-induced Notch3 hyperacetylation prevents in vivo growth of
T-cell leukemia/lymphoma in Notch3 tg mice. Together, our findings suggest a
novel level of Notch signaling control in which Notch3 acetylation/deacetylation 
process represents a key regulatory switch, thus representing a suitable
druggable target for Notch3-sustained T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
therapy.

PMID: 22120716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jan 6;287(2):925-34. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.279950. Epub 2011
Nov 21.

The histone acetyltransferase TIP60 interacts with c-Myb and inactivates its
transcriptional activity in human leukemia.

Zhao H(1), Jin S, Gewirtz AM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.
huiwuz@mail.med.upenn.edu

The histone acetyltransferase TIP60 is a coregulator of transcription factors and
is implicated in tumorigenesis. In this study, we explored potential regulatory
relationships between TIP60 and the c-Myb oncoprotein in hematopoietic cells. We 
first showed that TIP60 is a c-Myb interacting protein and that the interaction
is dependent on the TIP60 acetyltransferase domain and c-Myb transactivation
domain. We then found that coexpressing TIP60 decreases the transcriptional
activation ability of c-Myb in functional reporter assays. A ChIP assay also
revealed that TIP60 binds to the c-Myb target gene c-Myc promoter in a
c-Myb-dependent manner. Consistently, knockdown of Tip60 expression by siRNA
increased endogenous c-Myc expression. Furthermore, coimmunoprecipitation of
Jurkat cell lysates revealed that c-Myb is associated with histone deacetylases
HDAC1 and HDAC2, known to interact with TIP60 and repress transcription. Finally,
we compared Tip60 expression in six primary AML samples with three normal CD34(+)
cell samples using quantitative RT-PCR. Tip60 expression was significantly (~60%)
lower in the AML samples. In summary, these studies demonstrate that TIP60
negatively modulates c-Myb transcriptional activity by recruiting histone
deacetylases in human hematopoietic cells, leading us to hypothesize that TIP60
is a normal regulator of c-Myb function and that dysregulated or mutated TIP60
may contribute to c-Myb-driven leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3256894
PMID: 22110127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2012 Jan 1;22(1):571-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2011.10.080.
Epub 2011 Oct 31.

Synthesis, anticancer activity and apoptosis inducing ability of bisindole linked
pyrrolo[2,1-c][1,4]benzodiazepine conjugates.

Kamal A(1), Srikanth YV, Ramaiah MJ, Khan MN, Kashi Reddy M, Ashraf M, Lavanya A,
Pushpavalli SN, Pal-Bhadra M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Organic Chemistry, Indian Institute of Chemical Technology,
Tarnaka, Hyderabad 500607, India. ahmedkamal@iict.res.in

A series of bisindole-pyrrolobenzodiazepine conjugates (5a-f) linked through
different alkane spacers was prepared and evaluated for their anticancer
activity. All compounds exhibited significant anticancer potency and the most
potent compounds 5b and 5e were taken up for detailed studies on MCF-7 cell line.
Cell cycle effects were examined apart from investigating the inhibition of
tubulin polymerization for compounds 2a, 2b, 5b and 5e at 2µM. FACS analysis
showed that at higher concentrations (4 and 8µM) there was an increase of sub-G1 
phase cells and decrease of G2/M phase cells, thus indicating that compounds 5b
and 5e are effective in causing apoptosis in MCF-7 cells. It was also observed
that compounds 5b and 5e showed the down regulation of histone deacetylase
protein levels such as HDAC1, 2, 3, 8 and increase in the levels of p21, followed
by apoptotic cell death. The apoptotic nature of these compounds was further
evidenced by increased expression of cleaved-PARP and active caspase-7 in MCF-7
cells.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22104151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Fertil Steril. 2012 Jan;97(1):178-84.e3. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2011.10.023.
Epub 2011 Nov 17.

Insufficient histone-3 lysine-9 deacetylation in human oocytes matured in vitro
is associated with aberrant meiosis.

Huang J(1), Li T, Ding CH, Brosens J, Zhou CQ, Wang HH, Xu YW.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Reproductive Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, People's Republic
of China.

OBJECTIVE: To characterize histone acetylation during meiosis in human oocytes
matured in vitro or in vivo.
DESIGN: Experimental study.
SETTING: University reproductive medical center.
PATIENT(S): Patients undergoing routine intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI)
cycles.
INTERVENTION(S): Immature and mature oocytes were collected from patients
undergoing intracytoplasmic sperm injection.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Immunohistochemical assessment of the levels of
acetylated lysine-9 of histone-3 (H3K9) and lysine-12 of histone-4 (H4K12)
combined with spindle and chromosome configurations in in vitro- and
in vivo-matured human oocytes. Transcript levels of histone deacetylases (HDACs) 
1 and 2 were measured by single-cell quantitative polymerase chain reaction.
RESULT(S): Acetylation of H3K9 and H4K12 decreased during human oocyte
maturation. Residual H3K9 acetylation was found in 37.7% of oocytes matured
in vitro, compared with 11.8% in oocytes matured in vivo. Abnormal metaphase
spindle was more frequent in oocytes with residual histone acetylation than
without (51.6% vs. 25.4%, respectively). Treatment with the HDAC inhibitor
trichostatin A increased the incidence of an abnormal metaphase but had no
adverse effect on maturation efficiency. Furthermore, expression of HDAC1
transcripts was significantly lower in oocytes matured in vitro versus in vivo.
CONCLUSION(S): Reduced HDAC1 expression and insufficient histone deacetylation
are associated with metaphase defects in human oocytes matured in vitro.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22100169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e27599. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027599. Epub 2011 Nov 11.

The PHD finger of human UHRF1 reveals a new subgroup of unmethylated histone H3
tail readers.

Lallous N(1), Legrand P, McEwen AG, Ramón-Maiques S, Samama JP, Birck C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de Santé et de Recherche Médicale U964/Centre National de
Recherche Scientifique UMR 7104/Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France.
nlallous@cnio.es

The human UHRF1 protein (ubiquitin-like containing PHD and RING finger domains 1)
has emerged as a potential cancer target due to its implication in cell cycle
regulation, maintenance of DNA methylation after replication and heterochromatin 
formation. UHRF1 functions as an adaptor protein that binds to histones and
recruits histone modifying enzymes, like HDAC1 or G9a, which exert their action
on chromatin. In this work, we show the binding specificity of the PHD finger of 
human UHRF1 (huUHRF1-PHD) towards unmodified histone H3 N-terminal tail using
native gel electrophoresis and isothermal titration calorimetry. We report the
molecular basis of this interaction by determining the crystal structure of
huUHRF1-PHD in complex with the histone H3 N-terminal tail. The structure reveals
a new mode of histone recognition involving an extra conserved zinc finger
preceding the conventional PHD finger region. This additional zinc finger forms
part of a large surface cavity that accommodates the side chain of the histone H3
lysine K4 (H3K4) regardless of its methylation state. Mutation of Q330, which
specifically interacts with H3K4, to alanine has no effect on the binding,
suggesting a loose interaction between huUHRF1-PHD and H3K4. On the other hand,
the recognition appears to rely on histone H3R2, which fits snugly into a groove 
on the protein and makes tight interactions with the conserved aspartates D334
and D337. Indeed, a mutation of the former aspartate disrupts the formation of
the complex, while mutating the latter decreases the binding affinity nine-fold.

PMCID: PMC3214078
PMID: 22096602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2012 Apr;69(4):901-9. doi: 10.1007/s00280-011-1766-x.
Epub 2011 Nov 12.

Chidamide (CS055/HBI-8000): a new histone deacetylase inhibitor of the benzamide 
class with antitumor activity and the ability to enhance immune cell-mediated
tumor cell cytotoxicity.

Ning ZQ(1), Li ZB, Newman MJ, Shan S, Wang XH, Pan DS, Zhang J, Dong M, Du X, Lu 
XP.

Author information: 
(1)Chipscreen Biosciences Ltd, Bio-Incubator 2-601, 1st Ave of Gaoxin Road,
Hi-Tech Industrial Park, Shenzhen 518057, Guangdong, China.

PURPOSE: Chidamide (CS055/HBI-8000) is a new histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor
of the benzamide class currently under clinical development in cancer
indications. This study reports the in vitro and in vivo antitumor
characteristics of the compound.
METHODS: Selectivity and potency of chidamide in inhibition of HDAC isotypes were
analyzed by using a panel of human recombinant HDAC proteins. Tumor cell lines
either in culture or inoculated in nude mice were used for the evaluation of the 
compound's antitumor activity. To investigate the immune cell-mediated antitumor 
effect, isolated peripheral blood mononuclear cells from healthy donors were
treated with chidamide, and cytotoxicity and expression of relevant surface
proteins were analyzed. Microarray gene expression studies were performed on
peripheral white blood cells from two T-cell lymphoma patients treated with
chidamide.
RESULTS: Chidamide was found to be a low nanomolar inhibitor of HDAC1, 2, 3, and 
10, the HDAC isotypes well documented to be associated with the malignant
phenotype. Significant and broad spectrum in vitro and in vivo antitumor
activity, including a wide therapeutic index, was observed. Chidamide was also
shown to enhance the cytotoxic effect of human peripheral mononuclear cells ex
vivo on K562 target cells, accompanied by the upregulation of proteins involved
in NK cell functions. Furthermore, the expression of a number of genes involved
in immune cell-mediated antitumor activity was observed to be upregulated in
peripheral white blood cells from two T-cell lymphoma patients who responded to
chidamide administration.
CONCLUSIONS: The results presented in this study provide evidence that chidamide 
has potential applicability for the treatment of a variety of tumor types, either
as a single agent or in combination therapies.

PMID: 22080169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Lung Cancer. 2012 May;76(2):171-6. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2011.10.012. Epub 2011 
Nov 10.

Combining microRNA-449a/b with a HDAC inhibitor has a synergistic effect on
growth arrest in lung cancer.

Jeon HS(1), Lee SY, Lee EJ, Yun SC, Cha EJ, Choi E, Na MJ, Park JY, Kang J, Son
JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Kyungpook National University,
Daegu, Republic of Korea.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) play a crucial role in tumorigenesis.
Over-expression of HDACs has been reported in lung cancer. The mechanism of
highly expressed HDAC1 in lung cancer has yet not been determined. In the present
study, we showed that miR-449a/b regulates HDAC1 by directly binding with the 3' 
untranslated region of the HDAC1. The expression of miR-449a/b was down-regulated
and the expression of HDAC1 was up-regulated in primary lung cancer. The down
expression of miR-449a/b might be one mechanism for over-expression of HDAC1 in
lung cancer. miR-449a/b inhibited cell growth and anchorage-independent growth.
Furthermore, co-treatment with miR-449a and HDAC inhibitors had a significant
growth reduction compared with HDAC inhibitor mono-treatment. These results
suggest that miR-449a/b may have a tumor suppressor function and might be a
potential therapeutic candidate in patients with primary lung cancer.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22078727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Int J Mol Med. 2012 Feb;29(2):225-30. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2011.833. Epub 2011 Nov
10.

Maspin increases Ku70 acetylation and Bax-mediated cell death in cancer cells.

Lee SJ(1), Jang H, Park C.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genetics Laboratory, Biomedical Research Institute, Samsung Medical
Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul 135-710, Republic of
Korea.

Ku70, a DNA repair protein, was recently identified as a critical anti-apoptotic 
protein that inhibits Bax translocation to mitochondria. The dissociation of Bax 
from Ku70 is essential for the apoptotic activity of Bax. Here, we show that
maspin, a tumor suppressor protein frequently lost in cancer, regulates this
process. Maspin increased cell death in a Ku70 acetylation-dependent manner.
Maspin inhibited histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and thus increased the acetylation
of Ku70 and the dissociation of Bax from Ku70, which led to the induction of
apoptosis. These results reveal maspin as a Ku70-interacting molecule and provide
the basis for a new endogenous acetylation-based control mechanism that reduces
Ku70-mediated sequestration of Bax from mitochondria.

PMID: 22076034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Biol Reprod. 2012 Mar 8;86(3):1-8. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.096032. Print 2012
Mar.

Metastasis-associated protein 3 (MTA3) regulates G2/M progression in
proliferating mouse granulosa cells.

Kwintkiewicz J(1), Padilla-Banks E, Jefferson WN, Jacobs IM, Wade PA, Williams
CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Medicine Group, Laboratory of Reproductive and Developmental
Toxicology, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National
Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, USA.

Metastasis-associated protein 3 (MTA3) is a constituent of the Mi-2/nucleosome
remodeling and deacetylase (NuRD) protein complex that regulates gene expression 
by altering chromatin structure and can facilitate cohesin loading onto DNA. The 
biological function of MTA3 within the NuRD complex is unknown. Herein, we show
that MTA3 was expressed highly in granulosa cell nuclei of all ovarian follicle
stages and at lower levels in corpora lutea. We tested the hypothesis that
MTA3-NuRD complex function is required for granulosa cell proliferation. In the
ovary, MTA3 interacted with NuRD proteins CHD4 and HDAC1 and the core cohesin
complex protein RAD21. In cultured mouse primary granulosa cells, depletion of
endogenous MTA3 using RNA interference slowed cell proliferation; this effect was
rescued by coexpression of exogenous MTA3. Slowing of cell proliferation
correlated with a significant decrease in cyclin B1 and cyclin B2 expression.
Granulosa cell populations lacking MTA3 contained a significantly higher
percentage of cells in G2/M phase and a lower percentage in S phase compared with
control cells. Furthermore, MTA3 depletion slowed entry into M phase as indicated
by reduced phosphorylation of histone H3 at serine 10. These findings provide the
first evidence to date that MTA3 interacts with NuRD and cohesin complex proteins
in the ovary in vivo and regulates G2/M progression in proliferating granulosa
cells.

PMCID: PMC3316264
PMID: 22075476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Oncogene. 2012 Jul 5;31(27):3223-34. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.483. Epub 2011 Nov 7.

Twist contributes to hormone resistance in breast cancer by downregulating
estrogen receptor-a.

Vesuna F(1), Lisok A, Kimble B, Domek J, Kato Y, van der Groep P, Artemov D,
Kowalski J, Carraway H, van Diest P, Raman V.

Author information: 
(1)Russell H Morgan Department of Radiology and Radiological Science, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21250, USA.
fvesuna1@jhmi.edu

The role of estrogen receptor-a (ER) in breast cancer development, and as a
primary clinical marker for breast cancer prognosis, has been well documented. In
this study, we identified the oncogenic protein, TWIST1 (Twist), which is
overexpressed in high-grade breast cancers, as a potential negative regulator of 
ER expression. Functional characterization of ER regulation by Twist was
performed using Twist low (MCF-7, T-47D) and Twist high (Hs 578T, MDA-MB-231,
MCF-7/Twist) expressing cell lines. All Twist high expressing cell lines
exhibited low ER transcript and protein levels. By chromatin immunoprecipitation 
and promoter assays, we demonstrated that Twist could directly bind to E-boxes in
the ER promoter and significantly downregulate ER promoter activity in vitro.
Functionally, Twist overexpression caused estrogen-independent proliferation of
breast cells, and promoted hormone resistance to the selective estrogen receptor 
modulator tamoxifen and selective estrogen receptor down-regulator fulvestrant.
Importantly, this effect was reversible on downregulating Twist. In addition,
orthotopic tumors generated in mice using MCF-7/Twist cells were resistant to
tamoxifen. These tumors had high vascular volume and permeability surface area,
as determined by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Mechanistically, Twist
recruited DNA methyltransferase 3B (DNMT3B) to the ER promoter, leading to a
significantly higher degree of ER promoter methylation compared with parental
cells. Furthermore, we demonstrated by co-immunoprecipitation that Twist
interacted with histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) at the ER promoter, causing histone
deacetylation and chromatin condensation, further reducing ER transcript levels. 
Functional re-expression of ER was achieved using the demethylating agent,
5-azacytidine, and the HDAC inhibitor, valproic acid. Finally, an inverse
relationship was observed between Twist and ER expression in human breast tumors.
In summary, the regulation of ER by Twist could be an underlying mechanism for
the loss of ER activity observed in breast tumors, and may contribute to the
generation of hormone-resistant, ER-negative breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3276743
PMID: 22056872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Genes Dev. 2011 Nov 1;25(21):2291-305. doi: 10.1101/gad.173039.111.

Nkx2.2 repressor complex regulates islet ß-cell specification and prevents
ß-to-a-cell reprogramming.

Papizan JB(1), Singer RA, Tschen SI, Dhawan S, Friel JM, Hipkens SB, Magnuson MA,
Bhushan A, Sussel L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Institute of Human Nutrition, Columbia
University, New York 10032, USA.

Regulation of cell differentiation programs requires complex interactions between
transcriptional and epigenetic networks. Elucidating the principal molecular
events responsible for the establishment and maintenance of cell fate identities 
will provide important insights into how cell lineages are specified and
maintained and will improve our ability to recapitulate cell differentiation
events in vitro. In this study, we demonstrate that Nkx2.2 is part of a large
repression complex in pancreatic ß cells that includes DNMT3a, Grg3, and HDAC1.
Mutation of the endogenous Nkx2.2 tinman (TN) domain in mice abolishes the
interaction between Nkx2.2 and Grg3 and disrupts ß-cell specification.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that Nkx2.2 preferentially recruits Grg3 and HDAC1 to
the methylated Aristaless homeobox gene (Arx) promoter in ß cells. The Nkx2.2 TN 
mutation results in ectopic expression of Arx in ß cells, causing ß-to-a-cell
transdifferentiation. A corresponding ß-cell-specific deletion of DNMT3a is also 
sufficient to cause Arx-dependent ß-to-a-cell reprogramming. Notably, subsequent 
removal of Arx in the ß cells of Nkx2.2(TNmut/TNmut) mutant mice reverts the
ß-to-a-cell conversion, indicating that the repressor activities of Nkx2.2 on the
methylated Arx promoter in ß cells are the primary regulatory events required for
maintaining ß-cell identity.

PMCID: PMC3219233
PMID: 22056672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. J Neurovirol. 2011 Dec;17(6):512-7. doi: 10.1007/s13365-011-0058-x. Epub 2011 Nov
4.

Checkpoints in productive and latent infections with herpes simplex virus 1:
conceptualization of the issues.

Roizman B(1), Zhou G, Du T.

Author information: 
(1)Marjorie B. Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, The University of Chicago, 910
East 58th Street, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. bernard.roizman@bsd.uchicago.edu

The fundamental question posed here is why in dorsal root ganglia herpes simplex 
viruses (HSV) can establish a silent infection in which only latency associate
transcripts (LAT) and miRNAs are expressed and the neuronal cell survives whereas
in non-neuronal cells HSV replicates and destroys the infected cells. Current
evidence indicates that in productive infection there are two checkpoints. The
first is at activation of a genes and requires a viral protein (VP16) that
recruits HCF-1, Oct1, LSD1, and the CLOCK histone acetyl transferase to
demethylate histones and initiate transcription. The second checkpoint involves
activation of ß and <U+03B3> genes. An a protein, ICP0, activates transcription by
displacing HDAC1 or 2 from the HDAC/CoREST/LSD1/REST repressor complex at its DNA
binding sites. Current data suggest that in dorsal root ganglia VP16 and HCF-1
are not translocated to neuronal nucleus and that the HDAC/CoREST/LSD1/REST
complex is not suppressed-a first step in silencing of the viral genome and
establishment of heterochromatin. The viral genome remains in a state of
equilibrium with respect to viral gene expression. The function of both LAT and
the micro RNAs is to silence low level expression of viral genes that could
reactivate the latent genomes.

PMID: 22052379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Oct;7(10):e1002316. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002316. Epub
2011 Oct 27.

Histone deacetylase 8 is required for centrosome cohesion and influenza A virus
entry.

Yamauchi Y(1), Boukari H, Banerjee I, Sbalzarini IF, Horvath P, Helenius A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Influenza A virus (IAV) enters host cells by endocytosis followed by
acid-activated penetration from late endosomes (LEs). Using siRNA silencing, we
found that histone deacetylase 8 (HDAC8), a cytoplasmic enzyme, efficiently
promoted productive entry of IAV into tissue culture cells, whereas HDAC1
suppressed it. HDAC8 enhanced endocytosis, acidification, and penetration of the 
incoming virus. In contrast, HDAC1 inhibited acidification and penetration. The
effects were connected with dramatic alterations in the organization of the
microtubule system, and, as a consequence, a change in the behavior of LEs and
lysosomes (LYs). Depletion of HDAC8 caused loss of centrosome-associated
microtubules and loss of directed centripetal movement of LEs, dispersing LE/LYs 
to the cell periphery. For HDAC1, the picture was the opposite. To explain these 
changes, centrosome cohesion emerged as the critical factor. Depletion of HDAC8
caused centrosome splitting, which could also be induced by depleting a
centriole-linker protein, rootletin. In both cases, IAV infection was inhibited. 
HDAC1 depletion reduced the splitting of centrosomes, and enhanced infection. The
longer the distance between centrosomes, the lower the level of infection. HDAC8 
depletion was also found to inhibit infection of Uukuniemi virus (a bunyavirus)
suggesting common requirements among late penetrating enveloped viruses. The
results established class I HDACs as powerful regulators of microtubule
organization, centrosome function, endosome maturation, and infection by IAV and 
other late penetrating viruses.

PMCID: PMC3203190
PMID: 22046129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Nature. 2011 Oct 30;479(7374):534-7. doi: 10.1038/nature10531.

Somatic retrotransposition alters the genetic landscape of the human brain.

Baillie JK(1), Barnett MW, Upton KR, Gerhardt DJ, Richmond TA, De Sapio F,
Brennan PM, Rizzu P, Smith S, Fell M, Talbot RT, Gustincich S, Freeman TC,
Mattick JS, Hume DA, Heutink P, Carninci P, Jeddeloh JA, Faulkner GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics and Genomics, The Roslin Institute and Royal (Dick)
School of Veterinary Studies, University of Edinburgh, Easter Bush, Edinburgh
EH25 9RG, UK.

Retrotransposons are mobile genetic elements that use a germline 'copy-and-paste'
mechanism to spread throughout metazoan genomes. At least 50 per cent of the
human genome is derived from retrotransposons, with three active families (L1,
Alu and SVA) associated with insertional mutagenesis and disease. Epigenetic and 
post-transcriptional suppression block retrotransposition in somatic cells,
excluding early embryo development and some malignancies. Recent reports of L1
expression and copy number variation in the human brain suggest that L1
mobilization may also occur during later development. However, the corresponding 
integration sites have not been mapped. Here we apply a high-throughput method to
identify numerous L1, Alu and SVA germline mutations, as well as 7,743 putative
somatic L1 insertions, in the hippocampus and caudate nucleus of three
individuals. Surprisingly, we also found 13,692 somatic Alu insertions and 1,350 
SVA insertions. Our results demonstrate that retrotransposons mobilize to
protein-coding genes differentially expressed and active in the brain. Thus,
somatic genome mosaicism driven by retrotransposition may reshape the genetic
circuitry that underpins normal and abnormal neurobiological processes.

©2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

PMCID: PMC3224101
PMID: 22037309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Mod Pathol. 2012 Feb;25(2):222-30. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2011.157. Epub 2011 Oct
28.

Histone deacetylase 1 and 2 in mesenchymal tumors.

Pacheco M(1), Nielsen TO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) have a critical role in epigenetic gene silencing,
rendering a compact chromatin structure by removing acetyl groups from lysine
residues within the tails of core histones, thereby repressing gene expression.
Epigenetic transcriptional dysregulation is an important oncogenic mechanism in
some sarcomas associated with translocations, for which antitumor activity by
HDAC inhibitors has been shown in preclinical studies. Nevertheless, the
expression of the protein targets of these drugs has not yet been broadly
surveyed in this neoplasia. In this study, we assess the expression of HDAC1 and 
2 by immunohistochemistry in a tissue microarray series of 1332 cases,
representing 44 categories of malignant and borderline mesenchymal tumors. HDAC2 
was the more highly expressed isoform, and was more strongly expressed in
translocation-associated sarcomas than in other mesenchymal tumors or normal
tissues. HDAC1, in contrast, displayed lower expression in
translocation-associated sarcomas than in other mesenchymal tumors or in normal
tissues. These results indicate that HDAC1 and HDAC2 are differentially expressed
in mesenchymal neoplasms, and suggest that HDAC2 is the isoform more likely
contributing to the pathogenesis of many translocation-associated sarcomas and to
their response to HDAC inhibitors.

PMID: 22037263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Free Radic Biol Med. 2011 Dec 15;51(12):2309-18. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2011.10.001. Epub 2011 Oct 8.

Hydrogen peroxide induces Sp1 methylation and thereby suppresses cyclin B1 via
recruitment of Suv39H1 and HDAC1 in cancer cells.

Chuang JY(1), Chang WC, Hung JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 701,
Taiwan.

Sp1 is an important transcription factor for a number of genes that regulate cell
growth and survival. Sp1 is an anchor protein that recruits other factors to
regulate its target genes positively or negatively, but the mechanism of its
functional switch by which positive or negative coregulators are recruited is not
clear. In this study, we found that Sp1 could be methylated and that methylation 
was maintained by treatment with pargyline, a lysine-specific demethylase 1
(LSD1) inhibitor or knock LSD1 down directly. Hydrogen peroxide treatment
increased the methylation of Sp1 and repressed Sp1 transcriptional activity.
Investigation of the mechanism by which methylation decreased Sp1 activity found 
that methylation of Sp1 increased the recruitment of Su(var) 3-9 homologue
1(Suv39H1) and histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) to the cyclin B1 promoter, resulting
in deacetylation and methylation of histone H3 and subsequent downregulation of
cyclin B1. Finally, downregulation of cyclin B1 led to cell cycle arrest at the
G2 phase. These results show that methylation of Sp1 causes it to act as a
negative regulator by recruiting Suv39H1 and HDAC1 to induce chromatin
remodeling. This finding that methylation acts as a functional switch provides
new insight into the modulation of Sp1 transcriptional activity.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22036763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e26156. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026156. Epub 2011 Oct 20.

Tumor suppressor protein p53 recruits human Sin3B/HDAC1 complex for
down-regulation of its target promoters in response to genotoxic stress.

Bansal N(1), Kadamb R, Mittal S, Vig L, Sharma R, Dwarakanath BS, Saluja D.

Author information: 
(1)Dr. B. R. Ambedkar Center for Biomedical Research, University of Delhi, Delhi,
India.

Master regulator protein p53, popularly known as the "guardian of genome" is the 
hub for regulation of diverse cellular pathways. Depending on the cell type and
severity of DNA damage, p53 protein mediates cell cycle arrest or apoptosis,
besides activating DNA repair, which is apparently achieved by regulation of its 
target genes, as well as direct interaction with other proteins. p53 is known to 
repress target genes via multiple mechanisms one of which is via recruitment of
chromatin remodelling Sin3/HDAC1/2 complex. Sin3 proteins (Sin3A and Sin3B)
regulate gene expression at the chromatin-level by serving as an anchor onto
which the core Sin3/HDAC complex is assembled. The Sin3/HDAC co-repressor complex
can be recruited by a large number of DNA-binding transcription factors. Sin3A
has been closely linked to p53 while Sin3B is considered to be a close associate 
of E2Fs. The theme of this study was to establish the role of Sin3B in
p53-mediated gene repression. We demonstrate a direct protein-protein interaction
between human p53 and Sin3B (hSin3B). Amino acids 1-399 of hSin3B protein are
involved in its interaction with N-terminal region (amino acids 1-108) of p53.
Genotoxic stress induced by Adriamycin treatment increases the levels of hSin3B
that is recruited to the promoters of p53-target genes (HSPA8, MAD1 and CRYZ).
More importantly recruitment of hSin3B and repression of the three p53-target
promoters upon Adriamycin treatment were observed only in p53(+/+) cell lines.
Additionally an increased tri-methylation of the H3K9 residue at the promoters of
HSPA8 and CRYZ was also observed following Adriamycin treatment. The present
study highlights for the first time the essential role of Sin3B as an important
associate of p53 in mediating the cellular responses to stress and in the
transcriptional repression of genes encoding for heat shock proteins or proteins 
involved in regulation of cell cycle and apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC3197607
PMID: 22028823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Jan;32(1):50-63. doi: 10.1128/MCB.06152-11. Epub 2011 Oct 24.

TIEG1 inhibits breast cancer invasion and metastasis by inhibition of epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) transcription and the EGFR signaling pathway.

Jin W(1), Chen BB, Li JY, Zhu H, Huang M, Gu SM, Wang QQ, Chen JY, Yu S, Wu J,
Shao ZM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, Breast Cancer Institute, Shanghai Cancer Center,
Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai,
Peoples Republic of China.

TIEG1 can induce apoptosis of cancer cells, but its role in inhibiting invasion
and metastasis has not been reported and is unclear. In this study, we find that 
decreased TIEG1 expression is associated with increased human epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) expression in breast cancer tissues and cell lines. TIEG1 
plays an important role in suppressing transcription of EGFR by directly binding 
to the EGFR promoter. While overexpression of TIEG1 attenuates EGFR expression,
knockdown of TIEG1 stimulates EGFR expression. Furthermore, TIEG1 and HDAC1 form 
a complex, which binds to Sp1 sites on the EGFR promoter and inhibits its
transcription by suppressing histone acetylation. TIEG1 significantly inhibits
breast cancer cell invasion, suppresses mammary tumorigenesis in xenografts in
mice, and decreases lung metastasis by inhibition of EGFR gene transcription and 
the EGFR signaling pathway. Therefore, TIEG1 is an antimetastasis gene product;
regulation of EGFR expression by TIEG1 may be part of an integral signaling
pathway that determines and explains breast cancer invasion and metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3255702
PMID: 22025675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e26382. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026382. Epub 2011 Oct 14.

HDAC activity is required during Xenopus tail regeneration.

Tseng AS(1), Carneiro K, Lemire JM, Levin M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Center for Regenerative and Developmental
Biology, Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts, United States of America.

The ability to fully restore damaged or lost organs is present in only a subset
of animals. The Xenopus tadpole tail is a complex appendage, containing
epidermis, muscle, nerves, spinal cord, and vasculature, which regenerates after 
amputation. Understanding the mechanisms of tail regeneration may lead to new
insights to promote biomedical regeneration in non-regenerative tissues. Although
chromatin remodeling is known to be critical for stem cell pluripotency, its role
in complex organ regeneration in vivo remains largely uncharacterized. Here we
show that histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity is required for the early stages of
tail regeneration. HDAC1 is expressed during the 1(st) two days of regeneration. 
Pharmacological blockade of HDACs using Trichostatin A (TSA) increased histone
acetylation levels in the amputated tail. Furthermore, treatment with TSA or
another HDAC inhibitor, valproic acid, specifically inhibited regeneration.
Over-expression of wild-type Mad3, a transcriptional repressor known to associate
in a complex with HDACs via Sin3, inhibited regeneration. Similarly, expression
of a Mad3 mutant lacking the Sin3-interacting domain that is required for HDAC
binding also blocks regeneration, suggesting that HDAC and Mad3 may act together 
to regulate regeneration. Inhibition of HDAC function resulted in aberrant
expression of Notch1 and BMP2, two genes known to be required for tail
regeneration. Our results identify a novel early role for HDAC in appendage
regeneration and suggest that modulation of histone acetylation is important in
regenerative repair of complex appendages.

PMCID: PMC3194833
PMID: 22022609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Mol Carcinog. 2012 Dec;51(12):952-62. doi: 10.1002/mc.20866. Epub 2011 Oct 17.

Plant flavone apigenin inhibits HDAC and remodels chromatin to induce growth
arrest and apoptosis in human prostate cancer cells: in vitro and in vivo study.

Pandey M(1), Kaur P, Shukla S, Abbas A, Fu P, Gupta S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 44106,
USA.

Apigenin (4',5,7,-trihydroxyflavone), an anticancer agent, selectively toxic to
cancer cells induces cell cycle arrest and apoptosis through mechanisms that have
not been fully elucidated. Our studies indicate that apigenin-mediated growth
inhibitory responses are due to inhibition of class I histone deacetylases
(HDACs) in prostate cancer cells. Treatment of PC-3 and 22Rv1 cells with apigenin
(20-40<U+2009>µM) resulted in the inhibition of HDAC enzyme activity, specifically HDAC1
and HDAC3 at the protein and message level. Apigenin-mediated HDAC inhibition
resulted in global histone H3 and H4 acetylation, as well as localized
hyperacetylation of histone H3 on the p21/waf1 promoter. A corresponding increase
was observed in p21/waf1 and bax protein and mRNA expression after apigenin
exposure, consistent with the use of HDAC inhibitor, trichostatin A. The
downstream events demonstrated cell cycle arrest and induction of apoptosis in
both cancer cells. Studies of PC-3 xenografts in athymic nude mice further
demonstrated that oral intake of apigenin at doses of 20 and 50<U+2009>µg/mouse/d over
an 8-wk period resulted in a marked reduction in tumor growth, HDAC activity, and
HDAC1 and HDAC3 protein expression at both doses of apigenin. An increase in
p21/waf1 expression was observed in apigenin-fed mice, compared to the control
group. Furthermore, apigenin intake caused a significant decrease in bcl2
expression with concomitant increase in bax, shifting the bax/bcl2 ratio in favor
of apoptosis. Our findings confirm for the first time that apigenin inhibits
class I HDACs, particularly HDAC1 and HDAC3 and its exposure results in reversal 
of aberrant epigenetic events that promote malignancy. © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, 
Inc.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4019962
PMID: 22006862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. J Cell Mol Med. 2012 Aug;16(8):1758-65. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2011.01464.x.

The new low-toxic histone deacetylase inhibitor S-(2) induces apoptosis in
various acute myeloid leukaemia cells.

Cellai C(1), Balliu M, Laurenzana A, Guandalini L, Matucci R, Miniati D, Torre E,
Nebbioso A, Carafa V, Altucci L, Romanelli MN, Paoletti F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pathology and Oncology, University of Florence,
Sesto Fiorentino, Italy.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) induce tumour cell cycle arrest and/or
apoptosis, and some of them are currently used in cancer therapy. Recently, we
described a series of powerful HDACi characterized by a 1,4-benzodiazepine (BDZ) 
ring hybridized with a linear alkyl chain bearing a hydroxamate function as
Zn(++)--chelating group. Here, we explored the anti-leukaemic properties of three
novel hybrids, namely the chiral compounds (S)-2 and (R)-2, and their non-chiral 
analogue 4, which were first comparatively tested in promyelocytic NB4 cells.
(S)-2 and partially 4--but not (R)-2--caused G0/G1 cell-cycle arrest by
up-regulating cyclin G2 and p21 expression and down-regulating cyclin D2
expression, and also apoptosis as assessed by cell morphology and
cytofluorimetric assay, histone H2AX phosphorylation and PARP cleavage. Notably, 
these events were partly prevented by an anti-oxidant. Moreover, novel HDACi
prompted p53 and a-tubulin acetylation and, consistently, inhibited HDAC1 and 6
activity. The rank order of potency was (S)-2 > 4 > (R)-2, reflecting that of
other biological assays and addressing (S)-2 as the most effective compound
capable of triggering apoptosis in various acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) cell
lines and blasts from patients with different AML subtypes. Importantly, (S)-2
was safe in mice (up to 150 mg/kg/week) as determined by liver, spleen, kidney
and bone marrow histopathology; and displayed negligible affinity for
peripheral/central BDZ-receptors. Overall, the BDZ-hydroxamate (S)-2 showed to be
a low-toxic HDACi with powerful anti-proliferative and pro-apototic activities
towards different cultured and primary AML cells, and therefore of clinical
interest to support conventional anti-leukaemic therapy.

© 2012 The Authors Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine © 2012 Foundation
for Cellular and Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3822689
PMID: 22004558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Exp Cell Res. 2011 Dec 10;317(20):2925-37. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2011.09.018. Epub
2011 Oct 6.

Zac1, an Sp1-like protein, regulates human p21(WAF1/Cip1) gene expression in HeLa
cells.

Liu PY(1), Hsieh TY, Liu ST, Chang YL, Lin WS, Wang WM, Huang SM.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei
114, Taiwan, ROC.

Zac1 functions as both a transcription factor and a transcriptional cofactor for 
p53, nuclear receptors (NRs) and NR coactivators. Zac1 might also act as a
transcriptional repressor via the recruitment of histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1).
The ability of Zac1 to interact directly with GC-specific elements indicates that
Zac1 possibly binds to Sp1-responsive elements. In the present study, our data
show that Zac1 is able to interact directly with the Sp1-responsive element in
the p21(WAF1/Cip1) gene promoter and enhance the transactivation activity of Sp1 
through direct physical interaction. Our data further demonstrate that Zac1 might
enhance Sp1-specific promoter activity by interacting with the Sp1-responsive
element, affecting the transactivation activity of Sp1 via a protein-protein
interaction, or competing the HDAC1 protein away from the pre-existing Sp1/HDAC1 
complex. Finally, the synergistic regulation of p21(WAF1/Cip1) gene expression by
Zac1 and Sp1 is mediated by endogenous p53 protein and p53-responsive elements in
HeLa cells. Our work suggests that Zac1 might serve as an Sp1-like protein that
directly interacts with the Sp1-responsive element to oligomerize with and/or to 
coactivate Sp1.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22001409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. J Pharm Biomed Anal. 2012 Jan 25;58:78-82. doi: 10.1016/j.jpba.2011.09.017. Epub 
2011 Sep 22.

Histone deacetylase 1 is required for Carbamazepine-induced CYP3A4 expression.

Wu Y(1), Shi X, Liu Y, Zhang X, Wang J, Luo X, Wen A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Xijing Hospital, The Fourth Military Medical
University, 127 Chang Le Xi Road, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710032, China.

Carbamazepine (CBZ) is a commonly prescribed antiepileptic drug. Adverse effects 
and drug-drug interaction are the two major concerns for its clinic application. 
CBZ is mainly metabolized by cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A4, a strong inducer of
CYP3A4 as well, which in turn influences the pharmaceutical profiles of the
co-administrated drugs. To date, little is known about the mechanisms underlying 
CBZ-induced CYP3A4 expression. In this study, we explored the possible roles of
Pregnane X receptor (PXR) and the histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) on the
CBZ-induced CYP3A4 expression. The results showed that: (1) Although the
expression of PXR was increased in CBZ treated cells, PXR gene silencing
surprisingly showed no significant effects on CBZ-induced CYP3A4 expression; (2) 
CBZ inhibited the binding of HDAC1 to the promoter of CYP3A4. In addition, both
dominant negative form and siRNA of HDAC1 could repress the CBZ-induced CYP3A4
expression. These data, for the first time indicate that HDAC1, is required for
the CBZ-induced CYP3A4 expression.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21996064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Invest New Drugs. 2012 Oct;30(5):1887-98. doi: 10.1007/s10637-011-9752-z. Epub
2011 Oct 8.

A new synthetic HDAC inhibitor, MHY218, induces apoptosis or autophagy-related
cell death in tamoxifen-resistant MCF-7 breast cancer cells.

Park JH(1), Ahn MY, Kim TH, Yoon S, Kang KW, Lee J, Moon HR, Jung JH, Chung HY,
Kim HS.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy and MRC Center, Pusan National University, San 30,
Jangjeon-dong, Geumjeong-gu, Busan, 609-735, Republic of Korea.

Acquired resistance to tamoxifen (Tam) is a critical problem in breast cancer
therapy. Therefore, new potential strategies for Tam-resistant breast cancer are 
needed recently. In this study, we synthesized a novel histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitor, MHY218, for the development of potent inhibitors of HDAC and evaluated
its biological activities by monitoring the anticancer effects in Tam-resistant
MCF-7 (TAMR/MCF-7) cells via in vitro and in vivo studies. MHY218 significantly
inhibited the proliferation of TAMR/MCF-7 cells in a dose-dependent manner. The
total HDAC enzyme activity was significantly inhibited, corresponding with
inhibition of acetylated H3 and H4 expression in TAMR/MCF-7 cells. HDAC1, 4, and 
6 expression levels were decreased in response to MHY218 treatment. Cell cycle
analysis indicated that MHY218 induced G2/M phase cell cycle arrest. As expected,
apoptotic cell death was observed in response to MHY218 treatment. Interestingly,
levels of beclin-1 and LC3-II, the markers of autophagy, were increased in
TAMR/MCF-7 cells treated with MHY218. The efficacy of MHY218 was also compared
with that of SAHA in vivo in a xenograft model of nude mice bearing a TAMR/MCF-7 
cells. MHY218 (10 mg/kg, twice a week for 21 days) completely inhibited tumor
growth and MHY218 markedly inhibited the expression of proliferative cell nuclear
antigen (PCNA) in tumor tissue. These results indicate that MHY218 can induce
caspase-independent autophagic cell death rather than apoptotic cell death. The
MHY218-induced autophagic cell death could be a new strategy in the treatment of 
Tam-resistant human breast cancer.

PMID: 21983700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Cell Signal. 2012 Feb;24(2):460-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2011.09.025. Epub 2011 
Oct 1.

Dimethylcelecoxib induces an inhibitory complex consisting of
HDAC1/NF-<U+03BA>B(p65)RelA leading to transcriptional downregulation of mPGES-1 and
EGR1.

Deckmann K(1), Rörsch F, Geisslinger G, Grösch S.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmazentrum Frankfurt/ZAFES, Institute of Clinical Pharmacology,
Goethe-University Frankfurt, Frankfurt/Main, Germany.

Dimethylcelecoxib, a non-COX-2 inhibiting derivative of celecoxib, inhibits
PGE(2) synthesis by transcriptional inhibition of mPGES-1. Previously we
demonstrated that DMC downregulates EGR1 expression and increases nuclear NF-<U+03BA>B
in human cervical cancer cells (HeLa). Both transcription factors are important
regulators of mPGES-1 expression. Here we show that treatment of HeLa cells with 
DMC inhibits EGR1 promoter activity by influencing the transactivation activity
of NF-<U+03BA>B. Mutation of the NF-<U+03BA>B motif as well as downregulation of NF-<U+03BA>B(p65)RelA
using siRNA repealed the inhibitory effect of DMC on the EGR1 promoter. The
transactivation activity of NF-<U+03BA>B is regulated by various co-activators or
co-repressors. One of these co-repressors is HDAC1. DMC did not influence HDAC1
expression, but the HDAC activity was enhanced under DMC influence. After DMC
treatment NF-<U+03BA>B co-immunoprecipitated with HDAC1. Electromobility shift assays
depicted an increased interaction between NF-<U+03BA>B-HDAC1 and DNA containing NF-<U+03BA>B
binding motives. Performing CHIP-assays we finally demonstrated the interaction
of NF-<U+03BA>B and HDAC1 at the EGR1 promoter that was in part reversed by the HDAC1
inhibitor trichostatin A. Using siRNA against HDAC1 we could repeal the
inhibitory effect of DMC on the EGR1 promoter. In conclusion we demonstrated that
treatment of HeLa cells with DMC leads to an enhanced formation of a complex
consisting of NF-<U+03BA>B and HDAC1 that binds to the EGR1 promoter resulting in
downregulation of EGR1 expression which plays a major role for transcriptional
inhibition of mGPES-1 expression. How these effects of DMC may contribute to a
potential therapeutical benefit of various diseases is discussed.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21983014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Surgery. 2012 Mar;151(3):412-9. doi: 10.1016/j.surg.2011.07.038. Epub 2011 Oct 8.

Role of histone deacetylase expression in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma.

Morine Y(1), Shimada M, Iwahashi S, Utsunomiya T, Imura S, Ikemoto T, Mori H,
Hanaoka J, Miyake H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Institute of Health Biosciences, The University of
Tokushima Graduate School, Tokushima, Japan. ymorine@clin.med.tokushima-u.ac.jp

INTRODUCTION: Histone deacetylase (HDAC) plays an important role in chromatin
remodeling and gene expression, and in regulating cell cycle progression and
differentiation. Furthermore, hypoxic conditions in the malignant tumor enhance
HDAC function and increased HDAC activity is closely involved in worse malignant 
behavior through hypoxia inducible factor (HIF) activation. The aim of this study
was to elucidate the correlation between HDAC expression and tumor malignant
behavior including HIF-1a expression in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (IHCC).
METHODS: Thirty-five patients with IHCC who underwent hepatic resection were
evaluated. HDAC1 and HIF-1a expressions were determined immunohistochemically,
and the patients were divided into 2 groups: the HDAC1 positive group (n = 21)
and the HDAC1 negative group (n = 14). Clinicopathologic variables including
HIF-1a expression were compared between the 2 groups.
RESULTS: HDAC1 expression correlated significantly with higher stage carcinoma,
lymph node metastasis, and vascular invasion. The prognosis in the HDAC1 positive
group was poorer than in the HDAC1 negative group (5-year survival: 78% vs 8%, P 
= .001). Furthermore, disease free survival rate in the HDAC1 positive group had 
significantly worse than that in the HDAC1 negative group (P = .0003). In the
multivariate analysis, HDAC1 positive expression was identified as the only
independent prognostic factor for disease free survival (Hazard Ratio: 7.194, P =
.0018). Furthermore, there was a significant correlation between HDAC1 expression
and HIF-1a expression (P = .007).
CONCLUSION: These findings suggested that HDAC1 positive expression was a
potential new prognostic indicator of IHCC, and a possible promising molecular
target through the regulation of HIF-1a.

Copyright Â© 2012. Published by Mosby, Inc.

PMID: 21982637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Virology. 2011 Dec 5;421(1):12-8. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2011.09.002. Epub 2011 Oct
4.

Foxp3 inhibits HDAC1 activity to modulate gene expression in human T cells.

Holmes D(1), Gao J, Su L.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, The University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.

We have previously reported that HIV-1 preferentially infects Foxp3+ Treg cells
in vitro and in vivo, and Foxp3 enhances the HIV-1 LTR expression through
epigenetic mechanisms in T cells. We report here that histone deacetylase
inhibitor (HDACi) failed to further enhance HIV gene expression in FoxP3+ T
cells. We discovered that Foxp3 inhibited cellular HDAC activity in T cells, and 
mutations in the forkhead domain that ablate Foxp3 function also abolished its
ability to inhibit HDAC. When co-expressed, Foxp3 specifically inhibited the
deacetylase activity of HDAC1. We further showed that Foxp3 was associated with
HDAC1, and mutations in the forkhead domain that ablate Foxp3 function in Treg
cells also inhibited Foxp3 association with and inhibition of HDAC1. Finally,
Foxp3 failed to enhance HIV-1 gene expression in human T cells expressing
HDAC1-specific shRNA. We conclude that Foxp3 modulates gene expression in human T
cells at least partly by inhibiting HDAC1 activity.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3211087
PMID: 21974802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Biotechnol Lett. 2012 Feb;34(2):197-203. doi: 10.1007/s10529-011-0756-8. Epub
2011 Oct 5.

Analysis of HDAC1-mediated regulation of Runx2-induced osteopontin gene
expression in C3h10t1/2 cells.

Zhang Z(1), Deepak V, Meng L, Wang L, Li Y, Jiang Q, Zeng X, Liu W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics and Cell Biology, Northeast Normal University,
Changchun, 130024, People's Republic of China.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) deacetylate lysine residues of histone and
non-histone proteins and thereby regulate the cell-cycle, gene expression, and
several other processes. We have analyzed the effects of HDAC1 on Runx2-mediated 
regulation of osteopontin (OPN) promoter activation and gene expression in
mesenchymal progenitor C3h10t1/2 cells and show that co-expression of HDAC1 along
with Runx2 results in down-regulation of Runx2-induced OPN mRNA expression during
both the proliferation and differentiation stages of C3h10t1/2 cells. Luciferase 
assay results revealed that HDAC1 efficiently down-regulated Runx2-stimulated OPN
promoter activity in a dose-dependent manner whereas TSA relieved the
HDAC1-mediated repression and up-regulated the Runx2-induced OPN promoter
activity and mRNA expression. In vivo HDAC1 co-localized and physically
interacted with Runx2 and associated with the OPN promoter. Thus, HDAC1 not only 
plays a critical role in regulation of Runx2-stimulated expression of osteogenic 
genes, like OPN, but also regulate the proliferation and differentiation stages
of mesenchymal progenitor cells, such as C3h10t1/2.

PMID: 21972143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Histol Histopathol. 2011 Dec;26(12):1555-61.

Expression of histone deacetylases 1, 2 and 3 in histological subtypes of
testicular germ cell tumours.

Fritzsche FR(1), Hasler A, Bode PK, Adams H, Seifert HH, Sulser T, Moch H,
Barghorn A, Kristiansen G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Surgical Pathology, University Hospital Zurich, Switzerland.
florian.fritzsche@usz.ch

In this study we aimed to evaluate the protein expression of class I histone
deacetylases (HDAC) in testicular germ cell tumours (GCT) and to analyse
differences between the histological subtypes of testicular GCT. 325 testicular
GCT were included in a tissue microarray with each histological subtype of the
tumour being separately represented on this array. Expression of class I HDAC
isoforms 1, 2 and 3 was assessed by immunohistochemistry. While HDAC2 and 3 were 
highly expressed in all histological subtypes of GCT, HDAC1 was almost
consistently expressed at lower levels. We observed significant differences in
the expression of the respective HDACs between seminoma and non-seminoma GCT
tissue components. Interestingly, choriocarcinomas showed generally high
expression values for all three class I HDAC isoforms. Relevant correlations with
clinicopathological parameters could not be demonstrated. Contrasting published
findings on other tumour entities, no immediate practical diagnostic or
prognostic value for HDAC1-3 in GCT could be inferred. However, the high
expression levels might still be indicative for a treatment response to HDAC
inhibitors which ought to be evaluated in further studies.

PMID: 21972094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e25192. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025192. Epub 2011 Sep 21.

Anticancer effects of 15d-prostaglandin-J2 in wild-type and doxorubicin-resistant
ovarian cancer cells: novel actions on SIRT1 and HDAC.

de Jong E(1), Winkel P, Poelstra K, Prakash J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacokinetics, Toxicology and Targeting, Groningen Research
Institute for Pharmacy, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

15-Deoxy-delta-12,14-prostaglandin-J(2) (15d-PGJ(2)), an arachidonic metabolite
and a natural PPAR<U+03B3> agonist, is known to induce apoptosis in tumor cells. In this
study, we investigated new therapeutic potentials of 15d-PGJ(2) by determining
its anticancer effects in wild-type and doxorubicin-resistant ovarian carcinoma
cells. Despite high expression of resistance-inducing genes like MDR1, Bcl2 and
Bcl-xl, 15d-PGJ(2) strongly induced apoptosis in doxorubicin-resistant (A2780/AD)
cells similar to the wild-type (A2780). This was found to be related to
caspase-3/7- and NF-<U+03BA>B pathways but not to its PPAR<U+03B3> agonistic activity.
15d-PGJ(2) also was able to reduce the doxorubicin resistance of A2780/AD cells
at low doses as confirmed by the inhibition of gene expression of MDR1
(p-glycoprotein) and SIRT1 (a drug senescence gene). We also investigated effects
of 15d-PGJ(2) on cell migration and transformation using a wound-healing assay
and morphological analyses, respectively. We found that 15d-PGJ(2) inhibited
migration most likely due to NF-<U+03BA>B inhibition and induced transformation of the
round-shape A2780/AD cells into elongated epithelial cells due to HDAC1
inhibition. Using a 15d-PGJ(2) analog, we found the mechanism of action of these 
new activities of 15d-PGJ(2) on SIRT1 and HDAC1 gene expressions and enzyme
activities. In conclusion, the present study demonstrates that 15d-PGJ(2) has a
high therapeutic potential to kill drug-resistant tumor cells and, the newly
described inhibitory effects of this cyclo-oxygenase product on SIRT1 and HDAC
will provide new opportunities for cancer therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC3177888
PMID: 21957481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. FASEB J. 2012 Jan;26(1):240-9. doi: 10.1096/fj.11-191122. Epub 2011 Sep 28.

Opposed regulation of type I IFN-induced STAT3 and ISGF3 transcriptional
activities by histone deacetylases (HDACS) 1 and 2.

Icardi L(1), Lievens S, Mori R, Piessevaux J, De Cauwer L, De Bosscher K,
Tavernier J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Protein Research, Vlaams Instituut voor Biotechnologie, 
Ghent, Belgium.

The antiviral and antiproliferative responses mediated by type I interferons
(IFNs) depend on JAK/STAT signaling and ISGF3 (STAT1:STAT2:IRF9)-dependent
transcription. In addition, type I IFNs stimulate STAT3 activation in many cell
types, an event generally associated with cell cycle progression, survival, and
proliferation. To gather more insight into this functionally contradictive
phenomenon, we studied the regulation of STAT3 transcriptional activity upon type
I IFN treatment. We show that IFNa2 stimulation strongly induces STAT3
phosphorylation, nuclear translocation, and promoter binding, yet the activation 
of transcription of a STAT3-dependent reporter and endogenous genes, such as
SOCS3 and c-FOS, is impaired. Simultaneous treatment with IFNa2 and trichostatin 
A, as well as combined HDAC1/HDAC2 silencing, restores STAT3-dependent reporter
gene and endogenous gene expression, strongly suggesting that HDAC1 and HDAC2 are
directly involved in repressing IFNa2-activated STAT3. Of note, single silencing 
of only one of the two HDACs does not lead to enhanced STAT3 activity, supporting
a functional redundancy between these two enzymes. In sharp contrast, HDAC1 and
HDAC2 activities are required for ISGF3-dependent gene expression. We conclude
that HDAC1 and HDAC2 differentially modulate STAT activity in response to IFNa2: 
while they are required for the induction of ISGF3-responsive genes, they impair 
the transcription of STAT3-dependent genes.

PMID: 21957129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Int J Dev Biol. 2011;55(6):597-602. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.113315el.

Opposing actions of histone deacetylase 1 and Notch signalling restrict
expression of erm and fgf20a to hindbrain rhombomere centres during zebrafish
neurogenesis.

Lightman EG(1), Harrison MR, Cunliffe VT.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental and Biomedical Genetics, Department of Biomedical
Science, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK.

The rate and pattern of neurogenesis in the developing vertebrate nervous system 
is controlled by a complex interplay of intercellular signalling pathways and
transcriptional control mechanisms. In the zebrafish hindbrain, Fgf20a promotes
transcription of the gene encoding the ETS-domain transcription factor Erm in the
non-neurogenic centres of rhombomeres. Here, we demonstrate that the epigenetic
regulator, Histone Deacetylase 1 (Hdac1) and the Notch signalling pathway have
opposing functions in regulating expression of both erm and fgf20a in the
zebrafish hindbrain. Our results show that Hdac1 is required for expression of
erm and fgf20a in rhombomeres, and that the Hdac1-dependent expression of these
two genes is attenuated in rhombomere boundary regions by Notch signalling
activity, thereby restricting erm and fgf20a transcripts to narrow stripes of
cells at rhombomere centres.

PMID: 21948707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. J Cell Biochem. 2012 Feb;113(2):528-43. doi: 10.1002/jcb.23376.

Chromatin structure and expression of the AMPA receptor subunit Glur2 in human
glioma cells: major regulatory role of REST and Sp1.

Ekici M(1), Keim A, Rössler OG, Hohl M, Thiel G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of
Saarland Medical Center, D-66421 Homburg, Germany.

It has been suggested that reduced glutamate receptor expression protects glioma 
cells from glutamate toxicity. GluR2 is the critical subunit of the GluR2 subtype
of AMPA glutamate receptors as this subunit determines the Ca(2+) permeability of
the receptor. The gene encoding the GluR2 subtype of AMPA receptors has been
described as a target gene for the transcription repressor REST. However, we
recently showed that the GluR2 gene is not regulated by REST in several neuronal 
and neuroendocrine cell lines, due to a repressive chromatin environment. Here,
we show that the GluR2 gene has an open chromatin configuration in human glioma
cells. Overexpression of REST reduced GluR2 mRNA levels while shRNA-mediated
depletion of REST or expression of a REST mutant, that contained a
transcriptional activation domain, enhanced GluR2 expression. Incubation with
trichostatin A (TSA), a histone deacetylase inhibitor, induced acetylation of
histone 4 of the GluR2 locus in glioma cells, leading to an upregulation of GluR2
expression. Together, these data suggest that REST is responsible for the reduced
expression of GluR2 in glioma cells. The transcription factor Sp1 additionally
binds under physiological conditions to the GluR2 gene in human glioma cells and 
expression of a dominant-negative mutant of Sp1 reduced expression of GluR2.
Thus, the regulation via Sp1 represents a further control point for GluR2
expression in glioma cells. Together, we show that the GluR2 gene is embedded
into an open chromatin configuration in glioma cells and expression of GluR2 is
controlled by REST and Sp1.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21948504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Arch Dermatol Res. 2012 Jan;304(1):73-9. doi: 10.1007/s00403-011-1176-2. Epub
2011 Sep 24.

Role of NF-<U+03BA>B-p53 crosstalk in ultraviolet A-induced cell death and G1 arrest in 
human dermal fibroblasts.

Lee YK(1), Cha HJ, Hong M, Yoon Y, Lee H, An S.

Author information: 
(1)Cosmetology Research Institute, Konkuk University, Gwangjin-gu, Seoul,
Republic of Korea.

Photoaging is the premature aging of the skin caused by repeated exposure to
sunlight and is characterized by a depletion of the dermal extracellular matrix. 
This depletion is due to the loss of fibroblast cells and their multiple
functions. UVA was revealed as a major inducer of photoaging in various clinical 
studies. As UVA photons have long wavelength spectra, UVA penetrates deeper into 
the dermis than UVB and UVC, leading to the induction of cell death, the
destruction of the dermal extracellular matrix through the induction of matrix
metalloproteinase expression, and the repression of collagen expression. However,
the exact effects of UVA on the skin remain a matter of debate. Here, we assess
cell cycle stage to demonstrate that NF-<U+03BA>B-p53 crosstalk induces apoptosis and
growth arrest in UVA-irradiated human dermal fibroblasts. In addition, UVA
irradiation led to an increase of NF-<U+03BA>B-HDAC1 complexes, which in turn repressed 
cyclin D1 expression in UVA-irradiated human dermal fibroblasts. We provide
direct evidence that UVA irradiation induces changes in the p53-dependent NF-<U+03BA>B
complex that lead to growth arrest and apoptosis through the repression of cyclin
D1. These studies uncovered that NF-<U+03BA>B-p53 crosstalk is a key regulator of
UVA-dependent growth arrest and apoptosis.

PMID: 21947322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. AAPS J. 2011 Dec;13(4):606-14. doi: 10.1208/s12248-011-9300-y. Epub 2011 Sep 22.

Epigenetic CpG demethylation of the promoter and reactivation of the expression
of Neurog1 by curcumin in prostate LNCaP cells.

Shu L(1), Khor TO, Lee JH, Boyanapalli SS, Huang Y, Wu TY, Saw CL, Cheung KL,
Kong AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics, Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy, Rutgers, The
State University of New Jersey, Piscataway, 08854, USA.

Curcumin (CUR), a major bioactive polyphenolic component from turmeric curry,
Curcuma longa, has been shown to be a potent anti-cancer phytochemical with
well-established anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidative stress effects. Chromatin
remodeling-related epigenetic regulation has emerged as an important mechanism of
carcinogenesis, chemoprevention, and chemotherapy. CUR has been found to inhibit 
histone acetyltransferase activity, and it was also postulated to be a potential 
DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) and histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor. In this
study, we show that when human prostate LNCaP cells were treated with CUR, it led
to demethylation of the first 14 CpG sites of the CpG island of the Neurog1 gene 
and restored the expression of this cancer-related CpG-methylation epigenome
marker gene. At the protein level, CUR treatment had limited effects on the
expression of epigenetic modifying proteins MBD2, MeCP2, DNMT1, and DNMT3a. Using
ChIP assay, CUR decreased MeCP2 binding to the promoter of Neurog1 dramatically. 
CUR treatment showed different effects on the protein expression of HDACs,
increasing the expression of HDAC1, 4, 5, and 8 but decreasing HDAC3. However,
the total HDAC activity was decreased upon CUR treatment. Further analysis of the
tri-methylation of histone 3 at lysine 27 (H3K27me3) showed that CUR decreased
the enrichment of H3K27me3 at the Neurog1 promoter region as well as at the
global level. Taken together, our present study provides evidence on the CpG
demethylation ability of CUR on Neurog1 while activating its expression,
suggesting a potential epigenetic modifying role for this phytochemical compound 
in human prostate cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3231852
PMID: 21938566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Br J Dermatol. 2012 Feb;166(2):226-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2011.10646.x.
Epub 2012 Jan 9.

Abnormal epigenetic modifications in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from
patients with alopecia areata.

Zhao M(1), Liang G, Wu X, Wang S, Zhang P, Su Y, Yin H, Tan Y, Zhang J, Lu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Hunan Key Laboratory of Medical Epigenomics, Department of Dermatology, Second
Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 139 Renmin Middle Road, Changsha,
Hunan 410011, China.

BACKGROUND: Alopecia areata (AA) is a hair loss disease caused by T-cell-mediated
autoimmune reactions against anagen-stage hair follicles. Although the exact
aetiology is poorly understood, there is evidence to suggest that both genetic
and environmental factors are involved in AA pathogenesis.
OBJECTIVES: To analyse DNA methylation and histone modification patterns in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of patients with AA.
METHODS: PBMC samples were obtained from 25 patients with AA and 20 healthy
controls. Global DNA methylcytosine levels, as well as histone acetylation and
methylation levels, were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. mRNA
expression levels were determined using real-time quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Genomic DNA methylation in PBMCs of patients with AA was increased
relative to controls. DNMT1, MBD1 and MBD4 expression levels were significantly
higher in AA PBMCs than in controls, and DNMT1 transcription levels positively
correlated with global DNA methylation levels in patient samples. Histone H3
acetylation was significantly increased and histone H3 lysine 4 methylation was
significantly decreased in patient PBMCs compared with healthy controls. Histone 
H3 acetylation levels were positively correlated with AA disease severity, and
with RANTES (CCL5) mRNA expression in PBMCs of patients with AA. These changes
were accompanied by increased p300 (EP300), histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1),
myeloid/lymphoid or mixed lineage leukemia (MLL), SET7/9 (SETD7), G9A (EHMT2),
JMJD2C (KDM4C) and JARID1A (KDM5A) expression, as well as reduced HDAC2, HDAC7,
LSD1 (KDM1A), JMJD2A (KDM4A) and JMJD2B (KDM4B) expression.
CONCLUSIONS: DNA methylation and histone modification status are altered in PBMCs
of patients with AA, possibly due to the deregulation of epigenetic regulatory
genes. These changes may contribute to the activation of pathological immune
responses in AA.

© 2011 The Authors. BJD © 2011 British Association of Dermatologists.

PMID: 21936853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2011 Dec;301(6):L899-907. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00062.2011. Epub 2011 Sep 16.

Hypoxia induces downregulation of PPAR-<U+03B3> in isolated pulmonary arterial smooth
muscle cells and in rat lung via transforming growth factor-ß signaling.

Gong K(1), Xing D, Li P, Aksut B, Ambalavanan N, Yang Q, Nozell SE, Oparil S,
Chen YF.

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Biology and Hypertension Program, Department of Medicine, University 
of Alabama at Birmingham, 35294, USA.

Chronic hypoxia activates transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) signaling and
leads to pulmonary vascular remodeling. Pharmacological activation of peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> (PPAR-<U+03B3>) has been shown to prevent
hypoxia-induced pulmonary hypertension and vascular remodeling in rodent models, 
suggesting a vasoprotective effect of PPAR-<U+03B3> under chronic hypoxic stress. This
study tested the hypothesis that there is a functional interaction between
TGF-ß/Smad signaling pathway and PPAR-<U+03B3> in isolated pulmonary artery small muscle
cells (PASMCs) under hypoxic stress. We observed that chronic hypoxia led to a
dramatic decrease of PPAR-<U+03B3> protein expression in whole lung homogenates (rat and
mouse) and hypertrophied pulmonary arteries and isolated PASMCs. Using a
transgenic model of mouse with inducible overexpression of a dominant-negative
mutant of TGF-ß receptor type II, we demonstrated that disruption of TGF-ß
pathway significantly attenuated chronic hypoxia-induced downregulation of PPAR-<U+03B3>
in lung. Similarly, in isolated rat PASMCs, antagonism of TGF-ß signaling with
either a neutralizing antibody to TGF-ß or the selective TGF-ß receptor type I
inhibitor SB431542 effectively attenuated hypoxia-induced PPAR-<U+03B3> downregulation. 
Furthermore, we have demonstrated that TGF-ß1 treatment suppressed PPAR-<U+03B3>
expression in PASMCs under normoxia condition. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
analysis showed that TGF-ß1 treatment significantly increased binding of Smad2/3,
Smad4, and the transcriptional corepressor histone deacetylase 1 to the PPAR-<U+03B3>
promoter in PASMCs. Conversely, treatment with the PPAR-<U+03B3> agonist rosiglitazone
attenuated TGF-ß1-induced extracellular matrix molecule expression and growth
factor in PASMCs. These data provide strong evidence that activation of
TGF-ß/Smad signaling, via transcriptional suppression of PPAR-<U+03B3> expression,
mediates chronic hypoxia-induced downregulation of PPAR-<U+03B3> expression in lung.

PMCID: PMC3233825
PMID: 21926264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Eur J Med Chem. 2011 Nov;46(11):5387-97. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2011.08.045. Epub 
2011 Sep 8.

Design, synthesis and primary activity assay of tripeptidomimetics as histone
deacetylase inhibitors with linear linker and branched cap group.

Zhang Y(1), Feng J, Jia Y, Xu Y, Liu C, Fang H, Xu W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, School of Pharmacy, Shandong University,
Ji'nan, Shandong 250012, PR China.

A novel series of tripeptidomimetics with spiro ring containing sulfur atoms as
cap group and linear carbochain as linker was designed and synthesized as HDACs
inhibitors. Several compounds possessed more potent HDAC8 inhibitory activity
than clinically used drug SAHA, although their HDAC1 inhibitory activities and
anti-proliferative activities against human breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7,
MDA-MB-231) and prostate cancer cell line (PC-3) were not satisfactory. Among
them, compounds 11l and 11k showed excellent potency against HDAC8 (IC(50) values
were 0.021 ± 0.004 µM and 0.035 ± 0.007 µM, respectively, whereas SAHA was 0.70 ±
0.12 µM), and good selectivity over HDAC1. Up to now, few hydroxamic acid
derivatives with linear linker were reported to possess HDAC8 selectivity over
HDAC1.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21924799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. J Biol Chem. 2011 Nov 4;286(44):38095-102. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.257055. Epub
2011 Sep 14.

HDAC4 protein regulates HIF1a protein lysine acetylation and cancer cell response
to hypoxia.

Geng H(1), Harvey CT, Pittsenbarger J, Liu Q, Beer TM, Xue C, Qian DZ.

Author information: 
(1)Knight Cancer Institute, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland,
Oregon 97239, USA.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 a (HIF1a) is an essential part of the HIF-1
transcriptional complex that regulates angiogenesis, cellular metabolism, and
cancer development. In von Hippel-Lindau (VHL)-null kidney cancer cell lines, we 
reported previously that HIF1a proteins can be acetylated and inhibited by
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors or specific siRNA against HDAC4. To
investigate the mechanism and biological consequence of the inhibition, we have
generated stable HDAC4 knockdown via shRNA in VHL-positive normal and cancer cell
lines. We report that HDAC4 regulates HIF1a protein acetylation and stability.
Specifically, the HIF1a protein acetylation can be increased by HDAC4 shRNA and
decreased by HDAC4 overexpression. HDAC4 shRNA inhibits HIF1a protein stability. 
In contrast, HDAC1 or HDAC3 shRNA has no such inhibitory effect. Mutations of the
first five lysine residues (lysine 10, 11, 12, 19, and 21) to arginine within the
HIF1a N terminus reduce protein acetylation but render the mutant HIF1a protein
resistant to HDAC4 and HDACi-mediated inhibition. Functionally, in VHL-positive
cancer cell lines, stable inhibition of HDAC4 decreases both the HIF-1
transcriptional activity and a subset of HIF-1 hypoxia target gene expression. On
the cellular level, HDAC4 inhibition reduces the hypoxia-related increase of
glycolysis and resistance to docetaxel chemotherapy. Taken together, the novel
biological relationship between HDAC4 and HIF1a presented here suggests a
potential role for the deacetylase enzyme in regulating HIF-1 cancer cell
response to hypoxia and presents a more specific molecular target of inhibition.

PMCID: PMC3207467
PMID: 21917920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. PLoS Genet. 2011 Sep;7(9):e1002265. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002265. Epub 2011 
Sep 1.

An iterative genetic and dynamical modelling approach identifies novel features
of the gene regulatory network underlying melanocyte development.

Greenhill ER(1), Rocco A, Vibert L, Nikaido M, Kelsh RN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biochemistry and Centre for Regenerative Medicine,
University of Bath, Bath, United Kingdom.

The mechanisms generating stably differentiated cell-types from multipotent
precursors are key to understanding normal development and have implications for 
treatment of cancer and the therapeutic use of stem cells. Pigment cells are a
major derivative of neural crest stem cells and a key model cell-type for our
understanding of the genetics of cell differentiation. Several factors driving
melanocyte fate specification have been identified, including the transcription
factor and master regulator of melanocyte development, Mitf, and Wnt signalling
and the multipotency and fate specification factor, Sox10, which drive mitf
expression. While these factors together drive multipotent neural crest cells to 
become specified melanoblasts, the mechanisms stabilising melanocyte
differentiation remain unclear. Furthermore, there is controversy over whether
Sox10 has an ongoing role in melanocyte differentiation. Here we use zebrafish to
explore in vivo the gene regulatory network (GRN) underlying melanocyte
specification and differentiation. We use an iterative process of mathematical
modelling and experimental observation to explore methodically the core
melanocyte GRN we have defined. We show that Sox10 is not required for ongoing
differentiation and expression is downregulated in differentiating cells, in
response to Mitfa and Hdac1. Unexpectedly, we find that Sox10 represses
Mitf-dependent expression of melanocyte differentiation genes. Our systems
biology approach allowed us to predict two novel features of the melanocyte GRN, 
which we then validate experimentally. Specifically, we show that maintenance of 
mitfa expression is Mitfa-dependent, and identify Sox9b as providing an
Mitfa-independent input to melanocyte differentiation. Our data supports our
previous suggestion that Sox10 only functions transiently in regulation of mitfa 
and cannot be responsible for long-term maintenance of mitfa expression; indeed, 
Sox10 is likely to slow melanocyte differentiation in the zebrafish embryo. More 
generally, this novel approach to understanding melanocyte differentiation
provides a basis for systematic modelling of differentiation in this and other
cell-types.

PMCID: PMC3164703
PMID: 21909283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2012 Mar;47(3):264-74. doi: 10.1002/ppul.21540. Epub 2011 Sep
8.

Hyperoxia arrests alveolar development through suppression of histone
deacetylases in neonatal rats.

Zhu L(1), Li H, Tang J, Zhu J, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)XinHua Hospital, Shanghai Institute for Pediatric Research, Shanghai Jiaotong 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) poses a significant global health problem. It
mainly occurs in preterm infants. It is histopathologically characterized by
fewer and larger alveoli and less secondary septa, suggesting an arrested or
disordered lung development. To date, the mechanisms that lead to the
pathophysiological changes in BPD have still not been totally understood. In
embryonic development, histone deacetylase (HDAC) plays an important role by
regulating gene transcription. Here, we hypothesize that a decreased HDAC
expression and activity, caused by preterm birth or environmental stresses,
contribute to a disorder in alveolar development in BPD. To this end, newborn
Sprague-Dawley rats subjected to hyperoxia (85% O(2) ) were used to investigate
the gene expression and protein activity of HDAC and alveolar development in
lungs. Our results showed that hyperoxia exposure led to a suppression of the
HDAC1/HDAC2 expression and activity, and the overall HDAC activity, as well as
arrest of alveolarization, and an elevated expression of the cytokine-induced
neutrophil chemoattractant-1 (CINC-1) in the lungs of newborn rats. However,
preservation of HDAC activity by theophylline significantly improved alveolar
development and attenuated CINC-1 release, all of which were blocked by a
specific HDAC inhibitor, trichostatin A (TSA). TSA alone can disturb the alveolar
development in neonatal rats. Our findings indicate that a persistent exposure to
hyperoxia leads to a suppressed HDAC activity, which causes disorders in
pulmonary development. This effect may be mediated by CINC-1. Attenuation of
CINC-1-mediated inflammation by activating HDAC may have a protective effect in
BPD.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21905265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. J Cell Mol Med. 2012 Jul;16(7):1461-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2011.01420.x.

Trichostatin A induces 5-lipoxygenase promoter activity and mRNA expression via
inhibition of histone deacetylase 2 and 3.

Pufahl L(1), Katryniok C, Schnur N, Sorg BL, Metzner J, Grez M, Steinhilber D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutical Chemistry/ZAFES, Goethe University Frankfurt,
Frankfurt, Germany.

The 5-lipoxygenase (5-LO) is the key enzyme in the formation of leukotrienes. We 
have previously shown that the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor trichostatin 
A (TSA) activates 5-LO transcription via recruitment of Sp1, Sp3 and RNA
polymerase II to the proximal promoter. To identify the HDACs involved in the
regulation of 5-LO promoter activity isoform-specific HDAC inhibitors were
applied. 5-LO promoter activity and mRNA expression were up-regulated by the
class I HDAC inhibitors apicidin and MS-275 but not by class II inhibitors.
Knockdown of HDAC 1, 2 and 3 revealed that HDAC2 and HDAC3 but not HDAC1 is
involved in the up-regulation of 5-LO mRNA expression. To analyse the chromatin
modifications at the 5-LO promoter associated with HDAC inhibition, the time
course of 5-LO mRNA induction by trichostatin A was investigated and the
concomitant changes in histone modifications at the 5-LO promoter in HL-60, U937 
and Mono Mac6 cells were determined. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis
revealed that trichostatin A increases acetylation of histones H3 and H4 at the
5-LO core promoter in HL-60 and U937 cells whereas no significant changes were
observed in Mono Mac6 cells. The appearance of H3 and H4 acetylation preceded the
5-LO mRNA induction whereas in all three cell lines, induction of 5-LO mRNA
expression correlated with histone H3 lysine 4 trimethylation (H3K4me3), a marker
for transcriptional activity of gene promoters.

© 2011 The Authors Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine © 2011 Foundation
for Cellular and Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3823215
PMID: 21883892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Biol Pharm Bull. 2011;34(9):1432-7.

Emodin inhibits proinflammatory responses and inactivates histone deacetylase 1
in hypoxic rheumatoid synoviocytes.

Ha MK(1), Song YH, Jeong SJ, Lee HJ, Jung JH, Kim B, Song HS, Huh JE, Kim SH.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of East-West Medical Science, Kyung Hee University, Korea.

Chronic inflammation of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is promoted by proinflammatory 
cytokines and closely linked to angiogenesis. In the present study, we
investigated the anti-inflammatory effects of emodin
(1,3,8-trihydroxy-6-methyl-anthraquinone) isolated from the root of Rheum
palmatum L. in interleukin 1 beta (IL-1ß) and lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated
RA synoviocytes under hypoxia. Emodin significantly inhibited IL-1ß and
LPS-stimulated proliferation of RA synoviocytes in a dose-dependent manner under 
hypoxic condition. Also, enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) revealed that 
emodin significantly reduced the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines [tumor 
necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-a), IL-6 and IL-8], mediators [prostagladin E(2)
(PGE(2)), matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-1 and MMP-13] and vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) as an angiogenesis biomarker in IL-1ß and LPS-treated
synoviocytes under hypoxia. Consistently, emodin attenuated the expression of
cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2), VEGF, hypoxia inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF-1a), MMP-1 
and MMP-13 at mRNA level in IL-1ß and LPS-treated synoviocytes under hypoxia.
Furthermore, emodin reduced histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity as well as
suppressed the expression of HDAC1, but not HDAC2 in IL-1ß and LPS-treated
synoviocytes under hypoxia. Overall, these findings suggest that emodin inhibits 
proinflammatory cytokines and VEGF productions, and HDAC1 activity in hypoxic RA 
synoviocytes.

PMID: 21881229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Nov;39(21):9167-80. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr642. Epub 2011
Aug 16.

Selective requirement of H2B N-Terminal tail for p14ARF-induced chromatin
silencing.

Choi J(1), Kim H, Kim K, Lee B, Lu W, An W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

The N-terminal tail of histone H2B is believed to be involved in gene silencing, 
but how it exerts its function remains elusive. Here, we report the biochemical
characterization of p14ARF tumor suppressor as a transcriptional repressor that
selectively recognizes the unacetylated H2B tails on nucleosomes. The p14ARF-H2B 
tail interaction is functional, as the antagonistic effect of p14ARF on chromatin
transcription is lost upon deletion or acetylation of H2B tails. Gene expression 
profiling and chromatin immunoprecipitation studies emphasize the significance of
H2B deacetylation and p14ARF recruitment in establishing a repressive environment
over the cell cycle regulatory genes. Moreover, HDAC1-mediated H2B deacetylation,
especially at K20, constitutes an essential step in tethering p14ARF near target 
promoters. Our results thus reveal a hitherto unknown role of p14ARF in the
regulation of chromatin transcription, as well as molecular mechanisms governing 
the repressive action of p14ARF.

PMCID: PMC3241654
PMID: 21846774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e21898. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021898. Epub 2011 Jul 19.

Increased expression of beta-defensin 1 (DEFB1) in chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease.

Andresen E(1), Günther G, Bullwinkel J, Lange C, Heine H.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Immunoregulation, Division of Innate Immunity, Leibniz-Center for
Medicine and Biosciences, Borstel, Germany.

On-going airway inflammation is characteristic for the pathophysiology of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). However, the key factors determining the
decrease in lung function, an important clinical parameter of COPD, are not
clear. Genome-wide linkage analyses provide evidence for significant linkage to
airway obstruction susceptibility loci on chromosome 8p23, the location of the
human defensin gene cluster. Moreover, a genetic variation in the defensin beta 1
(DEFB1) gene was found to be associated with COPD. Therefore, we hypothesized
that DEFB1 is differently regulated and expressed in human lungs during COPD
progression. Gene expression of DEFB1 was assessed in bronchial epithelium and
BAL fluid cells of healthy controls and patients with COPD and using bisulfite
sequencing and ChIP analysis, the epigenetic control of DEFB1 mRNA expression was
investigated. We can demonstrate that DEFB1 mRNA expression was significantly
increased in bronchopulmonary specimen of patients with COPD (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>34) vs. healthy
controls (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>10) (p<0.0001). Furthermore, a significant correlation could be
detected between DEFB1 and functional parameters such as FEV(1) (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0024) and 
the FEV(1)/VC ratio (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0005). Upregulation of DEFB1 mRNA was paralleled by
changes in HDAC1-3, HDAC5 and HDAC8 mRNA expression. Whereas bisulfite sequencing
revealed no differences in the methylation state of DEFB1 promoter between
patients with COPD and controls, ChIP analysis showed that enhanced DEFB1 mRNA
expression was associated with the establishment of an active histone code. Thus,
expression of human DEFB1 is upregulated and related to the decrease in pulmonary
function in patients with COPD.

PMCID: PMC3139569
PMID: 21818276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. J Biol Chem. 2011 Sep 30;286(39):34036-50. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.284216. Epub
2011 Aug 4.

Disruption of IkappaB kinase (IKK)-mediated RelA serine 536 phosphorylation
sensitizes human multiple myeloma cells to histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors.

Dai Y(1), Chen S, Wang L, Pei XY, Funk VL, Kramer LB, Dent P, Grant S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Virginia Commonwealth University/Massey CancerCenter, 
Richmond, Virginia 23298, USA.

Post-translational modifications of RelA play an important role in regulation of 
NF-<U+03BA>B activation. We previously demonstrated that in malignant hematopoietic
cells, histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs) induced RelA hyperacetylation and 
NF-<U+03BA>B activation, attenuating lethality. We now present evidence that I<U+03BA>B kinase 
(IKK) ß-mediated RelA Ser-536 phosphorylation plays a significant functional role
in promoting RelA acetylation, inducing NF-<U+03BA>B activation, and limiting HDACI
lethality in human multiple myeloma (MM) cells. Immunoblot profiling revealed
that although basal RelA phosphorylation varied in MM cells, Ser-536
phosphorylation correlated with IKK activity. Exposure to the pan-HDACIs
vorinostat or LBH-589 induced phosphorylation of IKKa/ß (Ser-180/Ser-181) and
RelA (Ser-536) in MM cells, including cells expressing an I<U+03BA>Ba "super-repressor,"
accompanied by increased RelA nuclear translocation, acetylation, DNA binding,
and transactivation activity. These events were substantially blocked by either
pan-IKK or IKKß-selective inhibitors, resulting in marked apoptosis. Consistent
with these events, inhibitory peptides targeting either the NF-<U+03BA>B essential
modulator (NEMO) binding domain for IKK complex formation or RelA phosphorylation
sites also significantly increased HDACI lethality. Moreover, IKKß knockdown by
shRNA prevented Ser-536 phosphorylation and significantly enhanced HDACI
susceptibility. Finally, introduction of a nonphosphorylatable RelA mutant S536A,
which failed to undergo acetylation in response to HDACIs, impaired NF-<U+03BA>B
activation and increased cell death. These findings indicate that HDACIs induce
Ser-536 phosphorylation of the NF-<U+03BA>B subunit RelA through an IKKß-dependent
mechanism, an action that is functionally involved in activation of the
cytoprotective NF-<U+03BA>B signaling cascade primarily through facilitation of RelA
acetylation rather than nuclear translocation.

PMCID: PMC3190767
PMID: 21816815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Epigenetics. 2011 Sep 1;6(9):1095-104. doi: 10.4161/epi.6.9.16924. Epub 2011 Sep 
1.

Histone H3K9 modifications are a local chromatin event involved in
ethanol-induced neuroadaptation of the NR2B gene.

Qiang M(1), Denny A, Lieu M, Carreon S, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology; The University of Texas Health Science Center at
San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, USA. qiang@uthscsa.edu 

Expression of the NMDA receptor 2B (NR2B) gene is upregulated following chronic
intermittent ethanol (CIE) treatment and withdrawal, which underlies behavioral
alterations in addiction. The goal of this study was to characterize the changes 
of histone modifications induced by CIE treatment and its subsequent removal
associated to the upregulation of NR2B gene transcription. To investigate the
involvement of histone acetylation in the effect of ethanol on the NR2B gene, we 
examined the influence of CIE on histone acetylation in the 5' regulatory region 
of NR2B using a qChIP assay. CIE treatment and its subsequent removal produced a 
remarkable and selected increase in histone H3K9 acetylation. Interestingly, the 
majority of the increased H3K9 acetylation occurred after ethanol removal, which 
was coincident with a decrease in H3K9 methylation in the same time duration.
Further examination of the mechanisms of ethanol-induced alterations on the
histone modifications revealed that CIE-induced acetylation of H3K9 was not due
to the changes in global enzyme activities or the expression of histone
acetyltransferases (HATs) and deacetylase (HDACs). Instead, we found a
significant downregulation in some histone methyltransferases (HMTs) at both the 
global level and the local chromatin of the NR2B gene following CIE treatment.
Moreover, our experiments also indicated a decrease of G9a, Suv39 h1 and HDAC1-3 
in the chromatin of the NR2B gene promoter, which may be responsible for the
altered H3K9 modifications. Taken together, the findings suggest a mechanism
where the changes in H3K9 modifications in the local chromatin of the NR2B gene
underlie alcohol-induced neuroadaptation.

PMCID: PMC3225745
PMID: 21814037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Oncol Rep. 2011 Nov;26(5):1057-62. doi: 10.3892/or.2011.1407. Epub 2011 Jul 28.

Histone deacetylase inhibitor enhances the anti-tumor effect of gemcitabine: a
special reference to gene-expression microarray analysis.

Iwahashi S(1), Shimada M, Utsunomiya T, Morine Y, Imura S, Ikemoto T, Mori H,
Hanaoka J, Saito Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Institute of Health Biosciences, The University of
Tokushima Graduate School, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) is strongly associated with epigenetic regulation and 
carcinogenesis, and its inhibitors induce the differentiation or apoptosis of
cancer cells. Valproic acid (VPA) is one of the clinically available HDAC
inhibitors. We investigated the anticancer effects of VPA in combination with
gemcitabine (GEM) in the human cholangiocarcinoma cell line HuCCT1, and explored 
the mechanisms of the anticancer effects using microarray analysis. The
anticancer effects of VPA or gemcitabine (GEM), and the effects of VPA combined
with GEM, were studied by a cell proliferation assay. A microarray analysis was
performed and the genes were picked up using GeneSpring GX11.5, followed by
Ingenuity Pathways Analysis (IPA) and determination of gene expression by RT-PCR.
GEM (5 nM) and VPA (0.5 mM) reduced proliferation by 23%, which significantly
augmented the anticancer effect of GEM alone or VPA alone (P<0.01). Using
microarray analysis, 43 genes were identified with the comparison between the GEM
group and the GEM plus VPA combination group. Interactions were identified
between genes of the 'Cellular Development' network relevant to the
differentiation of cancer cells using IPA. Furthermore, GEM combined with VPA
up-regulated the HLA-DRA expression compared to the single agents (P<0.01). VPA
augmented the effects of GEM by enhancing the gene network mainly including
HLA-DRA, possibly through the modification of cancer cell differentiation.

PMID: 21805043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e22550. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022550. Epub 2011 Jul 22.

Improvement of cardiac function in mouse myocardial infarction after
transplantation of epigenetically-modified bone marrow progenitor cells.

Rajasingh J(1), Thangavel J, Siddiqui MR, Gomes I, Gao XP, Kishore R, Malik AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Center of Lung and Vascular Biology, University
of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.
rjohnson9@kumc.edu

OBJECTIVE: To study usefulness of bone marrow progenitor cells (BPCs)
epigenetically altered by chromatin modifying agents in mediating heart repair
after myocardial infarction in mice.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We tested the therapeutic efficacy of bone marrow progenitor
cells treated with the clinically-used chromatin modifying agents Trichostatin A 
(TSA, histone deacetylase inhibitor) and 5Aza-2-deoxycytidine (Aza, DNA
methylation inhibitor) in a mouse model of acute myocardial infarction (AMI).
Treatment of BPCs with Aza and TSA induced expression of pluripotent genes Oct4, 
Nanog, Sox2, and thereafter culturing these cells in defined cardiac
myocyte-conditioned medium resulted in their differentiation into cardiomyocyte
progenitors and subsequently into cardiac myocytes. Their transition was deduced 
by expression of repertoire of markers: Nkx2.5, GATA4, cardiotroponin T,
cardiotroponin I, a-sarcomeric actinin, Mef2c and MHC-a. We observed that the
modified BPCs had greater AceH3K9 expression and reduced histone deacetylase1
(HDAC1) and lysine-specific demethylase1 (LSD1) expression compared to untreated 
BPCs, characteristic of epigenetic changes. Intra-myocardial injection of
modified BPCs after AMI in mice significantly improved left ventricular function.
These changes were ascribed to differentiation of the injected cells into
cardiomyocytes and endothelial cells.
CONCLUSION: Treatment of BPCs with Aza and TSA converts BPCs into multipotent
cells, which can then be differentiated into myocyte progenitors. Transplantation
of these modified progenitor cells into infarcted mouse hearts improved left
ventricular function secondary to differentiation of cells in the niche into
myocytes and endothelial cells.

PMCID: PMC3142193
PMID: 21799893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. J Biosci. 2011 Aug;36(3):461-9.

N-terminal PDZ-like domain of chromatin organizer SATB1 contributes towards its
function as transcription regulator.

Notani D(1), Ramanujam PL, Kumar PP, Gottimukkala KP, Kumar-Sinha C, Galande S.

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Cell Science, Ganeshkhind, Pune 411 007, India.

The special AT-rich DNA-binding protein 1 (SATB1) is a matrix attachment region
(MAR)-binding protein that acts as a global repressor via recruitment of
CtBP1:HDAC1-containing co-repressors to its binding targets. The N-terminal
PSD95/Dlg-A/ZO-1 (PDZ)-like domain of SATB1 mediates interactions with several
chromatin proteins. In the present study, we set out to address whether the
PDZ-domain-mediated interactions of SATB1 are critical for its in vivo function
as a global repressor. We reasoned that since the N-terminal PDZ-like domain
(amino acid residues 1-204) lacks DNA binding activity, it would fail to recruit 
the interacting partners of SATB1 to its genomic binding sites and hence would
not repress the SATB1-regulated genes. Indeed, in vivo MAR-linked luciferase
reporter assay revealed that overexpression of the PDZ-like domain resulted in
de-repression, indicating that the PDZ-like domain exerts a dominant negative
effect on genes regulated by SATB1. Next, we developed a stable dominant negative
model in human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293T cells that conditionally expressed the
N-terminal 1-204 region harbouring the PDZ-like domain of SATB1. To monitor the
effect of sequestration of the interaction partners on the global gene regulation
by SATB1, transcripts from the induced and uninduced clones were subjected to
gene expression profiling. Clustering of expression data revealed that 600 out of
19000 genes analysed were significantly upregulated upon overexpression of the
PDZ-like domain. Induced genes were found to be involved in important signalling 
cascades and cellular functions. These studies clearly demonstrated the role of
PDZ domain of SATB1 in global gene regulation presumably through its interaction 
with other cellular proteins.

PMID: 21799257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. J Nat Prod. 2011 Oct 28;74(10):2031-8. doi: 10.1021/np200324x. Epub 2011 Jul 27.

Thailandepsins: bacterial products with potent histone deacetylase inhibitory
activities and broad-spectrum antiproliferative activities.

Wang C(1), Henkes LM, Doughty LB, He M, Wang D, Meyer-Almes FJ, Cheng YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, P.O. Box
413, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53201, United States.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors have emerged as a new class of anticancer
drugs, with one synthetic compound, SAHA (vorinostat, Zolinza; 1), and one
natural product, FK228 (depsipeptide, romidepsin, Istodax; 2), approved by FDA
for clinical use. Our studies of FK228 biosynthesis in Chromobacterium violaceum 
no. 968 led to the identification of a cryptic biosynthetic gene cluster in the
genome of Burkholderia thailandensis E264. Genome mining and genetic manipulation
of this gene cluster further led to the discovery of two new products,
thailandepsin A (6) and thailandepsin B (7). HDAC inhibition assays showed that
thailandepsins have selective inhibition profiles different from that of FK228,
with comparable inhibitory activities to those of FK228 toward human HDAC1,
HDAC2, HDAC3, HDAC6, HDAC7, and HDAC9 but weaker inhibitory activities than FK228
toward HDAC4 and HDAC8, the latter of which could be beneficial. NCI-60
anticancer screening assays showed that thailandepsins possess broad-spectrum
antiproliferative activities with GI50 for over 90% of the tested cell lines at
low nanomolar concentrations and potent cytotoxic activities toward certain types
of cell lines, particularly for those derived from colon, melanoma, ovarian, and 
renal cancers. Thailandepsins thus represent new naturally produced HDAC
inhibitors that are promising for anticancer drug development.

PMCID: PMC3204160
PMID: 21793558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. J Biol Chem. 2011 Sep 16;286(37):32775-89. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.248278. Epub
2011 Jul 21.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity is critical for embryonic kidney gene
expression, growth, and differentiation.

Chen S(1), Bellew C, Yao X, Stefkova J, Dipp S, Saifudeen Z, Bachvarov D, El-Dahr
SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Pediatric Nephrology, Tulane University
Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112, USA.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) regulate fundamental biological processes such as
cellular proliferation, differentiation, and survival via genomic and nongenomic 
effects. This study examined the importance of HDAC activity in the regulation of
gene expression and differentiation of the developing mouse kidney. Class I
HDAC1-3 and class II HDAC4, -7, and -9 genes are developmentally regulated.
Moreover, HDAC1-3 are highly expressed in nephron precursors. Short term
treatment of cultured mouse embryonic kidneys with HDAC inhibitors (HDACi)
induced global histone H3 and H4 hyperacetylation and H3K4 hypermethylation.
However, genome-wide profiling revealed that the HDAC-regulated transcriptome is 
restricted and encompasses regulators of the cell cycle, Wnt/ß-catenin,
TGF-ß/Smad, and PI3K-AKT pathways. Further analysis demonstrated that base-line
expression of key developmental renal regulators, including Osr1, Eya1, Pax2/8,
WT1, Gdnf, Wnt9b, Sfrp1/2, and Emx2, is dependent on intact HDAC activity.
Treatment of cultured embryonic kidney cells with HDACi recapitulated these gene 
expression changes, and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed that HDACi 
is associated with histone hyperacetylation of Pax2/Pax8, Gdnf, Sfrp1, and p21.
Gene knockdown studies demonstrated that HDAC1 and HDAC2 play a redundant role in
regulation of Pax2/8 and Sfrp1 but not Gdnf. Long term treatment of embryonic
kidneys with HDACi impairs the ureteric bud branching morphogenesis program and
provokes growth arrest and apoptosis. We conclude that HDAC activity is critical 
for normal embryonic kidney homeostasis, and we implicate class I HDACs in the
regulation of early nephron gene expression, differentiation, and survival.

PMCID: PMC3173185
PMID: 21778236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2011 Aug 15;21(16):4909-12. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2011.06.015.

The design, synthesis and structure-activity relationships of novel
isoindoline-based histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Shultz M(1), Fan J, Chen C, Cho YS, Davis N, Bickford S, Buteau K, Cao X,
Holmqvist M, Hsu M, Jiang L, Liu G, Lu Q, Patel C, Suresh JR, Selvaraj M, Urban
L, Wang P, Yan-Neale Y, Whitehead L, Zhang H, Zhou L, Atadja P.

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Inc., 250 Massachusetts Avenue,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. michael.shultz@novartis.com

The design, synthesis and biological evaluation of a novel series of
isoindoline-based hydroxamates is described. Several analogs were shown to
inhibit HDAC1 with IC(50) values in the low nanomolar range and inhibit cellular 
proliferation of HCT116 human colon cancer cells in the sub-micromolar range. The
cellular potency of compound 17e was found to have greater in vitro
anti-proliferative activity than several compounds in late stage clinical trials 
for the treatment of cancer. The in vitro safety profiles of selected compounds
were assessed and shown to be suitable for further lead optimization.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21742496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2011 Aug 15;21(16):4924-7. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2011.06.001.
Epub 2011 Jun 16.

Design, synthesis and docking studies on benzamide derivatives as histone
deacetylase inhibitors.

Lu A(1), Luo H, Shi M, Wu G, Yuan Y, Liu J, Tang F.

Author information: 
(1)JiangSu Simcere Pharmaceutical R&D Co., Ltd, and Jiangsu Key Laboratory of
Molecular Targeted Antitumor Drug Research, No. 699-18 Xuan Wu Avenue, Nanjing
210042, China. luaijun@simcere.com

A series of benzamide derivatives including two scaffolds were designed and
synthesized as potential histone deacetylase inhibitors. Most of synthesized
compounds showed moderate enzymatic potency at the same order of magnitude, and
compound 12b possessed better potency to the positive control (3.8 µM vs 13.0
µM). It also showed a 50-fold increase in vitro anticancer activity against
DU-145 cell-lines. Molecular docking studies were carried out and used to explain
the structure-activity relationships observed in vitro. Then we found that the
cavity surrounded by ASP104, HIS33, PRO34 and PHE155 may be crucial for the
inhibitors' activity. The docking results provide some useful information for
future design of more potent inhibitors.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21741834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. FASEB J. 2011 Oct;25(10):3695-707. doi: 10.1096/fj.10-178871. Epub 2011 Jul 7.

Resveratrol, through NF-Y/p53/Sin3/HDAC1 complex phosphorylation, inhibits
estrogen receptor alpha gene expression via p38MAPK/CK2 signaling in human breast
cancer cells.

De Amicis F(1), Giordano F, Vivacqua A, Pellegrino M, Panno ML, Tramontano D,
Fuqua SA, Andò S.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Sanitario, Department of Pharmaco-Biology, University of Calabria,
Arcavacata di Rende (CS) 87030, Italy.

Agents to counteract acquired resistance to hormonal therapy for breast cancer
would substantially enhance the long-term benefits of hormonal therapy. In the
present study, we demonstrate how resveratrol (Res) inhibits human breast cancer 
cell proliferation, including MCF-7 tamoxifen-resistant cells (IC(50) values for 
viability were in the 30-45 µM range). We show that Res, through p38(MAPK)
phosphorylation, causes induction of p53, which recruits at the estrogen receptor
a (ERa) proximal promoter, leading to an inhibition of ERa expression in terms of
mRNA and protein content. These events appear specifically p53 dependent, since
they are drastically abrogated with p53-targeting siRNA. Coimmunoprecipitation
assay showed specific interaction between p53, the Sin3A corepressor, and histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), which was phosphorylated. The enhancement of the
tripartite complex p53/Sin3A/HDAC1, together with NF-Y on Res treatment, was
confirmed by chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses, with a concomitant release
of Sp1 and RNA polymerase II, thereby inhibiting the cell transcriptional
machinery. The persistence of such effects in MCF-7 tamoxifen-resistant cells at 
a higher extent than parental MCF-7 cells addresses how Res may be considered a
useful pharmacological tool to be exploited in the adjuvant settings for
treatment of breast cancer developing hormonal resistance.

PMCID: PMC3177579
PMID: 21737614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Hepatology. 2011 Oct;54(4):1199-207. doi: 10.1002/hep.24529. Epub 2011 Aug 19.

Novel feedback inhibition of surface antigen synthesis by mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR) signal and its implication for hepatitis B virus tumorigenesis
and therapy.

Teng CF(1), Wu HC, Tsai HW, Shiah HS, Huang W, Su IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, National Cheng Kung University College of
Medicine and Hospital, Tainan, Taiwan.

Ground glass hepatocytes (GGHs) harboring hepatitis B virus (HBV) pre-S mutants
have been recognized as precursor lesions of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
Previously, we observed the activation of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) in
GGHs and HCCs, together with a decreased expression of HBV surface antigen
(HBsAg) in HCC tissues. It is, therefore, hypothesized that the activation of
mTOR during HBV tumorigenesis may potentially down-regulate HBsAg expression. In 
this study, we verified an inverse relationship between the expression of HBsAg
and phosphorylated mTOR (p-mTOR) in 13 of 20 paired nontumorous liver and HCC
tissues. In vitro, wild-type or mutant pre-S proteins could activate mTOR in the 
HuH-7 cell line. Interestingly, the up-regulated mTOR, in turn, suppressed HBsAg 
synthesis at the transcriptional level via the transcription factor, Yin Yang 1
(YY1), which bound to nucleotide 2812-2816 of the pre-S1 promoter. This
inhibitory effect by the mTOR signal could be abolished by the knockdown of
histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1). Furthermore, YY1 was physically associated with
HDAC1 in a manner dependent on mTOR activation. Collectively, pre-S
protein-induced mTOR activation may recruit the YY1-HDAC1 complex to feedback
suppress transcription from the pre-S1 promoter.CONCLUSION: The activation of
mTOR signal in GGHs may feedback suppress HBsAg synthesis during HBV
tumorigenesis and explain the observed decrease or absence of HBsAg in HCC
tissues. Therapy using mTOR inhibitors for HCCs may potentially activate HBV
replication in patients with chronic HBV infection.

Copyright © 2011 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 21735472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Oncol Rep. 2011 Oct;26(4):777-82. doi: 10.3892/or.2011.1361. Epub 2011 Jun 27.

Histone deacetylase 1 expression in gastric cancer.

Sudo T(1), Mimori K, Nishida N, Kogo R, Iwaya T, Tanaka F, Shibata K, Fujita H,
Shirouzu K, Mori M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, 
Beppu, Japan.

The aim of this study was to identify and evaluate novel prognostic markers for
gastric cancer. Differential mRNA displays comparing paired tumor/normal stomach 
samples were assessed. Several differentially expressed cDNA fragments of
candidate genes were identified, and one of these was further studied using
quantitative reverse transcription-PCR in 140 human gastric carcinomas. To
evaluate protein expression, immunohistochemical staining was performed in
selected cases. One of the genes abundantly expressed in tumor tissue on the
differential mRNA displays was identified as histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC). HDAC
was overexpressed in the tumor tissue in 77% of the cases as determined by
quantitative reverse transcription-PCR. Immunohistochemical staining revealed
analogous results, showing strong expression in cancer cells. Patients were then 
classified into high (n=78) and low (n=62) expression groups according to the
mean value of HDAC expression. High frequencies of lymph vessel and vascular
vessel permeations, and advanced stage of the disease were recognized in the high
expression group compared to the low expression group (p<0.05). Prognosis was
significantly worse for the high expression group than for the low expression
group (p<0.05), and multi-variate analysis demonstrated that HDAC expression was 
an independent prognostic factor. Although not significantly different, lymph
node metastasis was recognized more frequently in the high expression group
(p=0.07). In conclusion, the findings show that HDAC expression is associated
with aggressive behavior of primary gastric cancer, and imply that determination 
of the HDAC expression status is useful for predicting prognosis in patients with
gastric cancer.

PMID: 21725604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Oncogene. 2012 Feb 2;31(5):537-51. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.267. Epub 2011 Jul 4.

Endogenous modulators and pharmacological inhibitors of histone deacetylases in
cancer therapy.

Spiegel S(1), Milstien S, Grant S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Virginia Commonwealth
University School of Medicine Richmond, Richmond, VA 23298, USA. sspiegel@vcu.edu

The class-I histone deacetylases (HDACs) HDAC1 and HDAC2 belong to a family of 11
zinc-dependent human HDACs and are overexpressed in many cancers. Inhibitors of
these HDACs now in clinical trials show activity against several types of
cancers. This review is focused on recent advances in both clinical and
preclinical efforts to understand the basis for the actions of HDACis, with
emphasis on implications for rational combinations with conventional or other
targeted agents. We will address new perspectives on the molecular mechanisms by 
which HDACs act and how these actions relate to cancer. We will also review new
evidence showing that HDACs are direct intracellular targets of the potent
sphingolipid mediator S1P, the first identified endogenous nuclear regulator of
these enzymes, linking sphingolipid metabolism in the nucleus to remodeling of
chromatin and epigenetic regulation of gene expression. Understanding how
endogenous molecules regulate HDAC activity in vivo may facilitate the search for
safer and more effective anticancer drugs capable of interfering with HDAC
functions in a highly specific manner.

PMCID: PMC3356932
PMID: 21725353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. BMC Biochem. 2011 Jun 30;12:33. doi: 10.1186/1471-2091-12-33.

All Dact (Dapper/Frodo) scaffold proteins dimerize and exhibit conserved
interactions with Vangl, Dvl, and serine/threonine kinases.

Kivimäe S(1), Yang XY, Cheyette BN.

Author information: 
(1)The Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Department of
Psychiatry, University of California San Francisco, 1550 4th St, San Francisco CA
94158-2324, USA. bc@ucsf.edu

BACKGROUND: The Dact family of scaffold proteins was discovered by virtue of
binding to Dvl proteins central to Wnt and Planar Cell Polarity (PCP) signaling. 
Subsequently Dact proteins have been linked to a growing list of potential
partners implicated in ß-catenin-dependent and ß-catenin-independent forms of Wnt
and other signaling. To clarify conserved and non-conserved roles for this
protein family, we systematically compared molecular interactions of all three
murine Dact paralogs by co-immunoprecipitation of proteins recombinantly
expressed in cultured human embryonic kidney cells.
RESULTS: Every Dact paralog readily formed complexes with the Vangl, Dvl, and
CK1d/e proteins of species ranging from fruit flies to humans, as well as with
PKA and PKC. Dact proteins also formed complexes with themselves and with each
other; their conserved N-terminal leucine-zipper domains, which have no known
binding partners, were necessary and sufficient for this interaction, suggesting 
that it reflects leucine-zipper-mediated homo- and hetero-dimerization. We also
found weaker, though conserved, interactions of all three Dact paralogs with the 
catenin superfamily member p120ctn. Complex formation with other previously
proposed partners including most other catenins, GSK3, LEF/TCF, HDAC1, and TGFß
receptors was paralog-specific, comparatively weak, and/or more sensitive to
empirical conditions.
CONCLUSIONS: Combined with published functional evidence from targeted knock-out 
mice, these data support a conserved role for Dact proteins in kinase-regulated
biochemistry involving Vangl and Dvl. This strongly suggests that a principal
role for all Dact family members is in the PCP pathway or a molecularly related
signaling cascade in vertebrates.

PMCID: PMC3141656
PMID: 21718540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Eur J Dermatol. 2011 Jul-Aug;21(4):552-7. doi: 10.1684/ejd.2011.1383.

Abnormal histone modifications in PBMCs from patients with psoriasis vulgaris.

Zhang P(1), Su Y, Zhao M, Huang W, Lu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Hunan Key Laboratory of Medical Epigenomics, Second
Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, China.

Excessive keratinocyte proliferation is thought to be responsible for the
formation and development of psoriasis vulgaris. Evidence indicates that
epigenetic modifications are associated with aberrant gene expression, however,
nothing is known about the status of histone modifications in psoriasis vulgaris.
We investigated alterations in histone modifications in patients with psoriasis
vulgaris. Global histone H3/H4 acetylation and H3K4/H3K27 methylation in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells from 30 psoriatic patients and 20 healthy
control subjects were quanti<U+FB01>ed by the EpiQuik(TM) global histone H3/H4
acetylation and H3K4/H3K27 methylation assay kit. The mRNA levels of 12 members
of 3 classes of chromatin modifier genes were measured by real-time quantitative 
polymerase chain reaction. Compared with normal controls, global histone H4
hypoacetylation was observed in PBMCs from psoriasis vulgaris patients. There was
a negative correlation between the degree of histone H4 acetylation and disease
activity in patients as measured by PASI. Global levels of H3 acetylation,
H3K4/H3K27 methylation did not significantly differ between psoriatic patients
and controls. mRNA levels of P300, CBP and SIRT1 were significantly reduced in
PBMCs from patients with psoriasis vulgaris compared with healthy controls, while
mRNA expression levels of HDAC1, SUV39H1 and EZH2 was significantly increased in 
psoriatic patients.We conclude that histone modifications are aberrant in the
PBMCs of psoriasis vulgaris patients.

PMID: 21715244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Virchows Arch. 2011 Aug;459(2):129-39. doi: 10.1007/s00428-011-1103-0. Epub 2011 
Jun 29.

Clinical significance of histone deacetylases 1, 2, 3, and 7: HDAC2 is an
independent predictor of survival in HCC.

Quint K(1), Agaimy A, Di Fazio P, Montalbano R, Steindorf C, Jung R, Hellerbrand 
C, Hartmann A, Sitter H, Neureiter D, Ocker M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Surgical Research, Philipps University Marburg,
Baldingerstrasse, Marburg, Germany.

Histone deacetylases (HDAC) are responsible for the transcriptional control of
genes through chromatin remodeling and control tumor suppressor genes. In several
tumors, their expression has been linked to clinicopathological factors and
patient survival. This study investigates HDACs 1, 2, 3, and 7 expressions in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and their correlation with clinical data and
patient survival. Tissue microarrays of 170 surgically resected primary HCCs and 
adjacent uninvolved tissue were evaluated immunohistochemically for the
expression of HDACs 1, 2, 3, 7, and Ki-67 and were analyzed with respect to
clinicopathological data and patient survival. HDACs 1, 2, 3, and Ki-67 were
expressed significantly higher in cancer cells compared to normal tissue (HDAC1: 
p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.034, HDACs 2 and 3 and Ki-67: p < 0.001), while HDAC7 expression did not
differ between HCC and non-cancerous liver tissue. In tumor tissue HDACs 1-3
expression levels showed high concordance with each other, Ki-67 and tumor grade 
(p < 0.001). High HDAC2 expression was associated with poor survival in low-grade
and early-stage tumors (p < 0.05). The expression of the HDACs 1, 2, and 3 (but
not HDAC7) isoenzymes correlates with clinicopathological factors, and HDAC2
expression has an impact on patient survival.

PMID: 21713366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Eur J Med Chem. 2011 Sep;46(9):4042-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2011.06.002. Epub
2011 Jun 12.

Synthesis and evaluation of aliphatic-chain hydroxamates capped with osthole
derivatives as histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Huang WJ(1), Chen CC, Chao SW, Yu CC, Yang CY, Guh JH, Lin YC, Kuo CI, Yang P,
Chang CI.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Pharmacognosy, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 110,
Taiwan.

Our previous studies have demonstrated that osthole, a Chinese herbal compound,
could be incorporated into the hydroxycinnamide scaffold of LBH-589, a potent
HDAC inhibitor, as an effective hydrophobic cap; the resulting compounds showed
significant potency against several HDAC isoforms. Here, we presented a series of
osthole derivatives fused with the aliphatic-hydroxamate core of suberoylanilide 
hydroxamic acid (SAHA), a clinically-approved HDAC inhibitor. Several compounds
showed potent activity against nuclear HDACs. Further assays against individual
HDAC isoforms revealed that some compounds showed not only SAHA-like activity
towards HDAC1, -4 and -6, they inhibited HDAC8 by log difference than SAHA and
thus exhibited a broader HDAC inhibition spectrum. Among them, compound 6g showed
potent antiproliferative effect on several human cancer cell lines.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21712146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Oncogene. 2012 Feb 2;31(5):583-94. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.254. Epub 2011 Jun 20.

EZH2 supports nasopharyngeal carcinoma cell aggressiveness by forming a
co-repressor complex with HDAC1/HDAC2 and Snail to inhibit E-cadherin.

Tong ZT(1), Cai MY, Wang XG, Kong LL, Mai SJ, Liu YH, Zhang HB, Liao YJ, Zheng F,
Zhu W, Liu TH, Bian XW, Guan XY, Lin MC, Zeng MS, Zeng YX, Kung HF, Xie D.

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Cancer Center, Sun
Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China.

The enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is upregulated and has an oncogenic role
in several types of human cancer. However, the abnormalities of EZH2 and its
underlying mechanisms in the pathogenesis of nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC)
remain unknown. In this study, we found that high expression of EZH2 in NPC was
associated closely with an aggressive and/or poor prognostic phenotype (P<0.05). 
In NPC cell lines, knockdown of EZH2 by short hairpin RNA was sufficient to
inhibit cell invasiveness/metastasis both in vitro and in vivo, whereas ectopic
overexpression of EZH2 supported NPC cell invasive capacity with a decreased
expression of E-cadherin. In addition, ablation of endogenous Snail in NPC cells 
virtually totally prevented the repressive activity of EZH2 to E-cadherin,
indicating that Snail might be a predominant mediator of EZH2 to suppress
E-cadherin. Furthermore, co-immunoprecipitation (IP), chromatin IP and luciferase
reporter assays demonstrated that in NPC cells, (1) EZH2 interacted with
HDAC1/HDAC2 and Snail to form a repressive complex; (2) these components interact
in a linear fashion, not in a triangular fashion, that is, HDAC1 or HDAC2 bridge 
the interaction between EZH2 and Snail; and (3) the EZH2/HDAC1/2/Snail complex
could closely bind to the E-cadherin promoter by Snail, but not YY1, to repress
E-cadherin. The data provided in this report suggest a critical role of EZH2 in
the control of cell invasion and/or metastasis by forming a co-repressor complex 
with HDAC1/HDAC2/Snail to repress E-cadherin, an activity that might be
responsible, at least in part, for the development and/or progression of human
NPCs.

PMID: 21685935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Science. 2011 Jun 17;332(6036):1436-9. doi: 10.1126/science.1196766.

A molecular mechanism for circadian clock negative feedback.

Duong HA(1), Robles MS, Knutti D, Weitz CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Circadian rhythms in mammals are generated by a feedback loop in which the three 
PERIOD (PER) proteins, acting in a large complex, inhibit the transcriptional
activity of the CLOCK-BMAL1 dimer, which represses their own expression. Although
fundamental, the mechanism of negative feedback in the mammalian clock, or any
eukaryotic clock, is unknown. We analyzed protein constituents of PER complexes
purified from mouse tissues and identified PSF (polypyrimidine tract-binding
protein-associated splicing factor). Our analysis indicates that PSF within the
PER complex recruits SIN3A, a scaffold for assembly of transcriptional inhibitory
complexes and that the PER complex thereby rhythmically delivers histone
deacetylases to the Per1 promoter, which repress Per1 transcription. These
findings provide a function for the PER complex and a molecular mechanism for
circadian clock negative feedback.

PMCID: PMC3859310
PMID: 21680841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Indian J Physiol Pharmacol. 2010 Oct-Dec;54(4):299-308.

Quantitative analysis of six gene products as candidate markers of early
placental villi development in the human.

Khan MA(1), Mittal S, Kumar S, Sengupta J, Ghosh D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi--110 029.

Early placental development is critical for successful pregnancy. Recently, we
have reported that -70 genes were differentially expressed in human placental
villi between 6- and 8- weeks of gestation in cDNA-based expression arrays for
-400 PCR products, of which six specific gene products (COL4A4, CXCR4, ERBB2,
HDAC1, HPRT1, and TNFRSF1A) appeared intriguing. In the present study we have
examined expressions of these six candidate genes in placental villi obtained
from 6-weeks, 7-weeks and 8-weeks (n = 6 for each group) human placental samples 
using quantitative real time RTPCR. We observed that there was considerable
concordance (>95% confidence) in pair-wise analysis of transcript profiles
between the two methods, however, absolute quantitative values as measured by
quantitative RTPCR differed from those obtained from cDNA-based array analysis
for 2 gene products (CXCR4 and ERBB2) out of 6 genes. No significant change was
observed in the steady state expression of COL4A4 and HPRT1 during the time
period examined. However, there was significant decrease in CXCR4 for 7-weeks (P 
< 0.01) and 8-weeks (P < 0.05) samples, and significant (P < 0.05) increase was
seen for ERBB2 in 7-weeks and 8-weeks as compared to 6-weeks samples with no
change between 7-weeks and 8-weeks samples. Moreover, significant (P < 0.05)
increase for HDAC1 and decrease for TNFRSF1A was observed in 8-weeks samples as
compared to 6-weeks samples with no change observed between 6-weeks and 7-weeks
samples. We infer that it is essential that cDNA array-based data are verified in
terms of quantitative estimates preferably by quantitative PCR before their use
for any exploratory purpose. Taking together our previous array based data and
the present study we conclude that a categorical balance exists between the
expression of ERBB2 and HDAC1 genes affecting cell proliferation and
differentiation in one hand, and CXCR4 and TNFRSF1A affecting chemotaxis,
inflammatory response and apoptosis on the other hand. The expression of these
genes appear important for the early development of human placental villi.

PMID: 21675027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e20280. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020280. Epub 2011 Jun 2.

Integrative DNA methylation and gene expression analyses identify DNA packaging
and epigenetic regulatory genes associated with low motility sperm.

Pacheco SE(1), Houseman EA, Christensen BC, Marsit CJ, Kelsey KT, Sigman M,
Boekelheide K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Brown University, Providence,
Rhode Island, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: In previous studies using candidate gene approaches, low sperm count 
(oligospermia) has been associated with altered sperm mRNA content and DNA
methylation in both imprinted and non-imprinted genes. We performed a genome-wide
analysis of sperm DNA methylation and mRNA content to test for associations with 
sperm function.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Sperm DNA and mRNA were isolated from 21 men with a range of
semen parameters presenting to a tertiary male reproductive health clinic. DNA
methylation was measured with the Illumina Infinium array at 27,578 CpG loci.
Unsupervised clustering of methylation data differentiated the 21 sperm samples
by their motility values. Recursively partitioned mixture modeling (RPMM) of
methylation data resulted in four distinct methylation profiles that were
significantly associated with sperm motility (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.01). Linear models of
microarray analysis (LIMMA) was performed based on motility and identified 9,189 
CpG loci with significantly altered methylation (Q<0.05) in the low motility
samples. In addition, the majority of these disrupted CpG loci (80%) were
hypomethylated. Of the aberrantly methylated CpGs, 194 were associated with
imprinted genes and were almost equally distributed into hypermethylated
(predominantly paternally expressed) and hypomethylated (predominantly maternally
expressed) groups. Sperm mRNA was measured with the Human Gene 1.0 ST Affymetrix 
GeneChip Array. LIMMA analysis identified 20 candidate transcripts as
differentially present in low motility sperm, including HDAC1 (NCBI 3065), SIRT3 
(NCBI 23410), and DNMT3A (NCBI 1788). There was a trend among altered expression 
of these epigenetic regulatory genes and RPMM DNA methylation class.
CONCLUSIONS: Using integrative genome-wide approaches we identified CpG
methylation profiles and mRNA alterations associated with low sperm motility.

PMCID: PMC3107223
PMID: 21674046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Cell Host Microbe. 2011 Jun 16;9(6):484-95. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2011.05.004.

The TRIM family protein KAP1 inhibits HIV-1 integration.

Allouch A(1), Di Primio C, Alpi E, Lusic M, Arosio D, Giacca M, Cereseto A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Laboratory, Scuola Normale Superiore, Piazza dei Cavalieri
7, Pisa 56126, Italy.

Comment in
    Cell Host Microbe. 2011 Jun 16;9(6):447-8.

The integration of viral cDNA into the host genome is a critical step in the life
cycle of HIV-1. This step is catalyzed by integrase (IN), a viral enzyme that is 
positively regulated by acetylation via the cellular histone acetyl transferase
(HAT) p300. To investigate the relevance of IN acetylation, we searched for
cellular proteins that selectively bind acetylated IN and identified KAP1, a
protein belonging to the TRIM family of antiviral proteins. KAP1 binds acetylated
IN and induces its deacetylation through the formation of a protein complex which
includes the deacetylase HDAC1. Modulation of intracellular KAP1 levels in
different cell types including T cells, the primary HIV-1 target, revealed that
KAP1 curtails viral infectivity by selectively affecting HIV-1 integration. This 
study identifies KAP1 as a cellular factor restricting HIV-1 infection and
underscores the relevance of IN acetylation as a crucial step in the viral
infectious cycle.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21669397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Cell Host Microbe. 2011 Jun 16;9(6):447-8. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2011.05.009.

KAPs off for HIV-1 integration.

Figueiredo A(1), Hope TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL
60611, USA.

Comment on
    Cell Host Microbe. 2011 Jun 16;9(6):484-95.

Integration of reverse transcribed HIV-1 DNA into the host genome, catalyzed by
HIV-1 integrase, represents an obligate step in establishing productive viral
infection. Allouch et al. (2011) identify KAP1 (TRIM28) as an interaction partner
of acetylated integrase. KAP1, in complex with HDAC1, represses HIV-1 integration
through specific deacetylation of HIV-1 integrase.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21669392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. EMBO J. 2011 Jun 10;30(14):2894-907. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.184.

Modulation of Tcf3 repressor complex composition regulates cdx4 expression in
zebrafish.

Ro H(1), Dawid IB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Program in Genomics of Differentiation,
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

The caudal homeobox (cdx) gene family is critical for specification of caudal
body formation and erythropoiesis. In zebrafish, cdx4 expression is controlled by
the Wnt pathway, but the molecular mechanism of this regulation is not fully
understood. Here, we provide evidence that Tcf3 suppresses cdx4 expression
through direct binding to multiple sites in the cdx4 gene regulatory region. Tcf3
requires corepressor molecules such as Groucho (Gro)/TLE and HDAC1 for activity. 
Using zebrafish embryos and cultured mammalian cells, we show that the
transcription factor E4f1 derepresses cdx4 by dissociating corepressor proteins
from Tcf3 without inhibiting its binding to cis-regulatory sites in the DNA.
Further, the E3 ubiquitin ligase Lnx2b, acting as a scaffold protein irrespective
of its enzymatic activity, counteracts the effects of E4f1. We propose that the
modulation of Tcf3 repressor function by E4f1 assures precise and robust
regulation of cdx4 expression in the caudal domain of the embryo.

PMCID: PMC3160245
PMID: 21666599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Hepatogastroenterology. 2011 Mar-Apr;58(106):472-6.

Malignant potential of Barrett's esophagus: special reference to HDAC-1 and MTA-1
expression.

Miyatani T(1), Kurita N, Mikami C, Kashihara H, Higashijima J, Yoshikawa K,
Nishioka M, Sato H, Iwata T, Shimada M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Institute of Health Biosciences, The University of
Tokushima, Tokushima, Japan.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Barrett's esophagus is a major risk factor for esophageal
adenocarcinoma. It is important to decide when and how to treat the patients with
Barrett's esophagus (BE). It was reported that HDAC-1 (Histone Deacetylase-1) and
MTA-1 (Metastasis-Associated Protein-1) were associated with initiation and
progression of cancer. The aim of this study is to assess malignant potential of 
BE using the expression of HDAC-1 and MTA-1.
METHODOLOGY: Seven BE cases with pathological specialized columnar epithelium and
CK7/20 in an immunohistochemically positive state were selected from resected
specimens of 23 patients with gastro-esophageal junction cancer. The expression
of HDAC-1 and MTA-1 protein was evaluated using an immunohistochemical method.
RESULTS: All seven cases with Barrett's esophagus were diagnosed as low grade
dysplasia. Positive expression of HDAC-1 and MTA-1 was found in 0 out of 7 cases 
(0%) with normal esophageal epithelium, and 0 out of 7 cases (0%) with normal
gastric epithelium. On the other hand, positive expression of both HDAC-1 and
MTA-1 was found in 6 out of 7 (85.7%) cases with Barrett's epithelium and 7 out
of 7 (100%) cases with gastro-esophageal-junction-cancer, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Positive expression of HDAC-1 and MTA-1 was found even in low grade
dysplasia. Therefore, BE with HDAC-1 and MTA-1 expression is considered to be a
precancerous lesion re quiring curative treatment.

PMID: 21661415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Pathol Oncol Res. 2012 Apr;18(2):169-75. doi: 10.1007/s12253-011-9423-6. Epub
2011 Jun 8.

p53 Binds to estrogen receptor 1 promoter in human breast cancer cells.

Rasti M(1), Arabsolghar R, Khatooni Z, Mostafavi-Pour Z.

Author information: 
(1)Recombinant protein lab, Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine,
Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran. rasti31@yahoo.com

p53 is a tumor suppressor protein that regulates estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1)
expression. To investigate the mechanism of ESR1 gene regulation by p53,
chromatin immunoprecipitation was applied to assess the binding of p53, DNMT1,
HDAC1 and MeCP2 to both silenced ESR1 promoter in MDA-MB-468 cells and active
ESR1 promoter in MCF-7 breast cancer cells. The results of chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments showed that p53 protein binds to both
unmethylated CpG island of the ESR1 promoter in the ER-positive MCF-7 and the
hypermethylated ESR1 promoter in the ER-negative MDA-MB-468 cells. However,
repression complex including DNMT1, HDAC1 and MeCP2 is only associated with
silenced ESR1 in ER-negative MDA-MB-468 human breast cancer cells. In addition,
ectopically expressed wild type p53 failed to reactivate the ESR1 gene in these
cells. These results suggest that specific p53 mutations may contribute to loss
of estrogen receptor a expression in breast tumors and also support the
hypothesis that mutant p53 is likely to impact DNA methylation.

PMID: 21655924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Hepatology. 2011 Sep 2;54(3):989-98. doi: 10.1002/hep.24471. Epub 2011 Jul 27.

The reduction of SIRT1 in livers of old mice leads to impaired body homeostasis
and to inhibition of liver proliferation.

Jin J(1), Iakova P, Jiang Y, Medrano EE, Timchenko NA.

Author information: 
(1)Huffington Center on Aging and Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor 
College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Age declines liver functions, leading to the development of age-associated
diseases. A member of the sirtuins family, SIRT1, is involved in the control of
glucose homeostasis and fat metabolism. Because aging livers have alterations in 
glucose and fat metabolism, we examined a possible role of SIRT1 in these
alterations. We found that aged livers have a reduced expression of SIRT1 and
have lost proper control of the regulation of SIRT1 after partial hepatectomy
(PH). Down-regulation of SIRT1 in the liver of old mice is mediated by
CCAAT/Enhancer Binding Protein/histone deacetylase 1 (C/EBPß-HDAC1) complexes,
which bind to and repress the SIRT1 promoter. In the livers of young mice, SIRT1 
is activated after PH and supports high levels of glucose and triglycerides
during liver regeneration. In old mice, however, C/EBPß-HDAC1-mediated repression
of the SIRT1 promoter blocks activation of SIRT1, leading to low levels of
glucose and triglycerides during liver regeneration. Down-regulation of SIRT1 in 
the livers of young mice resulted in alterations similar to those observed in the
livers of old mice, whereas the normalization of SIRT1 in the livers of old mice 
corrects the levels of glucose and triglycerides after PH. The normalization of
SIRT1 in old mice also improves liver regeneration via the elimination of the
C/EBPa-Brm complex. These studies showed a critical role of the reduction of
SIRT1 in age-associated liver dysfunctions and provide a potential tool for the
correction of liver functions in old patients after surgical resections.

Copyright © 2011 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC3242815
PMID: 21638299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. EMBO Rep. 2011 Jul 1;12(7):735-42. doi: 10.1038/embor.2011.86.

RNA steady-state defects in myotonic dystrophy are linked to nuclear exclusion of
SHARP.

Dansithong W(1), Jog SP, Paul S, Mohammadzadeh R, Tring S, Kwok Y, Fry RC,
Marjoram P, Comai L, Reddy S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute for Genetic
Medicine, 2250 Alcazar Street, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, California 90033, USA.

We describe a new mechanism by which CTG tract expansion affects myotonic
dystrophy (DM1). Changes to the levels of a panel of RNAs involved in muscle
development and function that are downregulated in DM1 are due to aberrant
localization of the transcription factor SHARP (SMART/HDAC1-associated repressor 
protein). Mislocalization of SHARP in DM1 is consistent with increased
CRM1-mediated export of SHARP to the cytoplasm. A direct link between CTG repeat 
expression and SHARP mislocalization is demonstrated as expression of expanded
CTG repeats in normal cells recapitulates cytoplasmic SHARP localization. These
results demonstrate a role for the inactivation of SHARP transcription in DM1
biology.

PMCID: PMC3128970
PMID: 21637295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jul 22;286(29):25813-22. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.211292. Epub
2011 Jun 2.

Epigenetic regulation of phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-triphosphate-dependent Rac
exchanger 1 gene expression in prostate cancer cells.

Wong CY(1), Wuriyanghan H, Xie Y, Lin MF, Abel PW, Tu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Creighton University School of Medicine, Omaha,
Nebraska 68178, USA.

Comment in
    J Urol. 2012 Mar;187(3):1127-8.

Aberrant up-regulation of P-Rex1 expression plays important roles in cancer
progression and metastasis. The present study investigated the regulatory
mechanism underlying P-Rex1 gene expression in prostate cancer cells. We showed
that P-Rex1 expression was much higher in metastatic prostate cancer cells than
in prostate epithelial cells and non-metastatic prostate cancer cells. Histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors or silence of endogenous HDAC1 and HDAC2 markedly
elevated P-Rex1 transcription in non-metastatic prostate cancer cells, whereas
overexpression of recombinant HDAC1 in metastatic prostate cancer cells
suppressed P-Rex1 expression. HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA) also
significantly increased P-Rex1 promoter activity and caused acetylated histones
to accumulate and associate with the P-Rex1 promoter. One Sp1 site, essential for
basal promoter activity, was identified as critical for the TSA effect. TSA
treatment did not alter the DNA-binding activity of Sp1 toward the P-Rex1
promoter; however, it facilitated the dissociation of the repressive HDAC1 and
HDAC2 from the Sp1 binding region. Interestingly, HDAC1 association with Sp1 and 
with the P-Rex1 promoter were much weaker in metastatic prostate cancer PC-3
cells than in non-metastatic prostate cancer cells, and HDAC inhibitors only had 
very modest stimulatory effects on P-Rex1 promoter activity and P-Rex1 expression
in PC-3 cells. Altogether, our studies demonstrate that HDACs could regulate
P-Rex1 gene transcription by interaction with Sp1 and by region-specific changes 
in histone acetylation within the P-Rex1 promoter. Disassociation of HDACs from
Sp1 on the P-Rex1 promoter may contribute to aberrant up-regulation of P-Rex1 in 
cancer.

PMCID: PMC3138273
PMID: 21636851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. J Med Chem. 2011 Jul 14;54(13):4694-720. doi: 10.1021/jm2003552. Epub 2011 Jun
16.

Discovery of
(2E)-3-{2-butyl-1-[2-(diethylamino)ethyl]-1H-benzimidazol-5-yl}-N-hydroxyacrylami
de (SB939), an orally active histone deacetylase inhibitor with a superior
preclinical profile.

Wang H(1), Yu N, Chen D, Lee KC, Lye PL, Chang JW, Deng W, Ng MC, Lu T, Khoo ML, 
Poulsen A, Sangthongpitag K, Wu X, Hu C, Goh KC, Wang X, Fang L, Goh KL, Khng HH,
Goh SK, Yeo P, Liu X, Bonday Z, Wood JM, Dymock BW, Kantharaj E, Sun ET.

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry Discovery, S*BIO Pte Ltd., The Capricorn, Singapore Science Park II,
Singapore, Singapore. haishan_wang@sbio.com

A series of 3-(1,2-disubstituted-1H-benzimidazol-5-yl)-N-hydroxyacrylamides (1)
were designed and synthesized as HDAC inhibitors. Extensive SARs have been
established for in vitro potency (HDAC1 enzyme and COLO 205 cellular IC(50)),
liver microsomal stability (t(1/2)), cytochrome P450 inhibitory (3A4 IC(50)), and
clogP, among others. These parameters were fine-tuned by carefully adjusting the 
substituents at positions 1 and 2 of the benzimidazole ring. After comprehensive 
in vitro and in vivo profiling of the selected compounds, SB939 (3) was
identified as a preclinical development candidate. 3 is a potent pan-HDAC
inhibitor with excellent druglike properties, is highly efficacious in in vivo
tumor models (HCT-116, PC-3, A2780, MV4-11, Ramos), and has high and
dose-proportional oral exposures and very good ADME, safety, and pharmaceutical
properties. When orally dosed to tumor-bearing mice, 3 is enriched in tumor
tissue which may contribute to its potent antitumor activity and prolonged
duration of action. 3 is currently being tested in phase I and phase II clinical 
trials.

PMID: 21634430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. J Cell Sci. 2011 Jun 15;124(Pt 12):2041-8. doi: 10.1242/jcs.078261.

The histone deacetylase Rpd3 regulates the heterochromatin structure of
Drosophila telomeres.

Burgio G(1), Cipressa F, Ingrassia AM, Cenci G, Corona DF.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Telethon Dulbecco, c/o STEMBIO, Viale delle Scienze, Edificio 16,
90128 Palermo, Italy.

Telomeres are specialized structures at the end of eukaryotic chromosomes that
are required to preserve genome integrity, chromosome stability and nuclear
architecture. Telomere maintenance and function are established epigenetically in
several eukaryotes. However, the exact chromatin enzymatic modifications
regulating telomere homeostasis are poorly understood. In Drosophila
melanogaster, telomere length and stability are maintained through the
retrotransposition of specialized telomeric sequences and by the specific loading
of protecting capping proteins, respectively. Here, we show that the loss of the 
essential and evolutionarily conserved histone deacetylase Rpd3, the homolog of
mammalian HDAC1, causes aberrant telomeric fusions on polytene chromosome ends.
Remarkably, these telomere fusion defects are associated with a marked decrease
of histone H4 acetylation, as well as an accumulation of heterochromatic
epigenetic marks at telomeres, including histone H3K9 trimethylation and the
heterochromatic protein HP2. Our work suggests that Drosophila telomere structure
is epigenetically regulated by the histone deacetylase Rpd3.

PMID: 21625008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Mol Cancer Res. 2011 Jun;9(6):733-45. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-10-0505. Epub
2011 May 26.

HDAC1 inhibition by maspin abrogates epigenetic silencing of glutathione
S-transferase pi in prostate carcinoma cells.

Li X(1), Kaplun A, Lonardo F, Heath E, Sarkar FH, Irish J, Sakr W, Sheng S.

Author information: 
(1)Wayne State University School of Medicine, 540 East Canfield Avenue, Detroit, 
Michigan 48201, USA.

Both maspin and glutathione S-transferase pi (GSTp) are implicated as tumor
suppressors and downregulated in human prostate cancer. It is well established
that GSTp downregulation is through DNA methylation-based silencing. We report
here that maspin expression in prostate cancer cell line DU145 reversed GSTp DNA 
methylation, as measured by methylation- specific PCR, MethyLight assay, and
bisulfite sequencing. The effect of maspin on GSTp expression was similar to that
of the combination of a synthetic histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor and DNA
methylation inhibitor 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine. Maspin expression also led to an
increased level of acetylated histone 3, decreased level of methyl transferase,
and methyl-CpG-binding domain proteins at the site of demethylated GSTp promoter 
DNA. Earlier, we have shown that maspin inhibits HDAC1. In PC3 cells, where both 
maspin and GSTp are expressed at a reduced level, maspin knockdown led to a
significant reduction in GSTp expression, whereas dual knockdown of maspin and
HDAC1 barely increased the level of GSTp expression. Thus, HDAC1 may play an
essential role in cellular response to maspin-mediated GSTp desilencing. Maspin
has been shown to increase tumor cell sensitivity to drug-induced apoptosis.
Interestingly, GSTp reexpression in the absence of maspin expression perturbation
blocked the phosphorylation of histone 2A.X, the induction of hypoxia-induced
factor 1a (HIF-1a), and cell death of LNCaP cells under oxidative stress. Because
DNA hypermethylation-based silencing may couple with and depend on histone
deacetylation, our study suggests that endogenous HDAC inhibition by maspin may
prevent pathologic gene silencing in prostate tumor progression.

PMCID: PMC3612175
PMID: 21622623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Eur J Med Chem. 2011 Aug;46(8):3190-200. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2011.04.027. Epub 
2011 Apr 29.

Structure-based optimization of click-based histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Hou J(1), Feng C, Li Z, Fang Q, Wang H, Gu G, Shi Y, Liu P, Xu F, Yin Z, Shen J, 
Wang P.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Nankai University, 94 weijin Road, Nankai District,
Tianjin 300071, China.

Previously, we reported a click-chemistry based approach to the synthesis of a
novel class of histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors [1]. The lead compound
NSC746457 was found to be as potent as SAHA (Vorinostat). Further optimization of
NSC746457 by using the HDAC2-TSA crystal structure is described herein. Docking
of NSC746457 into HDAC2 binding domain suggested that the hydrophobic residue
Phe210 flanking the cap-group binding-motif could be exploited for structural
optimization. Substitution on the methylene group of cinnamic cap region led to
identification of more potent HDAC inhibitors: isopropyl derivative 5 and
tert-butyl derivative 6, with an IC(50) value of 22 nM and 18 nM, respectively.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21621883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. J Recept Signal Transduct Res. 2011 Jun;31(3):256-63. doi:
10.3109/10799893.2011.578140.

Cyclic AMP-induced p53 destabilization is independent of EPAC in pre-B acute
lymphoblastic leukemia cells in vitro.

Safa M(1), Kazemi A, Zaker F, Razmkhah F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, School of Allied Medical Sciences, Tehran University
of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. majid.safa@yahoo.com

CONTEXT: Activation of the tumor suppressor protein p53 facilitates the cellular 
response to genotoxic stress. Thus, releasing the wild-type p53 from indirect
suppression would be crucial to successful killing of cancer cells by
DNA-damaging therapeutic agents.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to investigate the inhibitory role of cyclic
adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) levels on p53 protein in acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL) cells. More importantly, we were interested to show through which 
receptor cAMP acts to promote p53 degradation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In cell cultures, we investigated the effects of
forskolin/3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine (IBMX) on stimulated p53 of ALL cell lines.
Western blotting analysis was performed to detect the expression of p53,
phospho-p53, acetylated-p53, phospho-cAMP response element-binding protein
(CREB), and Mdm2 proteins. Flow cytometry was applied to analyze apoptosis. The
gene expression of p53 and its target genes was examined by real-time polymerase 
chain reaction.
RESULTS: We show that elevation of cAMP levels in ALL cells exposed to DNA damage
attenuates p53 accumulation. Inhibition of proteosome function with MG-132
reversed the inhibitory effect of cAMP on p53. However, targeting the p53-Mdm2
interaction did not rescue accumulated p53 from the destabilizing signal of cAMP.
The specific agonist of the cAMP receptor exchange protein activated by cAMP had 
no effect on p53 expression in doxorubicin-treated NALM-6 cells, whereas PKA
activators decreased p53 accumulation.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: Our studies demonstrate that cAMP-PKA pathway
regulates the sensitivity toward DNA-damaging agents via inhibition of a
p53-dependent pathway in B-cell precursor ALL (BCP-ALL) cells.

PMID: 21619452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Oncol Rep. 2011 Aug;26(2):343-8. doi: 10.3892/or.2011.1312. Epub 2011 May 20.

Expression of histone deacetylase 1 and metastasis-associated protein 1 as
prognostic factors in colon cancer.

Higashijima J(1), Kurita N, Miyatani T, Yoshikawa K, Morimoto S, Nishioka M,
Iwata T, Shimada M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Institute of Health Biosciences, The University of
Tokushima, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan.

Histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and metastasis-associated protein 1 (MTA1) form the
nucleosome remodeling and histone deacetylation (NuRD) complex and may possibly
play a central role in cancer development. However, limited data has been
reported regarding the expression of both HDAC1 and MTA1. The aim of the present 
study was to clarify the clinical role of HDAC1 and MTA1 expression in colon
cancer. Seventy-four patients with colon cancer, who underwent colectomy at our
institution, were enrolled in this study. Expression of HDAC1 and MTA1 was
examined immunohistochemically. The patients were divided into four groups:
HDAC1-positive group (n=58), HDAC1-negative group (n=16), MTA1-positive group
(n=38) and MTA1-negative group (n=36). Clinicopathological factors and survival
rates were compared between the groups. Regarding the clinicopathological
factors, the depth of tumor invasion and stage correlated significantly with
HDAC1 expression (p<0.05). Age, depth of tumor invasion and vascular invasion
tended to correlate with MTA1 expression. The 5-year survival rate in the
HDAC1-positive group (55.1%) was significantly worse compared to the
HDAC1-negative group (86.5%) (p<0.05), and the 5-year survival rate of the
MTA1-positive group (50.5%) was significantly worse than that of the
MTA1-negative group (73.1%) (p=0.05). In patients with stages II-IV and
curability A, B, the survival rate in those with HDAC1-positive expression was
significantly worse than those with HDAC1-negative expression (p<0.05), and the
survival rate of the MTA1-positive group tended to be worse than that of the
MTA1-negative group (p=0.07). Overall survival in both the HDAC1 and
MTA1-positive groups was significantly worse than overall survival of the other
groups (p<0.05). Disease-free survival in both the HDAC1- and MTA1-positive
groups, among patients with stages II-IV and curability A, B, was also
significantly worse than that of the other groups (p<0.05). HDAC1 and MTA1
expression levels were significantly related to poorer prognosis. Therefore,
HDAC1 and MTA1 expression levels are potential prognostic indicators for colon
cancer.

PMID: 21617866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. J Bone Miner Res. 2011 Sep;26(9):2161-73. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.426.

Histone deacetylase inhibitor MS-275 stimulates bone formation in part by
enhancing Dhx36-mediated TNAP transcription.

Kim HN(1), Lee JH, Bae SC, Ryoo HM, Kim HH, Ha H, Lee ZH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Dental Research Institute,
School of Dentistry, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) deacetylate both histones and nonhistone proteins
and play a key role in the regulation of physiologic and aberrant gene
expression. Inhibition of HDACs has emerged as a promising therapeutic target for
cancer and neurologic diseases. In this study we investigated the osteogenic
effect and mechanism of action of MS-275, a class I HDAC inhibitor with
preference for HDAC1. Both local and systemic administration of MS-275 stimulated
bone regeneration in animal models. MS-275 stimulated mRNA expression and
activity of the early osteogenic marker tissue-nonspecific alkaline phosphatase
(TNAP) in bone tissue and osteogenic cells. By using a series of TNAP promoter
deletion constructs and a DNA affinity precipitation assay, we identified
DExH-box helicase Dhx36 as a factor that binds to the MS-275 response element in 
the TNAP promoter. We also found that Dhx36 binding to the MS-275 response
element is crucial for MS-275 induction of TNAP transcription. Dhx36 physically
interacted with a subset of HDACs (HDAC1 and -4) whose protein levels were
downregulated by MS-275, and forced expression of these HDACs blunted the
stimulatory effects of MS-275 by a deacetylase activity-independent mechanism(s).
Taken together, the results of our study show that MS-275 induces TNAP
transcription by decreasing the interaction of HDAC1/4 with Dhx36, which can at
least in part contribute to the bone anabolic effects of MS-275.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMID: 21590736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2011 Aug;10(8):M111.010462. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M111.010462.
Epub 2011 May 12.

Genome-wide characterization of miR-34a induced changes in protein and mRNA
expression by a combined pulsed SILAC and microarray analysis.

Kaller M(1), Liffers ST, Oeljeklaus S, Kuhlmann K, Röh S, Hoffmann R, Warscheid
B, Hermeking H.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental and Molecular Pathology, Institute of Pathology,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Thalkirchner Strasse 36, D-80337 Munich,
Germany.

The gene encoding the miR-34a microRNA is a transcriptional target of the p53
tumor suppressor protein and subject to epigenetic inactivation in colorectal
cancer and numerous other tumor types. Here, we combined pulsed SILAC (pSILAC)
and microarray analyses to identify miR-34a-induced changes in protein and mRNA
expression. pSILAC allowed to quantify the de novo protein synthesis of 1206
proteins after activation of a conditional miR-34a allele in a colorectal cancer 
cell line. ~19% of the detected proteins were differentially regulated, with 113 
proteins being down- and 115 up-regulated. The proteins with a miR-34a
seed-matching-sequence in the 3'-untranslated region (UTR) of the corresponding
mRNA showed a clear bias toward translational repression. Proteins involved in
DNA replication, e.g. the MCM proteins, and cell proliferation, were
over-represented among indirectly down-regulated proteins lacking a miR-34a
seed-match. The decrease in de novo protein synthesis of direct miR-34a targets
correlated with reduced levels of the corresponding mRNA in most cases,
indicating an interdependence of both types of regulation. In addition, 43 mRNAs 
encoding proteins not detected by pSILAC were down-regulated after miR-34a
expression and contained miR-34a seed-matches. The direct regulation of selected 
miR-34a target-mRNAs was confirmed using reporter assays. Via down-regulation of 
the proteins encoded by these mRNAs miR-34a presumably inhibits glycolysis
(LDHA), WNT-signaling (LEF1), invasion/migration (AXL) and lipid metabolism
(ACSL1, ACSL4). Furthermore, miR-34a may activate p53 by inhibiting its
acetylation (MTA2, HDAC1) and degradation (YY1). In summary, miR-34a presumably
participates in multiple tumor suppressive pathways by directly and indirectly
suppressing the expression of numerous, critical proteins.

PMCID: PMC3149097
PMID: 21566225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Jul;25(7):1159-69. doi: 10.1210/me.2011-0033. Epub 2011 May 
12.

Ligand-dependent regulation of the activity of the orphan nuclear receptor, small
heterodimer partner (SHP), in the repression of bile acid biosynthetic CYP7A1 and
CYP8B1 genes.

Miao J(1), Choi SE, Seok SM, Yang L, Zuercher WJ, Xu Y, Willson TM, Xu HE, Kemper
JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA.

Small heterodimer partner (SHP) plays important roles in diverse biological
processes by directly interacting with transcription factors and inhibiting their
activities. SHP has been designated an orphan nuclear receptor, but whether its
activity can be modulated by ligands has been a long-standing question. Recently,
retinoid-related molecules, including
4-[3-(1-adamantyl)-4-hydroxyphenyl]-3-chlorocinnamic acid (3Cl-AHPC), were shown 
to bind to SHP and enhance apoptosis. We have examined whether 3Cl-AHPC acts as
an agonist and increases SHP activity in the repression of bile acid biosynthetic
CYP7A1 and CYP8B1 genes and delineated the underlying mechanisms. Contrary to
this expectation, micromolar concentrations of 3Cl-AHPC increased CYP7A1
expression but indirectly via p38 kinase signaling. Nanomolar concentrations,
however, repressed CYP7A1 expression and decreased bile acid levels in HepG2
cells, and little repression was observed when SHP was down-regulated by small
hairpin RNA. Mechanistic studies revealed that 3Cl-AHPC bound to SHP, increased
the interaction of SHP with liver receptor homologue (LRH)-1, a hepatic activator
for CYP7A1 and CYP8B1 genes, and with repressive cofactors, Brahma, mammalian
Sin3a, and histone deacetylase-1, and, subsequently, increased the occupancy of
SHP and these cofactors at the promoters. Mutation of Leu-100, predicted to
contact 3Cl-AHPC within the SHP ligand binding pocket by molecular modeling,
severely impaired the increased interaction with LRH-1, and repression of LRH-1
activity mediated by 3Cl-AHPC. 3Cl-AHPC repressed SHP metabolic target genes in a
gene-specific manner in human primary hepatocytes and HepG2 cells. These data
suggest that SHP may act as a ligand-regulated receptor in metabolic pathways.
Modulation of SHP activity by synthetic ligands may be a useful therapeutic
strategy.

PMCID: PMC3125094
PMID: 21566081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Jun 3;409(2):211-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.04.121. Epub 2011 May 3.

The activation of p38 MAPK primarily contributes to UV-induced RhoB expression by
recruiting the c-Jun and p300 to the distal CCAAT box of the RhoB promoter.

Ahn J(1), Choi JH, Won M, Kang CM, Gyun MR, Park HM, Kim CH, Chung KS.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Research Center, KRIBB, Daejeon 305-806, Republic of Korea.

The Ras-related small GTP-binding protein RhoB is rapidly induced in response to 
genotoxic stresses caused by ionizing radiation. It is known that UV-induced RhoB
expression results from the binding of activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2)
via NF-Y to the inverted CCAAT box (-23) of the RhoB promoter. Here, we show that
the association of c-Jun with the distal CCAAT box (-72) is primarily involved in
UV-induced RhoB expression and p38 MAPK regulated RhoB induction through the
distal CCAAT box. UV-induced RhoB expression and apoptosis were markedly
attenuated by pretreatment with the p38 MAPK inhibitor. siRNA knockdown of RhoB, 
ATF2 and c-Jun resulted in decreased RhoB expression and eventually restored the 
growth of UV-irradiated Jurkat cells. In the reporter assay using luciferase
under the RhoB promoter, inhibition of RhoB promoter activity by the p38
inhibitor and knockdown of c-Jun using siRNA occurred through the distal CCAAT
box. Immunoprecipitation and DNA affinity protein binding assays revealed the
association of c-Jun and p300 via NF-YA and the dissociation of histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) via c-Jun recruitment to the CCAAT boxes of the RhoB
promoter. These results suggest that the activation of p38 MAPK primarily
contributes to UV-induced RhoB expression by recruiting the c-Jun and p300
proteins to the distal CCAAT box of the RhoB promoter in Jurkat cells.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21565167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 29;6(4):e19229. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019229.

Hypoxia-induced down-regulation of neprilysin by histone modification in mouse
primary cortical and hippocampal neurons.

Wang Z(1), Yang D, Zhang X, Li T, Li J, Tang Y, Le W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neurology, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School 
of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Amyloid ß-peptide (Aß) accumulation leads to neurodegeneration and Alzheimer's
disease (AD). Aß metabolism is a dynamic process in the Aß production and
clearance that requires neprilysin (NEP) and other enzymes to degrade Aß. It has 
been reported that NEP expression is significantly decreased in the brain of AD
patients. Previously we have documented hypoxia is a risk factor for Aß
generation in vivo and in vitro through increasing Aß generation by altering
ß-cleavage and <U+03B3>-cleavage of APP and down-regulating NEP, and causing tau
hyperphosphorylation. Here, we investigated the molecular mechanisms of
hypoxia-induced down-regulation of NEP. We found a significant decrease in NEP
expression at the mRNA and protein levels after hypoxic treatment in mouse
primary cortical and hippocampal neurons. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
assays and relative quantitative PCR (q-PCR) revealed an increase of histone
H3-lysine9 demethylation (H3K9me2) and a decrease of H3 acetylation (H3-Ace) in
the NEP promoter regions following hypoxia. In addition, we found that hypoxia
caused up-regulation of histone methyl transferase (HMT) G9a and histone
deacetylases (HDACs) HDAC-1. Decreased expression of NEP during hypoxia can be
prevented by application with the epigenetic regulators 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine
(5-Aza), HDACs inhibitor sodium valproate (VA), and siRNA-mediated knockdown of
G9a or HDAC1. DNA methylation PCR data do not support that hypoxia affects the
methylation of NEP promoters. This study suggests that hypoxia may down-regulate 
NEP by increasing H3K9me2 and decreasing H3-Ace modulation.

PMCID: PMC3084787
PMID: 21559427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Int J Clin Oncol. 2011 Dec;16(6):671-8. doi: 10.1007/s10147-011-0246-y. Epub 2011
May 10.

Histone deacetylase inhibitor augments anti-tumor effect of gemcitabine and
pegylated interferon-a on pancreatic cancer cells.

Iwahashi S(1), Shimada M, Utsunomiya T, Morine Y, Imura S, Ikemoto T, Mori H,
Hanaoka J, Sugimoto K, Saito Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Institute of Health Biosciences, The University of
Tokushima Graduate School, 3-18-15 Kuramoto-cho, Tokushima City 770-8503, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Histone deacetylase (HDAC) is strongly associated with epigenetic
regulation and carcinogenesis, and its inhibitor can induce the differentiation
or apoptosis of cancer cells.
METHODS: We investigated the anticancer effects of the HDAC inhibitor valproic
acid (VPA) in combination with gemcitabine (GEM), an antimetabolic, and pegylated
interferon-a2b (PEG-IFN-a2b) in a human pancreatic cancer cell line using a cell 
proliferation assay. The gene expressions of HDAC1, MTA1, p21(Waf1), and HIF-1
were evaluated by reverse transcription-PCR.
RESULTS: Valproic acid at 0.5 mM when used alone did not suppress cell
proliferation. PEG-IFN-a2b at 10(2 )E/ml weakly suppressed cell proliferation in 
both the BxPC3 (by 28%) and SUIT-2 (by 17%) human pancreatic cancer cell lines.
GEM at 5 nM when used alone suppressed cell proliferation by 36 and 61% in the
BxPC3 and SUIT-2 cell lines, respectively. The combination treatment of GEM +
PEG-IFN-a2b strongly suppressed cell proliferation in the SUIT-2 (82%) and BxPC3 
(51%) cell lines, which was further reinforced by the addition of VPA up to 88
and 67%, respectively. The combination treatment of GEM + PEG-IFN-a2b enhanced
the expression of p21(Waf1), which was also reinforced by VPA.
CONCLUSION: VPA augmented the inhibitory effects of PEG-IFN-a2b alone or in
combination with PEG-IFN-a2b and GEM on cell proliferation. Such inhibitory
effects may be due to the up-regulation of p21(Waf1) expression.

PMID: 21556798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Mol Cell. 2011 May 6;42(3):285-96. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2011.02.036.

Maintenance of silent chromatin through replication requires SWI/SNF-like
chromatin remodeler SMARCAD1.

Rowbotham SP(1), Barki L, Neves-Costa A, Santos F, Dean W, Hawkes N, Choudhary P,
Will WR, Webster J, Oxley D, Green CM, Varga-Weisz P, Mermoud JE.

Author information: 
(1)Nuclear Dynamics and Function, Babraham Institute, Cambridge CB22 3AT, UK.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2011 May 6;42(3):267-9.

Epigenetic marks such as posttranslational histone modifications specify the
functional states of underlying DNA sequences, though how they are maintained
after their disruption during DNA replication remains a critical question. We
identify the mammalian SWI/SNF-like protein SMARCAD1 as a key factor required for
the re-establishment of repressive chromatin. The ATPase activity of SMARCAD1 is 
necessary for global deacetylation of histones H3/H4. In this way, SMARCAD1
promotes methylation of H3K9, the establishment of heterochromatin, and faithful 
chromosome segregation. SMARCAD1 associates with transcriptional repressors
including KAP1, histone deacetylases HDAC1/2 and the histone methyltransferase
G9a/GLP and modulates the interaction of HDAC1 and KAP1 with heterochromatin.
SMARCAD1 directly interacts with PCNA, a central component of the replication
machinery, and is recruited to sites of DNA replication. Our findings suggest
that chromatin remodeling by SMARCAD1 ensures that silenced loci, such as
pericentric heterochromatin, are correctly perpetuated.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21549307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Epigenetics. 2011 Jun;6(6):720-6. Epub 2011 Jun 1.

HBc binds to the CpG islands of HBV cccDNA and promotes an epigenetic permissive 
state.

Guo YH(1), Li YN, Zhao JR, Zhang J, Yan Z.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology, Department of Pharmacogenomics, School
of Pharmacy, The Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China.
gyanhai@fmmu.edu.cn

HBV covalently closed circular DNA (cccDNA) is the template for the transcription
of HBV. HBV core protein (HBc) is a main component of the HBV cccDNA
minichromosome. However, the function of HBc in cccDNA is not fully understood.
In light of recent findings that HBV cccDNA may be regulated epigenetically, we
analyzed the binding of HBc to cccDNA and the impact of HBc on cccDNA epigenetic 
profile in the liver biopsy samples of 22 patients with chronic Hepatitis B
(CHB). We found that HBc binding to HBV cccDNA occurred preferentially at CpG
island 2, an important region for the regulation of HBV transcription.
Furthermore, the relative abundances of HBc binding to CpG island 2 were
positively correlated with the ratios of relaxed circular DNA to cccDNA and the
levels of serum HBV DNA in those patients. Interestingly, the relative abundances
of HBc binding to CpG island 2 were associated with the binding of CREB binding
protein (CBP) and with hypomethylation in CpG island 2 of HBV cccDNA
minichromosomes. However, relatively higher amounts of HBc binding to CpG island 
2 of cccDNA were accompanied by lower amounts of HDAC1 binding. Multivariate
analysis revealed that the abundances of HBc binding to CpG island 2 of cccDNA
and positive HBeAg were independent factors associated with the replication of
HBV (p = 0.001 for both). Apparently, HBc is a positive regulator of HBV
transcription and replication, maintaining the permissive epigenetic state in the
critical region of the HBV cccDNA minichromosomes.

PMID: 21546797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jun 24;286(25):22211-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.180224. Epub 2011
Apr 29.

Inhibitors of histone deacetylases: correlation between isoform specificity and
reactivation of HIV type 1 (HIV-1) from latently infected cells.

Huber K(1), Doyon G, Plaks J, Fyne E, Mellors JW, Sluis-Cremer N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15261, USA.

Deacetylation of histone proteins at the HIV type 1 (HIV-1) long terminal repeat 
(LTR) by histone deactylases (HDACs) can promote transcriptional repression and
virus latency. As such, HDAC inhibitors (HDACI) could be used to deplete
reservoirs of persistent, quiescent HIV-1 proviral infection. However, the
development of HDACI to purge latent HIV-1 requires knowledge of the HDAC
isoforms contributing to viral latency and the development of inhibitors specific
to these isoforms. In this study, we identify the HDACs responsible for HIV-1
latency in Jurkat J89GFP cells using a chemical approach that correlates HDACI
isoform specificity with their ability to reactivate latent HIV-1 expression. We 
demonstrate that potent inhibition or knockdown of HDAC1, an HDAC isoform
reported to drive HIV-1 into latency, was not sufficient to de-repress the viral 
LTR. Instead, we found that inhibition of HDAC3 was necessary to activate latent 
HIV-1. Consistent with this finding, we identified HDAC3 at the HIV-1 LTR by
chromatin immunoprecipitation. Interestingly, we show that valproic acid is a
weak inhibitor of HDAC3 (IC(50) = 5.5 mm) relative to HDAC1 (IC(50) = 170 µm).
Because the total therapeutic concentration of valproic acid ranges from 275 to
700 µm in adults, these data may explain why this inhibitor has no effect on the 
decay of latent HIV reservoirs in patients. Taken together, our study suggests an
important role for HDAC3 in HIV-1 latency and, importantly, describes a chemical 
approach that can readily be used to identify the HDAC isoforms that contribute
to HIV-1 latency in other cell types.

PMCID: PMC3121366
PMID: 21531716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Horm Mol Biol Clin Investig. 2011 May 1;6(2):215-25. doi: 10.1515/HMBCI.2011.005.

Liposomal trichostatin A: therapeutic potential in hormone-dependent and
-independent breast cancer xenograft models.

Urbinati G, Marsaud V, Nicolas V, Vergnaud-Gauduchon J, Renoir JM.

BACKGROUND: Trichostatin A (TSA) is one of the most potent histone deacetylase
inhibitors (HDACi) in vitro but it lacks biological activity in vivo when
injected intravenously owing to its fast metabolism.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: TSA was incorporated into Stealth® liposomes (TSA-lipo) at
a high loading and its anticancer activity was evaluated in several types of
breast cancer cells and xenografts.
RESULTS: In estrogen receptor a (ERa)-positive MCF-7 and T47-D cells, TSA induced
a long-term degradation of cyclin A and a proteasome-dependent loss of ERa and
cyclin D1, allowed derepression of p21WAF1/CIP1, HDAC1 and RhoB GTPase,
concomitantly with blockade in G2/M of the cell cycle and apoptosis induction. In
MDA-MB-231 (MDA) and SKBr-3 cells, TSA increased ERa mRNA and p21WAF1/CIP1
protein expression, but decreased cyclin A with a G2/M blockade and cleavage of
polyADP-ribose polymerase (PARP). No significant restoration of any ER protein
was noticed in any cells. TSA-lipo markedly inhibited tumor growth in MCF-7 and
MDA cells xenografts following intravenous injection. Their anticancer effects
were characterized by inhibition of Ki-67 labeling, the inhibition of tumor
vasculature and an increase of p21WAF1/CIP1 in both tumors. In MCF-7 cell tumors,
enhanced RhoB accumulation in the cytoplasm of epithelial cells was noticed,
inversely to ERa that was strongly decreased.
CONCLUSION: Such anticancer activity of TSA-lipo is exp-lained by the protection 
provided by HDACi encapsulation and by the strong tumor accumulation of the
nanocarriers as revealed by fluorescence confocal microscopy experi-ments.
Together with its lack of toxicity, the enhanced stability of TSA-lipo in vivo
justifies its development for therapeutic use in the treatment
estradiol-dependent and -independent breast cancers.

PMID: 25961258  [PubMed]



1. Cancer Res. 2011 Jul 1;71(13):4373-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-0046. Epub
2011 Apr 28.

Physical association of HDAC1 and HDAC2 with p63 mediates transcriptional
repression and tumor maintenance in squamous cell carcinoma.

Ramsey MR(1), He L, Forster N, Ory B, Ellisen LW.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.

Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is a treatment-refractory subtype of human cancer
arising from stratified epithelium of the skin, lung, esophagus, oropharynx, and 
other tissues. A unifying feature of SCC is high-level expression of the
p53-related protein p63 (TP63) in 80% of cases. The major protein isoform of p63 
expressed in SCC is <U+0394>Np63a, an N-terminally truncated form which functions as a
key SCC cell survival factor by mechanisms that are unclear. In this study, we
show that <U+0394>Np63a associates with histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and HDAC2 to form 
an active transcriptional repressor complex that can be targeted to therapeutic
advantage. Repression of proapoptotic Bcl-2 family member genes including p53
upregulated modulator of apoptosis (PUMA) by p63/HDAC is required for survival of
SCC cells. Cisplatin chemotherapy, a mainstay of SCC treatment, promotes
dissociation of p63 and HDAC from the PUMA promoter, leading to increased histone
acetylation, PUMA activation, and apoptosis. These effects are recapitulated upon
targeting the p63/HDAC complex selectively with class I/II HDAC inhibitors using 
both in vitro and in vivo models. Sensitivity to HDAC inhibition is directly
correlated with p63 expression and is abrogated in tumor cells that overexpress
endogenous Bcl-2. Together, our results elucidate a mechanism of p63-mediated
transcriptional repression and they identify the <U+0394>Np63a/HDAC complex as an
essential tumor maintenance factor in SCC. In addition, our findings offer a
rationale to apply HDAC inhibitors for SCC treatment.

©2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3129427
PMID: 21527555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jun 17;286(24):21488-99. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.211540. Epub
2011 Apr 25.

Liver-enriched inhibitory protein (LIP) actively inhibits preadipocyte
differentiation through histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1).

Abdou HS(1), Atlas E, Haché RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Biochemistry, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario K1N
6N5, Canada.

The CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß (C/EBPß) is expressed as three isoforms
(LAP*, liver-enriched activating protein (LAP), and liver-enriched inhibitory
protein (LIP)) that differentially regulate gene expression. The interplay
between LAP*, LAP, and LIP in regulating cellular processes is largely unknown,
and LIP has been largely regarded to repress transcription through a passive
heterodimerization-dependent mechanism. Recently, we have shown that p300/GCN5
and mSin3A/HDAC1 differentially regulate the ability of C/EBPß to stimulate
preadipocyte differentiation through activation of C/ebpa transcription. Here, we
have mapped requirements for binding of mSin3A/HDAC1 to LAP/LAP* and LIP to a
4-amino acid motif in the central region of LAP/LAP* (residues 153-156) and the N
terminus of LIP. Reducing mSin3A/HDAC1 binding to LAP/LAP* and LIP through
deletion of this motif reduced the recruitment of HDAC1 to the C/ebpa promoter
and increased preadipocyte differentiation stimulated by insulin and
1-methyl-3-isobutylxanthine. Additional studies showed that the interaction of
HDAC1 with LIP provides for active repression of C/ebpa transcription and is
largely responsible for the ability of LIP and HDAC1 to repress preadipocyte
differentiation. Thus, although mSin3A/HDAC1 interacted readily with LAP/LAP* in 
addition to LIP and that expression of LAP/LAP* was sufficient to recruit HDAC1
to the C/ebpa promoter, mutations in C/ebpß that abrogated HDAC1 association to
LAP/LAP* in the absence of LIP provided no additional stimulation of
differentiation or transcription beyond the deletion of LIP alone. The
implication of these results for the interaction between p300/GCN5 and
mSin3A/HDAC1 in regulating C/EBPa transcription and preadipocyte differentiation 
are discussed.

PMCID: PMC3122208
PMID: 21521687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jun 24;286(25):21961-70. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.238238. Epub
2011 Apr 22.

c-ETS1 facilitates G1/S-phase transition by up-regulating cyclin E and CDK2 genes
and cooperates with hepatitis B virus X protein for their deregulation.

Singh AK(1), Swarnalatha M, Kumar V.

Author information: 
(1)Virology Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi 110067, India.

Recent studies on the molecular mechanisms responsible for cell cycle
deregulation in cancer have puzzled out the role of oncogenes in mediating
unscheduled cellular proliferation. This is reminiscence of their activity as
proto-oncogenes that drives scheduled cell cycle progression under physiological 
conditions. Working on the cell cycle regulatory activity of proto-oncogene, we
observed that c-ETS1 transcriptionally up-regulated both cyclin E and CDK2 genes,
the master regulators of G(1)/S-phase transition. The process was mediated by
kinetic coherence of c-ETS1 expression and its recruitment to both promoters
during G(1)/S-phase transition. Furthermore, enforced expression of c-ETS1 helped
G(0)-arrested cells to progress into G(1)/S-phases apparently due to the
activation of cyclin E/CDK2 genes. Physiological induction of c-ETS1 by EGF
showed the remodeling of mononucleosomes bound to the c-ETS1 binding site on both
promoters during their activation. The exchange of HDAC1 with histone
acetyltransferase-p300 was contemporaneous to the chromatin remodeling with
consequent increase in histone H3K9 acetylation. Furthermore, the ATP-dependent
chromatin remodeler hBRM1 recruitment was also associated with nucleosome
remodeling and promoter occupancy of phospho-Ser5 RNA polymerase II.
Intriguingly, the activity of the HBx viral oncoprotein was dependent on c-ETS1
in a hepatotropic manner, which led to the activation of cyclin E/CDK2 genes.
Thus, cyclin E and CDK2 genes are key physiological effectors of the c-ETS1
proto-oncogene. Furthermore, c-ETS1 is indispensable for the hepatotropic action 
of HBx in cell cycle deregulation.

PMCID: PMC3121341
PMID: 21515670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Cancer Res. 2011 Jun 1;71(11):4028-39. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-3342. Epub
2011 Apr 21.

EZH2-mediated concordant repression of Wnt antagonists promotes
ß-catenin-dependent hepatocarcinogenesis.

Cheng AS(1), Lau SS, Chen Y, Kondo Y, Li MS, Feng H, Ching AK, Cheung KF, Wong
HK, Tong JH, Jin H, Choy KW, Yu J, To KF, Wong N, Huang TH, Sung JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Digestive Disease, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
SAR, China. alfredcheng@cuhk.edu.hk

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is the catalytic subunit of the
Polycomb-repressive complex 2 (PRC2) that represses gene transcription through
histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3). Although EZH2 is abundantly
present in various cancers, the molecular consequences leading to oncogenesis
remain unclear. Here, we show that EZH2 concordantly silences the Wnt pathway
antagonists operating at several subcellular compartments, which in turn activate
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC). Chromatin
immunoprecipitation promoter array and gene expression analyses in HCCs revealed 
EZH2 occupancy and reduced expression of Wnt antagonists, including the
growth-suppressive AXIN2, NKD1, PPP2R2B, PRICKLE1, and SFRP5. Knockdown of EZH2
reduced the promoter occupancy of PRC2, histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), and
H3K27me3, whereas the activating histone marks were increased, leading to the
transcriptional upregulation of the Wnt antagonists. Combinatorial EZH2 and HDAC 
inhibition dramatically reduced the levels of nuclear ß-catenin, T-cell
factor-dependent transcriptional activity, and downstream pro-proliferative
targets CCND1 and EGFR. Functional analysis revealed that downregulation of EZH2 
reduced HCC cell growth, partially through the inhibition of ß-catenin signaling.
Conversely, ectopic overexpression of EZH2 in immortalized hepatocytes activated 
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling to promote cellular proliferation. In human HCCs,
concomitant overexpression of EZH2 and ß-catenin was observed in one-third
(61/179) of cases and significantly correlated with tumor progression. Our data
indicate that EZH2-mediated epigenetic silencing contributes to constitutive
activation of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling and consequential proliferation of HCC
cells, thus representing a novel therapeutic target for this highly malignant
tumor.

PMID: 21512140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Virol J. 2011 Apr 18;8:179. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-8-179.

Gene silencing in HIV-1 latency by polycomb repressive group.

Kim HG(1), Kim KC, Roh TY, Park J, Jung KM, Lee JS, Choi SY, Kim SS, Choi BS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of AIDS, Center for Immunology and Pathology, Korea National
Institute of Health, Chung-buk, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: The persistence of latently human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1)
infected cellular reservoirs in resting CD4+ T cells is a major obstacle to HIV-1
eradication. The detailed mechanism of HIV-1 latency remains unclear. We
investigated histones and their post-translational modification associated with
HIV-1 latency in novel HIV-1 latently infected cell lines established previously,
NCHA cells.
METHODS: To examine histones and their modification linked with HIV-1 latency,
the expression profiles for core histone proteins and histone deacetylases
(HDACs) in NCHA cells were characterized by RT-PCR, ELISA, and western blot. The 
levels of histone acetylation and methylation at histone H3 Lys9 (H3K9) and Lys27
(H3K27) in HIV-1 latently infected cells were analyzed by western blot and
chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing (ChIP-seq).
RESULTS: The expression levels for four core histone proteins (H2A, H2B, H3 and
H4) and HDACs (HDAC1-8) in NCHA cells were not significantly different from those
in their parental cells. Histone H3K9 and H3K27 acetylations in NCHA cells showed
no difference in parental and NCHA cells, whereas the levels of di- and
tri-methylation were increased in NCHA cells. The expression of EED which is a
component of polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), and BMI1 and RING2 which are
constituents of PRC1, were upregulated in NCHA cells. In addition, more
ubiquitylation at histone H2A was detected in NCHA cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that tri-methylation of histone H3K27 and H2A
ubiquitylation via polycomb group protein may play a crucial role in epigenetic
silencing accounting for HIV-1 latency in NCHA cells.

PMCID: PMC3094299
PMID: 21496352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Apr 15;30:41. doi: 10.1186/1756-9966-30-41.

Down-regulation of UHRF1, associated with re-expression of tumor suppressor
genes, is a common feature of natural compounds exhibiting anti-cancer
properties.

Alhosin M(1), Sharif T, Mousli M, Etienne-Selloum N, Fuhrmann G, Schini-Kerth VB,
Bronner C.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 7213 Laboratoire de Biophotonique et Pharmacologie, Université de
Strasbourg, Faculté de Pharmacie, 74 route du Rhin, 67401 Illkirch, France.

Over-expressed in numerous cancers, Ubiquitin-like containing PHD Ring Finger 1
(UHRF1, also known as ICBP90 or Np95) is characterized by a SRA domain (Set and
Ring Associated) which is found only in the UHRF family. UHRF1 constitutes a
complex with histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1)
via its SRA domain and represses the expression of several tumour suppressor
genes (TSGs) including p16INK4A, hMLH1, BRCA1 and RB1. Conversely, UHRF1 is
regulated by other TSGs such as p53 and p73. UHRF1 is hypothetically involved in 
a macro-molecular protein complex called "ECREM" for "Epigenetic Code Replication
Machinery". This complex would be able to duplicate the epigenetic code by acting
at the DNA replication fork and by activating the right enzymatic activity at the
right moment. There are increasing evidence that UHRF1 is the conductor of this
replication process by ensuring the crosstalk between DNA methylation and histone
modifications via the SRA and Tandem Tudor Domains, respectively. This cross-talk
allows cancer cells to maintain the repression of TSGs during cell proliferation.
Several studies showed that down-regulation of UHRF1 expression in cancer cells
by natural pharmacological active compounds, favors enhanced expression or
re-expression of TSGs, suppresses cell growth and induces apoptosis. This
suggests that hindering UHRF1 to exert its role in the duplication of the
methylation patterns (DNA + histones) is responsible for inducing apoptosis. In
this review, we present UHRF1 expression as a target of several natural products 
and we discuss their underlying molecular mechanisms and benefits for
chemoprevention and chemotherapy.

PMCID: PMC3096999
PMID: 21496237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. FEBS Lett. 2011 May 6;585(9):1331-7. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2011.04.001. Epub
2011 Apr 7.

Virus-induced differential expression of nuclear receptors and coregulators in
dendritic cells: implication to interferon production.

Ng SS(1), Chang TH, Tailor P, Ozato K, Kino T.

Author information: 
(1)Unit on Molecular Hormone Action, Program in Reproductive and Adult
Endocrinology, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1109, USA.

We investigated mRNA expression of 49 nuclear hormone receptors (NRs) and 35
transcriptional coregulators in mouse bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (DCs)
upon infection with Newcastle Disease virus (NDV) or murine cytomegalovirus
(MCMV). These viruses regulated mRNA expression of some NRs among which NOR1 and 
LXRa were highly induced at mRNA and protein levels. Exogenous expression of the 
latter NRs repressed IRF3- or IRF7-induced transactivation of the interferon ß
promoter and NDV infection further potentiated their repressive effect. The viral
infection also significantly regulated mRNA expression of some coregulators,
including HDAC1. Toll-like receptor ligands regulated NR and coregulator mRNA
expression similar to the viruses. Thus, NRs and coregulators are integral
components of DC-organizing anti-viral response wherein NOR1 and LXRa participate
in regulating interferon production.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC3101080
PMID: 21492741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Br J Sports Med. 2011 Oct;45(13):1035-9. doi: 10.1136/bjsm.2010.083188. Epub 2011
Apr 10.

Tenocyte apoptosis in the torn rotator cuff: a primary or secondary pathological 
event?

Lundgreen K(1), Lian OB, Engebretsen L, Scott A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic.Surgery, Lovisenberg Deaconal.Hospital, Oslo,
Norway. kirsten.lundgreen@lds.no

Little information exists on the contribution of apoptosis to pathological tendon
changes in rotator cuff tendinopathy. The purpose of this study was to quantitate
the rate of tenocyte apoptosis in torn supraspinatus tendons and in the matched
intact subscapularis and to examine the potential relation between apoptotic
index (AI) and tendon pathology. In addition, the authors examined tenocyte
density, proliferation rate and p53 gene expression patterns to gain further
insight into relevant pathological mechanisms in the torn suprapinatus. 15 torn
supraspinatus tendons with matched intact subscapularis tendon samples and 10
reference subscapularis samples were collected. Immunohistochemistry was used to 
define the AI (F7-26), proliferation rate (Ki67) and presence of p53 (M7001).
Tendon degeneration was evaluated according to the Bonar scale. Expression of p53
and relevant genes (n=84) was examined on a subset of samples using microfluidic 
arrays. The AI was significantly increased in torn supraspinatus tendon and
matched subscapularis tendon (R² =0.5742; p=0.0005). Cell density and
proliferation rate were also elevated in torn supraspinatus compared with
reference subscapularis tendons (p<0.05). A significant increase in p53 occurred 
specifically in torn supraspinatus tendon (p<0.05), and several genes encoding
p53-inhibiting proteins were downregulated in association, including HDAC1
(p<0.05), MDM4 (p<0.001) and PPM1D (p<0.05). Our results suggest that tenocyte
apoptosis results from more than one mechanism in the injured rotator cuff,
including both intrinsic factors related specifically to the torn supraspinatus
tendon, as well as a more generalised effect on the adjacent subscapularis
tendon.

PMCID: PMC3951987
PMID: 21482545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Neoplasia. 2011 Apr;13(4):374-85.

Identification and characterization of KCASH2 and KCASH3, 2 novel Cullin3
adaptors suppressing histone deacetylase and Hedgehog activity in
medulloblastoma.

De Smaele E(1), Di Marcotullio L, Moretti M, Pelloni M, Occhione MA, Infante P,
Cucchi D, Greco A, Pietrosanti L, Todorovic J, Coni S, Canettieri G, Ferretti E, 
Bei R, Maroder M, Screpanti I, Gulino A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.

Medulloblastoma is the most common pediatric malignant brain tumor, arising from 
aberrant cerebellar precursors' development, a process mainly controlled by
Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway. Histone deacetylase HDAC1 has been recently
shown to modulate Hh signaling, deacetylating its effectors Gli1/2 and enhancing 
their transcriptional activity. Therefore, HDAC may represent a potential
therapeutic target for Hh-dependent tumors, but still little information is
available on the physiological mechanisms of HDAC regulation. The putative tumor 
suppressor REN(KCTD11) acts through ubiquitination-dependent degradation of
HDAC1, thereby affecting Hh activity and medulloblastoma growth. We identify and 
characterize here two REN(KCTD11) homologues, defining a new family of proteins
named KCASH, as "KCTD containing, Cullin3 adaptor, suppressor of Hedgehog."
Indeed, the novel genes (KCASH2(KCTD21) and KCASH3(KCTD6)) share with REN(KCTD11)
a number of features, such as a BTB domain required for the formation of a
Cullin3 ubiquitin ligase complex and HDAC1 ubiquitination and degradation
capability, suppressing the acetylation-dependent Hh/Gli signaling. Expression of
KCASH2 and -3 is observed in cerebellum, whereas epigenetic silencing and allelic
deletion are observed in human medulloblastoma. Rescuing KCASHs expression
reduces the Hedgehog-dependent medulloblastoma growth, suggesting that loss of
members of this novel family of native HDAC inhibitors is crucial in sustaining
Hh pathway-mediated tumorigenesis. Accordingly, they might represent a promising 
class of endogenous "agents" through which this pathway may be targeted.

PMCID: PMC3071086
PMID: 21472142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Cryo Letters. 2011 Jan-Feb;32(1):13-20.

Histone deacetyltransferase1 expression in mouse oocyte and their in
vitro-fertilized embryo: effect of oocyte vitrification.

Li JJ(1), Pei Y, Zhou GB, Suo L, Wang YP, Wu GQ, Fu XW, Hou YP, Zhu SE.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Agricultural University of Hebei,
Baoding, China.

This study was conducted to investigate the expression of Histone
Deacetyltransferase1 (HDAC1) in mouse embryos derived from the vitrified-warmed
oocytes. Firstly, the mouse oocytes at metaphaseII (MII) stage were randomly
allocated into three groups: A untreated (control), B exposed to vitri<U+FB01>cation
solution (VS) without being plunged into liquid nitrogen (toxicity), or C
vitri<U+FB01>ed by open-pulled straw (OPS) method (vitri<U+FB01>cation). After warming, they
were fertilized in vitro. Fresh oocytes were used as control. Expression of HDAC1
was then examined in MII mouse oocytes and embryos by immunofluorescence with
anti-HDAC1 polyclonal antibody and fluorescein isothiocyanate-conjugated goat
anti-rabbit IgG. Results showed that after in vitro fertilization (IVF),
developmental rates to two-cell embryos (39%), 4-cell embryos (35%), morula (32%)
and blastocysts (26%) in cryopreserved oocytes were all significantly lower than 
those of fresh oocytes (P < 0.01). In addition, HDAC1 expression in the vitrified
group was significantly lower (P< 0.05) than that in the control and toxicity
groups at all developmental stages except for the blastocyst. Moreover, the
vitrified-warmed oocytes showed significantly lower (P < 0.05) HDAC1 expression
compared with that of control and toxicity groups. In conclusion, HDAC1 was
expressed both in oocytes and in their in vitro-fertilized embryos. This
decreased expression of HDAC1 in mouse oocytes and the embryos due to the
cryopreservation may have a negative impact on embryo development.

PMID: 21468449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Cell Cycle. 2011 May 1;10(9):1456-67. Epub 2011 May 1.

RNA export factor RAE1 contributes to NUP98-HOXA9-mediated leukemogenesis.

Funasaka T(1), Nakano H, Wu Y, Hashizume C, Gu L, Nakamura T, Wang W, Zhou P,
Moore MA, Sato H, Wong RW.

Author information: 
(1)Kanazawa University; Kanazawa, Japan.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2011 Jul 1;10(13):2056.
    Cell Cycle. 2011 Jun 15;10(12):1896.

Chromosomal translocations involving chimeric fusions of the nucleoporin NUP98
protein have often been described in acute myelogenous leukemia (AML). All the
fusion proteins have an identical NUP98 N terminus, which contains the GLEBS
motif for interaction with the mRNA export factor RAE1 and FG repeats that
associate with the transcription factors HDAC1 and p300. It is virtually unknown 
whether these interaction partners affect leukemogenesis. We previously showed
that RAE1 depletion caused aneuploidy, which enhanced tumorigenesis. We
speculated that RAE1 may also be directly involved in NUP98 fusion-mediated
leukemogenesis. We show here that RNA interference (RNAi)-mediated knockdown of
NUP98 caused severe chromosome segregation defects and disrupted RAE1 but not
HDAC1 expression and localization. Next, we performed rescue experiments to
confirm that the RAE1-NUP98 complex orchestrates proper chromosome segregation.
Interestingly, we found diverse behaviors of NUP98 and the leukemogenic fusion
protein NUP98-HOXA9 throughout the cell cycle. Strikingly, in
NUP98-HOXA9-transfected cells, RAE1 protein were reduced and mis-localized. Our
cellular interpretations were further confirmed by NUP98-HOXA9 transgenic mice
and the NUP98-HOXA9 AML patient. These data suggest that RAE1 orchestrates
NUP98-mediated leukemogenesis and raise the possibility that targeting this
negative feedback loop may provide a new strategy for the therapy of aggressive
leukemias.

PMID: 21467841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Lung Cancer. 2011 Nov;74(2):300-4. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2011.02.019. Epub 2011 
Apr 5.

Expression of histone deacetylase 1 correlates with a poor prognosis in patients 
with adenocarcinoma of the lung.

Minamiya Y(1), Ono T, Saito H, Takahashi N, Ito M, Mitsui M, Motoyama S, Ogawa J.

Author information: 
(1)The Division of Thoracic Surgery, Breast and Endocrine Surgery, Akita
University Graduate School of Medicine, 1-1-1 Hondo, Akita City 010-8543, Japan. 
minamiya@med.akita-u.ac.jp

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors (HDACis) are now attracting attention as
promising therapeutic agents for the treatment of cancer. However, the relation
between HDAC1 expression and the clinicopathological characteristics of non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is not well understood. We therefore investigated the
relationship between HDAC1 expression by tumors and the clinicopathological
characteristics of patients with adenocarcinoma of the lung.METHODS: We used
semi-quantitative real time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction to
assess expression of HDAC1 mRNA in tumor samples from 93 patients with
adenocarcinoma of the lung. We then correlated HDAC1 mRNA levels with known
clinicopathological factors.
RESULTS: We found that the 5-year disease-free survival rate among patients
strongly expressing HDAC1 was significantly poorer than among those expressing
lower levels (P=0.005 by log-rank test). Multivariate Cox proportional hazard
analyses revealed that being male (hazard ratio, 3.56; 95% CI, 1.58-8.42;
P=0.002), nodal metastasis (hazard ratio, 7.98; 95% CI, 2.99-22.1; P<.001) and
HDAC1 (hazard ratio, 2.17; 95% CI, 1.04-4.84; P=0.039) were all independent
factors affecting 5-year disease-free survival.
CONCLUSION: Stronger HDAC1 expression by tumor cells is an independent predictor 
of a poor prognosis in patients with adenocarcinoma of the lung.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21466904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Biochemistry. 2011 May 17;50(19):3997-4010. doi: 10.1021/bi200309e. Epub 2011 Apr
20.

Autodeimination of protein arginine deiminase 4 alters protein-protein
interactions but not activity.

Slack JL(1), Jones LE Jr, Bhatia MM, Thompson PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of South Carolina,
Columbia, South Carolina 29208, United States.

The protein arginine deiminases (PAD), which catalyze the hydrolysis of
peptidyl-arginine to form peptidyl-citrulline, play important roles in a variety 
of cell signaling pathways, including apoptosis, differentiation, and
transcriptional regulation. In addition to these important cellular roles, PAD
activity is dysregulated in multiple human diseases [e.g., rheumatoid arthritis
(RA), cancer, and colitis], and significantly, PAD inhibition with Cl-amidine has
been shown to reduce disease severity in the collagen-induced arthritis model of 
RA. Although these enzymes play important roles in human cell signaling and
disease, the mechanisms that regulate PAD activity under both physiological and
pathological conditions are poorly understood. One possible mechanism for
regulating PAD activity is autodeimination, to which PAD4 has been shown by us
and others to be subjected in vitro and in vivo. Herein, we demonstrate that PAD4
autodeimination does not alter the activity, substrate specificity, or calcium
dependence of this isozyme. However, the results of these studies indicate a
novel role for autodeimination in modulating the ability of PAD4 to interact with
histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), citrullinated histone H3 (Cit H3), and protein
arginine methyltransferase 1 (PRMT1).

PMCID: PMC3091952
PMID: 21466234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Cell Biochem. 2011 Aug;112(8):2138-48. doi: 10.1002/jcb.23135.

Histone deacetylase 1/2 mediates proliferation of renal interstitial fibroblasts 
and expression of cell cycle proteins.

Pang M(1), Ma L, Liu N, Ponnusamy M, Zhao TC, Yan H, Zhuang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Brown University School of Medicine, Rhode Island
Hospital, Providence, Rhode Island 02903, USA.

We recently reported that the histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity is required for
activation of renal interstitial fibroblasts. In this study, we further examined 
the role of HDACs, in particular, HDAC1 and HDAC2, in proliferation of cultured
rat renal interstitial fibroblasts (NRK-49F) and expression of cell cycle
proteins. Inhibition of HDAC activity with trichostatin A (TSA), blocked cell
proliferation, decreased expression of Cyclin D1, a positive cell cycle
regulator, and increased expression of p27 and p57, two negative cell cycle
regulators. Silencing either HDAC1 or HDAC2 with siRNA also significantly
inhibited cell proliferation, decreased expression of Cyclin D1, and increased
expression of p57. However, down-regulation of HDAC2, but not HDAC1 resulted in
increased expression of p27. Furthermore, HDAC1 and HDAC2 down-regulation was
associated with dephosphorylation and hyperacetylation of STAT3 (Signal
transducer and activator of transcription 3). Blockade of STAT3 with S3I-201 or
siRNA decreased renal fibroblast proliferation. Finally, mouse embryonic
fibroblasts (MEFs) lacking STAT3 reduced the inhibitory effect of TSA on cell
proliferation, add-back of wild type STAT3 to STAT3(-/-) MEFs restored the effect
of TSA. Collectively, our results reveal an important role of HDAC1 and HDAC2 in 
regulating proliferation of renal interstitial fibroblasts, expression of cell
cycle proteins and activation of STAT3. Further, STAT3 mediates the proliferative
action of HDACs.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4626014
PMID: 21465537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Physiol Behav. 2011 Aug 3;104(2):312-20. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2011.03.026. Epub
2011 Apr 1.

Histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) participates in the down-regulation of
corticotropin releasing hormone gene (crh) expression.

Miller L(1), Foradori CD, Lalmansingh AS, Sharma D, Handa RJ, Uht RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia, 415 Lane Road,
Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

The paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus (PVH) plays a central role in
regulating the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. Medial parvocellular
neurons of the PVH (mpPVH) integrate sensory and humoral inputs to maintain
homeostasis. Humoral inputs include glucocorticoids secreted by the adrenals,
which down-regulate HPA activation. A primary glucocorticoid target is the
population of mpPVH neurons that synthesize and secrete corticotropin-releasing
factors, the most potent of which is corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH).
Although CRH gene (crh) expression is known to be down-regulated by
glucocorticoids, the mechanisms by which this process occurs are still poorly
understood. To begin this study we postulated that glucocorticoid repression of
crh involves HDAC recruitment to the region of the crh proximal promoter. To
evaluate this hypothesis, we treated hypothalamic cells that express CRH with the
HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA). As predicted, treatment with TSA led to
increased CRH mRNA levels and crh promoter activity. Although co-treatment with
Dex (10(-7)M) reduced the TSA effect on mRNA levels, it failed to reduce promoter
activity; however co-transfection of HDAC1 but not 3 restored Dex inhibition. A
distinction between HDAC1 and 3 was also apparent with respect to crh promoter
occupancy. Dex led to increased HDAC1 but not HDAC3 occupancy. In vivo studies
revealed that CRH-immunoreactive (-ir) neurons contained HDAC1- and HDAC3-ir.
Collectively, these data point to a role for HDAC1 in the physiologic regulation 
of crh.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3650854
PMID: 21463644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Mol Cancer Ther. 2011 Jun;10(6):1113-23. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-10-1010. Epub
2011 Apr 1.

Hypoxia induces genomic DNA demethylation through the activation of HIF-1a and
transcriptional upregulation of MAT2A in hepatoma cells.

Liu Q(1), Liu L, Zhao Y, Zhang J, Wang D, Chen J, He Y, Wu J, Zhang Z, Liu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Zhongnan Hospital, Wuhan, China.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) emerges as a crucial player in tumor
progression. However, its role in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), especially its 
relation with global DNA methylation patterns in HCC under hypoxic tumor
microenvironment is not completely understood. Methionine adenosyltransferase 2A 
(MAT2A) maintains the homeostasis of S-adenosylmethionine (SAM), a critical
marker of genomic methylation status. In this study, we investigated the link
between HIF-1a and MAT2A as a mechanism responsible for the change in genomic DNA
methylation patterns in liver cancer under hypoxia conditions. Our results showed
that hypoxia induces genomic DNA demethylation in CpG islands by reducing the
steady-state SAM level both in vitro and in vivo. In addition, HIF-1a and MAT2A
expression is correlated with tumor size and TNM stage of liver cancer tissues.
We further showed that hypoxia-induced MAT2A expression is HIF-1a dependent and
requires the recruitment of p300 and HDAC1. We also identified an authentic
consensus HIF-1a binding site in MAT2A promoter by site-directed mutagenesis,
electrophoretic mobility shift assay, and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay.
Taken together, we show for the first time that hypoxia induces genomic DNA
demethylation through the activation of HIF-1a and transcriptional upregulation
of MAT2A in hepatoma cells. These findings provide new insights into our
understanding of the molecular link between genomic DNA methylation and tumor
hypoxia in HCC.

PMID: 21460102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Oral Pathol Med. 2011 Oct;40(9):706-14. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0714.2011.01031.x. 
Epub 2011 Apr 2.

Histone deacetylase-1 and -2 expression in mobile tongue squamous cell carcinoma:
associations with clinicopathological parameters and patients survival.

Theocharis S(1), Klijanienko J, Giaginis C, Rodriguez J, Jouffroy T, Girod A,
Alexandrou P, Sastre-Garau X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Head and Neck Surgery, Institut Curie, Paris, France.
theocharis@ath.forthnet.gr

BACKGROUND:  Histone deacetylases (HDACs) have been associated with tumor
development and progression in several types of human malignancy and HDAC
inhibitors are currently being explored as anti-cancer agents in clinical trials.
The aim of the present study was to evaluate the clinical significance of HDAC-1 
and -2 protein expression in mobile tongue squamous cell carcinoma (SCC).
METHODS: HDAC-1 and -2 protein expression was assessed immunohistochemically on
49 mobile tongue SCC tissue samples and was analyzed in relation with
clinicopathological characteristics, overall and disease-free patients' survival.
RESULTS:  HDAC-1 overexpression was significantly associated with younger
patients' age (P = 0.0381) and male gender (P = 0.0345), poor histopathological
grade of differentiation (P = 0.0236) and the presence of lymph node metastases
(P = 0.0104). Intense HDAC-1 staining intensity was significantly associated with
male gender (P = 0.0127), increased stromal infiltration reaction (P = 0.0125)
and well-defined shape of tumor invasion (P = 0.0396). HDAC-2 overexpression did 
not show significant correlations with any clinicopathological parameters,
whereas intense HDAC-2 staining intensity was significantly associated with the
presence of muscular invasion (P = 0.0466) and advanced depth of invasion
(P = 0.0251). Mobile tongue SCC patients with HDAC-1 overexpression presented
shorter overall and disease-free survival compared to those with no evidence of
HDAC-1 overexpression (log-rank test, P = 0.0651 and 0.0247, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS:  The present study supported evidence that HDACs may participate in 
the formation and progression of mobile tongue SCC, reinforcing their possible
use as biomarkers as also the therapeutic utility of HDAC inhibitors in mobile
tongue SCC chemoprevention and treatment.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 21457345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Oncol Rep. 2011 Jun;25(6):1677-81. doi: 10.3892/or.2011.1236. Epub 2011 Mar 28.

Histone deacetylases 1, 6 and 8 are critical for invasion in breast cancer.

Park SY(1), Jun JA, Jeong KJ, Heo HJ, Sohn JS, Lee HY, Park CG, Kang J.

Author information: 
(1)Myunggok Medical Research Institute, College of Medicine, Konyang University, 
Daejeon 302-718, Republic of Korea.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are associated with the development and progression 
of cancer, but it is not known which of the HDAC isoforms play important roles in
breast cancer metastasis. This study identified the specific HDAC isoforms that
are necessary for invasion and/or migration in human breast cancer cell lines.
MDA-MB-231 cells were significantly more invasive and expressed higher levels of 
matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) compared to MCF-7 cells. We compared the
expression of HDAC isoforms between MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells and found greater 
expression of HDAC4, 6 and 8 in MDA-MB-231 cells by RT-PCR and Western blot
analyses. In addition, apicidin, a histone deacetylase inhibitor, was shown to
attenuate the invasion, migration and MMP-9 expression in MDA-MB-231 cells. Using
specific siRNAs directed against HDAC1, 4, 6 and 8, we show that inhibition of
HDAC1, 6 and 8, but not HDAC4, are responsible for invasion and MMP-9 expression 
in MDA-MB-231 cells. We analyzed the invasiveness of MCF-7 cells overexpressing
HDAC1, 4, 6 or 8 and found that overexpression of HDAC1, 6 or 8 increased
invasion and MMP-9 expression. By developing HDAC isoforms as potential
biomarkers for breast cancer metastasis, the present study can be extended to
developing therapies for breast cancer invasion.

PMID: 21455583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Biol Chem. 2011 May 20;286(20):18311-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.133603. Epub 2011
Mar 29.

The developmental regulator protein Gon4l associates with protein YY1,
co-repressor Sin3a, and histone deacetylase 1 and mediates transcriptional
repression.

Lu P(1), Hankel IL, Hostager BS, Swartzendruber JA, Friedman AD, Brenton JL,
Rothman PB, Colgan JD.

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Immunology Graduate Program, Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver
College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Genetic studies involving zebrafish and mice have demonstrated that the protein
Gon4l (Gon4-like) is essential for hematopoiesis. These studies also suggested
that Gon4l regulates gene expression during hematopoietic development, yet the
biochemical function of Gon4l has not been defined. Here, we describe the
identification of factors that interact with Gon4l and may cooperate with this
protein to regulate gene expression. As predicted by polypeptide sequence
conservation, Gon4l interacted and co-localized with the DNA-binding protein YY1 
(Yin Yang 1). Density gradient sedimentation analysis of protein lysates from
mouse M12 B cells showed that Gon4l and YY1 co-sediment with the transcriptional 
co-repressor Sin3a and its functional partner histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1.
Consistent with these results, immunoprecipitation studies showed that Gon4l
associates with Sin3a, HDAC1, and YY1 as a part of complexes that form in M12
cells. Sequential immunoprecipitation studies demonstrated that Gon4l, YY1,
Sin3a, and HDAC1 could all associate as components of a single complex and that a
conserved domain spanning the central portion of Gon4l was required for formation
of this complex. When targeted to DNA, Gon4l repressed the activity of a nearby
promoter, which correlated with the ability to interact with Sin3a and HDAC1. Our
data suggest that Sin3a, HDAC1, and YY1 are co-factors for Gon4l and that Gon4l
may function as a platform for the assembly of complexes that regulate gene
expression.

© 2011 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3093903
PMID: 21454521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Virol. 2011 Aug;85(15):7474-82. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00180-11. Epub 2011 Mar 30.

The checkpoints of viral gene expression in productive and latent infection: the 
role of the HDAC/CoREST/LSD1/REST repressor complex.

Roizman B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Marjorie B. Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, The University of Chicago, 910
East 58th Street, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. bernard.roizman@bsd.uchicago.edu

At the portal of entry into the body, herpes simplex viruses (HSV) vigorously
multiply and spread until curtailed by the adaptive immune response. At the same 
time, HSV invades nerve ending-abutting infected cells and is transported in a
retrograde manner to the neuronal nucleus, where it establishes a latent (silent)
infection. At intervals, as a consequence of physical or metabolic stress, the
virus is activated and transported in an anterograde manner to the body surface. 
The progression of infection is regulated at four checkpoints. In cell culture or
at the portal of entry into the body, HSV uses components of the HDAC1- or
HDAC2/CoREST/LSD1/REST repressor complex to activate a genes (checkpoint 1) and
then uses an a protein, ICP0, to suppress the same repressor complex from
silencing post-a gene expression (checkpoint 2). In neurons destined to harbor
latent virus (checkpoint 3), HSV hijacks the same repressor complex to silence
itself as a first step in the establishment of the latent state. Suppression of
histone deacetylases (HDACs) plays a key role in the reactivation from latency
(checkpoint 4). HSV has evolved a strategy of using the same host repressor
complex to meet its diverse lifestyle needs.

PMCID: PMC3147896
PMID: 21450817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Nat Neurosci. 2011 Apr;14(4):401-3. doi: 10.1038/nn.2788.

Unwrapping HDAC1 and HDAC2 functions in Schwann cell myelination.

Miller RH.

Comment on
    Nat Neurosci. 2011 Apr;14(4):437-41.
    Nat Neurosci. 2011 Apr;14(4):429-36.

PMID: 21445062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Brain Res. 2011 Jun 17;1396:60-8. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2011.03.040. Epub 2011 
Mar 22.

Valproic acid improves outcome after rodent spinal cord injury: potential roles
of histone deacetylase inhibition.

Lv L(1), Sun Y, Han X, Xu CC, Tang YP, Dong Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Huashan Hospital, State Key Laboratory of Medical
Neurobiology, Fudan University, Shanghai, PR China.

Histone deacetylases (HDAC) inhibitors including valproic acid (VPA) have emerged
as a promising therapeutic intervention in neurological disorders. We
investigated the levels of acetylated histone and the therapeutic potential of
VPA in a rat model of spinal cord injury (SCI). At different time points (12 h, 1
day, 3 days, 1 week and 2 weeks) after SCI or sham surgery, the spinal cords were
collected to evaluate the levels of acetylated histone H3 (Ac-H3) and H4 (Ac-H4).
VPA or vehicle was injected for 1 week starting immediately after SCI and histone
acetylation, apoptosis, as well as neurobehavior were observed to test the effect
of VPA. The levels of Ac-H3 and Ac-H4 in the injured spinal cord started to
significantly decrease as early as day 1, and remained below those in uninjured
controls for at least 2 weeks after SCI. Injection of VPA markedly prevented the 
reductions of Ac-H3 and Ac-H4, upregulated the expressions of Hsp70 and Bcl-2,
reduced apoptosis and finally promoted locomotion recovery. Our data demonstrated
that SCI led to marked reduction in histone acetylation; VPA was neuroprotective 
in the SCI model, and the mechanism may involve HDAC inhibition and protective
proteins induction.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21439269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Histopathology. 2011 Apr;58(5):773-80. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2011.03797.x.
Epub 2011 Mar 25.

The significance of strong histone deacetylase 1 expression in the progression of
prostate cancer.

Song Y(1), Shiota M, Tamiya S, Kuroiwa K, Naito S, Tsuneyoshi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu 
University, Fukuoka, Japan.

AIMS: Histone deacetylases (HDACs) play important roles in many types of cancer. 
Recently, it has been reported that HDAC1 expression in prostate cancer is
significantly higher than in benign prostate cell lines and tissues. The
expression of HDAC1 in association with the clinicopathological data was
investigated to define its functional and pathological roles in prostate cancer.
METHODS AND RESULTS: HDAC1 expression was examined immunohistochemically in 148
patients with prostate cancer. Strong expression of HDAC1 in benign prostate
glands, high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) and prostate cancer 
was observed in 17/148 (11%), 19/71 (27%) and 69/148 (47%) patients. Strong HDAC1
expression was correlated with high Gleason score (P = 0.025) and high pT stage
(P = 0.012). Patients with strong HDAC1 expression had higher biochemical
recurrence rates (P = 0.0010). Furthermore, strong HDAC1 expression had a
significant impact on patient biochemical recurrence rates in multivariate
analysis (P = 0.004).
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that overexpression of HDAC1 contributes to
progression and poor prognosis in prostate cancer. The findings may play an
important role in the emergence of effective new approaches for therapy and
prognostic markers of prostate cancer.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Limited.

PMID: 21438903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Apr 5;108(14):5620-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1014890108. Epub 2011 Mar 21.

Histone deacetylase inhibitor treatment dramatically reduces cholesterol
accumulation in Niemann-Pick type C1 mutant human fibroblasts.

Pipalia NH(1), Cosner CC, Huang A, Chatterjee A, Bourbon P, Farley N, Helquist P,
Wiest O, Maxfield FR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10065,
USA.

Niemann-Pick type C (NPC) disease is predominantly caused by mutations in the
NPC1 protein that affect intracellular cholesterol trafficking and cause
accumulation of unesterified cholesterol and other lipids in lysosomal storage
organelles. We report the use of a series of small molecule histone deacetylase
(HDAC) inhibitors in tissue culture models of NPC human fibroblasts. Some HDAC
inhibitors lead to a dramatic correction in the NPC phenotype in cells with
either one or two copies of the NPC1(I1061T) mutation, and for several of the
inhibitors, correction is associated with increased expression of NPC1 protein.
Increased NPC1(I1061T) protein levels may partially account for the correction of
the phenotype, because this mutant can promote cholesterol efflux if it is
delivered to late endosomes and lysosomes. The HDAC inhibitor treatment is
ineffective in an NPC2 mutant human fibroblast line. Analysis of the isoform
selectivity of the compounds used implicates HDAC1 and/or HDAC2 as likely targets
for the observed correction, although other HDACs may also play a role. LBH589
(panobinostat) is an orally available HDAC inhibitor that crosses the blood-brain
barrier and is currently in phase III clinical trials for several types of
cancer. It restores cholesterol homeostasis in cultured NPC1 mutant fibroblasts
to almost normal levels within 72 h when used at 40 nM. The findings that HDAC
inhibitors can correct cholesterol storage defects in human NPC1 mutant cells
provide the potential basis for treatment options for NPC disease.

PMCID: PMC3078401
PMID: 21436030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Cell Res. 2011 Jun;21(6):911-21. doi: 10.1038/cr.2011.47. Epub 2011 Mar 22.

Smek promotes histone deacetylation to suppress transcription of Wnt target gene 
brachyury in pluripotent embryonic stem cells.

Lyu J(1), Jho EH, Lu W.

Author information: 
(1)The Eli and Edythe Broad Center for Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell
Research, University of Southern California, Keck School of Medicine, Los
Angeles, CA 90033, USA. kohono@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp

In embryonic stem cells (ESCs), Wnt-responsive development-related genes are
silenced to maintain pluripotency and their expression is activated during
differentiation. Acetylation of histones by histone acetyltransferases stimulates
transcription, whereas deacetylation of histones by HDACs is correlated with
transcriptional repression. Although Wnt-mediated gene transcription has been
intimately linked to the acetylation or deacetylation of histones, how Wnt
signaling regulates this type of histone modification is poorly understood. Here,
we report that Smek, a regulatory subunit of protein phosphatase 4 (PP4) complex,
plays an important role in histone deacetylation and silencing of the
Wnt-responsive gene, brachyury, in ESCs. Smek mediates recruitment of PP4c and
HDAC1 to the Tcf/Lef binding site of the brachyury promoter and inhibits
brachyury expression in ESCs. Activation of Wnt signaling during differentiation 
causes disruption of the Smek/PP4c/HDAC1 complex, resulting in an increase in
histones H3 and H4 acetylation at the brachyury gene locus. These results suggest
that the Smek-containing PP4 complex represses transcription of Wnt-responsive
development-related genes through histone deacetylation, and that this complex is
essential for ESC pluripotency maintenance.

PMCID: PMC3203701
PMID: 21423269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Nat Neurosci. 2011 Apr;14(4):437-41. doi: 10.1038/nn.2780. Epub 2011 Mar 20.

HDAC-mediated deacetylation of NF-<U+03BA>B is critical for Schwann cell myelination.

Chen Y(1), Wang H, Yoon SO, Xu X, Hottiger MO, Svaren J, Nave KA, Kim HA, Olson
EN, Lu QR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology and Kent Waldrep Foundation Center for
Basic Neuroscience Research on Nerve Growth and Regeneration, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2011 Apr;14(4):401-3.

Schwann cell myelination is tightly regulated by timely expression of key
transcriptional regulators that respond to specific environmental cues, but the
molecular mechanisms underlying such a process are poorly understood. We found
that the acetylation state of NF-<U+03BA>B, which is regulated by histone deacetylases
(HDACs) 1 and 2, is critical for orchestrating the myelination program. Mice
lacking both HDACs 1 and 2 (HDAC1/2) exhibited severe myelin deficiency with
Schwann cell development arrested at the immature stage. NF-<U+03BA>B p65 became heavily
acetylated in HDAC1/2 mutants, inhibiting the expression of positive regulators
of myelination and inducing the expression of differentiation inhibitors. We
observed that the NF-<U+03BA>B protein complex switched from associating with p300 to
associating with HDAC1/2 as Schwann cells differentiated. NF-<U+03BA>B and HDAC1/2 acted
in a coordinated fashion to regulate the transcriptionally linked chromatin state
for Schwann cell myelination. Thus, our results reveal an HDAC-mediated
developmental switch for controlling myelination in the peripheral nervous
system.

PMCID: PMC3074381
PMID: 21423191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Nat Neurosci. 2011 Apr;14(4):429-36. doi: 10.1038/nn.2762. Epub 2011 Mar 20.

HDAC1 and HDAC2 control the transcriptional program of myelination and the
survival of Schwann cells.

Jacob C(1), Christen CN, Pereira JA, Somandin C, Baggiolini A, Lötscher P,
Ozçelik M, Tricaud N, Meijer D, Yamaguchi T, Matthias P, Suter U.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland. claire.jacob@cell.biol.ethz.ch

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2011 Apr;14(4):401-3.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are major epigenetic regulators. We show that HDAC1 
and HDAC2 functions are critical for myelination of the peripheral nervous
system. Using mouse genetics, we have ablated Hdac1 and Hdac2 specifically in
Schwann cells, resulting in massive Schwann cell loss and virtual absence of
myelin in mutant sciatic nerves. Expression of Sox10 and Krox20, the main
transcriptional regulators of Schwann cell myelination, was greatly reduced. We
demonstrate that in Schwann cells, HDAC1 and HDAC2 exert specific primary
functions: HDAC2 activates the transcriptional program of myelination in synergy 
with Sox10, whereas HDAC1 controls Schwann cell survival by regulating the levels
of active ß-catenin.

PMID: 21423190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Apr 15;407(3):587-92. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.03.068. Epub 2011 Mar 21.

Overexpression of HDAC1 induces cellular senescence by Sp1/PP2A/pRb pathway.

Chuang JY(1), Hung JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, National Cheng-Kung University, Tainan 701,
Taiwan.

Senescence is associated with decreased activities of DNA replication, protein
synthesis, and cellular division, which can result in deterioration of cellular
functions. Herein, we report that the growth and division of tumor cells were
significantly repressed by overexpression of histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1 with
the Tet-off induced system or transient transfection. In addition, HDAC1
overexpression led to senescence through both an accumulation of
hypophosphorylated active retinoblastoma protein (pRb) and an increase in the
protein level of protein phosphatase 2A catalytic subunit (PP2Ac). HDAC1
overexpression also increased the level of Sp1 deacetylation and elevated the
interaction between Sp1 and p300, and subsequently that Sp1/p300 complex bound to
the promoter of PP2Ac, thus leading to induction of PP2Ac expression. Similar
results were obtained in the HDAC1-Tet-off stable clone. Taken together, these
results indicate that HDAC1 overexpression restrained cell proliferation and
induced premature senescence in cervical cancer cells through a novel
Sp1/PP2A/pRb pathway.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21420382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Virol. 2011 May;85(10):4993-5002. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02265-10. Epub 2011 Mar 16.

Activities of ICP0 involved in the reversal of silencing of quiescent herpes
simplex virus 1.

Ferenczy MW(1), Ranayhossaini DJ, Deluca NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, 514 Bridgeside Point II, 450 Technology Dr., Pittsburgh, PA
15219, USA.

ICP0 is a transcriptional activating protein required for the efficient
replication and reactivation of latent herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1). Multiple
regions of ICP0 contribute its activity, the most prominent of which appears to
be the RING finger, which confers E3 ubiquitin ligase activity. A region in the C
terminus of ICP0 has also been implicated in several activities, including the
disruption of a cellular repressor complex, REST/CoREST/HDAC1/2/LSD1. We used
quiescent infection of MRC-5 cells with a virus that does not express
immediate-early proteins, followed by superinfection with various viral mutants
to quantify the ability of ICP0 variants to reactivate gene expression and alter 
chromatin structure. Superinfection with wild-type virus resulted in a 400-fold
increase in expression from the previously quiescent d109 genome, the removal of 
heterochromatin and histones from the viral genome, and an increase in histone
marks associated with activated transcription. RING finger mutants were unable to
reactivate transcription or remove heterochromatin from d109, while mutants that 
are unable to bind CoREST activate gene expression from quiescent d109, albeit to
a lesser degree than the wild-type virus. One such mutant, R8507, resulted in the
partial removal of heterochromatin. Infection with R8507 did not result in the
hyperacetylation of H3 and H4. The results demonstrate that (i) consistent with
previous findings, the RING finger domain of ICP0 is required for the activation 
of quiescent genomes, (ii) the RF domain is also crucial for the ultimate removal
of repressive chromatin, (iii) activities or interactions specified by the
carboxy-terminal region of ICP0 significantly contribute to activation, and (iv) 
while the effects of the R8507 on chromatin are consistent with a role for
REST/CoREST/HDAC1/2/LSD1 in the repression of quiescent genomes, the mutation may
also affect other activities involved in derepression.

PMCID: PMC3126212
PMID: 21411540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Reprod Domest Anim. 2011 Dec;46(6):1022-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1439-0531.2011.01778.x.
Epub 2011 Mar 16.

Histone deacetylase 1 down-regulation on developmental capability and histone
acetylation in bovine oocytes and parthenogenetic embryos.

Wang Z(1), Zhao T, Zhang P, Zhang S, Guan J, Ma X, Yin Y, Zhang J, Tang B, Li Z.

Author information: 
(1)Jilin Provincial Key Laboratory of Animal Embryo Engineering, College of
Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin,
China.

Histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) is one of the most conserved enzymes present in the
nuclei of cells, including bovine oocytes and pre-implantation embryos. However, 
the biological functions of HDAC1 in supporting the growth and development of
bovine oocytes and embryos are still not fully elucidates. In this study, three
siRNAs (si299, si672, and si1272) targeting to HDAC1 mRNA sequence were designed.
After transfection into bovine fibroblast cells, si299, the most effective one in
HDAC1 knock-down, was selected. The selected siRNA was microinjected into bovine 
germinal vesicle (GV) stage oocytes to determine the functions of HDAC1 in the
maturation of bovine oocytes. Finally, the siRNA was microinjected into mature
oocytes, which were then parthenogenetically activated and cultured in vitro
until the blastocyst stage. The rates of cleavage, blastocyst development and
acetylation of lysine 14 of H3 (H3K14) state were checked. The results suggest
that HDAC1 knock-down in oocytes did not influence the rates of maturation or
cleavage of parthenogenetic embryos. However, the rates of blastocyst decreased
after siRNA microinjection. Furthermore, histone H3K14 acetylation level
increased after siRNA microinjection into parthenogenetic embryos.

© 2011 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

PMID: 21410564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. FEBS Lett. 2011 Apr 6;585(7):1103-11. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2011.03.017. Epub
2011 Mar 12.

Novel histone deacetylase inhibitor NCH-51 activates latent HIV-1 gene
expression.

Victoriano AF(1), Imai K, Togami H, Ueno T, Asamitsu K, Suzuki T, Miyata N,
Ochiai K, Okamoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Nagoya City University Graduate 
School for Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan.

Pharmacological manipulations to purge human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) from
latent reservoirs have been considered as an adjuvant therapeutic approach to
highly-active antiretroviral therapy for the eradication of HIV. Our novel
histone deacetylase inhibitor NCH-51 induced expression of latent HIV-1 with
minimal cytotoxicity. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, we observed a
reduction of HDAC1 occupancy, histone hyperacetylation and the recruitment of
positive transcription factors at the HIV-1 promoter in latently infected-cells
under the treatment with NCH-51. Mutation studies of the long terminal repeat
(LTR) revealed NCH-51 mediated gene expression through the Sp1 sites. When Sp1
expression was knocked-down by small interfering RNA, the NCH-51-mediated
activation of a stably integrated HIV-1 LTR was attenuated. Moreover, the Sp1
inhibitor mithramycin A abolished the effects of NCH-51.

Copyright © 2011 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21402072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Biol Chem. 2011 May 6;286(18):15698-706. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.195362. Epub
2011 Mar 9.

Down-regulation of the tumor suppressor C-terminal Src kinase (Csk)-binding
protein (Cbp)/PAG1 is mediated by epigenetic histone modifications via the
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)/phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)
pathway.

Suzuki K(1), Oneyama C, Kimura H, Tajima S, Okada M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncogene Research, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases,
Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

The transmembrane adaptor protein Cbp (or PAG1) functions as a suppressor of
Src-mediated tumor progression by promoting the inactivation of Src. The
expression of Cbp is down-regulated in Src-transformed cells and in various human
cancer cells, suggesting a potential role for Cbp as a tumor suppressor. However,
the mechanisms underlying the down-regulation of Cbp remain unknown. The present 
study shows that Cbp expression is down-regulated by epigenetic histone
modifications via the MAPK/PI3K pathway. In mouse embryonic fibroblasts,
transformation by oncogenic Src and Ras induced a marked down-regulation of Cbp
expression. The levels of Cbp expression were inversely correlated with the
activity of MEK and Akt, and Cbp down-regulation was suppressed by inhibiting MEK
and PI3K. Src transformation did not affect the stability of Cbp mRNA, the
transcriptional activity of the cbp promoter, or the DNA methylation status of
the cbp promoter CpG islands. However, Cbp expression was restored by treatment
with histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors and by siRNA-mediated knockdown of
HDAC1/2. Src transformation significantly decreased the acetylation levels of
histone H4 and increased the trimethylation levels of histone H3 lysine 27 in the
cbp promoter. EGF-induced Cbp down-regulation was also suppressed by inhibiting
MEK and HDAC. Furthermore, the inhibition of MEK or HDAC restored Cbp expression 
in human cancer cells harboring Cbp down-regulation through promoter
hypomethylation. These findings suggest that Cbp down-regulation is primarily
mediated by epigenetic histone modifications via oncogenic MAPK/PI3K pathways in 
a subset of cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3091178
PMID: 21388951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Mol Cancer Res. 2011 Apr;9(4):418-29. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-10-0511. Epub
2011 Mar 7.

EZH2-dependent suppression of a cellular senescence phenotype in melanoma cells
by inhibition of p21/CDKN1A expression.

Fan T(1), Jiang S, Chung N, Alikhan A, Ni C, Lee CC, Hornyak TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Dermatology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins such as Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) are
epigenetic transcriptional repressors that function through recognition and
modification of histone methylation and chromatin structure. Targets of PcG
include cell cycle regulatory proteins which govern cell cycle progression and
cellular senescence. Senescence is a characteristic of melanocytic nevi, benign
melanocytic proliferations that can be precursors of malignant melanoma. In this 
study, we report that EZH2, which we find absent in melanocytic nevi but
expressed in many or most metastatic melanoma cells, functionally suppresses the 
senescent state in human melanoma cells. EZH2 depletion in melanoma cells
inhibits cell proliferation, restores features of a cellular senescence
phenotype, and inhibits growth of melanoma xenografts in vivo. p21/CDKN1A is
activated upon EZH2 knockdown in a p53-independent manner and contributes
substantially to cell cycle arrest and induction of a senescence phenotype. EZH2 
depletion removes histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) from the CDKN1A transcriptional
start site and downstream region, enhancing histone 3 acetylation globally and at
CDKN1A. This results in recruitment of RNA polymerase II, leading to p21/CDKN1A
activation. Depletion of EZH2 synergistically activates p21/CDKN1A expression in 
combination with the HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A. Since melanomas often retain 
wild-type p53 function activating p21, our findings describe a novel mechanism
whereby EZH2 activation during tumor progression represses p21, leading to
suppression of cellular senescence and enhanced tumorigenicity.

PMCID: PMC3078218
PMID: 21383005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Neurol Sci. 2011 May 15;304(1-2):1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2011.02.017. Epub 2011
Mar 5.

HDAC6 a-tubulin deacetylase: a potential therapeutic target in neurodegenerative 
diseases.

Li G(1), Jiang H, Chang M, Xie H, Hu L.

Author information: 
(1)Proteomics Laboratory, Department of Neurology, the First Hospital, Jilin
University, Changchun 130021, China.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs), or lysine deacetylases (KDAC), are epigenetic
regulators that catalyze the removal of acetyl moieties from the tails of lysine 
residues of histones and other proteins. To date, eighteen HDAC family members
(HDAC1-11 and SIRT1-7) have been identified and grouped into four classes
according to their homology to yeast histone deacetylases. HDACs play an
important role in regulating gene transcription as well as a variety of cellular 
functions. Recent studies have found that HDAC6 (a-tubulin deacetylase) has the
novel ability to capture a-tubulin as a substrate and regulate the physiological 
level of its acetylated form. In addition, a growing body of evidence suggests
that a-tubulin deacetylase plays a critical role in the cellular response to the 
accumulation of misfolded and aggregated proteins, which are a prominent
pathological feature common to many age-related neurodegenerative disorders such 
as Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, and Huntington's diseases. Therefore, the role of
a-tubulin deacetylase and its potential as a therapeutic target for
neurodegenerative diseases are areas of rapidly expanding investigation. Here we 
review the research of the role played by HDAC6 in the regulation of tubulin
modification and aggresome formation. We also summarize the specific inhibitors
of HDAC6 and address reports that implicate HDAC6 in various neurodegenerative
disorders.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21377170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. ChemMedChem. 2011 Apr 4;6(4):698-712. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.201000535. Epub 2011 Mar 
4.

Novel cinnamyl hydroxyamides and 2-aminoanilides as histone deacetylase
inhibitors: apoptotic induction and cytodifferentiation activity.

Valente S(1), Tardugno M, Conte M, Cirilli R, Perrone A, Ragno R, Simeoni S,
Tramontano A, Massa S, Nebbioso A, Miceli M, Franci G, Brosch G, Altucci L, Mai
A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Pasteur-Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti, Dipartimento di Chimica e
Tecnologie del Farmaco, Università degli Studi di Roma "La Sapienza", P.le A.
Moro 5, 00185 Roma, Italy.

Four novel series of cinnamyl-containing histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors
1-4 are described, containing hydroxamate (1 and 3) or 2-aminoanilide (2 and 4)
derivatives. When screened against class I (maize HD1-B and human HDAC1) and
class II (maize HD1-A and human HDAC4) HDACs, most hydroxamates and
2-aminoanilides displayed potent and selective inhibition toward class I enzymes.
Immunoblotting analyses performed in U937 leukemia cells generally revealed high 
acetyl-H3 and low acetyl-a-tubulin levels. Exceptions are compounds 3<U+2009>f-i, 3<U+2009>m-o,
and 4<U+2009>k, which showed higher tubulin acetylation than SAHA. In U937 cells,
cell-cycle blockade in either the G2/M or G1/S phase was observed with 1-4. Five 
hydroxamates (compounds 1<U+2009>h-l) effected a two- to greater than threefold greater 
percent apoptosis than SAHA, and in the CD11c cytodifferentiation test some
2-aminoanilides belonging to both series 2 and 4 were more active than MS-275.
The highest-scoring derivatives in terms of apoptosis (1<U+2009>k, 1<U+2009>l) or
cytodifferentiation (2<U+2009>c, 4<U+2009>n) also showed antiproliferative activity in U937
cells, thus representing valuable tools for study in other cancer contexts.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21374822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Mar 8;108(10):4123-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1015081108. Epub 2011 Feb 18.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors attenuate cardiac hypertrophy by
suppressing autophagy.

Cao DJ(1), Wang ZV, Battiprolu PK, Jiang N, Morales CR, Kong Y, Rothermel BA,
Gillette TG, Hill JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine (Cardiology), University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) regulate cardiac plasticity; however, their
molecular targets are unknown. As autophagy contributes to pathological cardiac
remodeling, we hypothesized that HDAC inhibitors target autophagy. The
prototypical HDAC inhibitor (HDACi), trichostatin A (TSA), attenuated both load- 
and agonist-induced hypertrophic growth and abolished the associated activation
of autophagy. Phenylephrine (PE)-triggered hypertrophy and autophagy in cultured 
cardiomyocytes were each blocked by a panel of structurally distinct HDAC
inhibitors. RNAi-mediated knockdown of either Atg5 or Beclin 1, two essential
autophagy effectors, was similarly capable of suppressing ligand-induced
autophagy and myocyte growth. RNAi experiments uncovered the class I isoforms
HDAC1 and HDAC2 as required for the autophagic response. To test the functional
requirement of autophagic activation, we studied mice that overexpress Beclin 1
in cardiomyocytes. In these animals with a fourfold amplified autophagic response
to TAC, TSA abolished TAC-induced increases in autophagy and blunted load-induced
hypertrophy. Finally, we subjected animals with preexisting hypertrophy to HDACi,
finding that ventricular mass reverted to near-normal levels and ventricular
function normalized completely. Together, these data implicate autophagy as an
obligatory element in pathological cardiac remodeling and point to HDAC1/2 as
required effectors. Also, these data reveal autophagy as a previously unknown
target of HDAC inhibitor therapy.

PMCID: PMC3053983
PMID: 21367693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Cell Death Dis. 2010 May 20;1:e44. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2010.21.

Histone deacetylase 1 and 2 differentially regulate apoptosis by opposing effects
on extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2.

Lei WW(1), Zhang KH, Pan XC, Wang DM, Hu Y, Yang YN, Song JG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai, China.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are epigenetic regulators that are important for the
control of various pathophysiological events. We found that HDAC inhibitors
completely abolished transforming growth factor-ß1 (TGF-ß1)-induced apoptosis in 
AML-12 and primary mouse hepatocytes. Expression of a dominant-negative mutant of
HDAC1 or downregulation of HDAC1 by RNAi both suppressed TGF-ß1-induced
apoptosis. In addition, overexpression of HDAC1 enhanced TGF-ß1-induced
apoptosis, and the rescue of HDAC1 expression in HDAC1 RNAi cells restored the
apoptotic response of cells to TGF-ß1. These data indicate that HDAC1 functions
as a proapoptotic factor in TGF-ß1-induced apoptosis. In contrast, downregulation
of HDAC2 by RNAi increased spontaneous apoptosis and markedly enhanced
TGF-ß1-induced apoptosis, suggesting that HDAC2 has a reciprocal role in
controlling cell survival. Furthermore, inhibition of extracellular
signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) by MEK1 inhibitor PD98059 or expression of a
kinase-dead mutant of MEK1 restored the apoptotic response to TGF-ß1 in HDAC1
RNAi cells. Strikingly, HDAC2 RNAi caused an inhibition of ERK1/2, and the
spontaneous apoptosis can be abolished by reactivation of ERK1/2. Taken together,
our data demonstrate that HDAC1 and 2 reciprocally affect cell viability by
differential regulation of ERK1/2; these observations provide insight into the
roles and potential mechanisms of HDAC1 and 2 in apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC3032309
PMID: 21364650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. PLoS One. 2011 Feb 16;6(2):e17138. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017138.

Inhibition of histone deacetylases 1 and 6 enhances cytarabine-induced apoptosis 
in pediatric acute myeloid leukemia cells.

Xu X(1), Xie C, Edwards H, Zhou H, Buck SA, Ge Y.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Therapeutics Program, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute,
Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan, United States of
America.

BACKGROUND: Pediatric acute myeloid leukemia (AML) remains a challenging disease 
to treat even with intensified cytarabine-based chemotherapy. Histone
deacetylases (HDACs) have been reported to be promising therapeutic targets for
treating AML. However, HDAC family members that are involved in chemotherapy
sensitivities remain unknown. In this study, we sought to identify members of the
HDAC family that are involved in cytarabine sensitivities, and to select the
optimal HDACI that is most efficacious when combined with cytarabine for treating
children with AML.
METHODOLOGY: Expression profiles of classes I, II, and IV HDACs in 4 pediatric
AML cell lines were determined by Western blotting. Inhibition of class I HDACs
by different HDACIs was measured post immnunoprecipitation. Individual
down-regulation of HDACs in pediatric AML cells was performed with lentiviral
shRNA. The effects of cytarabine and HDACIs on apoptosis were determined by flow 
cytometry analysis.
RESULTS: Treatments with structurally diverse HDACIs and HDAC shRNA knockdown
experiments revealed that down-regulation of both HDACs 1 and 6 is critical in
enhancing cytarabine-induced apoptosis in pediatric AML, at least partly mediated
by Bim. However, down-regulation of HDAC2 may negatively impact cytarabine
sensitivities in the disease. At clinically achievable concentrations, HDACIs
that simultaneously inhibited both HDACs 1 and 6 showed the best anti-leukemic
activities and significantly enhanced cytarabine-induced apoptosis.
CONCLUSION: Our results further confirm that HDACs are bona fide therapeutic
targets for treating pediatric AML and suggest that pan-HDACIs may be more
beneficial than isoform-specific drugs.

PMCID: PMC3040224
PMID: 21359182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Blood. 2011 Apr 14;117(15):4085-94. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-07-294470. Epub 2011 
Feb 23.

C/EBPa and C/EBPa oncoproteins regulate nfkb1 and displace histone deacetylases
from NF-<U+03BA>B p50 homodimers to induce NF-<U+03BA>B target genes.

Paz-Priel I(1), Houng S, Dooher J, Friedman AD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Oncology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA. 
ipazpri1@jhmi.edu

Mutated CEBPA defines a subgroup of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). We have
previously shown that C/EBPa or its AML mutants synergize with NF-<U+03BA>B p50 to
activate antiapoptotic genes, including BCL2 and FLIP. Furthermore, p50 binds and
activates the CEBPA gene in myeloid cells. We now report that C/EBPa or C/EBPa
leucine zipper AML mutants bind in vivo to the nfkb1 (p50) promoter and induce
its expression even in the presence of cycloheximide. Induction of p50 by C/EBPa 
depends on 2 conserved <U+03BA>B sites in the nfkb1 promoter. C/EBPa did not induce p65 
expression. Thus, C/EBPa and p50 reciprocally regulate each other's expression,
establishing a positive feedback relationship. Although p50 homodimers inhibit
transcription, C/EBPa and p50 synergistically activate antiapoptotic genes. ChIP 
analysis showed that C/EBPa diminishes the occupation of histone deacetylase 1
(HDAC1) or HDAC3 on the endogenous FLIP promoter but not in mice lacking p50.
Coimmunoprecipitation confirmed that C/EBPa, its AML variants, or C/EBPß disrupt 
interaction between p50 and HDACs dependent on the C/EBP basic region. These
findings suggest that C/EBPs displace HDACs from p50 homodimers bound to
antiapoptotic genes, contributing to NF-<U+03BA>B dysregulation in leukemia, and that
the C/EBPa:p50 complex is a potential therapeutic target.

PMCID: PMC3087533
PMID: 21346255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Cell Physiol. 2011 Dec;226(12):3385-91. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22691.

HDAC1/NF<U+03BA>B pathway is involved in curcumin inhibiting of Tat-mediated long
terminal repeat transactivation.

Zhang HS(1), Ruan Z, Sang WW.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science & Bioengineering, Beijing University of Technology,
Beijing, China. zhanghs@bjut.edu.cn

Chromatin remodeling, especially in relation to the transactivator Tat, is an
essential event for human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) transcription.
Curcumin has been shown to suppress pathways linked to HIV-1 replication. We
investigated whether curcumin had the potential to inhibit Tat-induced long
terminal repeat region (LTR) transactivation. As we shown, curcumin inhibited
Tat-induced LTR transcativation, while knockdown of histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1)
by siRNA potentiated Tat-induced HIV-1 transcativation. Curcumin reversed
Tat-induced down-regulation of HDAC1 expression in multinuclear activation of
galactosidase indicator (MAGI) cells. Treatment with curcumin reversed
Tat-induced dissociation of HDAC1 from LTR; and curcumin caused a decline in the 
binding of p65/NF<U+03BA>B to LTR promoters stimulated by Tat. Curcumin attenuated
Tat-induced p65 phosphorylation and IKK phosphorylation. Curcumin reversed
Tat-mediated reduction in AMPK activation and downstream acetyl-CoA carboxylase
(ACC) activation. Collectively, our data provide new insights into understanding 
of the molecular mechanisms of curcumin inhibited Tat-regulated transcription,
suggesting that targeting AMPK/HDAC1/NF<U+03BA>B pathway could serve as new anti-HIV-1
agents.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21344388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Exp Cell Res. 2011 Jul 1;317(11):1534-40. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2011.02.001. Epub 
2011 Feb 14.

MRG15 activates the cdc2 promoter via histone acetylation in human cells.

Peña AN(1), Tominaga K, Pereira-Smith OM.

Author information: 
(1)Sam and Ann Barshop Institute for Longevity and Aging Studies, The University 
of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, TX, USA. andreana.pena@gmail.com

Chromatin remodeling is required for transcriptional activation and repression.
MRG15 (MORF4L1), a chromatin modulator, is a highly conserved protein and is
present in complexes containing histone acetyltransferases (HATs) as well as
histone deacetylases (HDACs). Loss of expression of MRG15 in mice and Drosophila 
results in embryonic lethality and fibroblast and neural stem/progenitor cells
cultured from Mrg15 null mouse embryos exhibit marked proliferative defects when 
compared with wild type cells. To determine the role of MRG15 in cell cycle
progression we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation with an antibody to MRG15 
on normal human fibroblasts as they entered the cell cycle from a quiescent
state, and analyzed various cell cycle gene promoters. The results demonstrated a
3-fold increase in MRG15 occupancy at the cdc2 promoter during S phase of the
cell cycle and a concomitant increase in acetylated histone H4. H4 lysine 12 was 
acetylated at 24 h post-serum stimulation while there was no change in
acetylation of lysine 16. HDAC1 and 2 were decreased at this promoter during cell
cycle progression. Over-expression of MRG15 in HeLa cells activated a cdc2
promoter-reporter construct in a dose-dependent manner, whereas knockdown of
MRG15 resulted in decreased promoter activity. In order to implicate HAT
activity, we treated cells with the HAT inhibitor anacardic acid and determined
that HAT inhibition results in loss of expression of cdc2 mRNA. Further,
chromatin immunoprecipitation with Tip60 localizes the protein to the same 110bp 
stretch of the cdc2 promoter pulled down by MRG15. Additionally, we determined
that cotransfection of MRG15 with the known associated HAT Tip60 had a
cooperative effect in activating the cdc2 promoter. These results suggest that
MRG15 is acting in a HAT complex involving Tip60 to modify chromatin via
acetylation of histone H4 at the cdc2 promoter to activate transcription.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3410549
PMID: 21324423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Cell Physiol. 2011 Dec;226(12):3190-6. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22679.

The regulatory role of histone deacetylase inhibitors in Fgf4 expression is
dependent on the differentiation state of pluripotent stem cells.

Shi G(1), Gao F, Jin Y.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences/Shanghai JiaoTong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

The identity of embryonic stem cells (ESCs) is controlled by a set of
pluripotency genes, including Oct4, Sox2, Nanog, and Fgf4. How their expression
is repressed during differentiation and reactivated during reprogramming is
largely unknown. Here, using mouse ESCs as well as F9 and P19 cells (mouse
embryonal carcinoma cell lines, P19 being considered further differentiated than 
F9 cells) as models, we found that HDAC inhibitors elevated Fgf4 expression in
P19 cells, but reduced it in F9 cells. We also observed that HDAC inhibitors
enhanced the expression of Fgf4 and a subset of pluripotency genes in
differentiated ESCs, but reduced their expression in undifferentiated and less
differentiated ESCs. Mechanistically, we observed more HDAC1 recruitment and a
weaker association of histone 4 lysine 5 acetylation at the Fgf4 enhancer in P19 
cells compared to F9 cells. Additionally, we demonstrated the interaction between
Sox2 and HDAC1 both in vitro and in vivo, implicating a possible role for Sox2 in
the recruitment of HDAC1 to the Fgf4 enhancer. We also found that Nanog bound to 
the Fgf4 enhancer, and this binding was stronger in F9 cells, indicating the
involvement of Nanog in the regulation of Fgf4 expression in undifferentiated and
less differentiated pluripotent stem cells. This study uncovers an important role
of HDAC1 and histone modifications in the repression of Fgf4 and perhaps other
pluripotency genes during ESC differentiation. Our results also suggest that HDAC
inhibitors may promote reprogramming partially through activating pluripotency
genes at some intermediate stages.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21321941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Mar 11;406(2):292-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.02.035. Epub 2011 Feb 12.

Decreased histone deacetylase 2 impairs Nrf2 activation by oxidative stress.

Mercado N(1), Thimmulappa R, Thomas CM, Fenwick PS, Chana KK, Donnelly LE, Biswal
S, Ito K, Barnes PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Airway Disease Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College,
London SW3 6LY, UK.

Nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) plays a crucial role in
cellular defence against oxidative stress by inducing the expression of multiple 
anti-oxidant genes. However, where high levels of oxidative stress are observed, 
such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), Nrf2 activity is reduced,
although the molecular mechanism for this defect is uncertain. Here, we show that
down-regulation of histone deacetylase (HDAC) 2 causes Nrf2 instability,
resulting in reduced anti-oxidant gene expression and increase sensitivity to
oxidative stress. Although Nrf2 protein was clearly stabilized after hydrogen
peroxide (H(2)O(2)) stimulation in a bronchial epithelial cell line (BEAS2B),
Nrf2 stability was decreased and Nrf2 acetylation increased in the presence of an
HDAC inhibitor, trichostatin A (TSA). TSA also reduced Nrf2-regulated
heme-oxygenase-1 (HO-1) expression in these cells, and this was confirmed in
acute cigarette-smoke exposed mice in vivo. HDAC2 knock-down by RNA interference 
resulted in reduced H(2)O(2)-induced Nrf2 protein stability and activity in
BEAS2B cells, whereas HDAC1 knockdown had no effect. Furthermore,
monocyte-derived macrophages obtained from healthy volunteers (non-smokers and
smokers) and COPD patients showed a significant correlation between HDAC2
expression and Nrf2 expression (r=0.92, p<0.0001). Thus, reduced HDAC2 activity
in COPD may account for increased Nrf2 acetylation, reduced Nrf2 stability and
impaired anti oxidant defences.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3061319
PMID: 21320471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. PLoS One. 2011 Feb 2;6(2):e16727. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016727.

Histone deacetylase activity modulates alternative splicing.

Hnilicová J(1), Hozeifi S, Duková E, Icha J, Tománková T, Stanek D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of RNA Biology, Institute of Molecular Genetics AS CR, Prague,
Czech Republic.

There is increasing evidence to suggest that splicing decisions are largely made 
when the nascent RNA is still associated with chromatin. Here we demonstrate that
activity of histone deacetylases (HDACs) influences splice site selection. Using 
splicing-sensitive microarrays, we identified ~700 genes whose splicing was
altered after HDAC inhibition. We provided evidence that HDAC inhibition induced 
histone H4 acetylation and increased RNA Polymerase II (Pol II) processivity
along an alternatively spliced element. In addition, HDAC inhibition reduced
co-transcriptional association of the splicing regulator SRp40 with the target
fibronectin exon. We further showed that the depletion of HDAC1 had similar
effect on fibronectin alternative splicing as global HDAC inhibition.
Importantly, this effect was reversed upon expression of mouse HDAC1 but not a
catalytically inactive mutant. These results provide a molecular insight into a
complex modulation of splicing by HDACs and chromatin modifications.

PMCID: PMC3032741
PMID: 21311748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Cancer Biol Ther. 2011 Apr 1;11(7):659-70. Epub 2011 Apr 1.

Histone deacetylase 1 is required for exocrine pancreatic epithelial
proliferation in development and cancer.

Zhou W(1), Liang IC, Yee NS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Oncology and Blood & Marrow Transplantation,
Department of Internal Medicine, Carver College of Medicine, Program of Cancer
Signaling and Experimental Therapeutics, Holden Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of Iowa, Iowa City, USA.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) play important roles in the epigenetic control of
development, and aberrant expression of HDACs has been implicated in human
diseases including cancer. Among the mammalian HDACs, HDAC1 has been extensively 
studied, but its role in exocrine pancreatic morphogenesis and cancer is still
poorly understood. The goal of this study is to determine the functional role of 
HDAC1 in normal development of exocrine pancreas using zebrafish as the model
organism as well as in human pancreatic adenocarcinoma. The zebrafish germline
loss-of-function mutation hdac1(hi1618) caused impaired cell cycle progression in
pancreatic epithelia, resulting in growth arrest and dysmorphogenesis of exocrine
pancreas. In human pancreatic adenocarcinoma tissues and cell lines, HDAC1 was
expressed at variably elevated levels. RNA interference-induced silencing of
HDAC1 diminished proliferation of the cancer cells and cell cycle progression.
The proliferative arrest in the developing exocrine pancreas and pancreatic
cancer cells was associated with up-regulated expression of the cyclin-dependent 
kinase inhibitors and the sonic hedgehog signaling components. This study
indicates that HDAC1 is required for pancreatic epithelial proliferation in
development and cancer. We hypothesize that aberrant expression of HDAC1
modulates the developmental and signaling pathways in exocrine pancreatic
epithelia and consequently the genes required for cellular proliferation during
development and progression of pancreatic neoplasia.

PMCID: PMC3084970
PMID: 21301206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Pediatr Cardiol. 2011 Mar;32(3):263-6. doi: 10.1007/s00246-011-9893-z. Epub 2011 
Feb 4.

Epigenetic regulation of E2F-1-dependent Bnip3 transcription and cell death by
nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B and histone deacetylase-1.

Gang H(1), Dhingra R, Wang Y, Mughal W, Gordon JW, Kirshenbaum LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, The Institute of Cardiovascular
Sciences, St. Boniface General Hospital Research Centre, Winnipeg, MB, R2H 2A6,
Canada.

A delicate balance exists between cell growth and cell death. In the context of
the adult myocardium, inappropriate or inordinate cell loss through an apoptotic 
process may profoundly influence cardiac structure, function, or both given the
limited and meager ability of the heart for repair after injury. Earlier work by 
the authors' laboratory identified a close relation between cell cycle factor
E2F-1 and hypoxia-inducible factor Bnip3 as the key regulator of apoptosis and
autophagy in ventricular myocytes. Epigenetic changes by histone-modifying
proteins, namely, histone deacetylases (HDACs) influence cell survival by
altering the activity of histone core proteins, transcription factors, or both.
This report highlights the intricate nature between the cellular factors E2F-1
and nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) and the epigenetic regulation of Bnip3 gene
transcription by HDAC1 for cell survival of ventricular myocytes.

PMID: 21293853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Blood. 2011 Mar 31;117(13):3658-68. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-11-318055. Epub 2011 
Feb 3.

Deciphering the molecular and biologic processes that mediate histone deacetylase
inhibitor-induced thrombocytopenia.

Bishton MJ(1), Harrison SJ, Martin BP, McLaughlin N, James C, Josefsson EC,
Henley KJ, Kile BT, Prince HM, Johnstone RW.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Therapeutics Program, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, St. Andrews Place,
East Melbourne, VIC 3002, Australia

Erratum in
    Blood. 2015 Jun 11;125(24):3824-5.

Comment in
    Exp Hematol. 2012 Feb;40(2):95-6.

Histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACI)-induced thrombocytopenia (TCP) is a major
dose-limiting toxicity of this new class of drugs. Using preclinical models to
study the molecular and biologic events that underpin this effect of HDACI, we
found that C57BL/6 mice treated with both the HDAC1/2-selective HDACI romidepsin 
and the pan-HDACI panobinostat developed significant TCP. HDACI-induced TCP was
not due to myelosuppression or reduced platelet lifespan, but to decreased
platelet release from megakaryocytes. Cultured primary murine megakaryocytes
showed reductions in proplatelet extensions after HDACI exposure and a
dose-dependent increase in the phosphorylation of myosin light chain 2 (MLC2).
Phosphorylation of MLC to phospho-MLC (pMLC) and subsequent proplatelet formation
in megakaryocytes is regulated by the Rho-GTPase proteins Rac1, CDC42, and RhoA. 
Primary mouse megakaryocytes and the human megakaryoblastic cell line Meg-01
showed reductions in Rac1, CDC42, and RhoA protein levels after treatment with
HDACIs. We were able to overcome HDACI-induced TCP by administering the
mouse-specific thrombopoietin (TPO) mimetic AMP-4, which improved platelet
numbers to levels similar to untreated controls. Our report provides the first
detailed account of the molecular and biologic processes involved in
HDACI-mediated TCP. Moreover, our preclinical studies provide evidence that
dose-limiting TCP induced by HDACIs may be circumvented using a TPO mimetic.

PMID: 21292776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 Apr;1815(2):241-52. doi: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2011.01.002. 
Epub 2011 Jan 26.

Protected from the inside: endogenous histone deacetylase inhibitors and the road
to cancer.

Di Marcotullio L(1), Canettieri G, Infante P, Greco A, Gulino A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) play a crucial role in several physiological and
pathological cell functions, including cell development and cancer, by
deacetylating both histones and others proteins. HDACs belong to a large family
of enzymes including Class I, II and IV as well as Class III or sirtuins
subfamilies, that undergo a complex transcriptional and post-translational
regulation. In current years, antitumor therapy is attempting to exploit several 
chemical classes of inhibitors that target HDACs, frequently reported to be
misregulated in cancer. Nevertheless, the identity of gene products directly
involved in tumorigenesis and preventing HDAC misregulation in cancer is still
poorly understood. Recent evidence has demonstrated that the tumor suppressors
HIC1 and DBC1 induce direct repression of Sirt1 function, whereas Chfr and
REN(KCTD11/KASH family) downregulate HDAC1, by inducing its ubiquitin-dependent
degradation. Loss of these gene products leads to imbalanced enhancement of HDAC 
activity and subsequently to oncogenesis. All these genes are frequently deleted 
or silenced in human cancers, highlighting the role of endogenous HDAC inhibitors
to counteracts HDAC-mediated tumorigenesis. Thus, endogenous HDAC inhibitors
represent a promising class of "antitumor agents" thanks to which oncogenic
addiction pathways may be selectively therapeutically targeted.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21277938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Gastrointest Cancer. 2011 Jun;42(2):85-92. doi: 10.1007/s12029-011-9257-1.

Acetylation as a transcriptional control mechanism-HDACs and HATs in pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma.

Schneider G(1), Krämer OH, Schmid RM, Saur D.

Author information: 
(1)Klinikum rechts der Isar, II. Medizinische Klinik, Technische Universität
München, Ismaninger Strasse 22, Munich, Germany. guenter.schneider@lrz.tum.de

INTRODUCTION: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is one of the most
malignant tumors with a dismal prognosis. Although our understanding of the
carcinogenesis of the disease increases continuously, no effective conservative
therapeutic strategies exist. Therefore, novel targets have to be defined at the 
experimental level. Histone deacetylases (HDACs), especially the class I
isoenzymes HDAC1, 2, and 3, are highly expressed in PDAC.
CONCLUSION: This article summarizes the expression and functions of HDAC
isoenzymes in PDAC, with a special focus on their promoter-specific mode of
action. Although we have gained some molecular insight into the HDAC function in 
PDAC, less is known about the relevance of histone acetyltransferases (HATs) in
PDAC. As an example, we will summarize function of the HAT p300, for which
promoter-specific functions were described recently. Increasing the molecular
insights into the functions of the acetylating and deacetylating machineries in
PDAC are important, since this will lead to novel rationally based therapeutic
strategies in the future.

PMID: 21271301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Pediatr Res. 2011 May;69(5 Pt 1):371-7. doi: 10.1203/PDR.0b013e318211c917.

Hyperoxia impairs alveolar formation and induces senescence through decreased
histone deacetylase activity and up-regulation of p21 in neonatal mouse lung.

Londhe VA(1), Sundar IK, Lopez B, Maisonet TM, Yu Y, Aghai ZH, Rahman I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los
Angeles, California 90095, USA. vlondhe@mednet.ucla.edu

Alveolar development comprises the transition of lung architecture from saccules 
to gas-exchange units during late gestation and early postnatal development.
Exposure to hyperoxia disrupts developmental signaling pathways and causes
alveolar hypoplasia as seen in bronchopulmonary dysplasia affecting preterm human
newborns. Expanding literature suggests that epigenetic changes caused by
environmental triggers during development may lead to heritable changes in gene
expression. Given recent data on altered histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity in
lungs of humans and animal models with airspace enlargement/emphysema, we
hypothesized that alveolar hypoplasia from hyperoxia exposure in neonatal mice is
a consequence of cell cycle arrest and reduced HDAC activity and up-regulation of
the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, p21. We exposed newborn mice to hyperoxia 
and compared lung morphologic and epigenetic changes to room air controls.
Furthermore, we pretreated a subgroup of animals with the macrolide antibiotic
azithromycin (AZM), known to possess antiinflammatory properties. Our results
showed that hyperoxia exposure resulted in alveolar hypoplasia and was associated
with decreased HDAC1 and HDAC2 and increased p53 and p21 expression. Furthermore,
AZM did not confer protection against hyperoxia-induced alveolar changes. These
findings suggest that alveolar hypoplasia caused by hyperoxia is mediated by
epigenetic changes affecting cell cycle regulation/senescence during lung
development.

PMCID: PMC3092484
PMID: 21270677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Cell Cycle. 2011 Feb 1;10(3):406-12. Epub 2011 Feb 1.

Distinct and redundant functions of histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2 in
proliferation and tumorigenesis.

Jurkin J(1), Zupkovitz G, Lagger S, Grausenburger R, Hagelkruys A, Kenner L,
Seiser C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are negative regulators of gene expression and have 
been implicated in tumorigenesis and tumor progression. Therefore, HDACs are
promising targets for anti-tumor drugs. However, the relevant isoforms of the 18 
members encompassing HDAC family have not been identified. Studies utilizing
either gene targeting or knockdown approaches reveal both specific and redundant 
functions of the closely related class I deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2 in the
control of proliferation and differentiation. Combined ablation of HDAC1 and
HDAC2 in different cell types led to a severe proliferation defects or enhanced
apoptosis supporting the idea that both enzymes are relevant targets for tumor
therapy. In a recent study on the role of HDAC1 in teratoma formation we have
reported a novel and surprising function of HDAC1 in tumorigenesis. In this tumor
model HDAC1 attenuates proliferation during teratoma formation. In the present
work we discuss new findings on redundant and unique functions of HDAC1 and HDAC2
as regulators of proliferation and tumorigenesis and potential implications for
applications of HDAC inhibitors as therapeutic drugs.

PMCID: PMC3115015
PMID: 21270520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Cancer Biol Ther. 2011 Mar 1;11(5):477-89. Epub 2011 Mar 1.

Discovery of N-hydroxy-4-(3-phenylpropanamido)benzamide derivative 5j, a novel
histone deacetylase inhibitor, as a potential therapeutic agent for human breast 
cancer.

Feng J(1), Fang H, Wang X, Jia Y, Zhang L, Jiao J, Zhang J, Gu L, Xu W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medicinal Chemistry, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Shandong 
University, Jinan, China.

A novel series of N-hydroxy-4-(3-phenylpropanamido)benzamide (HPPB) derivatives
comprising N-hydroxybenzamide group as zinc-chelating moiety were designed,
synthesized and evaluated as histone deacetylases inhibitors. The thiophene
substituted derivative 5j exhibited the best HDAC inhibition activity among these
compounds. The present study was designed to evaluate the efficacy of 5j as a
candidate compound for cancer therapy. Our results indicated that 5j exhibited
better HDAC1, 8 and hela nuclear extract inhibition activities than SAHA, and
good antiproliferative activities against a broad spectrum of human cancer cell
lines especially for breast cancer. 5j induced cell cycle arrest at G(2)/M phase,
and eventual apoptosis possibly by modulating p21, caspase-3 and Bcl-x(L) on
MDA-MB-231 cells. In addition, 5j down regulated the active form of MMP2, and
inhibited the invasion of MDA-MB-231 cell lines. Moreover, 5j significantly
delayed the growth of MDA-MB-231 xenografts in mice after 3 weeks of peritoneal
injection. In summary, our results suggest that 5j might have therapeutic
potential for the treatment of human breast cancer.

PMID: 21263218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Apr;31(7):1540-50. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01212-10. Epub 2011 Jan
24.

Arginine methylation by PRMT5 at a naturally occurring mutation site is critical 
for liver metabolic regulation by small heterodimer partner.

Kanamaluru D(1), Xiao Z, Fang S, Choi SE, Kim DH, Veenstra TD, Kemper JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Illinois,
Urbana, IL 61801, USA.

Small Heterodimer Partner (SHP) inhibits numerous transcription factors that are 
involved in diverse biological processes, including lipid and glucose metabolism.
In response to increased hepatic bile acids, SHP gene expression is induced and
the SHP protein is stabilized. We now show that the activity of SHP is also
increased by posttranslational methylation at Arg-57 by protein arginine
methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5). Adenovirus-mediated hepatic depletion of PRMT5
decreased SHP methylation and reversed the suppression of metabolic genes by SHP.
Mutation of Arg-57 decreased SHP interaction with its known cofactors, Brm,
mSin3A, and histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), but not with G9a, and decreased their 
recruitment to SHP target genes in mice. Hepatic overexpression of SHP inhibited 
metabolic target genes, decreased bile acid and hepatic triglyceride levels, and 
increased glucose tolerance. In contrast, mutation of Arg-57 selectively reversed
the inhibition of SHP target genes and metabolic outcomes. The importance of
Arg-57 methylation for the repression activity of SHP provides a molecular basis 
for the observation that a natural mutation of Arg-57 in humans is associated
with the metabolic syndrome. Targeting posttranslational modifications of SHP may
be an effective therapeutic strategy by controlling selected groups of genes to
treat SHP-related human diseases, such as metabolic syndrome, cancer, and
infertility.

PMCID: PMC3135303
PMID: 21262773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Apr;31(7):1459-69. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01316-10. Epub 2011 Jan
24.

CCN5, a novel transcriptional repressor of the transforming growth factor ß
signaling pathway.

Sabbah M(1), Prunier C, Ferrand N, Megalophonos V, Lambein K, De Wever O, Nazaret
N, Lachuer J, Dumont S, Redeuilh G.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U938, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, 184 Rue du Faubourg Saint-Antoine, 75571
Paris cedex 12, France. michele.sabbah@inserm.fr

CCN5 is a member of the CCN (connective tissue growth factor/cysteine-rich
61/nephroblastoma overexpressed) family and was identified as an
estrogen-inducible gene in estrogen receptor-positive cell lines. However, the
role of CCN5 in breast carcinogenesis remains unclear. We report here that the
CCN5 protein is localized mostly in the cytoplasm and in part in the nucleus of
human tumor breast tissue. Using a heterologous transcription assay, we
demonstrate that CCN5 can act as a transcriptional repressor presumably through
association with histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1). Microarray gene expression
analysis showed that CCN5 represses expression of genes associated with
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) as well as expression of key components
of the transforming growth factor ß (TGF-ß) signaling pathway, prominent among
them TGF-ßRII receptor. We show that CCN5 is recruited to the TGF-ßRII promoter, 
thereby providing a mechanism by which CCN5 restricts transcription of the
TGF-ßRII gene. Consistent with this finding, CCN5, we found, functions to
suppress TGF-ß-induced transcriptional responses and invasion that is concomitant
with EMT. Thus, our data uncovered CCN5 as a novel transcriptional repressor that
plays an important role in regulating tumor progression functioning, at least in 
part, by inhibiting the expression of genes involved in the TGF-ß signaling
cascade that is known to promote EMT.

PMCID: PMC3135290
PMID: 21262769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Biochimie. 2011 Apr;93(4):715-24. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2010.12.014. Epub 2011
Jan 13.

Molecular organization of the cullin E3 ligase adaptor KCTD11.

Correale S(1), Pirone L, Di Marcotullio L, De Smaele E, Greco A, Mazzà D, Moretti
M, Alterio V, Vitagliano L, Di Gaetano S, Gulino A, Pedone EM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biostructures and Bioimaging, CNR, Napoli, Italy.

The family of human proteins containing a potassium channel tetramerization
domain (KCTD) includes 21 members whose function is largely unknown. Recent
reports have however suggested that these proteins are implicated in very
important biological processes. KCTD11/REN, the best-characterized member of the 
family to date, plays a crucial role in the ubiquitination of HDAC1 by acting, in
complex with Cullin3, as an E3 ubiquitin ligase. By combining bioinformatics and 
mutagenesis analyses, here we show that the protein is expressed in two
alternative variants: a short previously characterized form (sKCTD11) composed by
232 amino acids and a longer variant (lKCTD11) which contains an N-terminal
extension of 39 residues. Interestingly, we demonstrate that lKCTD11 starts with 
a non-canonical AUU codon. Although both sKCTD11 and lKCTD11 bear a POZ/BTB
domain in their N-terminal region, this domain is complete only in the long form.
Indeed, sKCTD11 presents an incomplete POZ/BTB domain. Nonetheless, sKCTD11 is
still able to bind Cul3, although to much lesser extent than lKCTD11, and to
perform its biological activity. The heterologous expression of sKCTD11 and
lKCTD11 and their individual domains in Escherichia coli yielded soluble products
as fusion proteins only for the longer form. In contrast to the closely related
KCTD5 which is pentameric, the characterization of both lKCTD11 and its POZ/BTB
domain by gel filtration and light scattering indicates that the protein likely
forms stable tetramers. In line with this result, experiments conducted in cells 
show that the active protein is not monomeric. Based on these findings,
homology-based models were built for lKCTD11 BTB and for its complex with Cul3.
These analyses indicate that a stable lKCTD11 BTB-Cul3 three-dimensional model
with a 4:4 stoichiometry can be generated. Moreover, these models provide
insights into the determinants of the tetramer stability and into the regions
involved in lKCTD11-Cul3 recognition.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21237243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. BMC Genomics. 2011 Jan 12;12:24. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-24.

The epigenetic regulator Histone Deacetylase 1 promotes transcription of a core
neurogenic programme in zebrafish embryos.

Harrison MR(1), Georgiou AS, Spaink HP, Cunliffe VT.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental and Biomedical Genetics, Department of Biomedical
Science, University of Sheffield, Western Bank, Sheffield S10 2TN, United
Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: The epigenetic regulator Histone Deacetylase 1 (Hdac1) is required
for specification and patterning of neurones and myelinating glia during
development of the vertebrate central nervous system (CNS). This co-ordinating
function for Hdac1 is evolutionarily conserved in zebrafish and mouse, but the
mechanism of action of Hdac1 in the developing CNS is not well-understood.
RESULTS: A genome-wide comparative analysis of the transcriptomes of
Hdac1-deficient and wild-type zebrafish embryos was performed, which identified
an extensive programme of gene expression that is regulated by Hdac1 in the
developing embryo. Using time-resolved expression profiling of embryos, we then
identified a small subset of 54 genes within the Hdac1-regulated transcriptome
that specifically exhibit robust and sustained Hdac1-dependent expression from
early neurogenesis onwards. 18 of these 54 stringently Hdac1-regulated genes
encode DNA-binding transcription factors that are implicated in promoting
neuronal specification and CNS patterning, including the proneural bHLH proteins 
Ascl1a and Ascl1b, as well as Neurod4 and Neurod. Relatively few genes are
strongly repressed by Hdac1 but expression of the Notch target gene her6 is
attenuated by Hdac1 in specific sub-regions of the developing CNS, from early
stages of neurogenesis onwards. Selected members of the stringently
Hdac1-regulated group of genes were tested for Hdac1 binding to their
promoter-proximal cis-regulatory elements. Surprisingly, we found that Hdac1 is
specifically and stably associated with DNA sequences within the promoter region 
of ascl1b during neurogenesis, and that this Hdac1-ascl1b interaction is
abolished in hdac1 mutant embryos.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that Hdac1 regulates histone acetylation and methylation
in the developing zebrafish embryo and promotes the sustained, co-ordinate
transcription of a small set of transcription factor genes that control expansion
and diversification of cell fates within the developing CNS. Our in vivo
chromatin immunoprecipitation results also suggest a specific function for Hdac1 
in directly regulating transcription of a key member of this group of genes,
ascl1b, from the beginning of neurogenesis onwards. Taken together, our
observations indicate a novel role for Hdac1 as a positive regulator of gene
transcription during development of the vertebrate CNS, in addition to its more
well-established function in transcriptional repression.

PMCID: PMC3032698
PMID: 21226904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. MBio. 2010 Dec 28;2(1):e00313-10. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00313-10.

The CoREST/REST repressor is both necessary and inimical for expression of herpes
simplex virus genes.

Zhou G(1), Te D, Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)The Marjorie B. Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Herpes simplex virus type 1 encodes three sets of genes, a, ß, and <U+03B3>, whose
expression is sequentially ordered in a cascade fashion. The transactivators of a
genes comprise virion protein 16 (VP16) and the cellular proteins octamer binding
protein 1 (Oct1) and host factor 1 (HCF1). Efficient transition from a to ß gene 
expression requires the a protein ICP0 (infected cell protein 0). Earlier studies
have shown that this protein binds to CoREST and displaces HDAC1 from the
CoREST/REST/lysine-specific demethylase 1 (LSD1) repressor complex. Ultimately,
the components of the repressor complex are translocated at least in part into
the cytoplasm. A key event in activation of a genes is the recruitment of LSD1 to
demethylate histones bound to the a gene promoters. LSD1 is unstable in the
absence of its partner, CoREST, and raises the question of whether both CoREST
and REST are involved in the initiation of transcription of the a genes. Here we 
show that CoREST or REST small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) destabilize CoREST,
REST, LSD1, and Sin3A, another component of the repressor complex. In cells
transfected with REST or CoREST siRNA, the accumulation of a proteins and mRNAs
is delayed in comparison to those of mock-transfected or control
siRNA-transfected cells. The LSD1/CoREST/REST compressor complex is thus
sequentially necessary and subsequently inimical for viral gene expression.

Copyright © 2010 Zhou et al.

PMCID: PMC3018283
PMID: 21221247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Bioorg Med Chem. 2011 Jun 15;19(12):3637-49. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2010.12.026. Epub
2010 Dec 15.

Epigenetic profiling of the antitumor natural product psammaplin A and its
analogues.

García J(1), Franci G, Pereira R, Benedetti R, Nebbioso A, Rodríguez-Barrios F,
Gronemeyer H, Altucci L, de Lera AR.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química Orgánica, Universidade de Vigo, 36310 Vigo, Spain.

A collection of analogues of the dimeric natural product psammaplin A that differ
in the substitution on the (halo)tyrosine aryl ring, the oxime and the diamine
connection has been synthesized. The effects on cell cycle, induction of
differentiation and apoptosis of the natural-product inspired series were
measured on the human leukaemia U937 cell line. Epigenetic profiling included
induction of p21(WAF1), effects on global H3 histone and tubulin acetylation
levels as well as in vitro enzymatic assays using HDAC1, DNMT1, DNMT3A, SIRT1 and
a peptide domain with p300/CBP HAT activity. Whereas the derivatives of
psammaplin A with modifications in the length of the connecting chain, the oxime 
bond and the disulfide unit showed lower potency, the analogues with changes on
the bromotyrosine ring exhibited activities comparable to those of the parent
compound in the inhibition of HDAC1 and in the induction of apoptosis. The lack
of HDAC1 activity of analogues modified on the disulfide bond suggests that its
cleavage must occur in cells to produce the monomeric Zn(2+)-chelating thiol.
This assumption is consistent with the molecular modelling of the complex of
psammaplin A thiol with h-HDAC8. Only a weak inhibition of DNMT1, DNMT3A and
residual activities with SIRT1 and a p300/CBP HAT peptide were measured for these
compounds.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21215647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Mol Oncol. 2011 Feb;5(1):61-76. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2010.11.004. Epub 2010 Nov 
25.

Methylation profiling with a panel of cancer related genes: association with
estrogen receptor, TP53 mutation status and expression subtypes in sporadic
breast cancer.

Rønneberg JA(1), Fleischer T, Solvang HK, Nordgard SH, Edvardsen H, Potapenko I, 
Nebdal D, Daviaud C, Gut I, Bukholm I, Naume B, Børresen-Dale AL, Tost J,
Kristensen V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo University
Hospital Radiumhospitalet, Oslo, Norway.

Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease that can be divided in subtypes based on
histology, gene expression profiles as well as differences in genomic
aberrations. Distinct global DNA methylation profiles have been reported in
normal breast epithelial cells as well as in breast tumors. However, the
influence of the tumor methylome on the previously described subgroups of breast 
cancer is not fully understood. Here we report the DNA methylation profiles of 80
breast tumors using a panel of 807 cancer related genes interrogating 1505 CpG
sites. We identified three major clusters based on the methylation profiles; one 
consisting of mainly tumors of myoepithelial origin and two other clusters with
tumors of predominantly luminal epithelial origin. The clusters were different
with respect to estrogen receptor status, TP53 status, ErbB2 status and grade.
The most significantly differentially methylated genes including HDAC1, TFF1,
OGG1, BMP3, FZD9 and HOXA11 were confirmed by pyrosequencing. Gene Ontology
analysis revealed enrichment for genes involved in developmental processes
including homeobox domain genes (HOXA9, HOXA11, PAX6, MYBL2, ISL1 and IPF1) and
(ETS1, HDAC1, CREBBP, GAS7, SPI1 and TBX1). Extensive correlation to mRNA
expression was observed. Pathway analyses identified a significant association
with canonical (curated) pathways such as hepatic fibrosis including genes like
EGF, NGFR and TNF, dendritic cell maturation and the NF-<U+03BA>B signaling pathway. Our
results show that breast tumor expression subtypes harbor major epigenetic
differences and tumors with similar gene expression profiles might belong to
epigenetically different subtypes. Some of the transcription factors identified, 
with key roles in differentiation and development might play a role in inducing
and maintaining the different phenotypes.

Copyright © 2010 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21212030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 29;5(12):e14460. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014460.

Identification of histone deacetylase 3 as a biomarker for tumor recurrence
following liver transplantation in HBV-associated hepatocellular carcinoma.

Wu LM(1), Yang Z, Zhou L, Zhang F, Xie HY, Feng XW, Wu J, Zheng SS.

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Combined Multi-Organ Transplantation, Key Lab of Organ
Transplantation, Division of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, Department of 
Surgery, Ministry of Public Health, First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have shown that high expression levels of class I
histone deacetylases (HDACs) correlate with malignant phenotype and poor
prognosis in some human tumors. However, the expression patterns and prognostic
role of class I HDAC isoforms in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) remain unclear.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The expression patterns and clinical significance
of class I HDAC isoforms were assessed by immunohistochemistry in a cohort of 43 
hepatitis B virus-associated HCC patients treated with liver transplantation. In 
addition, the effects of HDAC inhibition on HCC cell behavior were investigated
by knockdown of the HDAC isoform with short interfering RNA. Class I HDACs were
highly expressed in a subset of HCCs with positivity for HDAC1 in 51.2%, HDAC2 in
48.8%, and HDAC3 in 32.6% of cases. The expression levels of HDAC isoforms were
significantly associated with the proliferation index of HCC. Kaplan-Meier curves
showed that a high expression level of HDAC2 or HDAC3 implicated significantly
reduced recurrence-free survival. Cox proportional hazards model analysis
revealed HDAC3 overexpression was an unfavorable independent prognostic factor
(P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.002; HR 3.907). In vitro, inhibition of HDAC2 and HDAC3, but not HDAC1,
suppressed proliferation and the invasiveness of liver cancer cells.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our findings demonstrate that HDAC3 plays a significant
role in regulating tumor cell proliferation and invasion, and it could be served 
as a candidate biomarker for predicting the recurrence of hepatitis B
virus-associated HCC following liver transplantation and a potential therapeutic 
target.

PMCID: PMC3012077
PMID: 21206745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Biomed Biotechnol. 2011;2011:690848. doi: 10.1155/2011/690848. Epub 2010 Dec 9.

Regulating the regulators: the post-translational code of class I HDAC1 and
HDAC2.

Segré CV(1), Chiocca S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, IFOM-IEO 
Campus, Via Adamello 16, 20139 Milan, Italy.

Class I histone deacetylases (HDACs) are cellular enzymes expressed in many
tissues and play crucial roles in differentiation, proliferation, and cancer.
HDAC1 and HDAC2 in particular are highly homologous proteins that show redundant 
or specific roles in different cell types or in response to different stimuli and
signaling pathways. The molecular details of this dual regulation are largely
unknown. HDAC1 and HDAC2 are not only protein modifiers, but are in turn
regulated by post-translational modifications (PTMs): phosphorylation,
acetylation, ubiquitination, SUMOylation, nitrosylation, and carbonylation. Some 
of these PTMs occur and crosstalk specifically on HDAC1 or HDAC2, creating a
rational "code" for a differential, context-related regulation. The global
comprehension of this PTM code is central for dissecting the role of single HDAC1
and HDAC2 in physiology and pathology.

PMCID: PMC3004424
PMID: 21197454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Biol Chem. 2011 Mar 4;286(9):7681-91. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.188532. Epub 2010
Dec 30.

Coactivator function of positive cofactor 4 (PC4) in Sp1-directed luteinizing
hormone receptor (LHR) gene transcription.

Liao M(1), Zhang Y, Kang JH, Dufau ML.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Endocrinology Section, Program of Developmental Endocrinology and
Genetics, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4510, USA.

The LHR has an essential role in sexual development and reproductive function,
and its transcription is subjected to several modes of regulation. In this study,
we investigated PC4 coactivator function in the control of LHR transcription.
Knockdown of PC4 by siRNA inhibited the LHR basal promoter activity and
trichostatin A (TSA)-induced gene transcriptional activation and expression in
MCF-7 cells. While overexpression of PC4 alone had no effect on the LHR gene, it 
significantly enhanced Sp1- but not Sp3-mediated LHR transcriptional activity.
PC4 directly interacts with Sp1 at the LHR promoter, and this interaction is
negatively regulated by PC4 phosphorylation. The coactivator domain (22-91 aa) of
PC4 and DNA binding domain of Sp1 are essential for PC4/Sp1 interaction. ChIP
assay revealed significant occupancy of PC4 at the LHR promoter that increased
upon TSA treatment. Disruption of PC4 expression significantly reduced
TSA-induced recruitment of TFIIB and RNAP II, at the promoter. PC4 functions are 
beyond TSA-induced phosphatase release, PI3K-mediated Sp1 phosphorylation, and
HDAC1/2/mSin3A co-repressor release indicating its role as linker coactivator of 
Sp1 and the transcriptional machinery. These findings demonstrated a critical
aspect of LHR modulation whereby PC4 acts as a coactivator of Sp1 to contribute
to the human of LHR transcription.

PMCID: PMC3045022
PMID: 21193408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Arthritis Res Ther. 2010;12(6):R227. doi: 10.1186/ar3214. Epub 2010 Dec 30.

RFX1 regulates CD70 and CD11a expression in lupus T cells by recruiting the
histone methyltransferase SUV39H1.

Zhao M(1), Wu X, Zhang Q, Luo S, Liang G, Su Y, Tan Y, Lu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Hunan Key Laboratory of Medical Epigenomics, No, 139 Renmin Middle Rd, Changsha, 
Hunan 410011, PR China.

INTRODUCTION: Regulatory factor X-box 1 (RFX1) can interact with DNA
methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) and histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), and RFX1
down-regulation contributes to DNA hypomethylation and histone H3
hyperacetylation at the cluster of differentiation (CD) 11a and CD70 promoters in
CD4(+) T cells of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). This leads to
CD11a and CD70 overexpression, thereby triggering autoimmune responses. In order 
to provide more insight into the epigenetic mechanisms leading to the
deregulation of autoimmune-related genes in SLE, we asked whether RFX1 is
involved in regulating histone 3 lysine 9 (H3K9) tri-methylation at the CD11a and
CD70 promoters in SLE CD4(+) T cells.
METHODS: CD4(+) T cell samples were isolated from 15 SLE patients and 15 healthy 
controls. H3K9 tri-methylation levels were measured by chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and real-time quantitative PCR. CD4(+) T cells were
transfected with plasmids using the Human T cell Nucleofector Kit. RFX1 and
histone methyltransferase suppressor of variegation 3-9 (Drosophila) homolog 1
(SUV39H1) interaction was determined by co-immunoprecipation (co-IP) and Western 
blot and immunofluorescence staining. CD11a and CD70 mRNA levels were measured by
real-time RT-PCR.
RESULTS: H3K9 tri-methylation levels were significantly reduced within the CD11a 
and CD70 promoter regions in SLE CD4(+) T cells. RFX1 co-immunoprecipitated with 
SUV39H1 at the CD11a and CD70 promoters in healthy control CD4(+) T cells.
Overexpressing or knocking-down RFX1 revealed that RFX1 expression correlated
with H3K9 tri-methylation levels, as well as CD11a and CD70 expression levels in 
CD4(+) T cells.
CONCLUSIONS: RFX1 recruits SUV39H1 to the promoter regions of the CD11a and CD70 
genes in CD4(+) T cells, thereby regulating local H3K9 tri-methylation levels.
These findings shed further light on the central role of RFX1 down-regulation in 
the epigenetic de-repression of auto-immune genes in SLE.

PMCID: PMC3046540
PMID: 21192791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Vet Med Sci. 2011 May;73(5):623-31. Epub 2010 Dec 24.

Extended exposure to trichostatin A after activation alters the expression of
genes important for early development in nuclear transfer murine embryos.

Kang H(1), Roh S.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular Reprogramming and Embryo Biotechnology Laboratory, Dental Research
Institute and CLS 21, Seoul National University School of Dentistry, Seoul
110749, Korea.

The low viability of embryos reconstructed by somatic cell nuclear transfer
(SCNT) is believed to be associated with epigenetic modification errors, and
reduction of those errors may improve the viability of SCNT embryos. The present 
study shows the effect of trichostatin A (TSA), a strong inhibitor of histone
deacetylase, on the development of murine SCNT embryos. After enucleation and
nuclear injection, reconstructed murine oocytes were activated with or without
TSA for 6 hr (TSA-6 hr). After activation, TSA treatment was extended to 3 hr
(TSA-9 hr), 5 hr (TSA-11 hr) and 18 hr (TSA-24 hr) during culture. As a result,
the SCNT embryos in the TSA-11 hr group showed a remarkably higher blastocyst
rate (21.1%) when compared with the nontreated embryos (3.4%), while the
concentration of TSA did not significantly affect embryonic development. The
expressions of histone deacetylase (HDAC1 and HDAC2) and DNA methylation (DNMT3a 
and DNMT3b) genes decreased in the TSA-11 hr and TSA-24 hr groups, while there
was an increase in the expression of histone acetyltransferase (P300 and CBP),
pluripotency (OCT4 and NANOG) and embryonic growth/trophectoderm formation
(FGF4)-related genes in the same groups. The expression of CDX2, a critical gene 
for trophectoderm formation was upregulated only in the TSA-24 hr group. Our
results show that TSA treatment during the peri- and postactivation period
improves the development of reconstructed murine embryos, and this observation
may be explained by enhanced epigenetic modification of somatic cells caused by
TSA-induced hyperacetylation, demethylation and upregulation of pluripotency and 
embryonic growth after SCNT.

PMID: 21187677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Jan 28;404(4):915-21. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.12.081. Epub 2010 Dec 22.

Involvement of HDAC1 in E-cadherin expression in prostate cancer cells; its
implication for cell motility and invasion.

Kim NH(1), Kim SN, Kim YK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Kwandong University College of Medicine, Gangneung
210-701, Republic of Korea.

In this study, we investigate the molecular mechanism by which histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors exert anti-invasiveness effect against prostate
cancer cells. We first evaluate the growth inhibition effect of HDAC inhibitors
in prostate cancer cells, which is accompanied by induction of p21(WAF1)
expression and accumulation of acetylated histones. And we found that the
migration and invasion of prostate cancer cells is strongly inhibited by
treatment with HDAC inhibitors. In parallel, E-cadherin level is highly
up-regulated in HDAC inhibitor-treated prostate cancer cells. And siRNA knockdown
of E-cadherin significantly diminishes the anti-invasion effect of HDAC
inhibitors, indicating that E-cadherin overexpression is one of possible
mechanism for anti-invasion effect of HDAC inhibitors. Furthermore, specific
downregulation of HDAC1, but not HDAC2, causes E-cadherin expression and
subsequent inhibition of cell motility and invasion. Collectively, our data
demonstrate that HDAC1 is a major repressive enzyme for E-cadherin expression as 
well as HDAC inhibitor-mediated anti-invasiveness.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21184735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 14;5(12):e14335. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014335.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors downregulate checkpoint kinase 1 expression to
induce cell death in non-small cell lung cancer cells.

Brazelle W(1), Kreahling JM, Gemmer J, Ma Y, Cress WD, Haura E, Altiok S.

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Oncology Program, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, Tampa, Florida, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACis) are promising anticancer
drugs; however, the molecular mechanisms leading to HDACi-induced cell death have
not been well understood and no clear mechanism of resistance has been elucidated
to explain limited efficacy of HDACis in clinical trials.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Here, we show that protein levels of checkpoint kinase 1
(Chk1), which has a major role in G(2) cell cycle checkpoint regulation, was
markedly reduced at the protein and transcriptional levels in lung cancer cells
treated with pan-and selective HDACis LBH589, scriptaid, valproic acid, apicidin,
and MS-275. In HDACi treated cells Chk1 function was impaired as determined by
decreased inhibitory phosphorylation of cdc25c and its downstream target cdc2 and
increased expression of cdc25A and phosphorylated histone H3, a marker of mitotic
entry. In time course experiments, Chk1 downregulation occurred after HDACi
treatment, preceding apoptosis. Ectopic expression of Chk1 overcame HDACi-induced
cell death, and pretreating cells with the cdc2 inhibitor purvalanol A blocked
entry into mitosis and prevented cell death by HDACis. Finally, pharmacological
inhibition of Chk1 showed strong synergistic effect with LBH589 in lung cancer
cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These results define a pathway through which Chk1 inhibition can
mediate HDACi-induced mitotic entry and cell death and suggest that Chk1 could be
an early pharmacodynamic marker to assess HDACi efficacy in clinical samples.

PMCID: PMC3001870
PMID: 21179472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Biol Chem. 2011 Mar 4;286(9):7279-89. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.178780. Epub 2010
Dec 21.

A novel KRAB domain-containing zinc finger transcription factor ZNF431 directly
represses Patched1 transcription.

He Z(1), Cai J, Lim JW, Kroll K, Ma L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, Washington University School 
of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Krüppel-like zinc finger transcription factors compose the largest transcription 
factor family in the mammalian genome. However, the functions for the majority of
these transcription factors as well as their in vivo downstream targets are not
clear. We have functionally characterized a novel KRAB domain zinc finger
transcription factor ZNF431 using both in vitro and in vivo assays. ZNF431 is a
nuclear transcriptional repressor whose repressive activity depends on its
association with HDAC1 and -2. Using the limb mesenchymal cell line MPLB, we
identified Patched1 as a direct transcriptional target of ZNF431. Promoter
analyses revealed three ZNF431 binding sites that bind to ZNF431 both in vitro
and in vivo as revealed by gel-shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation,
respectively. Mutations of these three sites abolished ZNF431 repression in
transient transfection assays. Moreover, overexpressing ZNF431 in MPLB cells or
in Xenopus and mouse embryos strongly repressed Patched1 expression. On the other
hand, shRNA knockdown of ZNF431 in MPLB cells elevated Patched1 expression.
Finally, hedgehog signaling readout was reduced in ZNF431 overexpression but
elevated in ZNF431 knockdown MPLB cells. Our results indicate that ZNF431
directly represses Patched1 expression and likely functions to repress the
hedgehog response in cells.

PMCID: PMC3044984
PMID: 21177534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2011 Mar;155(1):58-64. doi:
10.1016/j.ejogrb.2010.11.014. Epub 2010 Dec 21.

Supraphysiological estrogen levels adversely impact proliferation and histone
modification in human embryonic stem cells: possible implications for controlled 
ovarian hyperstimulation assisted pregnancy.

Wang H(1), Zhou C, Chen W, Li T, Huang J, Zhuang G.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproductive Medicine, First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: Controlled ovarian hyperstimulation (COH) results in supraphysiologic 
levels of maternal serum estradiol (E(2)) during the luteal phase, thus promoting
oocyte production at unknown risk to the subsequently developing embryo. Human
embryonic stem cells (hESCs) have been identified as a model system to assess the
impact of COH on early embryonic development, specifically 17ß-estradiol mediated
effects on proliferation, gene expression, and histone modification.
STUDY DESIGN: Cell proliferation and associated factors, such as HDAC1, as well
as histone modification patterns were evaluated in ERa and ß expressing hESCs
after exposure to 17ß-estradiol (1×10(-10) M to 1×10(-7) M), as well as in an
untreated control.
RESULTS: Resultant data revealed that while physiologically relevant E(2) levels 
(1×10(-9)M E(2)) induced cell cycle progression from G1 to the proliferation
phase, supraphysiologic levels akin to those observed after COH (1×10(-7) M E(2))
adversely affected hESCs proliferation via down regulation of HDAC1. Modification
of H3K9me2, PhH3S10, H4K5ac, and H2A.Z histone patterns were also dependent on
17ß-estradiol concentration.
CONCLUSION: While physiologic levels of 17ß-estradiol induced cell proliferation,
possibly via HDAC1 involvement in histone modification, cell proliferation in
hESCs was suppressed at supraphysiologic levels.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21177016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Leuk Res. 2011 May;35(5):620-5. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2010.11.006. Epub 2010 Dec
22.

Increased HDAC1 deposition at hematopoietic promoters in AML and its association 
with patient survival.

Tickenbrock L(1), Klein HU, Trento C, Hascher A, Göllner S, Bäumer N, Kuss R,
Agrawal S, Bug G, Serve H, Thiede C, Ehninger G, Stadt UZ, McClelland M, Wang Y, 
Becker A, Koschmieder S, Berdel WE, Dugas M, Müller-Tidow C; Study Alliance
Leukemia Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine A, Hematology and Oncology, University of Münster,
Münster, Germany.

Epigenetic changes play a crucial role in leukemogenesis. HDACs are frequently
recruited to target gene promoters by balanced translocation derived oncogenic
fusion proteins. As important epigenetic effector mechanisms, histone
deacetylases (HDAC) have emerged as potential therapeutic targets. However, the
patterns of HDAC1 localization and the role of HDACs in leukemia pathogenesis
remain to be elucidated. Using ChIP-Chip analyses we analyzed HDAC1 deposition
patterns at more than 10,000 gene promoters in a large cohort of leukemia
patients and CD34+ controls. HDAC1 binding was significantly increased in AML
blasts compared to CD34+ progenitor cells at 130 gene promoters whereas decreased
binding was observed at 66 gene promoters. Distinct HDAC1 binding patterns
occurred in AML subtypes with balanced translocations t(15;17), t(8;21) and
inv(16). In addition, a more generalized signature was established, that revealed
an AML specific pattern of HDAC1 distribution. Many of the HDAC1-binding altered 
promoters regulate genes involved in hematopoiesis, transcriptional regulation
and signal transduction. HDAC1 binding patterns were associated with patients'
event free survival. This is the first study to determine HDAC1 modification
patterns in a large number of AML and ALL specimens. Our findings suggest that
dyslocalization of HDAC1 is a common feature in AML. Importantly, HDAC1
modifications possess prognostic power for patient survival. Our findings suggest
that altered HDAC1 localization is an explanation for the observed benefit of
HDAC inhibitors in AML therapy.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21176959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Mol Cancer Ther. 2010 Dec;9(12):3302-14. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-10-0550.

Inhibition of constitutive activation of STAT3 by curcurbitacin-I (JSI-124)
sensitized human B-leukemia cells to apoptosis.

Ishdorj G(1), Johnston JB, Gibson SB.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biochemistry and Medical Genetics, Manitoba Institute of Cell
Biology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.

Phosphorylation of STAT3 on serine 727 regulates gene expression and is found to 
be elevated in many B-leukemia cells including chronic lymphocytic leukemia
(CLL). It is, however, unclear whether targeting STAT3 will be an effective
antileukemia therapy. In this study, we assessed in vitro antileukemia activity
of the STAT3 inhibitor JSI-124 (cucurbitacin I). JSI-124 potently induces
apoptosis in 3 B-leukemia cell lines (BJAB, I-83, and NALM-6) and in primary CLL 
cells and was associated with a reduction in serine 727 phosphorylation of STAT3.
Similarly, knockdown of STAT3 expression induced apoptosis in these leukemia
cells. In addition, we found that JSI-124 and knockdown of STAT3 decreased
antiapoptotic protein XIAP expression and overexpression of XIAP blocked
JSI-124-induced apoptosis. Furthermore, we found that combined treatment of
JSI-124 and TRAIL increased apoptosis associated with an increase in death
receptor 4 expression. Besides apoptosis, we found that JSI-124 also induced
cell-cycle arrest prior to apoptosis in B-leukemia cells. This corresponded with 
reduced expression of the cell-cycle regulatory gene, cdc-2. Thus, we present
here for the first time that JSI-124 induced suppression of serine 727
phosphorylation of STAT3, leading to apoptosis and cell-cycle arrest through
alterations in gene transcription in B-leukemia cells.

©2010 AACR.

PMID: 21159613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Nutr Cancer. 2011;63(1):89-99. doi: 10.1080/01635581.2010.516868.

Epigenetics, an early event in the modulation of gene expression by inositol
hexaphosphate in ethylnitrosourea exposed mouse lungs.

Pandey M(1), Gupta KP.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Carcinogenesis Division, Indian Institute of Toxicology
Research, Lucknow, India.

Mechanisms of anticancer effects of inositol hexaphosphate are not fully
understood. Epigenetic changes are the early changes in tumorigenesis. DNA methyl
transferases, methyl CpG binding proteins, methyl CpG DNA binding domain protein,
and histone deacetylases are the major molecules involved in epigenetics. We have
shown the effects of IP6 at the molecular level in mouse lungs before the tumor
is developed. After 3 mo of ENU exposure, there was no tumor formation, but there
was hyperplasia and lymphocytic infiltration in the lungs. Inflammation and DNA
damage repair enzymes COX-2 and MLH1 appear to be upregulated, whereas tumor
suppressor gene p16 was downregulated by ENU. On the other hand, ENU exposure
more or less upregulated the epigenetic events such as the expressions of DNMT1, 
MeCP2, MBD1, and HDAC1. This alteration was reduced by IP6 administration.
Results were supported by modulation of global DNA methylation and the modulation
of promoter CpG methylation of p16, MLH1, and COX-2 genes. Hence, this study
indicates the possible role of epigenetics at the early stage of tumor
development and in the regulation of gene expression by IP6 before the onset of
ENU-induced lung tumors.

PMID: 21154115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Oncol Rep. 2011 Feb;25(2):393-7. doi: 10.3892/or.2010.1075. Epub 2010 Dec 7.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors control the transcription and alternative splicing
of prohibitin in thyroid tumor cells.

Puppin C(1), Passon N, Franzoni A, Russo D, Damante G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Biomediche, Università di Udine, and
Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria S. Maria della Misericordia, Udine, Italy.

Prohibitin (PHB) is a ubiquitous protein with a number of different molecular
functions. PHB is involved in tumorigenesis by exerting either a permissive or
blocking action on tumor growth, depending on the cell context. In the present
study, we investigated the effects of the histone deacetylase inhibitors
(HDACis), trichostatin A (TSA) and sodium butyrate (NaB), on PHB expression in
the thyroid tumor cell lines, TPC-1 and FRO. Both TSA and NaB increased PHB mRNA 
levels. Transfection experiments showed that the overexpression of HDAC1 or 2,
but not 3, inhibited PHB promoter activity. The effects of TSA and NaB on the two
major PHB mRNA splicing isoforms, were also investigated. Both TSA and NaB
decreased the mRNA levels of the shorter isoform, but increased those of the
longer isoform. Only the latter isoform contains a 3'UTR, which has been reported
to exert a growth suppressive action. Thus, our data demonstrate that HDACis
control both PHB transcription and alternative splicing. The effect of HDACis on 
PHB alternative splicing was not due to the modification of the expression of the
ASF/SF2 splicing factor.

PMID: 21152868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 3;5(12):e14229. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014229.

Epigenetic silencing of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> is a
biomarker for colorectal cancer progression and adverse patients' outcome.

Pancione M(1), Sabatino L, Fucci A, Carafa V, Nebbioso A, Forte N, Febbraro A,
Parente D, Ambrosino C, Normanno N, Altucci L, Colantuoni V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences, University of Sannio,
Benevento, Italy.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2011;6(1). doi:
10.1371/annotation/07419a37-33f1-4e4a-adc9-b186f305bae5.

The relationship between peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPARG)
expression and epigenetic changes occurring in colorectal-cancer pathogenesis is 
largely unknown. We investigated whether PPARG is epigenetically regulated in
colorectal cancer (CRC) progression. PPARG expression was assessed in CRC tissues
and paired normal mucosa by western blot and immunohistochemistry and related to 
patients' clinicopathological parameters and survival. PPARG promoter methylation
was analyzed by methylation-specific-PCR and bisulphite sequencing. PPARG
expression and promoter methylation were similarly examined also in CRC derived
cell lines. Chromatin immunoprecipitation in basal conditions and after
epigenetic treatment was performed along with knocking-down experiments of
putative regulatory factors. Gene expression was monitored by immunoblotting and 
functional assays of cell proliferation and invasiveness. Methylation on a
specific region of the promoter is strongly correlated with PPARG lack of
expression in 30% of primary CRCs and with patients' poor prognosis. Remarkably, 
the same methylation pattern is found in PPARG-negative CRC cell lines.
Epigenetic treatment with 5'-aza-2'-deoxycytidine can revert this condition and, 
in combination with trichostatin A, dramatically re-activates gene transcription 
and receptor activity. Transcriptional silencing is due to the recruitment of
MeCP2, HDAC1 and EZH2 that impart repressive chromatin signatures determining an 
increased cell proliferative and invasive potential, features that can
experimentally be reverted. Our findings provide a novel mechanistic insight into
epigenetic silencing of PPARG in CRC that may be relevant as a prognostic marker 
of tumor progression.

PMCID: PMC2997072
PMID: 21151932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Cancer Res. 2011 Feb 1;71(3):1187-95. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2626. Epub
2010 Dec 8.

Human papillomavirus E7 enhances hypoxia-inducible factor 1-mediated
transcription by inhibiting binding of histone deacetylases.

Bodily JM(1), Mehta KP, Laimins LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Northwestern University, Feinberg
School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Infection by human papillomaviruses (HPV) leads to the formation of benign
lesions, warts, and in some cases, cervical cancer. The formation of these
lesions is dependent upon increased expression of proangiogenic factors.
Angiogenesis is linked to tissue hypoxia through the activity of the
oxygen-sensitive hypoxia-inducible factor 1a (HIF-1a). Our studies indicate that 
the HPV E7 protein enhances HIF-1 transcriptional activity whereas E6 functions
to counteract the repressive effects of p53. Both high- and low-risk HPV E7
proteins were found to bind to HIF-1a through a domain located in the N-terminus.
Importantly, the ability of E7 to enhance HIF-1 activity mapped to the C-terminus
and correlated with the displacement of the histone deacetylases HDAC1, HDAC4,
and HDAC7 from HIF-1a by E7. Our findings describe a novel role of the E7
oncoprotein in activating the function of a key transcription factor mediating
hypoxic responses by blocking the binding of HDACs.

PMCID: PMC3077548
PMID: 21148070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Cancer Sci. 2011 Feb;102(2):387-92. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2010.01792.x. Epub
2010 Dec 10.

Expression of nuclear receptor corepressors and class I histone deacetylases in
astrocytic gliomas.

Campos B(1), Bermejo JL, Han L, Felsberg J, Ahmadi R, Grabe N, Reifenberger G,
Unterberg A, Herold-Mende C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurosurgical Research, Department of Neurosurgery, University of 
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

Transcriptional repressors such as nuclear receptor corepressors (NCORs) and
class I histone deacetylases (HDACs) are considered potential therapeutic targets
in various human malignancies. In astrocytic gliomas, however, there is still a
need to understand the role of these transcriptional repressors in tumor
proliferation, tumor differentiation, and patient survival. We
immunohistochemically analyzed the expression of NCOR1 and 2 as well as HDAC1, 2,
and 3 on a tissue microarray comprising tumor samples from 283 astrocytic gliomas
and correlated the expression levels with tumor differentiation, tumor
proliferation, and patient survival. Strong nuclear expression was found in
glioma cells for HDAC1, HDAC2, and NCOR2. In contrast, weak expression of NCOR1
and HDAC3 was detected in the cytoplasm and nuclei of tumor cells. HDAC3
expression was inversely associated with tumor grade. Consequently, increased
HDAC3 expression was associated with better patient survival in univariate
regression. Expression of HDAC1 and HDAC2 increased during tumor recurrence and
malignant tumor progression, respectively, whereas expression of the remaining
antigens did not seem to depend on tumor grade and was comparable to expression
levels found in non-neoplastic brain tissues. Finally, we detected a positive
association between HDAC2 expression and tumor proliferation as well as between
NCOR1 and expression of the stem cell-associated intermediate filament protein
nestin. Our findings suggest that "classical" transcriptional repressors are
expressed in astrocytic tumors and that the roles of HDAC2 and HDAC3 in these
tumors deserve further investigation.

© 2010 Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 21143702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Expert Opin Biol Ther. 2011 Jan;11(1):17-29. doi: 10.1517/14712598.2011.540564.

Analysis of the roles of HIV-derived microRNAs.

Narayanan A(1), Kehn-Hall K, Bailey C, Kashanchi F.

Author information: 
(1)George Mason University, National Center for Biodefense and Infectious
Diseases, Manassas, VA 20110, USA.

IMPORTANCE OF THE FIELD: HIV-1 is a retrovirus that has infected millions in
recent decades. The level of life cycle complexity and host control exerted by
this small virus with only nine proteins is astonishing. An interesting direction
that has emerged in recent years is the role of small non-coding RNAs in viral
gene expression.
AREAS COVERED IN THIS REVIEW: We focus on HIV-1 produced microRNAs (miRNAs),
namely, TAR, Nef and miR-H1, and their roles in HIV-1 biogenesis. The article
provides insights into TAR miRNA-mediated downregulation of viral and host gene
expression by recruitment of chromatin remodeling components (HDAC1).
WHAT THE READER WILL GAIN: We address the influence of TAR miRNA on host cell
cycle progression and apoptosis, and the role of Nef miRNA in the regulation of
viral and host gene expression. The review also highlights an intriguing
connection between miR-H1 and HIV-1-associated neurological pathogenesis, and the
influence of the miRNA machinery in the establishment of latency. In the Expert
Opinion section, we analyze the issue of host-based therapeutics against HIV-1
and how transcription inhibitors are influenced by viral miRNA production.
TAKE HOME MESSAGE: HIV-derived miRNAs are of significance not only to understand 
host-virus interactions, but also for the design of effective therapeutics.

PMID: 21133815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Biol Chem. 2011 Mar 4;286(9):7641-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.185488. Epub 2010
Dec 2.

Dynamic interaction of HDAC1 with a glucocorticoid receptor-regulated gene is
modulated by the activity state of the promoter.

Qiu Y(1), Stavreva DA, Luo Y, Indrawan A, Chang M, Hager GL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Florida Shands Cancer
Center, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32610, USA. qiuy@ufl.edu

Although histone deacetylases (HDACs) are normally considered as co-repressors,
HDAC1 has been identified as a coactivator for the glucocorticoid receptor (GR)
(Qiu, Y., Zhao, Y., Becker, M., John, S., Parekh, B. S., Huang, S., Hendarwanto, 
A., Martinez, E. D., Chen, Y., Lu, H., Adkins, N. L., Stavreva, D. A., Wiench,
M., Georgel, P. T., Schiltz, R. L., and Hager, G. L. (2006) Mol. Cell 22,
669-679). Furthermore, HDAC1 is acetylated, and its acetylation level is linked
to the transcription state of a GR-induced promoter (mouse mammary tumor virus). 
GR is also known to interact dynamically with regulatory elements in living cells
(McNally, J. G., Müller, W. G., Walker, D., Wolford, R., and Hager, G. L. (2000) 
Science 287, 1262-1265). However, HDAC1 dynamics have never been studied. We
demonstrate here that HDAC1 also exchanges rapidly with promoter chromatin, and
its exchange rate is significantly modulated during the development of promoter
activity. Prior to induction, HDAC1 mobility was retarded compared with the
exchange rate for GR. HDAC1 mobility then increased substantially, coordinately
with the peak of promoter activity. At later time points, promoter activity was
severely repressed, and HDAC1 mobility returned to the rate of exchange observed 
for the uninduced promoter. Thus, alterations of the exchange rates of HDAC1 at
the promoter are correlated with the activity state of the promoter. These
findings provide direct evidence for the functional role of highly mobile
transcription factor complexes in transcription regulation.

PMCID: PMC3045018
PMID: 21127047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. PLoS One. 2010 Nov 19;5(11):e15541. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015541.

Targeted disruption of Ing2 results in defective spermatogenesis and development 
of soft-tissue sarcomas.

Saito M(1), Kumamoto K, Robles AI, Horikawa I, Furusato B, Okamura S, Goto A,
Yamashita T, Nagashima M, Lee TL, Baxendale VJ, Rennert OM, Takenoshita S, Yokota
J, Sesterhenn IA, Trivers GE, Hussain SP, Harris CC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Human Carcinogenesis, Center for Cancer Research, National
Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

ING2 (inhibitor of growth family, member 2) is a member of the plant homeodomain 
(PHD)-containing ING family of putative tumor suppressors. As part of mSin3A-HDAC
corepressor complexes, ING2 binds to tri-methylated lysine 4 of histone H3
(H3K4me3) to regulate chromatin modification and gene expression. ING2 also
functionally interacts with the tumor suppressor protein p53 to regulate cellular
senescence, apoptosis and DNA damage response in vitro, and is thus expected to
modulate carcinogenesis and aging. Here we investigate the developmental and
physiological functions of Ing2 through targeted germline disruption. Consistent 
with its abundant expression in mouse and human testes, male mice deficient for
Ing2 showed abnormal spermatogenesis and were infertile. Numbers of mature sperm 
and sperm motility were significantly reduced in Ing2(-/-) mice (~2% of wild
type, P<0.0001 and ~10% of wild type, P<0.0001, respectively). Their testes
showed degeneration of seminiferous tubules, meiotic arrest before pachytene
stage with incomplete meiotic recombination, induction of p53, and enhanced
apoptosis. This phenotype was only partially abrogated by concomitant loss of p53
in the germline. The arrested spermatocytes in Ing2(-/-) testes were
characterized by lack of specific HDAC1 accumulation and deregulated chromatin
acetylation. The role of Ing2 in germ cell maturation may extend to human ING2 as
well. Using publicly available gene expression datasets, low expression of ING2
was found in teratozoospermic sperm (>3-fold reduction) and in testes from
patients with defective spermatogenesis (>7-fold reduction in Sertoli-cell only
Syndrome). This study establishes ING2 as a novel regulator of spermatogenesis
functioning through both p53- and chromatin-mediated mechanisms, suggests that an
HDAC1/ING2/H3K4me3-regulated, stage-specific coordination of chromatin
modifications is essential to normal spermatogenesis, and provides an animal
model to study idiopathic and iatrogenic infertility in men. In addition, a bona 
fide tumor suppressive role of Ing2 is demonstrated by increased incidence of
soft-tissue sarcomas in Ing2(-/-) mice.

PMCID: PMC2988811
PMID: 21124965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. EMBO J. 2010 Dec 1;29(23):3893-5. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.281. Epub 2010 Dec 1.

HDAC1, a novel marker for benign teratomas.

Simboeck E(1), Di Croce L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Regulació Genómica, Barcelona, Spain.

Comment on
    EMBO J. 2010 Dec 1;29(23):3992-4007.

PMCID: PMC3020642
PMID: 21124297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Cancer Res. 2011 Jan 15;71(2):404-12. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2627. Epub
2010 Dec 1.

A SP1/MIZ1/MYCN repression complex recruits HDAC1 at the TRKA and p75NTR
promoters and affects neuroblastoma malignancy by inhibiting the cell response to
NGF.

Iraci N(1), Diolaiti D, Papa A, Porro A, Valli E, Gherardi S, Herold S, Eilers M,
Bernardoni R, Della Valle G, Perini G.

Author information: 
(1)University of Bologna, Department of Biology, Bologna, Italy.

Neuroblastoma is the most common extracranial solid tumor of childhood. One
important factor that predicts a favorable prognosis is the robust expression of 
the TRKA and p75NTR neurotrophin receptor genes. Interestingly, TRKA and p75NTR
expression is often attenuated in aggressive MYCN-amplified tumors, suggesting a 
causal link between elevated MYCN activity and the transcriptional repression of 
TRKA and p75NTR, but the precise mechanisms involved are unclear. Here, we show
that MYCN acts directly to repress TRKA and p75NTR gene transcription.
Specifically, we found that MYCN levels were critical for repression and that
MYCN targeted proximal/core promoter regions by forming a repression complex with
transcription factors SP1 and MIZ1. When bound to the TRKA and p75NTR promoters, 
MYCN recruited the histone deacetylase HDAC1 to induce a repressed chromatin
state. Forced re-expression of endogenous TRKA and p75NTR with exposure to the
HDAC inhibitor TSA sensitized neuroblastoma cells to NGF-mediated apoptosis. By
directly connecting MYCN to the repression of TRKA and p75NTR, our findings
establish a key pathway of clinical pathogenicity and aggressiveness in
neuroblastoma.

© 2010 AACR.

PMID: 21123453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Toxicol Lett. 2011 Feb 5;200(3):146-53. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2010.11.008. Epub
2010 Nov 27.

Valproic acid augments vitamin D receptor-mediated induction of CYP24 by vitamin 
D3: a possible cause of valproic acid-induced osteomalacia?

Vrzal R(1), Doricakova A, Novotna A, Bachleda P, Bitman M, Pavek P, Dvorak Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Science, Palacky
University, Slechtitelu 11, 783 71 Olomouc, Czech Republic. radim.vrzal@email.cz

Valproic acid (VPA) is a wide spread anticonvulsant and mood-stabilizing agent,
the use of which is associated with hepatotoxicity, bone marrow suppression and
osteomalacia. In the current paper we propose a possible mechanism of VPA-induced
osteomalacia involving accelerated catabolism of 1a,25(OH)(2)-vitamin D3 (VD3)
due to increased expression of CYP24. We demonstrate that VPA strongly
potentiates CYP24 mRNA expression by VD3 in human hepatocytes (HH) and in human
embryonic kidney cells (HEK293). By the method of gene reporter assay we found
that VPA increases basal and VD3-inducible activity of CYP24 promoter
(pCYP24-luc) in human liver adenocarcinoma (HepG2) and in HEK293 cells in
dose-dependent manner. In order to delineate the role of inhibitory effects of
VPA on histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), we compared the effects of VPA with
trichostatin A (TSA) on basal and inducible levels of CYP24 mRNA and pCYP24-luc
transactivation. Transactivation of CYP24 promoter by VD3 was enhanced in the
presence of both TSA and VPA. In contrast, VD3-inducible expression of CYP24 mRNA
was enhanced by VPA but not by TSA, implying that HDAC1 inhibition is not the
major reason for VPA effects on CYP24. We examined the effects of VPA on
mitogen-activated protein kinases as the important transcriptional regulators of 
VDR. VPA activated extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) but not
c-Jun-N-terminal kinase (JNK) and p38 MAPKs. In conclusion, VPA enhances
transcriptional activity of VDR and increases expression of CYP24 mRNA in the
presence of VD3 in physiological concentrations. The mechanism involves
activation of ERK and partly the inhibition of HDAC1.

© 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21115105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Org Biomol Chem. 2011 Feb 7;9(3):659-62. doi: 10.1039/c0ob00824a. Epub 2010 Nov
26.

New synthetic strategies towards psammaplin A, access to natural product
analogues for biological evaluation.

Baud MG(1), Leiser T, Meyer-Almes FJ, Fuchter MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Imperial College London, South Kensington Campus, Department of Chemistry,
London, UK SW7 2AZ.

New synthetic routes towards the natural product psammaplin A were developed with
the particular view to preparing diverse analogues for biological assessment.
These routes utilize cheap and commercially available starting materials, and
allowed access to psammaplin A analogues not accessible via currently reported
methods. Preliminary biological studies revealed these compounds to be the most
potent non peptidic inhibitors of the enzyme histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1, class 
I) discovered so far. Interestingly, psammaplin A and our synthetic analogues
show class I selectivity in vitro, an important feature for the design and
synthesis of future isoform selective inhibitors.

PMID: 21113514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Recent Pat Anticancer Drug Discov. 2011 Jan;6(1):116-30.

Current and potential anticancer drugs targeting members of the UHRF1 complex
including epigenetic modifiers.

Unoki M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Biomarker Development, The Institute of Physical and Chemical
Research, Center for Genomic Medicine, RIKEN, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.
unokim@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Epigenetic modulators play significant roles in carcinogenesis. DNA methylation
and histone modifications are the two major epigenetic modifications involved in 
transcriptional regulation. Many histone modification enzymes and DNMTs are
up-regulated in cancer cells, and contribute to malignant transformation. The
majority of the current "new generation" of anticancer drugs target abnormally
overexpressed oncogenic proteins such as kinases or receptors which mediate
oncogenic signal transmission. Overexpression or accumulation of these
oncoproteins in cancer is caused directly or indirectly by genetic or epigenetic 
abnormalities in tumor-associated genes. Among these changes, epigenetic changes 
in DNA and histones can be caused by aberrant expression of epigenetic modulator 
proteins in cells. Recently, it has been revealed that UHRF1, which is
up-regulated in various cancers, links DNA methylation and histone modifications 
through binding to hemi-methylated DNA, and also to trimethylated histone H3K9.
The UHRF1 complex includes HDAC1, Tip60, G9a, and maintenance and de novo DNMTs. 
Many of these are reported to be involved in carcinogenesis. Several anticancer
drugs targeting epigenetic-machinery such as HDAC inhibitors, and DNMT inhibitors
have been developed. Even though these drugs showed some effect on several types 
of cancer, mild to severe adverse reactions have been observed. In this article, 
the relevant patents on the strategies to develop safer anticancer drugs
targeting epigenetic modulators, focusing on members and modifiers of the UHRF1
complex, are discussed.

PMID: 21110828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Jan 7;404(1):166-72. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.11.086. Epub 2010 Nov 23.

The role of class I histone deacetylase (HDAC) on gluconeogenesis in liver.

Oiso H(1), Furukawa N, Suefuji M, Shimoda S, Ito A, Furumai R, Nakagawa J,
Yoshida M, Nishino N, Araki E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Medicine, Faculty of Life Sciences, Kumamoto
University, Kumamoto, Japan.

Hepatic gluconeogenesis is crucial for glucose homeostasis. Although sirtuin 1
(Sirt1) is implicated in the regulation of gluconeogenesis in the liver, the
effects of other histone deacetylases (HDAC) on gluconeogenesis are unclear. The 
aim of this study was to identify the role of class I HDACs in hepatic
gluconeogenesis. In HepG2 cells and the liver of mice, the expressions of
phosphoenol pyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) and hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a
(HNF4a) were significantly decreased by treatment with a newly designed class I
HDAC inhibitor, Ky-2. SiRNA knockdown of HDAC1 expression, but not of HDAC2 or
HDAC3, in HepG2 cells decreased PEPCK and HNF4a expression. In HepG2 cells,
insulin-stimulated phosphorylation of Akt and forkhead box O 1 (FoxO1) was
increased by Ky-2. Pyruvate tolerance tests in Ky-2-treated high-fat-diet
(HFD)-fed mice showed a marked reduction in blood glucose compared with
vehicle-treated HFD mice. These data suggest that class I HDACs increase HNF4a
protein expression and the transcriptional activity of FoxO1, followed by the
induction of PEPCK mRNA expression and gluconeogenesis in liver.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21108932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Biol Chem. 2011 Feb 4;286(5):3451-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.168377. Epub 2010
Nov 24.

PTB-associated splicing factor (PSF) functions as a repressor of STAT6-mediated
Ig epsilon gene transcription by recruitment of HDAC1.

Dong L(1), Zhang X, Fu X, Zhang X, Gao X, Zhu M, Wang X, Yang Z, Jensen ON,
Saarikettu J, Yao Z, Silvennoinen O, Yang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Basic Medical College, Tianjin Medical University,
Heping District, Qixiangtai Road No. 22, Tianjin 300070, China.

Regulation of transcription requires cooperation between sequence-specific
transcription factors and numerous coregulatory proteins. In IL-4/IL-13 signaling
several coactivators for STAT6 have been identified, but the molecular mechanisms
of STAT6-mediated gene transcription are still not fully understood. Here we
identified by proteomic approach that the PTB-associated splicing factor (PSF)
interacts with STAT6. In intact cells the interaction was observed only after
IL-4 stimulation. The IL-4-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of both STAT6 and PSF
is a prerequisite for the efficient association of the two proteins. Functional
analysis demonstrated that ectopic expression of PSF resulted in inhibition of
STAT6-mediated transcriptional activation and mRNA expression of the Ige germline
heavy chain gene, whereas knockdown of PSF increased the STAT6-mediated
responses. PSF recruited histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) to the STAT6 transcription
complex, which resulted in reduction of H3 acetylation at the promoter regions of
Ig heavy chain germline Ige and inhibition of STAT6-mediated transcription. In
addition, the HDACs inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA) enhanced H3 acetylation, and
reverted the PSF-mediated transcriptional repression of Ige gene transcription.
In summary, these results identify PSF as a repressor of STAT6-mediated
transcription that functions through recruitment of HDAC to the STAT6
transcription complex, and delineates a novel regulatory mechanism of IL-4
signaling that may have implications in the pathogenesis of allergic diseases and
pharmacological HDAC inhibition in lymphomas.

PMCID: PMC3030351
PMID: 21106524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. PLoS One. 2010 Nov 12;5(11):e15486. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015486.

Sox2 uses multiple domains to associate with proteins present in Sox2-protein
complexes.

Cox JL(1), Mallanna SK, Luo X, Rizzino A.

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, United States of America.

Master regulators, such as Sox2, Oct4 and Nanog, control complex gene networks
necessary for the self-renewal and pluripotency of embryonic stem cells (ESC).
These master regulators associate with co-activators and co-repressors to
precisely control their gene targets. Recent studies using proteomic analysis
have identified a large, diverse group of co-activators and co-repressors that
associate with master regulators, including Sox2. In this report, we examined the
size distribution of nuclear protein complexes containing Sox2 and its associated
proteins HDAC1, Sall4 and Lin28. Interestingly, we determined that Sox2 and HDAC1
associate with protein complexes that vary greatly in size; whereas, Lin28
primarily associates with smaller complexes, and Sall4 primarily associates with 
larger complexes. Additionally, we examined the domains of Sox2 necessary to
mediate its association with its partner proteins Sall4, HDAC1 and HDAC2. We
determined that Sox2 uses multiple and distinct domains to associate with its
partner proteins. We also examined the domains of Sox2 necessary to mediate its
self-association, and we determined that Sox2 self-association is mediated
through multiple domains. Collectively, these studies provide novel insights into
how Sox2 is able to associate with a wide array of nuclear proteins that control 
gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC2980493
PMID: 21103394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2010 Dec;17(12):1406-13. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1941. Epub 2010
Nov 21.

Transcriptional regulation of BRCA1 expression by a metabolic switch.

Di LJ(1), Fernandez AG, De Siervi A, Longo DL, Gardner K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Receptor Biology and Gene Expression, National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Though the linkages between germline mutations of BRCA1 and hereditary breast
cancer are well known, recent evidence suggests that altered BRCA1 transcription 
may also contribute to sporadic forms of breast cancer. Here we show that BRCA1
expression is controlled by a dynamic equilibrium between transcriptional
coactivators and co-repressors that govern histone acetylation and DNA
accessibility at the BRCA1 promoter. Eviction of the transcriptional co-repressor
and metabolic sensor, C terminal-binding protein (CtBP), has a central role in
this regulation. Loss of CtBP from the BRCA1 promoter through estrogen induction,
depletion by RNA interference or increased NAD+/NADH ratio leads to HDAC1
dismissal, elevated histone acetylation and increased BRCA1 transcription. The
active control of chromatin marks, DNA accessibility and gene expression at the
BRCA1 promoter by this 'metabolic switch' provides an important molecular link
between caloric intake and tumor suppressor expression in mammary cells.

PMCID: PMC3460552
PMID: 21102443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Dev Cell. 2010 Dec 14;19(6):807-18. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2010.10.015. Epub 2010 
Nov 18.

Hdac1 and Hdac2 act redundantly to control p63 and p53 functions in epidermal
progenitor cells.

LeBoeuf M(1), Terrell A, Trivedi S, Sinha S, Epstein JA, Olson EN, Morrisey EE,
Millar SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, 19104, USA.

Epidermal and hair follicle development from surface ectodermal progenitor cells 
requires coordinated changes in gene expression. Histone deacetylases alter gene 
expression programs through modification of chromatin and transcription factors. 
We find that deletion of ectodermal Hdac1 and Hdac2 results in dramatic failure
of hair follicle specification and epidermal proliferation and stratification,
phenocopying loss of the key ectodermal transcription factor p63. Although
expression of p63 and its positively regulated basal cell targets is maintained
in Hdac1/2-deficient ectoderm, targets of p63-mediated repression, including p21,
14-3-3s, and p16/INK4a, are ectopically expressed, and HDACs bind and are active 
at their promoter regions in normal undifferentiated keratinocytes. Mutant
embryos display increased levels of acetylated p53, which opposes p63 functions, 
and p53 is required for HDAC inhibitor-mediated p21 expression in keratinocytes. 
Our data identify critical requirements for HDAC1/2 in epidermal development and 
indicate that HDAC1/2 directly mediate repressive functions of p63 and suppress
p53 activity.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3003338
PMID: 21093383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Nature. 2010 Nov 18;468(7322):443-6. doi: 10.1038/nature09544.

L1 retrotransposition in neurons is modulated by MeCP2.

Muotri AR(1), Marchetto MC, Coufal NG, Oefner R, Yeo G, Nakashima K, Gage FH.

Author information: 
(1)University of California San Diego, School of Medicine, Department of
Pediatrics/Rady Children's Hospital San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093-0695,
USA. muotri@ucsd.edu

Comment in
    Nature. 2010 Nov 18;468(7322):383-4.

Long interspersed nuclear elements-1 (LINE-1 or L1s) are abundant
retrotransposons that comprise approximately 20% of mammalian genomes. Active L1 
retrotransposons can impact the genome in a variety of ways, creating insertions,
deletions, new splice sites or gene expression fine-tuning. We have shown
previously that L1 retrotransposons are capable of mobilization in neuronal
progenitor cells from rodents and humans and evidence of massive L1 insertions
was observed in adult brain tissues but not in other somatic tissues. In
addition, L1 mobility in the adult hippocampus can be influenced by the
environment. The neuronal specificity of somatic L1 retrotransposition in neural 
progenitors is partially due to the transition of a Sox2/HDAC1 repressor complex 
to a Wnt-mediated T-cell factor/lymphoid enhancer factor (TCF/LEF)
transcriptional activator. The transcriptional switch accompanies chromatin
remodelling during neuronal differentiation, allowing a transient stimulation of 
L1 transcription. The activity of L1 retrotransposons during brain development
can have an impact on gene expression and neuronal function, thereby increasing
brain-specific genetic mosaicism. Further understanding of the molecular
mechanisms that regulate L1 expression should provide new insights into the role 
of L1 retrotransposition during brain development. Here we show that L1 neuronal 
transcription and retrotransposition in rodents are increased in the absence of
methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MeCP2), a protein involved in global DNA
methylation and human neurodevelopmental diseases. Using neuronal progenitor
cells derived from human induced pluripotent stem cells and human tissues, we
revealed that patients with Rett syndrome (RTT), carrying MeCP2 mutations, have
increased susceptibility for L1 retrotransposition. Our data demonstrate that L1 
retrotransposition can be controlled in a tissue-specific manner and that
disease-related genetic mutations can influence the frequency of neuronal L1
retrotransposition. Our findings add a new level of complexity to the molecular
events that can lead to neurological disorders.

PMCID: PMC3059197
PMID: 21085180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2010 Nov 17;29:149. doi: 10.1186/1756-9966-29-149.

Effects of valproic acid on the cell cycle and apoptosis through acetylation of
histone and tubulin in a scirrhous gastric cancer cell line.

Yagi Y(1), Fushida S, Harada S, Kinoshita J, Makino I, Oyama K, Tajima H, Fujita 
H, Takamura H, Ninomiya I, Fujimura T, Ohta T, Yashiro M, Hirakawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterologic Surgery, Division of Cancer Medicine, Graduate
School of Medical Science, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa 920-8641, Japan.
y-yagi@live.jp

BACKGROUND: Management of peritoneal dissemination is the most critical problem
in gastric cancer. This study was performed to investigate the inhibitory effects
of valproic acid (VPA) on a highly peritoneal-seeding cell line of human
scirrhous gastric cancer, OCUM-2MD3, and to explore the mechanism and the
potential of VPA.
METHODS: The effects of VPA on the growth of OCUM-2MD3 cells were assessed by MTT
assay. In addition, paclitaxel (PTX) was combined with VPA to evaluate their
synergistic effects. HDAC1 and HDAC2 expression were evaluated by western
blotting in OCUM-2MD3 cells and other gastric cancer cell lines (TMK-1, MKN-28). 
The acetylation status of histone H3 and a-tubulin after exposure to VPA were
analyzed by western blotting. The activities of cell cycle regulatory proteins
and apoptosis-modulating proteins were also examined by western blotting. The
effects of VPA in vivo were evaluated in a xenograft model, and apoptotic
activity was assessed by TUNEL assay.
RESULTS: OCUM-2MD3 cells showed high levels of HDAC1 and HDAC2 expression
compared with TMK-1 and MKN-28. The concentration of VPA required for significant
inhibition of cell viability (P < 0.05) was 5 mM at 24 h and 0.5 mM at 48 h and
72 h. The inhibition of VPA with PTX showed dose-dependent and combinatorial
effects. VPA increased acetyl-histone H3, acetyl-a-tubulin, and p21WAF1 levels
accompanied by upregulation of p27, caspase 3, and caspase 9, and downregulation 
of bcl-2, cyclin D1, and survivin. In the xenograft model experiment, the mean
tumor volume of the VPA-treated group was significantly reduced by 36.4%,
compared with that of the control group at 4 weeks after treatment (P < 0.01).
The apoptotic index was significantly higher in the VPA-treated group (42.3% ±
3.5%) than in the control group (7.7% ± 2.5%) (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: VPA induced dynamic modulation of histone H3 and a-tubulin
acetylation in relation with the anticancer effect and the enhancement of PTX in 
the OCUM-2MD3 cell line. Therefore, VPA in combination with PTX is expected to be
a promising therapy for peritoneal dissemination of scirrhous gastric cancer.

PMCID: PMC2994814
PMID: 21080974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jan 7;286(1):208-15. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.149013. Epub 2010
Nov 8.

Phosphorylation of RUNX1 by cyclin-dependent kinase reduces direct interaction
with HDAC1 and HDAC3.

Guo H(1), Friedman AD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Oncology, The Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

RUNX1 regulates formation of the definitive hematopoietic stem cell and its
subsequent lineage maturation, and mutations of RUNX1 contribute to leukemic
transformation. Phosphorylation of Ser-48, Ser-303, and Ser-424 by
cyclin-dependent kinases (cdks) increases RUNX1 trans-activation activity without
perturbing p300 interaction. We now find that endogenous RUNX1 interacts with
endogenous HDAC1 or HDAC3. Mutation of the three RUNX1 serines to aspartic acid
reduces co-immunoprecipitation with HDAC1 or HDAC3 when expressed in 293T cells; 
mutation of these three serines to alanine increases HDAC interaction, and
mutation of each serine individually to aspartic acid also reduces these
interactions. GST-RUNX1 isolated from bacterial extracts bound in vitro
translated HDAC1 or HDAC3, and these interactions were weakened by mutation of
Ser-48, Ser-303, and Ser-424 to aspartic acid. The ability of RUNX1
phosphorylation and not only serine to aspartic acid conversion to reduce HDAC1
binding was demonstrated using wild-type GST-RUNX1 phosphorylated in vitro using 
cdk1/cyclinB and by exposure of 293T cells transduced with RUNX1 and HDAC1 to
roscovitine, a cdk inhibitor. Finally, RUNX1 or RUNX1(tripleD), in which Ser-48, 
Ser-303, and Ser-424 are mutated to aspartic acid, stimulated proliferation of
transduced, lineage-negative murine marrow progenitors more potently than did
RUNX1(tripleA), in which these serines are mutated to alanine, suggesting that
stimulation of RUNX1 trans-activation by cdk-mediated reduction in HDAC
interaction increases marrow progenitor cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC3012976
PMID: 21059642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Sci Signal. 2010 Nov 2;3(146):ra80. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2001462.

DNMT1 stability is regulated by proteins coordinating deubiquitination and
acetylation-driven ubiquitination.

Du Z(1), Song J, Wang Y, Zhao Y, Guda K, Yang S, Kao HY, Xu Y, Willis J,
Markowitz SD, Sedwick D, Ewing RM, Wang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, 
USA.

DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) is the primary enzyme that maintains DNA
methylation. We describe a previously unknown mode of regulation of DNMT1 protein
stability through the coordinated action of an array of DNMT1-associated
proteins. DNMT1 was destabilized by acetylation by the acetyltransferase Tip60,
which triggered ubiquitination by the E3 ligase UHRF1, thereby targeting DNMT1
for proteasomal degradation. In contrast, DNMT1 was stabilized by histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and the deubiquitinase HAUSP (herpes virus-associated
ubiquitin-specific protease). Analysis of the abundance of DNMT1 and Tip60, as
well as the association between HAUSP and DNMT1, suggested that during the cell
cycle the initiation of DNMT1 degradation was coordinated with the end of DNA
replication and the need for DNMT activity. In human colon cancers, the abundance
of DNMT1 correlated with that of HAUSP. HAUSP knockdown rendered colon cancer
cells more sensitive to killing by HDAC inhibitors both in tissue culture and in 
tumor xenograft models. Thus, these studies provide a mechanism-based rationale
for the development of HDAC and HAUSP inhibitors for combined use in cancer
therapy.

PMCID: PMC3116231
PMID: 21045206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jan 7;286(1):469-79. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.164384. Epub 2010
Nov 2.

SLUG-induced elevation of D1 cyclin in breast cancer cells through the inhibition
of its ubiquitination.

Mittal MK(1), Singh K, Misra S, Chaudhuri G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Meharry Medical College, Nashville,
Tennessee 37208, USA. and.

UbcH5c, a member of the UbcH5 family of protein ubiquitin conjugase E2 enzymes,
is a critical component of biological processes in human cells, being the initial
ubiquitinating enzyme of substrates like I<U+03BA>B, TP53, and cyclin D1. We report here
that the metastasis regulator protein SLUG inhibits the expression of UbcH5c
directly through chromatin remodeling and thus, among other downstream effects,
elevates the level of cyclin D1, thus enhancing the growth rates of breast cancer
cells. Overexpression of SLUG in the SLUG-deficient breast cancer cells
significantly decreased the levels of mRNA and protein of UbcH5c but only
elevated the protein levels of cyclin D1. On the contrary, knockdown of SLUG in
SLUG-high breast cancer cells elevated the levels of UbcH5c while decreasing the 
level of cyclin D1 protein. SLUG is recruited at the E2-box sequence at the
UbcH5c gene promoter along with the corepressor CtBP1 and the effector HDAC1 to
silence the expression of this gene. Knockdown of UbcH5c in the SLUG-deficient
human breast cells elevated the level of cyclin D1 as well as the rates of
proliferation and invasiveness of these cells. Whereas the growth rates of the
cells are enhanced due to overexpression of SLUG or knockdown of UbcH5c in the
breast cancer cells tested, ER(+) cells also acquire resistance to the
anti-estrogen 4-hydroxytamoxifen due to the rise of cyclin D1 levels in these
cells. This study thus implicates high levels of SLUG and low levels of UbcH5c as
a determinant in the progression of metastatic breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3013006
PMID: 21044962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Jan;31(1):54-62. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00840-10. Epub 2010 Nov 1.

A novel mammalian complex containing Sin3B mitigates histone acetylation and RNA 
polymerase II progression within transcribed loci.

Jelinic P(1), Pellegrino J, David G.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Pharmacology, NYU Langone Medical Center, 550 First Ave., New York,
NY 10016, USA.

Transcription requires the progression of RNA polymerase II (RNAP II) through a
permissive chromatin structure. Recent studies of Saccharomyces cerevisiae have
demonstrated that the yeast Sin3 protein contributes to the restoration of the
repressed chromatin structure at actively transcribed loci. Yet, the mechanisms
underlying the restoration of the repressive chromatin structure at transcribed
loci and its significance in gene expression have not been investigated in
mammals. We report here the identification of a mammalian complex containing the 
corepressor Sin3B, the histone deacetylase HDAC1, Mrg15, and the PHD
finger-containing Pf1 and show that this complex plays important roles in
regulation of transcription. We demonstrate that this complex localizes at
discrete loci approximately 1 kb downstream of the transcription start site of
transcribed genes, and this localization requires both Pf1's and Mrg15's
interaction with chromatin. Inactivation of this mammalian complex promotes
increased RNAP II progression within transcribed regions and subsequent increased
transcription. Our results define a novel mammalian complex that contributes to
the regulation of transcription and point to divergent uses of the Sin3 protein
homologues throughout evolution in the modulation of transcription.

PMCID: PMC3019848
PMID: 21041482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Hepatogastroenterology. 2010 Jul-Aug;57(101):891-8.

The effect of differentiating and apoptotic agents on notch signalling pathway in
hepatoblastoma.

Aktas S(1), Zadeoglulari Z, Erçetin P, Olgun N.

Author information: 
(1)Dokuz Eylul University Institute of Oncology, Izmir Turkey.
safiyeaktas@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Notch expression is not yet determined in hepatoblastoma. In
this study the effect of chemotherapeutics (cisplatin, doxorubicin, cytosin
arabinoside); differentiating agent (13 cis-retinoic acid) and apoptotic agents
(5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, arsenic trioxide) on notch expression in hepatoblastoma 
were evaluated.
METHODOLOGY: After HepG2 cell line was cultured and the agents and their
combinations were applied for 24 hour in pre-optimized 50% lethal doses, RNA
isolation and cDNA converting, expression of 84 custom array genes of notch
signaling pathway (SABiosciences, PAT059F-24) was determined by Real Time PCR.
The methylation status of 6 genes that showed more than 5 fold changes compared
with control group were explored by Methylation qPCR Assay. High expressed genes 
are HDAC1, NFKB1, CHUK, CDKN1A, and CBL. Low expressed genes are DLL1, CD44,
FZD2, GLI1, IL17B, LMO2, NOTCH1, LOR, PAX5, PT-CRA, SH2D1A, and WISP1. The genes 
searched for methylation (DLL1, HEY1, DTX1, HDAC1, NOTCH2 and JAG1) were not
found to be related with methylation.
RESULTS: The high expressed genes are related with cell proliferation. The main
signaling genes that are closed to notch in signaling pathway are low expressed
in hepatoblastoma. The agents do not show prominent effect of gene expression in 
many genes and methylation is not the reason of expression changes. The use of
retinoic acid in the control of minimal residual disease of hepatoblastoma should
be discussed. 5 aza "cytidin" the demethylating agent is not advised in treatment
according to our results.
CONCLUSION: Cisplatin as main chemotherapeutic agent treatment is shown to change
gene expression levels in notch signalling pathway in hepatoblastoma.

PMID: 21033247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Int J Dev Biol. 2010;54(10):1527-37. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.092971cm.

Expression of class I histone deacetylases during chick and mouse development.

Murko C(1), Lagger S, Steiner M, Seiser C, Schoefer C, Pusch O.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Anatomy and Cell Biology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are a family of enzymes which regulate the
acetylation state of nucleosomal histones, as well as non-histone proteins. By
altering local chromatin architecture, HDACs play important roles in shaping cell
differentiation and morphogenesis. Expression of class I HDACs during early chick
development has so far not been analyzed. Here, we report the expression profile 
of chick class I HDACs from the onset of gastrulation (HH2) to day 4 of
development and compare it to relevant stages during mouse development.
Visualized by in situ hybridization to whole mount embryos and tissue sections,
we found tissue-specific overlapping temporal and spatial expression domains for 
all four class I HDACs in chick and mouse, although species-specific differences 
could be identified. All class I HDACs in both species are highly expressed in
the developing brain. In particular, HDAC1 is expressed at sites of anterior and 
posterior neural tube closure most obvious in the hot spot-like expression of
HDAC1 in HH12 chicken embryos. A significant species-specific spatio-temporal
expression pattern was observed for HDAC8. Whereas HDAC8 is exclusively found in 
fore- and midbrain regions during early mouse embryogenesis, the chick ortholog
shows an expanded expression pattern, suggesting a more diversified role of HDAC8
in the chick system. Our results present a basis for further functional analysis 
of class I HDACs in chick development.

PMCID: PMC3223403
PMID: 20979029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. EMBO J. 2010 Dec 1;29(23):3992-4007. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.264. Epub 2010 Oct
22.

Crucial function of histone deacetylase 1 for differentiation of teratomas in
mice and humans.

Lagger S(1), Meunier D, Mikula M, Brunmeir R, Schlederer M, Artaker M, Pusch O,
Egger G, Hagelkruys A, Mikulits W, Weitzer G, Muellner EW, Susani M, Kenner L,
Seiser C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter, Vienna, Austria.

Erratum in
    EMBO J. 2011 Apr 20;30(8):1671.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2010 Dec 1;29(23):3893-5.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors induce cell cycle arrest, differentiation
or apoptosis in tumour cells and are, therefore, promising anti-cancer reagents. 
However, the specific HDAC isoforms that mediate these effects are not yet
identified. To explore the role of HDAC1 in tumourigenesis and tumour
proliferation, we established an experimental teratoma model using wild-type and 
HDAC1-deficient embryonic stem cells. HDAC1-deficient teratomas showed no
significant difference in size compared with wild-type teratomas. Surprisingly,
loss of HDAC1 was not only linked to increased apoptosis, but also to
significantly enhanced proliferation. Epithelial structures showed reduced
differentiation as monitored by Oct3/4 expression and changed E-cadherin
localization and displayed up-regulated expression of SNAIL1, a regulator of
epithelial cell plasticity. Increased levels of the transcriptional regulator
SNAIL1 are crucial for enhanced proliferation and reduced differentiation of
HDAC1-deficient teratoma. Importantly, the analysis of human teratomas revealed a
similar link between loss of HDAC1 and enhanced tumour malignancy. These findings
reveal a novel role for HDAC1 in the control of tumour proliferation and identify
HDAC1 as potential marker for benign teratomas.

PMCID: PMC3020644
PMID: 20967026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Biol Chem. 2010 Dec 31;285(53):41443-54. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.141390. Epub
2010 Oct 20.

The transcriptionally active amyloid precursor protein (APP) intracellular domain
is preferentially produced from the 695 isoform of APP in a
{beta}-secretase-dependent pathway.

Belyaev ND(1), Kellett KA, Beckett C, Makova NZ, Revett TJ, Nalivaeva NN, Hooper 
NM, Turner AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Proteolysis Research Group, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Institute of
Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, United
Kingdom.

Amyloidogenic processing of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) by ß- and
<U+03B3>-secretases generates several biologically active products, including amyloid-ß 
(Aß) and the APP intracellular domain (AICD). AICD regulates transcription of
several neuronal genes, especially the Aß-degrading enzyme, neprilysin (NEP). APP
exists in several alternatively spliced isoforms, APP(695), APP(751), and
APP(770). We have examined whether each isoform can contribute to AICD generation
and hence up-regulation of NEP expression. Using SH-SY5Y neuronal cells stably
expressing each of the APP isoforms, we observed that only APP(695) up-regulated 
nuclear AICD levels (9-fold) and NEP expression (6-fold). Increased NEP
expression was abolished by a ß- or <U+03B3>-secretase inhibitor but not an a-secretase 
inhibitor. This correlated with a marked increase in both Aß(1-40) and Aß(1-42)
in APP(695) cells as compared with APP(751) or APP(770) cells. Similar phenomena 
were observed in Neuro2a but not HEK293 cells. SH-SY5Y cells expressing the
Swedish mutant of APP(695) also showed an increase in Aß levels and NEP
expression as compared with wild-type APP(695) cells. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation revealed that AICD was associated with the NEP promoter in
APP(695), Neuro2a, and APP(Swe) cells but not APP(751) nor APP(770) cells where
AICD was replaced by histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1). AICD occupancy of the NEP
promoter was replaced by HDAC1 after treatment of the APP(695) cells with a ß-
but not an a-secretase inhibitor. The increased AICD and NEP levels were
significantly reduced in cholesterol-depleted APP(695) cells. In conclusion, Aß
and functional AICD appear to be preferentially synthesized through ß-secretase
action on APP(695).

PMCID: PMC3009870
PMID: 20961856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Arthritis Res Ther. 2010;12(5):142. doi: 10.1186/ar3137. Epub 2010 Oct 11.

Histone deacetylases in RA: epigenetics and epiphenomena.

Grabiec AM, Reedquist KA.

Comment on
    Arthritis Res Ther. 2010;12(4):R133.

Reduced synovial expression of histone deacetylases (HDACs) is proposed to
contribute to pathology in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) by enhancing
histone-dependent access of transcription factors to promoters of inflammatory
genes. In the previous issue of Arthritis Research & Therapy, Kawabata and
colleagues provided independent evidence that HDAC activity is increased in the
synovium and fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLSs) of patients with RA and is
paralleled by increased HDAC1 expression and synovial tumor necrosis factor-alpha
(TNFa) production. Remarkably, stimulation of RA FLSs with TNFa specifically
increases HDAC activity and HDAC1 expression, suggesting that changes in synovial
HDAC activity and expression may be secondary to local inflammatory status.

PMCID: PMC2991004
PMID: 20959025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Mar;39(6):1993-2006. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq864. Epub 2010
Oct 15.

Chromatin and DNA methylation dynamics during retinoic acid-induced RET gene
transcriptional activation in neuroblastoma cells.

Angrisano T(1), Sacchetti S, Natale F, Cerrato A, Pero R, Keller S, Peluso S,
Perillo B, Avvedimento VE, Fusco A, Bruni CB, Lembo F, Santoro M, Chiariotti L.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare and Istituto di
Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale CNR, Università degli Studi di Napoli
'Federico II' 80131 Naples, Italy.

Although it is well known that RET gene is strongly activated by retinoic acid
(RA) in neuroblastoma cells, the mechanisms underlying such activation are still 
poorly understood. Here we show that a complex series of molecular events, that
include modifications of both chromatin and DNA methylation state, accompany
RA-mediated RET activation. Our results indicate that the primary epigenetic
determinants of RA-induced RET activation differ between enhancer and promoter
regions. At promoter region, the main mark of RET activation was the increase of 
H3K4me3 levels while no significant changes of the methylation state of H3K27 and
H3K9 were observed. At RET enhancer region a bipartite chromatin domain was
detected in unstimulated cells and a prompt demethylation of H3K27me3 marked RET 
gene activation upon RA exposure. Moreover, ChIP experiments demonstrated that
EZH2 and MeCP2 repressor complexes were associated to the heavily methylated
enhancer region in the absence of RA while both complexes were displaced during
RA stimulation. Finally, our data show that a demethylation of a specific CpG
site at the enhancer region could favor the displacement of MeCP2 from the
heavily methylated RET enhancer region providing a novel potential mechanism for 
transcriptional regulation of methylated RA-regulated loci.

PMCID: PMC3064803
PMID: 20952403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Mol Cancer. 2010 Oct 15;9:275. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-275.

Sp1 acetylation is associated with loss of DNA binding at promoters associated
with cell cycle arrest and cell death in a colon cell line.

Waby JS(1), Chirakkal H, Yu C, Griffiths GJ, Benson RS, Bingle CD, Corfe BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, University of Sheffield, Medical School, Beech Hill
Road, Sheffield, UK.

Butyrate, a known histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi) and product of fibre
fermentation, is postulated to mediate the protective effect of dietary fibre
against colon cancer. The transcription factor Sp1 is a target of acetylation and
is known to be associated with class I HDACs, including HDAC1. Sp1 is a
ubiquitous transcription factor and Sp1-regulated genes include those involved in
cell cycle regulation, apoptosis and lipogenesis: all major pathways in cancer
development. The only known acetylated residue of Sp1 is lysine703 which resides 
in the DNA binding domain. Here we show that acetylated Sp1 loses p21- and
bak-promoter -binding function in vitro. Furthermore treatment with a panel of
HDAC inhibitors showed clustering of activities for a subset of inhibitors,
causing G2 cell cycle arrest, Sp1 acetylation, p21 and Bak over-expression, all
with very similar EC50 concentrations. These HDACi activities were not
distributed according to the molecular class of compound. In order to mimic loss 
of binding, an siRNA strategy was used to reduce Sp1 expression. This resulted in
altered expression of multiple elements of the p53/p21 pathway. Taken together
our data suggest a mechanistic model for the chemopreventive actions of butyrate 
in colon epithelial cells, and provide new insight into the differential
activities some classes of HDAC inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC2972244
PMID: 20950428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Oncotarget. 2010 Sep;1(5):349-58.

miR-449a causes Rb-dependent cell cycle arrest and senescence in prostate cancer 
cells.

Noonan EJ(1), Place RF, Basak S, Pookot D, Li LC.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Biology in Medicine, Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health
Care System, Palo Alto, CA, USA. Emily.Noonan@gmail.com

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of small non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) that regulate
gene expression by repressing translation or triggering the degradation of
complementary mRNA sequences. Certain miRNAs have been shown to function as
integral components of the p53 and/or retinoblastoma (Rb) regulatory networks. As
such, miRNA dysregulation can have a profound effect on cancer development.
Previous studies have shown that miR-449a is down-regulated in human prostate
cancer tissue and possesses potential tumor suppressor function. In the present
study, we identify miR-449a-mediated growth arrest in prostate cancer cells is
dependent on the Rb protein. We show that mutant Rb prostate cancer cells (DU-
145) are resistant to cell cycle arrest and cellular senescence induced by miR-
449a, while overexpression of wild-type Rb in DU-145 sublines (DU-1.1 and B5)
restores miR-449a function. In silico analysis of 3'UTR regions reveal a putative
miR-449a target site in the transcript of Cyclin D1 (CCND1); an oncogene involved
in directly regulating Rb activity and cell cycle progression. Luciferase 3'UTR
reporter constructs and inhibitory oligonucleotides confirm that Cyclin D1 is a
direct downstream target of miR-449a. We also reveal that miR-449a suppresses Rb 
phosphorylation through the knockdown of Cyclin D1 and previously validated
target HDAC1. By targeting genes involved in controlling Rb activity, miR- 449a
regulates growth and senescence in an Rb-dependent manner. These data indicate
that miR-449a is a miRNA component of the Rb pathway and its tumor
suppressor-like effects, in part, depends on Rb status in prostate cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC2952964
PMID: 20948989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2010 Dec 1;20(23):7067-70. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2010.09.100.
Epub 2010 Oct 12.

Inhibitors selective for HDAC6 in enzymes and cells.

Gupta PK(1), Reid RC, Liu L, Lucke AJ, Broomfield SA, Andrews MR, Sweet MJ,
Fairlie DP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Queensland, Australia.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors with anticancer or anti-inflammatory activity bind
to Class I or Class I and II HDAC enzymes. Here we compare selectivity of
inhibitors of a Class II HDAC enzyme (HDAC6) and find one that retains high
selectivity in macrophages.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20947351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Mol Cancer. 2010 Oct 14;9:274. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-274.

Synergistic epigenetic reactivation of estrogen receptor-a (ERa) by combined
green tea polyphenol and histone deacetylase inhibitor in ERa-negative breast
cancer cells.

Li Y(1), Yuan YY, Meeran SM, Tollefsbol TO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 1300 University
Boulevard Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

BACKGROUND: The status of estrogen receptor-a (ERa) is critical to the clinical
prognosis and therapeutic approach in breast cancer. ERa-negative breast cancer
is clinically aggressive and has a poor prognosis because of the lack of hormone 
target-directed therapies. Previous studies have shown that epigenetic regulation
plays a major role in ERa silencing in human breast cancer cells. Dietary green
tea polyphenol, (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), is believed to be an
anticancer agent in part through its regulation of epigenetic processes.
RESULTS: In our current studies, we found that EGCG can reactivate ERa expression
in ERa-negative MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. Combination studies using EGCG
with the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, trichostatin A (TSA), revealed a
synergistic effect of reactivation of ERa expression in ERa-negative breast
cancer cells. Reactivation of ERa expression by EGCG and TSA treatment was found 
to sensitize ERa-dependent cellular responses to activator 17ß-estradiol (E2) and
antagonist tamoxifen in ERa-negative breast cancer cells. We also found that EGCG
can lead to remodeling of the chromatin structure of the ERa promoter by altering
histone acetylation and methylation status thereby resulting in ERa reactivation.
A decreased binding of the transcription repressor complex,
Rb/p130-E2F4/5-HDAC1-SUV39H1-DNMT1, in the regulatory region of the ERa promoter 
also contributes to ERa transcriptional activation through treatment with EGCG
and/or TSA.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, these studies show that green tea EGCG can restore ERa
expression by regulating epigenetic mechanisms, and this effect is enhanced when 
combined with an HDAC inhibitor. This study will facilitate more effective uses
of combination approaches in breast cancer therapy and will help to explore more 
effective chemotherapeutic strategies toward hormone-resistant breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2967543
PMID: 20946668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Cancer Res. 2010 Oct 15;70(20):7830-40. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-0833. Epub 
2010 Oct 12.

H3K9 histone methyltransferase G9a promotes lung cancer invasion and metastasis
by silencing the cell adhesion molecule Ep-CAM.

Chen MW(1), Hua KT, Kao HJ, Chi CC, Wei LH, Johansson G, Shiah SG, Chen PS, Jeng 
YM, Cheng TY, Lai TC, Chang JS, Jan YH, Chien MH, Yang CJ, Huang MS, Hsiao M, Kuo
ML.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Toxicology, National Taiwan University College of
Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

G9a is a mammalian histone methyltransferase that contributes to the epigenetic
silencing of tumor suppressor genes. Emerging evidence suggests that G9a is
required to maintain the malignant phenotype, but the role of G9a function in
mediating tumor metastasis has not been explored. Here, we show that G9a is
expressed in aggressive lung cancer cells, and its elevated expression correlates
with poor prognosis. RNAi-mediated knockdown of G9a in highly invasive lung
cancer cells inhibited cell migration and invasion in vitro and metastasis in
vivo. Conversely, ectopic G9a expression in weakly invasive lung cancer cells
increased motility and metastasis. Mechanistic investigations suggested that
repression of the cell adhesion molecule Ep-CAM mediated the effects of G9a.
First, RNAi-mediated knockdown of Ep-CAM partially relieved metastasis
suppression imposed by G9a suppression. Second, an inverse correlation between
G9a and Ep-CAM expression existed in primary lung cancer. Third, Ep-CAM
repression was associated with promoter methylation and an enrichment for
dimethylated histone H3K9. G9a knockdown reduced the levels of H3K9 dimethylation
and decreased the recruitment of the transcriptional cofactors HP1, DNMT1, and
HDAC1 to the Ep-CAM promoter. Our findings establish a functional contribution of
G9a overexpression with concomitant dysregulation of epigenetic pathways in lung 
cancer progression.

©2010 AACR.

PMID: 20940408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Biol Chem. 2010 Dec 17;285(51):39888-97. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.128348. Epub
2010 Oct 11.

High mobility group box 1 release from hepatocytes during ischemia and
reperfusion injury is mediated by decreased histone deacetylase activity.

Evankovich J(1), Cho SW, Zhang R, Cardinal J, Dhupar R, Zhang L, Klune JR,
Zlotnicki J, Billiar T, Tsung A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
15213, USA.

The mobilization and extracellular release of nuclear high mobility group box-1
(HMGB1) by ischemic cells activates inflammatory pathways following liver
ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury. In immune cells such as macrophages,
post-translational modification by acetylation appears to be critical for active 
HMGB1 release. Hyperacetylation shifts its equilibrium from a predominant nuclear
location toward cytosolic accumulation and subsequent release. However,
mechanisms governing its release by parenchymal cells such as hepatocytes are
unknown. In this study, we found that serum HMGB1 released following liver I/R in
vivo is acetylated, and that hepatocytes exposed to oxidative stress in vitro
also released acetylated HMGB1. Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are a family of
enzymes that remove acetyl groups and control the acetylation status of histones 
and various intracellular proteins. Levels of acetylated HMGB1 increased with a
concomitant decrease in total nuclear HDAC activity, suggesting that suppression 
in HDAC activity contributes to the increase in acetylated HMGB1 release after
oxidative stress in hepatocytes. We identified the isoforms HDAC1 and HDAC4 as
critical in regulating acetylated HMGB1 release. Activation of HDAC1 was
decreased in the nucleus of hepatocytes undergoing oxidative stress. In addition,
HDAC1 knockdown with siRNA promoted HMGB1 translocation and release. Furthermore,
we demonstrate that HDAC4 is shuttled from the nucleus to cytoplasm in response
to oxidative stress, resulting in decreased HDAC activity in the nucleus.
Together, these findings suggest that decreased nuclear HDAC1 and HDAC4
activities in hepatocytes following liver I/R is a mechanism that promotes the
hyperacetylation and subsequent release of HMGB1.

PMCID: PMC3000970
PMID: 20937823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Immunol. 2010 Nov 15;185(10):6003-12. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1000482. Epub 2010 
Oct 8.

Differential requirement of histone acetylase and deacetylase activities for
IRF5-mediated proinflammatory cytokine expression.

Feng D(1), Sangster-Guity N, Stone R, Korczeniewska J, Mancl ME,
Fitzgerald-Bocarsly P, Barnes BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, New Jersey Medical School,
University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, NJ 07103, USA.

Recent evidence indicates a new role for histone deacetylases (HDACs) in the
activation of genes governing the host immune response. Virus, along with other
pathogenic stimuli, triggers an antiviral defense mechanism through the induction
of IFN, IFN-stimulated genes, and other proinflammatory cytokines. Many of these 
genes have been shown to be regulated by transcription factors of the IFN
regulatory factor (IRF) family. Recent studies from IRF5 knockout mice have
confirmed a critical role for IRF5 in virus-induced type I IFN expression and
proinflammatory cytokines IL-6, IL-12, and TNF-a; yet, little is known of the
molecular mechanism of IRF5-mediated proinflammatory cytokine expression. In this
study, we show that both HDACs and histone acetyltransferases (HATs) associate
with IRF5, leading to alterations in its transactivation ability. Using the HDAC 
inhibitor trichostatin A, we demonstrate that ISRE, IFNA, and IL6 promoters
require HDAC activity for transactivation and transcription, whereas TNFa does
not. Mapping the interaction of corepressor proteins (HDAC1, silencing mediator
of retinoid and thyroid receptor/nuclear corepressor of retinoid receptor, and
Sin3a) and HATs to IRF5 revealed distinct differences, including the dependence
of IRF5 phosphorylation on HAT association resulting in IRF5 acetylation. Data
presented in this study support a mechanism whereby virus triggers the dynamic
conversion of an IRF5-mediated silencing complex to that of an activating complex
on promoters of target genes. These data provide the first evidence, to our
knowledge, of a tightly controlled transcriptional mechanism whereby IRF5
regulates proinflammatory cytokine expression in conjunction with HATs and HDACs.

PMCID: PMC3233222
PMID: 20935208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Cell Cycle. 2010 Sep 15;9(18):3680-4. doi: 10.4161/cc.9.18.12716. Epub 2010 Sep
30.

HDAC1 in axonal degeneration: A matter of subcellular localization.

Kim JY(1), Casaccia P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Genetics & Genomics, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, NY, USA.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a disease characterized by inflammatory demyelination 
and a strong neurodegenerative component. Axonal damage is characteristically
detected in MS brains, although the pathogenic mechanisms are not clearly
understood. Here, we discuss the importance of HDAC1 localization as one of the
potential mechanisms initiating damage in demyelinating conditions. We suggest
the occurrence of a two-stage mechanism of damage. The first event is a
calcium-dependent HDAC1 nuclear export in a CRM1-dependent manner and the second 
event is the interruption of mitochondrial transport resulting from the
cytoplasmic localization of HDAC1. In the cytosol of neurons challenged by
cytokines and excitatory aminoacids, HDAC1 formed complexes with motor-protein
and microtubules and this resulted in blockade of axonal transport and release of
cargo from motor proteins. We suggest that these findings might be the framework 
for future studies and for the development of novel therapeutic targets for
axonal damage in demyelinating conditions.

PMCID: PMC2995919
PMID: 20930523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Alzheimers Dis. 2010;22(4):1209-21. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2010-100651.

Chromatin-modifying agents increase transcription of CYP46A1, a key player in
brain cholesterol elimination.

Milagre I(1), Nunes MJ, Moutinho M, Rivera I, Fuso A, Scarpa S, Gama MJ,
Rodrigues E.

Author information: 
(1)iMed.UL-Research Institute for Medicines and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty 
of Pharmacy, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal.

The major mechanism of brain cholesterol elimination is the conversion of
cholesterol into 24S-hydroxycholesterol by CYP46A1, a neuron-specific cytochrome 
P450. Since increasing evidence suggests that upregulation of CYP46A1 may be
relevant for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease, we aim to identify the
molecular mechanisms involved in CYP46A1 transcription. Our previous studies
demonstrated the role of Sp transcription factors in basal expression and histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor-dependent derepression of CYP46A1. Here, we show
that the demethylating agent 5'-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine (DAC) is a CYP46A1 inducer
and that pre-treatment with DAC causes a marked synergistic activation of CYP46A1
transcription by trichostatin A. Surprisingly, bisulfite sequencing analysis
revealed that the CYP46A1 core promoter is completely unmethylated in both human 
brain and non-neuronal human tissues where CYP46A1 is not expressed. Therefore,
we have investigated Sp expression levels by western blot and real-time PCR, and 
their binding patterns to the CYP46A1 promoter, by electrophoretic mobility shift
assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, after DAC treatment. Our results 
showed that DAC decreases not only Sp1 and Sp3 protein levels, but also the
binding activity of Sp3 to the +1 region of the CYP46A1 locus. Concomitantly,
HDAC1 and HDAC2 were also significantly dissociated from the promoter. In
conclusion, DAC induces CYP46A1 gene expression, in a DNA methylation-independent
mechanism, decreasing Sp3/HDAC binding to the proximal promoter. Furthermore, by 
affecting the expression of the Sp3 transcription factor in neuronal cells, DAC
might affect not only brain cholesterol metabolism, but also the expression of
many other neuronal genes.

PMID: 20930312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Clin Pathol. 2010 Nov;63(11):994-8. doi: 10.1136/jcp.2010.080952. Epub 2010 Oct
5.

Expression of class I histone deacetylases (HDAC1 and HDAC2) in oesophageal
adenocarcinomas: an immunohistochemical study.

Langer R(1), Mutze K, Becker K, Feith M, Ott K, Höfler H, Keller G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany.
rupert.langer@lrz.tum.de

BACKGROUND: Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are enzymes which play a central role in
post-translational histone and non-histone protein modification. Deregulation of 
HDACs has been detected in various human malignancies and may also influence
response to chemotherapy.
AIMS: To investigate the expression of class I histone deacetylase (HDAC)
isoforms 1 and 2 in oesophageal adenocarcinomas.
METHODS: 132 primary resected tumours and 48 tumours treated by chemotherapy were
analysed. Expression of HDAC1 and HDAC2 was determined by immunohistochemistry,
applied on a tissue microarray and on pretherapeutic biopsies, and correlated
with pathological features and prognosis.
RESULTS: There was negative or low expression of HDAC1 in 54% of tumours,
moderate expression in 41% and high expression in 5%. HDAC2 expression was
negative or low in 30% of tumours, moderate in 47% and high in 21%. In primary
resected tumours, high HDAC2 levels were associated with lymphatic tumour spread 
and lower tumour differentiation grade. HDAC1 levels were not associated with pT,
pN category or tumour differentiation grade. For neoadjuvant treated tumours,
there was only a trend for an association with high pretherapeutic HDAC2
expression and tumour regression after chemotherapy. Pretherapeutic HDAC1 levels 
were not associated with regression after chemotherapy. Survival analysis failed 
to show any prognostic impact of HDAC1 or HDAC2 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: High HDAC2 expression is associated with aggressive tumour behaviour
in oesophageal adenocarcinomas. No significant prognostic value could be found
with respect to overall survival or an association with response to conventional 
chemotherapy for HDAC expression. Immunohistochemical determination of HDACs may 
be useful for prediction of response to specific HDAC inhibitors.

PMID: 20924032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Mol Cancer. 2010 Sep 29;9:263. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-263.

Maximum growth and survival of estrogen receptor-alpha positive breast cancer
cells requires the Sin3A transcriptional repressor.

Ellison-Zelski SJ(1), Alarid ET.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin
53706, USA.

BACKGROUND: Sin3A is an evolutionarily conserved transcriptional repressor which 
regulates gene expression as part of the multi-protein Sin3 repressive complex.
It functions as a scaffold upon which proteins with enzymatic activity dock,
including chromatin modifying histone deacetylases. Although regulation of
transcription by Sin3A has been studied in detail, little is understood about the
function of Sin3A in cancer cells. We previously showed that Sin3A is expressed
in breast cancer cells and is a repressor of estrogen receptor-alpha (ERa, ESR1) 
gene expression. Here, we expand our previous studies to elucidate the function
of Sin3A in the control of gene expression and growth of breast cancer cells.
RESULTS: Analysis of gene expression following knockdown of Sin3A revealed
changes in both basal and regulated gene transcription. Genes of known importance
in breast cancer and estrogen signaling, including ERBB2, PGR, MYC, CLU, and
NCOA2, were among those identified as Sin3A-responsive. The mechanism of Sin3A
action varied among genes and was found to be mediated through both HDAC1/2
-dependent and -independent activities. Loss of Sin3A inhibited breast cancer
cell growth by increasing apoptosis without affecting cell cycle progression.
Analysis of both ERa-positive and ERa-negative cell lines revealed that the
effects of Sin3A on growth were cell-type specific, as Sin3A expression promoted 
maximum growth of only the ERa-positive cells, and, notably, Sin3A protein itself
was increased by estrogen. Further gene expression experiments revealed that
Sin3A repressed expression of key apoptotic genes, including TRAIL, TRAILR1,
CASP10, and APAF1, in ERa-positive, but not ERa-negative, cell lines, which could
provide a mechanistic explanation for cell-type differences in growth.
CONCLUSIONS: This study identifies Sin3A as a regulator of gene expression,
survival, and growth in ERa-positive breast cancer cells. Sin3A regulates the
transcription of genes involved in breast cancer and apoptosis and acts through
multiple mechanisms not limited to histone deacetylase function. These findings
reveal previously undescribed functions of Sin3A in breast cancer and provide
evidence for an important role of this transcriptional repressor in ERa-positive 
tumor cell growth.

PMCID: PMC2956731
PMID: 20920219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Diabetologia. 2010 Dec;53(12):2569-78. doi: 10.1007/s00125-010-1892-8. Epub 2010 
Sep 28.

Lysine deacetylases are produced in pancreatic beta cells and are differentially 
regulated by proinflammatory cytokines.

Lundh M(1), Christensen DP, Rasmussen DN, Mascagni P, Dinarello CA, Billestrup N,
Grunnet LG, Mandrup-Poulsen T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Research Methodology, Department of Biomedical Sciences,
Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3, 2200
Copenhagen, Denmark.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Cytokine-induced beta cell toxicity is abrogated by
non-selective inhibitors of lysine deacetylases (KDACs). The KDAC family consists
of 11 members, namely histone deacetylases HDAC1 to HDAC11, but it is not known
which KDAC members play a role in cytokine-mediated beta cell death. The aim of
the present study was to examine the KDAC gene expression profile of the beta
cell and to investigate whether KDAC expression is regulated by cytokines. In
addition, the protective effect of the non-selective KDAC inhibitor ITF2357 and
interdependent regulation of four selected KDACs were investigated.
METHODS: The beta cell line INS-1 and intact rat and human islets were exposed to
cytokines with or without ITF2357. Expression of mRNA was assessed by real-time
PCR and selected targets validated at the protein level by immunoblotting.
Effects on cytokine-induced toxicity were investigated by in vitro assays.
RESULTS: Hdac1 to Hdac11 were expressed and differentially regulated by cytokines
in INS-1 cells and rat islets. HDAC1, -2, -6 and -11 were found to be expressed
and regulated by cytokines in human islets. ITF2357 protected against
cytokine-induced beta cell apoptosis and counteracted cytokine-induced
attenuation of basal insulin secretion. In addition, cytokine-induced regulation 
of Hdac2 and Hdac6, but not Hdac1 and Hdac11, was reduced by KDAC inhibition.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: All classical KDAC genes are expressed by beta cells 
and differentially regulated by cytokines. Based on the relative expression
levels and degree of regulation by cytokines, we propose that HDAC1, -2, -6 and
-11 are of particular importance for beta cell function. These observations may
help in the design of specific KDAC inhibitors to prevent beta cell destruction
in situ and in islet grafts.

PMID: 20878317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. PLoS Curr. 2010 Sep 2;2. pii: RRN1172. doi: 10.1371/currents.RRN1172.

Evaluation of histone deacetylases as drug targets in Huntington's disease
models. Study of HDACs in brain tissues from R6/2 and CAG140 knock-in HD mouse
models and human patients and in a neuronal HD cell model.

Quinti L(1), Chopra V, Rotili D, Valente S, Amore A, Franci G, Meade S, Valenza
M, Altucci L, Maxwell MM, Cattaneo E, Hersch S, Mai A, Kazantsev A.

Author information: 
(1)MassGeneral Institute for Neurodegenerative Disease, Massachusetts General
Hospital, & Harvard Medical School, Bldg. 114-3300, 16th Street, Charlestown, MA 
02129, USA.

The family of histone deacetylases (HDACs) has recently emerged as important drug
targets for treatment of slow progressive neurodegenerative disorders, including 
Huntington's disease (HD). Broad pharmaceutical inhibition of HDACs has shown
neuroprotective effects in various HD models. Here we examined the susceptibility
of HDAC targets for drug treatment in affected brain areas during HD progression.
We observed increased HDAC1 and decreased HDAC4, 5 and 6 levels, correlating with
disease progression, in cortices and striata of HD R6/2 mice. However, there were
no significant changes in HDAC protein levels, assessed in an age-dependent
manner, in HD knock-in CAG140 mice and we did not observe significant changes in 
HDAC1 levels in human HD brains. We further assessed acetylation levels of
a-tubulin, as a biomarker of HDAC6 activity, and found it unchanged in cortices
from R6/2, knock-in, and human subjects at all disease stages. Inhibition of
deacetylase activities was identical in cortical extracts from R6/2 and wild-type
mice treated with a class II-selective HDAC inhibitor. Lastly, treatment with
class I- and II-selective HDAC inhibitors showed similar responses in HD and
wild-type rat striatal cells. In conclusion, our results show that class I and
class II HDAC targets are present and accessible for chronic drug treatment
during HD progression and provide impetus for therapeutic development of
brain-permeable class- or isoform-selective inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC2943247
PMID: 20877454  [PubMed]


114. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Oct 12;107(41):17721-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1012991107. Epub 2010 Sep 27.

Circadian CLOCK histone acetyl transferase localizes at ND10 nuclear bodies and
enables herpes simplex virus gene expression.

Kalamvoki M(1), Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)Marjorie B. Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Expression of herpes simplex virus genes at the initiation of replication
involves two steps that take place at ND10 nuclear bodies. These are suppression 
of cellular repressors that attempt to silence viral DNA and remodeling of the
viral chromatin to make it accessible for transcription. In earlier studies we
reported on the mechanism by which viral proteins ICP0 and U(S)3 protein kinase
modify and disrupt the HDAC1/CoREST/REST/LSD1 repressor complex. The remodeling
step requires in addition acetylation of histones bound to DNA. In an attempt to 
identify the enzyme, we took note of the observation that ICP0 physically and
functionally interacts with Bmal1, a partner of the CLOCK histone acetyl
transferase, and key members of the bHLH-PAS family of transcriptional factors.
The Bmal11 and CLOCK heterodimer is best known as a regulator of the circadian
oscillation in the mammalian CLOCK system. In this article we report the
following: (i) in infected cells both Bmal1 and CLOCK localize at ND10 bodies;
(ii) wild-type virus stabilizes the CLOCK protein; (iii) overexpression of CLOCK 
partially compensates for the absence of ICP0 and enables higher yields in cells 
infected with a <U+0394>ICP0 mutant and this activity is not expressed by CLOCK mutants 
lacking histone acetyl transferase activity; and (iv) depletion of CLOCK in cells
infected with wild-type virus results in significant decrease in the expression
of all viral proteins tested. We conclude that ICP0 interacts with Bmal1 and by
extension with CLOCK histone acetyl transferase to remodel viral chromatin.

PMCID: PMC2955081
PMID: 20876123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Semin Cancer Biol. 2011 Feb;21(1):28-34. doi: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2010.09.001.
Epub 2010 Sep 17.

Intracellular signaling and hepatocellular carcinoma.

Iakova P(1), Timchenko L, Timchenko NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology and Huffington Center on Aging, Baylor 
College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, United States.

Liver cancer is the fifth most common cancer and the third most common cause of
cancer related death in the world. The recent development of new techniques for
the investigations of global change in the gene expression, signaling pathways
and wide genome binding has provided novel information for the mechanisms
underlying liver cancer progression. Although these studies identified gene
expression signatures in hepatocellular carcinoma, the early steps of the
development of hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC) are not well understood. The
development of HCC is a multistep process which includes the progressive
alterations of gene expression leading to the increased proliferation and to
liver cancer. This review summarizes recent progress in the identification of the
key steps of the development of HCC with the focus on early events of
carcinogenesis and on the role of translational and epigenetic alterations in the
development of HCC. Quiescent stage of the liver is supported by several tumor
suppressor proteins including p53, Rb and C/EBPa. Studies with chemical models of
liver carcinogenesis and with human HCC have shown that the elevation of gankyrin
is responsible for the elimination of these three proteins at early steps of
carcinogenesis. Later stages of progression of the liver cancer are associated
with alterations in many signaling pathways including translation which leads to 
epigenetic silencing/activation of many genes. Particularly, recent reports
suggest a critical role of histone deacetylase 1, HDAC1, in the development of
HCC through the interactions with transcription factors such as C/EBP family
proteins.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3228644
PMID: 20850540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Reprod Dev. 2011 Feb;57(1):34-42. Epub 2010 Sep 10.

Trichostatin A promotes the development of bovine somatic cell nuclear transfer
embryos.

Lee MJ(1), Kim SW, Lee HG, Im GS, Yang BC, Kim NH, Kim DH.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Animal Science, Suwon 441-706, Korea.

We studied the effects of trichostatin A (TSA), a histone deacetylase inhibitor, 
on the development of bovine somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) embryos by
investigating (1) the optimal concentration and treatment time of TSA for
development of bovine SCNT embryos, (2) the status of histone acetylation in
TSA-treated and control SCNT embryos and (3) the expression of histone
acetylation- and deacetylation-related genes in TSA-treated and control SCNT
embryos. We observed that 50 nM TSA-treatment for 20 h following fusion resulted 
in more efficient in vitro development of bovine SCNT embryos to the blastocyst
stage. In regard to histone H4K5 acetylation, half of the control SCNT embryos
faintly displayed histone H4K5 signals 30 min after electrofusion, while most of 
the TSA-treated SCNT embryos displayed histone H4K5 signals within 30 min after
electrofusion. Furthermore, the expressions of HDAC1 and HDAC2 in the blastocysts
were significantly lower (P<0.05) in the TSA-treated SCNT than in the control
SCNT. However, the expression of GCN5 and HAT1 did not differ between the
TSA-treated and control SCNT. In conclusion, we demonstrated that TSA-treatment
after SCNT in bovine embryos can dramatically improve the practical applications 
of current cloning techniques.

PMID: 20834196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Immunol. 2010 Oct 1;185(7):3980-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1000990. Epub 2010 Sep
8.

Vitamin D3 upregulated protein 1 suppresses TNF-a-induced NF-<U+03BA>B activation in
hepatocarcinogenesis.

Kwon HJ(1), Won YS, Suh HW, Jeon JH, Shao Y, Yoon SR, Chung JW, Kim TD, Kim HM,
Nam KH, Yoon WK, Kim DG, Kim JH, Kim YS, Kim DY, Kim HC, Choi I.

Author information: 
(1)Bio-Evaluation Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Chungbuk, South Korea.

Vitamin D(3) upregulated protein 1 (VDUP1) is a candidate tumor suppressor, the
expression of which is dramatically reduced in various tumor tissues. In this
study, we found that VDUP1 expression is suppressed during human hepatic
carcinogenesis, and mice lacking VDUP1 are much more susceptible to
diethylnitrosamine-induced hepatocarcinogenesis compared with wild type mice.
VDUP1-deficient tumors proliferated significantly more than wild type tumors and 
had corresponding changes in the expression of key cell cycle regulatory
proteins. In addition, the hepatomitogen-induced response was associated with a
considerable increase in the release of TNF-a and subsequent enhancement of NF-<U+03BA>B
activation in VDUP1-deficient mice. When cells were treated with TNF-a, the VDUP1
level was markedly reduced, concomitant with elevated NF-<U+03BA>B activation.
Furthermore, the overexpression of VDUP1 resulted in the robust suppression of
TNF-a-activated NF-<U+03BA>B activity via association with HDAC1 and HDAC3. These
results indicate that VDUP1 negatively regulates hepatocarcinogenesis by
suppressing TNF-a-induced NF-<U+03BA>B activation.

PMID: 20826751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Mol Pain. 2010 Sep 7;6:51. doi: 10.1186/1744-8069-6-51.

Inhibition of class II histone deacetylases in the spinal cord attenuates
inflammatory hyperalgesia.

Bai G(1), Wei D, Zou S, Ren K, Dubner R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neural and Pain Sciences, University of Maryland, Baltimore,
Maryland 21117, USA. gbai@umaryland.edu

BACKGROUND: Several classes of histone deacetylases (HDACs) are expressed in the 
spinal cord that is a critical structure of the nociceptive pathway.
HDAC-regulated histone acetylation is an important component of chromatin
remodeling leading to epigenetic regulation of gene transcription. To understand 
the role of histone acetylation in epigenetic regulation of pathological pain, we
have studied the impact of different classes of HDACs in the spinal cord on
inflammatory hyperalgesia induced by complete Freund's adjuvant (CFA).
RESULTS: We intrathecally applied inhibitors specific to different classes of
HDACs and evaluated their impact on inflammatory hyperalgesia. Pre-injected
inhibitors targeting class I as well as II (SAHA, TSA, LAQ824) or IIa (VPA, 4-PB)
HDACs significantly delayed the thermal hyperalgesia induced by unilateral CFA
injection in the hindpaw. Existing hyperalgesia induced by CFA was also
attenuated by the HDAC inhibitors (HDACIs). In contrast, these inhibitors did not
interfere with the thermal response either in naïve animals, or on the
contralateral side of inflamed animals. Interestingly, MS-275 that specifically
inhibits class I HDACs failed to alter the hyperalgesia although it increased
histone 3 acetylation in the spinal cord as SAHA did. Using immunoblot analysis, 
we further found that the levels of class IIa HDAC members (HDAC4, 5, 7, 9) in
the spinal dorsal horn were upregulated following CFA injection while those of
class I HDAC members (HDAC1, 2, 3) remained stable or were slightly reduced.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that activity of class II HDACs in the spinal cord 
is critical to the induction and maintenance of inflammatory hyperalgesia induced
by CFA, while activity of class I HDACs may be unnecessary. Comparison of the
effects of HDACIs specific to class II and IIa as well as the expression pattern 
of different HDACs in the spinal cord in response to CFA suggests that the
members of class IIa HDACs may be potential targets for attenuating persistent
inflammatory pain.

PMCID: PMC2942827
PMID: 20822541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2011 Aug;128(3):667-77. doi: 10.1007/s10549-010-1083-9. 
Epub 2010 Sep 7.

The rexinoid bexarotene represses cyclin D1 transcription by inducing the DEC2
transcriptional repressor.

Li Y(1), Shen Q, Kim HT, Bissonnette RP, Lamph WW, Yan B, Brown PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Cancer Prevention, The University of Texas, Anderson
Cancer Center Cancer, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Bexarotene is an RXR-selective vitamin A analog that has been shown to prevent
ER-negative mammary tumorigenesis in animal models. While investigating the
mechanism by which bexarotene prevents ER-negative breast cancer development, we 
found that the expression of cyclin D1, a critical cell cycle promoter, was
repressed by bexarotene in vitro and in vivo. Time course and cycloheximide
experiments show that repression of cyclin D1 is a late effect and requires new
protein synthesis. Previously we discovered that DEC2 (differentially expressed
in chondrocytes-2), a helix-loop-helix transcription repressor, was induced by
bexarotene in human mammary epithelial cells. Therefore, we hypothesized that
bexarotene represses the transcription of cyclin D1 through induction of DEC2.
Luciferase reporter studies demonstrated that either bexarotene treatment or
forced expression of DEC2 can repress the transcription of a cyclin D1 promoter
reporter by affecting the basal transcriptional activity. Results from chromatin 
immunoprecipitation experiments showed that bexarotene treatment causes the
recruitment of DEC2 and HDAC1 (histone deacetylase 1) to the cyclin D1 promoter. 
Co-immunoprecipitation confirms the interaction between DEC2 and HDAC1,
suggesting that the recruitment of HDAC1 to the cyclin D1 promoter is through
DEC2. Trichostatin A, a HDAC inhibitor, reverses the cyclin D1 repression by
bexarotene, suggesting that repression of cyclin D1 involves histone
deacetylation. Knock-down of DEC2 by siRNA abolishes the cyclin D1 repression,
further supporting our hypothesis. Finally, we demonstrated that overexpression
of DEC2 dramatically inhibited cell proliferation and repressed the expression of
cyclin D1 in human mammary epithelial cells. These results suggest that
bexarotene down-regulates cyclin D1 through induction of DEC2, followed by
recruitment of HDAC1 to the cyclin D1 promoter causing transcriptional
repression. By elucidating the mechanism by which rexinoids inhibit cell
proliferation, it will be possible to develop more effective and less toxic drugs
to prevent ER-negative breast cancers.

PMCID: PMC3444826
PMID: 20821348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2010 Sep;17(9):1144-51. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1899. Epub 2010
Aug 29.

Human HDAC1 and HDAC2 function in the DNA-damage response to promote DNA
nonhomologous end-joining.

Miller KM(1), Tjeertes JV, Coates J, Legube G, Polo SE, Britton S, Jackson SP.

Author information: 
(1)The Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair occurs within chromatin and can be modulated
by chromatin-modifying enzymes. Here we identify the related human histone
deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2 as two participants in the DNA-damage response. We
show that acetylation of histone H3 Lys56 (H3K56) was regulated by HDAC1 and
HDAC2 and that HDAC1 and HDAC2 were rapidly recruited to DNA-damage sites to
promote hypoacetylation of H3K56. Furthermore, HDAC1- and 2-depleted cells were
hypersensitive to DNA-damaging agents and showed sustained DNA-damage signaling, 
phenotypes that reflect defective DSB repair, particularly by nonhomologous
end-joining (NHEJ). Collectively, these results show that HDAC1 and HDAC2
function in the DNA-damage response by promoting DSB repair and thus provide
important insights into the radio-sensitizing effects of HDAC inhibitors that are
being developed as cancer therapies.

PMCID: PMC3018776
PMID: 20802485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2010 Nov;335(2):351-61. doi: 10.1124/jpet.110.172387. Epub 
2010 Aug 25.

Anticolon cancer activity of largazole, a marine-derived tunable histone
deacetylase inhibitor.

Liu Y(1), Salvador LA, Byeon S, Ying Y, Kwan JC, Law BK, Hong J, Luesch H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, University of Florida, 1600 SW Archer Road,
P.O. Box 100485, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are validated targets for anticancer therapy as
attested by the approval of suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) and romidepsin
(FK228) for treating cutaneous T cell lymphoma. We recently described the
bioassay-guided isolation, structure determination, synthesis, and target
identification of largazole, a marine-derived antiproliferative natural product
that is a prodrug that releases a potent HDAC inhibitor, largazole thiol. Here,
we characterize the anticancer activity of largazole by using in vitro and in
vivo cancer models. Screening against the National Cancer Institute's 60 cell
lines revealed that largazole is particularly active against several colon cancer
cell types. Consequently, we tested largazole, along with several synthetic
analogs, for HDAC inhibition in human HCT116 colon cancer cells. Enzyme
inhibition strongly correlated with the growth inhibitory effects, and
differential activity of largazole analogs was rationalized by molecular docking 
to an HDAC1 homology model. Comparative genomewide transcript profiling revealed 
a close overlap of genes that are regulated by largazole, FK228, and SAHA.
Several of these genes can be related to largazole's ability to induce cell cycle
arrest and apoptosis. Stability studies suggested reasonable bioavailability of
the active species, largazole thiol. We established that largazole inhibits HDACs
in tumor tissue in vivo by using a human HCT116 xenograft mouse model. Largazole 
strongly stimulated histone hyperacetylation in the tumor, showed efficacy in
inhibiting tumor growth, and induced apoptosis in the tumor. This effect probably
is mediated by the modulation of levels of cell cycle regulators, antagonism of
the AKT pathway through insulin receptor substrate 1 down-regulation, and
reduction of epidermal growth factor receptor levels.

PMCID: PMC2967399
PMID: 20739454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2010 Dec;48(12):1785-91. doi: 10.1515/CCLM.2010.353. Epub 2010
Aug 24.

Combination of polymorphisms within the HDAC1 and HDAC3 gene predict tumor
recurrence in hepatocellular carcinoma patients that have undergone transplant
therapy.

Yang Z(1), Zhou L, Wu LM, Xie HY, Zhang F, Zheng SS.

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Combined Multi-organ Transplantation, Ministry of Public Health,
Division of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, Department of Surgery, First
Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, P.R.
China.

BACKGROUND: Histone deacetylases (HDACs) have been reported to be poor prognostic
indicators in patients with cancer. However, no data are available for the role
of single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of class I HDAC in hepato-cellular
carcinoma (HCC). Therefore, we investigated the association of class I HDAC
isoforms genomic polymorphisms with risk of HCC and tumor recurrence following
liver transplantation (LT).
METHODS: One hundred and ninety-six Chinese subjects consisting of 97 HCC
patients and 99 controls were enrolled in this study. Nine polymorphisms of the
HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3 gene (rs2530223, rs1741981, rs2547547, rs13204445,
rs6568819, rs10499080, rs11741808, rs2475631, rs11391) were examined using
Applied Biosystems SNaP-Shot and TaqMan technology.
RESULTS: We found no significant difference in genotype frequencies between the
HCC cases and controls. In terms of tumor recurrence following LT, patients
carrying the T allele of HDAC1 SNP rs1741981 showed a favorable outcome for
recurrence free survival when compared with patients homozygous for CC. In
addition, the same significant trend was observed in HDAC3 SNP rs2547547.
Kaplan-Meier analysis showed that the combination of the T variant allele (CT+TT)
of HDAC1 SNP rs1741981 and the homozygous TT variant allele of HDAC3 SNP
rs2547547 was the most favorable prognostic factor. The risk for postoperative
tumor recurrence was about 2.2-fold lower for patients with this genotype
combination compared with carriers of the HDAC1 SNP rs1741981 CC and HDAC3 SNP
rs2547547 CT genotype combination (hazard ratio: 2.235, p=0.003).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that combined analysis of HDAC1 SNP rs1741981 and
HDAC3 SNP rs2547547 may be a potential genetic marker for HCC recurrence in LT
patients.

PMID: 20731616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Wei Sheng Yan Jiu. 2010 Jul;39(4):444-6.

[Apoptosis effects on human esophageal cancer cells by soyasaponin Bb and its
machanism].

[Article in Chinese]

Pei Y(1), Zhao H, Du X, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)College of Public Health, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effect and potential mechanism of apoptosis in the
Eca-9706 cells induced by soyasaponin Bb.
METHODS: Different concentrations of soyasaponin Bb were on the Eca-9706 cell.
Cell growth suppression rate was detected by MTT. Apoptotic rate was detected by 
TUNEL. The expression changes of HDAC1, NF-kappaB, PTEN, cyclin D1, c-met, VEGF
or caspase-3 in the SSBb were detected by immunohistochemistry and
immunoblotting.
RESULTS: Compared with the control group, the growth-inhibition rate and
apoptotic rate were increased, the expressions of PTEN, caspase 3 were increased,
the expressions of c-met, VEGF, HDAC1, NF-kappaB and cyclin D1 were decreased.
CONCLUSION: SSBb can suppress Eca-9706 cell growth. SSBb can exhibit reverse
effects on over expression of c-met, VEGF in Eca-9706 cells. Eca-9706 cell
apoptosis can be induced by SSBb through inhibiting HDAC1-NF-kappaB and
activating PETEN and caspase-3 signaling pathways.

PMID: 20726234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Immunol. 2010 Sep 15;185(6):3489-97. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0903610. Epub 2010
Aug 11.

Conditional deletion of histone deacetylase 1 in T cells leads to enhanced airway
inflammation and increased Th2 cytokine production.

Grausenburger R(1), Bilic I, Boucheron N, Zupkovitz G, El-Housseiny L,
Tschismarov R, Zhang Y, Rembold M, Gaisberger M, Hartl A, Epstein MM, Matthias P,
Seiser C, Ellmeier W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochecmistry, Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Vienna
Biocenter, Vienna, Austria.

Chromatin modifications, such as reversible histone acetylation, play a key role 
in the regulation of T cell development and function. However, the role of
individual histone deacetylases (HDACs) in T cells is less well understood. In
this article, we show by conditional gene targeting that T cell-specific loss of 
HDAC1 led to an increased inflammatory response in an in vivo allergic airway
inflammation model. Mice with HDAC1-deficient T cells displayed an increase in
all critical parameters in this Th2-type asthma model, such as eosinophil
recruitment into the lung, mucus hypersecretion, parenchymal lung inflammation,
and enhanced airway resistance. This correlated with enhanced Th2 cytokine
production in HDAC1-deficient T cells isolated from diseased mice. In
vitro-polarized HDAC1-deficient Th2 cells showed a similar enhancement of IL-4
expression, which was evident already at day 3 of Th2 differentiation cultures
and restricted to T cell subsets that underwent several rounds of cell divisions.
HDAC1 was recruited to the Il4 gene locus in ex vivo isolated nonstimulated
CD4(+) T cells, indicating a direct control of the Il4 gene locus. Our data
provide genetic evidence that HDAC1 is an essential HDAC that controls the
magnitude of an inflammatory response by modulating cytokine expression in
effector T cells.

PMCID: PMC3175530
PMID: 20702731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Aging Cell. 2010 Oct;9(5):895-910. doi: 10.1111/j.1474-9726.2010.00617.x.

Epigenetic changes play critical role in age-associated dysfunctions of the
liver.

Jin J(1), Wang GL, Iakova P, Shi X, Haefliger S, Finegold M, Timchenko NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
TX 77030, USA.

CCAAT/Enhancer Binding Proteins family proteins are important regulators of liver
functions. Here, we show the critical role of C/EBPa-mediated chromatin
remodeling in the age-associated dysfunctions of the liver and in the maintenance
of physiological homeostasis. Because ph-S193 isoform of C/EBPa is increased in
livers of old mice, we have generated C/EBPa-S193D knockin mice, which mimic the 
ph-S193 isoform of C/EBPa. Analyses of these mice showed that the S193D mutation 
causes chromatin remodeling leading to histological appearance of 'foci-like'
nodules, which are also observed in livers of old mice. These 'foci-like'
structures contain K9 trimethylated histone H3, a marker of heterochromatin. The 
increase of heterochromatin regions in S193D mice correlates with the elevation
of S193D-C/EBPa-HDAC1 complexes and with dys-regulation of gene expression
including epigenetic silencing of cyclin D1 and D2 promoters and the inhibition
of liver proliferation. The elimination of C/EBPa-HDAC1 complexes in S193D mice
by inhibition of HDAC1 corrects chromatin structure and normalizes expression of 
cyclin D1 and D2. We found that epigenetic dys-regulation is also associated with
the elevation of C/EBPß and with the increase of C/EBPa/ß heterodimers in S193D
mice. The C/EBPa/ß heterodimers activate transcription of Glut4 and increase the 
levels of Glut4. As the result, S193D livers have accelerated uptake of glucose
and accumulation of glycogen in the liver. Thus, this study demonstrates that the
phosphorylation of C/EBPa at S193 leads to the appearance of heterochromatin
regions, which correlates with the development of age-related dysfunctions of the
liver.

© 2010 The Authors Aging Cell © 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd/Anatomical Society 
of Great Britain and Ireland.

PMCID: PMC3046424
PMID: 20698834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Cell Reprogram. 2010 Jun;12(3):357-68. doi: 10.1089/cell.2009.0083.

Comparative potential of cultured skin fibroblast, cumulus, and granulosa cell to
produce somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) preimplantation embryos in buffaloes
(Bubalus bubalis) in relation to gene expressions.

Pandey A(1), Gupta SC, Gupta N.

Author information: 
(1)Transgenic Research Laboratory, National Bureau of Animal Genetic Resources,
Karnal, India.

To improve the efficiency of somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT)-derived embryos
in buffaloes (Bubalus bubalis), skin fibroblast, cumulus, and granulosa cells
were cultured up to the 15th passage and cloned embryos were produced from each
cell type. At the 15th passage the cumulative population doublings (CPDs) in
cumulus cells was higher (60.78) than skin fibroblast (57.12) and granulosa
(56.05) cell lines. Gene expression of chromatin remodelling proteins, that is,
HDAC1, DNMT1, DNMT3a, and DNMT3b, were comparable at all five passages (P-3, P-6,
P-9, P-12, and P-15) groups in cumulus cells but different in skin fibroblast and
granulosa cells. Cleavage and blastocyst production rate in cumulus (65.9 and
27.4%)-derived embryos was higher than skin fibroblast (63.8 and 24.3%) and
granulosa (62.5 and 22.3%)-derived embryos. Expressions of HDAC1, DNMT1, and
DNMT3a mRNA in cumulus-derived blastocysts were similar to IVF blastocysts
(control), whereas skin fibroblast and granulosa-derived blastocysts expression
was significantly different (p < or = 0.05). DNMT3b mRNA expression in all the
three donor cell types and IVF control were similar. The expression pattern of
these genes showed the effect of donor cell type with different epigenetic
reprogramming capabilities for SCNT embryo production rate. Overall, results
indicated that cumulus cells are the best nuclear donor for SCNT.

PMID: 20698775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Aug 24;107(34):15081-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1009575107. Epub 2010 Aug 9.

Mechanisms of estrogen receptor antagonism toward p53 and its implications in
breast cancer therapeutic response and stem cell regulation.

Konduri SD(1), Medisetty R, Liu W, Kaipparettu BA, Srivastava P, Brauch H, Fritz 
P, Swetzig WM, Gardner AE, Khan SA, Das GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Center for Genetics and
Pharmacology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY 14263, USA.

Estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) plays an important role in the onset and
progression of breast cancer, whereas p53 functions as a major tumor suppressor. 
We previously reported that ERalpha binds to p53, resulting in inhibition of
transcriptional regulation by p53. Here, we report on the molecular mechanisms by
which ERalpha suppresses p53's transactivation function. Sequential ChIP assays
demonstrated that ERalpha represses p53-mediated transcriptional activation in
human breast cancer cells by recruiting nuclear receptor corepressors (NCoR and
SMRT) and histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1). RNAi-mediated down-regulation of NCoR
resulted in increased endogenous expression of the cyclin-dependent kinase
(CDK)-inhibitor p21(Waf1/Cip1) (CDKN1A) gene, a prototypic transcriptional target
of p53. While 17beta-estradiol (E2) enhanced ERalpha binding to p53 and inhibited
p21 transcription, antiestrogens decreased ERalpha recruitment and induced
transcription. The effects of estrogen and antiestrogens on p21 transcription
were diametrically opposite to their known effects on the conventional
ERE-containing ERalpha target gene, pS2/TFF1. These results suggest that ERalpha 
uses dual strategies to promote abnormal cellular proliferation: enhancing the
transcription of ERE-containing proproliferative genes and repressing the
transcription of p53-responsive antiproliferative genes. Importantly, ERalpha
binds to p53 and inhibits transcriptional activation by p53 in stem/progenitor
cell-containing murine mammospheres, suggesting a potential role for the ER-p53
interaction in mammary tissue homeostasis and cancer formation. Furthermore,
retrospective studies analyzing response to tamoxifen therapy in a subset of
patients with ER-positive breast cancer expressing either wild-type or mutant p53
suggest that the presence of wild-type p53 is an important determinant of
positive therapeutic response.

PMCID: PMC2930589
PMID: 20696891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Methods Mol Biol. 2010;647:317-35. doi: 10.1007/978-1-60761-738-9_20.

Phosphorylation-dependent regulation of SATB1, the higher-order chromatin
organizer and global gene regulator.

Notani D(1), Limaye AS, Kumar PP, Galande S.

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Cell Science, Ganeshkhind, Maharashtra, India.

The chromatin organizer SATB1 regulates distant genes by selectively tethering
matrix attachment regions (MARs) to the nuclear matrix. Post-translational
modifications (PTMs) are important regulators of functional activities of
proteins. Recently, a phosphorylation-dependent molecular switch that provided
insights into the molecular mechanism of transcriptional repression and
activation by SATB1 was discovered. SATB1 is specifically phosphorylated by
protein kinase C (PKC) at serine 185 in vivo, and this modification leads to
repression of transcription by SATB1 via increased association with the histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) corepressor. In this chapter, we describe methods for
overexpression and purification of full length SATB1 protein and for its in vitro
phosphorylation. We also describe method for in vivo phosphorylation of SATB1
upon immunoprecipitation using anti-SATB1. Finally, we describe a functional
assay to monitor the effect of phosphorylation on transcription activity of SATB1
in vivo using MAR-linked reporter assay, in the presence and absence of PKC
inhibitors.

PMID: 20694677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Neurosci Lett. 2010 Oct 11;483(2):137-42. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2010.07.080. Epub
2010 Aug 5.

The extinction of morphine-induced conditioned place preference by histone
deacetylase inhibition.

Wang R(1), Zhang Y, Qing H, Liu M, Yang P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Tangdu Hospital, The Fourth Military Medical
University, Ba Qiao District, Xi'an, Shaanxi, China.

Recent evidence suggests that epigenetic mechanisms have an important role in the
development of addictive behavior. However, little is known about the role of
epigenetic mechanisms in the extinction of morphine-induced behavioral changes.
In this study, we will examine the effect of histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors on extinction of morphine-induced conditioned place preference (CPP). 
To facilitate extinction, rats will be administered an HDAC inhibitor (HDACi)
following nonreinforced exposure to the conditioned context. To measure
persistence, rats were subject to a reinstatement test using 3 mg/kg dose of
morphine. To exclude the effect of repeated NaBut injections themselves on
morphine-CPP in the absence of extinction session, rats received injection of
either NaBut or vehicle for 8 days. We found that HDAC inhibition during
nonconfined extinction or confined extinction consolidation can facilitate
extinction of morphine-induced CPP. We also showed that the extinction of drug
seeking via HDAC inhibition modulates extinction learning such that reinstatement
behavior is significantly attenuated. There is no effect of repeated NaBut
injections themselves on morphine-CPP in the absence of extinction session. In
conclusion, our results extend earlier reports on the ability of HDACi to modify 
the behavioral effects of drugs of abuse. Our increasing understanding of these
epigenetic mechanisms will provide key answers to basic processes in drug
addiction and hopefully provide insight into designing improved treatments for
drug addiction.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20691756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Apoptosis. 2010 Dec;15(12):1540-8. doi: 10.1007/s10495-010-0531-7.

JNK-mediated transcriptional upregulation of RhoB is critical for apoptosis of
HCT-116 colon cancer cells by a novel diarylsulfonylurea derivative.

Kim DM(1), Won M, Chung CS, Kim S, Yim HJ, Jung SH, Jeong S.

Author information: 
(1)LG Life Science R&D, Drug Discovery Institute, 104-1, Daejeon 305-380, Korea. 
dmkima@kaist.ac.kr

Diarylsulfonylureas are potent antitumor agents that have been tested in clinical
trials. However, detailed mechanisms of their apoptotic activity remain unclear. 
Here, we report a new diarylsulfonylurea derivative, LB2A, that upregulates RhoB,
thereby inducing potent apoptosis in HCT-116 human colon cancer cells
independently of p53 status. LB2A decreased procaspase-3, increased phospho-JNK, 
and cleaved PARP, leading to apoptosis of HCT-116 cells. Prior treatment of
HCT-116 cells with the JNK inhibitor SP600125 and the RNA synthesis inhibitor DRB
blocked apoptosis, implying that JNK activation and mRNA production are important
for apoptosis by LB2A. Western blotting, RT-PCR, and RhoB-promoter luciferase
reporter assays revealed that LB2A increased RhoB via JNK-mediated
transcriptional activation. LB2A decreased HDAC1 and increased acetyl-H3, both of
which activate the RhoB promoter and were blocked by SP600125. Ectopic expression
of RhoB induced apoptosis of HCT-116 cells, suggesting that RhoB is critical for 
the anti-cancer activity of LB2A in human colon cancer cells. LB2A also exhibited
potent tumor growth inhibition of HCT-116 cells in vivo using a mouse xenograft
assay. Taken together, these results show that LB2A induces apoptosis of HCT-116 
cells via JNK-mediated transcriptional upregulation of RhoB and may therefore
provide a potential therapy for human colon cancer.

PMID: 20683666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Mol Cells. 2010 Aug;30(2):107-12. doi: 10.1007/s10059-010-0094-z. Epub 2010 Jul
23.

Inhibition of histone deacetylase 10 induces thioredoxin-interacting protein and 
causes accumulation of reactive oxygen species in SNU-620 human gastric cancer
cells.

Lee JH(1), Jeong EG, Choi MC, Kim SH, Park JH, Song SH, Park J, Bang YJ, Kim TY.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, College of Medicine, Seoul National University,
Seoul 110-799, Korea.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC)10, a novel class IIb histone deacetylase, is the most 
similar to HDAC6, since both contain a unique second catalytic domain. Unlike
HDAC6, which is located in the cytoplasm, HDAC10 resides in both the nucleus and 
cytoplasm. The transcriptional targets of HDAC10 that are associated with HDAC10 
gene regulation have not been identified. In the present study, we found that
knockdown of HDAC10 significantly increased the mRNA expression levels of
thioredoxin-interacting protein (TXNIP) in SNU-620 human gastric cancer cells;
whereas inhibition of HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC6 did not affect TXNIP expression.
TXNIP is the endogenous inhibitor of thioredoxin (TRX), which acts as a cellular 
antioxidant. Real-time PCR and immunoblot analysis confirmed that inhibition of
HDAC10 induced TXNIP expression. Compared to class I only HDAC inhibitors,
inhibitors targeting both class I and II upregulated TXNIP, indicating that TXNIP
is regulated by class II HDACs such as HDAC10. We further verified that
inhibition of HDAC10 induced release of cytochrome c and activated apoptotic
signaling molecules through accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Taken 
together, our results demonstrate that HDAC10 is involved in transcriptional
downregulation of TXNIP, leading to altered ROS signaling in human gastric cancer
cells. How TXNIP is preferentially regulated by HDAC10 needs further
investigation.

PMID: 20680488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Oncogene. 2010 Sep 30;29(39):5427-36. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.276. Epub 2010 Aug 2.

Phosphorylated p68 RNA helicase activates Snail1 transcription by promoting HDAC1
dissociation from the Snail1 promoter.

Carter CL(1), Lin C, Liu CY, Yang L, Liu ZR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA 30303, USA.

The nuclear p68 RNA helicase is a prototypical member of the DEAD-box family of
RNA helicases. p68 RNA helicase has been implicated in cell proliferation and
early organ development and maturation. However, the functional role of p68 RNA
helicase in these biological processes at the molecular level is not well
understood. We previously reported that tyrosine phosphorylation of p68 RNA
helicase mediates the effects of platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) in
induction of epithelial mesenchymal transition by promoting ß-catenin nuclear
translocation. Here, we report that phosphorylation of p68 RNA helicase at Y593
upregulates transcription of the Snail1 gene. The phosphorylated p68 activates
transcription of the Snail1 gene by promoting histone deacetylase (HDAC)1
dissociation from the Snail1 promoter. Our results showed that p68 interacted
with the nuclear remodeling and deacetylation complex MBD3:Mi-2/NuRD. Thus, our
data suggested that a DEAD-box RNA unwindase could potentially regulate gene
expression by functioning as a protein 'displacer' to modulate protein-protein
interactions at the chromatin-remodeling complex.

PMCID: PMC2948064
PMID: 20676135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Hepatol. 2010 Nov;53(5):889-95. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2010.05.012. Epub 2010 Jul 
14.

Epigenetic inactivation of the tumor suppressor gene RIZ1 in hepatocellular
carcinoma involves both DNA methylation and histone modifications.

Zhang C(1), Li H, Wang Y, Liu W, Zhang Q, Zhang T, Zhang X, Han B, Zhou G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology and Pathophysiology, Shandong University School of
Medicine, Jinan 250012, China. zhangcuijuan@yahoo.com.cn

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The retinoblastoma-interacting zinc finger gene RIZ1 is
inactivated in many cancers, but the underlying mechanisms remain unknown. This
study aimed to investigate the epigenetic mechanisms of RIZ1 inactivation by
analyzing the relationship between DNA methylation and histone modifications
during regulation of RIZ1 expression.
METHODS: Methylation-specific PCR, RT-PCR, and immunohistochemistry were
performed to examine RIZ1 methylation and expression. Dynamic changes in histone 
H3 lysine 9 (H3K9) modifications and histone deacetylases (HDACs) associated with
the promoter were analyzed by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP).
RESULTS: RIZ1 methylation was detected in 66.7% (32/48) HCC tissues, 6.3% (3/48) 
corresponding non-cancerous tissues, and 66.7% (4/6) HCC cell lines. All 32 HCC
tissues with promoter methylation showed complete loss of RIZ1 protein, whereas
RIZ1 protein was present in all the corresponding non-cancerous tissues. Neither 
5-aza-2-deoxycitidine (5-Aza-dC) nor Trichostatin A (TSA) reversed promoter
methylation, but did restore RIZ1 mRNA and resulted in the downregulation of
HDAC1 but not HDAC3. However, 5-Aza-dC+TSA induced a partial reversal of promoter
methylation and a markedly synergistic reactivation of RIZ1. Moreover, both HDAC1
and HDAC3 were downregulated. The ChIP assays showed 5-Aza-dC and/or TSA also
contributed to the dynamic conversion of trimethylated to acetylated H3K9 at the 
promoter. Furthermore, a decrease in H3K9 trimethylation preceded an increase in 
H3K9 acetylation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that promoter methylation and H3K9 modifications
work together to silence the RIZ1 gene in HCC. 5-Aza-dC can restore the
expression of RIZ1, as reflected by its effects on histone modification levels.
This finding indicates that cooperative effects between these epigenetic
modifications exist.

Copyright © 2010 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20675009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Urol Int. 2010;85(2):221-7. doi: 10.1159/000315968. Epub 2010 Jul 21.

Downregulation of nucleostemin causes G1 cell cycle arrest via a p53-independent 
pathway in prostate cancer PC-3 cells.

Liu R(1), Zhang Z, Xu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Tianjin Institute of Urology and Department of Urology, Second Hospital of
Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, China.

AIMS: To screen the genes and possible signal transduction pathways with which
nucleostemin (NS) interacts and explore the mechanism of NS in prostate cancer.
METHODS: NS-specific short-hairpin RNA expression plasmid was used to
downregulate the NS level in PC-3 cells and the changes of cell cycle were
studied. After that, oligonucleotide DNA microarray was used to screen the genome
changes in PC-3 cells and quantitative real-time PCR was used to further confirm 
the differentially expressed genes.
RESULTS: Detection of cell cycle showed a decrease of S stage and an increase of 
G1 stage after downregulation of NS. 219 differentially expressed genes were
found and these genes were involved in cell cycle, cell proliferation, signal
transduction, cell apoptosis and cell differentiation, and so on. Genes related
to cell cycle were discussed emphatically. INK4 family genes (P15, P16, P18) were
upregulated while cyclin D1 HDAC1 were downregulated. These genes were tightly
related to CDK4/6-cyclin D and pRb-E2F1 complexes.
CONCLUSION: NS is an important G1/S checkpoint regulator and it could regulate
cell cycles via a p53-independent pathway in prostate cancer.

Copyright © 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20664182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Neurosci. 2010 Jul 21;30(29):9939-46. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1643-10.2010.

Histone deacetylase Rpd3 regulates olfactory projection neuron dendrite targeting
via the transcription factor Prospero.

Tea JS(1), Chihara T, Luo L.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biology, Stanford University,
Stanford, California 94305, USA.

Compared to the mechanisms of axon guidance, relatively little is known about the
transcriptional control of dendrite guidance. The Drosophila olfactory system
with its stereotyped organization provides an excellent model to study the
transcriptional control of dendrite wiring specificity. Each projection neuron
(PN) targets its dendrites to a specific glomerulus in the antennal lobe and its 
axon stereotypically to higher brain centers. Using a forward genetic screen, we 
identified a mutation in Rpd3 that disrupts PN targeting specificity. Rpd3
encodes a class I histone deacetylase (HDAC) homologous to mammalian HDAC1 and
HDAC2. Rpd3(-/-) PN dendrites that normally target to a dorsolateral glomerulus
mistarget to medial glomeruli in the antennal lobe, and axons exhibit a severe
overbranching phenotype. These phenotypes can be rescued by postmitotic
expression of Rpd3 but not HDAC3, the only other class I HDAC in Drosophila.
Furthermore, disruption of the atypical homeodomain transcription factor Prospero
(Pros) yields similar phenotypes, which can be rescued by Pros expression in
postmitotic neurons. Strikingly, overexpression of Pros can suppress Rpd3(-/-)
phenotypes. Our study suggests a specific function for the general chromatin
remodeling factor Rpd3 in regulating dendrite targeting in neurons, largely
through the postmitotic action of the Pros transcription factor.

PMCID: PMC2924735
PMID: 20660276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Br J Haematol. 2010 Sep;150(6):665-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2010.08301.x.

Differential expression of HDAC3, HDAC7 and HDAC9 is associated with prognosis
and survival in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukaemia.

Moreno DA(1), Scrideli CA, Cortez MA, de Paula Queiroz R, Valera ET, da Silva
Silveira V, Yunes JA, Brandalise SR, Tone LG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

Altered expression of histone deacetylases (HDACs) is a common feature in several
human malignancies and may represent an interesting target for cancer treatment, 
including haematological malignancies. We evaluated the mRNA gene expression
profile of 12 HDAC genes by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction in
94 consecutive childhood acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) samples and its
association with clinical/biological features and survival. ALL samples showed
higher expression levels of HDAC2, HDAC3, HDAC8, HDAC6 and HDAC7 when compared to
normal bone marrow samples. HDAC1 and HDAC4 showed high expression in T-ALL and
HDAC5 was highly expressed in B-lineage ALL. Higher than median expression levels
of HDAC3 were associated with a significantly lower 5-year event-free survival
(EFS) in the overall group of patients (P = 0·03) and in T-ALL patients (P =
0.01). HDAC7 and HADC9 expression levels higher than median were associated with 
a lower 5-year EFS in the overall group (P = 0.04 and P = 0.003, respectively)
and in B-lineage CD10-positive patients (P = 0.009 and P = 0·005, respectively). 
Our data suggest that higher expression of HDAC7 and HDAC9 is associated with
poor prognosis in childhood ALL and could be promising therapeutic targets for
the treatment of refractory childhood ALL.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 20636436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Exp Cell Res. 2010 Oct 15;316(17):2903-9. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2010.07.004. Epub 
2010 Jul 13.

High levels of glucose induce apoptosis in cardiomyocyte via epigenetic
regulation of the insulin-like growth factor receptor.

Yu XY(1), Geng YJ, Liang JL, Lin QX, Lin SG, Zhang S, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Center, Guangdong General Hospital, Guangdong Provincial
Cardiovascular Institute, Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou,
Guangdong, P.R. China. yuxycn@hotmail.com

Diabetic hyperglycemia result in cardiovascular complications, but the mechanisms
by which high levels of glucose (HG) cause diabetic cardiomyopathy are not known.
We investigate whether HG-induced repression of insulin-like growth factor 1
receptor (IGF-1R) mediated by epigenetic modifications is one potential
mechanism. We found that HG resulted in decreased IGF-1 receptor (IGF-1R) mRNA
levels, and IGF-1R protein when compared with H9C2 rat cardiomyocyte cells
incubated in normal glucose. HG also induced apoptosis of H9C2 cells. The effects
of HG on reduced expression of IGF-1R and increased apoptosis were blocked by
silencing p53 with small interference RNA but not by non-targeting scrambled
siRNA. Moreover, HG negatively regulated IGF-1R promoter activity as determined
by ChIP analysis, which was dependent on p53 since siRNA-p53 attenuated the
effects of HG on IGF-1R promoter activity. HG also increased the association of
p53 with histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), and decreased the association of
acetylated histone-4 with the IGF-1R promoter. Furthermore, HDAC inhibitor
relieved the repression of IGF-1R following HG state. These results suggest that 
HG-induced repression of IGF-1R is mediated by the association of p53 with the
IGF-1R promoter, and by the subsequent enhanced recruitment of
chromatin-modifying proteins, such as HDAC1, to the IGF-1R promoter-p53 complex. 
In conclusion, our data demonstrate that HG decreases expression of IGF-1R and
decreases the association of acetylated histone-4 with the IGF-1R promoter. These
studies may help delineate the complex pathways regulating diabetic
cardiomyopathy, and have implications for the development of novel therapeutic
strategies to prevent diabetic cardiomyopathy by epigenetic regulation of IGF-1R.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20633551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2010 Jun;1199:186-93. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.05175.x.

Effects of histone deacetylase inhibitor Trichostatin A on epigenetic changes and
transcriptional activation of Bdnf promoter 1 by rat hippocampal neurons.

Tian F(1), Marini AM, Lipsky RH.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Cancer Genetics, Genetics Branch, National Cancer Institute, NIH,
Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Histone acetylation/deacetylation is a central mechanism for regulating
transcription through chromatin remodeling. The brain-derived neurotrophic factor
gene (Bdnf) is regulated in part through chromatin remodeling. An inhibitor of
histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity, Trichostatin A (TSA), has differential
effects on two activation dependent regions of the Bdnf gene physically linked to
transcription sites for exons 1 and 4. We determined that TSA treatment of
cultures of hippocampal neurons produced a stronger response at promoter 1.
Transcriptional activation of promoter 1 correlated with increased occupancy of
the promoter by acetylated histones (H3AcK9/K14). TSA treatment also produced a
time-dependent increase in the level of H3AcK9 and H3AcK14 protein and Hdac1 mRNA
levels and HDAC1 protein levels. Taken together, these findings suggest that
inhibition of HDAC activity by TSA activates Bdnf transcription and a
compensatory change in HDAC1 expression in neurons. This response may reflect a
genome-wide change in gene expression.

PMID: 20633124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jul 13;107(28):12617-22. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1006774107. Epub 2010 Jun 28.

Chemical genetic strategy identifies histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and HDAC2 as
therapeutic targets in sickle cell disease.

Bradner JE(1), Mak R, Tanguturi SK, Mazitschek R, Haggarty SJ, Ross K, Chang CY, 
Bosco J, West N, Morse E, Lin K, Shen JP, Kwiatkowski NP, Gheldof N, Dekker J,
DeAngelo DJ, Carr SA, Schreiber SL, Golub TR, Ebert BL.

Author information: 
(1)Broad Institute of Harvard and Massachusetts Institute Technology, Cambridge, 
MA 02142, USA.

The worldwide burden of sickle cell disease is enormous, with over 200,000
infants born with the disease each year in Africa alone. Induction of fetal
hemoglobin is a validated strategy to improve symptoms and complications of this 
disease. The development of targeted therapies has been limited by the absence of
discrete druggable targets. We developed a unique bead-based strategy for the
identification of inducers of fetal hemoglobin transcripts in primary human
erythroid cells. A small-molecule screen of bioactive compounds identified
remarkable class-associated activity among histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors.
Using a chemical genetic strategy combining focused libraries of biased chemical 
probes and reverse genetics by RNA interference, we have identified HDAC1 and
HDAC2 as molecular targets mediating fetal hemoglobin induction. Our findings
suggest the potential of isoform-selective inhibitors of HDAC1 and HDAC2 for the 
treatment of sickle cell disease.

PMCID: PMC2906581
PMID: 20616024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Obstet Gynecol Int. 2010;2010:989278. doi: 10.1155/2010/989278. Epub 2010 Jun 20.

Effects of In Vitro Maturation on Histone Acetylation in Metaphase II Oocytes and
Early Cleavage Embryos.

Wang N(1), Le F, Zhan QT, Li L, Dong MY, Ding GL, Xu CM, Jiang SW, Huang HF, Jin 
F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Endocrinology, Women's Hospital, School of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, 310006 Hangzhou, China.

In vitro maturation (IVM) of oocyte is an effective procedure for avoiding
ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome in patients with polycystic ovaries (PCOS)
during in vitro fertilization (IVF). To investigate the influences of IVM on
epigenetic reprogramming and to search for the possible reasons for the lower
rates of fertilization and cleavage in IVM oocytes, we examined the expression of
two enzymes controlling histone acetylation, histone acetyltransferase GCN5
(GCN5) and histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), as well as their common target,
acetyl-histone H3 (Ac-H3), in mouse metaphase II (MII) oocytes and
preimplantation embryos. Results showed that IVM downregulated the protein
expression of GCN5 in MII oocytes and two-cell embryos and changed the
distribution of GCN5 in two-cell embryos. Expression of HDAC1 mRNA in MII oocytes
and two-cell embryos decreased in the IVM group. However, none of these changes
persisted after two-cell embryos. Levels of Ac-H3 in both oocytes and embryos
remained unchanged after IVM. Our studies indicated that IVM could affect the
protein and gene expression related to histone acetylation in oocytes and early
cleavage embryos. By function of selection, parts of the changes could be
recovered in late embryo development.

PMCID: PMC2896857
PMID: 20613962  [PubMed]


141. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2010 Oct;35(11):2225-37. doi: 10.1038/npp.2010.97. Epub 
2010 Jul 7.

The mood stabilizers valproic acid and lithium enhance mesenchymal stem cell
migration via distinct mechanisms.

Tsai LK(1), Leng Y, Wang Z, Leeds P, Chuang DM.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Molecular Neurobiology, National Institute of Mental Health,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1363, USA.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) show high potential for the therapy of several
human diseases; however, the effectiveness of MSC transplantation has been
hampered by the relatively poor migratory capacity of these cells toward disease 
target sites. This study investigated whether treatment of MSCs with two mood
stabilizers-valproic acid (VPA) and lithium-would enhance cell migration and, if 
so, to explore the mechanisms underlying their effects. Short-term (3<U+2009>h) exposure
of MSCs to a relatively high concentration (2.5<U+2009>mM) of VPA markedly increased the
transcript and protein levels of CXC chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4). VPA-induced
CXCR4 expression required inhibition of histone deacetylases (HDACs), including
the HDAC1 isoform, and involved histone hyperacetylation at the promoter region
of the CXCR4 gene. Notably, VPA treatment enhanced stromal cell-derived factor-1a
(SDF-1a)-mediated MSC migration, which was completely blocked by AMD3100, a CXCR4
antagonist. Treatment of MSCs with lithium (2.5<U+2009>mM for 1 day) selectively
elevated the transcript and protein levels of matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) 
and its enzymatic activity; these effects were mimicked by inhibition or gene
silencing of glycogen synthase kinase-3ß (GSK-3ß). Lithium treatment also
potentiated SDF-1a-dependent MSC migration across the extracellular matrix, which
was suppressed by two MMP-9 inhibitors, doxycycline and GM6001. Combining VPA and
lithium treatment further increased MSC migration. Overall, VPA and lithium
stimulated MSC migration through distinct targets and mediators: HDAC-CXCR4 and
GSK-3ß-MMP-9, respectively.

PMCID: PMC3055307
PMID: 20613717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Arthritis Res Ther. 2010;12(4):R133. doi: 10.1186/ar3071. Epub 2010 Jul 7.

Increased activity and expression of histone deacetylase 1 in relation to tumor
necrosis factor-alpha in synovial tissue of rheumatoid arthritis.

Kawabata T(1), Nishida K, Takasugi K, Ogawa H, Sada K, Kadota Y, Inagaki J,
Hirohata S, Ninomiya Y, Makino H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Okayama University Graduate
School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama City, Okayama 
, Japan. tmkkawakawa@m8.dion.ne.jp

Comment in
    Arthritis Res Ther. 2010;12(5):142.

INTRODUCTION: The purpose of this study was to investigate the profile of histone
deacetylase (HDAC) expression in the synovial tissue of rheumatoid arthritis (RA)
compared with that of normal control and osteoarthritis (OA), and to examine
whether there is a link between HDAC activity and synovial inflammation.
METHODS: HDAC activity and histone acetyltransferase (HAT) activity were
determined in nuclear extracts of total synovial tissue surgically obtained from 
normal, OA and RA joints. The level of cytoplasmic tumor necrosis factor a (TNFa)
fraction was measured by ELISA. Total RNA of synovial tissue was used for RT-PCR 
of HDAC1-8. In synovial fibroblasts from RA (RASFs), the effects of TNFa on
nuclear HDAC activity and class I HDACs (1, 2, 3, 8) mRNA expressions were
examined by quantitative real-time PCR. The protein expression and distribution
of class I HDACs were examined by Western blotting.
RESULTS: Nuclear HDAC activity was significantly higher in RA than in OA and
normal controls and correlated with the amount of cytoplasmic TNFa. The mRNA
expression of HDAC1 in RA synovial tissue was higher than in OA and normal
controls, and showed positive correlation with TNFa mRNA expression. The protein 
level of nuclear HDAC1 was higher in RA synovial tissue compared with OA synovial
tissue. Stimulation with TNFa significantly increased the nuclear HDAC activity
and HDAC1 mRNA expression at 24 hours and HDAC1 protein expression at 48 hours in
RASFs.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results showed nuclear HDAC activity and expression of HDAC1
were significantly higher in RA than in OA synovial tissues, and they were
upregulated by TNFa stimulation in RASFs. These data might provide important
clues for the development of specific small molecule HDAC inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC2945023
PMID: 20609223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Mol Cancer. 2010 Jul 7;9:178. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-178.

Transcriptional regulation of human osteopontin promoter by histone deacetylase
inhibitor, trichostatin A in cervical cancer cells.

Sharma P(1), Kumar S, Kundu GC.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Cell Science, Pune, India.

BACKGROUND: Trichostatin A (TSA), a potent inhibitor of histone deacetylases
exhibits strong anti-tumor and growth inhibitory activities, but its mechanism(s)
of action is not completely understood. Osteopontin (OPN) is a secreted
glycoprotein which has long been associated with tumor metastasis. Elevated OPN
expression in various metastatic cancer cells and the surrounding stromal cells
often correlates with enhanced tumor formation and metastasis. To investigate the
effects of TSA on OPN transcription, we analyzed a proximal segment of OPN
promoter in cervical carcinoma cells.
RESULTS: In this paper, we for the first time report that TSA suppresses
PMA-induced OPN gene expression in human cervical carcinoma cells and previously 
unidentified AP-1 transcription factor is involved in this event. Deletion and
mutagenesis analyses of OPN promoter led to the characterization of a proximal
sequence (-127 to -70) that contain AP-1 binding site. This was further confirmed
by gel shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays. Western blot and
reverse transcription-PCR analyses revealed that TSA suppresses c-jun recruitment
to the OPN promoter by inhibiting c-jun levels while c-fos expression was
unaffected. Silencing HDAC1 followed by stimulation with PMA resulted in
significant decrease in OPN promoter activity suggesting that HDAC1 but not HDAC3
or HDAC4 was required for AP-1-mediated OPN transcription. TSA reduces the
PMA-induced hyperacetylation of histones H3 and H4 and recruitment of RNA pol II 
and TFIIB, components of preinitiation complex to the OPN promoter. The
PMA-induced expression of other AP-1 regulated genes like cyclin D1 and uPA was
also altered by TSA. Interestingly, PMA promoted cervical tumor growth in mice
xenograft model was significantly suppressed by TSA.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, these findings provide new insights into mechanisms
underlying anticancer activity of TSA and blocking OPN expression at
transcriptional level by TSA may act as novel therapeutic strategy for the
management of cervical cancer.

PMCID: PMC2911447
PMID: 20609221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Int J Oncol. 2010 Aug;37(2):419-28.

Anticancer effects of the MHY218 novel hydroxamic acid-derived histone
deacetylase inhibitor in human ovarian cancer cells.

Jeon HS(1), Ahn MY, Park JH, Kim TH, Chun P, Kim WH, Kim J, Moon HR, Jung JH, Kim
HS.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Pusan National University, Jangjeon-dong, Geumjeong-gu,
Busan 609-735, South Korea.

To investigate the anticancer effects of the novel hydroxamic acid-derived
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor MHY218, its efficacy was compared to that of
suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) in human ovarian cancer cells. The
anticancer effects of MHY218 on cell viability, cell cycle regulation and
apoptosis were investigated. In addition, MHY218 or SAHA was administered for 28 
days in a tumor carcinomatosis model with SKOV-3 cells. MHY218 significantly
reduced the expression of HDAC4 and HDAC7 in SKOV-3 cells. Similarly, MHY218 also
inhibited total HDAC, HDAC1, HDAC4 and HDAC7 enzyme activity in a
concentration-dependent manner. The anticancer effect of MHY218 (IC50, 3.2
microM) was more potent than SAHA (IC50, 3.9 microM) in suppressing the SKOV-3
cell viability. Moreover, MHY218 markedly increased expression of p21WAF1/CIP1,
which acts as a cell cycle inhibitor. Cell cycle analysis showed that the high
dose (5 microM) of MHY218 significantly increased the proportion of cells in the 
G2/M phase. In particular, MHY218 and SAHA significantly increased the sub-G1
population and the number of TUNEL-positive apoptotic cells compared with those
in the untreated control. These results were confirmed by analysis of poly-ADP
ribose polymerase (PARP), where MHY218 and SAHA increased the level of an 85-kDa 
fragment resulting from PARP cleavage as well as caspase-3 activity. Likewise,
MHY218-induced apoptosis through caspase-3 activation was confirmed by the
increase in the release of cytochrome c and Bax/Bcl-2 ratio. In an in vivo tumor 
carcinomatosis model, the growth of transplanted SKOV-3 cells was inhibited by
71% after treatment with MHY218 (10 mg/kg), whereas SAHA (25 mg/kg) suppressed
growth by 48%. These results indicate that MHY218 is a potent HDAC inhibitor that
targets regulating multiple aspects of cancer cell death and might have
preclinical value in ovarian cancer chemotherapy, warranting further
investigation.

PMID: 20596669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Leuk Res. 2010 Dec;34(12):1558-9. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2010.05.033. Epub 2010
Jul 1.

Old drug--new insights--better treatment?

Diakos C, Kager L.

Comment on
    Leuk Res. 2010 Dec;34(12):1601-9.

PMID: 20594594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Virology. 2010 Sep 15;405(1):234-42. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2010.06.001. Epub 2010 
Jul 1.

Epigenetic regulation of CD8(+) T-lymphocyte mediated suppression of HIV-1
replication.

Saunders KO(1), Freel SA, Overman RG, Cunningham CK, Tomaras GD.

Author information: 
(1)Duke Human Vaccine Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC,
27710, USA.

CD8(+) T-lymphocytes from HIV-1 infected individuals express unidentified factors
that suppress viral replication by inhibiting HIV-1 gene expression. We examined 
the role of epigenetics in modulating the HIV-1 suppressive factors expressed by 
primary CD8(+) T cells from subjects naturally controlling virus replication.
HIV-1 suppression by CD8(+) T-lymphocytes was reversed up to 40% by the addition 
of a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor. Noncytolytic suppression was not
dependent on epigenetic changes within the target cells, as HDAC1 within the
target cell was dispensable, and HIV-1 LTR histone acetylation remained unchanged
in the presence of CD8(+) T-lymphocytes. Histone deacetylation within CD8(+)
T-lymphocytes was necessary for potent HIV-1 suppression. Blocking HDACs impairs 
the ability of CD8(+) T-lymphocytes to repress HIV-1 transcription, demonstrating
that expression of a portion of the suppressive factors is regulated by
epigenetics. These data provide a way to focus the search for the suppressive
factors and to potentially modulate their expression.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3664273
PMID: 20594570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Biochem J. 2010 Sep 1;430(2):237-44. doi: 10.1042/BJ20100131.

Dual roles for MEF2A and MEF2D during human macrophage terminal differentiation
and c-Jun expression.

Aude-Garcia C(1), Collin-Faure V, Bausinger H, Hanau D, Rabilloud T, Lemercier C.

Author information: 
(1)Commissariat a l'Energie Atomique, DSV, iRTSV, Laboratoire BBSI, Grenoble,
France.

Recent reports have evidenced a role for MEF2C (myocyte enhancer factor 2C) in
myelopoiesis, although the precise functions of this transcription factor are
still unclear. We show in the present study that MEF2A and MEF2D, two other MEF2 
family members, are expressed in human primary monocytes and in higher amounts in
monocyte-derived macrophages. High levels of MEF2A-MEF2D heterodimers are found
in macrophage-differentiated HL60 cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitations
demonstrate that MEF2A is present on the c-Jun promoter, both in undifferentiated
and in macrophage-differentiated cells. Moreover, c-Jun expression is derepressed
in undifferentiated cells in the presence of HDAC (histone deacetylase)
inhibitor, indicating the importance of chromatin acetylation in this process. We
show that MEF2A/D dimers strongly interact with HDAC1, and to a lesser extent
with HDAC7 in macrophages, whereas low levels of MEF2A/D-HDAC1 complexes are
found in undifferentiated cells or in monocytes. Since trichostatin A does not
disrupt MEF2A/D-HDAC1 complexes, we analysed the potential interaction of MEF2A
with p300 histone acetyltransferase, whose expression is up-regulated in
macrophages. Interestingly, endogenous p300 only associates with MEF2A in
differentiated macrophages, indicating that MEF2A/D could activate c-Jun
expression in macrophages through a MEF2A/D-p300 activator complex. The targets
of MEF2A/D-HDAC1-HDAC7 multimers remain to be identified. Nevertheless, these
data highlight for the first time the possible dual roles of MEF2A and MEF2D in
human macrophages, as activators or as repressors of gene transcription.

PMID: 20590529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Ann Surg Oncol. 2010 Dec;17(12):3336-43. doi: 10.1245/s10434-010-1182-1. Epub
2010 Jun 29.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1 and 2 expression and chemotherapy in gastric cancer.

Mutze K(1), Langer R, Becker K, Ott K, Novotny A, Luber B, Hapfelmeier A,
Göttlicher M, Höfler H, Keller G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Histone deacetylases (HDACs) modulate chromatin and may influence the
effect of DNA-damaging drugs. We investigated HDAC1 and -2 expression in gastric 
carcinomas (GCs) for an association of patient outcome with conventional
neoadjuvant chemotherapy. In vitro, HDAC inhibitors were evaluated as alternative
treatment options.
METHODS: HDAC1/2 expression was analyzed immunohistochemically in 127
pretherapeutic biopsy samples of neoadjuvant (platinum/5-fluorouracil)
chemotherapy-treated GC patients and correlated with response and overall
survival (OS). Chemosensitivity of four GC cell lines to cisplatin and the HDAC
inhibitors suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) and valproic acid was
determined by XTT assays. Efficiencies of combined drug schedules were analyzed.
RESULTS: High expression of HDAC1/2 was found in 69 (54%) of 127 and 108 (85%) of
127 carcinomas, respectively, and was not associated with response or OS. In
patients whose disease responded to therapy, high HDAC1 expression was associated
with worse OS (P = 0.005). In cell lines, sequential treatment with SAHA and
cisplatin showed synergistic effects irrespective of the initial cisplatin
sensitivity.
CONCLUSIONS: HDAC1 and -2 expression is not suitable to predict response or
survival for neoadjuvant-treated GC patients, but HDAC1 expression may be used
for risk stratification in patients whose disease responds to therapy. Sequential
treatment with SAHA and cisplatin may represent an alternative treatment option
for GC patients.

PMID: 20585871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. PLoS Pathog. 2010 Jun 24;6(6):e1000965. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000965.

Human cytomegalovirus UL29/28 protein interacts with components of the NuRD
complex which promote accumulation of immediate-early RNA.

Terhune SS(1), Moorman NJ, Cristea IM, Savaryn JP, Cuevas-Bennett C, Rout MP,
Chait BT, Shenk T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey, 
United States of America.

Histone deacetylation plays a pivotal role in regulating human cytomegalovirus
gene expression. In this report, we have identified candidate HDAC1-interacting
proteins in the context of infection by using a method for rapid immunoisolation 
of an epitope-tagged protein coupled with mass spectrometry. Putative interactors
included multiple human cytomegalovirus-coded proteins. In particular, the
interaction of pUL38 and pUL29/28 with HDAC1 was confirmed by reciprocal
immunoprecipitations. HDAC1 is present in numerous protein complexes, including
the HDAC1-containing nucleosome remodeling and deacetylase protein complex, NuRD.
pUL38 and pUL29/28 associated with the MTA2 component of NuRD, and shRNA-mediated
knockdown of the RBBP4 and CHD4 constituents of NuRD inhibited HCMV
immediate-early RNA and viral DNA accumulation; together this argues that
multiple components of the NuRD complex are needed for efficient HCMV
replication. Consistent with a positive acting role for the NuRD elements during 
viral replication, the growth of pUL29/28- or pUL38-deficient viruses could not
be rescued by treating infected cells with the deacetylase inhibitor,
trichostatin A. Transient expression of pUL29/28 enhanced activity of the HCMV
major immediate-early promoter in a reporter assay, regardless of pUL38
expression. Importantly, induction of the major immediate-early reporter activity
by pUL29/28 required functional NuRD components, consistent with the inhibition
of immediate-early RNA accumulation within infected cells after knockdown of
RBBP4 and CHD4. We propose that pUL29/28 modifies the NuRD complex to stimulate
the accumulation of immediate-early RNAs.

PMCID: PMC2891856
PMID: 20585571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2010 Sep;42(9):1489-97. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2010.05.006. Epub 2010 May 16.

Histone deacetylase 1 is required for transforming growth factor-beta1-induced
epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Lei W(1), Zhang K, Pan X, Hu Y, Wang D, Yuan X, Shu G, Song J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, PR China.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been implicated in embryonic
development, fibrosis, and tumor metastasis. Histone deacetylases (HDACs) also
play important roles in the control of various physiological and pathological
events. However, whether HDACs are involved in the control of EMT in liver cells 
remains unidentified. Three structurally unrelated HDAC inhibitors completely
suppress transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1)-induced EMT in AML-12
murine hepatocytes and primary mouse hepatocytes. Expression of a
dominant-negative mutant of HDAC1 but not HDAC2 or downregulation of HDAC1 but
not HDAC2 by RNAi suppressed TGF-beta1-induced EMT. In addition, both HDAC
inhibitor TSA and HDAC1 RNAi blocked cell migration. Overexpression of HDAC1 in
invasive hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) samples was detected. Further study
showed that the mRNA levels of ZO-1 and E-cadherin were downregulated during
TGF-beta1-induced EMT, and HDAC1 can downregulate the promoter activities of ZO-1
and E-cadherin.CONCLUSIONS: our results demonstrate that HDAC1 is required for
TGF-beta1-induced EMT and cell migration in hepatocytes. Its high expression
levels in majority of invasive HCC samples suggest that, by promoting EMT, HDAC1 
can be related with the invasiveness of HCC. The data also suggest that the
repression of transcription of ZO-1 and E-cadherin by HDAC1 may be involved in
TGF-beta1-induced EMT.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20580679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Hepatol. 2010 Sep;53(3):519-27. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2010.03.025. Epub 2010 Jun 
2.

The NF-kappaB p50:p50:HDAC-1 repressor complex orchestrates transcriptional
inhibition of multiple pro-inflammatory genes.

Elsharkawy AM(1), Oakley F, Lin F, Packham G, Mann DA, Mann J.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Group, Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle
Upon Tyne, UK.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The pro-inflammatory functions of NF-kappaB must be tightly
regulated to prevent inappropriate tissue damage and remodelling caused by
activated inflammatory and wound-healing cells. The p50 subunit of NF-kappaB is
emerging as an important repressor of immune and inflammatory responses, but by
mechanisms that are poorly defined. This study aims to delineate p50 target genes
in activated hepatic stellate cells and to outline mechanisms utilised in their
repression.
METHODS: Hepatic stellate cells were isolated from nfkb1(p50)-deficient or Wt
mice and gene expression compared using microarray. Target genes were verified by
qRT-PCR and p50-mediated HDAC-1 recruitment to the target genes demonstrated
using chromatin immunoprecipitation.
RESULTS: We identify p50 as transcriptional repressor of multiple
pro-inflammatory genes including Ccl2, Cxcl10, Gm-csf, and Mmp-13. These genes
are over-expressed in nfkb1(p50)-deficient mice suffering from chronic hepatitis 
and in fibrogenic/inflammatory hepatic stellate cells isolated from nfkb1(-/-)
liver. We identify Mmp-13 as a bona-fide target gene for p50 and demonstrate that
p50 is required for recruitment of the transcriptional repressor histone
deacetylase (HDAC)-1 to kappaB sites in the Mmp-13 promoter. Chromatin
immunoprecipitations identified binding of HDAC-1 to specific regulatory regions 
of the Ccl2, Cxcl10, Gm-csf genes that contain predicted kappaB binding motifs.
Recruitment of HDAC-1 to these genes was not observed in nfkb1(-/-) cells
suggesting a requirement for p50 in a manner similar to that described for
Mmp-13.
CONCLUSIONS: Recruitment of HDAC-1 to inflammatory genes provides a widespread
mechanism to explain the immunosuppressive properties of p50.

Copyright 2010 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3098379
PMID: 20579762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. EMBO J. 2010 Aug 4;29(15):2586-97. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.136. Epub 2010 Jun 22.

Overlapping functions of Hdac1 and Hdac2 in cell cycle regulation and
haematopoiesis.

Wilting RH(1), Yanover E, Heideman MR, Jacobs H, Horner J, van der Torre J,
DePinho RA, Dannenberg JH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, Plesmanlaan 121, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) counterbalance acetylation of lysine residues, a
protein modification involved in numerous biological processes. Here, Hdac1 and
Hdac2 conditional knock-out alleles were used to study the function of class I
Hdac1 and Hdac2 in cell cycle progression and haematopoietic differentiation.
Combined deletion of Hdac1 and Hdac2, or inactivation of their deacetylase
activity in primary or oncogenic-transformed fibroblasts, results in a
senescence-like G(1) cell cycle arrest, accompanied by up-regulation of the
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21(Cip). Notably, concomitant genetic
inactivation of p53 or p21(Cip) indicates that Hdac1 and Hdac2 regulate
p53-p21(Cip)-independent pathways critical for maintaining cell cycle
progression. In vivo, we show that Hdac1 and Hdac2 are not essential for liver
homeostasis. In contrast, total levels of Hdac1 and Hdac2 in the haematopoietic
system are critical for erythrocyte-megakaryocyte differentiation. Dual
inactivation of Hdac1 and Hdac2 results in apoptosis of megakaryocytes and
thrombocytopenia. Together, these data indicate that Hdac1 and Hdac2 have
overlapping functions in cell cycle regulation and haematopoiesis. In addition,
this work provides insights into mechanism-based toxicities observed in patients 
treated with HDAC inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC2928690
PMID: 20571512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Int J Cancer. 2011 Apr 15;128(8):1836-42. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25524.

Role for transcription factor TFII-I in the suppression of SSeCKS/Gravin/Akap12
transcription by Src.

Bu Y(1), Gao L, Gelman IH.

Author information: 
(1)Kinex Pharmaceuticals, LLC, Buffalo, NY, USA.

The SSeCKS/Gravin/AKAP12 gene, encoding a kinase scaffolding protein with
metastasis-suppressing activity, is transcriptionally downregulated in
Src-transformed cells through the recruitment of HDAC1 to a Src-responsive
proximal promoter site charged with Sp1, Sp3 and USF1. However, the ectopic
expression of these proteins formed a suppressive complex in Src-transformed but 
not in parental NIH3T3 cells, suggesting the involvement of additional repressor 
factors. Transcription factor II-I (TFII-I) [general transcription factor 2i
(Gtf2i)] was identified by mass spectrometry as being associated with the SSeCKS 
promoter complex in NIH3T3/Src cells, and moreover, the Src-induced tyrosine
phosphorylation of TFII-I significantly increased its binding to the SSeCKS
proximal promoter. siRNA-mediated knockdown of TFII-I or the expression of
TFII-I(Y248/249F) caused the derepression of SSeCKS in NIH3T3/Src cells. Taken
with previous data showing that the tyrosine phosphorylation of TFII-I
facilitates its nuclear translocation, these data suggest that Src-family
kinase-mediated phosphorylation converts a portion of TFII-I into a
transcriptional repressor.

Copyright © 2010 UICC.

PMCID: PMC2997892
PMID: 20568114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Cell Biochem. 2010 Aug 15;110(6):1306-13. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22644.

Role of histone acetylation in the development of diabetic retinopathy and the
metabolic memory phenomenon.

Zhong Q(1), Kowluru RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan, USA.

Hyperglycemia is considered as one of the major determinants in the development
of diabetic retinopathy, but the progression of retinopathy resists arrest after 
hyperglycemia is terminated, suggesting a metabolic memory phenomenon. Diabetes
alters the expression of retinal genes, and this continues even after good
glycemic control is re-instituted. Since the expression of genes is affected by
chromatin structure that is modulated by post-translational modifications of
histones, our objective is to investigate the role of histone acetylation in the 
development of diabetic retinopathy, and in the metabolic memory phenomenon.
Streptozotocin-induced rats were maintained either in poor glycemic control (PC, 
glycated hemoglobin, GHb >11%) or good glycemic control (GC, GHb <6%) for 12
months, or allowed to be in PC for 6 months followed by in GC for 6 months
(PC-GC). On a cellular level, retinal endothelial cells, the target of
histopathology of diabetic retinopathy, were incubated in 5 or 20 mM glucose for 
4 days. Activities of histone deacetylase (HDAC) and histone acetyltransferase
(HAT), and histone acetylation were quantified. Hyperglycemia activated HDAC and 
increased HDAC1, 2, and 8 gene expressions in the retina and its capillary cells.
The activity HAT was compromised and the acetylation of histone H3 was decreased.
Termination of hyperglycemia failed to provide any benefits to diabetes-induced
changes in retinal HDAC and HAT, and histone H3 remained subnormal. This suggests
"in principle" the role of global acetylation of retinal histone H3 in the
development of diabetic retinopathy and in the metabolic memory phenomenon
associated with its continued progression.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2907436
PMID: 20564224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Jun;18(3):638-41.

[Inhibitory effect of VPA on multiple myeloma U266 cell proliferation and
regulation of histone acetylation].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhu YF(1), Ye BG, Shen JZ, Lin CM, Lin FA, Shen SF, Xu CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, The Zhangzhou Municipal Hospital, Fujian Medical
University, Zhangzhou 363000, Fujian Province, China.

This study was aimed to investigate the effects of sodium valproate (VPA) on the 
proliferation and regulation of histone acetylation of multiple myeloma cell line
U266. U266 cells were treated with VPA. Cell proliferation was determined by
CCK-8 assay, and cell cycle were analyzed by flow cytometry (FCM). The expression
level of HDAC1 mRNA was detected by RT-PCR, and the protein levels of HDAC1 and
histone H3, H4 acetylation was detected by Western blot. The results showed that 
the VPA inhibited the proliferation of U266 cells in concentration-and
time-dependent manners.After exposure to different concentrations of VPA for 48
hours, the proportion of G(0)/G(1) cells increased, while the proportion of S
phase cells decreased. The cell cycle was arrested obviously in G(0)/G(1) phase
(p < 0.05). The expression of HDAC1 mRNA was inhibited, and the protein level of 
HDAC1 was down-regulated, while the histone H3/H4 acetylation was up-regulated in
U266 cells. It is concluded that the VPA can inhibit cell proliferation of U266
and induce G(0)/G(1) phase arrest. The increase of histone H3/H4 acetylation
resulting from inhibiting HDAC1 by VPA might be considered as a possible
mechanism.

PMID: 20561418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Dev Dyn. 2010 Jul;239(7):1950-66. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22329.

The transcriptional activity of Neurog3 affects migration and differentiation of 
ectopic endocrine cells in chicken endoderm.

Rosenberg LC(1), Lafon ML, Pedersen JK, Yassin H, Jensen JN, Serup P,
Hecksher-Sørensen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Hagedorn Research Institute, Niels
Steensens Vej 6, Gentofte, Denmark.

Neurog3 is expressed transiently in pancreatic endocrine progenitors where it is 
responsible for activating a transcription factor cascade which eventually
defines the mature endocrine cells. However, the mechanism by which Neurog3
regulates different aspects of the endocrine differentiation program is less
clear. In this report we used in ovo electroporation to investigate how
manipulation of Neurog3 protein activity affected migration, differentiation and 
fate determination. We found that changes in the onset of Neurog3 expression only
had minor effect on differentiation. However increasing the transcriptional
activity of Neurog3 by fusing it to VP16 or co-electroporating with Ep300 caused 
the electroporated cells to migrate rather than differentiate. In contrast,
reducing the transcriptional activity of Neurog3 by deleting parts of the
activation domain, by fusing Neurog3 to the engrailed repressor domain, or
co-electroporating with Hdac1 greatly increased the proportion of glucagon
expressing cells.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3070887
PMID: 20549731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Leuk Res. 2010 Dec;34(12):1601-9. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2010.05.012. Epub 2010
Jun 9.

Folylpolyglutamate synthetase gene transcription is regulated by a multiprotein
complex that binds the TEL-AML1 fusion in acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Leclerc GJ(1), Sanderson C, Hunger S, Devidas M, Barredo JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University of Miami Miller
School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33101, USA.

Comment in
    Leuk Res. 2010 Dec;34(12):1558-9.

Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL) non-random fusions influence clinical outcome 
and alter the accumulation of MTX-PGs in vivo. Analysis of primary ALL samples
uncovered subtype-specific patterns of folate gene expression. Using an
FPGS-luciferase reporter gene assay, we determined that E2A-PBX1 and TEL-AML1
expression decreased FPGS transcription. ChIP assays uncovered HDAC1, AML1,
mSin3A, E2F, and Rb interactions with the FPGS promoter region. We demonstrate
that FPGS expression is epigenetically regulated through binding of selected ALL 
fusions to a multiprotein complex, which also controls the cell cycle dependence 
of FPGS expression. This study provides insights into the pharmacogenomics of MTX
in ALL subtypes.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2946984
PMID: 20538338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Neuro Oncol. 2010 Sep;12(9):917-27. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noq044. Epub 2010 Jun 4.

Levetiracetam enhances p53-mediated MGMT inhibition and sensitizes glioblastoma
cells to temozolomide.

Bobustuc GC(1), Baker CH, Limaye A, Jenkins WD, Pearl G, Avgeropoulos NG, Konduri
SD.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, M. D. Anderson Cancer Center Orlando, Orlando,
Florida 32806, USA. george.bobustuc@orlandohealth.com

Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) are frequently used to treat seizures in glioma
patients. AEDs may have an unrecognized impact in modulating
O(6)-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT), a DNA repair protein that has an
important role in tumor cell resistance to alkylating agents. We report that
levetiracetam (LEV) is the most potent MGMT inhibitor among several AEDs with
diverse MGMT regulatory actions. In vitro, when used at concentrations within the
human therapeutic range for seizure prophylaxis, LEV decreases MGMT protein and
mRNA expression levels. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis reveals that LEV
enhances p53 binding on the MGMT promoter by recruiting the mSin3A/histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) corepressor complex. However, LEV does not exert any MGMT
inhibitory activity when the expression of either p53, mSin3A, or HDAC1 is
abrogated. LEV inhibits malignant glioma cell proliferation and increases glioma 
cell sensitivity to the monofunctional alkylating agent temozolomide. In 4 newly 
diagnosed patients who had 2 craniotomies 7-14 days apart, prior to the
initiation of any tumor-specific treatment, samples obtained before and after LEV
treatment showed the inhibition of MGMT expression. Our results suggest that the 
choice of AED in patients with malignant gliomas may have an unrecognized impact 
in clinical practice and research trial design.

PMCID: PMC2940696
PMID: 20525765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Drug Metab Dispos. 2010 Sep;38(9):1493-8. doi: 10.1124/dmd.110.032854. Epub 2010 
Jun 1.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors induce cytochrome P450 2B by activating nuclear
receptor constitutive androstane receptor.

Takizawa D(1), Kakizaki S, Horiguchi N, Tojima H, Yamazaki Y, Ichikawa T, Sato K,
Mori M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Molecular Science, Gunma University Graduate School
of Medicine, 3-39-15 Showa-machi, Maebashi, Gunma, Japan.

Valproic acid, a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, induces the cytochrome
P450 2B subfamily. However, the effects of HDAC inhibitors on CYP2B induction are
still not fully understood. Nuclear receptor constitutive androstane receptor
(CAR) is a key regulator of CYP2B induction. In this study, we investigated the
effect of HDAC inhibitors on CAR-mediated CYP2B induction. The expression of
CYP2B6 mRNA was induced in HepG2 cells stably expressing mouse CAR (Ym17) by HDAC
inhibitors including valproic acid, phenylbutyrate, and trichostatin A. HDAC
inhibitors activated the phenobarbital-responsive enhancer module of the CYP2B6
promoter in transient transfection reporter assays with Ym17 cells. Furthermore, 
HDAC inhibitors synergistically augmented the effect of the CAR ligand,
1,4-bis[2-(3,5-dichloropyridyloxy)]benzene, in the transactivation of CYP2B6 mRNA
and the promoter assay in Ym17 cells. Intraperitoneal injection of HDAC
inhibitors induced Cyp2b10 mRNA in wild-type mice. However, such induction was
not observed in CAR(-/-) mice. Immunoprecipitation demonstrated that CAR formed a
complex with HDACs. HDAC inhibitors diminished the binding between CAR and HDAC1 
and augmented the binding of steroid receptor coactivator-1 (SRC-1) to CAR.
Furthermore, small interfering RNA knockdown of HDAC1 increased CYP2B6 mRNA
expression. These results provide novel insight into the mechanism by which HDAC 
inhibitors affect gene expression of CYP2B6. HDAC inhibitors have the potential
to up-regulate CYP2B6 through the dissociation of HDAC1 and recruitment of SRC-1 
to receptor CAR.

PMID: 20516253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J Biol Chem. 2010 Aug 6;285(32):24871-81. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.133280. Epub 2010
Jun 1.

Novel polymorphisms of nuclear receptor SHP associated with functional and
structural changes.

Zhou T(1), Zhang Y, Macchiarulo A, Yang Z, Cellanetti M, Coto E, Xu P,
Pellicciari R, Wang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Oncological Sciences, Huntsman Cancer Institute,
University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah 84132, USA.

We identified three heterozygous nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms in
the small heterodimer partner (SHP, NROB2) gene in normal subjects and CADASIL
(cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and
leukoencephalopathy)-like patients, including two novel missense mutations
(p.R38H, p.K170N) and one of the previously reported polymorphism (p.G171A). Four
novel heterozygous mutations were also identified in the intron
((Intron)1265T-->A), 3'-untranslated region ((3'-UTR)101C-->G, (3'-UTR)186T-->C),
and promoter ((Pro)-423C-->T) of the SHP gene. The exonic R38H and K170N mutants 
exhibited impaired nuclear translocation. K170N made SHP more susceptible to
ubiquitination mediated degradation and blocked SHP acetylation, which displayed 
lost repressive activity on its interacting partners ERRgamma and HNF4alpha but
not LRH-1. In contrast, G171A increased SHP mRNA and protein expression and
maintained normal function. In general, the interaction of SHP mutants with LRH-1
and EID1 was enhanced. K170N also markedly impaired the recruitment of SHP,
HNF4alpha, HDAC1, and HDAC3 to the apoCIII promoter. Molecular dynamics
simulations of SHP showed that G171A stabilized the nuclear receptor boxes,
whereas K170N promoted the conformational destabilization of all the structural
elements of the receptor. This study suggests that genetic variations in SHP are 
common among human subjects and the Lys-170 residue plays a key role in
controlling SHP ubiquitination and acetylation associated with SHP protein
stability and repressive function.

PMCID: PMC2915723
PMID: 20516075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Biochem. 2010 Aug;148(2):201-7. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvq054. Epub 2010 May 28.

Distinct roles of HDAC1 and HDAC2 in transcription and recombination at the
immunoglobulin loci in the chicken B cell line DT40.

Kurosawa K(1), Lin W, Ohta K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, The
University of Tokyo, Komaba 3-8-1, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8902, Japan.

The class I histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2 are highly conserved except for 
their C-terminal domain, but are presumed to have distinct functions in various
tissues. We investigated the division of roles between HDAC1 and HDAC2 for the
control of transcription and recombination at the immunoglobulin (Ig) gene in
DT40. HDAC1(-/-) knock-out cells showed an increased incidence of gene conversion
and of deletion/insertion events at the Ig light chain locus (IgL), but not at
the heavy chain locus (IgH). Irrespective of recombinational activity, the
transcription levels at IgL and IgH were decreased in HDAC1(-/-) cells, while
other genes actively transcribed in B cells were slightly up-regulated compared
to the levels in wild-type cells. These observations were strikingly different
from the previously reported effects in HDAC2(-/-) cells, which showed a
significant enhancement of transcriptional and recombinational activities at both
IgL and IgH. Swapping experiments of the C-terminal unconserved domain of HDAC2
with its HDAC1 counterpart by gene knock-in demonstrated that this domain was not
responsible for the phenotypic differences of HDAC1(-/-) and HDAC2(-/-). This
suggests that other features such as modifications in the N-terminal catalytic
domain could be important to determine the functional differences of these
enzymes despite their structural similarities.

PMID: 20511365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Biol Chem. 2010 Aug 6;285(32):24388-97. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.118570. Epub 2010
May 28.

Mechanistic insights into the events that lead to synergistic induction of
interleukin 6 transcription upon activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor and 
inflammatory signaling.

DiNatale BC(1), Schroeder JC, Francey LJ, Kusnadi A, Perdew GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, The Pennsylvania State
University, Center for Molecular Toxicology and Carcinogenesis, University Park, 
Pennsylvania 16802, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is the ligand-activated transcription factor 
responsible for mediating the toxicological effects of dioxin and xenobiotic
metabolism. However, recent evidence has implicated the AHR in additional,
nonmetabolic physiological processes, including immune regulation. Certain tumor 
cells are largely nonresponsive to cytokine-mediated induction of the
pro-survival cytokine interleukin (IL) 6. We have demonstrated that multiple
nonresponsive tumor lines are able to undergo synergistic induction of IL6
following combinatorial treatment with IL1beta and the AHR agonist
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin. Such data implicate the AHR in tumor
expansion, although the mechanistic basis for the AHR-dependent synergistic
induction of IL6 has not been determined. Here, we demonstrate that
ligand-activated AHR is involved in priming the IL6 promoter through binding to
nonconsensus dioxin response elements located upstream of the IL6 start site.
Such binding appears to render the promoter more permissive to IL1beta-induced
binding of NF-kappaB components. The nature of the AHR-dependent increases in IL6
promoter transcriptional potential has been shown to involve a reorganization of 
repressive complexes as exemplified by the presence of HDAC1 and HDAC3. Dismissal
of these HDACs correlates with post-translational modifications of promoter-bound
NF-kappaB components in a time-dependent manner. Thus the AHR plays a role in
derepressing the IL6 promoter, leading to synergistic IL6 expression in the
presence of inflammatory signals. These observations may explain the association 
between enhanced expression of AHR and tumor aggressiveness. It is likely that
AHR-mediated priming is not restricted to the IL6 promoter and may contribute to 
the expression of a variety of genes, which do not have consensus dioxin response
elements.

PMCID: PMC2915674
PMID: 20511231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Cell Biochem. 2010 Sep 1;111(1):123-9. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22674.

Simulated microgravity-induced epigenetic changes in human lymphocytes.

Singh KP(1), Kumari R, Dumond JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Toxicology, The Institute of Environmental and
Human Health, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas 79409, USA.
kamaleshwar.singh@tiehh.ttu.edu

Real space flight and modeled microgravity conditions result in changes in the
expression of genes that control important cellular functions. However, the
mechanisms for microgravity-induced gene expression changes are not clear. The
epigenetic changes of DNA methylation and chromatin histones modifications are
known to regulate gene expression. The objectives of this study were to
investigate whether simulated microgravity alters (a) the DNA methylation and
histone acetylation, and (b) the expression of DNMT1, DNMT3a, DNMT3b, and HDAC1
genes that regulate epigenetic events. To achieve these objectives, human
T-lymphocyte cells were grown in a rotary cell culture system (RCCS) that
simulates microgravity, and in parallel under normal gravitational conditions as 
control. The microgravity-induced DNA methylation changes were detected by
methylation sensitive-random amplified polymorphic DNA (MS-RAPD) analysis of
genomic DNA. The gene expression was measured by Quantitative Real-time PCR. The 
expression of DNMT1, DNMT3a, and DNMT3b was found to be increased at 72 h, and
decreased at 7 days in microgravity exposed cells. The MS-RAPD analysis revealed 
that simulated microgravity exposure results in DNA hypomethylation and
mutational changes. Gene expression analysis revealed microgravity exposure
time-dependent decreased expression of HDAC1. Decreased expression of HDAC1
should result in increased level of acetylated histone H3, however a decreased
level of acetylated H3 was observed in microgravity condition, indicating thereby
that other HDACs may be involved in regulation of H3 deacetylation. The findings 
of this study suggest that epigenetic events could be one of the mechanistic
bases for microgravity-induced gene expression changes and associated adverse
health effects.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20506542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Oncogene. 2010 Jul 29;29(30):4341-51. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.179. Epub 2010 May
24.

CCDC6 represses CREB1 activity by recruiting histone deacetylase 1 and protein
phosphatase 1.

Leone V(1), Mansueto G, Pierantoni GM, Tornincasa M, Merolla F, Cerrato A,
Santoro M, Grieco M, Scaloni A, Celetti A, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR c/o Dipartimento 
di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare, Facoltà di Medicina e Chirurgia
di Napoli, Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, Naples, Italy.

RET/papillary thyroid carcinoma 1 (PTC1) oncogene is frequently activated in
human PTCs. It is characterized by the fusion of the intracellular
kinase-encoding domain of RET to the first 101 amino acids of CCDC6. The aim of
our work is to characterize the function of the CCDC6 protein to better
understand the function of its truncation, that results in the loss of the
expression of one allele, in the process of thyroid carcinogenesis. Here, we
report that CCDC6 interacts with CREB1 and represses its transcriptional activity
by recruiting histone deacetylase 1 and protein phosphatase 1 proteins at the CRE
site of the CREB1 target genes. Finally, we show an increased CREB1
phosphorylation and activity in PTCs carrying the RET/PTC1 oncogene.
Consistently, an increased expression of two known CREB1 target genes, AREG and
cyclin A, was observed in this subgroup of thyroid papillary carcinomas.
Therefore, the repression of CREB1 activity by CCDC6 has a critical function in
the development of human thyroid papillary carcinomas carrying RET/PTC1
activation.

PMID: 20498639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Pediatr Res. 2010 Jun;67(6):573-8. doi: 10.1203/PDR.0b013e3181da477c.

Histone deacetylases are critical regulators of the renin-angiotensin system
during ureteric bud branching morphogenesis.

Song R(1), Van Buren T, Yosypiv IV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tulane University Health Sciences Center, New
Orleans, LA 70112, USA.

Mutations in the genes encoding components of the renin-angiotensin system (RAS) 
in mice or humans cause congenital abnormalities of the kidney and urinary tract.
We hypothesized that absence of angiotensin (Ang) II in angiotensinogen
(AGT)-deficient mice leads to defects in ureteric bud (UB) branching and that RAS
genes are critically dependent on histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity. The number
of UB tips was lower in AGT-/- compared with AGT+/+ embryonic (E) day E13.5
metanephroi (24+/-1.5 versus 36+/-3.7, p<0.05). Real-time RT-PCR demonstrated
that pharmacological inhibition of HDAC activity with Scriptaid increases AGT,
renin, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), and AT1 receptor (AT1R) mRNA levels
in E12.5 mouse metanephroi and early mesenchymal (MK3) cells. Furthermore,
Scriptaid enhanced Ang II induced decrease in Sprouty (Spry) 1 gene expression in
cultured UB cells. Treatment of intact E12.5 mouse metanephroi grown ex vivo with
Ang II (10(-5) M, 24 h) increased HDAC-1 and decreased total acetylated histone
H3 protein levels. These findings indicate that lack of endogenous Ang II in
AGT-deficient mice inhibits UB branching. We conclude that intact RAS is critical
in structural integrity of the renal collecting system and that UB morphogenetic 
program genes, such as AGT, renin, ACE, AT1R, or Spry1, are epigenetically
controlled via HDACs.

PMCID: PMC3039915
PMID: 20496471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Med Chem. 2010 Jun 24;53(12):4654-67. doi: 10.1021/jm100244y.

Synthesis and biological characterization of the histone deacetylase inhibitor
largazole and C7- modified analogues.

Souto JA(1), Vaz E, Lepore I, Pöppler AC, Franci G, Alvarez R, Altucci L, de Lera
AR.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Quimica Organica, Universidade de Vigo, Lagoas-Marcosende,
36310 Vigo, Spain.

Largazole 4a and analogues with modifications at the C7 position, as well as
2,4'-bithiazole 5a, have been synthesized using an acyclic cross-metathesis of
the corresponding depsipeptide structures assembled by N-C6(O) or C15(O)-N lactam
formation. Similar to the parent system 4a, the series of largazole depsipeptides
4b-d, but not 2,4'-bithiazole 5a, showed a marked inhibition of recombinant HDAC1
and selectivity over HDAC4, as well as strong pro-apoptotic effects on the NB4
leukemia cell line, but they failed to induce differentiation to mature
granulocytes. Functional assays of the analogues correlated with the in vitro
activities, as shown by increased H3 and alpha-tubulin acetylation levels and
p21(WAF1/CIP1) up-regulation in NB4 cells. The activity of the natural product
HDACi largazole 4a is not significantly altered by the presence of groups of
different size (H, Et, Ph) at C7 on the dihydrothiazole ring.

PMID: 20491440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Mol Cancer Ther. 2010 Jun;9(6):1596-608. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-09-1146. Epub
2010 May 18.

Benzyl isothiocyanate-mediated inhibition of histone deacetylase leads to
NF-kappaB turnoff in human pancreatic carcinoma cells.

Batra S(1), Sahu RP, Kandala PK, Srivastava SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, and Cancer Biology Center, School of
Pharmacy, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, Amarillo, Texas 79106,
USA.

NF-kappaB/p65 is constitutively activated in pancreatic cancers, where it plays a
critical role in the transcriptional activation of multiple cell survival genes. 
We have previously shown the apoptosis-inducing effects of benzyl isothiocyanate 
(BITC) in pancreatic cancer cells. We hypothesized that inhibition of
NF-kappaB/p65 could be the mechanism of BITC-induced apoptosis. Therefore, the
effect of BITC on NF-kappaB/p65 was evaluated in BxPC-3, Capan-2, and normal
HPDE-6 cells by Western blotting, transcriptional and DNA-binding activity, and
immunohistochemistry in the xenografted tumors. Our results reveal a remarkable
decrease in the phosphorylation of NF-kappaB/p65 at Ser(536) in both BxPC-3 and
Capan-2 cells by BITC treatment. The expression of NF-kappaB/p65 was
downregulated significantly in BxPC-3 cells, whereas it remained unchanged in
Capan-2 cells. BITC treatment caused a significant decrease in NF-kappaB
transcriptional and DNA-binding activity in both BxPC-3 and Capan-2 cells. A
drastic decrease was observed in the expression and reporter activity of cyclin
D1 in both the cell lines. Moreover, BITC also caused a significant decrease in
the expression and activity of histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1 and HDAC3 in BxPC-3
and HDAC3 in Capan-2 cells. Overexpression of HDAC1 or HDAC3 abrogated the
effects of BITC. BITC treatment did not cause any change in HDAC expression in
normal HPDE-6 cells. Immunohistochemical analysis of tumors from BITC-treated
mice showed significantly reduced staining for NF-kappaB, cyclin D1, HDAC1, and
HDAC3 compared with control. Our results suggest inhibition of HDAC1/HDAC3 by
BITC as a plausible mechanism of NF-kappaB inactivation, resulting in the in
vitro and in vivo growth suppression of pancreatic cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC2946330
PMID: 20484017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2010 Sep;42(9):1472-81. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2010.05.004. Epub 2010 May 15.

SLy2 targets the nuclear SAP30/HDAC1 complex.

Brandt S(1), Ellwanger K, Beuter-Gunia C, Schuster M, Hausser A, Schmitz I,
Beer-Hammer S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hospital Hygiene, Heinrich-Heine
University Duesseldorf, Germany.

The adapter protein SLy2 (SH3 protein expressed in lymphocytes 2), also named
HACS1, NASH1 or SAMSN1, is expressed in hematopoietic tissues, muscle, heart,
brain, lung, pancreas, endothelial cells and myelomas. Endogenous SLy2 expression
was shown to be upregulated in primary B cells upon differentiation and
proliferation-inducing stimuli, and transduction experiments suggest a
stimulatory role for SLy2 in B cell differentiation to plasma cells. However the 
signalling pathways regulated by SLy2 remain unknown. In this study we identify
novel interaction partners of SLy2 providing a molecular framework for its
function. We show that phosphorylated SLy2 directly interacts with 14-3-3
proteins via a previously unrecognized phosphorylation site. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that 14-3-3 proteins control nucleo-cytoplasmic shuttling of SLy2 by 
retaining phosphorylated SLy2 in the cytoplasm. In the nucleus, SLy2 interacts
with the SAP30/HDAC1 complex and regulates the activity of HDAC1. Thus, our
findings unravel a novel mechanism how SLy2 localization is controlled and
implicate SLy2 in the epigenetic control of gene expression.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20478393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Int J Cancer. 2011 Feb 1;128(3):551-61. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25365.

DNMT3a plays a role in switches between doxorubicin-induced senescence and
apoptosis of colorectal cancer cells.

Zhang Y(1), Gao Y, Zhang G, Huang S, Dong Z, Kong C, Su D, Du J, Zhu S, Liang Q, 
Zhang J, Lu J, Huang B.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Genetics and Cytology, The Key Laboratory of Molecular
Epigenetics of Ministry of Education, Northeast Normal University, Changchun,
China.

The DNA-damaging drug doxorubicin (Dox) induces cell senescence at concentrations
significantly lower than those required for induction of apoptosis. At low Dox
concentrations, tumor suppressor p53 is activated, which enhances the expression 
of p21(Waf1/Cip1) (p21). At high concentrations, Dox activates p53 leading to
apoptosis without enhancing p21 expression. The underlying mechanisms and factors
that govern the differential effects of Dox in inducing senescence and apoptosis 
are unclear. Here, we report that the DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) DNMT3a was
upregulated by Dox especially at concentrations that induced apoptosis in HCT116 
colorectal cancer cells, and this process was regulated by p53. Meanwhile, p21
expression was significantly upregulated at senescence-inducing concentrations
and kept low on treatment with apoptosis-inducing concentrations of Dox. The
differential expression of DNMT3a and p21 in response to Dox suggests that DNMT3a
may be a key factor in switches between Dox-induced senescence and apoptosis.
Moreover, when DNMT3a was silenced, treatment of HCT116 cells with
apoptosis-inducing concentration of Dox increased the percentage of cells
undergoing senescence, accompanied by upregulation of p21. Contrarily,
senescence-inducing concentration of Dox promoted apoptosis rate, and p21
expression was repressed. Surprisingly, no changes in DNA methylation status at
p21 promoter were detected at either ranges of Dox, although DNMT3a and HDAC1
were recruited to p21 promoter at apoptosis-inducing Dox concentration, where
they were present in the same complex. Overall, these data demonstrate that
DNMT3a impacts the expression of p21 and plays a role in determining the
Dox-induced senescence and apoptosis in HCT116 cells.

PMID: 20473858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Gene Expr Patterns. 2010 Sep;10(6):237-43. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2010.05.002. Epub
2010 May 13.

Analysis of the Albumin/alpha-Fetoprotein/Afamin/Group specific component gene
family in the context of zebrafish liver differentiation.

Noël ES(1), Reis MD, Arain Z, Ober EA.

Author information: 
(1)MRC National Institute for Medical Research, Division of Developmental
Biology, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London, NW7 1AA, United Kingdom.

Members of the Albumin/alpha-Fetoprotein/Afamin/Group specific component
(Alb/Afp/Afm/Gc) multi-gene family perform physiological functions essential for 
body homeostasis and are among the earliest genes to be expressed in the fetal
liver in mammals. A comprehensive search of the zebrafish genome has led to the
isolation of a single member of this gene family, exhibiting close homology to
group specific component (gc; also described as vitamin D binding protein (dbp)).
Our phylogenetic analyses did not uncover albumin in the genome, indicating its
likely absence in zebrafish, whereas the absence of afp and afm is in agreement
with previous findings that both genes arose at a later stage of vertebrate
evolution. gc mRNA expression is initiated weakly around 55 hours post
fertilisation (hpf) in the developing liver, and increases until it reaches a
continuously high level from about 72 hpf onwards. Investigation of gc mRNA in
hdac1 mutants revealed a severe delay of expression, indicating a defect in
progression of hepatic differentiation. This provides further evidence for Hdac1 
regulating the precise timely execution of hepatic gene expression programmes.
Conversely, onset of gc expression was unaltered in cloche mutant embryos, which 
lack hepatic vasculature, suggesting that this particular step of hepatic
differentiation occurs independently from endothelial cells. Our studies identify
gc as the likely only member of the Alb/Afp/Afm/Gc gene family in zebrafish,
providing important insights into the evolution of this multi-gene family in
vertebrates. Furthermore, the identification of gc adds a valuable temporal
marker for investigating progressive hepatic differentiation in zebrafish.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20471496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Pancreas. 2010 Oct;39(7):994-1001. doi: 10.1097/MPA.0b013e3181db0086.

Upregulated histone deacetylase 1 expression in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma 
and specific siRNA inhibits the growth of cancer cells.

Gao DJ(1), Xu M, Zhang YQ, Du YQ, Gao J, Gong YF, Man XH, Wu HY, Jin J, Xu GM, Li
ZS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVES: So far, there are no investigations about the role of histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) in tumorigenesis of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. This 
study was designed to elucidate the roles and mechanisms of HDAC1 in
tumorigenesis of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
METHODS: Real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and
immunohistochemistry techniques were adopted to detect the expression of HDAC1 in
human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma tissues and paired paracancerous tissues. 
The roles of HDAC1 in human pancreatic cell line PaTu8988 were investigated using
siRNA.
RESULTS: Histone deacetylase 1 mRNA in pancreatic cancer tissues were
significantly higher than in paracancerous tissues (P < 0.05).
Immunohistochemistry showed that the indices of HDAC1 in pancreatic cancer
tissues and paracancerous tissues were 56.4% (SD, 23.1%) and 6.7% (SD, 5.0%),
respectively (P < 0.001). Knockdown of HDAC1 can generate a remarkable defect in 
proliferation and also can significantly induce apoptosis and S-phase arrest in
PaTu8988 cells (P < 0.05). The Bcl-2 mRNA expression was significantly
downregulated, whereas the p21 and Bax mRNA expression were significantly
upregulated.
CONCLUSIONS: The HDAC1 overexpression might play an important role in
tumorigenesis of pancreatic cancer. Our data support the development of selective
inhibitors targeting HDAC1 for the treatment of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
Histone deacetylase 1 could be a new gene therapy target in pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 20467347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Med Oncol. 2012 Mar;29(1):340-8. doi: 10.1007/s12032-010-9559-3. Epub 2010 May
13.

Enhanced radiosensitivity of EC109 cells by inhibition of HDAC1 expression.

Zhang B(1), Wang Y, Pang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, College of Basic Medicine, Third Military
Medical University, 400038 Chongqing, China.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity plays the role of deacetylation of histone
and non-histone proteins, which can alter gene expression patterns and cell
behavior potentially associated with malignant transformation. Aberrant
expression of HDAC1 has been found in various types of cancers, which indicated
that it might be a target for cancer therapy. In this study, overexpression of
HDAC1 was found in esophageal cancer samples by real-time RT-PCR, compared with
adjacent non-cancerous tissues. To further verify the possibility of anticancer
treatment by silencing the increased HDAC1 in esophageal carcinoma cells, HDAC1
expression was knockdown using plasmid-based RNA interference (RNAi). Results
showed the HDAC1 expression was efficiently inhibited and the acetylation of
histone H3 was significantly increased by RNAi in EC109 cells. Increased
apoptotic cell death was observed when HDAC1 expression was knockdown, which
indicated that cells were more sensitive to radiation. Moreover, the results also
showed DNA was more easily broken by radiation in EC109 cells when HDAC1
expression was knockdown, as measured by <U+03B3>H2AX foci and single-cell
electrophoresis. Our data suggested that targeting the increased HDAC1 expression
might be feasible for esophageal cancer therapy.

PMID: 20464640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. ACS Med Chem Lett. 2010 Mar 11;1(2):70-4. doi: 10.1021/ml100028g. eCollection
2010.

Vorinostat-like molecules as structural, stereochemical, and pharmacological
tools.

Hanessian S(1), Auzzas L(2), Larsson A(3), Zhang J(1), Giannini G(4), Gallo G(4),
Ciacci A(4), Cabri W(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Université de Montréal, P.O. Box 6128, Station
Centre-ville, Montréal, QC, H3C 3J7, Canada. (2)Department of Chemistry,
Université de Montréal, P.O. Box 6128, Station Centre-ville, Montréal, QC, H3C
3J7, Canada ; Istituto di Chimica Biomolecolare, Consiglio Nazionale delle
Ricerche, Traversa La Crucca 3, I-07040 Sassari, Italy. (3)Department of
Chemistry, Université de Montréal, P.O. Box 6128, Station Centre-ville, Montréal,
QC, H3C 3J7, Canada ; Department of Chemistry, Umeå University, 901 87, Umeå,
Sweden. (4)Sigma-Tau Research & Development, Via Pontina Km 30.400, I-00040
Pomezia, Roma, Italy.

The inhibitory activity of an <U+03C9>-alkoxy analogue of the HDAC inhibitor, Vorinostat
(SAHA), against the 11 isoforms of HDAC is described and evaluated with regard to
structural biology information retrieved through computational methods.
Preliminary absorption and metabolism studies were performed, which positioned
this compound as a potential candidate for further preclinical studies and
delineated measures for improving its pharmacokinetic profile.

PMCID: PMC4007911
PMID: 24900179  [PubMed]


174. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Jul 15;19(14):2841-57. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq184. Epub 2010 May
10.

SMARCA2 and other genome-wide supported schizophrenia-associated genes:
regulation by REST/NRSF, network organization and primate-specific evolution.

Loe-Mie Y(1), Lepagnol-Bestel AM, Maussion G, Doron-Faigenboim A, Imbeaud S,
Delacroix H, Aggerbeck L, Pupko T, Gorwood P, Simonneau M, Moalic JM.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U675/U894, Centre Psychiatrie & Neurosciences, Université
Paris-Descartes, 75014 Paris, France.

The SMARCA2 gene, which encodes BRM in the SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complex, 
was recently identified as being associated with schizophrenia (SZ) in a
genome-wide approach. Polymorphisms in SMARCA2, associated with the disease,
produce changes in the expression of the gene and/or in the encoded amino acid
sequence. We show here that an SWI/SNF-centered network including the Smarca2
gene is modified by the down-regulation of REST/NRSF in a mouse neuronal cell
line. REST/NRSF down-regulation also modifies the levels of Smarce1, Smarcd3 and 
SWI/SNF interactors (Hdac1, RcoR1 and Mecp2). Smarca2 down-regulation generates
an abnormal dendritic spine morphology that is an intermediate phenotype of SZ.
We further found that 8 (CSF2RA, HIST1H2BJ, NOTCH4, NRGN, SHOX, SMARCA2, TCF4 and
ZNF804A) out of 10 genome-wide supported SZ-associated genes are part of an
interacting network (including SMARCA2), 5 members of which encode transcription 
regulators. The expression of 3 (TCF4, SMARCA2 and CSF2RA) of the 10 genome-wide 
supported SZ-associated genes is modified when the REST/NRSF-SWI/SNF
chromatin-remodeling complex is experimentally manipulated in mouse cell lines
and in transgenic mouse models. The REST/NRSF-SWI/SNF deregulation also results
in the differential expression of genes that are clustered in chromosomes
suggesting the induction of genome-wide epigenetic changes. Finally, we found
that SMARCA2 interactors and the genome-wide supported SZ-associated genes are
considerably enriched in genes displaying positive selection in primates and in
the human lineage which suggests the occurrence of novel protein interactions in 
primates. Altogether, these data identify the SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling
complex as a key component of the genetic architecture of SZ.

PMID: 20457675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2010 Jun 1;20(11):3314-21. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2010.04.041.
Epub 2010 Apr 14.

Acylurea connected straight chain hydroxamates as novel histone deacetylase
inhibitors: Synthesis, SAR, and in vivo antitumor activity.

Wang H(1), Lim ZY, Zhou Y, Ng M, Lu T, Lee K, Sangthongpitag K, Goh KC, Wang X,
Wu X, Khng HH, Goh SK, Ong WC, Bonday Z, Sun ET.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry Discovery, S *BIO Pte Ltd, 1 Science Park Road, #05-09
The Capricorn, Singapore Science Park II, Singapore 117528, Singapore.
haishan_wang@sbio.com

Thirty-six novel acylurea connected straight chain hydroxamates were designed and
synthesized. Structure-activity relationships (SAR) were established for the
length of linear chain linker and substitutions on the benzoylurea group.
Compounds 5g, 5i, 5n, and 19 showed 10-20-fold enhanced HDAC1 potency compared to
SAHA. In general, the cellular potency pIC(50) (COLO205) correlates with
enzymatic potency pIC(50) (HDAC1). Compound 5b (SB207), a structurally simple and
close analogue to SAHA, is more potent against HDAC1 and HDAC6 compared to the
latter. As a representative example of this series, good in vitro enzymatic and
cellular potency plus an excellent pharmacokinetic profile has translated into
better efficacy than SAHA in both prostate cancer (PC3) and colon cancer (HCT116)
xenograft models.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20451378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. PLoS Genet. 2010 Apr 29;6(4):e1000927. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000927.

Epigenetic regulation of a murine retrotransposon by a dual histone modification 
mark.

Brunmeir R(1), Lagger S, Simboeck E, Sawicka A, Egger G, Hagelkruys A, Zhang Y,
Matthias P, Miller WJ, Seiser C.

Author information: 
(1)Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter,
Vienna, Austria.

Erratum in
    PLoS Genet. 2011;7(1). doi:
10.1371/annotation/4ec9cbbd-7620-4449-8961-28213e9dadf4.

Large fractions of eukaryotic genomes contain repetitive sequences of which the
vast majority is derived from transposable elements (TEs). In order to inactivate
those potentially harmful elements, host organisms silence TEs via methylation of
transposon DNA and packaging into chromatin associated with repressive histone
marks. The contribution of individual histone modifications in this process is
not completely resolved. Therefore, we aimed to define the role of reversible
histone acetylation, a modification commonly associated with transcriptional
activity, in transcriptional regulation of murine TEs. We surveyed histone
acetylation patterns and expression levels of ten different murine TEs in mouse
fibroblasts with altered histone acetylation levels, which was achieved via
chemical HDAC inhibition with trichostatin A (TSA), or genetic inactivation of
the major deacetylase HDAC1. We found that one LTR retrotransposon family
encompassing virus-like 30S elements (VL30) showed significant histone H3
hyperacetylation and strong transcriptional activation in response to TSA
treatment. Analysis of VL30 transcripts revealed that increased VL30
transcription is due to enhanced expression of a limited number of genomic
elements, with one locus being particularly responsive to HDAC inhibition.
Importantly, transcriptional induction of VL30 was entirely dependent on the
activation of MAP kinase pathways, resulting in serine 10 phosphorylation at
histone H3. Stimulation of MAP kinase cascades together with HDAC inhibition led 
to simultaneous phosphorylation and acetylation (phosphoacetylation) of histone
H3 at the VL30 regulatory region. The presence of the phosphoacetylation mark at 
VL30 LTRs was linked with full transcriptional activation of the mobile element. 
Our data indicate that the activity of different TEs is controlled by distinct
chromatin modifications. We show that activation of a specific mobile element is 
linked to a dual epigenetic mark and propose a model whereby phosphoacetylation
of histone H3 is crucial for full transcriptional activation of VL30 elements.

PMCID: PMC2861705
PMID: 20442873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Mol Cancer Ther. 2010 May;9(5):1361-70. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-09-0717. Epub 
2010 May 4.

Inhibition of histone deacetylase attenuates hypoxia-induced migration and
invasion of cancer cells via the restoration of RECK expression.

Jeon HW(1), Lee YM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, College of Natural Sciences,
Kyungpook National University, Daegu, Korea.

Hypoxia is a strong signal for cell migration and invasion in cancer. The
reversion-inducing cysteine-rich protein with Kazal motif (RECK), a tumor
suppressor, inhibits cancer cell migration and invasion and is frequently
silenced in aggressive tumor cells by histone deacetylases (HDAC). However, the
effect of RECK silencing in several cancer cells in a hypoxic microenvironment
has not been fully delineated. In this report, we investigated whether hypoxia
suppressed RECK expression and used HDAC inhibitor (HDACI) inhibition to restore 
RECK expression to inhibit cancer cell migration and invasion. HDACIs, including 
trichostatin A (TSA), completely rescued RECK expression, which was suppressed by
hypoxia, in the H-Ras-transformed human breast MCF10A and the HT1080 cell lines
(human fibrosarcoma). TSA suppressed the activity of matrix metalloproteinase-2
(MMP-2) and MMP-9, induced by hypoxia, and significantly inhibited
hypoxia-stimulated migration and invasion of both cancer cells. RECK
overexpression significantly inhibited the migration and invasion of cancer cells
induced by hypoxia. The hypoxic effect on the migration and invasion of cells was
equivalent to the effect seen using the small interfering RNA (siRNA) of RECK
under normoxia, suggesting an inhibitory role for RECK in hypoxic conditions. We 
also showed that siRNA silencing of HDAC1 suppressed hypoxia-induced RECK
downregulation and inhibited the migration and invasion of cancer cells. In
conclusion, the inhibition of HDAC successfully restored the expression of RECK
under hypoxic conditions. This resulted in the inhibition of cancer cell
migration and invasion through the repression of MMP-2 and MMP-9 activity.

PMID: 20442303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Biochem Pharmacol. 2010 Sep 15;80(6):867-73. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2010.04.026. Epub
2010 May 11.

Regulation of Nur77 protein turnover through acetylation and deacetylation
induced by p300 and HDAC1.

Kang SA(1), Na H, Kang HJ, Kim SH, Lee MH, Lee MO.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Bio-MAX Institute, and Research Institute of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Republic of
Korea.

Although the roles of Nur77, an orphan member of the nuclear hormone receptor
superfamily, in the control of cellular proliferation, apoptosis, inflammation,
and glucose metabolism, are well recognized, the molecular mechanism regulating
the activity and expression of Nur77 is not fully understood. Acetylation of
transcription factors has emerged recently as a major post-translational
modification that regulates protein stability and transcriptional activity. Here,
we examined whether Nur77 is acetylated, and we characterized potential
associated factors. First, Nur77 was found to be an acetylated protein when
examined by immunoprecipitation and western blotting using acetyl
protein-specific antibodies. Second, expression of p300, which possesses histone 
acetyltransferase activity, enhanced the acetylation and protein stability of
Nur77. Treatment with a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, trichostatin A,
also increased Nur77 acetylation. Among the several types of HDACs, HDAC1 was
found as the major enzyme affecting protein level of Nur77. HDAC1 decreased the
acetylation level, protein level, and transcriptional activity of Nur77.
Interestingly, overexpression of Nur77 induced expression of both p300 and HDAC1.
Finally, the expression of Nur77 increased along with that of p300, but decreased
with induction of HDAC1 after treatment with epithelial growth factor, nerve
growth factor, or 6-mercaptopurine, suggesting that the self-control of the
acetylation status contributes to the transient induction of Nur77 protein. Taken
together, these results demonstrate that acetylation of Nur77 is modulated by
p300 and HDAC1, and suggest that acetylation is an important post-translational
modification for the rapid turnover of Nur77 protein.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20438716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Mol Cell Biochem. 2010 Sep;342(1-2):151-61. doi: 10.1007/s11010-010-0479-5. Epub 
2010 May 1.

Epigenetics in anoxia tolerance: a role for histone deacetylases.

Krivoruchko A(1), Storey KB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
krivoruchko@gmail.com

The importance of epigenetics has been established in many key biological
processes but the relevance of this regulatory mechanism to animal survival of
low oxygen conditions has never been examined. To establish whether epigenetic
mechanisms could be involved in natural anoxia tolerance, we have examined the
anoxia-responsive expression of the transcriptional silencers, histone
deacetylases (HDACs), in tissues of a unique model for anoxia tolerance, the
freshwater turtle Trachemys scripta elegans. Transcript and protein levels of all
five HDACs rose by 1.3-4.6 and 1.7-3.5-fold, respectively, in skeletal muscle in 
response to 20 h of anoxia exposure. In addition, HDAC activity in the muscle
increased by 1.5-fold in response to 20 h of anoxia and levels of acetylated
histone H3 (Lys 9 or Lys 23) decreased to 40-60% of control values. The liver
displayed a milder response with HDAC1, -4, and -5 protein levels increasing by
1.6-2.1-fold after 5 h anoxia exposure; acetylated histone H3 levels also
decreased to 50-75% of control values. Only HDAC5 responded to anoxia exposure in
the heart; Hdac5 transcript levels increased 2.1-2.3-fold and HDAC5 protein rose 
by 3.3-fold. Overall, our results show a tissue-specific pattern of HDAC
upregulation in response to anoxia exposure in T.s. elegans, suggesting that
these enzymes play a key role in anoxia tolerance, probably by contributing to
the transcriptional silencing necessary in this hypometabolic state.

PMID: 20437082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Blood. 2010 Aug 19;116(7):1025-34. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-12-257485. Epub 2010
Apr 28.

Genomewide DNA methylation analysis reveals novel targets for drug development in
mantle cell lymphoma.

Leshchenko VV(1), Kuo PY, Shaknovich R, Yang DT, Gellen T, Petrich A, Yu Y,
Remache Y, Weniger MA, Rafiq S, Suh KS, Goy A, Wilson W, Verma A, Braunschweig I,
Muthusamy N, Kahl BS, Byrd JC, Wiestner A, Melnick A, Parekh S.

Author information: 
(1)Albert Einstein Cancer Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300
Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is a mostly incurable malignancy arising from naive B 
cells (NBCs) in the mantle zone of lymph nodes. We analyzed genomewide
methylation in MCL patients with the HELP (HpaII tiny fragment Enrichment by
Ligation-mediated PCR) assay and found significant aberrancy in promoter
methylation patterns compared with normal NBCs. Using biologic and statistical
criteria, we further identified 4 hypermethylated genes CDKN2B, MLF-1, PCDH8, and
HOXD8 and 4 hypomethylated genes CD37, HDAC1, NOTCH1, and CDK5 when aberrant
methylation was associated with inverse changes in mRNA levels.
Immunohistochemical analysis of an independent cohort of MCL patient samples
confirmed CD37 surface expression in 93% of patients, validating its selection as
a target for MCL therapy. Treatment of MCL cell lines with a small modular
immunopharmaceutical (CD37-SMIP) resulted in significant loss of viability in
cell lines with intense surface CD37 expression. Treatment of MCL cell lines with
the DNA methyltransferase inhibitor decitabine resulted in reversal of aberrant
hypermethylation and synergized with the histone deacetylase inhibitor
suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid in induction of the hypermethylated genes and
anti-MCL cytotoxicity. Our data show prominent and aberrant promoter methylation 
in MCL and suggest that differentially methylated genes can be targeted for
therapeutic benefit in MCL.

PMCID: PMC2938124
PMID: 20427703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2010 Jun;14(6):577-84. doi: 10.1517/14728221003796609.

Class I histone deacetylases 1, 2 and 3 are highly expressed in classical
Hodgkin's lymphoma.

Adams H(1), Fritzsche FR, Dirnhofer S, Kristiansen G, Tzankov A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Pathology, Zurich University Hospital, Schmelzbergstrasse 12,
CH-8091 Zurich, Switzerland. heiner.adams@usz.ch

OBJECTIVE: HDAC inhibitors (HDI) are anti-neoplastic drugs with preliminary
successful clinical applications in Hodgkin's lymphoma (HL). Systematic
investigations of HDAC expression in HL, based on histology and
immunohistochemistry are yet rare.
RESEARCH DESIGN/METHODS: We investigated the expression of HDAC1, 2 and 3 in 283 
HL on tissue microarrays.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Expression of HDAC isoforms was scored in Hodgkin and
Reed-Sternberg cells (HRSC) and background infiltrate and compared with freedom
of treatment failure (FTF) in 118 cases, for which all data was available.
RESULTS: All analyzable HL expressed the HDAC isoforms 2 (n = 194) and 3 (n =
207) in over 50%, mostly 100%, of HRSC and almost all background lymphocytes.
HDAC1 was expressed in 169 of 179 analyzable HL in a mean of 82% and in 172 out
of 179 analyzable cases in a mean of 83% of infiltrating lymphocytes. HDAC1 of
below 75% in HRSC correlated with worse FTF with 16 out of 32 events, compared
with 16 out of 82 in cases with over 75% HDAC1-expressing HRSC.
CONCLUSION: HDAC isoforms 1, 2 and 3 are highly expressed in HL. In addition,
decreased HDAC1 expression is accompanied by worse outcome in HL.

PMID: 20415600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Clin Cancer Res. 2010 Jun 15;16(12):3240-52. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-0395. 
Epub 2010 Apr 22.

HDAC5 and HDAC9 in medulloblastoma: novel markers for risk stratification and
role in tumor cell growth.

Milde T(1), Oehme I, Korshunov A, Kopp-Schneider A, Remke M, Northcott P, Deubzer
HE, Lodrini M, Taylor MD, von Deimling A, Pfister S, Witt O.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Cooperation Unit Pediatric Oncology, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg, Germany. t.milde@dkfz.de

PURPOSE: Medulloblastomas are the most common malignant brain tumors in
childhood. Survivors suffer from high morbidity because of therapy-related side
effects. Thus, therapies targeting tumors in a specific manner with small
molecules such as histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are urgently warranted.
This study investigated the expression levels of individual human HDAC family
members in primary medulloblastoma samples, their potential as risk
stratification markers, and their roles in tumor cell growth.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Gene expression arrays were used to screen for HDAC1 through
HDAC11. Using quantitative real time reverse transcriptase-PCR and
immunohistochemistry, we studied the expression of HDAC5 and HDAC9 in primary
medulloblastoma samples. In addition, we conducted functional studies using
siRNA-mediated knockdown of HDAC5 and HDAC9 in medulloblastoma cells.
RESULTS: HDAC5 and HDAC9 showed the highest expression in prognostically poor
subgroups. This finding was validated in an independent set of medulloblastoma
samples. High HDAC5 and HDAC9 expression was significantly associated with poor
overall survival, with high HDAC5 and HDAC9 expression posing an independent risk
factor. Immunohistochemistry revealed a strong expression of HDAC5 and HDAC9
proteins in most of all primary medulloblastomas investigated. siRNA-mediated
knockdown of HDAC5 or HDAC9 in medulloblastoma cells resulted in decreased cell
growth and cell viability.
CONCLUSION: HDAC5 and HDAC9 are significantly upregulated in high-risk
medulloblastoma in comparison with low-risk medulloblastoma, and their expression
is associated with poor survival. Thus, HDAC5 and HDAC9 may be valuable markers
for risk stratification. Because our functional studies point toward a role in
medulloblastoma cell growth, HDAC5 and HDAC9 may potentially be novel drug
targets.

(c) 2010 AACR.

PMID: 20413433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 May 4;107(18):8242-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1000478107. Epub 2010 Apr 19.

Histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), but not HDAC2, controls embryonic stem cell
differentiation.

Dovey OM(1), Foster CT, Cowley SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Leicester, Leicester LE1 9HN, United
Kingdom.

Histone deacetylases (HDAC) 1 and 2 are highly similar enzymes that help regulate
chromatin structure as the core catalytic components of corepressor complexes.
Although tissue-specific deletion of HDAC1 and HDAC2 has demonstrated functional 
redundancy, germ-line deletion of HDAC1 in the mouse causes early embryonic
lethality, whereas HDAC2 does not. To address the unique requirement for HDAC1 in
early embryogenesis we have generated conditional knockout embryonic stem (ES)
cells in which HDAC1 or HDAC2 genes can be inactivated. Deletion of HDAC1, but
not HDAC2, causes a significant reduction in the HDAC activity of Sin3A, NuRD,
and CoREST corepressor complexes. This reduced corepressor activity results in a 
specific 1.6-fold increase in histone H3 K56 acetylation (H3K56Ac), thus
providing genetic evidence that H3K56Ac is a substrate of HDAC1. In culture, ES
cell proliferation was unaffected by loss of either HDAC1 or HDAC2. Rather, we
find that loss of HDAC1 affects ES cell differentiation. ES cells lacking either 
HDAC1 or HDAC2 were capable of forming embryoid bodies (EBs), which stimulates
differentiation into the three primary germ layers. However, HDAC1-deficient EBs 
were significantly smaller, showed spontaneous rhythmic contraction, and
increased expression of both cardiomyocyte and neuronal markers. In summary, our 
genetic study of HDAC1 and HDAC2 in ES cells, which mimic the embryonic epiblast,
has identified a unique requirement for HDAC1 in the optimal activity of HDAC1/2 
corepressor complexes and cell fate determination during differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2889513
PMID: 20404188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jun 11;285(24):18166-76. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.077024. Epub
2010 Apr 16.

Double PHD fingers protein DPF2 recognizes acetylated histones and suppresses the
function of estrogen-related receptor alpha through histone deacetylase 1.

Matsuyama R(1), Takada I, Yokoyama A, Fujiyma-Nakamura S, Tsuji N, Kitagawa H,
Fujiki R, Kim M, Kouzu-Fujita M, Yano T, Kato S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, University of Tokyo, Yayoi
1-1-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0032, Japan.

Retraction in
    J Biol Chem. 2015 Feb 20;290(8):4816.

Estrogen-related receptor alpha (ERRalpha) is a member of the nuclear receptor
superfamily and regulates many physiological functions, including mitochondrial
biogenesis and lipid metabolism. ERRalpha enhances the transactivation function
without endogenous ligand by associating with coactivators such as peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1 alpha and beta (PGC-1alpha
and -beta) and members of the steroid receptor coactivator family. However, the
molecular mechanism by which the transactivation function of ERRalpha is
converted from a repressive state to an active state is poorly understood. Here
we used biochemical purification techniques to identify ERRalpha-associated
proteins in HeLa cells stably expressing ERRalpha. Interestingly, we found that
double PHD fingers protein DPF2/BAF45d suppressed PGC-1alpha-dependent
transactivation of ERRalpha by recognizing acetylated histone H3 and associating 
with HDAC1. DPF2 directly bound to ERRalpha and suppressed the transactivation
function of nuclear receptors such as androgen receptor. DPF2 was recruited to
ERR target gene promoters in myoblast cells, and knockdown of DPF2 derepressed
the level of mRNA expressed by target genes of ERRalpha. These results show that 
DPF2 acts as a nuclear receptor-selective co-repressor for ERRalpha by
associating with both acetylated histone H3 and HDAC1.

PMCID: PMC2881740
PMID: 20400511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Mol Cancer. 2010 Apr 16;9:80. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-80.

HDAC2 attenuates TRAIL-induced apoptosis of pancreatic cancer cells.

Schüler S(1), Fritsche P, Diersch S, Arlt A, Schmid RM, Saur D, Schneider G.

Author information: 
(1)Technische Universität München, Klinikum rechts der Isar, II, Medizinische
Klinik, Ismaninger Str, 22, 81675 Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is one of the most malignant 
tumors with a dismal prognosis and no effective conservative therapeutic
strategies. Although it is demonstrated that histone deacetylases (HDACs),
especially the class I HDACs HDAC1, 2 and 3 are highly expressed in this disease,
little is known about HDAC isoenzyme specific functions.
RESULTS: Depletion of HDAC2, but not HDAC1, in the pancreatic cancer cell lines
MiaPaCa2 and Panc1 resulted in a marked sensitization towards the tumor necrosis 
factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL). Correspondingly, the more class
I selective HDAC inhibitor (HDACI) valproic acid (VPA) synergized with TRAIL to
induce apoptosis of MiaPaCa2 and Panc1 cells. At the molecular level, an
increased expression of the TRAIL receptor 1 (DR5), accelerated processing of
caspase 8, pronounced cleavage of the BH3-only protein Bid, and increased
effector caspase activation was observed in HDAC2-depleted and TRAIL-treated
MiaPaCa2 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data characterize a novel HDAC2 function in PDAC cells and point
to a strategy to overcome TRAIL resistance of PDAC cells, a prerequisite to
succeed with a TRAIL targeted therapy in clinical settings.

PMCID: PMC2867820
PMID: 20398369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 Jul;1799(7):502-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2010.04.001. 
Epub 2010 Apr 11.

Mechanisms of p53-mediated repression of the human polycystic kidney disease-1
promoter.

van Bodegom D(1), Roessingh W, Pridjian A, El Dahr SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Pediatric Nephrology, Tulane University
Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA.

We previously reported that the tumor suppressor protein p53 participates in a
negative feedback loop to fine-tune PKD1 gene expression. This physiological
pathway is believed to prevent polycystin-1 overexpression and thus renal cysts. 
The present study examined the mechanisms of p53-mediated repression of PKD1. The
5'-upstream region of the human PKD1 gene is TATA-less, GC-rich, and contains
four consensus p53 binding sites at positions -2.7 kb (BS4), -1.2 kb (BS3), -0.8 
kb (BS2), and -0.2 kb (BS1), respectively. PKD1BS1-4 are bound to endogenous p53 
in vivo and in vitro. Transient transfection assays in inner medullary collecting
duct cells revealed that disruption of PKD1BS1 enhances baseline PKD1 promoter
activity; in contrast, disruption of PKD1BS4 suppressed PKD1 transcription.
PKD1BS1 confers p53-mediated repression when substituted for the p53 enhancer
element in the bradykinin B2 receptor gene, indicating that PKD1BS1 is a bona
fide p53 repressor element. Moreover, PKD1BS1 requires intact BS2-4 and cellular 
histone deacetylase activity for full functional activity. Indeed, the PKD1BS1/4 
regions are occupied by a complex containing HDAC1/2 and mSin3. These findings
suggest a model whereby p53 exerts a biphasic control on PKD1 gene transcription,
depending on cellular context and the cognate cis-acting element.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2893251
PMID: 20388565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jun 4;285(23):17417-24. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.089250. Epub 2010
Apr 12.

Redox signaling, alkylation (carbonylation) of conserved cysteines inactivates
class I histone deacetylases 1, 2, and 3 and antagonizes their transcriptional
repressor function.

Doyle K(1), Fitzpatrick FA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, University of Utah School of Pharmacy, Salt
Lake City, Utah 84112, USA.

Cells use redox signaling to adapt to oxidative stress. For instance, certain
transcription factors exist in a latent state that may be disrupted by oxidative 
modifications that activate their transcription potential. We hypothesized that
DNA-binding sites (response elements) for redox-sensitive transcription factors
may also exist in a latent state, maintained by co-repressor complexes containing
class I histone deacetylase (HDAC) enzymes, and that HDAC inactivation by
oxidative stress may antagonize deacetylase activity and unmask
electrophile-response elements, thus activating transcription. Electrophiles
suitable to test this hypothesis include reactive carbonyl species, often derived
from peroxidation of arachidonic acid. We report that alpha,beta-unsaturated
carbonyl compounds, e.g. the cyclopentenone prostaglandin,
15-deoxy-Delta12,14-PGJ(2) (15d-PGJ(2)), and 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (4HNE), alkylate
(carbonylate), a subset of class I HDACs including HDAC1, -2, and -3, but not
HDAC8. Covalent modification at two conserved cysteine residues, corresponding to
Cys(261) and Cys(273) in HDAC1, coincided with attenuation of histone deacetylase
activity, changes in histone H3 and H4 acetylation patterns, derepression of a
LEF1.beta-catenin model system, and transcription of HDAC-repressed genes, e.g.
heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1), Gadd45, and HSP70. Identification of particular class I 
HDACs as components of the redox/electrophile-responsive proteome offers a basis 
for understanding how cells stratify their responses to varying degrees of
pathophysiological oxidative stress associated with inflammation, cancer, and
metabolic syndrome.

PMCID: PMC2878505
PMID: 20385560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. PLoS One. 2010 Mar 29;5(3):e9912. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009912.

Transcription of human resistin gene involves an interaction of Sp1 with
peroxisome proliferator-activating receptor gamma (PPARgamma).

Singh AK(1), Battu A, Mohareer K, Hasnain SE, Ehtesham NZ.

Author information: 
(1)University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad, India.

BACKGROUND: Resistin is a cysteine rich protein, mainly expressed and secreted by
circulating human mononuclear cells. While several factors responsible for
transcription of mouse resistin gene have been identified, not much is known
about the factors responsible for the differential expression of human resistin.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDING: We show that the minimal promoter of human
resistin lies within approximately 80 bp sequence upstream of the transcriptional
start site (-240) whereas binding sites for cRel, CCAAT enhancer binding protein 
alpha (C/EBP-alpha), activating transcription factor 2 (ATF-2) and activator
protein 1 (AP-1) transcription factors, important for induced expression, are
present within sequences up to -619. Specificity Protein 1(Sp1) binding site
(-276 to -295) is also present and an interaction of Sp1 with peroxisome
proliferator activating receptor gamma (PPARgamma) is necessary for constitutive 
expression in U937 cells. Indeed co-immunoprecipitation assay demonstrated a
direct physical interaction of Sp1 with PPARgamma in whole cell extracts of U937 
cells. Phorbol myristate acetate (PMA) upregulated the expression of resistin
mRNA in U937 cells by increasing the recruitment of Sp1, ATF-2 and PPARgamma on
the resistin gene promoter. Furthermore, PMA stimulation of U937 cells resulted
in the disruption of Sp1 and PPARgamma interaction. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) assay confirmed the recruitment of transcription factors phospho ATF-2,
Sp1, Sp3, PPARgamma, chromatin modifier histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and the
acetylated form of histone H3 but not cRel, C/EBP-alpha and phospho c-Jun during 
resistin gene transcription.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest a complex interplay of Sp1 and PPARgamma along
with other transcription factors that drives the expression of resistin in human 
monocytic U937 cells.

PMCID: PMC2848011
PMID: 20360975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2010 Jun;21(6):1003-13. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2009070690. Epub 2010 
Apr 1.

ATF3-mediated epigenetic regulation protects against acute kidney injury.

Li HF(1), Cheng CF, Liao WJ, Lin H, Yang RB.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, 
Taiwan.

A variety of stress stimuli, including ischemia-reperfusion (I/R) injury, induce 
the transcriptional repressor ATF3 in the kidney. The functional consequences of 
this upregulation in ATF3 after renal I/R injury are not well understood. Here,
we found that ATF3-deficient mice had higher renal I/R-induced mortality, kidney 
dysfunction, inflammation (number of infiltrating neutrophils, myeloperoxidase
activity, and induction of IL-6 and P-selectin), and apoptosis compared with
wild-type mice. Furthermore, gene transfer of ATF3 to the kidney rescued the
renal I/R-induced injuries in the ATF3-deficient mice. Molecular and biochemical 
analysis revealed that ATF3 interacted directly with histone deacetylase 1
(HDAC1) and recruited HDAC1 into the ATF/NF-kappaB sites in the IL-6 and IL-12b
gene promoters. The ATF3-associated HDAC1 deacetylated histones, which resulted
in the condensation of chromatin structure, interference of NF-kappaB binding,
and inhibition of inflammatory gene transcription after I/R injury. Taken
together, these data demonstrate epigenetic regulation mediated by the
stress-inducible gene ATF3 after renal I/R injury and suggest potential targeted 
approaches for acute kidney injury.

PMCID: PMC2900964
PMID: 20360311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Postepy Hig Med Dosw (Online). 2010 Mar 16;64:100-14.

[Molecular mechanisms of parthenolide's action: Old drug with a new face].

[Article in Polish]

Koprowska K(1), Czyz M.

Author information: 
(1)Zaklad Biologii Molekularnej Nowotworów, Wydzial Lekarski Uniwersytetu
Medycznego w Lodzi.

Parthenolide, a sesquiterpene lactone derived from the leaves of feverfew
(Tanacetum parthenium), is considered a main bioactive component of this herb.
Feverfew has been used orally or as an infusion for the treatment of migraine,
arthritis, fever, and stomachache. Besides its anti-inflammatory and
anti-migraine properties, parthenolide also shows anticancer activities in a
variety of cell lines. It contains an alpha-methylene-gamma-lactone ring and an
epoxide moiety which are able to interact with nucleophilic sites of biologically
important molecules. Parthenolide modulates multiple targets, thereby
contributing to its various in vitro and in vivo effects. Inhibition of NF-kappaB
activity, constitutive in many types of cancers, via either interaction with IKK 
or more directly with the p65 subunit of NF-kappaB, is considered one of the main
mechanisms of its action. In addition, inhibition of STAT and MAP kinase
activities and the induction of sustained JNK activity as well as p53 activity
via influencing MDM2 and HDAC1 levels lead to an increased susceptibility of
cancer cells to chemo- and radiotherapy. At the epigenetic level, parthenolide
reduces HDAC1 level and, by inhibiting DNMT2 activity, induces global
hypomethylation of DNA, which can restore the expressions of some suppressor
genes. Moreover, this compound reduces the cellular level of GSH in cancer cells,
followed by ROS accumulation and apoptosis. A unique property of parthenolide is 
its ability to induce cell death mainly in cancer cells, while sparing healthy
ones and it also protects normal cells from UVB and oxidative stress. More
remarkably, it seems to have the potential to target some cancer stem cells. Its 
wide array of biological activity and low toxicity make parthenolide a very
promising drug with multi-pharmacological potential, largely dependent on the
cellular context.

PMID: 20354259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2010;22(4):613-24. doi: 10.1071/RD09108.

Abnormalities in the transcription of reprogramming genes related to global
epigenetic events of cloned endangered felid embryos.

Imsoonthornruksa S(1), Lorthongpanich C, Sangmalee A, Srirattana K,
Laowtammathron C, Tunwattana W, Somsa W, Ketudat-Cairns M, Parnpai R.

Author information: 
(1)Embryo Technology and Stem Cell Research Center, School of Biotechnology,
Institute of Agricultural Technology, Suranaree University of Technology, Nakhon 
Ratchasima 30000, Thailand.

The present study examined transcription levels of the Oct4, DNMT1, DNMT3a,
DNMT3b, HAT1 and HDAC1 genes in cloned felid embryos developing from single
one-cell to blastocyst stages. IVF, cloned domestic and leopard cat embryos had
low Oct4 and HAT1 levels during the early stages, but transcript expression
increased at the eight-cell and blastocyst stages. In contrast, expression in the
cloned marble cat embryos was low at all stages. Transcription patterns of HDAC1 
were altered in cloned embryos compared with IVF embryos. Transcription levels of
DNMT1 decreased markedly throughout development of both IVF and cloned embryos.
In IVF embryos, DNMT3a transcripts rarely appeared in the four- to eight-cell
stages, but levels increased in the morula to blastocyst stages. In contrast, in 
cloned embryos, DNMT3a transcript levels were high at the one- to two-cell
stages, decreased during subsequent cell division and then increased again at the
blastocyst stage. The IVF and cloned embryos showed similar DNMT3b transcription 
patterns, starting with low levels at the two-cell to morula stages and reaching 
a maximum at the blastocyst stage. These results suggest that the low level of
Oct4 transcripts may be responsible, in part, for the failure of blastocyst
production in the cloned marbled cat. However, higher transcription of the DNA
methylation genes and lower transcription of the histone acetylation genes were
observed in cloned compared with IVF embryos, suggesting that the felids' donor
nucleus could not completely reprogramme the nuclear genome and so the
re-establishment of embryonic totipotency was not achieved.

PMID: 20353721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Blood. 2010 Jul 22;116(3):406-17. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-07-235663. Epub 2010
Mar 29.

Histone deacetylases are critical targets of bortezomib-induced cytotoxicity in
multiple myeloma.

Kikuchi J(1), Wada T, Shimizu R, Izumi T, Akutsu M, Mitsunaga K, Noborio-Hatano
K, Nobuyoshi M, Ozawa K, Kano Y, Furukawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Stem Cell Regulation, Center for Molecular Medicine, Jichi Medical
University, Shimotsuke, Tochigi, Japan.

Comment in
    Blood. 2010 Jul 22;116(3):308-9.

Bortezomib is now widely used for the treatment of multiple myeloma (MM);
however, its action mechanisms are not fully understood. Despite the initial
results, recent investigations have indicated that bortezomib does not inactivate
nuclear factor-kappaB activity in MM cells, suggesting the presence of other
critical pathways leading to cytotoxicity. In this study, we show that histone
deacetylases (HDACs) are critical targets of bortezomib, which specifically
down-regulated the expression of class I HDACs (HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3) in MM
cell lines and primary MM cells at the transcriptional level, accompanied by
reciprocal histone hyperacetylation. Transcriptional repression of HDACs was
mediated by caspase-8-dependent degradation of Sp1 protein, the most potent
transactivator of class I HDAC genes. Short-interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of
HDAC1 enhanced bortezomib-induced apoptosis and histone hyperacetylation, whereas
HDAC1 overexpression inhibited them. HDAC1 overexpression conferred resistance to
bortezomib in MM cells, and administration of the HDAC inhibitor romidepsin
restored sensitivity to bortezomib in HDAC1-overexpressing cells both in vitro
and in vivo. These results suggest that bortezomib targets HDACs via distinct
mechanisms from conventional HDAC inhibitors. Our findings provide a novel
molecular basis and rationale for the use of bortezomib in MM treatment.

PMID: 20351311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Curr Pharm Des. 2010 Jun;16(16):1877-81.

The natural tumor suppressor protein maspin and potential application in non
small cell lung cancer.

Lonardo F(1), Li X, Kaplun A, Soubani A, Sethi S, Gadgeel S, Sheng S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Barbara
Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

The grim prognosis of lung cancer, that has an overall 10-15% survival at 5
years, remains in the US the leading cause of cancer mortality, provides a
compelling rationale for studying the molecular basis of this malignancy.
Surmising the common, general association with smoking, lung cancers differ at
the microscopic, anatomical, epidemiological and clinical level and harbor
complex genetic and epigenetic alterations. Currently, lung cancer is divided
into small cell lung carcinoma (SCLC) and non small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC)
for the purpose of clinical management. (NSCLC) constitutes 80-85% of lung
cancers and is further divided into histological subtypes such as adenocarcinoma,
squamous cell carcinoma, and large cell carcinoma, etc. The ultimate goal for
lung cancer research is to develop a strategy to block the tumor progression and 
improve the prognosis of lung cancer. This goal can realistically be achieved
only when the biological complexity of this disease is taken into account. To
this end, identification and understanding of molecular markers that are
mechanistically involved in tumor progression is needed. Our recent studies
suggest histological subtype-dependent distinct correlations between the
expression and/or subcellular localization of tumor suppressive maspin with the
progression and prognosis of NSCLC. Maspin is an epithelial specific member of
the serine protease inhibitor (serpin) superfamily but recently identified as an 
endogenous inhibitor of histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1). This novel biochemical
activity coincides with a consensus emerged recently from the evidence that
nuclear maspin confers better differentiated epithelial phenotypes, decreased
tumor angiogenesis, increased tumor sensitivity to drug-induced apoptosis, and a 
more favorable prognosis. In the current review, we discuss the evidence that
maspin may be a marker that stratifies the progression and prognosis of different
subtypes of NSCLC.

PMCID: PMC2908495
PMID: 20337574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Apr 16;394(4):1063-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.03.125. Epub 2010 Mar 21.

Cohesion establishment factor, Eco1 represses transcription via association with 
histone demethylase, LSD1.

Choi HK(1), Kim BJ, Seo JH, Kang JS, Cho H, Kim ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Sungkyunkwan University School of
Medicine, Suwon 440-746, Republic of Korea.

Accurate chromosome segregation during cell division requires physical attachment
of two sister chromatids from DNA replication until mitosis, a process known as
sister chromatid cohesion. Sister chromatid cohesion is mediated by a
four-subunit cohesin complex that connects sister chromatids by encircling them
as molecular rings. Eco1 is an essential acetyltransferase required for the
establishment of sister chromatid cohesion. Eco1 acetylates Smc3 and Mcd1 (Rad21)
to establish cohesion during S phase and in response to DNA damage, respectively.
Here, we show that Eco1 repress transcription in a dose-dependent manner.
Mutations of zinc-finger domain or acetyltransferase domain did not significantly
affect the transcriptional repression activity of Eco1. We observed that histone 
demethylase, Lsd1 interacts with Eco1 and is required for the transcriptional
repression activity of Eco1. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) experiments
show that Eco1 facilitates the demethylation of lysine 4 of histone H3. Taken
together, we provide the first evidence that Eco1 represses transcription by
interacting with histone demethylase, LSD1 to convert chromatin to inactive
state.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20331966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Mol Cancer. 2010 Mar 19;9:64. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-64.

Epidermal growth factor receptor regulates beta-catenin location, stability, and 
transcriptional activity in oral cancer.

Lee CH(1), Hung HW, Hung PH, Shieh YS.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, National Defense Medical Center,
Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Many cancerous cells accumulate beta-catenin in the nucleus. We
examined the role of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling in the
accumulation of beta-catenin in the nuclei of oral cancer cells.
RESULTS: We used two strains of cultured oral cancer cells, one with reduced EGFR
expression (OECM1 cells) and one with elevated EGFR expression (SAS cells), and
measured downstream effects, such as phosphorylation of beta-catenin and
GSK-3beta, association of beta-catenin with E-cadherin, and target gene
regulation. We also studied the expression of EGFR, beta-catenin, and cyclin D1
in 112 samples of oral cancer by immunostaining. Activation of EGFR signaling
increased the amount of beta-catenin in the nucleus and decreased the amount in
the membranes. EGF treatment increased phosphorylation of beta-catenin (tyrosine)
and GSK-3beta(Ser-(9), resulting in a loss of beta-catenin association with
E-cadherin. TOP-FLASH and FOP-FLASH reporter assays demonstrated that the EGFR
signal regulates beta-catenin transcriptional activity and mediates cyclin D1
expression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments indicated that the EGFR
signal affects chromatin architecture at the regulatory element of cyclin D1, and
that the CBP, HDAC1, and Suv39h1 histone/chromatin remodeling complex is involved
in this process. Immunostaining showed a significant association between EGFR
expression and aberrant accumulation of beta-catenin in oral cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: EGFR signaling regulates beta-catenin localization and stability,
target gene expression, and tumor progression in oral cancer. Moreover, our data 
suggest that aberrant accumulation of beta-catenin under EGFR activation is a
malignancy marker of oral cancer.

PMCID: PMC2850885
PMID: 20302655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Autoimmun. 2010 Aug;35(1):58-69. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2010.02.002. Epub 2010 Mar
11.

Epigenetics and SLE: RFX1 downregulation causes CD11a and CD70 overexpression by 
altering epigenetic modifications in lupus CD4+ T cells.

Zhao M(1), Sun Y, Gao F, Wu X, Tang J, Yin H, Luo Y, Richardson B, Lu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Epigenetic Research Center, Second Xiangya
Hospital, Central South University, #139 Renmin Middle Rd, Changsha, Hunan
410011, PR China.

DNA demethylation and histone hyperacetylation of CD11a and CD70 regulatory
regions contribute to the development of autoreactivity and autoantibody
overstimulation in CD4(+) T cells of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE). However, the mechanisms causing these changes remain largely unknown. We
report that the expression and activity of the transcription factor RFX1 are
decreased in SLE CD4(+) T cells. We demonstrate that RFX1 affects DNA methylation
and histone acetylation in CD4(+) T cells by recruiting the co-repressors DNMT1
and HDAC1 to the CD11a and CD70 promoters, and thereby represses their
expression. Reducing RFX1 in CD4(+) T cells is sufficient to cause lupus-like T
and B cell hyperactivity, whereas overexpressing RFX1 suppresses T cell
reactivity. These findings reveal a crucial role for RFX1 in regulating the
epigenetic status of T cells, and demonstrate that autoimmune responses in SLE
are due in part to RFX1 downregulation.

PMID: 20223637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. J Biomed Sci. 2010 Mar 10;17:16. doi: 10.1186/1423-0127-17-16.

Sodium valproate-induced congenital cardiac abnormalities in mice are associated 
with the inhibition of histone deacetylase.

Wu G(1), Nan C, Rollo JC, Huang X, Tian J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, the Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing, China.

BACKGROUND: Valproic acid, a widely used anticonvulsant drug, is a potent
teratogen resulting in various congenital abnormalities. However, the mechanisms 
underlying valproic acid induced teratogenesis are nor clear. Recent studies
indicate that histone deacetylase is a direct target of valproic acid.
METHODS: In the present study, we have used histological analysis and RT-PCR
assays to examine the cardiac abnormalities in mice treated with sodium valproate
(NaVP) and determined the effects of NaVP on histone deacetylase activity and the
expression of heart development-related genes in mouse myocardial cells.
RESULTS: The experimental data show that NaVP can induce cardiac abnormalities in
fetal mice in a dose-dependent manner. NaVP causes a dose-dependent inhibition of
hitone deacetylase (HDAC) activity in mouse myocardial cells. However, the
expression levels of HDAC (both HDAC1 and HDAC2) are not significantly changed in
fetal mouse hearts after administration of NaVP in pregnant mice. The
transcriptional levels of other heart development-related genes, such as CHF1,
Tbx5 and MEF2, are significantly increased in fetal mouse hearts treated with
NaVP.
CONCLUSIONS: The study indicates that administration of NaVP in pregnant mice can
result in various cardiac abnormalities in fetal hearts, which is associated with
an inhibition of histone deacetylase without altering the transcription of this
enzyme.

PMCID: PMC2841099
PMID: 20219112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Mar 23;107(12):5605-10. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0910578107. Epub 2010 Mar 8.

Epigenetic alterations regulate estradiol-induced enhancement of memory
consolidation.

Zhao Z(1), Fan L, Frick KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology and Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program, Yale
University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

The involvement of epigenetic alterations in mediating effects of estrogens on
memory is unknown. The present study determined whether histone acetylation and
DNA methylation are critical for the potent estrogen 17beta-estradiol (E(2)) to
enhance object recognition memory. We show that dorsal hippocampal E(2) infusion 
increases acetylation of dorsal hippocampal histone H3, but not H4--an effect
blocked by dorsal hippocampal inhibition of ERK activation. Further,
intrahippocampal inhibition of ERK activation or DNA methyltransferase (DNMT)
activity blocked the memory-enhancing effects of E(2). Consistent with these
effects, E(2) decreased levels of HDAC2 protein and increased DNMT expression in 
the dorsal hippocampus. These findings provide evidence that the beneficial
effects of E(2) on memory consolidation are associated with epigenetic
alterations, and suggest these can be triggered by dorsal hippocampal ERK
signaling.

PMCID: PMC2851775
PMID: 20212170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. ChemMedChem. 2010 Apr 6;5(4):598-607. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.200900494.

Synthesis of N-hydroxycinnamides capped with a naturally occurring moiety as
inhibitors of histone deacetylase.

Huang WJ(1), Chen CC, Chao SW, Lee SS, Hsu FL, Lu YL, Hung MF, Chang CI.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Pharmacognosy, Taipei Medical University, 250 Wu-Xing
Street, Taipei 110, Taiwan.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are regarded as promising therapeutics for 
the treatment of cancer. All reported HDAC inhibitors contain three
pharmacophoric features: a zinc-chelating group, a hydrophobic linker, and a
hydrophobic cap for surface recognition. In this study we investigated the
effectiveness of osthole, a hydrophobic Chinese herbal compound, as the surface
recognition cap in hydroxamate-based compounds as inhibitors of HDAC. Nine novel 
osthole-based N-hydroxycinnamides were synthesized and screened for enzyme
inhibition activity. Compounds 9 d, 9 e, 9 g exhibited inhibitory activities
(IC(50)=24.5, 20.0, 19.6 nM) against nuclear HDACs in HeLa cells comparable to
that of suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA; IC(50)=24.5 nM), a potent
inhibitor clinically used for the treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL). 
While compounds 9 d and 9 e showed SAHA-like activity towards HDAC1 and HDAC6,
compound 9 g was more selective for HDAC1. Compound 9 d exhibited the best
cellular effect, which was comparable to that of SAHA, of enhancing acetylation
of either alpha-tubulin or histone H3. Molecular docking analysis showed that the
osthole moiety of compound 9 d may interact with the same hydrophobic surface
pocket exploited by SAHA and it may be modified to provide class-specific
selectivity. These results suggest that osthole is an effective hydrophobic cap
when incorporated into N-hydroxycinnamide-derived HDAC inhibitors.

PMID: 20209563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Blood. 2010 Jul 22;116(3):475-84. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-07-232132. Epub 2010
Mar 4.

NF-kappaB balances vascular regression and angiogenesis via chromatin remodeling 
and NFAT displacement.

Aurora AB(1), Biyashev D, Mirochnik Y, Zaichuk TA, Sánchez-Martinez C, Renault
MA, Losordo D, Volpert OV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

Erratum in
    Blood. 2010 Dec 2;116(23):5079. Aurora, Aryn B [corrected to Aurora, Arin B].

Comment in
    Blood. 2010 Jul 22;116(3):312-3.

Extracellular factors control the angiogenic switch in endothelial cells (ECs)
via competing survival and apoptotic pathways. Previously, we showed that
proangiogenic and antiangiogenic factors target the same signaling molecules,
which thereby become pivots of angiogenic balance. Here we show that in
remodeling endothelium (ECs and EC precursors) natural angiogenic inhibitors
enhance nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) DNA binding, which is critical for
antiangiogenesis, and that blocking the NF-kappaB pathway abolishes multiple
antiangiogenic events in vitro and in vivo. NF-kappaB induction by antiangiogenic
molecules has a dual effect on transcription. NF-kappaB acts as an activator of
proapoptotic FasL and as a repressor of prosurvival cFLIP. On the FasL promoter, 
NF-kappaB increases the recruitment of HAT p300 and acetylated histones H3 and
H4. Conversely, on cFLIP promoter, NF-kappaB increases histone deacetylase 1
(HDAC1), decreases p300 and histone acetylation, and reduces the recruitment of
NFAT, a transcription factor critical for cFLIP expression. Finally, we found a
biphasic effect, when HDAC inhibitors (HDACi) were used to test the dependence of
pigment epithelial-derived factor activity on histone acetylation. The
cooperative effect seen at low doses switches to antagonistic as the
concentrations increase. Our study defines an interactive transcriptional network
underlying angiogenic balance and points to HDACi as tools to manipulate the
angiogenic switch.

PMCID: PMC2913457
PMID: 20203265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Leukoc Biol. 2010 Jun;87(6):1103-14. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0509363. Epub 2010 Mar 3.

Differential effects of selective HDAC inhibitors on macrophage inflammatory
responses to the Toll-like receptor 4 agonist LPS.

Halili MA(1), Andrews MR, Labzin LI, Schroder K, Matthias G, Cao C, Lovelace E,
Reid RC, Le GT, Hume DA, Irvine KM, Matthias P, Fairlie DP, Sweet MJ.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Queensland, Institute for Molecular Bioscience, S. Lucia,
Brisbane, Queensland, 4072, Australia.

Comment in
    J Leukoc Biol. 2010 Dec;88(6):1063-4; author reply 1065-6.

Broad-spectrum inhibitors of HDACs are therapeutic in many inflammatory disease
models but exacerbated disease in a mouse model of atherosclerosis. HDAC
inhibitors have anti- and proinflammatory effects on macrophages in vitro. We
report here that several broad-spectrum HDAC inhibitors, including TSA and SAHA, 
suppressed the LPS-induced mRNA expression of the proinflammatory mediators
Edn-1, Ccl-7/MCP-3, and Il-12p40 but amplified the expression of the
proatherogenic factors Cox-2 and Pai-1/serpine1 in primary mouse BMM. Similar
effects were also apparent in LPS-stimulated TEPM and HMDM. The pro- and
anti-inflammatory effects of TSA were separable over a concentration range,
implying that individual HDACs have differential effects on macrophage
inflammatory responses. The HDAC1-selective inhibitor, MS-275, retained
proinflammatory effects (amplification of LPS-induced expression of Cox-2 and
Pai-1 in BMM) but suppressed only some inflammatory responses. In contrast, 17a
(a reportedly HDAC6-selective inhibitor) retained anti-inflammatory but not
proinflammatory properties. Despite this, HDAC6(-/-) macrophages showed normal
LPS-induced expression of HDAC-dependent inflammatory genes, arguing that the
anti-inflammatory effects of 17a are not a result of inhibition of HDAC6 alone.
Thus, 17a provides a tool to identify individual HDACs with proinflammatory
properties.

PMID: 20200406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Genes Dev. 2010 Mar 1;24(5):455-69. doi: 10.1101/gad.552310.

Histone deacetylases 1 and 2 act in concert to promote the G1-to-S progression.

Yamaguchi T(1), Cubizolles F, Zhang Y, Reichert N, Kohler H, Seiser C, Matthias
P.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Novartis Research
Foundation, Basel, Switzerland.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) regulate gene expression by deacetylating histones
and also modulate the acetylation of a number of nonhistone proteins, thus
impinging on various cellular processes. Here, we analyzed the major class I
enzymes HDAC1 and HDAC2 in primary mouse fibroblasts and in the B-cell lineage.
Fibroblasts lacking both enzymes fail to proliferate in culture and exhibit a
strong cell cycle block in the G1 phase that is associated with up-regulation of 
the CDK inhibitors p21(WAF1/CIP1) and p57(Kip2) and of the corresponding mRNAs.
This regulation is direct, as in wild-type cells HDAC1 and HDAC2 are bound to the
promoter regions of the p21 and p57 genes. Furthermore, analysis of the
transcriptome and of histone modifications in mutant cells demonstrated that
HDAC1 and HDAC2 have only partly overlapping roles. Next, we eliminated HDAC1 and
HDAC2 in the B cells of conditionally targeted mice. We found that B-cell
development strictly requires the presence of at least one of these enzymes: When
both enzymes are ablated, B-cell development is blocked at an early stage, and
the rare remaining pre-B cells show a block in G1 accompanied by the induction of
apoptosis. In contrast, elimination of HDAC1 and HDAC2 in mature resting B cells 
has no negative impact, unless these cells are induced to proliferate. These
results indicate that HDAC1 and HDAC2, by normally repressing the expression of
p21 and p57, regulate the G1-to-S-phase transition of the cell cycle.

PMCID: PMC2827841
PMID: 20194438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. J Biol Chem. 2010 May 7;285(19):14663-70. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.081679. Epub 2010
Feb 26.

Redundant control of adipogenesis by histone deacetylases 1 and 2.

Haberland M(1), Carrer M, Mokalled MH, Montgomery RL, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, Texas 75390-9148, USA.

Adipocyte differentiation is a well defined process that is under the control of 
transcriptional activators and repressors. We show that histone deacetylase
(HDAC) inhibitors efficiently block adipocyte differentiation in vitro. This
effect is specific to adipogenesis, as another mesenchymal differentiation
process, osteoblastogenesis, is enhanced upon HDAC inhibition. Through the
systematic genetic deletion of HDAC genes in cultured mesenchymal precursor
cells, we show that deletion of HDAC1 and HDAC2 leads to reduced lipid
accumulation, revealing redundant and requisite roles of these class I HDACs in
adipogenesis. These findings unveil a previously unrecognized role for HDACs in
the control of adipogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2863240
PMID: 20190228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 23;285(17):13304-13. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.088468. Epub
2010 Feb 25.

Foxp1/2/4-NuRD interactions regulate gene expression and epithelial injury
response in the lung via regulation of interleukin-6.

Chokas AL(1), Trivedi CM, Lu MM, Tucker PW, Li S, Epstein JA, Morrisey EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104, USA.

To determine the underlying mechanism of Foxp1/2/4-mediated transcriptional
repression, a yeast two-hybrid screen was performed that identified p66beta, a
transcriptional repressor and component of the NuRD chromatin-remodeling complex.
We show that direct interactions between Foxp1/4 and p66beta are mediated by the 
CR2 domain within p66beta and the zinc finger/leucine zipper repression domain
found in Foxp1/2/4. These direct interactions are functionally relevant as
overexpression of p66beta in combination with Foxp factors cooperatively
represses Foxp target gene expression, whereas loss of p66 and Foxp factors
results in de-repression of endogenous Foxp target genes in lung epithelial
cells. Moreover, the NuRD components HDAC1/2 associate in a macromolecular
complex with Foxp proteins, and loss of expression or inhibition of HDAC1/2
activity leads to de-repression of Foxp target gene expression. Importantly, we
show in vivo that Foxp1 and HDAC2 act cooperatively to regulate expression of the
cytoprotective cytokine interleukin-6, which results in increased resistance to
hyperoxic lung injury in Foxp1/HDAC2 compound mutant animals. These data reveal
an important interaction between the Foxp transcription factors and the NuRD
chromatin-remodeling complex that modulates transcriptional repression critical
for the lung epithelial injury response.

PMCID: PMC2857082
PMID: 20185820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Hum Pathol. 2010 Jun;41(6):848-58. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2009.11.012. Epub 2010 
Feb 23.

Immunohistochemical detection of histone deacetylases in endometrial carcinoma:
involvement of histone deacetylase 2 in the proliferation of endometrial
carcinoma cells.

Fakhry H(1), Miyamoto T, Kashima H, Suzuki A, Ke H, Konishi I, Shiozawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Surgical Oncology Department, South Egypt Cancer Institute Assiut University, 
Assiut 7111, Egypt.

Overexpression of histone deacetylases has been reported in various human
malignancies; however, the expression of histone deacetylases in endometrial
tissue is not fully understood. In the present study, the expression of histone
deacetylase 1, histone deacetylase 2, and Ki-67 was examined
immunohistochemically in 30 normal and 66 malignant endometrial tissue samples.
The results were expressed as a positivity index and compared with the positivity
index for Ki-67 and rates of patient survival. The effect of 2 histone
deacetylase inhibitors, trichostatin A and apicidine, on cell proliferation and
the expression of cell cycle regulators such as cyclins (D1, E, and A), p21, p27,
and p16 were investigated using 6 endometrial carcinoma cell lines. The
positivity index for histone deacetylase 1 (79.8 +/- 33.0, mean +/- SD) and
histone deacetylase 2 (106.3 +/- 41.9) was higher in endometrial carcinoma than
the normal endometrium, with a significant difference for histone deacetylase 2. 
The positivity index for histone deacetylase 2 was significantly increased in
higher-grade carcinomas (positivity index for grade 3, 124.9 +/- 28.4) compared
with grade 1 tumors (86.0 +/- 41.0) and was positively correlated with that for
Ki-67. In addition, patients with histone deacetylase 2-positive carcinomas had a
poor prognosis compared with those with histone deacetylase 2-negative carcinoma 
(P = .048). Treatment with trichostatin A or apicidine suppressed the
proliferation in all cell lines examined, in association with increased
expression of p21 and down-regulation of cyclin D1 and cyclin A expression. These
results indicated that increased histone deacetylase 2 expression is involved in 
the acquisition of aggressive behavior by endometrial carcinoma and suggest
histone deacetylase inhibitor to be a promising anticancer drug for this
carcinoma.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20178884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. ChemMedChem. 2010 Apr 6;5(4):591-7. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.200900500.

A structure-based virtual screening approach toward the discovery of histone
deacetylase inhibitors: identification of promising zinc-chelating groups.

Park H(1), Kim S, Kim YE, Lim SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Sejong University, 98 Kunja-dong, 
Kwangjin-ku, Seoul 143-747, Korea. hspark@sejong.ac.kr

The inhibitors of histone deacetylases (HDACs) have drawn a great deal of
attention due to their promising potential as small-molecule therapeutics for the
treatment of cancer. By means of virtual screening with docking simulations under
consideration of the effects of ligand solvation, we were able to identify six
novel HDAC inhibitors with IC(50) values ranging from 1 to 100 muM. These newly
identified inhibitors are structurally diverse and have various chelating groups 
for the active site zinc ion, including N-[1,3,4]thiadiazol-2-yl sulfonamide,
N-thiazol-2-yl sulfonamide, and hydroxamic acid moieties. The former two groups
are included in many drugs in current clinical use and have not yet been reported
as HDAC inhibitors. Therefore, they can be considered as new inhibitor scaffolds 
for the development of anticancer drugs by structure-activity relationship
studies to improve the inhibitory activities against HDACs. Interactions with the
HDAC1 active site residues responsible for stabilizing these new inhibitors are
addressed in detail.

PMID: 20157916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Aging (Albany NY). 2009 Jun 22;1(6):582-5.

GSK3beta and aging liver.

Jin J(1), Wang GL, Timchenko L, Timchenko NA.

Author information: 
(1)Huffington Center on Aging and Department of Pathology, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The loss of regenerative capacity of tissues is one of the major characteristics 
of aging. Liver represents a powerful system for investigations of mechanisms by 
which aging reduces regenerative capacity of tissues. The studies within last
five years revealed critical role of epigenetic silencing in the inhibition of
liver proliferation in old mice. These studies have shown that a number of cell
cycle proteins are silenced in livers of old mice by C/EBPalpha-HDAC1-Brm complex
and that old liver fails to reduce the complex and activate these genes in
response to proliferative stimulus such as partial hepatectomy. The complex
modifies histone H3 on the promoters of c-myc and FoxM1B in the manner which
prevents expression of these genes. Despite this progress, little is known about 
mechanisms by which aging causes this epigenetic silencing. We have recently
discovered signal transduction pathways which operate upstream of the
C/EBPalpha-HDAC1-Brm complex. These pathways involve communications of growth
hormone, GSK3beta and cyclin D3. In addition to the liver, GH-GSK3beta-cyclin D3 
pathway is also changed with age in lung, brain and adipose tissues. We suggest
that other age-associated alterations in these tissues might be mediated by the
reduced levels of GSK3beta and by elevation of cyclin D3. In this review, we
summarize these new data and discuss the role of such alterations in the
development of aging phenotype in the liver and in other tissues.

PMCID: PMC2806031
PMID: 20157540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Oncogene. 2010 May 6;29(18):2659-71. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.19. Epub 2010 Feb 15.

An HDAC1-binding domain within FATS bridges p21 turnover to radiation-induced
tumorigenesis.

Li Z(1), Zhang Q, Mao JH, Weise A, Mrasek K, Fan X, Zhang X, Liehr T, Lu KH,
Balmain A, Cai WW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Key Laboratory of Ministry
of Education for Breast Cancer Prevention and Treatment, Tianjin Medical
University Cancer Institute and Hospital, Tianjin, China. zhengli@tijmu.edu.cn

There is a gap between the initial formation of cells carrying radiation-induced 
genetic damage and their contribution to cancer development. Herein, we reveal a 
previously uncharacterized gene FATS through a genome-wide approach and
demonstrate its essential role in regulating the abundance of p21 in surveillance
of genome integrity. A large exon coding the NH2-terminal domain of FATS, deleted
in spontaneous mouse lymphomas, is much more frequently deleted in
radiation-induced mouse lymphomas. Its human counterpart is a fragile site gene
at a previously identified loss of heterozygosity site. FATS is essential for
maintaining steady-state level of p21 protein and sustaining DNA damage
checkpoint. Furthermore, the NH2-terminal FATS physically interacts with histone 
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) to enhance the acetylation of endogenous p21, leading to
the stabilization of p21. Our results reveal a molecular linkage between p21
abundance and radiation-induced carcinogenesis.

PMID: 20154723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Eur J Med Chem. 2010 May;45(5):1777-91. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2010.01.010. Epub
2010 Jan 28.

Investigation on the isoform selectivity of histone deacetylase inhibitors using 
chemical feature based pharmacophore and docking approaches.

Zhu Y(1), Li HF, Lu S, Zheng YX, Wu Z, Tang WF, Zhou X, Lu T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organic Chemistry, China Pharmaceutical University, 24
Tongjiaxiang, Nanjing 210009, PR China.

A three dimensional (3D) chemical feature based pharmacophore model was developed
for selective histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) inhibitors, which provides an
efficient way to discuss the isoform selectivity of HDAC inhibitors. In contrast 
to the classical pan-HDAC pharmacophore, two hydrophobic features (HY and HYAr2) 
were found in the chemical feature based pharmacophore model, which might be
responsible for the selectivity of HDAC1 inhibitions. Molecular docking also
highlighted the two hydrophobic features, which are located in the internal
cavity adjacent to the active site. The results contribute to our understanding
of the molecular mechanism underlying the selectivity of HDAC1 inhibitors and
suggest a possible target region to design novel selective HDAC1 inhibitors.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20153566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Virology. 2010 Apr 25;400(1):76-85. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2010.01.017. Epub 2010
Feb 11.

Nuclear matrix protein SMAR1 represses HIV-1 LTR mediated transcription through
chromatin remodeling.

Sreenath K(1), Pavithra L, Singh S, Sinha S, Dash PK, Siddappa NB, Ranga U, Mitra
D, Chattopadhyay S.

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Cell science, University of Pune Campus, Ganeshkhind, Pune
411007, Maharashtra, India.

Nuclear Matrix and MARs have been implicated in the transcriptional regulation of
host as well as viral genes but their precise role in HIV-1 transcription remains
unclear. Here, we show that >98% of HIV sequences contain consensus MAR element
in their promoter. We show that SMAR1 binds to the LTR MAR and reinforces
transcriptional silencing by tethering the LTR MAR to nuclear matrix. SMAR1
associated HDAC1-mSin3 corepressor complex is dislodged from the LTR upon
cellular activation by PMA/TNFalpha leading to an increase in the acetylation and
a reduction in the trimethylation of histones, associated with the recruitment of
RNA Polymerase II on the LTR. Overexpression of SMAR1 lead to reduction in LTR
mediated transcription, both in a Tat dependent and independent manner, resulting
in a decreased virion production. These results demonstrate the role of SMAR1 in 
regulating viral transcription by alternative compartmentalization of LTR between
the nuclear matrix and chromatin.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20153010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Biochem J. 2010 Apr 14;427(3):391-400. doi: 10.1042/BJ20091798.

MMP28 gene expression is regulated by Sp1 transcription factor acetylation.

Swingler TE(1), Kevorkian L, Culley KL, Illman SA, Young DA, Parker AE, Lohi J,
Clark IM.

Author information: 
(1)University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK.

MMP-28 (epilysin) is a recently cloned member of the MMP (matrix
metalloproteinase) family. It is highly expressed in the skin by keratinocytes,
the developing and regenerating nervous system and a number of other normal human
tissues, as well as a number of carcinomas. The MMP28 promoter has previously
been cloned and characterized identifying a conserved GT-box that binds Sp1/Sp3
(specificity proteins 1 and 3) proteins and is essential for the basal expression
of the gene. The present study demonstrates that MMP28 expression is induced by
HDAC (histone deacetylase) inhibitors and that this effect is mediated through
the GT-box. Transient transfection assays have shown that the induction of MMP28 
expression by the HDAC inhibitior TSA (trichostatin A) is mediated via Sp1 at the
GT-box. Immunoprecipitation experiments have shown that the acetylation of Sp1
and Sp3 is increased by TSA treatment; however, no effect on DNA binding was
observed. Histone acetyltransferases such as p300 and P/CAF [p300/CREB
(cAMP-response-element-binding protein)-binding protein-associated factor]
increased induction of the MMP28 promoter by Sp1. Knockdown of HDAC1 using siRNA 
(small interfering RNA) also induces the MMP28 promoter. Oligonucleotide pulldown
identified STRAP (serine/threonine kinase receptor-associated protein) as a
further protein recruited to the MMP28 promoter and acting functionally with Sp1.

PMID: 20144149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Feb 9;107(6):2431-6. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0912599106.
Epub 2010 Jan 22.

Streamlined analysis schema for high-throughput identification of endogenous
protein complexes.

Malovannaya A(1), Li Y, Bulynko Y, Jung SY, Wang Y, Lanz RB, O'Malley BW, Qin J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Mar 30;107(13):6118.

Immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry (IP/MS) has recently emerged as
a preferred method in the analysis of protein complex components and cellular
protein networks. Targeting endogenous protein complexes of higher eukaryotes,
particularly in large-scale efforts, has been challenging due to cellular
heterogeneity, high proteome complexity, and, compared to lower organisms, lack
of efficient in-locus epitope-tagging techniques. It is further complicated by
variability in nonspecific identifications and cross-reactivity of primary
antibodies. Still, the study of endogenous human protein networks is highly
desired despite its challenges. Here we describe a streamlined IP/MS protocol for
the purification and identification of extended endogenous protein complexes. We 
investigate the sources of nonspecific protein binding and develop
semiquantitative specificity filters that are based on peptide spectral count
measurements. We also outline logical constraints for the derivation of accurate 
complex composition from IP/MS data and demonstrate the effectiveness of this
approach by presenting our analyses of different transcriptional coregulator
complexes. We show consistent purification of novel components for the Integrator
complex, analyze the composition of the Mediator complex solely from our data to 
demonstrate the wide usability of spectral counts, and deconvolute heterogeneous 
HDAC1/2 networks into core complex modules and several novel subcomplex
interactions.

PMCID: PMC2823922
PMID: 20133760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. APMIS. 2010 Mar;118(3):196-202. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0463.2009.02579.x.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 expression is associated with tumor cell
proliferation and metastasis in gastric cancer.

Choi JH(1), Song YS, Yoon JS, Song KW, Lee YY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Hanyang University College of Medicine,
Gyunggi-do, Korea. jhcmd@hanyang.ac.kr

The enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), a member of the polycomb group of
proteins, plays an important role in cell proliferation and cell cycle
regulation. EZH2 is overexpressed in aggressive forms of prostate, breast,
bladder, and endometrial cancers. However, the role of EZH2 expression in gastric
cancer has not been fully determined. This study was conducted to investigate the
correlation between EZH2 and cell cycle-related molecules, and the clinical value
of EZH2 expression in gastric cancer. We analyzed EZH2 expression using Western
blotting in AGS, MKN-28, SNU-16, SNU-484, SNU-601, and SNU-638 gastric cancer
cell lines. After transfection of EZH2 siRNA into MKN-28 cells, the change in
cell cycle-related molecules was assessed by Western blot analysis. Expression of
EZH2, Ki-67, and p53 was determined by immunohistochemical staining of tissue
microarrays from specimens of 137 cases of resected gastric cancer. We found high
expressions of EZH2 in all of the tested gastric cancer cell lines. RNA
interference of EZH2 induced upregulation of p53 and HDAC1 and downregulation of 
cyclin D1 and cyclin E. High EZH2 expression was observed in 60.6% of gastric
cancers and in 6.7% of non-neoplastic gastric tissues (p < 0.01); 40.1% were
positive for p53 in gastric cancers. High EZH2 expression was correlated with
Ki-67 and p53 expressions and was significantly associated with distant
metastases and non-signet ring cells. Our results suggest that high EZH2
expression is associated with tumor cell proliferation and metastasis in gastric 
cancer.

PMID: 20132185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2010 May;67(10):1687-97. doi: 10.1007/s00018-010-0272-3. Epub 
2010 Feb 4.

Ordered transcriptional factor recruitment and epigenetic regulation of tnf-alpha
in necrotizing acute pancreatitis.

Sandoval J(1), Pereda J, Rodriguez JL, Escobar J, Hidalgo J, Joosten LA, Franco
L, Sastre J, López-Rodas G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Valencia,
46100, Valencia, Burjassot, Spain.

Tauhe expression of the critical initiator cytokine TNF-alpha was strongly
upregulated in vivo in acute necrotic pancreatitis (AP) in rodents and in vitro
in TNF-alpha activated acinar AR42J cells. Upregulation of tnf-alpha, inos,
icam-1 and il-6 occurred both in TNF-alpha receptor 1 and 2 knock-out mice, but
not in TNF-alpha knock-out mice, in cerulein-induced acute pancreatitis.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis showed that transcriptional factors
(ELK-1, SP1, NF-kappaB and EGR-1) and chromatin modification complexes (HDAC1,
HDAC2, GCN5, PCAF and CBP) were recruited and/or released from the promoter in a 
strictly ordered mechanism. Activation of tnf-alpha gene was also accompanied by 
an ordered increased level of histone H3K9, H3K14 and H3K18-acetylation and H3K4 
methylation, as well as H4K5 acetylation. A better knowledge of the molecular
mechanisms that control tnf-alpha gene regulation will provide deeper
understanding of the initiation and development of the inflammatory processes
occurring in acute pancreatitis triggered by TNF-alpha cytokine.

PMID: 20130956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 9;285(15):11129-42. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.087429. Epub 2010
Feb 3.

Pitx2-dependent occupancy by histone deacetylases is associated with T-box gene
regulation in mammalian abdominal tissue.

Hilton T(1), Gross MK, Kioussi C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Oregon State
University, Corvallis, Oregon 97331, USA.

The homeodomain transcription factor Pitx2 and the T-box transcription factors
are essential for organogenesis. Pitx2 and T-box genes are induced by growth
factors and function as transcriptional activators or repressors. Gene expression
analyses on abdominal tissue were used to identify seven of the T-box genes of
the genome as Pitx2 target genes in the abdomen at embryonic day.10.5. Pitx2
activated Tbx4, Tbx15, and Mga and repressed Tbx1, Tbx2, Tbx5, and Tbx6
expression. As expected, activated genes showed reduced expression patterns, and 
repressed T-box genes showed increased expression patterns in the abdomen of
Pitx2 mutants. Pitx2 occupied chromatin sites near all of these T-box genes.
Co-occupancy by coactivators, corepressors, and histone acetylation at these
sites was frequently Pitx2-dependent. Genes repressed by Pitx2 generally showed
increased histone acetylation and decreased histone deacetylase
(HDAC)/corepressor occupancy in Pitx2 mutants. The lower N-CoR, HDAC1, and HDAC3 
occupancy observed at multiple sites along Tbx1 chromatin in mutants is
consistent with the model that increased histone acetylation and gene expression 
of Tbx1 may result from a loss of recruitment of corepressors by Pitx2. Genes
activated by Pitx2 showed less consistent patterns in chromatin analyses. Reduced
H4 acetylation and increased HDAC1/nuclear receptor corepressor (N-CoR) occupancy
at some Tbx4 sites were accompanied by increased H3 acetylation and reduced HDAC3
occupancy at the same or other more distal chromatin sites in mutants.
Pitx2-dependent occupancy by corepressors resulted in alteration of the
acetylation levels of several T-box genes, whereas Pitx2-dependent occupancy by
coactivators was more site-localized. These studies will provide the basic
scientific underpinning to understand abdominal wall syndromes.

PMCID: PMC2856990
PMID: 20129917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Proteomics. 2010 Apr;10(7):1494-504. doi: 10.1002/pmic.200900586.

Increased interaction between DJ-1 and the Mi-2/ nucleosome remodelling and
deacetylase complex during cellular stress.

Opsahl JA(1), Hjørnevik LV, Bull VH, Fismen L, Frøyset AK, Gromyko D, Solstad T, 
Fladmark KE.

Author information: 
(1)Proteomic Unit (PROBE), Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen,
Bergen, Norway.

DJ-1 was originally identified to be an oncogenic product, but has later been
shown to be highly multifunctional. DJ-1 plays a role in oxidative stress
response and transcriptional regulation, and loss of its function leads to an
early onset of Parkinsonism. To further understand the mechanisms behind DJ-1's
role in cell survival and death, we investigated alternations in endogenous DJ-1 
protein-protein interaction in apoptotic cells exposed to the phosphatase
inhibitor okadaic acid. By combining cellular stable isotopic labelling of amino 
acids in cell culture, sub-cellular fractionation, co-immunoprecipitation, and
MS, we identified a novel group of DJ-1 interaction partners that increased their
association to DJ-1 in okadaic acid-exposed cells. These proteins were integral
components of the Mi-2/nucleosome remodelling and deacetylase (NuRD) complex.
Knockdown of DJ-1 and MTA2, a core component of the NuRD complex, had a similar
and pro-apoptotic effect on the transcriptional- and p53-dependent cell death
induced by daunorubicin. On the other hand, MTA2 knockdown had no significant
effect on the progression of p53-independent okadaic acid-induced apoptosis. Our 
data suggest that the increased DJ-1/NuRD interaction is a general anti-stress
response regulated by okadaic acid-induced modifications of DJ-1. The observed
interaction between DJ-1 and the NuRD complex may give new clues to how DJ-1 can 
protect cells from p53-dependent cell death.

PMID: 20127688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 2;285(14):10385-96. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.070136. Epub 2010
Feb 2.

Glucocorticoid-induced leucine zipper (GILZ) and long GILZ inhibit myogenic
differentiation and mediate anti-myogenic effects of glucocorticoids.

Bruscoli S(1), Donato V, Velardi E, Di Sante M, Migliorati G, Donato R, Riccardi 
C.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Sperimentale, Sezione di Farmacologia,
Tossicologia e Chemioterapia, Universitá di Perugia, 06122 Perugia, Italy.

Myogenesis is a process whereby myoblasts differentiate and fuse into
multinucleated myotubes, the precursors of myofibers. Various signals and factors
modulate this process, and glucocorticoids (GCs) are important regulators of
skeletal muscle metabolism. We show that glucocorticoid-induced leucine zipper
(GILZ), a GC-induced gene, and the newly identified isoform long GILZ (L-GILZ)
are expressed in skeletal muscle tissue and in C2C12 myoblasts where GILZ/L-GILZ 
maximum expression occurs during the first few days in differentiation medium.
Moreover, we observed that GC treatment of myoblasts, which increased GILZ/L-GILZ
expression, resulted in reduced myotube formation, whereas GILZ and L-GILZ
silencing dampened GC effects. Inhibition of differentiation caused by
GILZ/L-GILZ overexpression correlated with inhibition of MyoD function and
reduced expression of myogenin. Notably, results indicate that GILZ and L-GILZ
bind and regulate MyoD/HDAC1 transcriptional activity, thus mediating the
anti-myogenic effect of GCs.

PMCID: PMC2856245
PMID: 20124407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Nat Neurosci. 2010 Feb;13(2):143-4. doi: 10.1038/nn0210-143.

Renegade nuclear enzymes disrupt axonal integrity.

Miller RH(1).

Author information: 
(1)The author is in the Department of Neurosciences, Case Western Reserve
University, School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, USA. rhm3@case.edu

Comment on
    Nat Neurosci. 2010 Feb;13(2):180-9.

PMID: 20104203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 2;285(14):10890-901. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.058347. Epub
2010 Jan 26.

Xenopus skip modulates Wnt/beta-catenin signaling and functions in neural crest
induction.

Wang Y(1), Fu Y, Gao L, Zhu G, Liang J, Gao C, Huang B, Fenger U, Niehrs C, Chen 
YG, Wu W.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Protein Science Laboratory of the Ministry of
Education, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.

The beta-catenin-lymphoid enhancer factor (LEF) protein complex is the key
mediator of canonical Wnt signaling and initiates target gene transcription upon 
ligand stimulation. In addition to beta-catenin and LEF themselves, many other
proteins have been identified as necessary cofactors. Here we report that the
evolutionally conserved splicing factor and transcriptional co-regulator,
SKIP/SNW/NcoA62, forms a ternary complex with LEF1 and HDAC1 and mediates the
repression of target genes. Loss-of-function studies showed that SKIP is
obligatory for Wnt signaling-induced target gene transactivation, suggesting an
important role of SKIP in the canonical Wnt signaling. Consistent with its
involvement in beta-catenin signaling, the C-terminally truncated forms of SKIP
are able to stabilize beta-catenin and enhance Wnt signaling. In Xenopus embryos,
both overexpression and knockdown of Skip lead to reduced neural crest induction,
consistent with down-regulated Wnt signaling in both cases. Our results indicate 
that SKIP is a novel component of the beta-catenin transcriptional complex.

PMCID: PMC2856295
PMID: 20103590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Oncogene. 2010 Mar 11;29(10):1451-62. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.433. Epub 2010 Jan
18.

ERalpha signaling through slug regulates E-cadherin and EMT.

Ye Y(1), Xiao Y, Wang W, Yearsley K, Gao JX, Shetuni B, Barsky SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Nevada School of Medicine, Reno, NV
89557-0350, USA.

The ERalpha signaling pathway is one of the most important and most studied
pathways in human breast cancer, yet numerous questions still exist such as how
hormonally responsive cancers progress to a more aggressive and hormonally
independent phenotype. We have noted that human breast cancers exhibit a strong
direct correlation between ERalpha and E-cadherin expression by
immunohistochemistry, suggesting that ERalpha signaling might regulate E-cadherin
and implying that this regulation might influence epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) and tumor progression. To investigate this hypothesis and the
mechanisms behind it, we studied the effects of ERalpha signaling in
ERalpha-transfected ERalpha-negative breast carcinoma cell lines, the MDA-MB-468 
and the MDA-MB-231 and the effects of ERalpha knockdown in naturally expressing
ERalpha-positive lines, MCF-7 and T47D. When ERalpha was overexpressed in the
ERalpha-negative lines, 17beta-estradiol (E2) decreased slug and increased
E-cadherin. Clones maximally exhibiting these changes grew more in clumps and
became less invasive in Matrigel. When ERalpha was knocked down in the
ERalpha-positive lines, slug increased, E-cadherin decreased, cells became
spindly and exhibited increased Matrigel invasion. ERalpha signaling decreased
slug expression by two different mechanisms: directly, by repression of slug
transcription by the formation of a corepressor complex of ligand-activated
ERalpha, HDAC inhibitor (HDAC1), and nuclear receptor corepressor (N-CoR) that
bound the slug promoter in three half-site estrogen response elements (EREs);
indirectly by phosphorylation and inactivation of GSK-3beta through
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/protein kinase B (Akt). The GSK-3beta
inactivation, in turn, repressed slug expression and increased E-cadherin. In
human breast cancer cases, there was a strong inverse correlation between slug
and ERalpha and E-cadherin immunoreactivity. Our findings indicate that ERalpha
signaling through slug regulates E-cadherin and EMT.

PMID: 20101232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Cell Death Differ. 2010 Sep;17(9):1392-408. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2009.216. Epub 2010 
Jan 22.

HDAC inhibition promotes neuronal outgrowth and counteracts growth cone collapse 
through CBP/p300 and P/CAF-dependent p53 acetylation.

Gaub P(1), Tedeschi A, Puttagunta R, Nguyen T, Schmandke A, Di Giovanni S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurology, Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, University
of Tuebingen, Germany.

Neuronal outgrowth is guided by both extrinsic and intrinsic factors, involving
transcriptional regulation. The acetylation of histones and transcription
factors, which facilitates promoter accessibility, ultimately promotes
transcription, and depends on the balance between histone deacetylases (HDACs)
and histone acetyltransferases (HATs) activities. However, a critical function
for specific acetylation modifying enzymes in neuronal outgrowth has yet to be
investigated. To address this issue, we have used an epigenetic approach to
facilitate gene expression in neurons, by using specific HDAC inhibitors. Neurons
treated with a combination of HDAC and transcription inhibitors display an
acetylation and transcription-dependent increase in outgrowth and a reduction in 
growth cone collapse on both 'permissive' (poly-D-lysine, PDL) and
'non-permissive' substrates (myelin and chondroitin sulphate proteoglycans
(CSPGs)). Next, we specifically show that the expression of the histone
acetyltransferases CBP/p300 and P/CAF is repressed in neurons by inhibitory
substrates, whereas it is triggered by HDAC inhibition on both permissive and
inhibitory conditions. Gene silencing and gain of function experiments show that 
CBP/p300 and P/CAF are key players in neuronal outgrowth, acetylate histone H3 at
K9-14 and the transcription factor p53, thereby initiating a pro-neuronal
outgrowth transcriptional program. These findings contribute to the growing
understanding of transcriptional regulation in neuronal outgrowth and may lay the
molecular groundwork for the promotion of axonal regeneration after injury.

PMID: 20094059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. J Virol. 2010 Apr;84(8):4050-9. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02131-09. Epub 2010 Jan 20.

E1A interacts with two opposing transcriptional pathways to induce quiescent
cells into S phase.

Sha J(1), Ghosh MK, Zhang K, Harter ML.

Author information: 
(1)Case Western Reserve University, Department of Biochemistry, 10900 Euclid
Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA. ml.nikki.harter@case.edu

Despite data suggesting that the adenovirus E1A protein of 243 amino acids
creates an S-phase environment in quiescent cells by overcoming the nucleosomal
repression of E2F-regulated genes, the precise mechanisms underlying E1A's
ability in this process have not yet been defined at the biochemical level. In
this study, we show by kinetic analysis that E1A, as opposed to an E1A mutant
failing to bind p130, can temporally eliminate corepressor complexes consisting
of p130-E2F4 and HDAC1/2-mSin3B from the promoters of E2F-regulated genes in
quiescent cells. Once the complexes are removed, the di-methylation of H3K9 at
these promoters becomes dramatically diminished, and this in turn allows for the 
acetylation of H3K9/14 and the recruitment of activating E2F family members,
which is then followed by the transcriptional activity of the E2F-regulated
genes. Remarkably, although an E1A mutant that can no longer bind to a histone
acetyltransferase (PCAF) is as capable as wild-type E1A in eliminating
corepressor complexes and methyl groups from the promoters of these genes, it
cannot mediate the acetylation of H3K9/14 or induce their transcription. These
findings suggest that corepressors as well as coactivators are acted upon by E1A 
to derepress E2F-regulated genes in quiescent cells. Thus, our results highlight 
for the first time a functional relationship between E1A and two transcriptional 
pathways of differing functions for transitioning cells out of quiescence and
into S phase.

PMCID: PMC2849484
PMID: 20089639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Nat Cell Biol. 2010 Feb;12(2):132-42. doi: 10.1038/ncb2013. Epub 2010 Jan 17.

Histone deacetylase and Cullin3-REN(KCTD11) ubiquitin ligase interplay regulates 
Hedgehog signalling through Gli acetylation.

Canettieri G(1), Di Marcotullio L, Greco A, Coni S, Antonucci L, Infante P,
Pietrosanti L, De Smaele E, Ferretti E, Miele E, Pelloni M, De Simone G, Pedone
EM, Gallinari P, Giorgi A, Steinkühler C, Vitagliano L, Pedone C, Schinin ME,
Screpanti I, Gulino A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University, 324 viale Regina
Elena, 00161 Rome, Italy.

Hedgehog signalling is crucial for development and is deregulated in several
tumours, including medulloblastoma. Regulation of the transcriptional activity of
Gli (glioma-associated oncogene) proteins, effectors of the Hedgehog pathway, is 
poorly understood. We show here that Gli1 and Gli2 are acetylated proteins and
that their HDAC-mediated deacetylation promotes transcriptional activation and
sustains a positive autoregulatory loop through Hedgehog-induced upregulation of 
HDAC1. This mechanism is turned off by HDAC1 degradation through an E3 ubiquitin 
ligase complex formed by Cullin3 and REN, a Gli antagonist lost in human
medulloblastoma. Whereas high HDAC1 and low REN expression in neural progenitors 
and medulloblastomas correlates with active Hedgehog signalling, loss of HDAC
activity suppresses Hedgehog-dependent growth of neural progenitors and tumour
cells. Consistent with this, abrogation of Gli1 acetylation enhances cellular
proliferation and transformation. These data identify an integrated HDAC- and
ubiquitin-mediated circuitry, where acetylation of Gli proteins functions as an
unexpected key transcriptional checkpoint of Hedgehog signalling.

PMID: 20081843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 May;1803(5):608-16. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2010.01.004.
Epub 2010 Jan 15.

Downregulation of a tumor suppressor RECK by hypoxia through recruitment of HDAC1
and HIF-1alpha to reverse HRE site in the promoter.

Lee KJ(1), Lee KY, Lee YM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Kyungpook National University,
Daegu, 702-701, Republic of Korea.

Reversion-inducing cysteine-rich protein with Kazal motifs (RECK) is a tumor
suppressor and the suppression of RECK is induced by Ras or Her-2/neu oncogenes. 
However, regulation of RECK under hypoxic microenvironment is largely unknown.
Here, we identified that hypoxia significantly downregulates RECK mRNA and
protein expression using semiquantitative RT-PCR, real-time RT-PCR and western
blot analysis. This repression was reversed by the HDAC inhibitor, trichostatin A
(TSA) and HIF-1 inhibitor, YC-1. Hypoxia-induced downregulation of RECK was
abolished by knockdown of HDAC1 and HIF-1alpha with respective small interfering 
RNAs (siRNAs), whereas overexpression of HDAC1 and HIF-1alpha suppressed RECK
expression similar to the level under hypoxic conditions. Transfection of a
deletion mutant of the second reverse HRE (rHRE2, -2345 to -2333) site of RECK
promoter completely removed RECK suppression under hypoxia, indicating that the
rHRE2 site is responsible for the inhibition of RECK. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation and DNA affinity precipitation assays demonstrated that HDAC1
and HIF-1alpha were recruited to the rHRE2 region of RECK promoter under hypoxic 
conditions, but the treatment of TSA or YC-1 inhibited their binding to the rHRE2
site. Moreover, TSA and YC-1 inhibited hypoxia-induced cancer cell migration,
invasion and MMPs secretion. Taken together, we can conclude that hypoxia induces
RECK downregulation through the recruitment of HDAC1 and HIF-1alpha to the rHRE2 
site in the promoter and the inhibition of hypoxic RECK silencing would be a
therapeutic and preventive target for early tumorigenesis.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20080132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. EMBO J. 2010 Feb 17;29(4):830-42. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.395. Epub 2010 Jan 14.

Coordinated regulation of p53 apoptotic targets BAX and PUMA by SMAR1 through an 
identical MAR element.

Sinha S(1), Malonia SK, Mittal SP, Singh K, Kadreppa S, Kamat R, Mukhopadhyaya R,
Pal JK, Chattopadhyay S.

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Cell Science (NCCS), Pune University Campus, Ganeshkhind, 
Pune, India.

How tumour suppressor p53 bifurcates cell cycle arrest and apoptosis and executes
these distinct pathways is not clearly understood. We show that BAX and PUMA
promoters harbour an identical MAR element and are transcriptional targets of
SMAR1. On mild DNA damage, SMAR1 selectively represses BAX and PUMA through
binding to the MAR independently of inducing p53 deacetylation through HDAC1.
This generates an anti-apoptotic response leading to cell cycle arrest.
Importantly, knockdown of SMAR1 induces apoptosis, which is abrogated in the
absence of p53. Conversely, apoptotic DNA damage results in increased size and
number of promyelocytic leukaemia (PML) nuclear bodies with consequent
sequestration of SMAR1. This facilitates p53 acetylation and restricts SMAR1
binding to BAX and PUMA MAR leading to apoptosis. Thus, our study establishes MAR
as a damage responsive cis element and SMAR1-PML crosstalk as a switch that
modulates the decision between cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in response to DNA
damage.

PMCID: PMC2829167
PMID: 20075864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2010 Apr 15;244(2):234-41. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2009.12.037. Epub 2010 Jan 11.

Blockage of JNK pathway enhances arsenic trioxide-induced apoptosis in human
keratinocytes.

Huang HS(1), Liu ZM, Hong DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology, College of
Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 701, Taiwan.
huanghs@mail.ncku.edu.tw

Arsenic is well known as a carcinogen predisposing humans to some severe diseases
and also as an effective medicine for treating acute promyelocytic leukemia,
syphilis, and psoriasis. Multiple active mechanisms, including cell cycle arrest 
and apoptosis, have been proposed in therapy; however, the opposing effects of
arsenic remain controversial. Our previous study found that arsenic trioxide
(ATO)-induced activation of p21(WAF1/CIP1) (p21) led to A431 cell death through
the antagonistic effects of the signaling of ERK1/2 and JNK1. In the current
study, the inhibitory effects of JNK1 on ATO-induced p21 expression were
explored. Over-expression of JNK1 in A431 cells could inhibit p21 expression,
which was associated with HDAC1 and TGIF. Using the GST pull-down assay and
fluorescence resonance energy transfer analysis, N-terminal domain (amino acids
1-108) of TGIF, critical to its binding with c-Jun, was found. Using reporter
assays, requirement of the C-terminal domain (amino acids 138-272) of TGIF to
suppress ATO-induced p21 expression was observed. Thus, the domains of TGIF that 
carried out its inhibitory effects on p21 were identified. Finally, treatment
with JNK inhibitor SP600125 could enhance ATO-induced apoptosis of HaCaT
keratinocytes by using flow cytometry.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20074581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Leukemia. 2010 Mar;24(3):552-62. doi: 10.1038/leu.2009.282. Epub 2010 Jan 14.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors induce FPGS mRNA expression and intracellular
accumulation of long-chain methotrexate polyglutamates in childhood acute
lymphoblastic leukemia: implications for combination therapy.

Leclerc GJ(1), Mou C, Leclerc GM, Mian AM, Barredo JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University of Miami Miller
School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33101-6960, USA.

Comment in
    Leukemia. 2011 Feb;25(2):359-61.

Children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) diagnosed with resistant
phenotypes, and those who relapse, have a dismal prognosis for cure. The
antifolate methotrexate (MTX), a universal component of ALL therapies, is
metabolized by folylpoly-gamma-glutamate synthetase (FPGS) into long-chain
polyglutamates (MTX-PG(3-7)), resulting in enhanced cytotoxicity from prolonged
inhibition of dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) and thymidylate synthetase (TS).
Using DNaseI assays, we identified a hypersensitive site upstream from exon-1,
suggesting chromatin remodeling could alter FPGS expression. We demonstrated that
histone deacetylase-1 (HDAC1) is recruited by NFY and Sp1 transcription factors
to the FPGS promoter in ALL cell lines. We examined the effect of histone
deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs) sodium butyrate and suberoylanilide hydroxamic
acid (SAHA) on the expression of FPGS and other folate-related genes. HDACIs
increased FPGS mRNA expression by 2- to 5-fold, whereas DHFR and TS mRNA
expression was decreased. Combination treatment with MTX plus SAHA significantly 
increased cytotoxicity and apoptosis in B- and T-ALL cell lines as compared with 
each drug alone (CI<or=0.8). SAHA increased the intracellular accumulation of
long-chain MTX-PG(3-7). Therefore, HDACI-induced FPGS expression increases the
accumulation of MTX-PG(3-7) and cytotoxicity in ALL cell lines, which is
potentiated by DHFR and TS downregulation. The synergism exhibited by the
combination of MTX and SAHA warrants clinical testing in ALL patients.

PMID: 20072153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Ann Biomed Eng. 2010 Mar;38(3):729-37. doi: 10.1007/s10439-009-9896-6.

Normal shear stress and vascular smooth muscle cells modulate migration of
endothelial cells through histone deacetylase 6 activation and tubulin
acetylation.

Wang YH(1), Yan ZQ, Qi YX, Cheng BB, Wang XD, Zhao D, Shen BR, Jiang ZL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Mechanobiology & Medical Engineering, School of Life Sciences and
Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.

Endothelial cells (ECs) line the innermost of the blood vessel wall and are
constantly subjected to shear stress imposed by blood flow. ECs were also
influenced by the neighboring vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs). The
bidirectional communication between ECs and VSMCs modulates vascular homeostasis.
In this study, the involvement of histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) in modulating
migration of ECs co-cultured with VSMCs by the normal level of laminar shear
stress (NSS) was investigated. ECs was either cultured alone or co-cultured with 
VSMCs under static conditions or subjected to NSS of 15 dyne/cm2 by using a
parallel-plate co-culture flow chamber system. It was demonstrated that both NSS 
and VSMCs could increase EC migration. The migration level of ECs co-cultured
with VSMCs under NSS was not higher than that under the static condition. The
process of EC migration regulated by VSMCs and NSS was associated with the
increased expression of HDAC6 and low level of acetylated tubulin. The increase
in HDAC6 expression was accompanied by a time-dependent decrease in the
acetylation of tubulin in ECs co-cultured with VSMCs. Inhibition of the HDAC6 by 
siRNA or tributyrin, an inhibitor of HDACs, induced a parallel alteration in the 
migration and the acetylated tubulin of ECs co-cultured with VSMCs. It was
observed by immunofluorescence staining that the acetylated tubulin was
distributed mostly around the cell nucleus in ECs co-cultured with VSMCs. The
results suggest that the NSS may display a protective function on the vascular
homeostasis by modulating EC migration to a normal level in a VSMC-dependent
manner. This modulation process involves the down-regulation of acetylated
tubulin which results from increased HDAC6 activity in ECs.

PMID: 20069369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Cancer Res. 2010 Jan 15;70(2):646-54. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-1924. Epub
2010 Jan 12.

Chemopreventive agent 3,3'-diindolylmethane selectively induces proteasomal
degradation of class I histone deacetylases.

Li Y(1), Li X, Guo B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, North Dakota State
University, Fargo, North Dakota 58108, USA.

3,3'-Diindolylmethane (DIM) is an anticancer agent that induces cell cycle arrest
and apoptosis through unknown mechanisms. Here, we report that DIM can
selectively induce proteasome-mediated degradation of class I histone
deacetylases (HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3, and HDAC8) without affecting the class II HDAC
proteins. DIM induced downregulation of class I HDACs in human colon cancer cells
in vitro and in vivo in tumor xenografts. HDAC depletion relieved HDAC-mediated
transcriptional inhibition of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors p21WAF1 and 
p27KIP2, significantly increasing their expression and triggering cell cycle
arrest in the G(2) phase of the cell cycle. Additionally, HDAC depletion was
associated with an induction of DNA damage that triggered apoptosis. Our findings
indicate that DIM acts to selectively target the degradation of class I HDACs.

PMCID: PMC2808120
PMID: 20068155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Sci Signal. 2010 Jan 5;3(103):pe1. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.3103pe1.

New endogenous regulators of class I histone deacetylases.

Riccio A(1).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Laboratory for Molecular and Cell Biology and Department of Neuroscience, 
Physiology and Pharmacology, University College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK.
a.riccio@ucl.ac.uk

Gene expression in eukaryotes depends on epigenetic changes that occur on both
histones and DNA. Class I histone deacetylases (HDACs) are enzymes that remove
acetyl groups from histones and other nuclear proteins, thereby inducing
chromatin condensation and transcriptional repression. HDACs belong to a large
family of enzymes that undergo posttranslational modifications after the
activation of several intracellular pathways. However, the environmental stimuli 
that change nuclear HDAC functions remain largely unknown. New evidence has
demonstrated that the lipid sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) inhibits the activity
of HDAC1 and HDAC2. Both S1P and sphingosine kinase 2 (SphK2), the enzyme that
synthesizes S1P, are assembled in corepressor complexes containing HDAC1 and
HDAC2. S1P is among the few endogenous HDAC inhibitors that is synthesized in the
nucleus in response to extracellular stimulation, and the first nuclear lipid
associated with an epigenetic modification. The discovery of endogenous molecules
that regulate HDAC activity in vivo has implications for the development of new
therapeutic approaches for a host of human diseases, including cancer and
neurodegenerative disorders.

PMID: 20051592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Int J Cancer. 2010 Sep 1;127(6):1332-46. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25151.

Type-specific roles of histone deacetylase (HDAC) overexpression in ovarian
carcinoma: HDAC1 enhances cell proliferation and HDAC3 stimulates cell migration 
with downregulation of E-cadherin.

Hayashi A(1), Horiuchi A, Kikuchi N, Hayashi T, Fuseya C, Suzuki A, Konishi I,
Shiozawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shinshu University School of
Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan. aki9hori@shinshu-u.ac.jp

Histone acetylation/deacetylation controls chromatin activity and subsequent gene
transcription. Recent studies demonstrated the activation of histone deacetylases
(HDACs) in various human malignancies; however, the expression and function of
HDACs in ovarian tumors are not fully understood. In this study, we examined the 
immunohistochemical expression of HDAC1, HDAC2 and HDAC3 using tissues obtained
from 115 cases of ovarian tumors and compared it with that of Ki-67 (a growth
marker), p21, and E-cadherin and clinicopathological parameters. In addition, we 
analyzed the effect of specific siRNA for HDAC1, HDAC2 and HDAC3 on the
expression of cell cycle-related molecules and E-cadherin to clarify the
functional difference among the 3 HDACs. The results indicated that the
immunohistochemical expression of nuclear HDAC1, HDAC2 and HDAC3 proteins
increased stepwise in benign, borderline and malignant tumors. The expression of 
HDAC1 and HDAC2 was correlated with Ki-67 expression and that of HDAC3 was
inversely correlated with E-cadherin expression. Among the HDACs examined, only
HDAC1 was associated with a poor outcome, when overexpressed. Treatment with HDAC
inhibitors suppressed the proliferation of ovarian cancer cells in association
with apoptosis. A specific siRNA for HDAC1 significantly reduced the
proliferation of ovarian carcinoma cells via downregulation of cyclin A
expression, but siRNA for HDAC3 reduced the cell migration with elevated
E-cadherin expression. Our results suggested that HDAC1 plays an important role
in the proliferation of ovarian cancer cells, whereas HDAC3 functions in cell
adhesion and migration. Therefore, specific therapeutic approaches should be
considered according to the HDAC subtypes.

PMID: 20049841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2010 Feb 1;20(3):997-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2009.12.054.
Epub 2009 Dec 21.

Bicyclic peptides as potent inhibitors of histone deacetylases: optimization of
alkyl loop length.

Islam NM(1), Kato T, Nishino N, Kim HJ, Ito A, Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Life Science and Systems Engineering, Kyushu Institute of
Technology, Kitakyushu 808-0196, Japan.

Bicyclic tetrapeptide hydroxamic acids were prepared as histone deacetylase
(HDAC) inhibitors, and the evaluated inhibitory activity shows that they are
potent against HDAC1 and HDAC4. The in vivo activity depends on alkyl loop
length.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20045316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. J Huazhong Univ Sci Technolog Med Sci. 2009 Dec;29(6):729-31. doi:
10.1007/s11596-009-0611-5. Epub 2009 Dec 29.

Interaction among Rb/p16, Rb/E2F1 and HDAC1 proteins in gallbladder carcinoma.

Wang X(1), Huang K, Xu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China.
newman3008@hotmail.com

The mechanism and interaction among Rb/p16, Rb/E2F1 and HDAC1 proteins in
gallbladder carcinoma were investigated. By using the immunoprecipitation method,
the interactions among Rb, p16, E2F1, HDAC1 proteins in gallbladder carcinoma
cell line (Mz-ChA-1) were studied. It was found that there were Rb and E2F1
proteins in the precipitates with anti-HDAC1, and there were HDAC1 and E2F1
proteins in the precipitate with anti-Rb. It was concluded that there are
specific interactions among Rb, HDAC1 and E2F1 proteins in gallbladder carcinoma,
indicating the existence of the direct Rb/E2F1/HDAC1 signal transduction pathway.
There is no direct relationship between p16 proteins with Rb, HDAC1, and E2F1
proteins.

PMID: 20037816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2010 Nov;124(1):39-48. doi: 10.1007/s10549-009-0683-8.

UHRF1 inhibits MDR1 gene transcription and sensitizes breast cancer cells to
anticancer drugs.

Jin W(1), Liu Y, Xu SG, Yin WJ, Li JJ, Yang JM, Shao ZM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, Breast Cancer Institute, CancerHospital/Cancer
Institute, Shanghai Medical College, Instituteof Biomedical Science, Fudan
University, Shanghai 200032, Peoples Republic of China.

Overexpression of MDR1 in breast cancer remains a major cause for the failure of 
chemotherapy. In the present report, we find UHRF1 plays an important role in
inhibiting MDR1 promoter activity by directly binding to the MDR1 promoter.
Knockdown of UHRF1 activates MDR1 promoter activity and expression, attenuates
the binding of UHRF1 and HDAC1 to the MDR1 promoter.Overexpression of UHRF1 in
NCI/ADR-RES cells can induce deacetylation of histones H3 and H4 on the MDR1
promoter, which is facilitated by recruitment of HDAC1 to the MDR1 promoter. Loss
of histone acetylation is accompanied by loss of binding of the key transcription
factor, MyoD, CBP and p300, locking in marked suppression of MDR1, increasing
sensitivity of MDR cancer cells to cytotoxic drugs that are transported by
P-glycoprotein(P-gp). The inhibition of MDR1 expression by UHRF1 may provide
potential ways to overcome multidrug resistance (MDR) in breast cancer treatment.

PMID: 20037778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Nat Neurosci. 2010 Feb;13(2):180-9. doi: 10.1038/nn.2471. Epub 2009 Dec 27.

HDAC1 nuclear export induced by pathological conditions is essential for the
onset of axonal damage.

Kim JY(1), Shen S, Dietz K, He Y, Howell O, Reynolds R, Casaccia P.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Neuroscience at the Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey-Robert Wood Johnson 
Medical School, Piscataway, New Jersey, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2010 Feb;13(2):143-4.

Histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) is a nuclear enzyme involved in transcriptional
repression. We detected cytosolic HDAC1 in damaged axons in brains of humans with
multiple sclerosis and of mice with cuprizone-induced demyelination, in ex vivo
models of demyelination and in cultured neurons exposed to glutamate and tumor
necrosis factor-alpha. Nuclear export of HDAC1 was mediated by the interaction
with the nuclear receptor CRM-1 and led to impaired mitochondrial transport. The 
formation of complexes between exported HDAC1 and members of the kinesin family
of motor proteins hindered the interaction with cargo molecules, thereby
inhibiting mitochondrial movement and inducing localized beading. This effect was
prevented by inhibiting HDAC1 nuclear export with leptomycin B, treating neurons 
with pharmacological inhibitors of HDAC activity or silencing HDAC1 but not other
HDAC isoforms. Together these data identify nuclear export of HDAC1 as a critical
event for impaired mitochondrial transport in damaged neurons.

PMCID: PMC2829989
PMID: 20037577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Mar;30(5):1171-81. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01500-09. Epub 2009 Dec
22.

The cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21 is a crucial target for histone
deacetylase 1 as a regulator of cellular proliferation.

Zupkovitz G(1), Grausenburger R, Brunmeir R, Senese S, Tischler J, Jurkin J,
Rembold M, Meunier D, Egger G, Lagger S, Chiocca S, Propst F, Weitzer G, Seiser
C.

Author information: 
(1)Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Department of Medical Biochemistry, Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter, Dr. Bohr-Gasse 9/2, A-1030 Vienna,
Austria.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are chromatin-modifying enzymes that are involved in
the regulation of proliferation, differentiation and development. HDAC inhibitors
induce cell cycle arrest, differentiation, or apoptosis in tumor cells and are
therefore promising antitumor agents. Numerous genes were found to be deregulated
upon HDAC inhibitor treatment; however, the relevant target enzymes are still
unidentified. HDAC1 is required for mouse development and unrestricted
proliferation of embryonic stem cells. We show here that HDAC1 reversibly
regulates cellular proliferation and represses the cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor p21 in embryonic stem cells. Disruption of the p21 gene rescues the
proliferation phenotype of HDAC1(-/-) embryonic stem cells but not the embryonic 
lethality of HDAC1(-/-) mice. In the absence of HDAC1, mouse embryonic
fibroblasts scarcely undergo spontaneous immortalization and display increased
p21 expression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrate a direct
regulation of the p21 gene by HDAC1 in mouse embryonic fibroblasts.
Transformation with simian virus 40 large T antigen or ablation of p21 restores
normal immortalization of primary HDAC1(-/-) fibroblasts. Our data demonstrate
that repression of the p21 gene is crucial for HDAC1-mediated control of
proliferation and immortalization. HDAC1 might therefore be one of the relevant
targets for HDAC inhibitors as anticancer drugs.

PMCID: PMC2820891
PMID: 20028735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Biochem Pharmacol. 2010 May 1;79(9):1251-60. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2009.12.015. Epub
2009 Dec 22.

Induction of apoptosis by thymoquinone in lymphoblastic leukemia Jurkat cells is 
mediated by a p73-dependent pathway which targets the epigenetic integrator
UHRF1.

Alhosin M(1), Abusnina A, Achour M, Sharif T, Muller C, Peluso J, Chataigneau T, 
Lugnier C, Schini-Kerth VB, Bronner C, Fuhrmann G.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR7213 Laboratoire de Biophotonique et Pharmacologie, Faculté de
Pharmacie, 74 Route du Rhin, 67401 Illkirch, France.

The salvage anti-tumoral pathway which implicates the p53-related p73 gene is not
yet fully characterized. We therefore attempted to identify the up- and
down-stream events involved in the activation of the p73-dependent pro-apoptotic 
pathway, by focusing on the anti-apoptotic and epigenetic integrator UHRF1 which 
is essential for cell cycle progression. For this purpose, we analyzed the
effects of a known anti-neoplastic drug, thymoquinone (TQ), on the p53-deficient 
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) Jurkat cell line. Our results showed that TQ
inhibits the proliferation of Jurkat cells and induces G1 cell cycle arrest in a 
dose-dependent manner. Moreover, TQ treatment triggers programmed cell death,
production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and alteration of the mitochondrial
membrane potential (DeltaPsim). TQ-induced apoptosis, confirmed by the presence
of hypodiploid G0/G1 cells, is associated with a rapid and sharp re-expression of
p73 and dose-dependent changes of the levels of caspase-3 cleaved subunits. These
modifications are accompanied by a dramatic down-regulation of UHRF1 and two of
its main partners, namely DNMT1 and HDAC1, which are all involved in the
epigenetic code regulation. Knockdown of p73 expression restores UHRF1
expression, reactivates cell cycle progression and inhibits TQ-induced apoptosis.
Altogether our results showed that TQ mediates its growth inhibitory effects on
ALL p53-mutated cells via the activation of a p73-dependent mitochondrial and
cell cycle checkpoint signaling pathway which subsequently targets UHRF1.

2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20026309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Jan 15;391(3):1396-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.12.072. Epub 2009 Dec 22.

Inhibition of histone deacetylase activity is a novel function of the antifolate 
drug methotrexate.

Yang PM(1), Lin JH, Huang WY, Lin YC, Yeh SH, Chen CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
Taipei 10018, Taiwan.

Methotrexate (MTX) is a dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) inhibitor widely used for 
treating human cancers, and overexpression of histone deacetylase (HDAC) is
usually found in tumors. HDAC inhibitors (HDACi) can reactivate tumor suppressor 
genes and serve as potential anti-cancer drugs. In this study, we found that MTX 
shared structural similarity with some HDACi and molecular modeling showed that
MTX indeed docks into the active site of HDLP, a bacterial homologue of HDAC.
Subsequent in vitro assay demonstrated MTX's inhibition on HDAC activity in human
cancer cells. The global acetylation of histone H3 was also induced by MTX.
Moreover, MTX inhibited immunoprecipitated HDAC1/2 activity but not their protein
levels. This study provides evidence that MTX inhibits HDAC activity.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20026300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. J Biol Chem. 2010 Feb 19;285(8):5428-37. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.035295. Epub 2009 
Dec 17.

A DDX5 S480A polymorphism is associated with increased transcription of
fibrogenic genes in hepatic stellate cells.

Guo J(1), Hong F, Loke J, Yea S, Lim CL, Lee U, Mann DA, Walsh MJ, Sninsky JJ,
Friedman SL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Liver Diseases, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York
10029, USA.

We recently identified a missense single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in DDX5
(rs1140409, p.S480A) that enhances the risk of developing cirrhosis. DDX5 is an
ATP-dependent RNA helicase and transcriptional modulator. We hypothesized that
the activity of DDX5 in regulating fibrogenic gene transcription in hepatic
stellate cells (HSCs) is altered by the S480A SNP. To test this, we employed two 
approaches: 1) transient overexpression of DDX5 cDNA or siRNA knockdown of
endogenous DDX5, with replacement by either DDX5 wild type (WT) or SNP cDNA, or
2) stable expression of exogenous DDX5 WT and SNP in HSC lines. WT DDX5 mRNA in
HSCs was inversely correlated with gene expression for alpha2(I) collagen, tissue
inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1, and transforming growth factor-beta1. Stable
DDX5 SNP-expressing cells had higher basal and transforming growth
factor-beta1-stimulated expression and enhanced promoter activities of fibrogenic
genes. DDX5 variant-expressing cells also had higher Smad3 and AP-1-responsive
reporter activities. In a one-hybrid GAL4 system, co-expression of the DDX5 SNP
variant with chimeras of GAL4 DNA binding domain linked to JunD or Sp1 displayed 
higher transactivation of a GAL4-responsive reporter than that of DDX5 WT.
Increased fibrogenic gene expression in DDX5 SNP-expressing cells was associated 
with reduced recruitment of DDX5 homodimers to responsive promoters, but there
was no difference in the recruitment of the co-repressor HDAC1 (histone
deacetylase 1). These data suggest that DDX5 is a repressor of fibrogenic genes
in HSCs through interaction with transcriptional complexes. The enhanced
fibrogenic activity of the DDX5 risk variant is linked to a reduced repressive
function toward these target genes.

PMCID: PMC2820771
PMID: 20022962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2009 Aug;31(8):561-5.

[Gene profiling after knocking-down the expression of NS gene in prostate cancer 
PC-3 cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu RL(1), Xu Y, Zhang ZH, Wang M, Sun JT, Zhang Y, Li SZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Second Hospital, Tianjin Medical University & Tianjin
Institute of Urology, Tianjin 300211, China.

OBJECTIVE: To screen the genes and possible signal transduction pathways involved
in the mechanism of nucleostemin (NS) in the proliferation of prostate cancer.
METHODS: Oligonucleotide DNA microarray was used to screen the genome changes
after knocking-down expression of NS in PC-3 cells and quantitative real-time PCR
was used to further confirm the important differentially expressed genes.
RESULTS: 219 differentially expressed genes were found and theses genes were
involved in cell cycle, cell proliferation, signal transduction, cell apoptosis
and cell differentiation, etc. INK4 family genes (p15, p16, p18) were
up-regulated and cyclin D1, HDAC1 were down-regulated, the main action points
were CDK4/6-cyclin D and pRb-E2F1 complexes.
CONCLUSION: NS may promote the progression of prostate cancer by inhibiting the
expression of p15, p16, and p18 in PC-3 cells. NS is an important G(1)/S
checkpoint regulator and its regulatory activity has been certified at gene
level.

PMID: 20021940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2010 Mar;35(4):870-80. doi: 10.1038/npp.2009.197. Epub
2009 Dec 9.

Inhibitors of class 1 histone deacetylases reverse contextual memory deficits in 
a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease.

Kilgore M(1), Miller CA, Fass DM, Hennig KM, Haggarty SJ, Sweatt JD, Rumbaugh G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Evelyn F McKnight Brain Institute, University of
Alabama at Birmingham School of Medicine, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

Comment in
    Neuropsychopharmacology. 2010 Mar;35(4):853-4.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized clinically
by cognitive impairments that progress to dementia and death. The earliest
symptoms of AD present as a relatively pure deficit in memory retrieval.
Therefore, drug treatments that intervene in the early stages of AD by rescuing
memory deficits could be promising therapies to slow, or even reverse progression
of the disease. In this study, we tested the potential of systemic histone
deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi) treatment to rescue cognitive deficits in a mouse
model of AD. APPswe/PS1dE9 mice showed pronounced contextual memory impairments
beginning at 6 months of age. Chronic HDACi injections (2-3 weeks) did not alter 
contextual memory formation in normal mice, but had profound effects in
transgenic animals. Injections of sodium valproate, sodium butyrate, or
vorinostat (suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid; Zolinza) completely restored
contextual memory in these mutant mice. Further behavioral testing of the
HDACi-treated transgenic mice showed that the newly consolidated memories were
stably maintained over a 2-week period. Measurement of the HDAC isoform
selectivity profile of sodium valproate, sodium butyrate, and vorinostat revealed
the common inhibition of class I HDACs (HDAC1, 2, 3, 8) with little effect on the
class IIa HDAC family members (HDAC4, 5, 7, 9) and inhibition of HDAC6 only by
vorinostat. These preclinical results indicate that targeted inhibition of class 
I HDAC isoforms is a promising avenue for treating the cognitive deficits
associated with early stage AD.

PMCID: PMC3055373
PMID: 20010553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Jan 8;391(2):1255-61. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.12.055. Epub 2009 Dec 16.

Tumor Necrosis Factor alpha (TNFalpha) regulates CD40 expression through SMAR1
phosphorylation.

Singh K(1), Sinha S, Malonia SK, Chattopadhyay S.

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Cell Science, Pune University Campus, Ganeshkhind, Pune
411 007, Maharashtra, India.

CD40 plays an important role in mediating inflammatory response and is mainly
induced by JAK/STAT phosphorylation cascade. TNFalpha is the key cytokine that
activates CD40 during inflammation and tumorigenesis. We have earlier shown that 
SMAR1 can repress the transcription of Cyclin D1 promoter by forming a HDAC1
dependent repressor complex. In this study, we show that SMAR1 regulates the
transcription of NF-kappaB target gene CD40. SMAR1 recruits HDAC1 and forms a
repressor complex on CD40 promoter and keeps its basal transcription in check.
Further, we show that TNFalpha stimulation induces SMAR1 phosphorylation at
Ser-347 and promotes its cytoplasmic translocation, thus releasing its negative
effect. Concomitantly, TNFalpha induced phosphorylation of STAT1 at Tyr-701 by
JAK1 facilitates its nuclear translocation and activation of CD40 through p300
recruitment and core Histone-3 acetylation. Thus, TNFalpha mediated regulation of
CD40 expression occurs by dual phosphorylation of SMAR1 and STAT1.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20006573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Biochem J. 2010 Feb 24;426(3):345-54. doi: 10.1042/BJ20091630.

Thr435 phosphorylation regulates RelA (p65) NF-kappaB subunit transactivation.

O'Shea JM(1), Perkins ND.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, School of Medical Sciences,
University of Bristol, University Walk, Bristol BS8 1TD, UK.

Phosphorylation of the RelA (p65) NF-kappaB (nuclear factor kappaB) subunit has
been previously shown to modulate its ability to induce or repress transcription.
In the present study we have investigated the consequences of Thr435
phosphorylation within the C-terminal transactivation domain of RelA. We confirm 
that Thr435 is phosphorylated in cells and is induced by TNFalpha (tumour
necrosis factor alpha) treatment. Mutational analysis of this site revealed
gene-specific effects on transcription, with a T435D phosphomimetic mutant
significantly enhancing Cxcl2 (CXC chemokine ligand 2) mRNA levels in
reconstituted Rela-/- mouse embryonic fibroblasts. Chromatin immunoprecipitation 
analysis revealed that this mutation results in enhanced levels of histone
acetylation associated with decreased recruitment of HDAC1 (histone deacetylase
1). Moreover, mutation of this site disrupted RelA interaction with HDAC1 in
vitro. Thr435 phosphorylation of promoter-bound RelA was also detected at
NF-kappaB target genes following TNFalpha treatment in wild-type mouse embryonic 
fibroblasts. Phosphorylation at this site therefore provides an additional
mechanism through which the specificity of NF-kappaB transcriptional activity can
be modulated in cells.

PMCID: PMC2829238
PMID: 20001970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Am J Transl Res. 2009;1(1):62-71. Epub 2009 Jan 1.

Increased expression of histone deacetylaces (HDACs) and inhibition of prostate
cancer growth and invasion by HDAC inhibitor SAHA.

Wang L, Zou X, Berger AD, Twiss C, Peng Y, Li Y, Chiu J, Guo H, Satagopan J,
Wilton A, Gerald W, Basch R, Wang Z, Osman I, Lee P.

Histone deacetetylases (HDACs) are a group of corepressors of transcriptional
activators and their levels of expression are potentially dysregulated in
prostate cancer. Certain inhibitors of histone deacetylases show anti-tumor
activity in prostate cancer cell lines. Here, we systemically studied the
expression of HDACs in human prostate cancer and the suppression of prostate
cancer growth and invasion by HDAC inhibitor SAHA. HDAC1-5 showed increased
expression using a combination of DNA microarray, in-situ hybridization, and
immunohistochemistry in benign and malignant human prostate tissue as well as
RT-PCR and Western blot analysis on various PCa cell lines. Importantly, HDAC
inhibitor SAHA suppressed, in particular, prostate cancer cell growth and
invasion determined using cell proliferation and Matrigel invasion assays. The
findings of this study show that the expression of HDACs and their associated
corepressors are increased in prostate cancer in humans and HDAC inhibitor SAHA
could serve as a potential therapeutic agent in prostate cancer in addition to
anti-androgens.

PMCID: PMC2776287
PMID: 19966939  [PubMed]


245. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Dec 22;106(51):21819-24. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0911987106. Epub 2009 Dec 4.

Chemical modifier screen identifies HDAC inhibitors as suppressors of PKD models.

Cao Y(1), Semanchik N, Lee SH, Somlo S, Barbano PE, Coifman R, Sun Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, 
New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Polycystic kidney disease (PKD) is a common human genetic disease with severe
medical consequences. Although it is appreciated that the cilium plays a central 
role in PKD, the underlying mechanism for PKD remains poorly understood and no
effective treatment is available. In zebrafish, kidney cyst formation is closely 
associated with laterality defects and body curvature. To discover potential drug
candidates and dissect signaling pathways that interact with ciliary signals, we 
performed a chemical modifier screen for the two phenotypes using zebrafish
pkd2(hi4166) and ift172(hi2211) models. pkd2 is a causal gene for autosomal
dominant PKD and ift172 is essential for building and maintaining the cilium. We 
identified trichostatin A (TSA), a pan-HDAC (histone deacetylase) inhibitor, as a
compound that affected both body curvature and laterality. Further analysis
verified that TSA inhibited cyst formation in pkd2 knockdown animals. Moreover,
we demonstrated that inhibiting class I HDACs, either by valproic acid (VPA), a
class I specific HDAC inhibitor structurally unrelated to TSA, or by knocking
down hdac1, suppressed kidney cyst formation and body curvature caused by pkd2
deficiency. Finally, we show that VPA was able to reduce the progression of cyst 
formation and slow the decline of kidney function in a mouse ADPKD model.
Together, these data suggest body curvature may be used as a surrogate marker for
kidney cyst formation in large-scale high-throughput screens in zebrafish. More
importantly, our results also reveal a critical role for HDACs in PKD
pathogenesis and point to HDAC inhibitors as drug candidates for PKD treatment.

PMCID: PMC2799791
PMID: 19966229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Cell Adh Migr. 2010 Jan-Mar;4(1):77-80. Epub 2010 Jan 19.

FAK interaction with MBD2: A link from cell adhesion to nuclear chromatin
remodeling?

Mei L(1), Xiong WC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine & Genetics and Department of Neurology,
Medical College of Georgia, Augusta, GA, USA.

Cell adhesion, migration, proliferation and differentiation are tightly linked
and coordinated cellular processes. Cell adhesion dependent gene expression is
believed to contribute to such coordination. Focal adhesion kinase (FAK) and its 
related protein, PYK2 (proline rich tyrosine kinase 2), are a major family of
cell adhesion activated tyrosine kinases that play important roles in these
cellular processes. Whereas FAK or PYK2 is known to be a scaffold protein,
recruiting many cytoplasmic proteins into the focal adhesion complex and
regulating focal adhesion turnover and cell migration, how FAK or PYK2 links to
the nuclei and regulates gene expression remain largely unclear. We recently
report a new signaling of FAK in regulating heterochromatin remodeling by its
interaction with MBD2 (Methyl CpG binding domain protein 2), which may underlie
FAK regulation of myogenin expression and muscle differentiation. Two insights
have been obtained through the analysis of FAK-MBD2 interaction. The interaction 
appears to be sufficient, but not necessary, for FAK translocation into or
maintaining in the nucleus. The nuclear FAK-MBD2 complexes cause altered
heterochromatin organization and decreased MBD2 association with HDAC1 (histone
deacetylase complex 1) and methyl CpG site in the myogenin promoter, thus,
inducing myogenin expression. These results demonstrate a new mechanism
underlying FAK regulation of gene expression, and suggest a potential link
between cell adhesion and cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2852562
PMID: 19949307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. J Chem Inf Model. 2009 Dec;49(12):2774-85. doi: 10.1021/ci900288e.

Docking of hydroxamic acids into HDAC1 and HDAC8: a rationalization of activity
trends and selectivities.

Ortore G(1), Di Colo F, Martinelli A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Farmaceutiche, Universita di Pisa, via Bonanno 6,
56126 Pisa, Italy.

A docking protocol using Gold software was developed to predict the binding
disposition of histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors, starting from the X-ray
structures of HDAC8. The optimized procedure was subsequently utilized to dock
into HDAC8 and into a homology model of HDAC1 nearly 40 compounds that had been
tested for their inhibitory activity against the two HDAC isozymes. Evaluation of
the best binding poses allowed us to identify the ligand properties and the
protein residues important for activity and selectivity. HDACs are important
anticancer drug targets, and their study is currently being actively pursued. As 
such, our results could help design new isozyme-selective HDAC inhibitors.
Furthermore, this strategy may also be used for the investigation of other HDACs.

PMID: 19947584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Viruses. 2009 Dec;1(3):873-94. doi: 10.3390/v1030873. Epub 2009 Nov 10.

Reverse Transcriptase and Cellular Factors: Regulators of HIV-1 Reverse
Transcription.

Warren K(1), Warrilow D, Meredith L, Harrich D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Queensland Institute of Medical Research,
Brisbane, QLD, Australia; E-Mails: kylieW@qimr.edu.au (K.W.); davidW@qimr.edu.au 
(D.W.); lukeMe@qimr.edu.au (L.M.).

There is ample evidence that synthesis of HIV-1 proviral DNA from the viral RNA
genome during reverse transcription requires host factors. However, only a few
cellular proteins have been described in detail that affect reverse transcription
and interact with reverse transcriptase (RT). HIV-1 integrase is an RT binding
protein and a number of IN-binding proteins including INI1, components of the
Sin3a complex, and Gemin2 affect reverse transcription. In addition, recent
studies implicate the cellular proteins HuR, AKAP149, and DNA topoisomerase I in 
reverse transcription through an interaction with RT. In this review we will
consider interactions of reverse transcription complex with viral and cellular
factors and how they affect the reverse transcription process.

PMCID: PMC3185528
PMID: 21994574  [PubMed]


249. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2010 Sep;123(2):359-73. doi: 10.1007/s10549-009-0652-2. 
Epub 2009 Nov 27.

UHRF1 is associated with epigenetic silencing of BRCA1 in sporadic breast cancer.

Jin W(1), Chen L, Chen Y, Xu SG, Di GH, Yin WJ, Wu J, Shao ZM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, Breast Cancer Institute, Cancer Hospital/Cancer 
Institute, Fudan University, 200032, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
jinwei7207@163.com

BRCA1 is closely related to the pathogenesis of breast cancer, BRCA1 mRNA is
reduced in sporadic breast cancer cells despite the lack of mutations. In the
present report, we found that overexpression of UHRF1 (ubiquitin-like, containing
PHD and RING finger domains 1) was closely related to DNA methylation,
deacetylation, and methylation of histones, recruitment of an inhibiting
transcriptional complex on the BRCA1 promoter in sporadic breast cancer.
Overexpression of UHRF1 induced deacetylation of histones H3 and H4, which was
facilitated by recruitment of histone deacetylase1 (HDAC1) to the BRCA1 promoter.
Loss of acetylation was accompanied by loss of binding of the key transcription
factors MyoD, CBP, and p300. UHRF1 also recruited histone lysine
methyltransferase G9a to the BRCA1 promoter and histone 3 lysine 4 (H3K4) was
demethylated, and histone 3 lysine 9 (H3K9) was methylated. Finally,
overexpression of UHRF1 leaded to methylation of BRCA1 promoter by recruitment of
DNMT1 to the BRCA1 promoter, locking in marked suppression of BRCA1. It is the
first to describe that UHRF1 is responsible for regulating BRCA1 transcription by
inducing DNA methylation, histone modifications, and recruitment of
transcriptional complex on the BRCA1 promoter, UHRF1 is a new bio-marker in
sporadic breast cancer.

PMID: 19943104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. BMC Cancer. 2009 Nov 13;9:395. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-9-395.

High class I HDAC activity and expression are associated with RelA/p65 activation
in pancreatic cancer in vitro and in vivo.

Lehmann A(1), Denkert C, Budczies J, Buckendahl AC, Darb-Esfahani S, Noske A,
Müller BM, Bahra M, Neuhaus P, Dietel M, Kristiansen G, Weichert W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Charité University Hospital, Berlin, Germany.
annika.lehmann@charite.de

BACKGROUND: The strong association between aberrant HDAC activity and the
occurrence of cancer has led to the development of a variety of HDAC inhibitors
(HDIs), which emerge as promising new targeted anticancer therapeutics.
METHODS: Due to the pivotal role of RelA/p65 in the tumorigenesis of pancreatic
neoplasia we examined the expression of class I HDACs 1, 2 and 3 in a large
cohort of human pancreatic carcinomas and correlated our findings with RelA/p65
expression status. Furthermore, we investigated the impact of the HDIs SAHA and
VPA on RelA/p65 activity in pancreatic cancer cell culture models.
RESULTS: Class I HDACs were strongly expressed in a subset of pancreatic
adenocarcinomas and high expression was significantly correlated with increased
nuclear translocation of RelA/p65 (p = 0.024). The link of HDAC activity and
RelA/p65 in this tumor entity was confirmed in vitro, where RelA/p65 nuclear
translocation as well as RelA/p65 DNA binding activity could be markedly
diminished by HDI treatment.
CONCLUSION: The RelA/p65 inhibitory effects of SAHA and VPA in vitro and the
close relationship of class I HDACs and RelA/p65 in vivo suggest that treatment
with HDIs could serve as a promising approach to suppress NF-kappaB activity
which in turn may lead to enhanced apoptosis and chemosensitization of pancreatic
cancers.

PMCID: PMC2779818
PMID: 19912635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Nov 24;106(47):19975-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0908365106. Epub 2009 Nov 11.

Nuclear HBx binds the HBV minichromosome and modifies the epigenetic regulation
of cccDNA function.

Belloni L(1), Pollicino T, De Nicola F, Guerrieri F, Raffa G, Fanciulli M,
Raimondo G, Levrero M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Expression, Fondazione A Cesalpino, 00161 Rome, Italy.
laura.belloni@gmail.com

HBV cccDNA, the template for transcription of all viral mRNAs, accumulates in the
nucleus of infected cells as a stable episome organized into minichromosomes by
histones and non-histone viral and cellular proteins. Using a cccDNA-specific
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-based quantitative assay, we have previously
shown that transcription of the HBV minichromosome is regulated by epigenetic
changes of cccDNA-bound histones and that modulation of the acetylation status of
cccDNA-bound H3/H4 histones impacts on HBV replication. We now show that the
cellular histone acetyltransferases CBP, p300, and PCAF/GCN5, and the histone
deacetylases HDAC1 and hSirt1 are all recruited in vivo onto the cccDNA. We also 
found that the HBx regulatory protein produced in HBV replicating cells is
recruited onto the cccDNA minichromosome, and the kinetics of HBx recruitment on 
the cccDNA parallels the HBV replication. As expected, an HBV mutant that does
not express HBx is impaired in its replication, and exogenously expressed HBx
transcomplements the replication defects. p300 recruitment is severely impaired, 
and cccDNA-bound histones are rapidly hypoacetylated in cells replicating the HBx
mutant, whereas the recruitment of the histone deacetylases hSirt1 and HDAC1 is
increased and occurs at earlier times. Finally, HBx mutant cccDNA transcribes
significantly less pgRNA. Altogether our results further support the existence of
a complex network of epigenetic events that influence cccDNA function and HBV
replication and identify an epigenetic mechanism (i.e., to prevent cccDNA
deacetylation) by which HBx controls HBV replication.

PMCID: PMC2775998
PMID: 19906987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2010 Jan;298(1):F133-41. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00400.2009. Epub 2009 Nov 11.

Histone deacetylase modulates the proinflammatory and -fibrotic changes in
tubulointerstitial injury.

Marumo T(1), Hishikawa K, Yoshikawa M, Hirahashi J, Kawachi S, Fujita T.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Clinical Renal Regeneration, and Div. of Nephrology and
Endocrinology, Dept. of Internal Medicine, Univ. of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo,
Bunkyo-ku, 113-8655 Tokyo, Japan. tmarumo-npr@umin.ac.jp

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) regulates gene expression by modifying chromatin
structure. Although changes in the expression and activities of HDAC may affect
the course of kidney disease, the role of HDAC in tubulointerstitial injury has
not been explored. We therefore investigated the alterations in HDAC expression
and determined the effects of HDAC inhibition on the tubulointerstitial injury
induced by unilateral ureteral obstruction. The induction of HDAC1 and HDAC2,
accompanied by a decrease in histone acetylation was observed in kidneys injured 
by ureteral obstruction. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that HDAC1 and
HDAC2 were induced in renal tubular cells. Treatment with an HDAC inhibitor,
trichostatin A (TSA), attenuated macrophage infiltration and fibrotic changes in 
tubulointerstitial injury induced by ureteral obstruction. The induction of
colony-stimulating factor-1 (CSF-1), a chemokine known to be involved in
macrophage infiltration in tubulointerstitial injury, was reduced in injured
kidneys from mice treated with TSA. TSA, valproate, and the knockdown of HDAC1 or
HDAC2 significantly reduced CSF-1 induced by TNF-alpha in renal tubular cells.
These results suggest that tubular HDAC1 and HDAC2, induced in response to
injury, may contribute to the induction of CSF-1 and the initiation of macrophage
infiltration and profibrotic responses. These findings suggest a potential of
HDAC inhibition therapy aimed at reducing inflammation and fibrosis in
tubulointerstitial injury.

PMID: 19906951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Med Oncol. 2010 Dec;27(4):1144-8. doi: 10.1007/s12032-009-9350-5. Epub 2009 Nov
7.

Large-cell neuroendocrine carcinoma of the ampulla of Vater.

Stojsic Z(1), Brasanac D, Bilanovic D, Mitrovic O, Stevanovic R, Boricic I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, School of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Dr
Subotica 1/II, 11000, Belgrade, Serbia. zstojsic@med.bg.ac.rs

Large-cell neuroendocrine carcinoma is a high-grade neuroendocrine carcinoma,
originally described in the lung. The tumor rarely occurs in extrapulmonary sites
like the gastrointestinal tract, and only few examples have been described in the
ampulla of Vater. A new case of large-cell neuroendocrine carcinoma of the
ampulla of Vater in a 60-year-old man is reported. After pancreatoduodenectomy,
macroscopic examination revealed ulcerated tumor in the region of the ampulla of 
Vater. Microscopically, the tumor exhibited organoid, predominantly nested growth
pattern, consisting of large, polygonal cells with pleomorphic nuclei. Average
number of mitoses was 36 per 10 high-power fields. Small and large areas of
necrosis were identified. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive
for synaptophysin, chromogranin A, PGP 9.5, neuron-specific enolase,
pancytokeratin, CK8 and somatostatin and negative for CK7, CK20, S-100, TTF-1,
HMB-45, CD117, E-cadherin and regulatory peptides. Ki-67 proliferative index was 
41%. Histone deacetylase (HDAC) analysis showed almost identical results for
HDAC1, HDAC2 and HDAC3--60, 60.3 and 61%, respectively. Two months after surgery,
liver metastases occurred, confirming highly aggressive behavior of large-cell
neuroendocrine carcinoma.

PMID: 19898974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Med Chem. 2009 Nov 12;52(21):6782-9. doi: 10.1021/jm900555u.

Identification of novel, selective, and stable inhibitors of class II histone
deacetylases. Validation studies of the inhibition of the enzymatic activity of
HDAC4 by small molecules as a novel approach for cancer therapy.

Ontoria JM(1), Altamura S, Di Marco A, Ferrigno F, Laufer R, Muraglia E, Palumbi 
MC, Rowley M, Scarpelli R, Schultz-Fademrecht C, Serafini S, Steinkühler C, Jones
P.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Di Ricerche Di Biologia Molecolare, P. Angeletti SpA (IRBM-MRL,
Rome), Via Pontina Km 30,600, I-00040 Pomezia, Italy. jmontoria@gmail.com

5-Aryl-2-(trifluoroacetyl)thiophenes were identified as a new series of class II 
HDAC inhibitors (HDACi). Further development of this new series led to compounds 
such as 6h, a potent inhibitor of HDAC4 and HDAC6 (HDAC4 WT IC(50) = 310 nM,
HDAC6 IC(50) = 70 nM) that displays 40-fold selectivity over HDAC1 and improved
stability in HCT116 cancer cells (t(1/2) = 11 h). Compounds 6h and 2 show
inhibition of alpha-tubulin deacetylation in HCT116 cells at 1 microM
concentration and antiproliferation effects only at concentrations where
inhibition of histone H3 deacetylation is observed.

PMID: 19888759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Chem Commun (Camb). 2009 Nov 28;(44):6735-7. doi: 10.1039/b916715c. Epub 2009 Oct
12.

A novel anti-cancer bifunctional platinum drug candidate with dual DNA binding
and histone deacetylase inhibitory activity.

Griffith D(1), Morgan MP, Marmion CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Synthesis and Chemical Biology, Department of Pharmaceutical &
Medicinal Chemistry, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland (RCSI), Dublin 2,
Ireland.

The successful design and synthesis of a novel multifunctional platinum drug
candidate with DNA binding, histone deacetylase inhibitory activity and enhanced 
selectivity for cancer cells are described.

PMID: 19885462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. BMC Mol Biol. 2009 Nov 1;10:100. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-10-100.

Evaluation of real-time PCR endogenous control genes for analysis of gene
expression in bovine endometrium.

Walker CG(1), Meier S, Mitchell MD, Roche JR, Littlejohn M.

Author information: 
(1)DairyNZ Ltd,, Hamilton, New Zealand. Caroline.Walker@vialactia.com

BACKGROUND: Quantitative real-time PCR gene expression results are generally
normalised using endogenous control genes. These reference genes should be
expressed at a constant level across all sample groups in a study, and should not
be influenced by study treatments or conditions. There has been no systematic
investigation of endogenous control genes for bovine endometrium to date. The
suitability of both commonly used and novel endogenous control genes was
evaluated in this study, with the latter being selected from stably expressed
transcripts identified through microarray analysis of bovine endometrium. Fifteen
candidate endogenous control genes were assessed across different tissue subtypes
in pregnant and cycling Holstein-Friesian dairy cows from two divergent genetic
backgrounds.
RESULTS: The expression profiles of five commonly used endogenous control genes
(GAPDH, PPIA, RPS9, RPS15A, and UXT) and 10 experimentally derived candidate
endogenous control genes (SUZ12, C2ORF29, ZNF131, ACTR1A, HDAC1, SLC30A6, CNOT7, 
DNAJC17, BBS2, and RANBP10) were analysed across 44 samples to determine the most
stably expressed gene. Gene stability was assessed using the statistical
algorithms GeNorm and Normfinder. All genes presented with low overall
variability (0.87 to 1.48% CV of Cq). However, when used to normalise a
differentially expressed gene (oxytocin receptor - OXTR) in the samples, the
reported relative gene expression levels were significantly affected by the
control gene chosen. Based on the results of this analysis, SUZ12 is proposed as 
the most appropriate control gene for use in bovine endometrium during early
pregnancy or the oestrus cycle.
CONCLUSION: This study establishes the suitability of novel endogenous control
genes for comparing expression levels in endometrial tissues of pregnant and
cycling bovines, and demonstrates the utility of microarray analysis as a method 
for identifying endogenous control gene candidates.

PMCID: PMC2774697
PMID: 19878604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Neurobiol Aging. 2011 Sep;32(9):1662-77. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2009.09.010. Epub 2009 Oct 28.

Urocortin modulates dopaminergic neuronal survival via inhibition of glycogen
synthase kinase-3ß and histone deacetylase.

Huang HY(1), Lin SZ, Chen WF, Li KW, Kuo JS, Wang MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research, Neuro-Medical Scientific Center, Buddhist Tzu Chi
General Hospital, Hualien 970, Taiwan, ROC.

Urocortin (UCN) is a member of the corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) family
of neuropeptides that regulates stress responses. Although UCN is principally
expressed in dopaminergic neurons in rat substantia nigra (SN), the function of
UCN in modulating dopaminergic neuronal survival remains unclear. Using primary
mesencephalic cultures, we demonstrated that dopaminergic neurons underwent
spontaneous cell death when their age increased in culture. Treatment of
mesencephalic cultures with UCN markedly prolonged the survival of dopaminergic
neurons, whereas neutralization of UCN with anti-UCN antibody accelerated
dopaminergic neurons degeneration. UCN increased intracellular cAMP levels
followed by phosphorylating glycogen synthase kinase-3ß (GSK-3ß) on Ser9.
Moreover, UCN directly inhibited the histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity and
induced a robust increase in histone H3 acetylation levels. Using pharmacological
approaches, we further demonstrated that inhibition of GSK-3ß and HDAC
contributes to UCN-mediated neuroprotection. These results suggest that
dopaminergic neuron-derived UCN might be involved in an autocrine protective
signaling mechanism.

Copyright © 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19875195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Blood. 2009 Dec 24;114(27):5464-72. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-06-227777. Epub 2009 
Oct 28.

Mta3-NuRD complex is a master regulator for initiation of primitive hematopoiesis
in vertebrate embryos.

Li X(1), Jia S, Wang S, Wang Y, Meng A.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Science Laboratory of Ministry of Education, Department of Biological 
Sciences and Biotechnology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.

Metastasis-associated antigens 1/2/3 (Mta1/2/3) are components of nucleosome
remodeling and deacetylase (NuRD) complexes and have been found to play roles in 
embryonic development and homeostasis. However, their functions in primitive
hematopoiesis are unknown. In this study, we demonstrate that knockdown of mta3
by antisense morpholinos abolishes primitive hematopoietic lineages and causes
abnormal angiogenesis in zebrafish embryos. However, the expression of the
pronephric duct and paraxial mesoderm markers is unaltered and the specification 
of angioblasts is unaffected in mta3 morphants. The results suggest that mta3 is 
specifically required for primitive hematopoiesis. Furthermore, inhibition of
deacetylase activity with the inhibitors valproic acid (VPA) or trichostatin A
(TSA) in zebrafish embryos completely blocks primitive hematopoiesis, resulting
in hematopoietic defects almost identical to those seen in mta3 morphants.
Importantly, overexpression of scl or scl and lmo2, 2 master genes for primitive 
hematopoiesis, is able to overturn effects of mta3 knockdown or VPA/TSA
treatment; and overexpression of mta3, and human MBD3 or HDAC1, 2 other
components of NuRD complex, enhances the expression of scl and lmo2 in the
posterior lateral plate mesoderm during early primitive hematopoiesis. We
conclude that Mta3-NuRD complex is essential for the initiation of primitive
hematopoiesis. Thus, our findings provide new insight into the regulatory
hierarchy of primitive hematopoiesis in vertebrates.

PMID: 19864643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Nov 15;15(22):6841-51. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-0547. 
Epub 2009 Oct 27.

JNJ-26481585, a novel "second-generation" oral histone deacetylase inhibitor,
shows broad-spectrum preclinical antitumoral activity.

Arts J(1), King P, Mariën A, Floren W, Beliën A, Janssen L, Pilatte I, Roux B,
Decrane L, Gilissen R, Hickson I, Vreys V, Cox E, Bol K, Talloen W, Goris I,
Andries L, Du Jardin M, Janicot M, Page M, van Emelen K, Angibaud P.

Author information: 
(1)Ortho Biotech Oncology Research and Development, Clinical Pharmacology,
Biostatistics, and Functional Genomics, Johnson & Johnson Pharmaceutical R. & D.,
Beerse, Belgium. jarts@its.jnj.com

PURPOSE: Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors have shown promising clinical
activity in the treatment of hematologic malignancies, but their activity in
solid tumor indications has been limited. Most HDAC inhibitors in clinical
development only transiently induce histone acetylation in tumor tissue. Here, we
sought to identify a "second-generation" class I HDAC inhibitor with prolonged
pharmacodynamic response in vivo, to assess whether this results in superior
antitumoral efficacy.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: To identify novel HDAC inhibitors with superior
pharmacodynamic properties, we developed a preclinical in vivo tumor model, in
which tumor cells have been engineered to express fluorescent protein dependent
on HDAC1 inhibition, thereby allowing noninvasive real-time evaluation of the
tumor response to HDAC inhibitors.
RESULTS: In vivo pharmacodynamic analysis of 140 potent pyrimidyl-hydroxamic acid
analogues resulted in the identification of JNJ-26481585. Once daily oral
administration of JNJ-26481585 induced continuous histone H3 acetylation. The
prolonged pharmacodynamic response translated into complete tumor growth
inhibition in Ras mutant HCT116 colon carcinoma xenografts, whereas
5-fluorouracil was less active. JNJ-26481585 also fully inhibited the growth of
C170HM2 colorectal liver metastases, whereas again 5-fluorouracil/Leucovorin
showed modest activity. Further characterization revealed that JNJ-26481585 is a 
pan-HDAC inhibitor with marked potency toward HDAC1 (IC(50), 0.16 nmol/L).
CONCLUSIONS: The potent antitumor activity as a single agent in preclinical
models combined with its favorable pharmacodynamic profile makes JNJ-26481585 a
promising "second-generation" HDAC inhibitor. The compound is currently in
clinical studies, to evaluate its potential applicability in a broad spectrum of 
both solid and hematologic malignancies.

PMID: 19861438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Cancer Sci. 2010 Feb;101(2):355-62. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2009.01387.x. Epub
2009 Oct 6.

Histone deacetylase inhibitor (SAHA) and repression of EZH2 synergistically
inhibit proliferation of gallbladder carcinoma.

Yamaguchi J(1), Sasaki M, Sato Y, Itatsu K, Harada K, Zen Y, Ikeda H, Nimura Y,
Nagino M, Nakanuma Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology, Kanazawa University Graduate School of
Medicine, Kanazawa, Japan.

Polycomb group protein EZH2, frequently overexpressed in malignant tumors, is the
catalytic subunit of polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2). PRC2 interacts with
HDACs in transcriptional silencing and relates to tumor suppressor loss. We
examined the expression of HDAC isoforms (HDAC 1 and 2) and EZH2, and evaluated
the possible use of HDAC inhibitor suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) and
EZH2 repressor for gallbladder carcinoma. We used 48 surgically resected
gallbladders and cultures of human gallbladder epithelial cells (HGECs),
gallbladder carcinoma (TGBC2TKB), and cholangiocarcinoma (HuCCT-1 and TFK-1) cell
lines for examination. Immunohistochemically, EZH2 was overexpressed in
gallbladder carcinoma, especially poorly differentiated carcinoma, but not in
normal epithelium. In contrast, HDAC1/2 were expressed in both carcinoma and
normal epithelium in vivo. This pattern was verified in cultured cells; EZH2 was 
highly expressed only in TGBC2TKB, whereas HDAC1/2 were expressed in HGECs and
TGBC2TKB. Interestingly, SAHA treatment caused significant cell number decline in
three carcinoma cells, and this effect was synergized with EZH2 siRNA treatment; 
however, HGECs were resistant to SAHA. In TGBC2TKB cells, the expression of EZH2 
and HDAC1/2 were decreased by SAHA treatment, and p16(INK4a), E-cadherin, and
p21were simultaneously activated; however, no such findings were obtained in
HGECs, suggesting that the effect of SAHA depends on the EZH2-mediated tumor
suppressor loss. In conclusion, this study suggests a possible mechanism by which
carcinoma cells but not normal cells are sensitive to SAHA and indicates the
efficacy of this new anticancer agent in combination with EZH2 repression in
gallbladder carcinoma.

PMID: 19860841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Dev Cell. 2009 Oct;17(4):561-7. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2009.08.007.

Meis cofactors control HDAC and CBP accessibility at Hox-regulated promoters
during zebrafish embryogenesis.

Choe SK(1), Lu P, Nakamura M, Lee J, Sagerström CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, 364 Plantation Street, LRB822, Worcester, MA 01605,
USA.

Hox proteins form complexes with Pbx and Meis cofactors to control gene
expression, but the role of Meis is unclear. We demonstrate that Hoxb1-regulated 
promoters are highly acetylated on histone H4 (AcH4) and occupied by Hoxb1, Pbx, 
and Meis in zebrafish tissues where these promoters are active. Inhibition of
Meis blocks gene expression and reduces AcH4 levels at these promoters,
suggesting a role for Meis in maintaining AcH4. Within Hox transcription
complexes, Meis binds directly to Pbx and we find that this binding displaces
histone deacetylases (HDACs) from Hoxb1-regulated promoters in zebrafish embryos.
Accordingly, Pbx mutants that cannot bind Meis act as repressors by recruiting
HDACs and reducing AcH4 levels, while Pbx mutants that bind neither HDAC nor Meis
are constitutively active and recruit CBP to increase AcH4 levels. We conclude
that Meis acts, at least in part, by controlling access of HDAC and CBP to
Hox-regulated promoters.

PMCID: PMC2768649
PMID: 19853569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. J Neurosci. 2009 Oct 14;29(41):13079-89. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3610-09.2009.

Protein phosphatase 1 regulates the histone code for long-term memory.

Koshibu K(1), Gräff J, Beullens M, Heitz FD, Berchtold D, Russig H, Farinelli M, 
Bollen M, Mansuy IM.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Research Institute, University of Zürich, Swiss Federal Institute of
Technology, CH-8057 Zurich, Switzerland.

Chromatin remodeling through histone posttranslational modifications (PTMs) and
DNA methylation has recently been implicated in cognitive functions, but the
mechanisms involved in such epigenetic regulation remain poorly understood. Here,
we show that protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) is a critical regulator of chromatin
remodeling in the mammalian brain that controls histone PTMs and gene
transcription associated with long-term memory. Our data show that PP1 is present
at the chromatin in brain cells and interacts with enzymes of the epigenetic
machinery including HDAC1 (histone deacetylase 1) and histone demethylase JMJD2A 
(jumonji domain-containing protein 2A). The selective inhibition of the nuclear
pool of PP1 in forebrain neurons in transgenic mice is shown to induce several
histone PTMs that include not only phosphorylation but also acetylation and
methylation. These PTMs are residue-specific and occur at the promoter of genes
important for memory formation like CREB (cAMP response element-binding protein) 
and NF-kappaB (nuclear factor-kappaB). These histone PTMs further co-occur with
selective binding of RNA polymerase II and altered gene transcription, and are
associated with improved long-term memory for objects and space. Together, these 
findings reveal a novel mechanism for the epigenetic control of gene
transcription and long-term memory in the adult brain that depends on PP1.

PMID: 19828821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. PLoS Biol. 2009 Sep;7(9):e1000189. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000189. Epub 2009
Sep 8.

Recruitment of Cln3 cyclin to promoters controls cell cycle entry via histone
deacetylase and other targets.

Wang H(1), Carey LB, Cai Y, Wijnen H, Futcher B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Stony Brook University,
Stony Brook, New York, USA.

In yeast, the G1 cyclin Cln3 promotes cell cycle entry by activating the
transcription factor SBF. In mammals, there is a parallel system for cell cycle
entry in which cyclin dependent kinase (CDK) activates transcription factor
E2F/Dp. Here we show that Cln3 regulates SBF by at least two different pathways, 
one involving the repressive protein Whi5, and the second involving Stb1. The
Rpd3 histone deacetylase complex is also involved. Cln3 binds to SBF at the CLN2 
promoter, and removes previously bound Whi5 and histone deacetylase. Adding extra
copies of the SBF binding site to the cell delays Start, possibly by titrating
Cln3. Since Rpd3 is the yeast ortholog of mammalian HDAC1, there is now a
virtually complete analogy between the proteins regulating cell cycle entry in
yeast (SBF, Cln3, Whi5 and Stb1, Rpd3) and mammals (E2F, Cyclin D, Rb, HDAC1).
The cell may titrate Cln3 molecules against the number of SBF binding sites, and 
this could be the underlying basis of the size-control mechanism for Start.

PMCID: PMC2730028
PMID: 19823669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. J Biol Chem. 2009 Dec 11;284(50):34901-10. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.038356. Epub
2009 Oct 11.

Trans-regulation of histone deacetylase activities through acetylation.

Luo Y(1), Jian W, Stavreva D, Fu X, Hager G, Bungert J, Huang S, Qiu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Florida, Gainesville,
Florida 32610, USA.

HDAC1 and -2 are highly conserved enzymes and often coexist in the same
coregulator complexes. Understanding the regulation of histone deacetylase
activities is extremely important because these enzymes play key roles in
epigenetic regulation in normal and cancer cells. We previously showed that HDAC1
is required for glucocorticoid receptor-mediated transcription activation and
that its activity is regulated through acetylation by p300 during the induction
cycle. Here, we showed that HDAC2 is also required for glucocorticoid
receptor-mediated gene activation. HDAC2, however, is regulated through a
different mechanism from that of HDAC1. HDAC2 is not acetylated by p300, although
5 of 6 acetylated lysine residues in HDAC1 are also present in HDAC2. More
importantly, the activity of HDAC2 is inhibited by acetylated HDAC1.
Additionally, we showed that acetylated HDAC1 can trans-regulate HDAC2 through
heterodimerization. Thus, this study uncovered fundamental differences between
HDAC1 and HDAC2. It also unveiled a new mechanism of collaborative regulation by 
HDAC1/2 containing coregulator complexes.

PMCID: PMC2787352
PMID: 19822520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2009 Nov 15;19(22):6284-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2009.09.100.
Epub 2009 Sep 29.

Novel N-hydroxybenzamide-based HDAC inhibitors with branched CAP group.

Su H(1), Yu L, Nebbioso A, Carafa V, Chen Y, Altucci L, You Q.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing 210009, China.

Ongoing effort to gather further knowledge about the structural requirements on
histone deacetylase inhibitors led to the synthesis of novel
N-hydroxybenzamide-based HDAC inhibitors 1a-o, introducing branched hydrophobic
groups at the capping group, and their inhibition activity against HDACs and
anti-proliferation activity in four tumor cell lines were determined. Compounds
1j-o were further tested against recombinant human HDAC1 and HDAC4 to evaluate
their selectivity profile. This work further suggests that the chemical nature of
the capping group is critical for subtle discrimination between the class I and
the class II HDAC isoforms.

PMID: 19822426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Endocrinology. 2009 Nov;150(11):4950-7. doi: 10.1210/en.2009-0358. Epub 2009 Oct 
9.

Modulation of vitamin d receptor activity by the corepressor hairless:
differential effects of hairless isoforms.

Malloy PJ(1), Wang J, Jensen K, Feldman D.

Author information: 
(1)S025 Division of Endocrinology, Gerontology, and Metabolism, Stanford
University School of Medicine, 300 Pasteur Drive, Stanford, California
94305-5103, USA. pjmalloy@stanford.edu

The vitamin D receptor (VDR) and its corepressor Hairless (HR) are thought to
regulate key steps in the hair cycle because mutations in VDR or HR cause
alopecia in humans and mice. Many mammalian cells express two major HR isoforms
due to alternative splicing of exon 17. HR isoform-a encodes an 1189-amino acid
protein (full-length HR), and isoform-b encodes an 1134-amino acid protein
(HRDelta1072-1126). We demonstrated that both HR isoforms are expressed in
primary human keratinocytes and in the human keratinocyte cell line HaCaT. In
transfected COS-7 cells, the full-length HR repressed VDR-mediated
transactivation. In contrast, HRDelta1072-1126 failed to suppress and even
stimulated VDR-mediated transactivation. In coimmunoprecipitation, both HR
isoforms interacted with the VDR, but only the full-length HR interacted with
histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1). Alanine mutagenesis of two conserved glutamic
acids residues (E1100A/E1101A) encoded by exon 17 completely eliminated HR
corepressor activity and interactions with HDAC1. When the two HR isoforms were
coexpressed in COS-7 cells, the corepressor activity of the full-length HR was
not antagonized by the HRDelta1072-1126 isoform. When transfected into HaCaT
cells, the full-length HR inhibited endogenous CYP24A1 basal gene expression as
well as 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3-stimulated CYP24A1 expression. HRDelta1072-1126 
failed to suppress basal or 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3-stimulated CYP24A1 gene
expression. In conclusion, we have demonstrated that both HR isoforms are
expressed in keratinocytes and that the HRDelta1072-1126 isoform lacks
corepressor activity and is unable to bind HDACs. HRDelta1072-1126 may function
as a coactivator in some settings by inhibiting HDAC recruitment to the VDR
transcriptional complex.

PMCID: PMC2775984
PMID: 19819974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Exp Gerontol. 2010 Apr;45(4):279-85. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2009.10.001. Epub 2009 
Oct 8.

Role of HDAC1 in senescence, aging, and cancer.

Willis-Martinez D(1), Richards HW, Timchenko NA, Medrano EE.

Author information: 
(1)Huffington Center on Aging, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030,
USA.

HDAC1 is a member of the class I of histone deacetylases that also includes
HDAC2, -3 and -8. Although HDAC1 has been mostly studied in the context of
cancer, recent evidence strongly suggests that it plays critical roles in
cellular senescence, aging of the liver, myelination, and adult neurogenesis.
Here we review such roles and discuss the entangled relationships between HDAC1
with histone acetyltransferases and other HDACs including SIRT1.

2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2838962
PMID: 19818845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. J Cell Mol Med. 2011 Jan;15(1):94-108. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2009.00927.x.

Epigenetic modulation of the protein kinase A RIIa (PRKAR2A) gene by histone
deacetylases 1 and 2 in human smooth muscle cells.

Karolczak-Bayatti M(1), Loughney AD, Robson SC, Europe-Finner GN.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, Faculty of Medical
Sciences, Framlington Place, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
magda.karolczak@newcastle.ac.uk

Recently we reported that the expression of the protein kinase A (PKA) regulatory
subunit RIIa is dynamically regulated in human smooth muscle cells of the uterus.
We showed that expression levels of mRNA/protein were substantially increased
during pregnancy and decreased upon labour, changes that were mirrored by
particulate type II PKA activity. This implied an important role for RIIa in
maintaining uterine quiescence during pregnancy. Consequently the purpose of the 
present study was to identify potential mechanisms by which expression of the
RIIa gene was regulated in this tissue. We indicate here that the three SpI-III
(GC) binding domains within the proximal promoter region of the human RIIa gene
may play important roles in modulating expression of the gene in human myometrial
cells. We show that all three GC binding domains are involved in binding Sp1,
Sp3, histone deacetylase (HDACs) 1/2 and RbAp48 transcriptional complexes. The
functional significance of these binding domains was further analysed employing
in vitro luciferase reporter assays with full-length/truncated RIIa promoter
constructs. Importantly we show that treatment of primary human myometrial cell
cultures with the general class I/II HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A results in an 
increase in mRNA/protein levels. Moreover the increase in mRNA levels appeared to
be preceded by an increase in aH3, PolIIa, Sp3 and HDAC 2 binding to the three
SpI-III (GC) binding sites within the RIIa promoter. These results enable us to
provide a model whereby RIIa expression is epigenetically regulated in human
myometrial smooth muscle cells by histone deacetylase(s) activity within the
GC-rich proximal promoter region of the gene.

© 2011 The Author Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine © 2011 Foundation
for Cellular and Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3822497
PMID: 19818097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Int J Cancer. 2010 Apr 1;126(7):1538-48. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24928.

Resveratrol enhances p53 acetylation and apoptosis in prostate cancer by
inhibiting MTA1/NuRD complex.

Kai L(1), Samuel SK, Levenson AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology and Robert H Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Feinberg
School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

Dietary compounds and epigenetic influences are well recognized factors in cancer
progression. Resveratrol (Res), a dietary compound from grapes, has anticancer
properties; however, its epigenetic effects are understudied.
Metastasis-associated protein 1 (MTA1) is a part of the nucleosome remodeling
deacetylation (NuRD) corepressor complex that mediates posttranslational
modifications of histones and nonhistone proteins resulting in transcriptional
repression. MTA1 overexpression in prostate cancer (PCa) correlates with tumor
aggressiveness and metastasis. In this study, we have identified a novel
MTA1-mediated mechanism, by which Res restores p53-signaling pathways in PCa
cells. We show, for the first time, that Res causes down-regulation of MTA1
protein, leading to destabilization of MTA1/NuRD thus allowing
acetylation/activation of p53. We demonstrated that MTA1 decrease by Res was
concomitant with accumulation of Ac-p53. MTA1 knockdown further sensitized PCa
cells to Res-dependent p53 acetylation and recruitment to the p21 and Bax
promoters. Furthermore, MTA1 silencing maximized the levels of Res-induced
apoptosis and pro-apoptotic Bax accumulation. HDAC inhibitor SAHA, like MTA1
silencing, increased Res-dependent p53 acetylation and showed cooperative effect 
on apoptosis. Our results indicate a novel epigenetic mechanism that contributes 
to Res anticancer activities: the inhibition of MTA1/NuRD complexes due to MTA1
decrease, which suppresses its deacetylation function and allows p53 acetylation 
and subsequent activation of pro-apoptotic genes. Our study identifies MTA1 as a 
new molecular target of Res that may have important clinical applications for PCa
chemoprevention and therapy, and points to the combination of Res with HDAC
inhibitors as an innovative therapeutic strategy for the treatment of PCa.

PMID: 19810103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Mol Cancer Res. 2009 Oct;7(10):1672-85. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-09-0112. Epub 
2009 Oct 6.

Promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies link the DNA damage repair pathway with
hepatitis B virus replication: implications for hepatitis B virus exacerbation
during chemotherapy and radiotherapy.

Chung YL(1), Tsai TY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Koo Foundation Sun Yat-Sen Cancer Center,
Taipei, Taiwan. ylchung@kfsyscc.org

The mechanism responsible for hepatitis B virus (HBV) exacerbation during
chemotherapy and radiotherapy remains unknown. We investigated whether the
activation of DNA repair pathways influences HBV replication. The upregulation of
the promyelocytic leukemia (PML) protein and its associated PML nuclear body
(PML-NB) by chemotherapy and irradiation-induced DNA repair signaling correlated 
with the upregulation of HBV pregenomic transcription, HBV-core expression, and
HBV DNA replication. The HBV-core protein and HBV DNA localized to PML-NBs, where
they associated with PML and histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1). Chemotherapy and
radiotherapy affected the interactions between PML, HBV-core, and HDAC1. The
enhanced protein-protein interaction between PML and HBV-core inhibited
PML-mediated apoptosis and decreased PML-associated HDAC activity. The reversal
of HDAC-mediated repression on the HBV covalently closed circular DNA basal core 
promoter resulted in the amplification of HBV-core and pregenomic expression.
These results suggest that PML in PML-NBs links the DNA damage response with HBV 
replication and may cooperate with HBV-core and HDAC1 on the HBV covalently
closed circular DNA basal core promoter to form a positive feedback loop for HBV 
exacerbation during chemotherapy and radiotherapy.

PMID: 19808906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Oct 20;106(42):17823-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0905935106. Epub 2009 Sep 30.

NF-kappaB activity is constitutively elevated in c-Abl null fibroblasts.

Liberatore RA(1), Goff SP, Nunes I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, College of Physicians and
Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

The c-abl proto-oncogene encodes a nonreceptor tyrosine kinase involved in many
cellular processes, including signaling from growth factor and antigen receptors,
remodeling the cytoskeleton, and responding to DNA damage and oxidative stress.
Many downstream pathways are affected by c-Abl. Elevated c-Abl kinase activity
can inhibit NF-kappaB activity by stabilizing the inhibitory protein IkappaB
alpha, raising the possibility that c-Abl-deficient cells might have increased
NF-kappaB activity. We examined the levels of NF-kappaB activity in primary mouse
embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) derived from wild-type and c-Abl knockout mice and
found that the knockout MEFs indeed exhibited elevated NF-kappaB activity in
response to stimulation as well as constitutively elevated NF-kappaB activity.
Thus, endogenous c-Abl is a negative regulator of basal and inducible NF-kappaB
activity. Examination of various points of NF-kappaB regulation revealed that
unstimulated c-Abl knockout MEFs do not exhibit an increase in IkappaB alpha
degradation, p65/RelA nuclear translocation, or DNA binding of NF-kappaB
subunits. They do, however, show reduced levels of the histone deacetylase HDAC1,
a negative regulator of basal NF-kappaB activity. Unstimulated c-Abl knockout
MEFs are less responsive to induction of NF-kappaB activity by trichostatin A, an
HDAC inhibitor, suggesting that c-Abl might play a role in the HDAC-mediated
repression of basal NF-kappaB activity.

PMCID: PMC2754925
PMID: 19805123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Mol Cell Biochem. 2010 Mar;336(1-2):75-84. doi: 10.1007/s11010-009-0262-7. Epub
2009 Oct 3.

Modulation of chromatin by MARs and MAR binding oncogenic transcription factor
SMAR1.

Nakka KK(1), Chattopadhyay S.

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Cell Science, Pune University Campus, Ganeshkhind, Pune,
411007, Maharashtra, India.

The orchestration of the events in the cell during the progression of the cell
cycle is modulated by various phenomenon which are regulated by structural
modules of the cell. The nucleus is a major hub for all these regulatory units
which harbour the nuclear matrix, matrix proteins and chromatin. The histone
modifications etch a complex code on the chromatin and the matrix proteins in
consort with the histone code regulate the gene expression. SMAR1 is a matrix
attachment region binding protein that interacts with chromatin modulators like
HDAC1, Sin3A and causes chromatin condensation. SMAR1 modulates the chromatin at 
the Vbeta locus and plays a prominent role in V(D)J recombination. Such
indispensable function of SMAR1 by the modulation of chromatin in the context of 
malignancy and V(D)J recombination emphasizes that MAR binding proteins regulate 
the complex events of the cell and perturbed expression causes disease
conditions.

PMID: 19802523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Biol Pharm Bull. 2009 Oct;32(10):1723-7.

A novel gamma-lactam-based histone deacetylase inhibitor potently inhibits the
growth of human breast and renal cancer cells.

Kwon HK(1), Ahn SH, Park SH, Park JH, Park JW, Kim HM, Park SK, Lee K, Lee CW,
Choi E, Han G, Han JW.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746, Republic of
Korea.

We evaluated the novel gamma-lactam-based analogue, KBH-A145, for its anticancer 
activities. KBH-A145 markedly inhibited histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity in
vitro and in vivo to an extent comparable to suberoyl-anilide hydroxamic acid
(SAHA). The proliferation of various types of cancers was significantly
suppressed by KBH-A145, among which MDA-MB-231 and MCF, human breast cancer cells
and ACHN human renal cancer cells, were most sensitive. This was accompanied by
induction of p21(WAF1/Cip1) through compromised recruitment of HDAC1, which leads
to hyperacetylation of its promoter region and thus arrested both cells in the
G(2)/M phase. Interestingly, this compound induced apoptosis of MDA-MB-231 cells,
but not ACHN cells, through cleavage of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP). Taken
together, these results show that this novel gamma-lactam-based HDAC inhibitor
potently inhibits the growth of human breast and renal cancer cells. Thus
KBH-A145 is a potential therapeutic agent for the treatment of these types of
cancer.

PMID: 19801834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Dec 18;390(3):523-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.09.131. Epub 2009 Oct 2.

UHRF1 recruits the histone acetyltransferase Tip60 and controls its expression
and activity.

Achour M(1), Fuhrmann G, Alhosin M, Rondé P, Chataigneau T, Mousli M,
Schini-Kerth VB, Bronner C.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 7213, Université de Strasbourg, Faculté de Pharmacie, 74 route du
Rhin, 67401 Illkirch, France.

Tat-interactive protein, 60kDa (Tip60) is a histone acetyltransferase with
specificity toward lysine 5 of histone H2A (H2AK5) and plays multiple roles in
chromatin remodeling processes. Co-immunoprecipitation experiments performed on
Jurkat cells, showed that Tip60 is present in the same macro-molecular complex as
UHRF1 (Ubiquitin-like containing PHD and RING domain 1), DNMT1 (DNA
methyltransferase 1), and HDAC1 (histone deacetylase 1). Furthermore,
immunocytochemistry experiments confirmed that Tip60 co-localizes with the
UHRF1/DNMT1 complex. Although down-regulation of UHRF1 by RNA interference
enhanced Tip60 expression, a significant decrease of the level of acetylated
H2AK5 was observed. Consistently, we have observed that down-regulation of Tip60 
and DNMT1 by RNA interference, dramatically reduced the levels of acetylated
H2AK5. Altogether, these results suggest that Tip60 is a novel partner of the
epigenetic integration platform interplayed by UHRF1, DNMT1 and HDAC1 involved in
the epigenetic code replication.

PMID: 19800870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Mol Biol Cell. 2009 Dec;20(23):4976-84. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E09-04-0295. Epub 2009
Sep 30.

Heat-shock factor 1 controls genome-wide acetylation in heat-shocked cells.

Fritah S(1), Col E, Boyault C, Govin J, Sadoul K, Chiocca S, Christians E,
Khochbin S, Jolly C, Vourc'h C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U823, Institut
Albert Bonniot, Université Joseph Fourier, F-38706 Grenoble, France.

A major regulatory function has been evidenced here for HSF1, the key
transcription factor of the heat-shock response, in a large-scale remodeling of
the cell epigenome. Indeed, upon heat shock, HSF1, in addition to its well-known 
transactivating activities, mediates a genome-wide and massive histone
deacetylation. Investigating the underlying mechanisms, we show that HSF1
specifically associates with and uses HDAC1 and HDAC2 to trigger this
heat-shock-dependent histone deacetylation. This work therefore identifies HSF1
as a master regulator of global chromatin acetylation and reveals a cross-talk
between HSF1 and histone deacetylases in the general control of genome
organization in response to heat shock.

PMCID: PMC2785740
PMID: 19793920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Chem Biol. 2009 Sep 25;16(9):980-9. doi: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2009.07.010.

Chemical probes identify a role for histone deacetylase 3 in Friedreich's ataxia 
gene silencing.

Xu C(1), Soragni E, Chou CJ, Herman D, Plasterer HL, Rusche JR, Gottesfeld JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 
92037, USA.

We recently identified a class of pimelic diphenylamide histone deacetylase
(HDAC) inhibitors that show promise as therapeutics in the neurodegenerative
diseases Friedreich's ataxia (FRDA) and Huntington's disease. Here, we describe
chemical approaches to identify the HDAC enzyme target of these inhibitors.
Incubation of a trifunctional activity-based probe with a panel of class I and
class II recombinant HDAC enzymes, followed by click chemistry addition of a
fluorescent dye and gel electrophoresis, identifies HDAC3 as a unique
high-affinity target of the probe. Photoaffinity labeling in a nuclear extract
prepared from human lymphoblasts with the trifunctional probe, followed by biotin
addition through click chemistry, streptavidin enrichment, and Western blotting
also identifies HDAC3 as the preferred cellular target of the inhibitor.
Additional inhibitors with different HDAC specificity profiles were synthesized, 
and results from transcription experiments in FRDA cells point to a unique role
for HDAC3 in gene silencing in Friedreich's ataxia.

PMCID: PMC2909763
PMID: 19778726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Dec 4;390(1):48-53. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.09.059. Epub 2009 Sep 19.

Escape mechanisms from antibody therapy to lymphoma cells: downregulation of CD20
mRNA by recruitment of the HDAC complex and not by DNA methylation.

Sugimoto T(1), Tomita A, Hiraga J, Shimada K, Kiyoi H, Kinoshita T, Naoe T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Nagoya University Graduate School of
Medicine, Nagoya, Japan.

Although rituximab is a critical monoclonal antibody therapy for CD20-positive
B-cell lymphomas, rituximab resistance showing a CD20-negative phenotypic change 
has been a considerable clinical problem. Here we demonstrate that CD20 mRNA and 
protein expression is repressed by recruitment of a histone deacetylase protein
complex to the MS4A1 (CD20) gene promoter in CD20-negative transformed cells
after treatment with rituximab. CD20 mRNA and protein expression were stimulated 
by decitabine (5-Aza-dC) in CD20-negative transformed cells, and was enhanced by 
trichostation A (TSA). Immunoblotting indicated that DNMT1 expression was first
downregulated 1 day after treatment with 5-Aza-dC, but IRF4 and Pu.1, the
transcriptional regulators of MS4A1, were still expressed with or without
5-Aza-dC. Interestingly, CpG methylation of the MS4A1 promoter was not observed
in CD20-negative transformed cells without 5-Aza-dC. A chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay indicated that the Sin3A-HDAC1 co-repressor
complex was recruited to the promoter and dissociated from the promoter with
5-Aza-dC and TSA, resulting in histone acetylation. Under these conditions, IRF4 
and Pu.1 were continually recruited to the promoter with or without 5-Aza-dC and 
TSA. These results suggest that recruitment of the Sin3A-HDAC1 complex is related
to downregulation of CD20 expression in CD20-negative B-cells after treatment
with rituximab.

PMID: 19769942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Psychiatr Res. 2010 Apr;44(5):263-70. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2009.08.015.
Epub 2009 Sep 19.

Altered gene expression of histone deacetylases in mood disorder patients.

Hobara T(1), Uchida S, Otsuki K, Matsubara T, Funato H, Matsuo K, Suetsugi M,
Watanabe Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuropsychiatry, Department of Neuroscience, Yamaguchi University,
Graduate School of Medicine, 1-1-1 Minami-kogushi, Ube, Yamaguchi 755-8505,
Japan.

Chromatin remodeling such as changes in histone acetylation has been suggested to
play an important role in the pathophysiology and treatment of mood disorders. In
the present study, we investigated whether the expression of histone deacetylase 
(HDAC) genes are altered in mood disorder patients. We used quantitative
real-time PCR to measure the mRNA levels of 11 HDACs (HDAC1-11) in peripheral
white blood cells of major depressive disorder (MDD) and bipolar disorder (BPD)
patients during depressive and remissive episodes and in the first-degree
relatives of BPD patients. In addition, we investigated the effect of
antidepressants and mood stabilizers on the mRNA levels of HDACs using mice. In
MDD, the expression of HDAC2 and -5 mRNA was increased in a depressive state, but
not in a remissive state, compared to controls. In BPD, the expression of HDAC4
mRNA was increased only in a depressive state, and the expression of HDAC6 and -8
was decreased in both depressive and remissive states compared to controls,
whereas the first-degree relatives did not show any significant alteration in
expression levels. Animal study showed that the expression of HDAC2 and -5 or
HDAC4, -6 and -8 mRNAs in the mouse leukocytes were not affected by chronic
treatment with antidepressants or mood stabilizers. Our data suggest that
aberrant transcriptional regulation caused by the altered expression of HDACs is 
associated with the pathophysiology of mood disorders.

PMID: 19767015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Neurochem. 2009 Nov;111(4):976-87. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2009.06385.x. Epub 
2009 Sep 18.

Valproic acid induces functional heat-shock protein 70 via Class I histone
deacetylase inhibition in cortical neurons: a potential role of Sp1 acetylation.

Marinova Z(1), Ren M, Wendland JR, Leng Y, Liang MH, Yasuda S, Leeds P, Chuang
DM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Section, National Institute of Mental Health, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1363, USA.

Neuroprotective properties of the mood stabilizer valproic acid (VPA) are
implicated in its therapeutic efficacy. Heat-shock protein 70 (HSP70) is a
molecular chaperone, neuroprotective and anti-inflammatory agent. This study
aimed to investigate underlying mechanisms and functional significance of HSP70
induction by VPA in rat cortical neurons. VPA treatment markedly up-regulated
HSP70 protein levels, and this was accompanied by increased HSP70 mRNA levels and
promoter hyperacetylation and activity. Other HDAC inhibitors--sodium butyrate,
trichostatin A, and Class I HDAC-specific inhibitors MS-275 and apicidin, --all
mimicked the ability of VPA to induce HSP70. Pre-treatment with
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibitors or an Akt inhibitor attenuated HSP70
induction by VPA and other HDAC inhibitors. VPA treatment increased Sp1
acetylation, and a Sp1 inhibitor, mithramycin, abolished the induction of HSP70
by HDAC inhibitors. Moreover, VPA promoted the association of Sp1 with the
histone acetyltransferases p300 and recruitment of p300 to the HSP70 promoter.
Further, VPA-induced neuroprotection against glutamate excitotoxicity was
prevented by blocking HSP70 induction. Taken together, the data suggest that the 
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt pathway and Sp1 are likely involved in HSP70
induction by HDAC inhibitors, and induction of HSP70 by VPA in cortical neurons
may contribute to its neuroprotective and therapeutic effects.

PMCID: PMC2766424
PMID: 19765194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Chemistry. 2009 Oct 26;15(42):11174-86. doi: 10.1002/chem.200901552.

Total synthesis of the bicyclic depsipeptide HDAC inhibitors spiruchostatins A
and B, 5''-epi-spiruchostatin B, FK228 (FR901228) and preliminary evaluation of
their biological activity.

Narita K(1), Kikuchi T, Watanabe K, Takizawa T, Oguchi T, Kudo K, Matsuhara K,
Abe H, Yamori T, Yoshida M, Katoh T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Synthetic Medicinal Chemistry, Department of Chemical
Pharmaceutical Science, Tohoku Pharmaceutical University, 4-4-1 Komatsushima,
Aoba-ku, Sendai, 981-8558, Japan.

The bicyclic depsipeptide histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors spiruchostatins A
and B, 5''-epi-spiruchostatin B and FK228 were efficiently synthesized in a
convergent and unified manner. The synthetic method involved the following
crucial steps: i) a Julia-Kocienski olefination of a 1,3-propanediol-derived
sulfone and a L- or D-malic acid-derived aldehyde to access the most
synthetically challenging unit, (3S or 3R,4E)-3-hydroxy-7-mercaptohept-4-enoic
acid, present in a D-alanine- or D-valine-containing segment; ii) a condensation 
of a D-valine-D-cysteine- or D-allo-isoleucine-D-cysteine-containing segment with
a D-alanine- or D-valine-containing segment to directly assemble the
corresponding seco-acids; and iii) a macrocyclization of a seco-acid using the
Shiina method or the Mitsunobu method to construct the requisite 15- or
16-membered macrolactone. The present synthesis has established the C5''
stereochemistry of spiruchostatin B. In addition, HDAC inhibitory assay and the
cell-growth inhibition analysis of the synthesized depsipeptides determined the
order of their potency and revealed some novel aspects of structure-activity
relationships. It was also found that unnatural 5''-epi-spiruchostatin B shows
extremely high selectivity (ca. 1600-fold) for class I HDAC1 (IC(50)=2.4 nM) over
class II HDAC6 (IC(50)=3900 nM) with potent cell-growth-inhibitory activity at
nanomolar levels of IC(50) values.

PMID: 19760730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Zhongguo Dang Dai Er Ke Za Zhi. 2009 Sep;11(9):753-6.

[Acetylation of hepatic histone H3 in rats with intrauterine growth retardation].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu XM(1), Zhang HL, Song WW, Jiao YS, Lu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Research Center, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University, 
Shenyang 110004, China. liuxm1@sj-hospital.org

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR)
caused by malnutrition during pregnancy on the acetylation of histone H3 and
expression of histonedeacetylase1(HDAC1) in the hepar of the adult offspring and 
to explore the relationship between them.
METHODS: Male 8-week-old offspring from maternal protein-malnutrition dams were
studied. The expression of HDAC1 mRNA in the hepar was measured by fluorescent
quantization RT-PCR. The levels of hepatic nuclear HDAC1 protein and acetylation 
of histone H3/K9 were assessed by Western blot.
RESULTS: The hepatic HDAC1 mRNA expression in IUGR rats was reduced to 54% of
that of normal control rats (t=2.042, p<0.05). A decline in nuclear expression of
HDAC1 protein (438 +/- 47) was also noted when compared with normal controls
(1,128 +/- 110) (t=2.179, p<0.05). In contrast, the percentage of acetylated
histone H3/K9 in IUGR rats (17.3 +/- 1.6%) increased significantly compared with 
that of normal control rats (10.5 +/- 1.2%) (t=3.597, p<0.01). The level of
acetylated histone H3/K9 was negatively correlated with the HDAC1 protein
concentration (r=-0.781, p<0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Increased hepatic acetylation of histone H3 in the IUGR offspring
might be caused by decreased HDAC1 expression in nuclear protein. This may
contribute to the transcription change of some genes in the hepar.

PMID: 19755027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Cloning Stem Cells. 2009 Sep;11(3):397-405. doi: 10.1089/clo.2009.0016.

Transcript levels of several epigenome regulatory genes in bovine somatic donor
cells are not correlated with their cloning efficiency.

Zhou W(1), Sadeghieh S, Abruzzese R, Uppada S, Meredith J, Ohlrichs C, Broek D,
Polejaeva I.

Author information: 
(1)Viagen, Inc. Austin, Texas 78732, USA. wenli.zhou@viagen.com

Among many factors that potentially affect somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT)
embryo development is the donor cell itself. Cloning potentials of somatic donor 
cells vary greatly, possibly because the cells have different capacities to be
reprogrammed by ooplasma. It is therefore intriguing to identify factors that
regulate the reprogrammability of somatic donor cells. Gene expression analysis
is a widely used tool to investigate underlying mechanisms of various phenotypes.
In this study, we conducted a retrospective analysis investigating whether donor 
cell lines with distinct cloning efficiencies express different levels of genes
involved in epigenetic reprogramming including histone deacetylase-1 (HDAC1), -2 
(HDAC2); DNA methyltransferase-1 (DNMT1), -3a (DNMT3a),-3b (DNMT3b), and the
bovine homolog of yeast sucrose nonfermenting-2 (SNF2L), a SWI/SNF family of
ATPases. Cell samples from 12 bovine donor cell lines were collected at the time 
of nuclear transfer experiments and expression levels of the genes were measured 
using quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Our results show that there
are no significant differences in expression levels of these genes between donor 
cell lines of high and low cloning efficiency defined as live calving rates,
although inverse correlations are observed between in vitro embryo developmental 
rates and expression levels of HDAC2 and SNF2L. We also show that selection of
stable reference genes is important for relative quantification, and different
batches of cells can have different gene expression patterns. In summary, we
demonstrate that expression levels of these epigenome regulatory genes in bovine 
donor cells are not correlated with cloning potential. The experimental design
and data analysis method reported here can be applied to study any genes
expressed in donor cells.

PMID: 19751110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. PLoS One. 2009 Sep 9;4(9):e6931. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006931.

AP-2alpha induces epigenetic silencing of tumor suppressive genes and
microsatellite instability in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Bennett KL(1), Romigh T, Eng C.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Medicine Institute, Lerner Research Institute and Taussig Cancer
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Activator protein 2 alpha (AP-2alpha) is involved in a variety of
physiological processes. Increased AP-2alpha expression correlates with
progression in various squamous cell carcinomas, and a recent publication found
AP-2alpha to be overexpressed in approximately 70% of Head and Neck Squamous Cell
Carcinoma (HNSCC) patient samples. It was found to repress transcription of the
tumor suppressor gene C/CAAT Enhancer Binding Protein alpha (C/EBPalpha), and its
binding site correlated with upstream methylation of the C/EBPalpha promoter.
Therefore, we investigated the potential for AP-2alpha to target methylation to
additional genes that would be relevant to HNSCC pathogenesis.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Stable downregulation of AP-2alpha stable by shRNA in HNSCC
cell lines correlated with decreased methylation of its target genes' regulatory 
regions. Furthermore, methylation of MLH1 in HNSCC with and without AP-2alpha
downregulation revealed a correlation with microsatellite instability (MSI). ChIP
analysis was used to confirm binding of AP-2alpha and HDAC1/2 to the targets. The
effects of HDAC inhibition was assessed using Trichostatin A in a HNSCC cell
line, which revealed that AP-2alpha targets methylation through HDAC recruitment.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings are significant because they suggest AP-2alpha plays 
a role not only in epigenetic silencing, but also in genomic instability. This
intensifies the potential level of regulation AP-2alpha has through
transcriptional regulation. Furthermore, these findings have the potential to
revolutionize the field of HNSCC therapy, and more generally the field of
epigenetic therapy, by targeting a single gene that is involved in the malignant 
transformation via disrupting DNA repair and cell cycle control.

PMCID: PMC2734430
PMID: 19742317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Nat Biotechnol. 2009 Sep;27(9):829-39. doi: 10.1038/nbt.1563. Epub 2009 Sep 9.

Genome-wide identification of post-translational modulators of transcription
factor activity in human B cells.

Wang K(1), Saito M, Bisikirska BC, Alvarez MJ, Lim WK, Rajbhandari P, Shen Q,
Nemenman I, Basso K, Margolin AA, Klein U, Dalla-Favera R, Califano A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Columbia University, New York, New York,
USA.

The ability of a transcription factor (TF) to regulate its targets is modulated
by a variety of genetic and epigenetic mechanisms, resulting in highly
context-dependent regulatory networks. However, high-throughput methods for the
identification of proteins that affect TF activity are still largely unavailable.
Here we introduce an algorithm, modulator inference by network dynamics (MINDy), 
for the genome-wide identification of post-translational modulators of TF
activity within a specific cellular context. When used to dissect the regulation 
of MYC activity in human B lymphocytes, the approach inferred novel modulators of
MYC function, which act by distinct mechanisms, including protein turnover,
transcription complex formation and selective enzyme recruitment. MINDy is
generally applicable to study the post-translational modulation of mammalian TFs 
in any cellular context. As such it can be used to dissect context-specific
signaling pathways and combinatorial transcriptional regulation.

PMCID: PMC2753889
PMID: 19741643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Virol. 2009 Nov;83(22):11502-13. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01318-09. Epub 2009 Sep 9.

Histone deacetylases 1 and 2 are phosphorylated at novel sites during
varicella-zoster virus infection.

Walters MS(1), Erazo A, Kinchington PR, Silverstein S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, 701 W. 168th St., New York, NY 10032, USA.

ORF66p, a virion-associated varicella-zoster virus (VZV) protein, is a member of 
a conserved Alphaherpesvirinae kinase family with homology to herpes simplex
virus US3 kinase. Expression of ORF66p in cells infected with VZV or an
adenovirus expressing only ORF66p results in hyperphosphorylation of histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and HDAC2. Mapping studies reveal that phosphorylation is
at a unique conserved Ser residue in the C terminus of both HDACs. This
modification requires an active kinase domain in ORF66p, as neither protein is
phosphorylated in cells infected with VZV lacking kinase activity. However,
hyperphosphorylation appears to occur indirectly, as within the context of in
vitro kinase reactions, purified ORF66p phosphorylates a peptide derived from
ORF62p, a known substrate, but does not phosphorylate HDAC. These results support
a model where ORF66p is necessary but not sufficient to effect
hyperphosphorylation of HDAC1 and HDAC2.

PMCID: PMC2772673
PMID: 19740981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Biol Chem. 2009 Oct 23;284(43):29383-90. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.024745. Epub
2009 Sep 8.

RNA-destabilizing factor tristetraprolin negatively regulates NF-kappaB
signaling.

Liang J(1), Lei T, Song Y, Yanes N, Qi Y, Fu M.

Author information: 
(1)Burnett School of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, University of
Central Florida, Orlando, Florida 32816, USA.

Tristetraprolin (TTP) is a CCCH zinc finger-containing protein that destabilizes 
mRNA by binding to an AU-rich element. Mice deficient in TTP develop a severe
inflammatory syndrome mainly because of overproduction of tumor necrosis factor
alpha. We report here that TTP also negatively regulates NF-kappaB signaling at
the transcriptional corepressor level, by which it may repress inflammatory gene 
transcription. TTP expression inhibited NF-kappaB-dependent transcription.
However, overexpression of TTP did not affect reporter mRNA stability. Instead,
TTP functioned as a corepressor of p65/NF-kappaB. In support of this concept, we 
found that TTP physically interacted with the p65 subunit of NF-kappaB and was
also associated with HDAC1, -3, and -7 in vivo. Treatment with histone
deacetylase inhibitors or small interfering RNA induced HDAC1 or HDAC3 knockdown 
completely or partly abolished the inhibitory activity of TTP on NF-kappaB
reporter activation. Consistently, chromatin immunoprecipitation showed decreased
recruitment of HDAC1 and increased recruitment of CREB-binding protein on the
Mcp-1 promoter in TTP(-/-) cells compared with wild-type cells. Moreover,
overexpression of TTP blocked CREB-binding protein-induced acetylation of
p65/NF-kappaB. Taken together, these data suggest that TTP may also function in
vivo as a modulator in suppressing the transcriptional activity of NF-kappaB.

PMCID: PMC2785570
PMID: 19738286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. J Biol Chem. 2009 Oct 30;284(44):30673-83. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.042242. Epub
2009 Sep 7.

Expression levels of histone deacetylases determine the cell fate of
hematopoietic progenitors.

Wada T(1), Kikuchi J, Nishimura N, Shimizu R, Kitamura T, Furukawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Stem Cell Regulation, Center for Molecular Medicine, Jichi Medical
School, Tochigi 329-0498, Japan.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are globally implicated in the growth and
differentiation of mammalian cells; however, relatively little is known about
their specific roles in hematopoiesis. In this study, we investigated the
expression of HDACs in human hematopoietic cells and their functions during
hematopoiesis. The expression of HDACs was very low in hematopoietic progenitor
cells, which was accompanied by histone hyperacetylation. HDACs were detectable
in more differentiated progenitors and erythroid precursors but down-regulated in
mature myeloid cells especially granulocytes. In contrast, acute myeloid
leukemias showed HDAC overexpression and histone hypoacetylation. Transcription
of the HDAC1 gene was repressed by CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins during myeloid
differentiation, and activated by GATA-1 during erythro-megakaryocytic
differentiation. Small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of HDAC1 enhanced
myeloid differentiation in immature hematopoietic cell lines and perturbed
erythroid differentiation in progenitor cells. Myeloid but not
erythro-megakaryocytic differentiation was blocked in mice transplanted with
HDAC1-overexpressing hematopoietic progenitor cells. These findings suggest that 
HDAC is not merely an auxiliary factor of genetic elements but plays a direct
role in the cell fate decision of hematopoietic progenitors.

PMCID: PMC2781621
PMID: 19736310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2009 Oct 1;75(2):497-505. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.05.056.

Systems biology modeling of the radiation sensitivity network: a biomarker
discovery platform.

Eschrich S(1), Zhang H, Zhao H, Boulware D, Lee JH, Bloom G, Torres-Roca JF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biomedical Informatics, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research 
Institute, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

PURPOSE: The discovery of effective biomarkers is a fundamental goal of molecular
medicine. Developing a systems-biology understanding of radiosensitivity can
enhance our ability of identifying radiation-specific biomarkers.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Radiosensitivity, as represented by the survival fraction 
at 2 Gy was modeled in 48 human cancer cell lines. We applied a linear regression
algorithm that integrates gene expression with biological variables, including
ras status (mut/wt), tissue of origin and p53 status (mut/wt).
RESULTS: The biomarker discovery platform is a network representation of the top 
500 genes identified by linear regression analysis. This network was reduced to a
10-hub network that includes c-Jun, HDAC1, RELA (p65 subunit of NFKB), PKC-beta, 
SUMO-1, c-Abl, STAT1, AR, CDK1, and IRF1. Nine targets associated with
radiosensitization drugs are linked to the network, demonstrating clinical
relevance. Furthermore, the model identified four significant radiosensitivity
clusters of terms and genes. Ras was a dominant variable in the analysis, as was 
the tissue of origin, and their interaction with gene expression but not p53.
Overrepresented biological pathways differed between clusters but included DNA
repair, cell cycle, apoptosis, and metabolism. The c-Jun network hub was
validated using a knockdown approach in 8 human cell lines representing lung,
colon, and breast cancers.
CONCLUSION: We have developed a novel radiation-biomarker discovery platform
using a systems biology modeling approach. We believe this platform will play a
central role in the integration of biology into clinical radiation oncology
practice.

PMCID: PMC2762403
PMID: 19735874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Nat Cell Biol. 2009 Oct;11(10):1261-7. doi: 10.1038/ncb1971. Epub 2009 Sep 6.

Ageing-related chromatin defects through loss of the NURD complex.

Pegoraro G(1), Kubben N, Wickert U, Göhler H, Hoffmann K, Misteli T.

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2009 Oct;11(10):1176-7.

Physiological and premature ageing are characterized by multiple defects in
chromatin structure and accumulation of persistent DNA damage. Here we identify
the NURD chromatin remodelling complex as a key modulator of these
ageing-associated chromatin defects. We demonstrate loss of several NURD
components during premature and normal ageing and we find an ageing-associated
reduction in HDAC1 activity. Silencing of individual NURD subunits recapitulated 
chromatin defects associated with ageing and we provide evidence that structural 
chromatin defects precede DNA damage accumulation. These results outline a
molecular mechanism for chromatin defects during ageing.

PMCID: PMC2779731
PMID: 19734887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Science. 2009 Sep 4;325(5945):1254-7. doi: 10.1126/science.1176709.

Regulation of histone acetylation in the nucleus by sphingosine-1-phosphate.

Hait NC(1), Allegood J, Maceyka M, Strub GM, Harikumar KB, Singh SK, Luo C,
Marmorstein R, Kordula T, Milstien S, Spiegel S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and the Massey Cancer Center,
Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine, Richmond, VA 23298, USA.

Erratum in
    Science. 2009 Oct 16;326(5951):366.

The pleiotropic lipid mediator sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) can act
intracellularly independently of its cell surface receptors through unknown
mechanisms. Sphingosine kinase 2 (SphK2), one of the isoenzymes that generates
S1P, was associated with histone H3 and produced S1P that regulated histone
acetylation. S1P specifically bound to the histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2
and inhibited their enzymatic activity, preventing the removal of acetyl groups
from lysine residues within histone tails. SphK2 associated with HDAC1 and HDAC2 
in repressor complexes and was selectively enriched at the promoters of the genes
encoding the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21 or the transcriptional
regulator c-fos, where it enhanced local histone H3 acetylation and
transcription. Thus, HDACs are direct intracellular targets of S1P and link
nuclear S1P to epigenetic regulation of gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2850596
PMID: 19729656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo). 2009 Sep;57(9):897-906.

Explorative study on isoform-selective histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Suzuki T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Nagoya City University, 3-1
Tanabe-dori, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya, Aichi 467-8603, Japan.
suzuki@phar.nagoya-cu.ac.jp

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) catalyze the deacetylation of the acetylated lysine 
residues of histones and non-histone proteins, and are involved in various
fundamental life phenomena, such as gene expression and cell cycle progression.
Thus far, eighteen HDAC family members (HDAC1-11 and SIRT1-7) have been
identified, but the functions of the HDAC isoforms are not yet fully understood. 
In addition, some of the HDAC isoforms have been suggested to be associated with 
various disease states, including cancer and neurodegenerative disorders.
Therefore, isoform-selective HDAC inhibitors are of great interest, not only as
tools for probing the biological functions of the isoforms, but also as candidate
therapeutic agents with few side effects. It was against this background that we 
initiated research programs to identify isoform-selective HDAC inhibitors. We
designed HDAC inhibitors based on the three-dimensional structure of the enzyme
and on the proposed catalytic mechanism of HDACs, and found several
isoform-selective HDAC inhibitors. Furthermore, we elucidated the functions of
HDAC6 by chemical genetic approaches using these inhibitors. The results of this 
research also suggested the feasibility of using isoform-selective HDAC
inhibitors as therapeutic agents.

PMID: 19721249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 Mar-Apr;1799(3-4):296-301. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2009.08.007. Epub 2009 Aug 27.

Viral-encoded enzymes that target host chromatin functions.

Wei H(1), Zhou MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural and Chemical Biology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine,
New York University, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Ever since their existence, there has been an everlasting arms race between
viruses and their host cells. Host cells have developed numerous strategies to
silence viral gene expression whereas viruses always find their ways to overcome 
these obstacles. Recent studies show that viruses have also evolved to take full 
advantage of existing cellular chromatin components to activate or repress its
own genes when needed. While in most cases viruses encode certain proteins to
recruit or inhibit cellular factors through physical interactions, growing
examples show that viral-encoded enzymes affect host chromatin structure through 
post-translationally modifying histones or other cellular proteins important for 
chromatin function. The most well-studied example is vSET encoded by paramecium
bursaria chlorella virus 1. vSET specifically methylates histone H3 at lysine 27,
causing genome-wide silencing of Polycomb target genes upon infection, thus
mimicking the function of Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) in eukaryotes.
Other examples include BGLF4 from Epstein-Barr virus that affects both condensin 
and topoisomerase II activity and Us3 from Herpes Simplex virus 1 that inhibits
HDAC1 function through phosphorylation.

2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2923641
PMID: 19716451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Mol Med Rep. 2009 Sep-Oct;2(5):743-7. doi: 10.3892/mmr_00000166.

Inhibition of proliferation induced by anti-sense RNA of HDAC1 in MCF-7 cells.

Zhu Y(1), Wei Q, Lu Y, Yao J, Cao X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, P.R. 
China.

Acetylation and deacetylation are the main post-translational modifications of
histones. Increased deacetylation is associated with carcinogenesis, but the
individual histone deacetylase (HDAC) responsible for this increase remains
elusive. This study was designed to investigate the role of histone deacetylase 1
during tumorigenesis in MCF-7 human breast cancer cells. Anti-sense RNA was used 
to downregulate HDAC1 expression. RT-PCR analysis confirmed the efficiency of the
anti-sense RNA, revealing that anti-sense RNA effectively downregulated HDAC1.
The MTT assay showed that the proliferation of MCF-7 cells was inhibited and that
cell activity was decreased. Cell cycle analysis identified cell cycle phase
variations, with cells mainly arrested in the G1 and G2 phase. The anti-sense RNA
of HDAC1 induced the inhibition of proliferation and cell cycle arrest in MCF-7
cells, suggesting it might have therapeutic applications as an antitumor agent in
breast cancer.

PMID: 21475895  [PubMed]


294. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Aug 25;106(34):14576-80. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0906905106. Epub 2009 Aug 12.

ICP0 enables and monitors the function of D cyclins in herpes simplex virus 1
infected cells.

Kalamvoki M(1), Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)The Marjorie B Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

The herpes simplex virus 1 ICP0 is a regulatory protein. Early in infection ICP0 
localizes in ND10 bodies and performs two functions: As an E3 ligase in
conjunction with E2 UbcH5a conjugating enzyme, it degrades the ND10 components
PML and SP100. Concurrently, it suppresses the silencing of viral DNA by
dispersing the HDAC1/CoREST/REST/LSD1 repressor complex. Subsequently, ICP0 is
exported to the cytoplasm. In cells treated with HDAC inhibitors or transfected
with irrelevant DNA, the export is delayed in a DNA dose-dependent fashion. Here,
we follow up an observation that ICP0 binds cyclin D3 and that ICP0 mutants
unable to bind cyclin D3 are not exported. Moreover, in infected cells cdk4 is
activated, but cdk2 is not. We report that (i) cyclin D1, D2, or D3 colocalize
with ND10 bodies and ICP0 early in infection and ultimately become incorporated
into viral replication compartments, (ii) each of the D cyclins partially rescues
DeltaICP0 mutants, and (iii) inhibition of cdk4 by inhibitor I sequesters ICP0 in
the nucleus. A key finding is that overexpression of cyclin D3 enables the
transport of ICP0 to the cytoplasm. We conclude that (i) ICP0 facilitates the
recruitment of cyclin D3 to the sites of viral DNA synthesis, (ii) until its
functions are completed, ICP0 is retained in the nucleus, and (iii) a common
signal that results in the export of ICP0 to the cytoplasm is the accumulation of
a viral DNA-synthesis-dependent late protein.

PMCID: PMC2732861
PMID: 19706544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Dev Genes Evol. 2009 Jul;219(7):339-51. doi: 10.1007/s00427-009-0296-6. Epub 2009
Aug 25.

Temporal Notch activation through Notch1a and Notch3 is required for maintaining 
zebrafish rhombomere boundaries.

Qiu X(1), Lim CH, Ho SH, Lee KH, Jiang YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Signalling and Patterning, Genes and Development
Division, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, A*STAR (Agency for Science,
Technology and Research), Singapore, Singapore.

In vertebrates, hindbrain is subdivided into seven segments termed rhombomeres
and the interface between each rhombomere forms the boundary. Similar to the D/V 
boundary formation in Drosophila, Notch activation has been shown to regulate the
segregation of rhombomere boundary cells. Here we further explored the function
of Notch signaling in the formation of rhombomere boundaries. By using bodipy
ceramide cell-labeling technique, we found that the hindbrain boundary is formed 
initially in mib mutants but lost after 24 hours post-fertilization (hpf). This
phenotype was more severe in mib(ta52b) allele than in mib(tfi91) allele.
Similarly, injection of su(h)-MO led to boundary defects in a dosage-dependent
manner. Boundary cells were recovered in mib(ta52b) mutants in the
hdac1-deficient background, where neurogenesis is inhibited. Furthermore,
boundary cells lost sensitivity to reduced Notch activation from 15 somite stage 
onwards. We also showed that knockdown of notch3 function in notch1a mutants
leads to the loss of rhombomere boundary cells and causes neuronal hyperplasia,
indicating that Notch1a and Notch3 play a redundant role in the maintenance of
rhombomere boundary.

PMCID: PMC2744777
PMID: 19705151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Cancer Lett. 2010 Feb 28;288(2):236-50. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2009.07.011. Epub
2009 Aug 20.

Troglitazone inhibits histone deacetylase activity in breast cancer cells.

Davies GF(1), Ross AR, Arnason TG, Juurlink BH, Harkness TA.

Author information: 
(1)University of Saskatchewan, Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Saskatoon,
SK, Canada.

We previously demonstrated that the PPARgamma agonist Troglitazone (TRG), a
potent antiproliferative agent, in combination with the anthracycline antibiotic 
Doxorubicin (DOX), is an effective killer of multiple drug resistant (MDR) human 
cancer cells. Cell killing was accompanied by increased global histone H3
acetylation. Presently, we investigated the epigenetic and cell killing effects
of TRG in estrogen receptor (ER) positive MCF7 breast cancer cells. MCF7 cells
were treated with the Thiazolidinediones (TZDs) TRG and Ciglitazone (CIG), the
non-TZD PPARgamma agonist 15PGJ2, and the histone deacetylase inhibitors
(HDACi's) Trichostatin A (TSA), sodium butyrate and PXD101. Using MTT cell
viability assays, Western analyzes and mass spectrometry, we showed a
dose-dependent increase in cell killing in TRG and HDACi treated cells, that was 
associated with increased H3 lysine 9 (H3K9) and H3K23 acetylation, H2AX and
H3S10 phosphorylation, and H3K79 mono- and di-methylation. These effects were
mediated through an ER independent pathway. Using HDAC activity assays, TRG
inhibited HDAC activity in cells and in cell lysates, similar to that observed
with TSA. Furthermore, TRG and TSA induced a slower migrating HDAC1 species that 
was refractory to HDAC2 associations. Lastly, TRG and the HDACi's decreased total
and phosphorylated AKT levels. These findings suggest that TRG's mode of killing 
may involve downregulation of PI3K signaling through HDAC inhibition, leading to 
increased global histone post-translational modifications.

2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19699029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Biochem J. 2009 Oct 12;423(3):389-400. doi: 10.1042/BJ20090086.

Functional characterization of the interactions between endosomal adaptor protein
APPL1 and the NuRD co-repressor complex.

Banach-Orlowska M(1), Pilecka I, Torun A, Pyrzynska B, Miaczynska M.

Author information: 
(1)International Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Laboratory of Cell
Biology, Ks. Trojdena 4, 02-109 Warsaw, Poland.

Multifunctional adaptor protein APPL1 [adaptor protein containing PH (pleckstrin 
homology) domain, PTB (phosphotyrosine binding) domain and leucine zipper motif] 
belongs to a growing group of endocytic proteins which actively participate in
various stages of signalling pathways. Owing to its interaction with the small
GTPase Rab5, APPL1 localizes predominantly to a subpopulation of early endosomes 
but is also capable of nucleocytoplasmic shuttling. Among its various binding
partners, APPL1 was reported to associate with the nuclear co-repressor complex
NuRD (nucleosome remodelling and deacetylase), containing both nucleosome
remodelling and HDAC (histone deacetylase) activities, but the biochemical basis 
or functional relevance of this interaction remained unknown. Here we
characterized the binding between APPL1 and NuRD in more detail, identifying
HDAC2 as the key NuRD subunit responsible for this association. APPL1 interacts
with the NuRD complex containing enzymatically active HDAC2 but not HDAC1 as the 
only deacetylase. However, the cellular levels of HDAC1 can regulate the extent
of APPL1-NuRD interactions, which in turn modulates the nucleocytoplasmic
distribution of APPL1. Increased binding of APPL1 to NuRD upon silencing of HDAC1
promotes the nuclear localization of APPL1, whereas HDAC1 overexpression exerts
an opposite effect. Moreover, we also uncovered a NuRD-independent interaction of
APPL1 with HDAC1. APPL1 overexpression affects the composition of the
HDAC1-containing NuRD complex and the expression of HDAC1 target p21WAF1/CIP1.
Cumulatively, these data reveal a surprising complexity of APPL1 interactions
with HDACs, with functional consequences for the modulation of gene expression.
In a broader sense, these results contribute to an emerging theme of endocytic
proteins playing alternative roles in the cell nucleus.

PMCID: PMC2762692
PMID: 19686092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. BJU Int. 2010 Apr;105(8):1181-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-410X.2009.08795.x. Epub 2009
Aug 13.

Inhibition of bladder tumour growth by histone deacetylase inhibitor.

Ozawa A(1), Tanji N, Kikugawa T, Sasaki T, Yanagihara Y, Miura N, Yokoyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Ehime University Graduate School of Medicine, Toon,
Ehime, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the expression profile of histone deacetylase (HDAC)-1 and 
explore its potential role in the development of bladder cancer, using valproic
acid (VPA), a HDAC inhibitor, which reduces tumour growth and metastasis
formation in animal models.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The study comprised clinical samples from patients with
urinary bladder cancer, mouse urinary bladder tissue specimens, and two human
urinary bladder cancer cell lines (HT-1376 and 5637). HDAC1 mRNA and protein
expression were examined using real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction and immunohistochemical methods. Female C3H/He mice were given VPA (0,
250, 500 and 750 mg/kg body weight, intraperitoneal, every day) from the start or
4 weeks after 0.05%N-butyl-N-(4-hydroxybutyl)-nitrosamine (BBN) treatment, and
were humanely killed and sampled at 8 and 12 weeks.
RESULTS: A significantly higher level of HDAC1 mRNA was expressed in human
urinary bladder cancer specimens. The immunohistochemical study showed that HDAC1
was expressed in the cytoplasm and nucleus in the specimens. BBN treatment
increased HDAC1 mRNA expression in the urinary bladder. VPA administration seemed
to delay the incidences of BBN-induced mouse urinary bladder tumour, possibly
through p21(WAF1) protein expression.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that HDAC might be an effective molecular
target for cancer therapy.

© 2009 THE AUTHORS. JOURNAL COMPILATION © 2009 BJU INTERNATIONAL.

PMID: 19681894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Aug 11;106(32):13433-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0906455106. Epub 2009 Jul 28.

Epigenetic changes during disease progression in a murine model of human chronic 
lymphocytic leukemia.

Chen SS(1), Raval A, Johnson AJ, Hertlein E, Liu TH, Jin VX, Sherman MH, Liu SJ, 
Dawson DW, Williams KE, Lanasa M, Liyanarachchi S, Lin TS, Marcucci G, Pekarsky
Y, Davuluri R, Croce CM, Guttridge DC, Teitell MA, Byrd JC, Plass C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology, and Medical Genetics, Human
Cancer Genetics Program, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Epigenetic alterations, including gain or loss of DNA methylation, are a hallmark
of nearly every malignancy. Changes in DNA methylation can impact expression of
cancer-related genes including apoptosis regulators and tumor suppressors.
Because such epigenetic changes are reversible, they are being aggressively
investigated as potential therapeutic targets. Here we use the Emu-TCL1
transgenic mouse model of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) to determine the
timing and patterns of aberrant DNA methylation, and to investigate the
mechanisms that lead to aberrant DNA methylation. We show that CLL cells from
Emu-TCL1 mice at various stages recapitulate epigenetic alterations seen in human
CLL. Aberrant methylation of promoter sequences is observed as early as 3 months 
of age in these animals, well before disease onset. Abnormally methylated
promoter regions include binding sites for the transcription factor FOXD3. We
show that loss of Foxd3 expression due to an NF-kappaB p50/p50:HDAC1 repressor
complex occurs in TCL1-positive B cells before methylation. Therefore, specific
transcriptional repression is an early event leading to epigenetic silencing of
target genes in murine and human CLL. These results provide strong rationale for 
the development of strategies to target NF-kappaB components in CLL and
potentially other B-cell malignancies.

PMCID: PMC2726368
PMID: 19666576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. EMBO J. 2009 Sep 2;28(17):2568-82. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.178. Epub 2009 Aug 6.

Regulation of heterochromatin remodelling and myogenin expression during muscle
differentiation by FAK interaction with MBD2.

Luo SW(1), Zhang C, Zhang B, Kim CH, Qiu YZ, Du QS, Mei L, Xiong WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Medical
College of Georgia, Augusta, GA 30912, USA.

Focal adhesion kinase (FAK), a major cell adhesion-activated tyrosine kinase, has
an important function in cell adhesion and migration. Here, we report a new
signalling of FAK in regulating chromatin remodelling by its interaction with
MBD2 (methyl CpG-binding protein 2), underlying FAK regulation of myogenin
expression and muscle differentiation. FAK interacts with MBD2 in vitro, in
myotubes, and in isolated muscle fibres. Such an interaction, increased in
myotubes exposed to oxidative stress, enhances FAK nuclear localization. The
nuclear FAK-MBD2 complexes alter heterochromatin reorganization and decrease MBD2
association with HDAC1 (histone deacetylase complex 1) and methyl CpG site in the
myogenin promoter, thus, inducing myogenin expression. In line with this view are
observations that blocking FAK nuclear localization by expressing dominant
negative MBD2 or suppression of FAK expression by its miRNA in C2C12 cells
attenuates myogenin induction and/or impairs muscle-terminal differentiation.
Together, these results suggest an earlier unrecognized role of FAK in regulating
chromatin remodelling that is important for myogenin expression and
muscle-terminal differentiation, reveal a new mechanism of MBD2 regulation by FAK
family tyrosine kinases, and provide a link between cell adhesion and chromatin
remodelling.

PMCID: PMC2738694
PMID: 19661918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Nat Rev Urol. 2009 Aug;6(8):429-39. doi: 10.1038/nrurol.2009.127.

ETS gene fusions in prostate cancer.

Clark JP(1), Cooper CS.

Author information: 
(1)Male Urological Cancer Research Centre, Sutton, UK. jeremy.clark@icr.ac.uk

Chromosomal rearrangements that result in high level expression of ETS gene
family members are common events in human prostate cancer. Most frequently, the
androgen-activated gene TMPRSS2 is found fused to the ERG gene. Fusions involving
ETV1, ETV4 and ETV5 occur less frequently but exhibit greater variability in
fusion structure with 12 unique 5' fusion partners identified so far. ETS gene
rearrangement seems to be a key event in driving prostate neoplastic development:
the rearrangement occurs as an early event and continues to be expressed in
metastatic and castration-resistant disease. However, ETS alterations seem
insufficient on their own to induce cancer formation. No consistent associations 
are seen between the presence of ETS alteration and clinical outcome, with the
possible exception that duplication of rearranged ERG, reflecting aneuploidy, is 
associated with poor outcome. Thus, factors other than ERG gene status may be the
major determinants of poor clinical outcome. Expression signatures of prostate
cancers containing the TMPRSS2-ERG fusion suggest involvement of beta-estradiol
signaling, and reveal higher levels of expression of HDAC1 and ion channel genes 
when compared to cancers that lack the rearrangement. These observations suggest 
new therapeutic possibilities for patients harboring ETS gene fusions.

PMID: 19657377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Histochem Cell Biol. 2009 Oct;132(4):457-68. doi: 10.1007/s00418-009-0625-x. Epub
2009 Aug 1.

The inability of fully grown germinal vesicle stage oocyte cytoplasm to
transcriptionally silence transferred transcribing nuclei.

Fulka H(1), Novakova Z, Mosko T, Fulka J Jr.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Animal Science, Pratelstvi 815, 10400, Prague 10, Czech
Republic. hell.f@seznam.cz

For somatic cell nuclear transfer cytoplasts from metaphase II, oocytes are
exclusively used. However, it is evident that certain reprogramming activities
are present in oocytes even at earlier stages of maturation. These activities
are, however, only poorly characterised. The main reason for this is that even
the intrinsic oocyte processes are insufficiently understood. The mammalian
oocyte is a highly specialised cell that harbours many specific characteristics. 
One of these is its particularly large size when compared to somatic cells. As
the oocyte enters the growth phase its volume, as well as the amount of material,
increases considerably. Thus, it is clear that the oocyte must possess the
machinery to accomplish this incredible material accumulation. When the growth
phase is completed, the transcription ceases and the oocyte becomes
transcriptionally inactive. In our study, we have used the model system of oocyte
fusion (transcribing x non-transcribing germinal vesicle (GV) stage oocytes) as a
substitute for a somatic cell nuclear transfer schemes where the somatic cell
nucleus would be introduced into a cytoplast obtained from a GV stage oocyte. We 
wanted to determine if the fully grown GV stage oocyte could induce reprogramming
of transcriptionally active transferred nucleus by suppressing this activity. In 
order to evaluate possible changes in transcriptional properties after nuclear
transfer, we also investigated the mechanism of transcriptional silencing taking 
place when the oocyte reaches its full size as well as the fate of the components
namely of the RNA polymerase II (Pol II) transcriptional and splicing machinery. 
Here, we show that while the Pol II is degraded in fully grown GV stage oocytes
and the splicing proteins undergo significant rearrangement, these oocytes are
unable to induce similar changes in transcriptionally active nuclei even after a 
prolonged culture interval.

PMID: 19649647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. J Biol Chem. 2009 Oct 9;284(41):27933-43. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.025742. Epub 2009
Jul 31.

Injury-induced platelet-derived growth factor receptor-alpha expression mediated 
by interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) release and cooperative transactivation by
NF-kappaB and ATF-4: IL-1beta facilitates HDAC-1/2 dissociation from promoter.

Zhang N(1), Khachigian LM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Vascular Research, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052,
Australia.

Retraction in
    J Biol Chem. 2010 Jul 9;285(28):21902.

Platelet-derived growth factors are a family of potent mitogens and
chemoattractants for fibroblasts and other cells of mesenchymal origin.
Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) dimeric ligands (composed of A-, B-, C-,
and D-chains) exert their biological activity through high affinity interactions 
with cell surface receptor subunits (alpha and beta). PDGF-receptor-alpha is
widely implicated in the pathogenesis of hyperplastic fibrotic disease, yet the
molecular mechanisms controlling its expression in response to injury are poorly 
understood. Here we show that PDGF-R alpha expression is induced in fibroblasts
by mechanical injury and interleukin (IL)-1beta, which was abolished by
neutralizing IL-1beta antibodies in the culture supernatant or inhibitors of
NF-kappaB. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and electrophoretic mobility shift
assays revealed the existence of a new NF-kappaB binding site at -531/-521 bp in 
the PDGF-R alpha promoter. We have recently shown that ATF-4 is also induced by
injury (Malabanan, K. P., Kanellakis, P., Bobik, A., and Khachigian, L. M. (2008)
Circ. Res. 103, 378-387), and we demonstrate here that ATF-4 binds a novel
element -259/-254 and stimulates PDGF-R alpha transcription. ATF-4 and NF-kappaB 
interact, occupy the PDGF-R alpha promoter, and induce PDGF-R alpha transcription
in a cooperative manner. IL-1beta facilitates the dissociation of histone
deacetylase (HDAC)-1/2 from the PDGF-R alpha promoter, whereas the HDAC
inhibitors suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid and trichostatin A potentiate IL-1beta
induction of PDGF-R alpha transcription. These findings, taken together,
demonstrate that injury stimulates IL-1beta secretion by fibroblasts, which
activates NF-kappaB and ATF-4 and stimulates interaction with the PDGF-R alpha
promoter, triggering PDGF-R alpha transcription. Physical and functional
interactions between NF-kappaB and ATF-4 have not been reported in any gene. This
is also the first report of HDAC regulation of PDGF-R alpha transcription.

PMCID: PMC2788845
PMID: 19648113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. FASEB J. 2009 Nov;23(11):3851-64. doi: 10.1096/fj.09-132415. Epub 2009 Jul 28.

Histone deacetylases facilitate sodium/calcium exchanger up-regulation in adult
cardiomyocytes.

Chandrasekaran S(1), Peterson RE, Mani SK, Addy B, Buchholz AL, Xu L,
Thiyagarajan T, Kasiganesan H, Kern CB, Menick DR.

Author information: 
(1)Gazes Cardiac Research Institute, Division of Cardiology, Department of
Medicine, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29425,
USA.

It is becoming increasingly evident that histone deacetylases (HDACs) have a
prominent role in the alteration of gene expression during the growth remodeling 
process of cardiac hypertrophy. HDACs are generally viewed as corepressors of
gene expression. However, we demonstrate that class I and class II HDACs play an 
important role in the basal expression and up-regulation of the sodium calcium
exchanger (Ncx1) gene in adult cardiomyocytes. Treatment with the HDAC inhibitor 
trichostatin A (TSA) prevented the pressure-overload-stimulated up-regulation of 
Ncx1 expression. Overexpression of HDAC5 resulted in the dose-dependent
up-regulation of basal and alpha-adrenergic stimulated Ncx1 expression. We show
that Nkx2.5 recruits HDAC5 to the Ncx1 promoter, where HDAC5 complexes with
HDAC1. Nkx2.5 also interacts with transcriptional activator p300, which is
recruited to the Ncx1 promoter. We demonstrate that when Nkx2.5 is acetylated, it
is found associated with HDAC5, whereas deacetylated Nkx2.5 is in complex with
p300. Notably, TSA treatment prevents p300 from being recruited to the endogenous
Ncx1 promoter, resulting in the repression of Ncx1 expression. We propose a novel
model for Ncx1 regulation in which deacetylation of Nkx2.5 is required for the
recruitment of p300 and results in up-regulation of exchanger expression.

PMCID: PMC2775004
PMID: 19638401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Cancer. 2009 Oct 15;115(20):4655-66. doi: 10.1002/cncr.24532.

Transport by SLC5A8 with subsequent inhibition of histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1)
and HDAC3 underlies the antitumor activity of 3-bromopyruvate.

Thangaraju M(1), Karunakaran SK, Itagaki S, Gopal E, Elangovan S, Prasad PD,
Ganapathy V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical College of Georgia, 
Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA. mthangaraju@mcg.edu

BACKGROUND: 3-bromopyruvate is an alkylating agent with antitumor activity. It is
currently believed that blockade of adenosine triphosphate production from
glycolysis and mitochondria is the primary mechanism responsible for this
antitumor effect. The current studies uncovered a new and novel mechanism for the
antitumor activity of 3-bromopyruvate.
METHODS: The transport of 3-bromopyruvate by sodium-coupled monocarboxylate
transporter SMCT1 (SLC5A8), a tumor suppressor and a sodium (Na+)-coupled,
electrogenic transporter for short-chain monocarboxylates, was studied using a
mammalian cell expression and the Xenopus laevis oocyte expression systems. The
effect of 3-bromopyruvate on histone deacetylases (HDACs) was monitored using the
lysate of the human breast cancer cell line MCF7 and human recombinant HDAC
isoforms as the enzyme sources. Cell viability was monitored by
fluorescence-activated cell-sorting analysis and colony-formation assay. The
acetylation status of histone H4 was evaluated by Western blot analysis.
RESULTS: 3-Bromopyruvate is a transportable substrate for SLC5A8, and that
transport process is Na+-coupled and electrogenic. MCF7 cells did not express
SLC5A8 and were not affected by 3-bromopyruvate. However, when transfected with
SLC5A8 or treated with inhibitors of DNA methylation, these cells underwent
apoptosis in the presence of 3-bromopyruvate. This cell death was associated with
the inhibition of HDAC1/HDAC3. Studies with different isoforms of human
recombinant HDACs identified HDAC1 and HDAC3 as the targets for 3-bromopyruvate.
CONCLUSIONS: 3-Bromopyruvate was transported into cells actively through the
tumor suppressor SLC5A8, and the process was energized by an electrochemical Na+ 
gradient. Ectopic expression of the transporter in MCF7 cells led to apoptosis,
and the mechanism involved the inhibition of HDAC1/HDAC3.

Copyright (c) 2009 American Cancer Society.

PMCID: PMC2782911
PMID: 19637353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Biol Chem. 2009 Sep 18;284(38):25993-6004. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.034280. Epub
2009 Jul 26.

Interaction between HMGA1 and retinoblastoma protein is required for adipocyte
differentiation.

Esposito F(1), Pierantoni GM, Battista S, Melillo RM, Scala S, Chieffi P, Fedele 
M, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del Consiglio Nazionale
delle Ricerche, Facoltà di Medicina e Chirurgia di Napoli, Università degli Studi
di Napoli Federico II, Via S. Pansini 5, 80131 Naples, Italy.

It is generally accepted that the regulation of adipogenesis prevents obesity.
However, the mechanisms controlling adipogenesis have not been completely
defined. We have previously demonstrated that HMGA1 proteins play a critical role
in adipogenesis. In fact, suppression of HMGA1 protein synthesis by antisense
technology dramatically increased growth rate and impaired adipocyte
differentiation in 3T3-L1 cells. Furthermore, we showed that HMGA1 strongly
potentiates the capacity of the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta (C/EBPbeta)
transcriptional factor to transactivate the leptin promoter, an
adipocytic-specific promoter. In this study we demonstrate that HMGA1 physically 
interacts with retinoblastoma protein (RB), which is also required in adipocyte
differentiation. Moreover, we show that RB, C/EBPbeta, and HMGA1 proteins all
cooperate in controlling both Id1 and leptin gene transcriptions, which are down-
and up-regulated during adipocyte differentiation, respectively. We also
demonstrate that HMGA1/RB interaction regulates CDC25A and CDC6 promoter
activities, which are induced by E2F-1 protein during early adipocyte
differentiation, by displacing HDAC1 from the RB-E2F1 complex. Furthermore, by
using Hmga1(-/-) embryonic stem cells, which failed to undergo adipocyte
differentiation, we show the crucial role of HMGA1 proteins in adipocyte
differentiation due to its pivotal involvement in the formation of the
RB-C/EBPbeta complex. Altogether these data demonstrate a key role of the
interaction between HMGA1 and RB in adipocyte differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2758000
PMID: 19633359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Exp Cell Res. 2009 Oct 15;315(17):2914-20. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2009.07.014. Epub
2009 Jul 18.

Deletion of the p107/p130-binding domain of Mip130/LIN-9 bypasses the requirement
for CDK4 activity for the dissociation of Mip130/LIN-9 from p107/p130-E2F4
complex.

Sandoval R(1), Pilkinton M, Colamonici OR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Illinois, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Mip130/LIN-9 is part of a large complex that includes homologs of the Drosophila 
dREAM (drosophila RB-like, E2F, and Myb) and C. elegans DRM complexes. This
complex also includes proteins such as Mip40/LIN-37, Mip120/LIN-54, and LIN-52.
In mammalian cells, Mip130/LIN-9 specifically associates with the p107/p130-E2F4 
repressor complex in G0/G1 and with B-Myb in S-phase. However, little is known
about how the transition occurs and whether Mip130/LIN-9 contributes to the
repressor effect of p107/p130. In this report, we demonstrate that Mip130/LIN-9, 
Mip40/LIN-37, Mip120/LIN-54, and Sin3b form a core complex, the Mip Core Complex 
or LIN Complex (MCC/LINC), which is detectable in all phases of the cell cycle.
This complex specifically recruits transcriptional repressors such as p107, p130,
E2F4 and HDAC1 in G0/G1, and B-Myb in S-phase. Importantly, we provide strong
evidence that the transition between repressors and activators of transcription
is mediated by CDK4, through the phosphorylation of the pocket proteins, p107 and
p130. The requirement for CDK4 activity is bypassed by the deletion of the first 
84 amino acids (Mip130/LIN-9(Delta84)), since this mutant is unable to interact
with p107/p130 in G0/G1, while maintaining its association with B-Myb.
Importantly, the Mip130/LIN-9(Delta84) allele rescues the low expression of G1/S 
genes observed in CDK4(-/-) MEFs demonstrating that Mip130/LIN-9 contributes to
the repression of these E2F-regulated genes in G0/G1.

PMCID: PMC2757496
PMID: 19619530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Seikagaku. 2009 Jun;81(6):502-10.

[Transcriptional regulation of cellular senescence].

[Article in Japanese]

Igarashi K(1), Dohi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Seiryo-machi 2-1, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

PMID: 19618874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Anticancer Res. 2009 Jul;29(7):2535-40.

O6-Methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase hypermethylation modulated by
17beta-estradiol in lung cancer cells.

Lai JC(1), Wu JY, Cheng YW, Yeh KT, Wu TC, Chen CY, Lee H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Institute of Medical and Molecular
Toxicology, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Our recent report indicated that MGMT hypermethylation is more common
in squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) in males, and smokers than in adenocarcinomas
(ADC) in females, and nonsmokers. More interestingly, MGMT hypermethylation in
SCC and ADC was pronouncedly influenced by gender factor, not by smoking status. 
We questioned whether 17beta-estradiol could modulate the machinery of promoter
methylation to cause the gender difference of MGMT hypermethylation in lung
cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Two MGMT hypermethylated Ch27 and H1355 lung cancer cell
lines were treated with or without 17beta-estradiol and the status of
hypermethylation was examined by methylated specific methylation (MSP) as
compared with both cells treated with demethylating agents, 5-AZA-dC (AZA) or
TSA.
RESULTS: Our data showed that 17beta-estradiol, similar to AZA, diminished the
MGMT hypermethylation and restored MGMT mRNA expression, which was not observed
in the case of TSA. Western blotting showed that 17beta-estradiol markedly
reduced DNMT1 expression in Ch27 and H1355 cells, but slightly reduced HDAC1
expression. Consequently, acetylated H3 and H4 histone levels were slightly
increased by 17beta-estradiol in both cell types. In addition, ChIP analysis
revealed that 17beta-estradiol simultaneously diminished the binding activity of 
both proteins on the MGMT promoter of both cell lines.
CONCLUSION: 17beta-Estradiol decreased DNMT1 and HDAC1 protein expressions and
their binding activity on MGMT promoter, and this may partially contribute to the
gender difference of MGMT hypermethylation in lung cancer.

PMID: 19596925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. AIDS. 2009 Sep 10;23(14):1799-806. doi: 10.1097/QAD.0b013e32832ec1dc.

Expression of latent human immunodeficiency type 1 is induced by novel and
selective histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Archin NM(1), Keedy KS, Espeseth A, Dang H, Hazuda DJ, Margolis DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, North Carolina 7599-7435, USA.

OBJECTIVES: A family of histone deacetylases (HDACs) mediates chromatin
remodeling, and repression of gene expression. Deacetylation of histones within
the HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR) by HDACs plays a key role in the maintenance
of latency, whereas acetylation of histones about the LTR is linked to proviral
expression and escape of HIV from latency. Global HDAC inhibition may adversely
affect host gene expression, leading to cellular toxicities. Potent inhibitors
selective for HDACs that maintain LTR repression could be ideal antilatency
therapeutics.
METHODS: We investigated the ability of selective HDAC inhibitors to de-repress
the HIV-1 LTR in both a cell line model of latency and in resting CD4 T cells
isolated from patients who were aviremic on antiretroviral therapy (ART).
RESULTS: We found that inhibition of class I HDACs increased acetylation of
histones at the LTR, but that LTR chromatin was unaffected by class II HDAC
inhibitors. In a latently infected cell line, inhibitors selective for class I
HDACs were more efficient activators of the LTR than inhibitors that target class
II HDACs. Class I HDAC inhibitors were strikingly efficient inducers of virus
outgrowth from resting CD4 T cells of aviremic patients, whereas HIV was rarely
recovered from patient's cells exposed to class II HDAC inhibitors.
CONCLUSIONS: Further development of selective HDAC inhibitors as part of a
clinical strategy to target persistent HIV infection is warranted.

2009 Wolters Kluwer Health | Lippincott Williams & Wilkins

PMCID: PMC3809117
PMID: 19590405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Leukemia. 2009 Nov;23(11):2081-9. doi: 10.1038/leu.2009.131. Epub 2009 Jul 9.

Inhibition of the hTERT promoter by the proto-oncogenic protein TAL1.

Terme JM(1), Mocquet V, Kuhlmann AS, Zane L, Mortreux F, Wattel E, Duc Dodon M,
Jalinot P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire de la Cellule, Unité Mixte de Recherche
5239, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Ecole Normale Supérieure de
Lyon, Institut Fédératif de Recherche, Lyon cedex 07, France.

Telomerase activity, which has fundamental roles in development and
carcinogenesis, strongly depends on the expression of human telomerase reverse
transcriptase (hTERT), its catalytic subunit. In this report, we show that the
basic helix-loop-helix factor, TAL1 (T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia 1), is a
negative regulator of the hTERT promoter. Indeed, TAL1 overexpression leads to a 
decrease in hTERT mRNA abundance and hence to reduced telomerase activity.
Conversely, suppression of TAL1 by RNA interference in Jurkat cells increases
hTERT expression. Analysis by chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed that
TAL1 binds to the hTERT proximal promoter and recruits HDAC1. Considering the
relationship recently established between TAL1 and the human T-cell leukemia
virus type 1 (HTLV-1) Tax protein, which was confirmed in T lymphocyte clones
derived from adult T-cell leukemia patients, we analyzed the effect of TAL1 with 
respect to the earlier characterized effects of Tax and HBZ (HTLV-1 basic leucine
zipper) on hTERT expression. TAL1 was observed to reinforce the negative effect
of Tax, whereas hTERT transactivation by the HBZ-JunD complex was repressed by
TAL1 overexpression. Moreover, HBZ was found to induce proteasome-mediated
degradation of TAL1. These observations support a model in which Tax and TAL1 by 
repressing hTERT would initially favor genomic instability, whereas expression of
factors such as HBZ allows at a later stage an increase in hTERT production and
consequently in telomerase activity.

PMID: 19587703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Sep;29(18):4982-93. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00285-09. Epub 2009 Jul 
6.

Functional connection between deimination and deacetylation of histones.

Denis H(1), Deplus R, Putmans P, Yamada M, Métivier R, Fuks F.

Author information: 
(1)Free University of Brussels, Faculty of Medicine, Laboratory of Cancer
Epigenetics, Brussels, Belgium.

Histone methylation plays key roles in regulating chromatin structure and
function. The recent identification of enzymes that antagonize or remove histone 
methylation offers new opportunities to appreciate histone methylation plasticity
in the regulation of epigenetic pathways. Peptidylarginine deiminase 4 (PADI4;
also known as PAD4) was the first enzyme shown to antagonize histone methylation.
PADI4 functions as a histone deiminase converting a methylarginine residue to
citrulline at specific sites on the tails of histones H3 and H4. This activity is
linked to repression of the estrogen-regulated pS2 promoter. Very little is known
as to how PADI4 silences gene expression. We show here that PADI4 associates with
the histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1). Kinetic chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
revealed that PADI4 and HDAC1, and the corresponding activities, associate
cyclically and coordinately with the pS2 promoter during repression phases.
Knockdown of HDAC1 led to decreased H3 citrullination, concomitantly with
increased histone arginine methylation. In cells with a reduced HDAC1 and a
slightly decreased PADI4 level, these effects were more pronounced. Our data thus
suggest that PADI4 and HDAC1 collaborate to generate a repressive chromatin
environment on the pS2 promoter. These findings further substantiate the
"transcriptional clock" concept, highlighting the dynamic connection between
deimination and deacetylation of histones.

PMCID: PMC2738279
PMID: 19581286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Cell Cycle. 2009 Aug;8(15):2356-9. Epub 2009 Aug 11.

GSK3beta-cyclin D3-CUGBP1-eIF2 pathway in aging and in myotonic dystrophy.

Jin J(1), Wang GL, Salisbury E, Timchenko L, Timchenko NA.

Author information: 
(1)Huffington Center on Aging and Departments of Pathology and Molecular
Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.

Epigenetic silencing of the cell cycle proteins is one of the major pathways of
the inhibition of liver proliferation in old mice. We recently identified
glycogen synthase 3beta, GSK3beta, as an enzyme which controls the epigenetic
regulation of the liver proliferation via reduction of cyclin D3-cdk4. The
elevation of cyclin D3 in livers of old mice leads to the accumulation of a
transcriptional C/EBPalpha-HDAC1-Brm complex and translational CUGBP1-eIF2
complex. The accumulation of the CUGBP1-eIF2 increases translation of HDAC1 and
C/EBPbeta in livers of old mice leading to formation of C/EBPbeta-HDAC1 complex
which represses C/EBPbeta-dependent genes by interacting with their promoters.
The translational CUGBP1-eIF2 complex also plays critical role in the regulation 
of biological processes in young livers and needs to be tightly regulated. Our
recent paper showed that this complex is un-appropriately upregulated in skeletal
muscle precursors of patients affected with multisystemic disease, Myotonic
Dystrophy 2 (DM2) leading to translational elevation of several proteins. These
data suggest that the age-specific translational dysfunctions might be involved
in DM2 pathogenesis. Our data also suggest that the regulation of translation is 
conserved in liver and skeletal muscle. In this review, we discuss biological
consequences of the age-associated alterations of translation in the liver and a 
possible role of the elevation of the CUGBP1-eIF2 complex in development of DM2
pathology.

PMID: 19571675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Aug;37(15):5183-96. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp533. Epub 2009
Jun 26.

Senescence delay and repression of p16INK4a by Lsh via recruitment of histone
deacetylases in human diploid fibroblasts.

Zhou R(1), Han L, Li G, Tong T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Peking University Health
Science Center, Research Center on Aging, Beijing 100191, People's Republic of
China.

Lymphoid specific helicase (Lsh) belongs to the family of SNF2/helicases.
Disruption of Lsh leads to developmental growth retardation and premature aging
in mice. However, the specific effect of Lsh on human cellular senescence remains
unknown. Herein, we report that Lsh overexpression delays cell senescence by
silencing p16(INK4a) in human fibroblasts. The patterns of p16(INK4a) and Lsh
expression during cell senescence present the inverse correlation. We also find
that Lsh requires histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity to repress p16(INK4a) and
treatment with trichostatin A (TSA) is sufficient to block the repressor effect
of Lsh. Moreover, overexpression of Lsh is correlated with deacetylation of
histone H3 at the p16 promoter, and TSA treatment in Lsh-expressing cells
reverses the acetylation status of histones. Additionally, we demonstrate an
interaction between Lsh, histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and HDAC2 in vivo.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that Lsh interacts in vivo with the p16 promoter and 
recruits HDAC1. Our data suggest that Lsh represses endogenous p16(INK4a)
expression by recruiting HDAC to establish a repressive chromatin structure at
the p16(INK4a) promoter, which in turn delays cell senescence.

PMCID: PMC2731912
PMID: 19561196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. FASEB J. 2009 Oct;23(10):3539-52. doi: 10.1096/fj.09-133215. Epub 2009 Jun 26.

A novel domain in histone deacetylase 1 and 2 mediates repression of
cartilage-specific genes in human chondrocytes.

Hong S(1), Derfoul A, Pereira-Mouries L, Hall DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cartilage Molecular Genetics Group, Cartilage Biology and Orthopaedics Branch,
National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

The role of histone deacetylase 1 and 2 (HDAC1 and HDAC2) in regulating
cartilage-specific gene expression was explored in primary human chondrocytes.
HDAC1 and HDAC2 protein levels were elevated in chondrocytes from osteoarthritic 
patients, consistent with a down-regulation of some cartilage marker genes. When 
expressed in these cells, HDAC1 and HDAC2 repressed aggrecan and collagen
2(alpha1) expression but differed in their repression of collagen 9(alpha1),
collagen 11(alpha1), dermatopontin, and cartilage oligomeric matrix protein
(COMP). To identify the basis of these differences between HDAC1 and HDAC2, their
carboxy-terminal domains (CTDs) were deleted, which led to proteins that retained
enzymatic activity but were unable to repress cartilage gene expression. Further,
exchange of the CTDs between HDAC1 and HDAC2 led to proteins that were
enzymatically active but displayed altered target gene specificity, indicating
that these CTDs can function independently of HDAC enzymatic activity, to target 
the HDACs to specific genes. The Snail transcription factor was identified as a
mediator of HDAC1 and HDAC2 repression of the collagen 2(alpha1) gene, via its
interaction with the HDAC1 and 2 CTDs. The data indicate that the CTD serves a
novel function within HDAC1 and HDAC2, to mediate repression of
cartilage-specific gene expression in human chondrocytes.

PMCID: PMC2747680
PMID: 19561124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Nat Neurosci. 2009 Jul;12(7):815-7. doi: 10.1038/nn0709-815.

Genetics meets epigenetics: HDACs and Wnt signaling in myelin development and
regeneration.

Li H, Richardson WD.

Comment on
    Nat Neurosci. 2009 Jul;12(7):829-38.

PMID: 19554044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. J Neurosci. 2009 Jun 24;29(25):8288-97. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0097-09.2009.

Histone deacetylases 1 and 2 form a developmental switch that controls excitatory
synapse maturation and function.

Akhtar MW(1), Raingo J, Nelson ED, Montgomery RL, Olson EN, Kavalali ET,
Monteggia LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75390-9111, USA.

The structural assembly of synapses can be accomplished in a rapid time frame,
although most nascent synapses formed during early development are not fully
functional and respond poorly to presynaptic action potentials. The mechanisms
that are responsible for this delay in synapse maturation are unknown. Histone
deacetylases (HDACs) regulate the activity state of chromatin and repress gene
expression through the removal of acetyl groups from histones. Class I HDACs,
which include HDAC1 and HDAC2, are expressed in the CNS, although their specific 
role in neuronal function has not been studied. To delineate the contribution of 
HDAC1 and HDAC2 in the brain, we have used pharmacological inhibitors of HDACs
and mice with conditional alleles to HDAC1 and HDAC2. We found that a decrease in
the activities of both HDAC1 and HDAC2 during early synaptic development causes a
robust facilitation of excitatory synapse maturation and a modest increase in
synapse numbers. In contrast, in mature neurons a decrease in HDAC2 levels alone 
was sufficient to attenuate basal excitatory neurotransmission without a
significant change in the numbers of detectable nerve terminals. Therefore, we
propose that HDAC1 and HDAC2 form a developmental switch that controls synapse
maturation and function acting in a manner dependent on the maturational states
of neuronal networks.

PMCID: PMC2895817
PMID: 19553468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. J Neurochem. 2009 Aug;110(4):1226-40. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2009.06212.x. Epub
2009 Jun 15.

The HDAC inhibitor, sodium butyrate, stimulates neurogenesis in the ischemic
brain.

Kim HJ(1), Leeds P, Chuang DM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Section, Mood and Anxiety Disorders Program, National
Institute of Mental Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1363, USA.

In the healthy adult brain, neurogenesis normally occurs in the subventricular
zone (SVZ) and hippocampal dentate gyrus (DG). Cerebral ischemia enhances
neurogenesis in neurogenic and non-neurogenic regions of the ischemic brain of
adult rodents. This study demonstrated that post-insult treatment with a histone 
deacetylase inhibitor, sodium butyrate (SB), stimulated the incorporation of
bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU) in the SVZ, DG, striatum, and frontal cortex in the 
ischemic brain of rats subjected to permanent cerebral ischemia. SB treatment
also increased the number of cells expressing polysialic acid-neural cell
adhesion molecule, nestin, glial fibrillary acidic protein, phospho-cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB), and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) in
various brain regions after cerebral ischemia. Furthermore, extensive
co-localization of BrdU and polysialic acid-neural cell adhesion molecule was
observed in multiple regions after ischemia, and SB treatment up-regulated
protein levels of BDNF, phospho-CREB, and glial fibrillary acidic protein.
Intraventricular injection of K252a, a tyrosine kinase B receptor antagonist,
markedly reduced SB-induced cell proliferation detected by BrdU and Ki67 in the
ipsilateral SVZ, DG, and other brain regions, blocked SB-induced nestin
expression and CREB activation, and attenuated the long-lasting behavioral
benefits of SB. Together, these results suggest that histone deacetylase
inhibitor-induced cell proliferation, migration and differentiation require
BDNF-tyrosine kinase B signaling and may contribute to long-term beneficial
effects of SB after ischemic injury.

PMCID: PMC2726719
PMID: 19549282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. PLoS Pathog. 2009 Jun;5(6):e1000488. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000488. Epub 2009
Jun 19.

Epigenetic silencing of host cell defense genes enhances intracellular survival
of the rickettsial pathogen Anaplasma phagocytophilum.

Garcia-Garcia JC(1), Barat NC, Trembley SJ, Dumler JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

Intracellular bacteria have evolved mechanisms that promote survival within
hostile host environments, often resulting in functional dysregulation and
disease. Using the Anaplasma phagocytophilum-infected granulocyte model, we
establish a link between host chromatin modifications, defense gene transcription
and intracellular bacterial infection. Infection of THP-1 cells with A.
phagocytophilum led to silencing of host defense gene expression. Histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) expression, activity and binding to the defense gene
promoters significantly increased during infection, which resulted in decreased
histone H3 acetylation in infected cells. HDAC1 overexpression enhanced
infection, whereas pharmacologic and siRNA HDAC1 inhibition significantly
decreased bacterial load. HDAC2 does not seem to be involved, since HDAC2
silencing by siRNA had no effect on A. phagocytophilum intracellular propagation.
These data indicate that HDAC up-regulation and epigenetic silencing of host cell
defense genes is required for A. phagocytophilum infection. Bacterial epigenetic 
regulation of host cell gene transcription could be a general mechanism that
enhances intracellular pathogen survival while altering cell function and
promoting disease.

PMCID: PMC2694362
PMID: 19543390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Rheumatol. 2009 Aug;36(8):1580-9. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.081115. Epub 2009 Jun 16.

Expression and function of histone deacetylases in rheumatoid arthritis synovial 
fibroblasts.

Horiuchi M(1), Morinobu A, Chin T, Sakai Y, Kurosaka M, Kumagai S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pathology and Immunology, Kobe University School of
Medicine, Kobe, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effects of histone deacetylases (HDAC) on rheumatoid
arthritis synovial fibroblasts (RA-SF).
METHODS: The expression of mRNA encoding HDAC1 through HDAC11 in RA-SF and
osteoarthritis-SF (OA-SF) was determined using real-time polymerase chain
reactions. The functions of HDAC1 and HDAC2 in RA-SF were assessed using small
interfering RNA (siRNA) technology. Cell counts and proliferation were examined
by MTT assays and BrDU ELISA, respectively, and apoptosis was determined using
the TUNEL assay and annexin V staining. Levels of cell cycle-related molecules
and matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) were tested by Western blotting and ELISA,
respectively.
RESULTS: Messenger RNA expression of HDAC1 was significantly higher in RA-SF than
in OA-SF. Knockdown of HDAC1 and HDAC2 by siRNA resulted in decreased cell counts
and cell proliferation, and increased apoptosis in RA-SF. Expression of p16, p21,
and p53 was increased by knockdown of both HDAC1 and HDAC2. On the other hand,
knockdown of HDAC1, but not of HDAC2, upregulated tumor necrosis
factor-alpha-induced MMP-1 production by RA-SF.
CONCLUSION: HDAC1 is overexpressed in RA-SF compared to OA-SF. HDAC1 supports
cell proliferation and survival of RA-SF, but suppresses MMP-1 production. HDAC2 
also plays an important role in cell proliferation and apoptosis of RA-SF. Our
study provides useful information to develop new HDAC inhibitors for the
treatment of RA.

PMID: 19531758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Neuroscience. 2009 Sep 29;163(1):1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.06.028.
Epub 2009 Jun 13.

Histone deactylase inhibition combined with behavioral therapy enhances learning 
and memory following traumatic brain injury.

Dash PK(1), Orsi SA, Moore AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, The University of Texas Medical
School, Houston, TX 77225, USA. p.dash@uth.tmc.edu

Traumatic brain injury (TBI) induces a number of pathological events ranging from
neuronal degeneration and tissue loss to impaired neuronal plasticity and
neurochemical dysregulation. In rodents, exposure of brain-injured animals to
environmental enrichment has been shown to be an effective means of enhancing
learning and memory post-injury. Recently, it has been discovered that
environmental enrichment may enhance neuronal plasticity through epigenetic
changes that involve enhanced histone acetylation, a property that can be
mimicked by the use of histone deactylase (HDAC) inhibitors. We therefore
evaluated the consequences of the HDAC inhibitor sodium butyrate on the learning 
and memory of brain-injured mice. In contrast to a previous report using a mouse 
neurodegeneration model, sodium butyrate (1.2 g/kg daily for four weeks) did not 
improve learning and memory when tested after the completion of the drug
treatment paradigm. In addition, sodium butyrate administration during the
reported period of neurodegeneration (days 0-5) also offered no benefit. However,
when administered concurrently with training in the Morris water maze task
(beginning on day 14 post-injury), sodium butyrate improved learning and memory
in brain-injured mice. Interestingly, when these mice were subsequently tested in
an associative fear conditioning task, an improvement was observed. Taken
together, our findings indicate that HDAC inhibition may mimic some of the
cognitive improvements seen following enriched environment exposure, and that the
improvement is observed when the treatment is carried out current with behavioral
testing.

PMCID: PMC4217276
PMID: 19531374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Carcinogenesis. 2009 Aug;30(8):1416-23. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgp147. Epub 2009 Jun
15.

Alpha-keto acid metabolites of organoselenium compounds inhibit histone
deacetylase activity in human colon cancer cells.

Nian H(1), Bisson WH, Dashwood WM, Pinto JT, Dashwood RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Oregon State University, Corvallis,
OR 97331, USA.

Methylselenocysteine (MSC) and selenomethionine (SM) are two organoselenium
compounds receiving interest for their potential anticancer properties. These
compounds can be converted to beta-methylselenopyruvate (MSP) and
alpha-keto-gamma-methylselenobutyrate (KMSB), alpha-keto acid metabolites that
share structural features with the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor butyrate.
We tested the organoselenium compounds in an in vitro assay with human HDAC1 and 
HDAC8; whereas SM and MSC had little or no activity up to 2 mM, MSP and KMSB
caused dose-dependent inhibition of HDAC activity. Subsequent experiments
identified MSP as a competitive inhibitor of HDAC8, and computational modeling
supported a mechanism involving reversible interaction with the active site zinc 
atom. In human colon cancer cells, acetylated histone H3 levels were increased
during the period 0.5-48 h after treatment with MSP and KMSB, and there was
dose-dependent inhibition of HDAC activity. The proportion of cells occupying
G(2)/M of the cell cycle was increased at 10-50 microM MSP and KMSB, and
apoptosis was induced, as evidenced by morphological changes, Annexin V staining 
and increased cleaved caspase-3, -6, -7, -9 and poly(adenosine
diphosphate-ribose)polymerase. P21WAF1, a well-established target gene of
clinically used HDAC inhibitors, was increased in MSP- and KMSB-treated colon
cancer cells at both the messenger RNA and protein level, and there was enhanced 
P21WAF1 promoter activity. These studies confirm that in addition to targeting
redox-sensitive signaling molecules, alpha-keto acid metabolites of
organoselenium compounds alter HDAC activity and histone acetylation status in
colon cancer cells, as recently observed in human prostate cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC2718078
PMID: 19528666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Gut. 2009 Oct;58(10):1399-409. doi: 10.1136/gut.2009.180711. Epub 2009 Jun 14.

HDAC2 mediates therapeutic resistance of pancreatic cancer cells via the BH3-only
protein NOXA.

Fritsche P(1), Seidler B, Schüler S, Schnieke A, Göttlicher M, Schmid RM, Saur D,
Schneider G.

Author information: 
(1)Technische Universität München, Klinikum rechts der Isar, II Medizinische
Klinik, Ismaninger Str 22, 81675 Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Although histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) are promising cancer 
therapeutics regulating proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis, molecular
pathways engaged by specific HDAC isoenzymes in cancer are ill defined.
RESULTS: In this study we demonstrate that HDAC2 is highly expressed in
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), especially in undifferentiated tumours. 
We show that HDAC2, but not HDAC1, confers resistance towards the topoisomerase
II inhibitor etoposide in PDAC cells. Correspondingly, the class I selective
HDACi valproic acid (VPA) synergises with etoposide to induce apoptosis of PDAC
cells. Transcriptome profiling of HDAC2-depleted PDAC cells revealed upregulation
of the BH3-only protein NOXA. We show that the epigenetically silenced NOXA gene 
locus is opened after HDAC2 depletion and that NOXA upregulation is sufficient to
sensitise PDAC cells towards etoposide-induced apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, our data characterise a novel molecular mechanism that
links the epigenetic regulator HDAC2 to the regulation of the pro-apoptotic
BH3-only protein NOXA in PDAC. Targeting HDAC2 will therefore be a promising
strategy to overcome therapeutic resistance of PDAC against chemotherapeutics
that induce DNA damage.

PMID: 19528037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Immunity. 2009 Jun 19;30(6):802-16. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2009.04.013. Epub 2009 
Jun 11.

Promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger protein regulates interferon-mediated innate
immunity.

Xu D(1), Holko M, Sadler AJ, Scott B, Higashiyama S, Berkofsky-Fessler W,
McConnell MJ, Pandolfi PP, Licht JD, Williams BR.

Author information: 
(1)Monash Institute of Medical Research, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2009 Jun 19;30(6):757-8.

Interferons (IFNs) direct innate and acquired immune responses and, accordingly, 
are used therapeutically to treat a number of diseases, yet the diverse effects
they elicit are not fully understood. Here, we identified the promyelocytic
leukemia zinc finger (PLZF) protein as a previously unrecognized component of the
IFN response. IFN stimulated an association of PLZF with promyelocytic leukemia
protein (PML) and histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) to induce a decisive subset of
IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs). Consequently, PLZF-deficient mice had a specific ISG
expression defect and as a result were more susceptible to viral infection. This 
susceptibility correlated with a marked decrease in the expression of the key
antiviral mediators and an impaired IFN-mediated induction of natural killer cell
function. These results provide new insights into the regulatory mechanisms of
IFN signaling and the induction of innate antiviral immunity.

PMCID: PMC2711215
PMID: 19523849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. PLoS Pathog. 2009 Jun;5(6):e1000463. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000463. Epub 2009
Jun 5.

Recruitment of a SAP18-HDAC1 complex into HIV-1 virions and its requirement for
viral replication.

Sorin M(1), Cano J, Das S, Mathew S, Wu X, Davies KP, Shi X, Cheng SW, Ott D,
Kalpana GV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, 
United States of America.

HIV-1 integrase (IN) is a virally encoded protein required for integration of
viral cDNA into host chromosomes. INI1/hSNF5 is a component of the SWI/SNF
complex that interacts with HIV-1 IN, is selectively incorporated into HIV-1 (but
not other retroviral) virions, and modulates multiple steps, including particle
production and infectivity. To gain further insight into the role of INI1 in
HIV-1 replication, we screened for INI1-interacting proteins using the yeast
two-hybrid system. We found that SAP18 (Sin3a associated protein 18 kD), a
component of the Sin3a-HDAC1 complex, directly binds to INI1 in yeast, in vitro
and in vivo. Interestingly, we found that IN also binds to SAP18 in vitro and in 
vivo. SAP18 and components of a Sin3A-HDAC1 complex were specifically
incorporated into HIV-1 (but not SIV and HTLV-1) virions in an HIV-1 IN-dependent
manner. Using a fluorescence-based assay, we found that HIV-1 (but not SIV)
virion preparations harbour significant deacetylase activity, indicating the
specific recruitment of catalytically active HDAC into the virions. To determine 
the requirement of virion-associated HDAC1 to HIV-1 replication, an inactive,
transdominant negative mutant of HDAC1 (HDAC1(H141A)) was utilized. Incorporation
of HDAC1(H141A) decreased the virion-associated histone deacetylase activity.
Furthermore, incorporation of HDAC1(H141A) decreased the infectivity of HIV-1
(but not SIV) virions. The block in infectivity due to virion-associated
HDAC1(H141A) occurred specifically at the early reverse transcription stage,
while entry of the virions was unaffected. RNA-interference mediated knock-down
of HDAC1 in producer cells resulted in decreased virion-associated HDAC1 activity
and a reduction in infectivity of these virions. These studies indicate that
HIV-1 IN and INI1/hSNF5 bind SAP18 and selectively recruit components of
Sin3a-HDAC1 complex into HIV-1 virions. Furthermore, HIV-1 virion-associated
HDAC1 is required for efficient early post-entry events, indicating a novel role 
for HDAC1 during HIV-1 replication.

PMCID: PMC2685004
PMID: 19503603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Nat Neurosci. 2009 Jul;12(7):829-38. doi: 10.1038/nn.2333. Epub 2009 Jun 7.

HDAC1 and HDAC2 regulate oligodendrocyte differentiation by disrupting the
beta-catenin-TCF interaction.

Ye F(1), Chen Y, Hoang T, Montgomery RL, Zhao XH, Bu H, Hu T, Taketo MM, van Es
JH, Clevers H, Hsieh J, Bassel-Duby R, Olson EN, Lu QR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology and Kent Waldrep Foundation Center for
Basic Neuroscience Research on Nerve Growth and Regeneration, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2009 Jul;12(7):815-7.

Oligodendrocyte development is regulated by the interaction of repressors and
activators in a complex transcriptional network. We found that two
histone-modifying enzymes, HDAC1 and HDAC2, were required for oligodendrocyte
formation. Genetic deletion of both Hdac1 and Hdac2 in oligodendrocyte lineage
cells resulted in stabilization and nuclear translocation of beta-catenin, which 
negatively regulates oligodendrocyte development by repressing Olig2 expression. 
We further identified the oligodendrocyte-restricted transcription factor
TCF7L2/TCF4 as a bipartite co-effector of beta-catenin for regulating
oligodendrocyte differentiation. Targeted disruption of Tcf7l2 in mice led to
severe defects in oligodendrocyte maturation, whereas expression of its
dominant-repressive form promoted precocious oligodendrocyte specification in
developing chick neural tube. Transcriptional co-repressors HDAC1 and HDAC2
compete with beta-catenin for TCF7L2 interaction to regulate downstream genes
involved in oligodendrocyte differentiation. Thus, crosstalk between HDAC1/2 and 
the canonical Wnt signaling pathway mediated by TCF7L2 serves as a regulatory
mechanism for oligodendrocyte differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2701973
PMID: 19503085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Biochem Pharmacol. 2009 Nov 15;78(10):1279-88. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2009.05.035.
Epub 2009 Jun 6.

Drug discovery targeting epigenetic codes: the great potential of UHRF1, which
links DNA methylation and histone modifications, as a drug target in cancers and 
toxoplasmosis.

Unoki M(1), Brunet J, Mousli M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Biomarker Development, The Institute of Physical and Chemical
Research, Center for Genomic Medicine, RIKEN, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku,
Tokyo 108-8639, Japan. unokim@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp

UHRF1 plays a central role in transferring methylation status from mother cells
to daughter cells. Its SRA domain recognizes hemi-methylated DNA that appears in 
daughter DNA strands during duplication of DNA. UHRF1 recruits DNMT1 to the site 
and methylates both strands. UHRF1 also binds to HDAC1 and di- and tri-methyl K9 
histone H3, ubiquitinates histone H3, and associates with heterochromatin
formation, indicating that UHRF1 links histone modifications, DNA methylation,
and chromatin structure. UHRF1 is a direct target of E2F1 and promotes G1/S
transition. The tumor suppressor p53, which is deficient in 50% of cancers,
down-regulates UHRF1 through up-regulation of p21/WAF1 and subsequent
deactivation of E2F1. The expression levels of UHRF1 are up-regulated in many
cancers, probably partially because of the absence of wild type p53, but it is
probably regulated by several other factors. Knockdown of UHRF1 expression in
cancer cells suppressed cell growth, suggesting that UHRF1 can be a useful
anticancer drug target. Recently, it was revealed that UHRF1 plays important
roles not only in carcinogenesis, but also in toxoplasmosis, which is
occasionally fatal to people with a weakened immune system, and can cause
blindness in the major pathology of ocular toxoplasmosis. Toxoplasma gondii,
which causes toxoplasmosis, utilizes UHRF1 to control the cell cycle phase and
enhance its proliferation. Thus, knockdown of UHRF1 can be effective at stopping 
the proliferation of the parasites in infected cells. In this review, we discuss 
several possible methods that can inhibit the multiple unique functions of UHRF1,
which can be utilized for treating cancers and toxoplasmosis.

PMID: 19501055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Jun 23;106(25):10141-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0900437106. Epub 2009 Jun 3.

LSD1-mediated epigenetic modification is required for TAL1 function and
hematopoiesis.

Hu X(1), Li X, Valverde K, Fu X, Noguchi C, Qiu Y, Huang S.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Anatomy and Cell
Biology, Genetics Institute, and Shands Cancer Center, University of Florida
College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

TAL1 is a critical transcription factor required for hematopoiesis. However,
perturbation of its activity often leads to T cell leukemia. Whether and how its 
transcriptional activities are regulated during hematopoiesis remains to be
addressed. Here, we show that TAL1 is associated with histone demethylase
complexes containing lysine-specific demethylase 1 (LSD1), RE1 silencing
transcription factor corepressor (CoREST), histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), and
histone deacetylase 2 in erythroleukemia and T cell leukemia cells. The enzymatic
domain of LSD1 plays an important role in repressing the TAL1-directed
transcription of GAL4 reporter linked to a thymidine kniase minimal promoter.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that the TAL1-associated LSD1, HDAC1, and their
enzymatic activities are coordinately down-regulated during the early phases of
erythroid differentiation. Consistent with the rapid changes of TAL1-corepressor 
complex during differentiation, TAL1 recruits LSD1 to the silenced p4.2 promoter 
in undifferentiated, but not in differentiated, murine erythroleukemia (MEL)
cells. Finally, shRNA-mediated knockdown of LSD1 in MEL cells resulted in
derepression of the TAL1 target gene accompanied by increasing dimeH3K4 at the
promoter region. Thus, our data revealed that histone lysine demethylase LSD1 may
negatively regulate TAL1-mediated transcription and suggest that the dynamic
regulation of TAL1-associated LSD1/HDAC1 complex may determine the onset of
erythroid differentiation programs.

PMCID: PMC2700898
PMID: 19497860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Zhong Nan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2009 May;34(5):369-74.

Relation of promoter methylation of mdr-1 gene and histone acetylation status
with multidrug resistance in MCF-7/Adr cells.

Huang C(1), Cao P, Xie Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha 410013, China. hchdoctor@sohu.com

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the mdr-1 gene promoter methylation and histone acetylation
status in both MCF-7/Adr and MCF-7 cells and to preliminarily explore the
epigenetic mechanism of multidrug resistance in breast cancer.
METHODS: mdr-1 gene promoter methylation status of the 2 cell lines was detected 
by methylation-sensitive PCR. mRNA expression of DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs)
and histone deacetylases (HDACs) was detected by real-time quantitative PCR.
Acetylation level of histone H3 and H4 was examined by optical density assay.
RESULTS: Promoter hypermethylation of mdr-1 gene was observed in MCF-7 cells
whereas hypomethylation was found in MCF-7/Adr cells. Expression of DNMT1,
DNMT3a, and DNMT3b mRNA in MCF-7/Adr cells significantly decreased compared with 
that of MCF-7 cells (P<0.05). H3 and H4 histone acetylation levels of MCF-7/Adr
cells were obviously higher than those of the MCF-7 cells (P<0.01). Expression of
HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC7, and Sirtuin type 1 (SIRT1) mRNA in MCF-7/Adr cells was
significantly reduced (P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: Hypomethylation of the promoter region of mdr-1 gene, high H3 and H4 
histone acetylation, and low mRNA expression of DNMTs and HDACs may be important 
epigenetic factors for the development of MDR in MCF-7/ Adr cells.

PMID: 19483282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Neurochem. 2009 Jun;109(5):1375-88. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2009.06058.x. Epub
2009 Mar 23.

Dynamic chromatin remodeling events in hippocampal neurons are associated with
NMDA receptor-mediated activation of Bdnf gene promoter 1.

Tian F(1), Hu XZ, Wu X, Jiang H, Pan H, Marini AM, Lipsky RH.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Molecular Genetics, Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute
on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA.

To determine the epigenetic events associated with NMDA receptor-mediated
activation of brain-derived neurotrophic factor gene (Bdnf) promoter 1 by
hippocampal neurons in culture, we screened 12 loci across 4.5 kb of genomic DNA 
5' of the transcription start site (TSS) of rat Bdnf for specific changes in
histone modification and transcription factor binding following NMDA receptor
stimulation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays showed that NMDA
receptor stimulation produced a durable, time-dependent decrease in histone H3 at
lysine 9 dimethylation (H3K9me2), within 3 h after NMDA treatment across multiple
loci. Concomitant increases in H3K4me2 and H3K9/14 acetylation (H3AcK9/14) were
associated with transcriptional activation, but occurred at fewer sites within
the promoter. The decrease in H3K9me2 was associated with release of HDAC1, MBD1,
MeCP2, and REST from specific locations within promoter 1, although with
different kinetics. In addition, occupancy of sites proximal to and distal to the
TSS by the transcription factors NF-kappaB, CREB-binding protein (CBP), and
cAMP-response element-binding protein were correlated with increased occupancy of
RNA polymerase II at two loci proximal to the TSS following NMDA receptor
stimulation. These temporal changes in promoter occupancy could occur thousands
of base pairs 5' of the TSS, suggesting a mechanism that produces waves of Bdnf
transcription.

PMID: 19476549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. J Gynecol Oncol. 2008 Sep;19(3):185-90. doi: 10.3802/jgo.2008.19.3.185. Epub 2008
Sep 30.

Expression profile of histone deacetylases 1, 2 and 3 in ovarian cancer tissues.

Jin KL(1), Pak JH, Park JY, Choi WH, Lee JY, Kim JH, Nam JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, College of Medicine, University of
Ulsan, Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Korea.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression levels of histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1, 
2, and 3 in ovarian cancer tissues and normal ovarian tissues.
METHODS: Randomly assigned each of six patients with serous, mucinous and
endometrioid ovarian cancer were included. Another six patients with normal
ovarian tissue were included for comparison. RT-PCR was performed to quantify the
levels of HDACs1-3 mRNA in the cancer and normal tissues. Western blot analysis
was performed to measure the expression levels of HDACs1-3 protein. The HDACs1-3 
expression pattern was also topologically examined by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Increased mRNA expressions of HDCA1, HDAC 2 and HDAC 3 were detected in 
83%, 67% and 83% of 18 cancer tissue samples, compared to normal tissue samples. 
The relative densities of HDAC1 mRNA and HDAC3 mRNA in the serous, mucinous and
endometrioid cancer tissues, and HDAC2 mRNA in serous cancer tissues were
significantly higher than those of the normal tissues, respectively (p<0.05).
Overexpression of HDAC1, HDAC2 and HDAC3 proteins were detected in 94%, 72% and
83% of 18 cancer samples, respectively. The relative densities of HDAC1 protein
and HDAC3 protein in serous, mucinous and endometrioid cancer, and HDAC2 protein 
in serous and mucinous cancer tissues were significantly higher than those of
normal tissues, respectively (p<0.05). Most cancer tissues expressed moderate to 
strong staining of HDACs1, 2 and 3 in immunohistochemistry. Staining of HDAC2 was
weak in only one endometrioid cancer tissue.
CONCLUSION: HDACs1-3 are over expressed in ovarian cancer tissues and probably
play a significant role in ovarian carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2676472
PMID: 19471575  [PubMed]


332. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2010 Jan 27;314(2):221-7. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2009.05.005.
Epub 2009 May 21.

Participation of signaling pathways in the derepression of luteinizing hormone
receptor transcription.

Dufau ML(1), Liao M, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Molecular Endocrinology, Program in Developmental Endocrinology and
Genetics, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-4510, USA.
dufaum@mail.nih.gov

The luteinizing hormone receptor (LHR) transcription is subject to an epigenetic 
regulatory mode whereby the proximal Sp1 site acts as an anchor to recruit
histone deacetylases (HDAC)1/2 and the Sin3A co-repressor complex. This results
in promoter-localized histone hypo-acetylation that contributes to the silencing 
of LHR transcriptional expression. Chromatin changes resulting from site-specific
acetylation and methylation of histones regulate LHR gene expression. The HDAC
inhibitor TSA-induced cell-specific phosphatase release from the promoter, which 
serves as an 'on' mechanism for Sp1 phosphorylation by phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase/protein kinase Czeta (PI3K/PKCzeta) at Ser641, leading to p107 repressor
derecruitment and LHR transcriptional activation. The methylation status of the
promoter provides another layer of modulation in a cell-specific manner. Maximal 
derepression of the LHR gene is dependent on complete DNA demethylation of the
promoter in conjunction with histone hyperacetylation and release of repressors
(p107 and HDAC/Sin3A). Independently, the PKC-alpha/Erk pathway, participates in 
LHR gene expression through induction of Sp1 phosphorylation at Ser site(s) other
than Ser641. This causes dissociation of the HDAC1/mSin3A from the promoter,
recruitment of TFIIB and Pol II, and transcriptional activation. Collectively,
these findings demonstrate that LHR gene expression at the transcriptional level 
is regulated by complex and diverse networks, in which coordination and
interactions between these regulatory effectors are crucial for
silencing/activation of LHR expression.

Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMCID: PMC2815110
PMID: 19464346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. J Neurochem. 2009 Jun;109(6):1610-23. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2009.06052.x. Epub
2009 Mar 23.

RE1 silencing transcription factor is involved in regulating neuron-specific
expression of alpha-internexin and neurofilament genes.

Ching GY(1), Liem RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University College of
Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York 10032, USA.

Alpha-internexin and the neurofilament triplet proteins (NF-L, NF-M, and NF-H)
co-assemble into intermediate filament networks in neurons. We have found that
the RE1 silencing transcription factor (REST) plays a contributory role in the
neuron-specific expression of the alpha-internexin, NF-H and NF-M genes.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation and transient transfection experiments performed
with catecholaminergic neuronal Cath a.-differentiated (CAD) cells and
non-neuronal NIH3T3 cells demonstrated that REST repressed transcription of these
genes in NIH3T3 cells by binding and recruiting mSin3A, CoREST, histone
deacetylase (HDAC) 1 and MeCP2 to the RE1 sites in the intron-1 of
alpha-internexin and the 5' flanking regions of NF-H and NF-M. No repression
effect of the RE1 sites was observed in CAD cells, which express these neuronal
genes but not REST. Treatment of NIH3T3 cells with trichostatin A, a HDAC
inhibitor, relieved the REST-mediated repression and induced ectopic activation
of alpha-internexin, NF-H and NF-M. The trichostatin A treatment did not affect
the levels of REST occupancy but caused coordinated changes in acetylation and
methylation of histones around the RE1 sites of these genes in NIH3T3 cells
consistent with a transition from transcriptional repression to transcriptional
activation. Thus, REST regulates expression of these neuronal genes, partly by a 
HDAC-dependent epigenetic mechanism.

PMCID: PMC2700175
PMID: 19457133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Cancer Lett. 2009 May 18. [Epub ahead of print]

WITHDRAWN: Cross-talk between Wnt and hypoxia signaling pathways in breast cancer
cells: Dual role of HDAC1 and beta-catenin.

Sarkar TR(1), Irudayaraj J.

Author information: 
(1)Purdue Cancer Center, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA;
Bindley Bioscience Center, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA;
National Cancer Institute (NCI), Laboratory of Cell and Developmental Signaling
(LCDS), 1050 Boyles Street, Building 560, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

This article has been withdrawn at the request of the author(s) and/or editor.
The Publisher apologizes for any inconvenience this may cause. The full Elsevier 
Policy on Article Withdrawal can be found at
http://www.elsevier.com/locate/withdrawalpolicy.

PMID: 19454368  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


335. Histopathology. 2009 May;54(6):688-98. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2009.03290.x.

Histone deacetylase 1, 2, 6 and acetylated histone H4 in B- and T-cell lymphomas.

Marquard L(1), Poulsen CB, Gjerdrum LM, de Nully Brown P, Christensen IJ, Jensen 
PB, Sehested M, Johansen P, Ralfkiaer E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen N,
Denmark. l.m.ipsen@mail.tele.dk

AIMS: Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are novel therapeutics in the
treatment of peripheral T-cell lymphoma, unspecified (PTCL) and diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), where, for unknown reasons, T-cell malignancies appear
to be more sensitive than B-cell malignancies. The aim was to determine HDAC
expression in DLBCL and PTCL which has not previously been investigated.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The expression of HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC6 and acetylated histone
H4 was examined immunohistochemically in 31 DLBCL and 45 PTCL. All four markers
showed high expression in both DLBCL and PTCL compared with normal lymphoid
tissue. HDAC1 was more abundantly expressed in PTCL than in DLBCL (P = 0.0046),
whereas acetylated H4 was more frequent in DLBCL (P < 0.0001), the latter
suggesting a mechanism for T-cell lymphoma sensitivity to HDAC inhibitors.
Moderate to strong HDAC6 expression was significantly correlated with favourable 
outcome (P = 0.016) in DLBCL patients, whereas the opposite effect was observed
in PTCL patients (P < 0.0001). The other markers did not correlate with survival 
(P > 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC6 and acetylated H4 are overexpressed in DLBCL and
PTCL relative to normal lymphoid tissue. Furthermore, HDAC6 may be an important
prognostic marker associated with favourable outcome in DLBCL and a more
aggressive course in PTCL.

PMID: 19438744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Int J Cancer. 2009 Sep 15;125(6):1306-15. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24437.

ING2 is upregulated in colon cancer and increases invasion by enhanced MMP13
expression.

Kumamoto K(1), Fujita K, Kurotani R, Saito M, Unoki M, Hagiwara N, Shiga H,
Bowman ED, Yanaihara N, Okamura S, Nagashima M, Miyamoto K, Takenoshita S, Yokota
J, Harris CC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Human Carcinogenesis, Center for Cancer Research, National
Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-4258, USA.

Inhibitor of growth 2 (ING2) is associated with chromatin remodeling and
regulation of gene expression by binding to a methylated histone H3K4 residue and
recruiting HDAC complexes to the region. The aim of our study is to investigate
the regulation of ING2 expression and the clinical significance of upregulated
ING2 in colon cancer. Here, we show that the ING2 mRNA level in colon cancer
tissue increased to more than twice than that in normal mucosa in the 45% of
colorectal cancer cases that we examined. A putative NF-kappaB binding site was
found in the ING2 promoter region. We confirmed that NF-kappaB could bind to the 
ING2 promoter by EMSA and luciferase assays. Subsequent microarray analyses
revealed that ING2 upregulates expression of matrix metalloproteinase 13 (MMP13),
which enhances cancer invasion and metastasis. ING2 regulation of MMP13
expression was confirmed in both ING2 overexpression and knock down experiments. 
MMP13 expression was further induced by coexpression of ING2 with HDAC1 or with
mSin3A, suggesting that the ING2-HDAC1-mSin3A complex members regulates
expression of MMP13. In vitro invasion assay was performed to determine
functional significance of ING2 upregulation. ING2 overexpressed cells exhibited 
greater invasive potential. Taken together, upregulation of ING2 was associated
with colon cancer and MMP13-dependent cellular invasion, indicating that ING2
expression might be involved with cancer invasion and metastasis.

2009 UICC

PMCID: PMC2790157
PMID: 19437536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Mol Cancer Res. 2009 May;7(5):735-44. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-08-0296. Epub
2009 May 12.

Histone deacetylase inhibitor induction of P-glycoprotein transcription requires 
both histone deacetylase 1 dissociation and recruitment of CAAT/enhancer binding 
protein beta and pCAF to the promoter region.

Kim SN(1), Kim NH, Lee W, Seo DW, Kim YK.

Author information: 
(1)KIST Gangneung Institute, Gangneung, Korea.

Although histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are appreciated as a promising
class of anticancer drugs, recent reports show that P-glycoprotein (P-gp) is
induced by HDAC inhibitor treatment in cancer cells, resulting in multidrug
resistance of cancer cells to other chemotherapeutic agents. In this study, we
investigated the molecular mechanism of HDAC inhibitor induction of P-gp
expression. HDAC inhibitor treatment causes cell type-specific induction of P-gp 
expression without changes in the CpG methylation status of the promoter region. 
In addition, our data show that HDAC inhibitor does not alter the DNA binding
activity of Sp1 but facilitates both the recruitment of a coactivator complex
that includes CAAT/enhancer binding protein beta and pCAF and the dissociation of
the repressive complex, HDAC1, to the Sp1 binding region. Subsequently, the
hyperacetylated histone H3 becomes enriched in the promoter region, leading to
RNA polymerase II recruitment to activate P-gp gene transcription. Furthermore,
specific down-regulation of HDAC1, but not HDAC2, by RNA silencing was enough to 
induce P-gp expression in HeLa cells, strongly supporting the essential role of
HDAC1 in HDAC inhibitor induction of P-gp. Concomitantly, cell type-specific
induction of P-gp expression seems to be dependent on phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase activity. Taken together, our findings show that HDAC inhibitor
treatment leads to an increase in P-gp expression through dynamic changes in
chromatin structure and transcription factor association within the promoter
region.

PMID: 19435809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jul 3;284(27):18115-28. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.007237. Epub 2009
May 11.

Endosomal adaptor proteins APPL1 and APPL2 are novel activators of
beta-catenin/TCF-mediated transcription.

Rashid S(1), Pilecka I, Torun A, Olchowik M, Bielinska B, Miaczynska M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Biology, International Institute of Molecular and Cell
Biology, Ks. Trojdena 4, 02-109 Warsaw, Poland.

Canonical Wnt signaling regulates many aspects of cellular physiology and tissue 
homeostasis during development and in adult organisms. In molecular terms,
stimulation by Wnt ligands leads to the stabilization of beta-catenin, its
translocation to the nucleus, and stimulation of TCF (T-cell factor)-dependent
transcription of target genes. This process is controlled at various stages by a 
number of regulatory proteins, including transcriptional activators and
repressors. Here we demonstrate that the endosomal proteins APPL1 and APPL2 are
novel activators of beta-catenin/TCF-mediated transcription. APPL proteins are
multifunctional adaptors and effectors of the small GTPase Rab5, which localize
to a subpopulation of early endosomes but are also capable of nucleocytoplasmic
shuttling. Overexpression of APPL1 or APPL2 protein stimulates the activity of
beta-catenin/TCF-dependent reporter construct, whereas silencing of APPL1 reduces
it. Both APPL proteins interact directly with Reptin, a transcriptional repressor
binding to beta-catenin and HDAC1 (histone deacetylase 1), and this interaction
was mapped to the pleckstrin homology domain of APPL1. Moreover, APPL proteins
are present in an endogenous complex containing Reptin, beta-catenin, HDAC1, and 
HDAC2. Overexpression of either APPL protein relieves Reptin-dependent
transcriptional repression and correlates with the reduced amounts of HDACs and
beta-catenin associated with Reptin as well as with the lower levels of Reptin
and HDAC1 on the promoters of beta-catenin target genes. We propose that APPL
proteins exert their stimulatory effects on beta-catenin/TCF-dependent
transcription by decreasing the activity of a Reptin-containing repressive
complex.

PMCID: PMC2709337
PMID: 19433865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Oncogene. 2009 Jun 25;28(25):2370-82. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.117. Epub 2009 May
11.

HDAC3 represses the expression of NKG2D ligands ULBPs in epithelial tumour cells:
potential implications for the immunosurveillance of cancer.

López-Soto A(1), Folgueras AR, Seto E, Gonzalez S.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Funcional, Universidad de Oviedo, IUOPA, Principado
de Asturias, Spain.

The expression of the NKG2D ligands on cancer cells leads to their recognition
and elimination by host immune responses mediated by natural killer and T cells. 
UL16-binding proteins (ULBPs) are NKG2D ligands, which are scarcely expressed in 
epithelial tumours, favouring their evasion from the immune system. Herein, we
investigated the epigenetic mechanisms underlying the repression of ULBPs in
epithelial cancer cells. We show that ULBP1-3 expression is increased in tumour
cells after exposure to the inhibitor of histone deacetylases (HDACs)
trichostatin A (TSA), which enhances the natural killer cell-mediated
cytotoxicity of HeLa cells. Our experiments showed that the transcription factor 
Sp3 is crucial in the activation of the ULBP1 promoter by TSA. Furthermore, by
small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown and overexpression of HDAC1-3, we showed
that HDAC3 is a repressor of ULBPs expression in epithelial cancer cells.
Remarkably, TSA treatment caused the complete release of HDAC3 from the ULBP1-3
promoters. HDAC3 is recruited to the ULBP1 promoter through its interaction with 
Sp3 and TSA treatment interfered with this association. Together, we describe a
new mechanism by which cancer cells may evade the immune response through the
epigenetic modulation of the ULBPs expression and provide a model in which HDAC
inhibitors may favour the elimination of transformed cells by increasing the
immunogenicity of epithelial tumours.

PMID: 19430493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Mutat Res. 2009 Jun 1;665(1-2):20-8. doi: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2009.02.011. Epub 2009
Mar 9.

Epigenetic control of mammalian LINE-1 retrotransposon by retinoblastoma
proteins.

Montoya-Durango DE(1), Liu Y, Teneng I, Kalbfleisch T, Lacy ME, Steffen MC, Ramos
KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Center for Genetics and
Molecular Medicine, University of Louisville School of Medicine Health Sciences
Center, Louisville, KY 40202, USA.

Long interspersed nuclear elements (LINEs or L1 elements) are targeted for
epigenetic silencing during early embryonic development and remain inactive in
most cells and tissues. Here we show that E2F-Rb family complexes participate in 
L1 elements epigenetic regulation via nucleosomal histone modifications and
recruitment of histone deacetylases (HDACs) HDAC1 and HDAC2. Our experiments
demonstrated that (i) Rb and E2F interact with human and mouse L1 elements, (ii) 
L1 elements are deficient in both heterochromatin-associated histone marks H3 tri
methyl K9 and H4 tri methyl K20 in Rb family triple knock out (Rb, p107, and
p130) fibroblasts (TKO), (iii) L1 promoter exhibits increased histone H3
acetylation in the absence of HDAC1 and HDAC2 recruitment, (iv) L1 expression in 
TKO fibroblasts is upregulated compared to wild type counterparts, (v) L1
expression increases in the presence of the HDAC inhibitor TSA. On the basis of
these findings we propose a model in which L1 sequences throughout the genome
serve as centers for heterochromatin formation in an Rb family-dependent manner. 
As such, Rb proteins and L1 elements may play key roles in heterochromatin
formation beyond pericentromeric chromosomal regions. These findings describe a
novel mechanism of L1 reactivation in mammalian cells mediated by failure of
corepressor protein recruitment by Rb, loss of histone epigenetic marks,
heterochromatin formation, and increased histone H3 acetylation.

PMCID: PMC3418809
PMID: 19427507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Oncol Rep. 2009 Jun;21(6):1439-47.

Significance of DNA methyltransferase-1 and histone deacetylase-1 in pancreatic
cancer.

Wang W(1), Gao J, Man XH, Li ZS, Gong YF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai 200433, P.R. China.

Epigenetic modifications play an important role during carcinogenesis. The main
goal of this study was to examine expression levels of two critical enzymes, DNA 
methyltransferase-1 (DNMT1) and histone deacetylase-1 (HDAC1), by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) in human pancreatic cancer and precancerous lesions:
20 foci containing normal ductal epithelial cells without an inflammatory
back-ground (DE), 30 containing ductal epithelial cells with an inflammatory
background (DEI), 48 of pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia-1A (PanIN-1A), 103
of PanIN-1B, 99 of PanIN-2, 30 of PanIN-3, 18 of intraductal papillary mucinous
neoplasm A (IPMA), 10 of IPMB, 20 of IPMC, and 54 of pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC). The expression levels of both DNMT1 and HDAC1 increased
from normal to precancerous lesions to pancreatic cancer, in a
malignancy-dependent manner. Correlations between expression levels and
clinicopathological features of the 54 PDAC patients were also analyzed. The
expression of DNMT1 significantly correlated with nerve infiltration, degree of
tumor differentiation and TNM staging (p<0.05), while that of HDAC1 correlated
with proliferative activity, degree of tumor differentiation and TNM staging
(p<0.05). Patients with higher expression of DNMT1 and/or HDAC1 had an overall
lower survival than those with lower expression (p<0.05). Higher expression of
DNMT1 and HDAC1 correlated with advanced stages of the disease and reflect the
malignancy of pancreatic carcinoma. They may become new prognostic markers and
potential therapeutic targets for pancreatic cancer.

PMID: 19424621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Nature. 2009 May 7;459(7243):55-60. doi: 10.1038/nature07925.

HDAC2 negatively regulates memory formation and synaptic plasticity.

Guan JS(1), Haggarty SJ, Giacometti E, Dannenberg JH, Joseph N, Gao J, Nieland
TJ, Zhou Y, Wang X, Mazitschek R, Bradner JE, DePinho RA, Jaenisch R, Tsai LH.

Author information: 
(1)Picower Institute for Learning and Memory, Department of Brain and Cognitive
Sciences.

Chromatin modifications, especially histone-tail acetylation, have been
implicated in memory formation. Increased histone-tail acetylation induced by
inhibitors of histone deacetylases (HDACis) facilitates learning and memory in
wild-type mice as well as in mouse models of neurodegeneration. Harnessing the
therapeutic potential of HDACis requires knowledge of the specific HDAC family
member(s) linked to cognitive enhancement. Here we show that neuron-specific
overexpression of HDAC2, but not that of HDAC1, decreased dendritic spine
density, synapse number, synaptic plasticity and memory formation. Conversely,
Hdac2 deficiency resulted in increased synapse number and memory facilitation,
similar to chronic treatment with HDACis in mice. Notably, reduced synapse number
and learning impairment of HDAC2-overexpressing mice were ameliorated by chronic 
treatment with HDACis. Correspondingly, treatment with HDACis failed to further
facilitate memory formation in Hdac2-deficient mice. Furthermore, analysis of
promoter occupancy revealed an association of HDAC2 with the promoters of genes
implicated in synaptic plasticity and memory formation. Taken together, our
results suggest that HDAC2 functions in modulating synaptic plasticity and
long-lasting changes of neural circuits, which in turn negatively regulates
learning and memory. These observations encourage the development and testing of 
HDAC2-selective inhibitors for human diseases associated with memory impairment.

PMCID: PMC3498958
PMID: 19424149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Jul 17;385(1):72-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.05.001. Epub 2009 May 5.

ATF-2 regulates lipopolysaccharide-induced transcription in macrophage cells.

Hirose N(1), Maekawa T, Shinagawa T, Ishii S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, RIKEN Tsukuba Institute, 3-1-1 Koyadai,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0074, Japan.

The transcription factor ATF-2, a member of the ATF/CREB family, is a target of
p38 that are involved in stress-induced apoptosis and in Toll-like receptor
(TLR)-mediated signaling. Phosphorylation of ATF-2 at Thr-71 was enhanced by
treating of RAW264.7 macrophage cells with either LPS, MALP-2, or CpG-ODN. LPS
treatment enhanced the trans-activation capacity of ATF-2. Among multiple
LPS-induced genes, the LPS-induced expression of Socs-3 was significantly reduced
by the treatment of RAW264.7 cells with an Atf-2 siRNA. Transcription from the
Socs-3 promoter was synergistically stimulated by ATF-2 and LPS, whereas it was
suppressed by Atf-2 siRNA. Histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) interacted with ATF-2
after LPS treatment, but not before treatment. Treatment of RAW264.7 cells with
trichostatin A, an inhibitor of HDAC, suppressed the LPS-induced Socs-3
expression, suggesting that HDAC1 positively regulates the LPS-induced
transcription of Socs-3. Thus, ATF-2 plays an important role in TLR-mediated
transcriptional control in macrophage cells.

PMID: 19422799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Mol Cancer Ther. 2009 May;8(5):1086-94. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-08-1166. Epub 
2009 May 5.

Transcriptional induction of GRP78/BiP by histone deacetylase inhibitors and
resistance to histone deacetylase inhibitor-induced apoptosis.

Baumeister P(1), Dong D, Fu Y, Lee AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, USC/Norris Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, California 90089-9176, USA.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are emerging as effective therapies in the 
treatment of cancer, and the role of HDACs in the regulation of promoters is
rapidly expanding. GRP78/BiP is a stress inducible endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
chaperone with antiapoptotic properties. We present here the mechanism for
repression of the Grp78 promoter by HDAC1. Our studies reveal that HDAC
inhibitors specifically induce GRP78, and the induction level is amplified by ER 
stress. Through mutational analysis, we have identified the minimal Grp78
promoter and specific elements responsible for HDAC-mediated repression. We show 
the involvement of HDAC1 in the negative regulation of the Grp78 promoter not
only by its induction in the presence of the HDAC inhibitors trichostatin A and
MS-275 but also by exogenous overexpression and small interfering RNA knockdown
of specific HDACs. We present the results of chromatin immunoprecipitation
analysis that reveals the binding of HDAC1 to the Grp78 promoter before, but not 
after, ER stress. Furthermore, overexpression of GRP78 confers resistance to HDAC
inhibitor-induced apoptosis in cancer cells, and conversely, suppression of GRP78
sensitizes them to HDAC inhibitors. These results define HDAC inhibitors as new
agents that up-regulate GRP78 without concomitantly inducing the ER or heat shock
stress response, and suppression of GRP78 in tumors may provide a novel,
adjunctive option to enhance anticancer therapies that use these compounds.

PMCID: PMC2889001
PMID: 19417144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 May 12;106(19):7751-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0903139106. Epub 2009 Apr 29.

Genetic dissection of histone deacetylase requirement in tumor cells.

Haberland M(1), Johnson A, Mokalled MH, Montgomery RL, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) represent a new group of drugs currently
being tested in a wide variety of clinical applications. They are especially
effective in preclinical models of cancer where they show antiproliferative
action in many different types of cancer cells. Recently, the first HDACi was
approved for the treatment of cutaneous T cell lymphomas. Most HDACi currently in
clinical development act by unspecifically interfering with the enzymatic
activity of all class I HDACs (HDAC1, 2, 3, and 8), and it is widely believed
that the development of isoform-specific HDACi could lead to better therapeutic
efficacy. The contribution of the individual class I HDACs to different disease
states, however, has so far not been fully elucidated. Here, we use a genetic
approach to dissect the involvement of the different class I HDACs in tumor
cells. We show that deletion of a single HDAC is not sufficient to induce cell
death, but that HDAC1 and 2 play redundant and essential roles in tumor cell
survival. Their deletion leads to nuclear bridging, nuclear fragmentation, and
mitotic catastrophe, mirroring the effects of HDACi on cancer cells. These
findings suggest that pharmacological inhibition of HDAC1 and 2 may be sufficient
for anticancer activity, providing an experimental framework for the development 
of isoform-specific HDAC inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC2683118
PMID: 19416910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Int J Dev Biol. 2009;53(2-3):275-89. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.082649rb.

Histone deacetylase HDAC1/HDAC2-controlled embryonic development and cell
differentiation.

Brunmeir R(1), Lagger S, Seiser C.

Author information: 
(1)Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter,
Vienna, Austria.

During development from the fertilized egg to a multicellular organism, cell fate
decisions have to be taken and cell lineage or tissue-specific gene expression
patterns are created and maintained. These alterations in gene expression occur
in the context of chromatin structure and are controlled by chromatin modifying
enzymes. Gene disruption studies in different genetic systems have shown an
essential role of various histone deacetylases (HDACs) during early development
and cellular differentiation. In this review, we focus on the functions of the
class I enzymes HDAC1 and HDAC2 during development in different organisms and
summarise the current knowledge about their involvement in neurogenesis,
myogenesis, haematopoiesis and epithelial cell differentiation.

PMID: 19412887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2009 Jul;297(1):L35-43. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.90399.2008. Epub 2009 May 1.

Loss of CFTR results in reduction of histone deacetylase 2 in airway epithelial
cells.

Bartling TR(1), Drumm ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Case Western Reserve University and Rainbow Babies and
Children's Hospital, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

Inflammatory cytokines, particularly the neutrophil chemoattractant IL-8, are
elevated in the cystic fibrosis (CF) airway, even in the absence of detectable
infection. The transcriptional regulation of many inflammatory genes, including
IL8 (CXCL8), involves chromatin remodeling through histone acetylation. NF-kappaB
is known to facilitate histone acetylation of IL8 and other proinflammatory gene 
promoters, but we find that increased NF-kappaB activation cannot explain the
elevated IL8 expression and promoter acetylation seen in CFTR-deficient cells.
Recognized components of the NF-kappaB-coactivator complex, acetyltransferase
CBP, p300, and the histone deacetylase HDAC1, are unchanged by CFTR activity.
However, we find that the histone acetyltransferase (HAT)/HDAC balance is
sensitive to CFTR function, as cells with reduced or absent CFTR function have
decreased HDAC2 protein, resulting in hyperacetylation of the IL8 promoter and
increased IL8 transcription. Reduced HDAC2 and HDAC2 activity, but not HDAC2
mRNA, is observed in cells deficient in CFTR. Suppressing HDAC2 expression with
HDAC2 short hairpin RNA (shRNA) results in increased IL8 expression and promoter 
acetylation comparable with CFTR-deficient cells. Treating CFTR-deficient cells
with N-acetyl-cysteine (NAC) increases HDAC2 expression to near control levels.
Our data suggest that there is an intrinsic alteration in the HAT/HDAC balance in
cells lacking CFTR function in vitro and in native CF tissue and that oxidative
stress is likely contributing to this alteration. This mechanism, found in other 
inflammatory airway diseases, provides an explanation for the apparent
dysregulation of inflammatory mediators seen in the CF airway, as reduced histone
deacetylation would potentially influence many genes.

PMCID: PMC2711807
PMID: 19411311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Jul;29(14):3867-80. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00456-09. Epub 2009 Apr 
27.

The age-associated decline of glycogen synthase kinase 3beta plays a critical
role in the inhibition of liver regeneration.

Jin J(1), Wang GL, Shi X, Darlington GJ, Timchenko NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Huffington Center on Aging, Baylor College of
Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Aging reduces the regenerative capacities of many tissues. In this paper, we show
a critical role of the glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK3beta)-cyclin D3
pathway in the loss of the regenerative capacity of the liver. In young animals, 
high levels of growth hormone (GH) increase expression of GSK3beta, which
associates with cyclin D3 and triggers degradation of cyclin D3. In livers of old
mice, the GSK3beta promoter is repressed by C/EBPbeta-histone deacetylase 1
(HDAC1) complexes, leading to the reduction of GSK3beta. The treatment of old
mice with GH increases expression of GSK3beta via removal of the C/EBPbeta-HDAC1 
complexes from the GSK3beta promoter. We found that the GSK3beta-cyclin D3
pathway is also altered in young GH-deficient Little mice and that treatment of
Little mice with GH corrects the GSK3beta-cyclin D3 pathway. We present evidence 
that GSK3beta regulates liver proliferation by controlling growth-inhibitory
activity of C/EBPalpha. The downregulation of GSK3beta in young mice inhibits
liver proliferation after partial hepatectomy via the cyclin D3-C/EBPalpha
pathway, while the elevation of GSK3beta in old mice accelerates liver
proliferation. Thus, this paper shows that GSK3beta is a critical regulator of
liver proliferation and that the reduction of GSK3beta with age causes the loss
of regenerative capacities of the liver.

PMCID: PMC2704742
PMID: 19398579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Jun 19;384(1):120-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.04.094. Epub 2009 Apr 24.

OCT4A contributes to the stemness and multi-potency of human umbilical cord
blood-derived multipotent stem cells (hUCB-MSCs).

Seo KW(1), Lee SR, Bhandari DR, Roh KH, Park SB, So AY, Jung JW, Seo MS, Kang SK,
Lee YS, Kang KS.

Author information: 
(1)Adult Stem Cell Research Center, College of Veterinary Medicine, Seoul
National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

The OCT4A gene, a POU homeodomain transcription factor, has been shown to be
expressed in embryonic stem cells (ESC) as well as hUCB-MSCs. In this study, the 
roles played by OCT4A in hUCB-MSCs were determined by stably inhibiting OCT4A
with lenti-viral vector-based small hairpin RNA (shRNA). A decreased rate of cell
proliferation was observed in OCT4-inhibited hUCB-MSCs. Down-regulation of CCNA2 
expression in OCT4-inhibited hUCB-MSCs was confirmed by RT-PCR and real-time
RT-PCR analysis in three genetically independent hUCB-MSC clones. Adipogenic
differentiation was also suppressed in OCT4-inhibited hUCB-MSCs. The
up-regulation of DTX1 and down-regulation of HDAC1, 2, and 4 expressions may be
related to this differentiation deformity. The expression of other transcription 
factors, including SOX2, REX1 and c-MYC, was also affected by OCT4 inhibition in 
hUCB-MSCs. In conclusion, these finding suggest that OCT4A performs functionally 
conserved roles in hUCB-MSCs, making its expression biologically important for ex
vivo culture of hUCB-MSCs.

PMID: 19394308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Toxicol Pathol. 2009 Jun;37(4):446-55. doi: 10.1177/0192623309335062. Epub 2009
Apr 23.

Molecular expression analysis of beta-naphthoflavone-induced hepatocellular
tumors in rats.

Dewa Y(1), Nishimura J, Jin M, Kawai M, Saegusa Y, Harada T, Shibutani M,
Mitsumori K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Veterinary Pathology, Tokyo University of Agriculture and
Technology, Tokyo, Japan.

The present study was performed to characterize molecular expression levels of
preneoplastic and neoplastic lesions induced by beta-naphthoflavone (BNF), an
aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) agonist in rat hepatocarcinogenesis. Male F344
rats were initiated with an intraperitoneal injection of 200 mg/kg
N-diethylnitrosamine, and two weeks later, they were fed a diet containing 0% or 
1% BNF for twenty-eight weeks. All animals were subjected to a two-thirds partial
hepatectomy at week 3 and sacrificed at week 30. Histopathologically, BNF
increased the incidence and multiplicity of altered foci (1.7-fold and 3.3-fold) 
and hepatocellular adenomas (HCAs) (4.0-fold and 4.7-fold).
Immunohistochemically, BNF increased the number of proliferating cell nuclear
antigen (PCNA)-positive cells in altered foci (2.3-fold) and HCAs (6.7-fold)
compared with the surrounding tissue and decreased the staining of cell cycle
regulators (P21, C/EBPalpha). In addition, loss of reactivity for AhR-regulated
(CYP1A1, CYP1B1) molecules and increased reactivity of Nrf-2-regulated (AKR7,
GPX2) molecules were also observed in proliferative lesions. Furthermore,
increased staining of histone deacetylase (HDAC1) in the nucleus was prominent in
HCAs. The differential expression patterns were confirmed at mRNA levels by
real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis.
These results suggest that enhanced cell proliferation and protection against
oxidative stress play an important role in BNF-induced hepatocarcinogenesis in
rats.

PMID: 19389873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Aug;23(8):1135-46. doi: 10.1210/me.2008-0347. Epub 2009 Apr 
23.

Mechanism of BRCA1-mediated inhibition of progesterone receptor transcriptional
activity.

Katiyar P(1), Ma Y, Riegel A, Fan S, Rosen EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center/Georgetown
University, Washington, D.C. 20057-1469, USA.

Previously, we reported that BRCA1 inhibits progesterone receptor (PR) activity
and blocks progesterone-stimulated gene expression and cell proliferation. In the
present manuscript, we studied the mechanism of BRCA1 inhibition of PR activity, 
using c-Myc as a model progesterone-regulated promoter. Here, we found that BRCA1
has little or no effect on PR ligand-binding affinity. However, BRCA1
overexpression inhibited the R5020-induced recruitment of PR to the c-Myc and
mouse mammary tumor virus progesterone response elements (PREs) and blocked
R5020-stimulated c-Myc expression, whereas BRCA1 underexpression did the
opposite. In EMSAs, BRCA1 overexpression blocked the R5020-induced complex
formation between PR and several radiolabeled PRE-containing oligonucleotides,
and in vitro-translated BRCA1 blocked the interaction of full-length PR-A or a
fragment containing the DNA-binding domain of PR with a radiolabeled PRE
oligonucleotide. In further studies, BRCA1 overexpression inhibited the
recruitment of coactivators (steroid receptor coactivator 1 and amplified in
breast cancer 1) and enhanced the recruitment of a corepressor (histone
deacetylase 1) to the c-Myc PRE, whereas BRCA1 knockdown increased the abundance 
of AIB1 and decreased the abundance of HDAC1 at the c-Myc PRE. These findings
suggest that BRCA1 inhibits progestin-stimulated PR activity, in part, by
preventing PR from binding to the PRE and by promoting the formation of a
corepressor complex rather than a coactivator complex.

PMCID: PMC2718743
PMID: 19389812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Int J Cancer. 2009 Aug 15;125(4):774-82. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24325.

Ribosome-inactivating proteins isolated from dietary bitter melon induce
apoptosis and inhibit histone deacetylase-1 selectively in premalignant and
malignant prostate cancer cells.

Xiong SD(1), Yu K, Liu XH, Yin LH, Kirschenbaum A, Yao S, Narla G, DiFeo A, Wu
JB, Yuan Y, Ho SM, Lam YW, Levine AC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hematology and Tumor Biology Research, First Affiliated Hospital 
of Wenzhou Medical College, Wenzhou, China.

Erratum in
    Int J Cancer. 2009 Oct 15;125(8):1995.

Epidemiologic evidence suggests that a diet rich in fruits and vegetables is
associated with a reduced risk of prostate cancer (PCa) development. Although
several dietary compounds have been tested in preclinical PCa prevention models, 
no agents have been identified that either prevent the progression of
premalignant lesions or treat advanced disease. Momordica charantia, known as
bitter melon in English, is a plant that grows in tropical areas worldwide and is
both eaten as a vegetable and used for medicinal purposes. We have isolated a
protein, designated as MCP30, from bitter melon seeds. The purified fraction was 
verified by SDS-PAGE and mass spectrometry to contain only 2 highly related
single chain Type I ribosome-inactivating proteins (RIPs), alpha-momorcharin and 
beta-momorcharin. MCP30 induces apoptosis in PIN and PCa cell lines in vitro and 
suppresses PC-3 growth in vivo with no effect on normal prostate cells.
Mechanistically, MCP30 inhibits histone deacetylase-1 (HDAC-1) activity and
promotes histone-3 and -4 protein acetylation. Treatment with MCP30 induces PTEN 
expression in a prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) and PCa cell lines
resulting in inhibition of Akt phosphorylation. In addition, MCP30 inhibits Wnt
signaling activity through reduction of nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin and 
decreased levels of c-Myc and Cyclin-D1. Our data indicate that MCP30 selectively
induces PIN and PCa apoptosis and inhibits HDAC-1 activity. These results suggest
that Type I RIPs derived from plants are HDAC inhibitors that can be utilized in 
the prevention and treatment of prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC3778503
PMID: 19384952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 May 1;15(9):3163-71. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-2319.
Epub 2009 Apr 21.

Protein acetylation and histone deacetylase expression associated with malignant 
breast cancer progression.

Suzuki J(1), Chen YY, Scott GK, Devries S, Chin K, Benz CC, Waldman FM, Hwang ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of California, San Francisco,
CA, USA.

PURPOSE: Excess histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity can induce hypoacetylation of
histone and nonhistone protein substrates, altering gene expression patterns and 
cell behavior potentially associated with malignant transformation. However, HDAC
expression and protein acetylation have not been studied in the context of breast
cancer progression.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We assessed expression levels of acetylated histone H4
(ac-H4), ac-H4K12, ac-tubulin, HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC6 in 22 reduction
mammoplasties and in 58 specimens with synchronous normal epithelium, ductal
carcinoma in situ (DCIS), and invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC) components.
Differences among groups were tested for significance using nonparametric tests.
RESULTS: From normal epithelium to DCIS, there was a marked reduction in histone 
acetylation (P < 0.0001). Most cases showed similar levels of acetylation in DCIS
and IDC, although some showed further reduction of ac-H4 and ac-H4K12 from DCIS
to IDC. Expression of HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC6 was also significantly reduced but 
by a smaller magnitude. Greater reductions of H4 acetylation and HDAC1 levels
were observed from normal to DCIS in estrogen receptor-negative compared with
estrogen receptor-positive, and in high-grade compared with non-high-grade
tumors.
CONCLUSION: Overall, there was a global pattern of hypoacetylation associated
with progression from normal to DCIS to IDC. These findings suggest that the
reversal of this hypoacetylation in DCIS and IDC could be an early measure of
HDAC inhibitor activity.

PMCID: PMC3746548
PMID: 19383825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 May 12;106(19):7876-81. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0902750106. Epub 2009 Apr 20.

Histone deacetylases 1 and 2 control the progression of neural precursors to
neurons during brain development.

Montgomery RL(1), Hsieh J, Barbosa AC, Richardson JA, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center at Dallas, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA.

The molecular mechanism by which neural progenitor cells commit to a specified
lineage of the central nervous system remains unknown. We show that HDAC1 and
HDAC2 redundantly control neuronal development and are required for neuronal
specification. Mice lacking HDAC1 or HDAC2 in neuronal precursors show no overt
histoarchitectural phenotypes, whereas deletion of both HDAC1 and HDAC2 in
developing neurons results in severe hippocampal abnormalities, absence of
cerebellar foliation, disorganization of cortical neurons, and lethality by
postnatal day 7. These abnormalities in brain formation can be attributed to a
failure of neuronal precursors to differentiate into mature neurons and to
excessive cell death. These results reveal redundant and essential roles for
HDAC1 and HDAC2 in the progression of neuronal precursors to mature neurons in
vivo.

PMCID: PMC2683090
PMID: 19380719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Nat Cell Biol. 2009 May;11(5):580-91. doi: 10.1038/ncb1864. Epub 2009 Apr 19.

KRAB-type zinc-finger protein Apak specifically regulates p53-dependent
apoptosis.

Tian C(1), Xing G, Xie P, Lu K, Nie J, Wang J, Li L, Gao M, Zhang L, He F.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteomics Research Center,
Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, 27 Taiping Road, Beijing 100850, China.

Only a few p53 regulators have been shown to participate in the selective control
of p53-mediated cell cycle arrest or apoptosis. How p53-mediated apoptosis is
negatively regulated remains largely unclear. Here we report that Apak (ATM and
p53-associated KZNF protein), a Krüppel-associated box (KRAB)-type zinc-finger
protein, binds directly to p53 in unstressed cells, specifically downregulates
pro-apoptotic genes, and suppresses p53-mediated apoptosis by recruiting
KRAB-box-associated protein (KAP)-1 and histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) to
attenuate the acetylation of p53. Apak inhibits p53 activity by interacting with 
ATM, a previously identified p53 activator. In response to stress, Apak is
phosphorylated by ATM and dissociates from p53, resulting in activation of p53
and induction of apoptosis. These findings revealed Apak to be a negative
regulator of p53-mediated apoptosis and showed the dual role of ATM in p53
regulation.

PMID: 19377469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Mol Cancer Ther. 2009 Apr;8(4):794-801. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-08-0985.

HDAC2 regulates chromatin plasticity and enhances DNA vulnerability.

Marchion DC(1), Bicaku E, Turner JG, Schmitt ML, Morelli DR, Munster PN.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Therapeutics Program, Department of Interdisciplinary Oncology,
H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, Tampa, FL, USA.

Histone deacetylases (HDAC) may have a prominent role in the development of
cancer and the response to anticancer therapy. However, the therapeutic relevance
and tissue specificity of individual HDAC enzymes remain largely unknown. HDAC
inhibitors may function as sensitizing agents to chemotherapies that target DNA
through their effects on chromatin structure and plasticity. Here, we report a
new role for HDAC2 as a regulator of chromatin compaction status and the mediator
of HDAC inhibitor-induced sensitization to chemotherapy. The selective depletion 
of HDAC2 by small interfering RNA led to reduced expression of heterochromatin
maintenance proteins and morphologic changes indicative of chromatin
decondensation. Furthermore, depletion of HDAC2 but not HDAC1 or HDAC6 was
sufficient to sensitize breast cancer cells to topoisomerase inhibitor-induced
apoptosis. The levels of HDAC2 expression appear to correlate with the degree of 
HDAC inhibitor-induced histone acetylation in a surrogate tissue in patients.
These data suggest that HDAC2 may be a relevant pharmacologic and biological
target for combination therapy involving drugs that target DNA.

PMID: 19372552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. J Proteome Res. 2008 Dec;7(12):5177-86. doi: 10.1021/pr800510p.

Quantitative analysis of histone deacetylase-1 selective histone modifications by
differential mass spectrometry.

Lee AY(1), Paweletz CP, Pollock RM, Settlage RE, Cruz JC, Secrist JP, Miller TA, 
Stanton MG, Kral AM, Ozerova ND, Meng F, Yates NA, Richon V, Hendrickson RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Proteomics, Merck Research Laboratories, Merck & Co. Inc.,
Rahway, New Jersey 07065, USA.

Inhibitors of class 1 and class 2 histone deacetylase (HDAC) enzymes have shown
antitumor activity in human clinical trials. More recently, there has been
interest in developing subtype-selective HDAC inhibitors designed to retain
anticancer activity while reducing potential side effects. Efforts have been
initiated to selectively target HDAC1 given its role in tumor proliferation and
survival. The development of HDAC1-specific inhibitors will require the
identification of HDAC1-selective pharmacodynamic markers that correlate closely 
with HDAC1-inhibition in vitro and in vivo. Existing histone markers of HDAC
target engagement were developed using pan-HDAC inhibitors and do not necessarily
represent robust readouts for isoform-specific inhibitors. Therefore, we have
initiated a proteomic approach to identify readouts for HDAC1 inhibition. This
approach involves the use of differential mass spectrometry (dMS) to identify
post-translational changes in histones by profiling histone-enriched cellular
fractions treated with various HDAC inhibitors. In this study, we profiled
histones isolated from the HCT116 human colon cancer cell line that have been
treated with compounds from multiple chemical classes that are specific for
HDAC1; HDAC1 and 3; and HDAC1, 3, and 6 enzymes. In two independent experiments, 
we identified 24 features that correlated with HDAC1-inhibition. Among the
peptides modulated by HDAC1-selective inhibitors were Ac-H2B-K5 from histone H2B,
and Ac-H3-K18 from histone H3. Commercially available antibodies to specific
histone acetyl-lysine residues were used to confirm that these peptides also
provide pharmacodynamic readouts for HDAC1-selective inhibitors in vivo and in
vitro. These results show the utility of dMS in guiding the identification of
specific readouts to aid in the development of HDAC-selective inhibitors.

PMID: 19367703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2009 Jul 15;19(14):3928-31. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2009.03.085. Epub 2009 Mar 25.

Design and synthesis of novel hybrid benzamide-peptide histone deacetylase
inhibitors.

Hu F(1), Chou CJ, Gottesfeld JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 
92037, USA.

We designed and synthesized a series of novel hybrid histone deacetylase
inhibitors based on conjugation of benzamide-type inhibitors with either linear
or cyclic peptides. Linear tetrapeptides (compounds 13 and 14), cyclic
tetrapeptides (compounds 1 and 11), and heptanediamide-peptide conjugates
(compounds 10, 12, 15 and 16) were synthesized through on-resin solid-phase
peptide synthesis (SPPS). All compounds were found to be moderate HDAC1 and HDAC3
inhibitors, with IC(50) values ranging from 1.3 microM to 532 microM.
Interestingly, compound 15 showed 19-fold selectivity for HDAC3 versus HDAC1.

PMCID: PMC3045849
PMID: 19362838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Gastroenterology. 2009 Jul;137(1):361-71, 371.e1-5. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2009.04.004. Epub 2009 Apr 9.

E-cadherin regulates metastasis of pancreatic cancer in vivo and is suppressed by
a SNAIL/HDAC1/HDAC2 repressor complex.

von Burstin J(1), Eser S, Paul MC, Seidler B, Brandl M, Messer M, von Werder A,
Schmidt A, Mages J, Pagel P, Schnieke A, Schmid RM, Schneider G, Saur D.

Author information: 
(1)II. Medizinische Klinik, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Early metastasis is a hallmark of pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma and responsible for >90% of pancreatic cancer death. Because
little is known about the biology and genetics of the metastatic process, we
desired to elucidate molecular pathways mediating pancreatic cancer metastasis in
vivo by an unbiased forward genetic approach.
METHODS: Highly metastatic pancreatic cancer cell populations were selected by
serial in vivo passaging of parental cells with low metastatic potential and
characterized by global gene expression profiling, chromatin immunoprecipitation,
and in vivo metastatic assay.
RESULTS: In vivo selection of highly metastatic pancreatic cancer cells induced
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), loss of E-cadherin expression, and
up-regulation of mesenchymal genes such as Snail. Genetic inactivation of
E-cadherin in parental cells induced EMT and increased metastasis in vivo.
Silencing of E-cadherin in highly metastatic cells is mediated by a
transcriptional repressor complex containing Snail and histone deacetylase 1
(HDAC1) and HDAC2. In line, mesenchymal pancreatic cancer specimens and primary
cell lines from genetically engineered Kras(G12D) mice showed HDAC-dependent
down-regulation of E-cadherin and high metastatic potential. Finally,
transforming growth factor beta-driven E-cadherin silencing and EMT of human
pancreatic cancer cells depends on HDAC activity.
CONCLUSIONS: We provide the first in vivo evidence that HDACs and Snail play an
essential role in silencing E-cadherin during the metastatic process of
pancreatic cancer cells. These data link the epigenetic HDAC machinery to EMT and
metastasis and provide preclinical evidence that HDACs are promising targets for 
antimetastatic therapy.

PMID: 19362090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2009 May;20(4):171-6. doi: 10.1016/j.tem.2009.01.005.
Epub 2009 Apr 7.

Aging and liver regeneration.

Timchenko NA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Huffington Center on Aging, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. nikolait@bcm.tmc.edu

The loss of regenerative capacity is the most dramatic age-associated alteration 
in the liver. Although this phenomenon was reported over 50 years ago, the
molecular basis for the loss of regenerative capacity of aged livers has not been
fully elucidated. Aging causes alterations of several signal-transduction
pathways and changes in the expression of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) 
and chromatin-remodeling proteins. Consequently, aging livers accumulate a
multi-protein C/EBPalpha-Brm-HDAC1 complex that occupies and silences
E2F-dependent promoters, reducing the regenerative capacity of livers in older
mice. Recent studies have provided evidence for the crucial role of epigenetic
silencing in the age-dependent inhibition of liver proliferation. This review
focuses on mechanisms of age-dependent inhibition of liver proliferation and
approaches for correcting liver regeneration in the elderly.

PMID: 19359195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Cancer Res. 2009 Apr 15;69(8):3597-604. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-4368. Epub 
2009 Apr 7.

Characterization of the HDAC1 complex that regulates the sensitivity of cancer
cells to oxidative stress.

Kato T(1), Shimono Y, Hasegawa M, Jijiwa M, Enomoto A, Asai N, Murakumo Y,
Takahashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Center for Neurological Disease and Cancer, Nagoya
University Graduate School of Medicine, Showa-ku, Nagoya, Japan.

Histone deacetylases (HDAC) are involved in carcinogenesis through their
regulation of cell proliferation, differentiation, and survival. The inhibitors
of HDAC exhibit profound synergistic effects in cancer treatment when combined
with other anticancer drugs. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying this
synergy are not fully understood. Here, we show that HDAC1 increases the
resistance of cancer cells to oxidative stress by negatively regulating the
expression of thioredoxin binding protein 2 (TBP-2). We found that the
recruitment of HDAC1 to the TBP-2 promoter is mediated by a protein complex
consisting of RET finger protein (RFP; also called TRIM27) and the trimeric
transcription factor NF-Y. Accordingly, RNA interference-mediated depletion of
RFP led to the disruption of the protein complex and a marked increase in the
sensitivity of cancer cells to cisplatin, a potent inducer of oxidative stress.
Furthermore, high levels of RFP expression correlated with down-regulation of
TBP-2 in human colon cancers and were associated with poor clinical outcome.
These findings reveal the diverse cancer-promoting activities of HDAC1 and
identify RFP as a key regulator that provides cancer cells with resistance to
anticancer drugs.

PMID: 19351825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 May 22;383(1):88-92. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.03.147. Epub 2009 Apr 1.

Acetylation of histone deacetylase 6 by p300 attenuates its deacetylase activity.

Han Y(1), Jeong HM, Jin YH, Kim YJ, Jeong HG, Yeo CY, Lee KY.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Drug Development, Chonnam
National University, Yongbong-dong, Gwangju, Republic of Korea.

Protein acetyltransferases and deacetylases affect the activities of each other. 
This is well documented by the acetylation and inhibition of HDAC1 by p300, a
transcriptional co-activator with protein acetyltransferase activity. However,
the relationship between HDAC6 and p300 is poorly understood. HDAC6 is a class II
histone deacetylase and differs from other members of HDAC family in that it
contains two HDAC domains and an ubiquitin-binding motif. HDAC6 is a
microtubule-associated deacetylase. It predominantly deacetylates non-histone
proteins, including alpha-tubulin, and regulates cell motility. Here, we report
that p300 interacts with and acetylates HDAC6 resulting down-regulation of HDAC6 
deacetylase activity. Furthermore, we provide evidences that acetylation of HDAC6
by p300 inhibits tubulin deacetylation and suppression of Sp1 transcriptional
activity by HDAC6. Our results demonstrate that p300 can inactivate HDAC6 by
acetylation, and that p300 may regulate the activity of Sp1 indirectly through
HDAC6 in addition to its direct modification of Sp1.

PMID: 19344692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. J Assoc Res Otolaryngol. 2009 Sep;10(3):341-53. doi: 10.1007/s10162-009-0166-y.
Epub 2009 Apr 2.

Epigenetic influences on sensory regeneration: histone deacetylases regulate
supporting cell proliferation in the avian utricle.

Slattery EL(1), Speck JD, Warchol ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, MO 63110, USA.

The sensory hair cells of the cochlea and vestibular organs are essential for
normal hearing and balance function. The mammalian ear possesses a very limited
ability to regenerate hair cells and their loss can lead to permanent sensory
impairment. In contrast, hair cells in the avian ear are quickly regenerated
after acoustic trauma or ototoxic injury. The very different regenerative
abilities of the avian vs. mammalian ear can be attributed to differences in
injury-evoked expression of genes that either promote or inhibit the production
of new hair cells. Gene expression is regulated both by the binding of
cis-regulatory molecules to promoter regions as well as through structural
modifications of chromatin (e.g., methylation and acetylation). This study
examined effects of histone deacetylases (HDACs), whose main function is to
modify histone acetylation, on the regulation of regenerative proliferation in
the chick utricle. Cultures of regenerating utricles and dissociated cells from
the utricular sensory epithelia were treated with the HDAC inhibitors valproic
acid, trichostatin A, sodium butyrate, and MS-275. All of these molecules prevent
the enzymatic removal of acetyl groups from histones, thus maintaining nuclear
chromatin in a "relaxed" (open) configuration. Treatment with all inhibitors
resulted in comparable decreases in supporting cell proliferation. We also
observed that treatment with the HDAC1-, 2-, and 3-specific inhibitor MS-275 was 
sufficient to reduce proliferation and that two class I HDACs--HDAC1 and
HDAC2--were expressed in the sensory epithelium of the utricle. These results
suggest that inhibition of specific type I HDACs is sufficient to prevent cell
cycle entry in supporting cells. Notably, treatment with HDAC inhibitors did not 
affect the differentiation of replacement hair cells. We conclude that histone
deacetylation is a positive regulator of regenerative proliferation but is not
critical for avian hair cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3084382
PMID: 19340485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. J Neurosci. 2009 Apr 1;29(13):4189-99. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5747-08.2009.

BNIP3 (Bcl-2 19 kDa interacting protein) acts as transcriptional repressor of
apoptosis-inducing factor expression preventing cell death in human malignant
gliomas.

Burton TR(1), Eisenstat DD, Gibson SB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Medical Genetics, University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada R3E 0V9.

The Bcl-2 19 kDa interacting protein (BNIP3) is a pro-cell-death BH3-only member 
of the Bcl-2 family. We previously found that BNIP3 is localized to the nucleus
in the majority of glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) tumors and fails to induce cell 
death. Herein, we have discovered that nuclear BNIP3 binds to the promoter of the
apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF) gene and represses its expression. BNIP3
associates with PTB-associating splicing factor (PSF) and HDAC1 (histone
deacetylase 1) contributing to transcriptional repression of the AIF gene. This
BNIP3-mediated reduction in AIF expression leads to decreased
temozolomide-induced apoptosis in glioma cells. Furthermore, nuclear BNIP3
expression in GBMs correlates with decreased AIF expression. Together, we have
discovered a novel transcriptional repression function for BNIP3 causing reduced 
AIF expression and increased resistance to apoptosis. Thus, nuclear BNIP3 may
confer a survival advantage to glioma cells and explain, in part, why BNIP3 is
expressed at high levels in solid tumors, especially GBM.

PMCID: PMC3262017
PMID: 19339613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Blood. 2009 Jun 4;113(23):5776-82. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-12-193607. Epub 2009
Mar 30.

A genetic screen in zebrafish defines a hierarchical network of pathways required
for hematopoietic stem cell emergence.

Burns CE(1), Galloway JL, Smith AC, Keefe MD, Cashman TJ, Paik EJ, Mayhall EA,
Amsterdam AH, Zon LI.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Program and Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital and
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Defining the genetic pathways essential for hematopoietic stem cell (HSC)
development remains a fundamental goal impacting stem cell biology and
regenerative medicine. To genetically dissect HSC emergence in the
aorta-gonad-mesonephros (AGM) region, we screened a collection of insertional
zebrafish mutant lines for expression of the HSC marker, c-myb. Nine essential
genes were identified, which were subsequently binned into categories
representing their proximity to HSC induction. Using overexpression and
loss-of-function studies in zebrafish, we ordered these signaling pathways with
respect to each other and to the Vegf, Notch, and Runx programs. Overexpression
of vegf and notch is sufficient to induce HSCs in the tbx16 mutant, despite a
lack of axial vascular organization. Although embryos deficient for artery
specification, such as the phospholipase C gamma-1 (plcgamma1) mutant, fail to
specify HSCs, overexpression of notch or runx1 can rescue their hematopoietic
defect. The most proximal HSC mutants, such as hdac1, were found to have no
defect in vessel or artery formation. Further analysis demonstrated that hdac1
acts downstream of Notch signaling but upstream or in parallel to runx1 to
promote AGM hematopoiesis. Together, our results establish a hierarchy of
signaling programs required and sufficient for HSC emergence in the AGM.

PMCID: PMC2700318
PMID: 19332767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Gene. 2009 Jun 15;439(1-2):87-94. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2009.03.014. Epub 2009 Mar 
28.

The homeodomain protein Cux1 interacts with Grg4 to repress p27 kip1 expression
during kidney development.

Sharma M(1), Brantley JG, Vassmer D, Chaturvedi G, Baas J, Vanden Heuvel GB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City,
Kansas 66160, USA. msharma3@kumc.edu

The homeodomain protein Cux1 is highly expressed in the nephrogenic zone of the
developing kidney where it functions to regulate cell proliferation. Here we show
that Cux1 directly interacts with the co-repressor Grg4 (Groucho 4), a known
effector of Notch signaling. Promoter reporter based luciferase assays revealed
enhanced repression of p27(kip1) promoter activity by Cux1 in the presence of
Grg4. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays demonstrated the direct
interaction of Cux1 with p27(kip1) in newborn kidney tissue in vivo. ChIP assays 
also identified interactions of Cux1, Grg4, HDAC1, and HDAC3 with p27(kip1) at
two separate sites in the p27(kip1) promoter. DNAse1 footprinting experiments
revealed that Cux1 binds to the p27(kip1) promoter on the sequence containing two
Sp1 sites and a CCAAT box approximately 500 bp from the transcriptional start
site, and to an AT rich sequence approximately 1.5 kb from the transcriptional
start site. Taken together, these results identify Grg4 as an interacting partner
for Cux1 and suggest a mechanism of p27(kip1) repression by Cux1 during kidney
development.

PMCID: PMC2742960
PMID: 19332113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 May;37(9):2984-95. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp127. Epub 2009 Mar
20.

Promoter targeted small RNAs induce long-term transcriptional gene silencing in
human cells.

Hawkins PG(1), Santoso S, Adams C, Anest V, Morris KV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, Kellogg School of Science
and Technology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Small RNAs targeted to gene promoters in human cells can mediate transcriptional 
gene silencing (TGS) by directing silent state epigenetic modifications to
targeted loci. Many mechanistic details of this process remain poorly defined,
and the ability to stably modulate gene expression in this manner has not been
explored. Here we describe the mechanisms of establishment and maintenance of
long-term transcriptional silencing of the human ubiquitin C gene (UbC).
Sustained targeting of the UbC promoter with a small RNA for a minimum of 3 days 
resulted in long-term silencing which correlated with an early increase in
histone methylation and a later increase in DNA methylation at the targeted
locus. Transcriptional silencing of UbC required the presence of a
promoter-associated RNA. The establishment and maintenance of the TGS were shown 
to require distinct protein factors. Argonaute 1 (Ago1), DNA methyltransferase 3a
(DNMT3a) and histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) were required for the initiation of
silencing, and DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) was necessary for maintenance.
Taken together the data presented here highlight the cellular pathway with which 
noncoding RNAs interact to epigenetically regulate gene expression in human
cells.

PMCID: PMC2685082
PMID: 19304753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. J Mol Biol. 2009 May 15;388(4):691-702. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.03.033. Epub 2009
Mar 19.

SMAR1 forms a ternary complex with p53-MDM2 and negatively regulates p53-mediated
transcription.

Pavithra L(1), Mukherjee S, Sreenath K, Kar S, Sakaguchi K, Roy S, Chattopadhyay 
S.

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Cell Science, Ganeshkhind, Pune 411007, India.

The intra-cellular level of tumor suppressor protein p53 is tightly controlled by
an autoregulatory feedback loop between the protein and its negative regulator
MDM2. The role of MDM2 in down-regulating the p53 response in unstressed
conditions and in the post-stress recovery phase is well documented. However,
interplay between the N-terminal phosphorylations and C-terminal acetylations of 
p53 in this context remains unclear. Here, we show that an MAR binding protein
SMAR1 interacts with MDM2 and the Ser15 phosphorylated form of p53, forming a
ternary complex in the post stress-recovery phase. This triple complex formation 
between p53, MDM2 and SMAR1 results in recruitment of HDAC1 to deacetylate p53.
The deacetylated p53 binds poorly to the target promoter (p21), which results in 
switching off the p53 response, essential for re-entry into the cell cycle.
Interestingly, the knock-down of SMAR1 using siRNA leads to a prolonged
cell-cycle arrest in the post stress recovery phase due to ablation of
p53-MDM2-HDAC1 interaction. Thus, the results presented here for the first time
highlight the role of SMAR1 in masking the active phosphorylation site of p53,
enabling the deacetylation of p53 by HDAC1-MDM2 complex, thereby regulating the
p53 transcriptional response during stress rescue.

PMID: 19303885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. J Med Chem. 2009 Apr 23;52(8):2265-79. doi: 10.1021/jm800988r.

Design of chimeric histone deacetylase- and tyrosine kinase-inhibitors: a series 
of imatinib hybrides as potent inhibitors of wild-type and mutant BCR-ABL,
PDGF-Rbeta, and histone deacetylases.

Mahboobi S(1), Dove S, Sellmer A, Winkler M, Eichhorn E, Pongratz H, Ciossek T,
Baer T, Maier T, Beckers T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacy, University of Regensburg, D-93040 Regensburg, Germany. 
siavosh.mahboobi@chemie.uni-regensburg.de

Inhibitors of histone deacetylases are a new class of cancer therapeutics with
possibly broad applicability. Combinations of HDAC inhibitors with the kinase
inhibitor 1 (Imatinib) in recent studies showed additive and synergistic effects.
Here we present a new concept by combining inhibition of protein kinases and
HDACs, two independent pharmacological activities, in one synthetic small
molecule. In general, the HDAC inhibition profile, the potencies, and the
probable binding modes to HDAC1 and HDAC6 were similar as for 6 (SAHA).
Inhibition of Abl kinase in biochemical assays was maintained for most compounds,
but in general the kinase selectivity profile differed from that of 1 with nearly
equipotent inhibition of the wild-type and the Imatinib resistant Abl T(315)I
mutant. A potent cellular inhibition of PDGFR and cytotoxicity toward EOL-1
cells, a model for idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome (HES), are restored or
enhanced for selected analogues (12b, 14b, and 18b). Cytotoxicity was evaluated
by using a broad panel of tumor cell lines, with selected analogues displaying
mean IC(50) values between 3.6 and 7.1 muM.

PMID: 19301902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Cancer Lett. 2009 Aug 8;280(2):211-21. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2009.02.013. Epub
2009 Mar 16.

Isoform-specific histone deacetylase inhibitors: the next step?

Balasubramanian S(1), Verner E, Buggy JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Pharmacyclics, Inc, Sunnyvale, CA 94085, United 
States. sriram@pcyc.com

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) have emerged as attractive drug targets,
particularly for neoplastic indications. This large family is divided into four
classes, of which three consist of zinc-dependent enzymes, and inhibitors of
these are the subject of this review. Currently, there are several inhibitors
advancing through clinical trials, all of which inhibit multiple isoforms of
these three classes. While promising, these compounds have exhibited toxicities
in the clinic that might limit their potential, particularly in solid tumors. It 
may be possible to reduce some of the toxicity by specifically targeting only the
isoform(s) involved in maintaining that particular tumor and spare other isoforms
that are uninvolved or even beneficial. This review examines the selectivity and 
toxicity of HDAC inhibitors currently in clinic, comparing pan-HDAC inhibitors to
Class I selective compounds. The rationale for isoform-specific inhibitors is
examined. The current status of isoform-specific inhibitor development is
analyzed, especially inhibitors of HDAC1, 2, 4 and 8 enzymes, and the potential
clinical utility of these compounds is discussed.

PMID: 19289255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. J Virol. 2009 May;83(10):4749-56. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02585-08. Epub 2009 Mar 11.

A limited group of class I histone deacetylases acts to repress human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 expression.

Keedy KS(1), Archin NM, Gates AT, Espeseth A, Hazuda DJ, Margolis DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, 3302 Michael Hooker Research Ctr., CB#7435, Chapel Hill, NC
27599-7435, USA.

Silencing of the integrated human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) genome in
resting CD4(+) T cells is a significant contributor to the persistence of
infection, allowing the virus to evade both immune detection and pharmaceutical
attack. Nonselective histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are capable of
inducing expression of quiescent HIV-1 in latently infected cells. However,
potent global HDAC inhibition can induce host toxicity. To determine the specific
HDACs that regulate HIV-1 transcription, we evaluated HDAC1 to HDAC11 RNA
expression and protein expression and compartmentalization in the resting CD4(+) 
T cells of HIV-1-positive, aviremic patients. HDAC1, -3, and -7 had the highest
mRNA expression levels in these cells. Although all HDACs were detected in
resting CD4(+) T cells by Western blot analysis, HDAC5, -8, and -11 were
primarily sequestered in the cytoplasm. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays, we detected HDAC1, -2, and -3 at the HIV-1 promoter in Jurkat J89GFP
cells. Targeted inhibition of HDACs by small interfering RNA demonstrated that
HDAC2 and HDAC3 contribute to repression of HIV-1 long terminal repeat expression
in the HeLa P4/R5 cell line model of latency. Together, these results suggest
that HDAC inhibitors specific for a limited number of class I HDACs may offer a
targeted approach to the disruption of persistent HIV-1 infection.

PMCID: PMC2682072
PMID: 19279091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. J Biol Chem. 2009 May 8;284(19):12896-904. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M809046200. Epub 2009
Mar 11.

Glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide and glucagon-like peptide-1 modulate
beta-cell chromatin structure.

Kim SJ(1), Nian C, McIntosh CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular & Physiological Sciences and the Diabetes Research
Group, Life Sciences Institute, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada.

Chromatin can exert a regulatory effect on gene transcription by modulating the
access of transcription factors to target genes. In the present study, we
examined whether nuclear actions of the incretin hormones, glucose-dependent
insulinotropic polypeptide and glucagon-like peptide-1, involve modulation of
beta-cell chromatin structure. Stimulation of INS-1(832/13) beta-cells or
dispersed mouse islets with glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide or
glucagon-like peptide-1 resulted in the post-translational modification of core
H3 histones, through acetylation and phosphorylation. Both increased histone H3
acetyltransferase and reduced histone deacetylase activities contributed.
Subsequent studies demonstrated that incretin-mediated histone H3 modifications
involved activation of protein kinase A, p42/44 mitogen-activated protein kinase 
(MAPK), and p38 MAPK signaling modules, resulting in the activation of mitogen-
and stress-activated kinase-1. Additionally, modification of histone H3 increased
its association with the transcription factor, phosphorylated cAMP-response
element-binding protein (phospho-CREB) and with cAMP-responsive CREB coactivator 
2. Incretin-activated CREB-related Bcl-2 transcription was greatly reduced by a
histone acetyltransferase inhibitor, demonstrating the functional importance of
histone H3 modification. This appears to be the first demonstration of beta-cell 
chromatin modification in response to the incretins and the studies indicate that
their regulatory effects involve coordinated nuclear interactions between
specific signaling modules, chromatin-modifying enzymes and transcription
factors.

PMCID: PMC2676020
PMID: 19279000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Mol Biol Rep. 2010 Mar;37(3):1221-7. doi: 10.1007/s11033-009-9492-8. Epub 2009
Mar 7.

Mode of action of the retrogene product SNAI1P, a SNAIL homolog, in human breast 
cancer cells.

Mittal MK(1), Myers JN, Bailey CK, Misra S, Chaudhuri G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbial Pathogenesis and Immune Response, Meharry Medical
College, Nashville, TN 37208, USA.

SNAI1P, a protein coded by a retrogene, is a member of the SNAI family of E2-box 
binding transcriptional repressors. To evaluate whether the mode of action of
SNAI1P is similar to those of the other predominant members of the SNAI family,
we studied its action on human claudin 7 (CLDN7) gene promoter which has seven
E2-boxes. We over-expressed FLAG-tagged SNAI1P in MCF7 and MDA-MB-468 cells.
SNAI1P inhibited the expression of CLDN7 in these recombinant cells. SNAI1P also 
inhibited cloned CLDN7 gene promoter activity in human breast cancer cells. ChIP 
assays revealed that SNAI1P is recruited on the CLDN7 gene promoter along with
the co-repressor CtBP1 and the effector HDAC1. Treatment of the cells with
trichostatin A, an inhibitor of HDAC1, abrogated the repressor activity of
SNAI1P. These data suggest that SNAI1P inhibits CLDN7 gene promoter
epigenetically in breast cancer cells through chromatin remodeling.

PMCID: PMC2824646
PMID: 19277896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Mol Cancer Ther. 2009 Mar;8(3):552-62. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-08-0661. Epub
2009 Mar 10.

Parthenolide promotes the ubiquitination of MDM2 and activates p53 cellular
functions.

Gopal YN(1), Chanchorn E, Van Dyke MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Unit 079, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX
77030-4009, USA.

MDM2 belongs to a class of ring-finger domain-containing ubiquitin ligases that
mediate the proteasomal degradation of numerous proteins, including themselves.
Arguably, the most important substrate of MDM2 is p53, which controls cell cycle 
progression and apoptosis. MDM2 and p53 are parts of a feedback regulatory loop
whose perturbations are often present in cancer and are targets for anticancer
drug development. We found that the natural product, small-molecule
anti-inflammatory agent parthenolide (PN), which is actively being investigated
as a potential therapeutic for many human cancers, induces ubiquitination of MDM2
in treated cells, resulting in the activation of p53 and other MDM2-regulated
tumor-suppressor proteins. Using cells with functional gene deletions and small
interfering RNA knockdown studies, we found that these effects required the DNA
damage transducer ataxia telangiectasia mutated. The effects of PN on tumor
suppressor activation were comparable with that of nutlin-3a, a recently
developed small molecule that was designed to interfere with the interaction
between MDM2 and p53 but does not promote MDM2 ubiquitination. Our study
illustrates an alternative approach for controlling MDM2 and p53 activities and
identifies an additional critically important cancer pathway affected by PN.

PMID: 19276167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2009 Apr 1;19(7):1866-70. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2009.02.075. 
Epub 2009 Feb 23.

Synthesis and evaluation of lysine derived sulfamides as histone deacetylase
inhibitors.

Manku S(1), Allan M, Nguyen N, Ajamian A, Rodrigue J, Therrien E, Wang J, Guo T, 
Rahil J, Petschner AJ, Nicolescu A, Lefebvre S, Li Z, Fournel M, Besterman JM,
Déziel R, Wahhab A.

Author information: 
(1)MethylGene Inc., Departments of Medicinal Chemistry, 7220 rue
Frederick-Banting, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H4S 2A1.

We have recently reported on a novel class of histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors bearing a sulfamide group as the zinc-binding unit. Herein, we report 
on the synthesis of sulfamide based inhibitors designed around a lysine scaffold 
and their structure-activity relationships against HDAC1 and HDAC6 isotypes as
well as 293T cells. Our efforts led us to an improvement of the originally
disclosed lysine-based sulfamide, 2a to compound 12h which has equal potency in
enzyme and cell-based assays as well as enhanced metabolic stability and PK
profile.

PMID: 19272776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2009 Apr 1;19(7):2053-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2009.02.009.
Epub 2009 Feb 8.

Exploring the pharmacokinetic properties of phosphorus-containing selective HDAC 
1 and 2 inhibitors (SHI-1:2).

Heidebrecht RW Jr(1), Chenard M, Close J, Dahlberg WK, Fleming J, Grimm JB,
Hamill JE, Harsch A, Haines BB, Hughes B, Kral AM, Middleton RE, Mushti C,
Ozerova N, Szewczak AA, Wang H, Wilson K, Witter DJ, Secrist JP, Miller TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Drug Design and Optimization, Merck Research Laboratories, 33
Avenue Louis Pasteur, Boston, MA 02115, USA. richard_heidebrecht@merck.com

We report the preparation and structure-activity relationships of
phosphorus-containing histone deacetylase inhibitors. A strong trend between
decreasing phosphorus functional group size and superior mouse pharmacokinetic
properties was identified. In addition, optimized candidates showed tumor growth 
inhibition in xenograft studies.

PMID: 19268585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. J Immunol. 2009 Mar 15;182(6):3688-95. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0802906.

Reactivation of latent HIV-1 infection by the periodontopathic bacterium
Porphyromonas gingivalis involves histone modification.

Imai K(1), Ochiai K, Okamoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Nagoya City University Graduate 
School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Japan.

Latently infected cells harbor the HIV-1 proviral DNA genome primarily integrated
into heterochromatin, allowing the persistence of transcriptionally silent
proviruses. Hypoacetylation of histone proteins by histone deacetylases (HDAC) is
involved in the maintenance of HIV-1 latency by repressing viral transcription.
In addition, periodontal diseases, caused by polymicrobial subgingival bacteria
including Porphyromonas gingivalis, are among the most prevalent infections of
mankind. Here we demonstrate the effects of P. gingivalis on HIV-1 replication.
This activity could be ascribable to the bacterial culture supernatant but not to
other bacterial components such as fimbriae or LPS. We found that this
HIV-1-inducing activity was recovered in the lower molecular mass (<3 kDa)
fraction of the culture supernatant. We also demonstrated that P. gingivalis
produces high concentrations of butyric acid, acting as a potent inhibitor of
HDACs and causing histone acetylation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
revealed that the corepressor complex containing HDAC1 and AP-4 was dissociated
from the HIV-1 long terminal repeat promoter upon stimulation with bacterial
culture supernatant concomitantly with the association of acetylated histone and 
RNA polymerase II. We thus found that P. gingivalis could induce HIV-1
reactivation via chromatin modification and that butyric acid, one of the
bacterial metabolites, is responsible for this effect. These results suggest that
periodontal diseases could act as a risk factor for HIV-1 reactivation in
infected individuals and might contribute to the systemic dissemination of the
virus.

PMID: 19265147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Oncogene. 2009 Apr 9;28(14):1714-24. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.19. Epub 2009 Mar 2.

miR-449a targets HDAC-1 and induces growth arrest in prostate cancer.

Noonan EJ(1), Place RF, Pookot D, Basak S, Whitson JM, Hirata H, Giardina C,
Dahiya R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Veterans Affairs Medical Center and University of
California, San Francisco, CA 94121, USA. emily.noonan@gmail.com

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are frequently overexpressed in broad range of
cancer types, where they alter cellular epigenetic programming to promote cell
proliferation and survival. However, the mechanism by which HDACs become
overexpressed in human cancers remains somewhat of a mystery. In this study, we
investigated the expression and functional significance of miR-449a in prostate
cancer cells. Using real-time PCR, we found that miR-449a is downregulated in
prostate cancer tissues relative to patient-matched control tissue. Introduction 
of miR-449a into PC-3 prostate cancer cells resulted in cell-cycle arrest,
apoptosis and a senescent-like phenotype. In silico analysis of 3'-UTR regions
identified a number of genes involved in cell-cycle regulation as putative
targets of miR-449a. Using a luciferase 3'-UTR reporter system, we established
that HDAC-1 (histone deacetylase 1), a gene that is frequently overexpressed in
many types of cancer, is a direct target of miR-449a. Further, our data indicate 
that miR-449a regulates cell growth and viability in part by repressing the
expression of HDAC-1 in prostate cancer cells. Our findings provide new insight
into the function of miRNA in regulating HDAC expression in normal versus
cancerous tissue.

PMID: 19252524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Mar 10;106(10):3818-22. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0809819106. Epub 2009 Feb 23.

Aberrant E2F activation by polyglutamine expansion of androgen receptor in SBMA
neurotoxicity.

Suzuki E(1), Zhao Y, Ito S, Sawatsubashi S, Murata T, Furutani T, Shirode Y,
Yamagata K, Tanabe M, Kimura S, Ueda T, Fujiyama S, Lim J, Matsukawa H, Kouzmenko
AP, Aigaki T, Tabata T, Takeyama K, Kato S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, University of Tokyo, 1-1-1
Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0032, Japan.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Oct 2;109(40):16393.

Spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA) is a neurodegenerative disorder caused 
by a polyglutamine repeat (polyQ) expansion within the human androgen receptor
(AR). Unlike other neurodegenerative diseases caused by abnormal polyQ expansion,
the onset of SBMA depends on androgen binding to mutant human polyQ-AR proteins. 
This is also observed in Drosophila eyes ectopically expressing the polyQ-AR
mutants. We have genetically screened mediators of androgen-induced
neurodegeneration caused by polyQ-AR mutants in Drosophila eyes. We identified
Rbf (Retinoblastoma-family protein), the Drosophila homologue of human Rb
(Retinoblastoma protein), as a neuroprotective factor. Androgen-dependent
association of Rbf or Rb with AR was remarkably potentiated by aberrant polyQ
expansion. Such potentiated Rb association appeared to attenuate recruitment of
histone deacetyltransferase 1 (HDAC1), a corepressor of E2F function. Either
overexpression of Rbf or E2F deficiency in fly eyes reduced the neurotoxicity of 
the polyQ-AR mutants. Induction of E2F function by polyQ-AR-bound androgen was
suppressed by Rb in human neuroblastoma cells. We conclude that abnormal
expansion of polyQ may potentiate innate androgen-dependent association of AR
with Rb. This appears to lead to androgen-dependent onset of SBMA through
aberrant E2F transactivation caused by suppressed histone deacetylation.

PMCID: PMC2656163
PMID: 19237573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Dev Dyn. 2009 Mar;238(3):572-80. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21873.

The homeobox gene Mohawk represses transcription by recruiting the sin3A/HDAC
co-repressor complex.

Anderson DM(1), Beres BJ, Wilson-Rawls J, Rawls A.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Center for Evolutionary Functional Genomics, Arizona 
State University, Tempe, Arizona 85287-4501, USA.

Mohawk is an atypical homeobox gene expressed in embryonic progenitor cells of
skeletal muscle, tendon, and cartilage. We demonstrate that Mohawk functions as a
transcriptional repressor capable of blocking the myogenic conversion of 10T1/2
fibroblasts. The repressor activity is located in three small, evolutionarily
conserved domains (MRD1-3) in the carboxy-terminal half of the protein. Point
mutation analysis revealed six residues in MRD1 are sufficient for repressor
function. The carboxy-terminal half of Mohawk is able to recruit components of
the Sin3A/HDAC co-repressor complex (Sin3A, Hdac1, and Sap18) and a subset of
Polymerase II general transcription factors (Tbp, TFIIA1 and TFIIB). Furthermore,
Sap18, a protein that bridges the Sin3A/HDAC complex to DNA-bound transcription
factors, is co-immunoprecipitated by MRD1. These data predict that Mohawk can
repress transcription through recruitment of the Sin3A/HDAC co-repressor complex,
and as a result, repress target genes required for the differentiation of cells
to the myogenic lineage.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19235719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Mol Ther. 2009 Apr;17(4):707-15. doi: 10.1038/mt.2008.306. Epub 2009 Feb 17.

ICP0 inhibits the decrease of HSV amplicon-mediated transgene expression.

Suzuki M(1), Kasai K, Ohtsuki A, Godlewski J, Nowicki MO, Chiocca EA, Saeki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Dardinger Laboratory for Neuro-oncology and Neurosciences, Department of
Neurological Surgery, James Comprehensive Cancer Center and The Ohio State
University Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

The herpes simplex virus (HSV) amplicon vector produces an initial host response 
that limits transgene expression. In this study, we hypothesized that restoration
of the HSV gene infected cell protein (ICP0) into the amplicon could circumvent
this host response and thus overcome silencing of encoded transgenes. To test
this, we constructed an amplicon vector that encodes the ICP0 under control of
its native promoter (ICP0+ amplicon). Expression of ICP0 was transient and, at a 
multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 1, did not significantly alter interferon
(IFN)-based responses against the vector or cell kinetics/apoptosis of infected
cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) PCR analysis revealed that
conventional amplicon DNA became associated with histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1)
immediately after infection, whereas ICP0+ amplicon DNA remained relatively
unbound by HDAC1 for at least 72 hours after infection. Mice administered
systemic ICP0+ amplicon exhibited significantly greater and more sustained
transgene expression in their livers than did those receiving conventional
amplicon, likely due to increased transcriptional or post-transcriptional
activity rather than increased copy numbers of vector DNA. These findings
indicate that restoration of ICP0 expression may be employed within HSV amplicon 
constructs to decrease transgene silencing in vitro and in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2835108
PMID: 19223864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Oncogene. 2009 Mar 26;28(12):1496-505. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.494. Epub 2009 Feb
9.

15-LOX-1 transcription suppression through the NuRD complex in colon cancer
cells.

Zuo X(1), Morris JS, Broaddus R, Shureiqi I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Cancer Prevention, The University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030-4009, USA.

15-Lipoxygenase-1 (15-LOX-1) is transcriptionally silenced in cancer cells, and
its transcription reactivation (for example, through histone deacetylase
inhibitors (HDACIs)) restores apoptosis to cancer cells. However, the exact
mechanism underlying 15-LOX-1 transcription reactivation in cancer cells is still
undefined. Therefore, we evaluated the critical mechanisms required for 15-LOX-1 
transcription reactivation in colon cancer cells. Specific HDAC1 and HDAC2
inhibition activated 15-LOX-1 transcription. 15-LOX-1 transcription was repressed
through transcription repressor complex recruitment in the region of -120 to -391
of the 15-LOX-1 promoter. The nucleosome remodeling and histone deacetylase
(NuRD) repression complex was recruited to this region. Depsipeptide
significantly reduced the recruitment of NuRD key components (for example,
metastasis-associated protein 1 (MTA1) and HDAC1) to the 15-LOX-1 promoter before
15-LOX-1 transcriptional activation. Knock down of NuRD key components (for
example, MTA1 and HDAC1) by small interfering RNA (siRNA) activated 15-LOX-1
transcription, as measured by luciferase reporter assays in stably transfected
SW480 cells with the 15-LOX-1 promoter construct of the -391, but not the -120
region. Relative to expression in normal tissue, MTA1 expression in colorectal
cancer mucosa from colorectal cancer patients was negatively related to 15-LOX-1 
expression. Thus, our results show that NuRD contributes to 15-LOX-1
transcription suppression in colon cancer cells and that HDACIs can inhibit NuRD 
recruitment to a promoter to activate gene transcription, as in the case of
15-LOX-1.

PMCID: PMC2743348
PMID: 19198625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. J Virol. 2009 May;83(9):4376-85. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02515-08. Epub 2009 Feb 4.

Engagement of the lysine-specific demethylase/HDAC1/CoREST/REST complex by herpes
simplex virus 1.

Gu H(1), Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)Marjorie B Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Among the early events in herpes simplex virus 1 replication are localization of 
ICP0 in ND10 bodies and accumulation of viral DNA-protein complexes in structures
abutting ND10. ICP0 degrades components of ND10 and blocks silencing of viral
DNA, achieving the latter by dislodging HDAC1 or -2 from the lysine-specific
demethylase 1 (LSD1)/CoREST/REST repressor complex. The role of this process is
apparent from the observation that a dominant-negative CoREST protein compensates
for the absence of ICP0 in a cell-dependent fashion. HDAC1 or -2 and the
CoREST/REST complex are independently translocated to the nucleus once viral DNA 
synthesis begins. The focus of this report is twofold. First, we report that in
infected cells, LSD1, a key component of the repressor complex, is partially
degraded or remains stably associated with CoREST and is ultimately also
translocated, in part, to the cytoplasm. Second, we examined the distribution of 
the components of the repressor complex and ICP8 early in infection in
wild-type-virus- and ICP0 mutant virus-infected cells. The repressor component
and ultimately ICP8 localize in structures that abut the ND10 nuclear bodies.
There is no evidence that the two compartments fuse. We propose that ICP0 must
dynamically interact with both compartments in order to accomplish its functions 
of degrading PML and SP100 and suppressing silencing of viral DNA through its
interactions with CoREST. In turn, the remodeling of the viral DNA-protein
complex enables recruitment of ICP8 and initiation of formation of replication
compartments.

PMCID: PMC2668468
PMID: 19193804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. J Am Chem Soc. 2009 Mar 4;131(8):2900-5. doi: 10.1021/ja807772w.

Synthesis and conformation-activity relationships of the peptide isosteres of
FK228 and largazole.

Bowers AA(1), Greshock TJ, West N, Estiu G, Schreiber SL, Wiest O, Williams RM,
Bradner JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, Colorado
80523, USA.

The peptide isosteres (10 and 11) of the naturally occurring and potent histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors FK228 and largazole have been synthesized and
evaluated side-by-side with FK228, largazole, and SAHA for inhibition of the
class I HDACs 1, 2, 3, and 6.

PMCID: PMC2880701
PMID: 19193120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. J Chem Inf Model. 2009 Feb;49(2):461-76. doi: 10.1021/ci800366f.

Novel inhibitors of human histone deacetylase (HDAC) identified by QSAR modeling 
of known inhibitors, virtual screening, and experimental validation.

Tang H(1), Wang XS, Huang XP, Roth BL, Butler KV, Kozikowski AP, Jung M, Tropsha 
A.

Author information: 
(1)Lab. for Molecular Modeling, and Carolina Exploratory Center for
Cheminformatics Res., Div. of Medicinal Chemistry and Natural Products, School of
Pharmacy, UNC, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599-7360, USA.

Inhibitors of histone deacetylases (HDACIs) have emerged as a new class of drugs 
for the treatment of human cancers and other diseases because of their effects on
cell growth, differentiation, and apoptosis. In this study we have developed
several quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR) models for 59
chemically diverse histone deacetylase class 1 (HDAC1) inhibitors. The variable
selection k nearest neighbor (kNN) and support vector machines (SVM) QSAR
modeling approaches using both MolconnZ and MOE chemical descriptors generated
from two-dimensional rendering of compounds as chemical graphs have been
employed. We have relied on a rigorous model development workflow including the
division of the data set into training, test, and external sets and extensive
internal and external validation. Highly predictive QSAR models were generated
with leave-one-out cross-validated (LOO-CV) q2 and external R2 values as high as 
0.80 and 0.87, respectively, using the kNN/MolconnZ approach and 0.93 and 0.87,
respectively, using the SVM/MolconnZ approach. All validated QSAR models were
employed concurrently for virtual screening (VS) of an in-house compound
collection including 9.5 million molecules compiled from the ZINC7.0 database,
the World Drug Index (WDI) database, the ASINEX Synergy libraries, and other
commercial databases. VS resulted in 45 structurally unique consensus hits that
were considered novel putative HDAC1 inhibitors. These computational hits had
several novel structural features that were not present in the original data set.
Four computational hits with novel scaffolds were tested experimentally, and
three of them were confirmed active against HDAC1, with IC50 values for the most 
active compound of 1.00 microM. The fourth compound was later identified to be a 
selective inhibitor of HDAC6, a Class II HDAC. Moreover, two of the confirmed
hits are marketed drugs, which could potentially facilitate their further
development as anticancer agents. This study illustrates the power of the
combined QSAR-VS method as a general approach for the effective identification of
structurally novel bioactive compounds.

PMID: 19182860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Nat Cell Biol. 2009 Mar;11(3):295-302. doi: 10.1038/ncb1837. Epub 2009 Feb 1.

Chfr is linked to tumour metastasis through the downregulation of HDAC1.

Oh YM(1), Kwon YE, Kim JM, Bae SJ, Lee BK, Yoo SJ, Chung CH, Deshaies RJ, Seol
JH.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Research Center for Functional Cellulomics,
Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Korea.

Chfr is a ubiquitin ligase that functions in the mitotic checkpoint by delaying
entry into metaphase in response to mitotic stress. It has been suggested that
Chfr is a tumour suppressor as Chfr is frequently silenced in human cancers. To
better understand how Chfr activity relates to cell-cycle progression and
tumorigenesis, we sought to identify Chfr-interacting proteins using affinity
purification combined with mass spectrometry. Histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1),
which represses transcription by deacetylating histones, was newly isolated as a 
Chfr-interacting protein. Chfr binds and downregulates HDAC1 by inducing its
polyubiquitylation, both in vitro and in vivo. Ectopic expression of Chfr in
cancer cells that normally do not express it results in downregulation of HDAC1, 
leading to upregulation of the Cdk inhibitor p21(CIP1/WAF1) and the metastasis
suppressors KAI1 and E-cadherin. Coincident with these changes, cells arrest in
the G1 phase of the cell cycle and become less invasive. Collectively, our data
suggest that Chfr functions as a tumour suppressor by regulating HDAC1.

PMID: 19182791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Int Immunol. 2009 Mar;21(3):227-35. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxn143. Epub 2009 Jan 30.

The transcription repressor, ZEB1, cooperates with CtBP2 and HDAC1 to suppress
IL-2 gene activation in T cells.

Wang J(1), Lee S, Teh CE, Bunting K, Ma L, Shannon MF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Bioscience, John Curtin School of Medical Research,
Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 2601 Australia.

Activation of T cells leads to the induction of many cytokine genes that are
required for appropriate immune responses, including IL-2, a key cytokine for T
cell proliferation and homeostasis. The activating transcription factors such as 
nuclear factor of activated T cells, nuclear factor kappaB/Rel and activated
protein-1 family members that regulate inducible IL-2 gene expression have been
well documented. However, negative regulation of the IL-2 gene is less studied.
Here we examine the role of zinc finger E-box-binding protein (ZEB) 1, a
homeodomain/Zn finger transcription factor, as a repressor of IL-2 gene
transcription. We show here that ZEB1 is expressed in non-stimulated and
stimulated T cells and using chromatin immunoprecipitation assays we show that
ZEB1 binds to the IL-2 promoter. Over-expression of ZEB1 can repress IL-2
promoter activity, as well as endogenous IL-2 mRNA production in EL-4 T cells,
and this repression is dependent on the ZEB-binding site at -100. ZEB1 cooperates
with the co-repressor C-terminal-binding protein (CtBP) 2 and with histone
deacetylase 1 to repress the IL-2 promoter and this cooperation depends on the
ZEB-binding site in the promoter as well as the Pro-X-Asp-Leu-Ser protein-protein
interaction domain in CtBP2. Thus, ZEB1 may function to recruit a repressor
complex to the IL-2 promoter.

PMID: 19181930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Cancer Res. 2009 Feb 1;69(3):958-66. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2216. Epub
2009 Jan 27.

Histone deacetylases are required for androgen receptor function in
hormone-sensitive and castrate-resistant prostate cancer.

Welsbie DS(1), Xu J, Chen Y, Borsu L, Scher HI, Rosen N, Sawyers CL.

Author information: 
(1)David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California at Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, California, USA.

Transcriptional activity of the androgen receptor (AR) is crucial for growth and 
survival of prostate cancer even upon development of resistance to androgen
ablation and antiandrogen therapies. Therefore, novel therapies that can suppress
AR transcriptional activity when conventional hormone therapies fail are needed. 
Here, we show that histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors, including SAHA
(vorinostat) and LBH589, which are currently being tested in clinic, could be
such a therapy. HDAC inhibitors block the AR-mediated transcriptional activation 
of many genes, including the TMPRSS2 gene involved in fusion with ETS family
members in a majority of prostate cancers. Genetic knockdown of either HDAC1 or
HDAC3 can also suppress expression of AR-regulated genes, recapitulating the
effect of HDAC inhibitor treatment. Whereas HDAC inhibitor treatment can lower
androgen receptor protein levels in prostate cancer cells, we show that
independent of AR protein levels, HDAC inhibitors block AR activity through
inhibiting the assembly of coactivator/RNA polymerase II complex after AR binds
to the enhancers of target genes. Failed complex assembly is associated with a
phase shift in the cyclical wave of AR recruitment that typically occurs in
response to ligand treatment. HDAC inhibitors retain the ability to block AR
activity in castration-resistant prostate cancer models and, therefore, merit
clinical investigation in this setting. The HDAC-regulated AR target genes
defined here can serve as biomarkers to ensure sufficient levels of HDAC
inhibition.

PMCID: PMC3219545
PMID: 19176386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Apr 15;18(8):1415-23. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp048. Epub 2009 Jan 
27.

MeCP2 involvement in the regulation of neuronal alpha-tubulin production.

Abuhatzira L(1), Shemer R, Razin A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry and Human Genetics, Hebrew University
Medical School, Ein Kerem, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

Rett syndrome (RTT) is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder caused by a dominant 
mutation in the X-linked methyl CpG binding protein 2 (MeCP2) gene.
Neuroanatomically, RTT is characterized by a reduction in dendritic arborization 
and perikaryal size in the brain. MECP2 binds methylated promoters and
facilitates assembly of a multiprotein repressor complex that includes Sin3A and 
the histone deacetylases HDAC1/HDAC2. MeCP2 has recently been found to be
downregulated in autistic spectrum disorders such as Angelman syndrome (AS) and
RTT, which share some phenotypic manifestations. We have conducted expression
analysis of cytoskeleton-related genes in brain tissue of RTT and AS patients.
Striking examples of genes with reduced expression were TUBA1B and TUBA3 that
encode the ubiquitous alpha-tubulin and the neuronal specific alpha-tubulin,
respectively. In accordance with the downregulation of expression of these genes,
we have observed a reduction in the level of the corresponding protein
product-tyrosinated alpha-tubulin. Low levels of alpha-tubulin and deteriorated
cell morphology were also observed in MeCP2(-/y) MEF cells. The effects of MeCP2 
deficiency in these cells were completely reversed by introducing and expressing 
the human MeCP2 gene. These results imply that MeCP2 is involved in the
regulation of neuronal alpha-tubulin and add molecular evidence that reversal of 
the effects of MeCP2 deficiency is achievable. This raises hopes for a cure of
Rett syndrome and related MeCP2 deficiency disorders of the autistic spectrum.

PMID: 19174478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Genome Biol. 2009;10(1):R9. doi: 10.1186/gb-2009-10-1-r9. Epub 2009 Jan 27.

Profiling RE1/REST-mediated histone modifications in the human genome.

Zheng D(1), Zhao K, Mehler MF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Brain Disorders and Neural Regeneration, Department of
Neurology, Rose F Kennedy Center for the Study of Intellectual and Developmental 
Disabilities, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.
dzheng@aecom.yu.edu

BACKGROUND: The transcriptional repressor REST (RE1 silencing transcription
factor, also called NRSF for neuron-restrictive silencing factor) binds to a
conserved RE1 motif and represses many neuronal genes in non-neuronal cells. This
transcriptional regulation is transacted by several nucleosome-modifying enzymes 
recruited by REST to RE1 sites, including histone deacetylases (for example,
HDAC1/2), demethylases (for example, LSD1), and methyltransferases (for example, 
G9a).
RESULTS: We have investigated a panel of 38 histone modifications by ChIP-Seq
analysis for REST-mediated changes. Our study reveals a systematic decline of
histone acetylations modulated by the association of RE1 with REST (RE1/REST). By
contrast, alteration of histone methylations is more heterogeneous, with some
methylations increased (for example, H3K27me3, and H3K9me2/3) and others
decreased (for example, H3K4me, and H3K9me1). Furthermore, the observation of
such trends of histone modifications in upregulated genes demonstrates
convincingly that these changes are not determined by gene expression but are
RE1/REST dependent. The outcomes of REST binding to canonical and non-canonical
RE1 sites were nearly identical. Our analyses have also provided the first direct
evidence that REST induces context-specific nucleosome repositioning, and
furthermore demonstrate that REST-mediated histone modifications correlate with
the affinity of RE1 motifs and the abundance of RE1-bound REST molecules.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that the landscape of REST-mediated chromatin 
remodeling is dynamic and complex, with novel histone modifying enzymes and
mechanisms yet to be elucidated. Our results should provide valuable insights for
selecting the most informative histone marks for investigating the mechanisms and
the consequences of REST modulated nucleosome remodeling in both neural and
non-neural systems.

PMCID: PMC2687797
PMID: 19173732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. FEBS Lett. 2009 Feb 18;583(4):627-32. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2009.01.012. Epub
2009 Jan 21.

Kaiso is a bimodal modulator for Wnt/beta-catenin signaling.

Iioka H(1), Doerner SK, Tamai K.

Author information: 
(1)BRB 723, Department of Genetics, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve
University, 10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

The Wnt family of secreted ligands plays critical roles during embryonic
development and tumorigenesis. Here we show that Kaiso, a dual specific
DNA-binding protein, functions as a bimodal regulator of canonical Wnt signaling.
Loss-of-function analysis of Kaiso abrogated Wnt-mediated reporter activity and
axis duplication, whereas gain-of-function analysis of Kaiso dose-dependently
resulted in synergistic and suppressive effects. Our analyses further suggest
Kaiso can regulate TCF/LEF1-activity for these effects via modulating HDAC1 and
beta-catenin-complex formation. Our studies together provide insights into why
Kaiso null mice display resistance to intestinal tumors when crossed onto an
Apc(Min/+) background.

PMID: 19166851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2009;26(3):229-37. doi: 10.1007/s10585-009-9235-1. Epub 2009
Jan 23.

BRMS1 contributes to the negative regulation of uPA gene expression through
recruitment of HDAC1 to the NF-kappaB binding site of the uPA promoter.

Cicek M(1), Fukuyama R, Cicek MS, Sizemore S, Welch DR, Sizemore N, Casey G.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Research Unit, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, 200 First Street SW,
Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

The BRMS1 metastasis suppressor was recently shown to negatively regulate
NF-kappaB signaling and down regulate NF-kappaB-dependent uPA expression. Here we
confirm that BRMS1 expression correlates with reduced NF-kappaB DNA binding
activity in independently derived human melanoma C8161.9 cells stably expressing 
BRMS1. We show that knockdown of BRMS1 expression in these cells using small
interfering RNA (siRNA) leads to the reactivation of NF-kappaB DNA binding
activity and re-expression of uPA. Further, we confirm that BRMS1 expression does
not alter IKKbeta kinase activity suggesting that BRMS1-dependent uPA regulation 
does not occur through inhibition of the classical upstream activators of
NF-kappaB. BRMS1 has been implicated as a corepressor of HDAC1 and consistent
with this, we show that BRMS1 promotes HDAC1 recruitment to the NF-kappaB binding
site of the uPA promoter and is associated with reduced H3 acetylation. We also
confirm that BRMS1 expression stimulates disassociation of p65 from the NF-kappaB
binding site of the uPA promoter consistent with its reduced DNA binding
activity. These data suggest that BRMS1 recruits HDAC1 to the NF-kappaB binding
site of the uPA promoter, modulates histone acetylation of p65 on the uPA
promoter, leading to reduced NF-kappaB binding activity on its consensus
sequence, and reduced transactivation of uPA expression.

PMCID: PMC2756239
PMID: 19165610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Jan 15;15(2):570-7. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-1813.

Combination of proteasome and HDAC inhibitors for uterine cervical cancer
treatment.

Lin Z(1), Bazzaro M, Wang MC, Chan KC, Peng S, Roden RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA.

PURPOSE: Cervical cancer cells are addicted to the expression of the human
papillomavirus (HPV) oncoproteins E6 and E7. The oncogencity of E6 is mediated in
part by targeting p53 and PDZ-family tumor suppressor proteins for rapid
proteasomal degradation, whereas the E7 oncoprotein acts in part by coopting
histone deacetylases (HDAC)1/2. Here, we examine the hypothesis that inhibition
of proteasome function and HDAC activity would synergistically and specifically
trigger cervical cancer cell death by the interruption of E6 and E7 signaling.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The sensitivity and molecular responses of keratinocytes and
HPV-positive and HPV-negative cervical cancer cells and xenografts to
combinations of proteasome and HDAC inhibitors were tested. The expression of
HDAC1/HDAC2 in situ was examined in cervical cancer, its precursors, and normal
epithelium.
RESULTS: Cervical cancer cell lines exhibit greater sensitivity to proteasome
inhibitors than do HPV-negative cervical cancers or primary human keratinocytes. 
Treatment of cervical cancer cells with bortezomib elevated the level of p53 but 
not hDlg, hScribble or hMAGI. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed elevated
HDAC1/HDAC2 expression in cervical dysplasia and cervical carcinoma versus normal
cervical epithelium. The combination of bortezomib and HDAC inhibitor
trichostatin A or vorinostat shows synergistic killing of HPV-positive, but not
HPV-negative, cervical cancer cell lines. Similarly, treatment of HeLa xenografts
with the combination of bortezomib and trichostatin A retarded tumor growth
significantly more effectively than either agent alone.
CONCLUSIONS: A combination of proteasome and HDAC inhibitors, including
bortezomib and vorinostat, respectively, warrants exploration for the treatment
of cervical cancer.

PMCID: PMC2714480
PMID: 19147762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. J Biol Chem. 2009 Apr 10;284(15):10067-75. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M808782200. Epub 2009
Jan 14.

Antagonistic roles for BRM and BRG1 SWI/SNF complexes in differentiation.

Flowers S(1), Nagl NG Jr, Beck GR Jr, Moran E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, New Jersey Medical School-University Hospital
Cancer Center, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, New
Jersey 07103, USA.

The mammalian SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complex is essential for the multiple 
changes in gene expression that occur during differentiation. However, the basis 
within the complex for specificity in effecting positive versus negative changes 
in gene expression has only begun to be elucidated. The catalytic core of the
complex can be either of two closely related ATPases, BRM or BRG1, with the
potential that the choice of alternative subunits is a key determinant of
specificity. Short hairpin RNA-mediated depletion of the ATPases was used to
explore their respective roles in the well characterized multistage process of
osteoblast differentiation. The results reveal an unexpected role for
BRM-specific complexes. Instead of impeding differentiation as was seen with BRG1
depletion, depletion of BRM caused accelerated progression to the differentiation
phenotype. Multiple tissue-specific differentiation markers, including the
tightly regulated late stage marker osteocalcin, become constitutively
up-regulated in BRM-depleted cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis of the
osteocalcin promoter as a model for the behavior of the complexes indicates that 
the promoter is a direct target of both BRM- and BRG1-containing complexes. BRG1 
complexes, which are required for activation, are associated with the promoter
well before induction, but the concurrent presence of BRM-specific complexes
overrides their activation function. BRM-specific complexes are present only on
the repressed promoter and are required for association of the co-repressor
HDAC1. These findings reveal an unanticipated degree of specialization of
function linked with the choice of ATPase and suggest a new paradigm for the
roles of the alternative subunits during differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2665061
PMID: 19144648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. J Neurochem. 2009 Mar;108(5):1226-36. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2009.05871.x. Epub
2009 Jan 29.

Aminoglycoside-induced histone deacetylation and hair cell death in the mouse
cochlea.

Chen FQ(1), Schacht J, Sha SH.

Author information: 
(1)Kresge Hearing Research Institute, Department of Otolaryngology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA.

Post-translational modification of histones is an important form of chromatin
regulation impacting transcriptional activation. Histone acetyltransferases, for 
example, acetylate lysine residues on histone tails thereby enhancing gene
transcription, while histone deacetylases (HDACs) remove those acetyl groups and 
repress gene transcription. Deficient histone acetylation is associated with
pathologies, and histone deacetylase inhibitors have been studied in the
treatment of cancer and neurodegenerative diseases. Here we explore histone
acetylation in cochlear sensory cells following a challenge with gentamicin, an
aminoglycoside antibiotic known to cause loss of auditory hair cells and hearing.
The addition of the drug to organotypic cultures of the mouse organ of Corti
decreased the acetylation of histone core proteins (H2A Ack5, H2B Ack12, H3 Ack9,
and H4 Ack8) followed by a loss of sensory cells. Protein levels of HDAC1, HDAC3 
and HDAC4 were increased while the histone acetyltransferases such as
CREB-binding protein and p300 remained unchanged. We next hypothesized that
protecting histone acetylation should prevent cell death and tested the effects
of HDAC-inhibitors on the actions of gentamicin. Co-treatment with trichostatin A
maintained near-normal levels of acetylation of histone core proteins in cochlear
hair cells and attenuated gentamicin-induced cell death. The addition of sodium
butyrate also rescued hair cells from damage by gentamicin. The results are
consistent with an involvement of deficient histone acetylation in
aminoglycoside-induced hair cell death and point to the potential value of
HDAC-inhibitors in protection from the side effects of these drugs.

PMCID: PMC3341988
PMID: 19141081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2009 Feb 15;19(4):1168-72. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2008.12.083.
Epub 2008 Dec 25.

Parallel medicinal chemistry approaches to selective HDAC1/HDAC2 inhibitor
(SHI-1:2) optimization.

Kattar SD(1), Surdi LM, Zabierek A, Methot JL, Middleton RE, Hughes B, Szewczak
AA, Dahlberg WK, Kral AM, Ozerova N, Fleming JC, Wang H, Secrist P, Harsch A,
Hamill JE, Cruz JC, Kenific CM, Chenard M, Miller TA, Berk SC, Tempest P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Drug Design and Optimization, Merck Research Laboratories, 33
Avenue Louis Pasteur, Boston, MA 02115, USA. sam_kattar@merck.com

The successful application of both solid and solution phase library synthesis,
combined with tight integration into the medicinal chemistry effort, resulted in 
the efficient optimization of a novel structural series of selective HDAC1/HDAC2 
inhibitors by the MRL-Boston Parallel Medicinal Chemistry group. An initial lead 
from a small parallel library was found to be potent and selective in biochemical
assays. Advanced compounds were the culmination of iterative library design and
possess excellent biochemical and cellular potency, as well as acceptable PK and 
efficacy in animal models.

PMID: 19138845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Feb 13;379(3):710-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.12.141. Epub 2009 Jan 6.

Stress-induced overexpression of the heme-regulated eIF-2alpha kinase is
regulated by Elk-1 activated through ERK pathway.

Singh VB(1), Pavithra L, Chattopadhyay S, Pal JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, University of Pune, Ganeshkhind, Pune,
Maharashtra, India.

The heme-regulated eIF-2alpha kinase, also called the heme-regulated inhibitor
(HRI), is activated under various cytoplasmic stresses in reticulocytes leading
to inhibition of initiation of protein synthesis. Our previous studies indicated 
that the promoter activity and expression of the human HRI (hHRI) increase in
human K562 cells during heat shock and lead exposure. Contrary to this, hemin
chloride which inactivates the kinase, downregulates HRI expression. Here, we
attempted to understand the mechanism of regulation of hHRI expression in the
lead- and hemin-exposed cells. Our results demonstrate the involvement of two
transcription factors, Elk-1 and MZF-1 in regulating HRI expression. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays established further that Elk-1 is involved in
upregulating HRI expression during stress along with a co-activator p300, while
MZF-1 along with HDAC-1 is instrumental in its downregulation during hemin
treatment. We also demonstrate the involvement of ERK pathway in activating Elk-1
during stress resulting in an over expression of hHRI.

PMID: 19133234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2009 Mar;29(3):380-6. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.108.178319. Epub 2009 Jan 2.

Statins control oxidized LDL-mediated histone modifications and gene expression
in cultured human endothelial cells.

Dje N'Guessan P(1), Riediger F, Vardarova K, Scharf S, Eitel J, Opitz B, Slevogt 
H, Weichert W, Hocke AC, Schmeck B, Suttorp N, Hippenstiel S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine/Infectious Diseases and Respiratory Medicine, 
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Activation of the endothelium by oxidized low-density lipoprotein
(oxLDL) has been implicated in the development of atherosclerosis. Histone
modifications impact on the transcriptional activity state of genes. We tested
the hypothesis that oxLDL-induced inflammatory gene expression is regulated by
histone modifications and experienced the effect of statins on these alterations.
METHODS AND RESULTS: OxLDL-related interleukin-8 (IL-8) and
monocyte-chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) secretion in endothelial cells was
reduced by statins but enhanced by histone deacetylase inhibitors. OxLDL induced 
lectin-like oxidized LDL receptor-1 (LOX-1) and extracellular regulated kinases
(ERK1/2)-dependent acetylation of histone H3 and H4 as well as phosphorylation of
histone H3, both globally and on the promoters of il8 and mcp1. Pretreatment of
oxLDL-exposed cells with statins reduced the above mentioned histone
modification, as well as recruitment of CREB binding protein (CBP) 300,
NF-kappaB, and of RNA polymerase II but prevented loss of binding of histone
deacetylase (HDAC)-1 and -2 at the il8 and mcp1 gene promoters. OxLDL reduced
HDAC1 and 2 expression, and statins partly restored global HDAC-activity.
Statin-related effects were reverted with mevalonate. In situ experiments
indicated decreased expression of HDAC2 in endothelial cells in atherosclerotic
plaques of human coronary arteries.
CONCLUSIONS: Histone modifications seem to play an important role in
atherosclerosis.

PMID: 19122173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Jan 1;15(1):91-9. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-0684.

Histone deacetylase 8 in neuroblastoma tumorigenesis.

Oehme I(1), Deubzer HE, Wegener D, Pickert D, Linke JP, Hero B, Kopp-Schneider A,
Westermann F, Ulrich SM, von Deimling A, Fischer M, Witt O.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Cooperation Unit Pediatric Oncology, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg, Germany.

PURPOSE: The effects of pan-histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors on cancer cells
have shown that HDACs are involved in fundamental tumor biological processes such
as cell cycle control, differentiation, and apoptosis. However, because of the
unselective nature of these compounds, little is known about the contribution of 
individual HDAC family members to tumorigenesis and progression. The purpose of
this study was to evaluate the role of individual HDACs in neuroblastoma
tumorigenesis.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We have investigated the mRNA expression of all HDAC1-11
family members in a large cohort of primary neuroblastoma samples covering the
full spectrum of the disease. HDACs associated with disease stage and survival
were subsequently functionally evaluated in cell culture models.
RESULTS: Only HDAC8 expression was significantly correlated with advanced disease
and metastasis and down-regulated in stage 4S neuroblastoma associated with
spontaneous regression. High HDAC8 expression was associated with poor prognostic
markers and poor overall and event-free survival. The knockdown of HDAC8 resulted
in the inhibition of proliferation, reduced clonogenic growth, cell cycle arrest,
and differentiation in cultured neuroblastoma cells. The treatment of
neuroblastoma cell lines as well as short-term-culture neuroblastoma cells with
an HDAC8-selective small-molecule inhibitor inhibited cell proliferation and
clone formation, induced differentiation, and thus reproduced the HDAC8 knockdown
phenotype. Global histone 4 acetylation was not affected by HDAC8 knockdown or by
selective inhibitor treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data point toward an important role of HDAC8 in neuroblastoma
pathogenesis and identify this HDAC family member as a specific drug target for
the differentiation therapy of neuroblastoma.

PMID: 19118036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. J Cell Biochem. 2009 Feb 15;106(3):453-63. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22027.

HDAC4 contributes to IL-1-induced mPGES-1 expression in human synovial
fibroblasts through up-regulation of Egr-1 transcriptional activity.

Chabane N(1), Li X, Fahmi H.

Author information: 
(1)Osteoarthritis Research Unit, Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal
(CHUM), Department of Medicine, Notre-Dame Hospital, University of Montreal, 1560
Sherbrooke Street East, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H2L 4M1.

Microsomal prostaglandin E synthase-1 (mPGES-1) catalyzes the terminal step in
the biosynthesis of PGE(2), which contributes to many physiopathological
processes. We show here that inhibitors of histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity,
trichostatin A (TSA), butyric acid (BA), and valproic acid (BA) prevented
IL-1-induced mPGES-1 protein expression in human synovial fibroblasts. TSA also
inhibited IL-1-induced mPGES-1 mRNA expression and promoter activation.
Overexpression of HDAC4, but not of HDAC1, 2, 3, 5, or 6 enhanced, whereas HDAC4 
silencing with small interfering RNA (siRNA) reduced, IL-1-induced mPGES-1
promoter activation, implying that HDAC4 contributes to mPGES-1 gene expression. 
Consistently, IL-1-induced mPGES-1 protein expression was prevented by siRNA for 
HDAC4. We also demonstrate that IL-1-induced HDAC4 recruitment to the mPGES-1
promoter. This recruitment was not accompanied by deacetylation of histones H3
and H4, suggesting that HDAC4 contributes to mPGES-1 induction independently of
local deacetylation of histones H3 and H4. We then investigated whether HDAC4
regulates mPGES-1 expression by modulating the activity of Egr-1, a key
transcription factor in IL-1-induced mPGES-1 expression. We found that HDAC4
overexpression enhances, whereas HDAC4 knockdown by siRNA reduces Egr-1-mediated 
activation of the mPGES-1 promoter. Together these data indicate that HDAC4
contributes to transcriptional induction of mPGES-1 by IL-1 through a mechanism
involving up-regulation of Egr-1 transcriptional activity.

PMID: 19115247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Mar;29(6):1526-37. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01523-08. Epub 2008 Dec
29.

Ikaros and GATA-1 combinatorial effect is required for silencing of human
gamma-globin genes.

Bottardi S(1), Ross J, Bourgoin V, Fotouhi-Ardakani N, Affar el B, Trudel M,
Milot E.

Author information: 
(1)Maisonneuve Rosemont Hospital Research Center, Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital, 
Faculty of Medicine, University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

During development and erythropoiesis, globin gene expression is finely modulated
through an important network of transcription factors and chromatin modifying
activities. In this report we provide in vivo evidence that endogenous Ikaros is 
recruited to the human beta-globin locus and targets the histone deacetylase
HDAC1 and the chromatin remodeling protein Mi-2 to the human gamma-gene
promoters, thereby contributing to gamma-globin gene silencing at the time of the
gamma- to beta-globin gene transcriptional switch. We show for the first time
that Ikaros interacts with GATA-1 and enhances the binding of the latter to
different regulatory regions across the locus. Consistent with these results, we 
show that the combinatorial effect of Ikaros and GATA-1 impairs close proximity
between the locus control region and the human gamma-globin genes. Since the
absence of Ikaros also affects GATA-1 recruitment to GATA-2 promoter, we propose 
that the combinatorial effect of Ikaros and GATA-1 is not restricted to globin
gene regulation.

PMCID: PMC2648246
PMID: 19114560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2009 Feb 1;19(3):644-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2008.12.048.
Epub 2008 Dec 24.

SAR and biological evaluation of analogues of a small molecule histone
deacetylase inhibitor
N-(2-aminophenyl)-4-((4-(pyridin-3-yl)pyrimidin-2-ylamino)methyl)benzamide
(MGCD0103).

Raeppel S(1), Zhou N, Gaudette F, Leit S, Paquin I, Larouche G, Moradei O,
Fréchette S, Isakovic L, Delorme D, Fournel M, Kalita A, Lu A, Trachy-Bourget MC,
Yan PT, Liu J, Rahil J, Wang J, Besterman JM, Murakami K, Li Z, Vaisburg A.

Author information: 
(1)MethylGene Inc., Department of Medicinal Chemistry, 7220 Frederick-Banting,
Montréal, Que., Canada H4S 2A1. raeppels@methylgene.com

Analogues of the clinical compound MGCD0103 (A) were designed and synthesized.
These compounds inhibit recombinant human HDAC1 with IC(50) values in the
sub-micromolar range. In human cancer cells growing in culture these compounds
induce hyperacetylation of histones, cause expression of the tumor suppressor
protein p21(WAF1/CIP1), and inhibit cellular proliferation. Lead molecule of the 
series, compound 25 is metabolically stable, possesses favorable pharmacokinetic 
characteristics and is orally active in vivo in different mouse tumor xenograft
models.

PMID: 19114304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. J Biol Chem. 2009 Mar 6;284(10):6156-68. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M807713200. Epub 2008
Dec 26.

A chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factor I (COUP-TFI) complex
represses expression of the gene encoding tumor necrosis factor alpha-induced
protein 8 (TNFAIP8).

Zhang LJ(1), Liu X, Gafken PR, Kioussi C, Leid M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Oregon State
University, Corvallis, Oregon 97331, USA.

The orphan nuclear receptor chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription
factor I (COUP-TFI) plays key roles in development and homeostasis. A tandem
affinity purification procedure revealed that COUP-TFI associated with a number
of transcriptional regulatory proteins in HeLa S3 cells, including the nuclear
receptor corepressor (NCoR), TIF1beta/KAP-1, HDAC1, and the SWI/SNF family member
Brahma. The proapoptotic protein DBC1 was also identified in COUP-TFI complexes. 
In vitro experiments revealed that COUP-TFI interacted directly with NCoR but in 
a manner different from that of other nuclear receptors. DBC1 stabilized the
interaction between COUP-TFI and NCoR by interacting directly with both proteins.
The gene encoding the anti-apoptotic protein TNFAIP8 (tumor necrosis factor alpha
(TNFalpha)-induced protein 8) was identified as being repressed by COUP-TFI in a 
manner that required several of the component proteins of the COUP-TFI complex.
Finally, our studies highlight a central role for COUP-TFI in the induction of
the TNFAIP8 promoter by TNFalpha. Together, these studies identify a novel
COUP-TFI complex that functions as a repressor of transcription and may play a
role in the TNFalpha signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC2649093
PMID: 19112178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Mar;29(5):1321-37. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00822-08. Epub 2008 Dec
22.

Acetylation-dependent interaction of SATB1 and CtBP1 mediates transcriptional
repression by SATB1.

Purbey PK(1), Singh S, Notani D, Kumar PP, Limaye AS, Galande S.

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Cell Science, NCCS Complex, Ganeshkhind, Pune 411007,
India.

Special AT-rich binding protein 1 (SATB1) acts as a global regulator of gene
expression by recruiting various corepressor or coactivator complexes, thereby
establishing a unique chromatin structure at its genomic targets in a
context-dependent manner. Although SATB1 acts predominantly as a repressor via
recruitment of histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) complexes, the precise mechanism of 
global repression is not clear. Here we report that SATB1 and C-terminal binding 
protein 1 (CtBP1) form a repressor complex in vivo. The interaction occurs via
the CtBP1 interaction consensus motif PVPLS within the PDZ-like domain of SATB1. 
The acetylation of SATB1 upon LiCl and ionomycin treatments disrupts its
association with CtBP1, resulting in enhanced target gene expression. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis indicated that the occupancy of CtBP1 and HDAC1 is
gradually decreased and the occupancy of PCAF is elevated at the SATB1 binding
sites within the human interleukin-2 and mouse c-Myc promoters. Moreover, gene
expression profiling studies using cells in which expression of SATB1 and CtBP1
was silenced indicated commonly targeted genes that may be coordinately repressed
by the SATB1-CtBP1 complex. Collectively, these results provide a mechanistic
insight into the role of SATB1-CtBP1 interaction in the repression and
derepression of SATB1 target genes during Wnt signaling in T cells.

PMCID: PMC2643834
PMID: 19103759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Jan 30;379(1):160-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.12.043. Epub 2008 Dec 25.

Covalent conjugation of Groucho with SUMO-1 modulates its corepressor activity.

Ahn JW(1), Lee YA, Ahn JH, Choi CY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Republic of 
Korea.

Groucho is a corepressor that forms a macromolecular complex for its corepressor 
activity, in which HDAC1 is an essential component for the modulation of
chromatin structure and transcriptional repression of target genes. Here, we show
that Groucho is covalently conjugated with small ubiquitin-related modifier-1
(SUMO-1) in vitro and in vivo. SUMO conjugations of Groucho occur at four
different lysine residues. Substitutions of all these residues abolished
sumoylation of Groucho and inhibited its corepressor activity. In addition,
Groucho corepressor activity was reduced by inhibition of SUMO-1 conjugation via 
Ubc9 knockdown through expression of short-hairpin RNA against Ubc9. Furthermore,
interactions between Groucho and HDAC1 are enhanced by sumoylation of Groucho,
which is mediated by the SUMO-interaction motif of HDAC1. Taken together, these
findings indicate that Groucho sumoylation increases its corepressor activity by 
enhancing the recruitment of HDAC1 to Groucho corepressor complex.

PMID: 19101520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. BMC Cancer. 2008 Dec 19;8:381. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-8-381.

Class I histone deacetylases 1, 2 and 3 are highly expressed in renal cell
cancer.

Fritzsche FR(1), Weichert W, Röske A, Gekeler V, Beckers T, Stephan C, Jung K,
Scholman K, Denkert C, Dietel M, Kristiansen G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany.
florian.fritzsche@usz.ch

BACKGROUND: Enhanced activity of histone deacetylases (HDAC) is associated with
more aggressive tumour behaviour and tumour progression in various solid tumours.
The over-expression of these proteins and their known functions in malignant
neoplasms has led to the development of HDAC inhibitors (HDI) as new
anti-neoplastic drugs. However, little is known about HDAC expression in renal
cell cancer.
METHODS: We investigated the expression of HDAC 1, 2 and 3 in 106 renal cell
carcinomas and corresponding normal renal tissue by immunohistochemistry on
tissue micro arrays and correlated expression data with clinico-pathological
parameters including patient survival.
RESULTS: Almost 60% of renal cell carcinomas expressed the HDAC isoforms 1 and 2.
In contrast, HDAC 3 was only detected in 13% of all renal tumours, with
particular low expression rates in the clear cell subtype. HDAC 3 was
significantly higher expressed in pT1/2 tumours in comparison to pT3/4 tumours.
Expression of class I HDAC isoforms correlated with each other and with the
proliferative activity of the tumours. We found no prognostic value of the
expression of any of the HDAC isoforms in this tumour entity.
CONCLUSION: Class I HDAC isoforms 1 and 2 are highly expressed in renal cell
cancer, while HDAC 3 shows low, histology dependent expression rates. These
unexpected differences in the expression patterns suggests alternative regulatory
mechanisms of class I HDACs in renal cell cancer and should be taken into account
when trials with isoform selective HDI are being planned. Whether HDAC expression
in renal cancers is predictive of responsiveness for HDI will have to be tested
in further studies.

PMCID: PMC2631013
PMID: 19099586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Genome Biol. 2008;9(12):R182. doi: 10.1186/gb-2008-9-12-r182. Epub 2008 Dec 19.

A genome-wide screen for modifiers of transgene variegation identifies genes with
critical roles in development.

Ashe A(1), Morgan DK, Whitelaw NC, Bruxner TJ, Vickaryous NK, Cox LL, Butterfield
NC, Wicking C, Blewitt ME, Wilkins SJ, Anderson GJ, Cox TC, Whitelaw E.

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetics Laboratory, Queensland Institute of Medical Research, 300 Herston 
Road, Herston, Queensland 4006, Australia. alyson.ashe@qimr.edu.au

BACKGROUND: Some years ago we established an N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea screen for
modifiers of transgene variegation in the mouse and a preliminary description of 
the first six mutant lines, named MommeD1-D6, has been published. We have
reported the underlying genes in three cases: MommeD1 is a mutation in SMC hinge 
domain containing 1 (Smchd1), a novel modifier of epigenetic gene silencing;
MommeD2 is a mutation in DNA methyltransferase 1 (Dnmt1); and MommeD4 is a
mutation in Smarca 5 (Snf2h), a known chromatin remodeler. The identification of 
Dnmt1 and Smarca5 attest to the effectiveness of the screen design.
RESULTS: We have now extended the screen and have identified four new modifiers, 
MommeD7-D10. Here we show that all ten MommeDs link to unique sites in the
genome, that homozygosity for the mutations is associated with severe
developmental abnormalities and that heterozygosity results in phenotypic
abnormalities and reduced reproductive fitness in some cases. In addition, we
have now identified the underlying genes for MommeD5 and MommeD10. MommeD5 is a
mutation in Hdac1, which encodes histone deacetylase 1, and MommeD10 is a
mutation in Baz1b (also known as Williams syndrome transcription factor), which
encodes a transcription factor containing a PHD-type zinc finger and a
bromodomain. We show that reduction in the level of Baz1b in the mouse results in
craniofacial features reminiscent of Williams syndrome.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate the importance of dosage-dependent
epigenetic reprogramming in the development of the embryo and the power of the
screen to provide mouse models to study this process.

PMCID: PMC2646286
PMID: 19099580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. ChemMedChem. 2009 Feb;4(2):283-90. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.200800196.

Pyridylalanine-containing hydroxamic acids as selective HDAC6 inhibitors.

Schäfer S(1), Saunders L, Schlimme S, Valkov V, Wagner JM, Kratz F, Sippl W,
Verdin E, Jung M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg,
Germany.

We synthesized hydroxamic acids with a pyridylalanine substructure and identified
them as selective inhibitors of human recombinant HDAC6. The in vitro selectivity
was up to 25-fold for HDAC6 over HDAC1 and was confirmed by Western blotting to
assess tubulin versus histone acetylation in cancer cells. Docking studies with
an HDAC6 homology model suggested that the hydrophobic cap group of the
inhibitors interacts with aromatic residues that form a sub-pocket near the
entrance of the substrate binding channel. The HDAC6-selective compounds have
less cytotoxicity toward cancer cells than do pan-HDAC inhibitors. The
synergistic antiproliferative activity we showed with the proteasome inhibitor
bortezomib suggests the potential for combination anticancer therapy with less
general toxicity.

PMID: 19090524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2009 Jan 15;19(2):336-40. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2008.11.081. 
Epub 2008 Nov 27.

Sulfamides as novel histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Wahhab A(1), Smil D, Ajamian A, Allan M, Chantigny Y, Therrien E, Nguyen N, Manku
S, Leit S, Rahil J, Petschner AJ, Lu AH, Nicolescu A, Lefebvre S, Montcalm S,
Fournel M, Yan TP, Li Z, Besterman JM, Déziel R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, MethylGene Inc., 7220 rue
Frederick-Banting, Montreal, Que., Canada H4S 2A1. wahhaba@methylgene.com

The sulfamide moiety has been utilized to design novel HDAC inhibitors. The
potency and selectivity of these inhibitors were influenced both by the nature of
the scaffold, and the capping group. Linear long-chain-based analogs were
primarily HDAC6-selective, while analogs based on the lysine scaffold resulted in
potent HDAC1 and HDAC6 inhibitors.

PMID: 19084395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Neuron. 2008 Dec 10;60(5):803-17. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.10.015.

Deregulation of HDAC1 by p25/Cdk5 in neurotoxicity.

Kim D(1), Frank CL, Dobbin MM, Tsunemoto RK, Tu W, Peng PL, Guan JS, Lee BH, Moy 
LY, Giusti P, Broodie N, Mazitschek R, Delalle I, Haggarty SJ, Neve RL, Lu Y,
Tsai LH.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Picower Institute for Learning and Memory,
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Comment in
    Neuron. 2008 Dec 10;60(5):731-2.

Aberrant cell-cycle activity and DNA damage are emerging as important
pathological components in various neurodegenerative conditions. However, their
underlying mechanisms are poorly understood. Here, we show that deregulation of
histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) activity by p25/Cdk5 induces aberrant cell-cycle
activity and double-strand DNA breaks leading to neurotoxicity. In a transgenic
model for neurodegeneration, p25/Cdk5 activity elicited cell-cycle activity and
double-strand DNA breaks that preceded neuronal death. Inhibition of HDAC1
activity by p25/Cdk5 was identified as an underlying mechanism for these events, 
and HDAC1 gain of function provided potent protection against DNA damage and
neurotoxicity in cultured neurons and an in vivo model for ischemia. Our findings
outline a pathological signaling pathway illustrating the importance of
maintaining HDAC1 activity in the adult neuron. This pathway constitutes a
molecular link between aberrant cell-cycle activity and DNA damage and is a
potential target for therapeutics against diseases and conditions involving
neuronal death.

PMCID: PMC2912147
PMID: 19081376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Neuron. 2008 Dec 10;60(5):775-87. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.09.040.

A calcium-dependent switch in a CREST-BRG1 complex regulates activity-dependent
gene expression.

Qiu Z(1), Ghosh A.

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiology Section, Division of Biological Sciences, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0366, USA.

CREST plays a critical role in activity-dependent development, but its mechanism 
of action is not well understood. Here, we show that a CREST-BRG1 complex
regulates promoter activation by orchestrating a calcium-dependent release of a
repressor complex and a recruitment of an activator complex. In resting neurons, 
transcription of the c-fos promoter is inhibited by BRG1-dependent recruitment of
a phospho-Rb-HDAC repressor complex. Upon calcium influx, Rb becomes
dephosphorylated at serine 795 by calcineurin, which leads to release of the
repressor complex. At the same time, there is increased recruitment of CBP to the
promoter by a CREST-dependent mechanism, which leads to transcriptional
activation. The CREST-BRG1 also binds to the NR2B promoter, and
activity-dependent induction of NR2B expression involves a release of HDAC1 and
recruitment of CBP, suggesting that this mechanism may be generally involved in
regulating calcium-dependent transcription of neuronal genes.

PMCID: PMC2615455
PMID: 19081374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Cancer Res. 2008 Dec 15;68(24):10290-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2038.

A transcription-independent function of FOXO1 in inhibition of
androgen-independent activation of the androgen receptor in prostate cancer
cells.

Liu P(1), Li S, Gan L, Kao TP, Huang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Masonic Cancer Center,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA.

Increasing evidence suggests that aberrant activation of the androgen receptor
(AR) plays a pivotal role in the development and progression of androgen
depletion-independent prostate cancer (PCa) after androgen deprivation therapy.
Here, we show that loss of the PTEN tumor suppressor gene is associated with
hyperactivation of the AR in human PCa cell lines. This effect is mediated
primarily by its downstream effector FOXO1. In addition to the inhibition of
androgenic activation of the AR, forced expression of FOXO1 in PTEN-negative PCa 
cells also inhibits androgen-independent activation of the AR in a manner
independent of FOXO1 transcriptional function. In contrast, silencing of FOXO1 in
PTEN-positive cells not only increases the basal activity of the AR in the
absence of androgens, it also markedly sensitizes the AR activation by low levels
of androgens or nonandrogenic factors such as interleukin-6. FOXO1-mediated
inhibition of the AR is partially attenuated by the histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitor trichostatin A. Accordingly, FOXO1 interacts with HDAC3 as shown by
coimmunoprecipitation assays, and cotransfection of cells with FOXO1 and HDAC3,
but not HDAC1 and HDAC2, results in a greater inhibition of AR activity than in
cells transfected with FOXO1 or HDAC3 individually. Together, our findings define
a novel corepressor function of FOXO1 in inhibition of androgen-independent
activation of the AR.

PMID: 19074897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Dec 23;105(51):20488-93. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0810879105. Epub 2008 Dec 10.

Nuclear retention of ICP0 in cells exposed to HDAC inhibitor or transfected with 
DNA before infection with herpes simplex virus 1.

Kalamvoki M(1), Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)Marjorie B. Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, The University of Chicago, 910
East 58th Street, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

The alpha (immediate early) protein ICP0 of herpes simplex virus 1 enhances the
expression of genes introduced by infection or transfection. Early in infection
it performs two key functions: It blocks the silencing of the viral DNA by
cellular proteins and it blocks the IFN stimulated host response to infection.
Between 5 and 9 h after infection, ICP0 is translocated to the cytoplasm but
remains dynamically associated with proteasomes. In this report we show that in
permissive cells that are poor expressors of transfected genes (HEp-2, U2OS,
etc.), ICP0 is retained in the nucleus if the cells had been transfected with DNA
and then infected. The retention is DNA dose- and size-dependent but not DNA
type-dependent. Retention of ICP0 is also a consequence of infection with
wild-type virus concomitant with exposure of cells to sodium butyrate. ICP0 is
not retained in transfected/infected cells that efficiently express transfected
genes (HEK293, rabbit skin cells). The retention of ICP0 in the nucleus is
concordant with failure to degrade PML and disperse ND10 structures, and delays
in the transition to post alpha genes expression, translocation of components of 
the CoREST/REST/HDAC1 complex and histone relocation in the infected cell. The
data suggest that (i) retention of ICP0 is linked to its function to remodel
acetylated DNA but not DNA in heterochromatin. This function is independent of
response elements embedded in the DNA and (ii) transfection-resistant cells do
take up DNA but process it differently than cells that readily express
transfected genes.

PMCID: PMC2629265
PMID: 19073918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. J Virol. 2009 Mar;83(5):2154-62. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02115-08. Epub 2008 Dec 10.

Epstein-Barr virus episome stability is coupled to a delay in replication timing.

Zhou J(1), Snyder AR, Lieberman PM.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The temporal regulation of DNA replication is thought to be important for
chromosome organization and genome stability. We show here that Epstein-Barr
virus (EBV) genomes replicate in mid- to late S phase and that agents that
accelerate replication timing of EBV reduce viral genome stability. Hydroxyurea
(HU) treatment, which is known to eliminate EBV episomes, shifted EBV replication
to earlier times in the cell cycle. HU treatment correlated with hyperacetylation
of histone H3 and loss of telomere repeat factor 2 (TRF2) binding at the EBV
origin of plasmid replication (OriP). Deletion of TRF2 binding sites within OriP 
or short hairpin RNA depletion of TRF2 advanced the replication timing of
OriP-containing plasmids. Inhibitors of class I histone deacetylases (HDACs)
increased histone acetylation at OriP, advanced the replication timing of EBV,
and reduced EBV genome copy number. We also show that HDAC1 and -2 form a stable 
complex with TRF2 at OriP and that HU treatment inhibits HDAC activity. We
propose that the TRF2-HDAC complex enhances EBV episome stability by providing a 
checkpoint that delays replication initiation at OriP.

PMCID: PMC2643711
PMID: 19073720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Jan 30;379(1):1-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.11.135. Epub 2008 Dec 12.

Inactivation of CREB mediated gene transcription by HDAC8 bound protein
phosphatase.

Gao J(1), Siddoway B, Huang Q, Xia H.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Center, LSU Health Science Center, 2020 Gravier Street, Suite D, 
New Orleans, LA 70112, USA.

CREB activation via phosphorylation at serine 133 and resulting CREB mediated
gene expression is a critical event which can have a significant effect on many
cellular processes, including cell survival and plasticity. CREB can be activated
by many kinases, for example, it can be phosphorylated by PKA, MAPK, and CaMKIV. 
The various signaling pathways leading to CREB activation have been extensively
studied. On the other hand, CREB is inactivated by PP1 through dephosphorylation 
at S133 and not much attention has been paid to this aspect of the signaling
pathway. It was shown recently that PP1 can be targeted to CREB, for efficient
dephosphorylation, through PP1 binding protein HDAC1. In this study, we found
that another class-I HDAC family protein, HDAC8, localized in the nucleus of
HEK293 cells and also bound to both CREB and PP1. Expression of recombinant HDAC8
results in decreased CREB activation and CREB mediated gene transcription in
response to forskolin application. Our study thus elucidated that more than one
class-I HDAC family members can regulate the duration of CREB mediated gene
transcription.

PMID: 19070599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. J Hepatol. 2009 Feb;50(2):377-87. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2008.10.019. Epub 2008 Nov 
28.

Epigenetic modification induced by hepatitis B virus X protein via interaction
with de novo DNA methyltransferase DNMT3A.

Zheng DL(1), Zhang L, Cheng N, Xu X, Deng Q, Teng XM, Wang KS, Zhang X, Huang J, 
Han ZG.

Author information: 
(1)National Human Genome Center of Rui-Jin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, 197 Rui-Jin Road II, Shanghai 200025, China.

Comment in
    J Hepatol. 2009 Feb;50(2):252-5.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: The hepatitis B virus X protein (HBx) has been implicated as a
potential trigger of the epigenetic deregulation of some genes, but the
underlying mechanisms remain unknown. The aim of this study was to identify
underlying mechanisms involved in HBx-mediated epigenetic modification.
METHODS: Interactions between HBx and DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) or histone
deacetylase-1 (HDAC1) were assessed by co-immunoprecipitation. DNA methylation of
gene promoters was detected by bisulfite sequencing, and HBx-mediated protein
binding to gene regulatory elements was evaluated by chromatin
immunoprecipitation. Target gene transcriptional activity was measured by
real-time polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: HBx can interact directly with DNMT3A and HDAC1. HBx recruited DNMT3A to
the regulatory promoters of interleukin-4 receptor and metallothionein-1F and
subsequently silenced their transcription via de novo DNA methylation. By
contrast, the transcription of CDH6 and IGFBP3 was triggered by HBx through the
deprivation of DNMT3A from their promoters. Transcriptional levels of target
genes in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) specimens were strongly correlated with
the occurrence of HBx.
CONCLUSIONS: The interaction of HBx and DNMT3A facilitates cellular epigenetic
modification (via regional hypermethylation or hypomethylation) at distinct
genomic loci, providing an alternative mechanism within HBx-mediated
transcriptional regulation, and a profound understanding of hepatitis and HCC
pathogenesis.

PMID: 19070387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Glia. 2009 Jul;57(9):989-99. doi: 10.1002/glia.20823.

Loss of NECL1, a novel tumor suppressor, can be restored in glioma by HDAC
inhibitor-Trichostatin A through Sp1 binding site.

Gao J(1), Chen T, Liu J, Liu W, Hu G, Guo X, Yin B, Gong Y, Zhao J, Qiang B, Yuan
J, Peng X.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
National Human Genome Center, Beijing 100005, China.

Nectin-like molecule 1 (NECL1)/CADM3/IGSF4B/TSLL1/SynCAM3 is a neural
tissue-specific immunoglobulin-like cell-cell adhesion molecule downregulated at 
the mRNA level in 12 human glioma cell lines. Here we found that the expression
of NECL1 was lost in six glioma cell lines and 15 primary glioma tissues at both 
RNA and protein levels. Re-expression of NECL1 into glioma cell line U251 would
repress cell proliferation in vitro by inducing cell cycle arrest. And also NECL1
could decrease the growth rate of tumors in nude mice in vivo. To further
investigate the mechanism why NECL1 was silenced in glioma, the basic promoter
region located at -271 to +81 in NECL1 genomic sequence was determined. DNA
bisulfite sequencing was performed to study the methylation status of CpG islands
in NECL1 promoter; however, no hypermethylated CpG site was found. Additionally, 
the activity of histone deacetylase (HDACs) in glioma was higher than that in
normal brain tissues, and the expression of NECL1 in glioma cell lines could be
reactivated by HDACs inhibitor-Trichostatin A (TSA). So the loss of NECL1 in
glioma was at least partly caused by histone deacetylation. Luciferase reporter
assays, chromatin immunoprecipitation and co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) assays
indicated that Sp1 played an important role in this process by binding to either 
HDAC1 in untreated glioma cells or p300/CBP in TSA treated cells. Our finding
suggests that NECL1 may act as a tumor suppressor in glioma and loss of it in
glioma may be caused by histone deacetylation.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19062177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Feb;37(2):493-505. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn961. Epub 2008 Dec
4.

UHRF1 binds G9a and participates in p21 transcriptional regulation in mammalian
cells.

Kim JK(1), Estève PO, Jacobsen SE, Pradhan S.

Author information: 
(1)New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA 01938-2723, USA.

UHRF1 (ubiquitin-like, containing PHD and RING finger domains 1) is a
multi-domain protein associated with cellular proliferation and epigenetic
regulation. The UHRF1 binds to methylated CpG dinucleotides and recruits
transcriptional repressors DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) and histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) through its distinct domains. However, the molecular basis 
of UHRF1-mediated transcriptional regulation via chromatin modifications is yet
to be fully understood. Here we show that UHRF1 binds histone lysine
methyltransferase G9a, and both are co-localized in the nucleus in a
cell-cycle-dependent manner. Concurrent with the cell-cycle progression, gradual 
deposition of UHRF1 and G9a was observed, which mirrored H3K9me2 accumulation on 
chromatin. Murine Uhrf1-null embryonic stem (ES) cells displayed a reduced amount
of G9a and H3K9me2 on chromatin. UHRF1 recruited and cooperated with G9a to
inhibit the p21 promoter activity, which correlated with the elevated p21 protein
level in both human UHRF1 siRNA-transfected HeLa cells and murine Uhrf1-null ES
cells. Furthermore, endogenous p21 promoter remained bound to UHRF1, G9a, DNMT1
and HDAC1, and knockdown of UHRF1 impaired the association of all three chromatin
modifiers with the promoter. Thus, our results suggest that UHRF1 may serve as a 
focal point of transcriptional regulation mediated by G9a and other chromatin
modification enzymes.

PMCID: PMC2632929
PMID: 19056828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Leuk Lymphoma. 2008 Dec;49(12):2321-7. doi: 10.1080/10428190802527699.

Enhanced histone deacetylase enzyme activity in primary myelofibrosis.

Wang JC(1), Chen C, Dumlao T, Naik S, Chang T, Xiao YY, Sominsky I, Burton J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Brookdale University Hospital Medical Center,
Brooklyn, New York 112112, USA. jcwang5@aol.com

Comment in
    Leuk Lymphoma. 2008 Dec;49(12):2231-2.

We measured histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity in 17 patients with primary
myelofibrosis (PMF); 19 with other myeloproliferative neoplasm (MPN) and 16
normal volunteers. Significantly elevated HDAC levels were shown in patients with
PMF compared with other MPN patients and normal volunteers (p<0.05). Sixteen
patients with PMF were also studied for correlation between JAK2 mutation status 
and HDAC levels; no significant correlation was found. We further correlated HDAC
levels with clinical features in PMF: there was no correlation with WBC, platelet
counts, Hb levels or degree of bone marrow fibrosis, but HDAC levels were
correlated to the degree of splenomegaly. This suggests that HDAC may be
recruited as essential thrombocythemia or polycythemia vera progresses into
myelofibrosis or PMF progresses into more advanced stage. We then used the
qRT-PCR cycle threshold (CT) method to study which HDACs were elevated in PMF.
The results showed that, in general, Class 1 HDACs were elevated (HDAC1,2,8)
except HDAC3, Class II HDACs were depressed (HDAC4,5) except HDAC6 and 10, and
Class III HDACs were generally elevated. The current study may form the basis for
using HDAC inhibitor in the treatment of patients with PMF and may implicate a
possible role of HDAC in the association of pathogenesis of PMF.

PMID: 19052980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Feb;1793(2):368-77. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2008.10.013.
Epub 2008 Nov 6.

Transcriptional regulation of hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha by HIPK2 suggests a
novel mechanism to restrain tumor growth.

Nardinocchi L(1), Puca R, Guidolin D, Belloni AS, Bossi G, Michiels C, Sacchi A, 
Onisto M, D'Orazi G.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncogenesis Laboratory, Regina Elena Cancer Institute, (00158) Rome,
Italy.

HIPK2 has been implicated in restraining tumor progression by more than one
mechanism, involving both its catalytic and transcriptional co-repressor
functions. Starting from the finding that HIPK2 knockdown by RNA-interference
(HIPK2i) induced significant up-regulation of HIF-1alpha mRNA and of its target
VEGF in tumor cells, we evaluated the role of HIPK2 in transcriptional regulation
of HIF-1alpha. We found that HIPK2 overexpression downmodulated both HIF-1alpha
reporter activity and mRNA levels and showed that HIPK2 was bound in vivo to the 
HIF-1alpha promoter likely in a multiprotein co-repressor complex with histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1). Thus, the HIF-1alpha promoter was strongly acetylated
following HIPK2 knockdown. The HIF-1alpha-dependent VEGF transcription was
evaluated by co-transfection of a dominant negative (DN) construct of HIF-1alpha 
that inhibited VEGF reporter activity induced by HIPK2 knockdown. HIF-1alpha and 
VEGF up-regulation in HIPK2i cells correlated with increased vascularity of tumor
xenografts in vivo and tube formation in HUVEC in vitro. These findings provide
the first evidence of HIPK2-mediated transcriptional regulation of HIF-1alpha
that might play a critical role in VEGF expression.

PMID: 19046997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Stem Cells. 2009 Feb;27(2):375-82. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2008-0546.

Epigenetic reprogramming of IGF1 and leptin genes by serum deprivation in
multipotential mesenchymal stromal cells.

Sanchez C(1), Oskowitz A, Pochampally RR.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Gene Therapy, Tulane University Health Sciences Center, New
Orleans, Louisiana 70112, USA.

Recent studies on the therapeutic effect of multipotential mesenchymal stem cells
(MSCs) in various models of injury have shown that paracrine factors secreted by 
MSCs are responsible for tissue repair with very little engraftment. In this
study we tested the hypothesis that MSCs under stress undergo epigenetic
modifications that direct secretion of paracrine factors responsible for tissue
repair. Microarray assays of MSCs that had been deprived of serum (SD-MSCs), to
induce stress, demonstrated an increase in the expression of several angiogenic, 
prosurvival, and antiapoptotic factors, including insulin-like growth factor 1
(IGF1) and leptin. Real-time polymerase chain reaction assays demonstrated a
>200-fold increase in the expression of IGF1 and leptin in SD-MSCs. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation of SD-MSCs revealed histone tail modifications consistent
with transcriptional activation of IGF1 and leptin promoters in a reversible
manner. To identify the functional significance of the epigenetic changes in
stressed MSCs, we tested the prosurvival properties of SD-MSCs and the ability of
conditioned medium from SD-MSCs to enhance survival of apoptotic cancer cells.
First, we showed that SD-MSCs are more resistant to oxidative damage than MSCs
using alkaline comet assays. Next, we demonstrated that conditioned medium from
SD-MSCs decreased staurosporin-induced cell death in the KHOS osteosarcoma cell
line, and that this effect was partially reversed by immunodepletion of IGF1 or
leptin from the conditioned medium. In conclusion, we demonstrate that serum
deprivation induces epigenetic changes in MSCs to upregulate the expression of
the proangiogenic and antiapoptotic factors IGF1 and leptin.

PMID: 19038795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. EMBO Rep. 2009 Jan;10(1):79-86. doi: 10.1038/embor.2008.207. Epub 2008 Nov 21.

SHARP1/DEC2 inhibits adipogenic differentiation by regulating the activity of
C/EBP.

Gulbagci NT(1), Li L, Ling B, Gopinadhan S, Walsh M, Rossner M, Nave KA, Taneja
R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, New York 10029, USA.

SHARP1, a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, is expressed in many cell 
types; however, the mechanisms by which it regulates cellular differentiation
remain largely unknown. Here, we show that SHARP1 negatively regulates
adipogenesis. Although expression of the early marker CCAAT/enhancer binding
protein beta (C/EBPbeta) is not altered, its crucial downstream targets
C/EBPalpha and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) are
downregulated by SHARP1. Protein interaction studies confirm that SHARP1
interacts with and inhibits the transcriptional activity of both C/EBPbeta and
C/EBPalpha, and enhances the association of C/EBPbeta with histone deacetylase 1 
(HDAC1). Consistently, in SHARP1-expressing cells, HDAC1 and the histone
methyltransferase G9a are retained at the C/EBP regulatory sites on the
C/EBPalpha and PPARgamma2 promoters during differentiation, resulting in
inhibition of their expression. Interestingly, treatment with troglitazone
results in displacement of HDAC1 and G9a, and rescues the differentiation defect 
of SHARP1-overexpressing cells. Our data indicate that SHARP1 inhibits
adipogenesis through the regulation of C/EBP activity, which is essential for
PPARgamma-ligand-dependent displacement of co-repressors from adipogenic
promoters.

PMCID: PMC2613201
PMID: 19029947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Mol Pharmacol. 2009 Feb;75(2):342-54. doi: 10.1124/mol.108.051763. Epub 2008 Nov 
24.

The reelin and GAD67 promoters are activated by epigenetic drugs that facilitate 
the disruption of local repressor complexes.

Kundakovic M(1), Chen Y, Guidotti A, Grayson DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, The Psychiatric Institute, College of Medicine,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.

The epigenetic down-regulation of genes is emerging as a possible underlying
mechanism of the GABAergic neuron dysfunction in schizophrenia. For example,
evidence has been presented to show that the promoters associated with reelin and
GAD67 are down-regulated as a consequence of DNA methyltransferase
(DNMT)-mediated hypermethylation. Using neuronal progenitor cells to study this
regulation, we have previously demonstrated that DNMT inhibitors coordinately
increase reelin and GAD67 mRNAs. Here, we report that another group of epigenetic
drugs, histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors, activate these two genes with dose 
and time dependence comparable with that of DNMT inhibitors. In parallel, both
groups of drugs decrease DNMT1, DNMT3A, and DNMT3B protein levels and reduce DNMT
enzyme activity. Furthermore, induction of the reelin and GAD67 mRNAs is
accompanied by the dissociation of repressor complexes containing all three
DNMTs, MeCP2, and HDAC1 from the corresponding promoters and by increased local
histone acetylation. Our data imply that drug-induced promoter demethylation is
relevant for maximal activation of reelin and GAD67 transcription. The results
suggest that HDAC and DNMT inhibitors activate reelin and GAD67 expression
through similar mechanisms. Both classes of drugs attenuate, directly or
indirectly, the enzymatic and transcriptional repressor activities of DNMTs and
HDACs. These data provide a mechanistic rationale for the use of epigenetic
drugs, individually or in combination, as a potential novel therapeutic strategy 
to alleviate deficits associated with schizophrenia.

PMCID: PMC2684898
PMID: 19029285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jan 16;284(3):1343-52. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M806075200. Epub 2008
Nov 17.

Autoacetylation regulates P/CAF nuclear localization.

Blanco-García N(1), Asensio-Juan E, de la Cruz X, Martínez-Balbás MA.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología Molecular de Barcelona, Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas, Baldiri i Reixac 15-21, Parc Cientific de Barcelona,
E-08028 Barcelona, Spain.

Acetylation is a posttranslational modification that alters the biological
activities of proteins by affecting their association with other proteins or DNA,
their catalytic activities, or their subcellular distribution. The
acetyltransferase P/CAF is autoacetylated and acetylated by p300 in vivo. P/CAF
autoacetylation is an intramolecular or intermolecular event. Intramolecular
acetylation targets five lysines within the nuclear localization signal at the
P/CAF C terminus. We analyzed how the subcellular distribution of P/CAF is
regulated by intramolecular autoacetylation and found that a P/CAF mutant lacking
histone acetyltransferase activity accumulated primarily in the cytoplasm. This
cytoplasmic fraction of P/CAF is enriched for nonautoacetylated P/CAF. In
addition, P/CAF deacetylation by HDAC3 and in a minor degree by HDAC1, HDAC2, or 
HDAC4 leads to cytoplasmic accumulation of P/CAF. Importantly, our data show that
P/CAF accumulates in the cytoplasm during apoptosis. These results reveal the
molecular mechanism of autoacetylation control of P/CAF nuclear translocation and
suggest a novel pathway by which P/CAF activity is controlled in vivo.

PMID: 19015268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2008 Dec;15(12):1246-54. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1516. Epub 2008
Nov 16.

Bach1 inhibits oxidative stress-induced cellular senescence by impeding p53
function on chromatin.

Dohi Y(1), Ikura T, Hoshikawa Y, Katoh Y, Ota K, Nakanome A, Muto A, Omura S,
Ohta T, Ito A, Yoshida M, Noda T, Igarashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Seiryo-machi 2-1, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

Cellular senescence is one of the key strategies to suppress expansion of cells
with mutations. Senescence is induced in response to genotoxic and oxidative
stress. Here we show that the transcription factor Bach1 (BTB and CNC homology 1,
basic leucine zipper transcription factor 1), which inhibits oxidative
stress-inducible genes, is a crucial negative regulator of oxidative
stress-induced cellular senescence. Bach1-deficient murine embryonic fibroblasts 
showed a propensity to undergo more rapid and profound p53-dependent premature
senescence than control wild-type cells in response to oxidative stress. Bach1
formed a complex that contained p53, histone deacetylase 1 and nuclear
co-repressor N-coR. Bach1 was recruited to a subset of p53 target genes and
contributed to impeding p53 action by promoting histone deacetylation. Because
Bach1 is regulated by oxidative stress and heme, our data show that Bach1
connects oxygen metabolism and cellular senescence as a negative regulator of
p53.

PMID: 19011633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. J Med Chem. 2008 Dec 11;51(23):7417-27. doi: 10.1021/jm8005355.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors through click chemistry.

Shen J(1), Woodward R, Kedenburg JP, Liu X, Chen M, Fang L, Sun D, Wang PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The Ohio State University, 876 Biological Sciences
Building, 484 West 12th Avenue, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) are a relatively new class of chemotherapy
agents. Herein, we report a click-chemistry based approach to the synthesis of
HDACi. Fourteen agents were synthesized from the combination of two alkyne and
seven azido precursors. The inhibition of HDAC1 and HDAC8 was then determined by 
in vitro enzymatic assays, after which the cytotoxicity was evaluated in the NCI 
human cancer cell line screen. A lead compound 5 g (NSC746457) was discovered
that inhibited HDAC1 at an IC(50) value of 104 +/- 30 nM and proved quite potent 
in the cancer cell line screen with GI(50) values ranging from 3.92 microM to 10 
nM. Thus, this click HDACi design has provided a new chemical scaffold that has
not only revealed a lead compound, but one which is easily amendable to further
structural modifications given the modular nature of this approach.

PMCID: PMC3441833
PMID: 19007204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jan 9;284(2):1267-78. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M801088200. Epub 2008
Nov 3.

Tumor suppressor SMAR1 represses IkappaBalpha expression and inhibits p65
transactivation through matrix attachment regions.

Singh K(1), Sinha S, Malonia SK, Bist P, Tergaonkar V, Chattopadhyay S.

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Cell Science, Pune University Campus, Ganeshkhind, Pune
411007, Maharastra, India.

Aberrant NF-kappaB activity promotes tumorigenesis. However, NF-kappaB also
inhibits tumor growth where tumor suppressor pathways remain unaltered. Thus, its
role in tumorigenesis depends upon the function of other cellular factors. Tumor 
suppressor SMAR1 down-modulated in high grade breast cancers is regulated by p53 
and is reported to interact and stabilize p53. Because both SMAR1 and NF-kappaB
are involved in tumorigenesis, we investigated the effect of SMAR1 upon NF-kappaB
activity. We show that SMAR1 induction by doxorubicin or overexpression produces 
functional NF-kappaB complexes that are competent for binding to NF-kappaB
consensus sequence. However, SMAR1 induced p65-p50 complex is phosphorylation-
and transactivation-deficient. Induction of functional NF-kappaB complexes stems 
from down-regulation of IkappaBalpha transcription through direct binding of
SMAR1 to the matrix attachment region site present in IkappaBalpha promoter and
recruitment of corepressor complex. Real time PCR array for NF-kappaB target
genes revealed that SMAR1 down-regulates a subset of NF-kappaB target genes that 
are involved in tumorigenesis. We also show that SMAR1 inhibits tumor necrosis
factor alpha-induced induction of NF-kappaB suggesting that activation of
NF-kappaB by SMAR1 is independent and different from classical pathway. Thus, for
the first time we report that a tumor suppressor protein SMAR1 can modulate
NF-kappaB transactivation and inhibit tumorigenesis by regulating NF-kappaB
target genes.

PMID: 18981184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Dec 26;377(4):1079-84. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.10.090. Epub 2008 Oct 31.

The class I histone deacetylases of the platyhelminth parasite Schistosoma
mansoni.

Oger F(1), Dubois F, Caby S, Noël C, Cornette J, Bertin B, Capron M, Pierce RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U 547, Lille, France.

Histone deacetylases (HDAC) form a conserved enzyme family that control gene
expression via the removal of acetyl residues from histones and other proteins
and are under increasing investigation as therapeutic targets, notably in cancer 
and parasitic diseases. To investigate the conservation of these enzymes in the
platyhelminth parasite Schistosoma mansoni, we cloned and characterized three
class I HDACs, orthologues of mammalian HDAC1, 3 and 8, and confirmed their
identities by phylogenetic analysis. The identification of an HDAC8 orthologue
showed that it is not vertebrate-specific as previously thought and insertions in
its catalytic domain suggest specific enzymatic properties. SmHDAC1, 3, and 8
mRNAs are expressed at all schistosome life-cycle stages. SmHDAC1 repressed
transcriptional activity in a mammalian cell line and this activity was dependent
on its catalytic activity since transcription was partially restored by treatment
with trichostatin A and a catalytic site mutant failed to repress transcription.

PMID: 18977200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Cancer Res. 2008 Nov 1;68(21):8770-8. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-1912.

Loss of NKX3.1 favors vascular endothelial growth factor-C expression in prostate
cancer.

Zhang H(1), Muders MH, Li J, Rinaldo F, Tindall DJ, Datta K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urologic Research, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo
Clinic Cancer Center, Mayo Clinic Foundation, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

Decreased levels of the prostate-specific homeobox protein NKX3.1 are correlated 
with hormone-refractory and metastatic prostate cancer. Thus, it is compelling to
define the NKX3.1-regulated genes that may be important for the progression of
the advanced stage of the disease. In this study, we showed that vascular
endothelial growth factor-C (VEGF-C) is one such target gene of NKX3.1. NKX3.1
inhibited VEGF-C expression in prostate cancer, and the loss of NKX3.1 led to
increased VEGF-C expression. Histone deacetylase 1 acted as a corepressor of
VEGF-C expression along with NKX3.1. Activated RalA acted in synergy with the
loss of NKX3.1 for VEGF-C transcription. Patients with deletions at chromosome
8p21.1-p21.2 as a sole deletion developed lymph node metastasis. Interestingly,
the higher expression of VEGF-C in prostate cancer is also correlated with lymph 
node metastasis. Therefore, regulation of VEGF-C expression by NKX3.1 provides a 
possible mechanism by which the loss of NKX3.1 protein level leads to
lymphangiogenesis in the late stages of advanced prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC2674365
PMID: 18974119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. J Biol Chem. 2008 Dec 19;283(51):35402-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M807045200. Epub 2008 
Oct 24.

Pimelic diphenylamide 106 is a slow, tight-binding inhibitor of class I histone
deacetylases.

Chou CJ(1), Herman D, Gottesfeld JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla,
California 92037, USA.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors, including various benzamides and
hydroxamates, are currently in clinical development for a broad range of human
diseases, including cancer and neurodegenerative diseases. We recently reported
the identification of a family of benzamide-type HDAC inhibitors that are
relatively non-toxic compared with the hydroxamates. Members of this class of
compounds have shown efficacy in cell-based and mouse models for the
neurodegenerative diseases Friedreich ataxia and Huntington disease. Considerable
differences in IC(50) values for the various HDAC enzymes have been reported for 
many of the HDAC inhibitors, leading to confusion as to the HDAC isotype
specificities of these compounds. Here we show that a benzamide HDAC inhibitor, a
pimelic diphenylamide (106), is a class I HDAC inhibitor, demonstrating no
activity against class II HDACs. 106 is a slow, tight-binding inhibitor of HDACs 
1, 2, and 3, although inhibition for these enzymes occurs through different
mechanisms. Inhibitor 106 also has preference toward HDAC3 with K(i) of
approximately 14 nm, 15 times lower than the K(i) for HDAC1. In comparison, the
hydroxamate suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid does not discriminate between these
enzymes and exhibits a fast-on/fast-off inhibitory mechanism. These observations 
may explain a paradox involving the relative activities of pimelic diphenylamides
versus hydroxamates as gene activators.

PMCID: PMC2602898
PMID: 18953021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2008 Dec 1;18(23):6104-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2008.10.052. 
Epub 2008 Oct 14.

SAR profiles of spirocyclic nicotinamide derived selective HDAC1/HDAC2 inhibitors
(SHI-1:2).

Methot JL(1), Hamblett CL, Mampreian DM, Jung J, Harsch A, Szewczak AA, Dahlberg 
WK, Middleton RE, Hughes B, Fleming JC, Wang H, Kral AM, Ozerova N, Cruz JC,
Haines B, Chenard M, Kenific CM, Secrist JP, Miller TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Drug Design and Optimization, Merck Research Laboratories, 33
Avenue Louis Pasteur, Boston, MA 02115, USA. joey_methot@merck.com

A potent family of spirocyclic nicotinyl aminobenzamide selective HDAC1/HDAC2
inhibitors (SHI-1:2) is profiled. The incorporation of a biaryl zinc-binding
motif into a nicotinyl scaffold resulted in enhanced potency and selectivity
versus HDAC3, but also imparted hERG activity. It was discovered that increasing 
polar surface area about the spirocycle attenuates this liability. Compound 12
induced a 4-fold increase in acetylated histone H2B in an HCT-116 xenograft model
study with acute exposure, and inhibited tumor growth in a 21-day efficacy study 
with qd dosing.

PMID: 18951790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Brain Res. 2008 Dec 30;1246:1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.09.083. Epub 2008 
Oct 11.

Effects of trichostatin A on neuronal mu-opioid receptor gene expression.

Lin YC(1), Flock KE, Cook RJ, Hunkele AJ, Loh HH, Ko JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Seton Hall University, 400 South Orange
Ave., South Orange, NJ 07079, USA.

In this study, we determined the effects of a histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitor, trichostatin A (TSA), on neuronal mu-opioid receptor (MOR) gene
expression using human neuronal NMB cells, endogenously expressing MOR.
Recruitment of two classes of HDAC, HDAC1 and HDAC2, to MOR promoter region in
situ was detected via chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis with NMB
cells. Functional analysis using the luciferase reporter gene system showed that 
TSA induced an approximately 3-fold increase of the promoter activity as compared
to the vehicle treated group. Mutation analysis demonstrated that TSA response
was mediated by both dsDNA (Sp1/Sp3 binding site) and ssDNA (PolyC binding
protein1, PCBP, binding site) elements located in mouse MOR proximal core
promoter region, further suggesting the functional importance of this
cis-element, which shows high sequence homology between human and mouse MOR
genes. ChIP analysis further suggested that TSA enhanced the recruitment of
Sp1/Sp3 and PCBP to the promoter region, whereas no significant changes of total 
proteins were observed in response to TSA using Western blot analysis. Moreover, 
confocal images showed TSA-induced nuclear hot spots of endogenous PCBP in
neuronal cells, whereas no obvious nuclear PCBP hotspot was observed in vehicle
treated cells. Taken together, these results suggested that TSA enhanced neuronal
MOR gene expression at the transcriptional level. RT-PCR analysis further
revealed that TSA also decreased the steady-state level of MOR mRNA in a
time-dependent manner by enhancing its instability. Thus, data suggest that TSA, 
an epigenetic regulator, affects neuronal MOR gene expression at both
transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels.

PMCID: PMC2639711
PMID: 18950606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Virus Res. 2009 Jan;139(1):14-21. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2008.09.006. Epub 2008 
Nov 13.

Hepatitis B virus-X protein recruits histone deacetylase 1 to repress
insulin-like growth factor binding protein 3 transcription.

Shon JK(1), Shon BH, Park IY, Lee SU, Fa L, Chang KY, Shin JH, Lee YI.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Cell Signal Transduction Laboratory, Metabolic Syndrome Research Center,
Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Liver Research
Division, Lee's Biotechnology Institute of Research and Development, Taejeon
305-606, Republic of Korea.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV), a major causative agent of hepatocelluar carcinoma
(HCC), encodes an oncogenic X-protein (HBx) which has been known as a
transcriptional transactivator on multiple viral and celluar promoters. In the
report, we verified that HBx transcriptionally repress insulin-like growth factor
binding protein-3 (IGFBP-3) by promoting HBx/histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1)
complex formation. HBx recruited HDAC1 forms complex with Sp1 in a
p53-independent manner) and deacetylates Sp1 which resulted in the diminished
binding of Sp1 on targeted DNA during transcriptional repression. Deacetylation
of Sp1 by HBx recruited HDAC1 likely to be a part of the mechanism that controls 
HBx induced IGFBP-3 repression and the modification of chromatin structure.

PMID: 18948152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. J Virol. 2009 Jan;83(1):181-7. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01940-08. Epub 2008 Oct 22.

The two functions of herpes simplex virus 1 ICP0, inhibition of silencing by the 
CoREST/REST/HDAC complex and degradation of PML, are executed in tandem.

Gu H(1), Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)The Marjorie B. Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, University of Chicago, 910
East 58th Street, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

ICP0, an alpha (immediate-early) protein of herpes simplex virus 1, performs at
least two key functions. It blocks inhibition of viral-gene expression by
interferon, a function dependent on the degradation of the ND10 components PML
and SP100 by the ubiquitin ligase expressed by the RING finger (RF), and it
blocks silencing of viral DNA mediated by the HDAC1/2-CoREST-REST complex. In the
latter case, a mutant CoREST lacking the HDAC1 binding site compensates totally
or in part for the absence of ICP0 in a cell-type-dependent manner. Here, we
compare the phenotypes of an ICP0 mutant containing disabling amino acid
substitutions in the RF with those of a mutant with substitutions in the CoREST
binding site (R8507). We report the following: (i) the onset of replication of
both mutants was delayed, but the RF mutant yields did not reach wild-type virus 
levels even as late as 48 h after infection, and (ii) in infected cells, PML is
rapidly degraded by wild-type virus, with some delay by the R8507 mutant, and is 
spared by the RF mutant. The translocation of ICP0 to the cytoplasm is impaired
in cells infected with the RF mutant or delayed in cells infected with the R8507 
mutant. Finally, in contrast to wild-type viruses, both mutants are inhibited by 
alpha or gamma interferon. The results indicate that both sets of events, the
degradation of PML and the blocking of silencing, are interdependent and in large
measure dependent on events in the ND10 nuclear bodies.

PMCID: PMC2612314
PMID: 18945770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. J Biol Chem. 2008 Dec 19;283(51):35679-88. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M804088200. Epub 2008
Oct 20.

Dapper1 is a nucleocytoplasmic shuttling protein that negatively modulates Wnt
signaling in the nucleus.

Gao X(1), Wen J, Zhang L, Li X, Ning Y, Meng A, Chen YG.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, Department of 
Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084,
China.

Wnt signaling, via the activation of the canonical beta-catenin and lymphoid
enhancer factor (LEF)/T-cell factor pathway, plays an important role in
embryogenesis and cancer development by regulating the expression of genes
involved in cell proliferation, differentiation, and survival. Dapper (Dpr), as a
Dishevelled interactor, has been suggested to modulate Wnt signaling by promoting
Dishevelled degradation. Here, we provide evidence that Dpr1 shuttles between the
cytoplasm and the nucleus. Although overexpressed Dpr1 was mainly found in the
cytoplasm, endogenous Dpr1 was localized over the cell, and Wnt1 induced its
nuclear export. Treatment with leptomycin B induced nuclear accumulation of both 
endogenous and overexpressed Dpr1. We further identified the nuclear localization
signal and the nuclear export signal within Dpr1. Using reporter assay and in
vivo zebrafish embryo assay, we demonstrated that the forced nuclearly localized 
Dpr1 possessed the ability to antagonize Wnt signaling. Dpr1 interacted with
beta-catenin and LEF1 and disrupted their complex formation. Furthermore, Dpr1
could associate with histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and enhance the LEF1-HDAC1
interaction. Together, our findings suggest that Dpr1 negatively modulates the
basal activity of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in the nucleus by keeping LEF1 in
the repressive state. Thus, Dpr1 controls Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in both the 
cytoplasm and the nucleus.

PMID: 18936100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2008 Oct;16(5):1030-4.

[Molecular mechanism underlying differentiation of HL-60 cells induced by
hexamethylene bisacetamide].

[Article in Chinese]

Ren X(1), Wen PE, Yang WH, Tang TH, Ren HQ, Zhang ZY, Zhao HT, Fan H, Qiao GJ,
Jiang GH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences,
Jinan 250062, Shangdong Province, China.

The objective of this study was to investigate the effect of hexamethylene
bisacetamide (HMBA) on differentiation of HL-60 cells and its possible molecular 
mechanism. HL-60 cells were co-cultured with different concentrations of HMBA
(0.5, 1, 2 mmol/L) for 4 days, then the proliferation was assayed by MTT at
different time points. Wright-Giemsa staining was used to observe the change in
morphology. Cell differentiation antigen CD11b expression and the altered
distribution of cell cycle in HL-60 induced by HMBA were analyzed by flow
cytometry. The expressions of c-myc, mad1, p21, p27, hTERT and HDAC1 mRNA were
detected by RT-PCR. The results indicated that the proliferation of HL-60 cells
was inhibited by HMBA in a time-and-dose-dependent manner. Upon 2 mmol/L HMBA
treatment, the HL-60 cells arrested at G(0)/G(1) phase and differentiated into
granular line in morphology, with the up-regulation of CD11b expression. The
expression of c-myc and hTERT mRNA obviously down-regulated, the expression of
p21, p27 and mad1 mRNA up-regulated, while there was no change of the expression 
of hTERT mRNA. It is concluded that effect of HMBA on the differentiation of
HL-60 cells may partly contribute to switch from c-myc to mad1 expression, to
up-regulate expressions of p21 and p27 mRNA, and down-regulate hTERT mRNA
expression, while there is no relation with the expression of HDAC1 mRNA.

PMID: 18928589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Nov;36(20):6450-8. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn688. Epub 2008 Oct
14.

The Cohesin loading factor NIPBL recruits histone deacetylases to mediate local
chromatin modifications.

Jahnke P(1), Xu W, Wülling M, Albrecht M, Gabriel H, Gillessen-Kaesbach G, Kaiser
FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Universität zu Lübeck, 23538 Lübeck, Germany.

Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS) is a rare congenital malformation disorder.
About half of the patients with CdLS carry mutations in the NIPBL gene encoding
the NIPBL protein, a subunit of the Cohesin loading complex. Recent studies show 
association of Cohesin with chromatin-remodeling complexes, either by
establishing cohesion or by recruiting Cohesin to specific chromosome locations. 
In yeast two-hybrid assays, we identified an interaction of NIPBL with the
histone deacetylases -1 and -3. These interactions were confirmed in mammalian
cells by coimmunoprecipitation and a critical region for interaction was defined 
to a stretch of 163 amino acids of a highly conserved region of NIPBL, which is
mutated in patients with CdLS. Utilizing reporter gene assays, we could show that
NIPBL fused to the GAL4-DNA-binding domain (GAL4-DBD) represses promoter activity
via the recruitment of histone deacetylases. Interestingly, this effect is
dramatically reduced by both NIPBL missense mutations identified in CdLS and by
chemical inhibition of the histone deacetylases. Our data are the first to
indicate a molecular and functional connection of NIPBL with chromatin-remodeling
processes via the direct interaction with histone deacetylases.

PMCID: PMC2582609
PMID: 18854353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Feb;1793(2):300-11. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2008.08.013.
Epub 2008 Sep 11.

WNT signaling promotes Nkx2.5 expression and early cardiomyogenesis via
downregulation of Hdac1.

Liu Z(1), Li T, Liu Y, Jia Z, Li Y, Zhang C, Chen P, Ma K, Affara N, Zhou C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Peking University, 38 Xue Yuan Road, Hai Dian District, Beijing,
100191, China.

The cardiac transcription factor NKX2.5 plays a crucial role in cardiomyogenesis,
but its mechanism of regulation is still unclear. Recently, epigenetic regulation
has become increasingly recognized as important in differentiation and
development. In this study, we used P19CL6 cells to investigate the regulation of
Nkx2.5 expression by methylation and acetylation during cardiomyocyte
differentiation. During the early stage of differentiation, Nkx2.5 expression was
upregulated, but the methylation status of the Nkx2.5 promoter did not undergo
significant change; while the acetylation levels of histones H3 and H4 were
increased, accompanied by a significant reduction in Hdac1 expression.
Suppression of Hdac1 activity stimulated cardiac differentiation accompanied by
increased expression of cardiac-specific genes and cell cycle arrest.
Overexpression of Hdac1 inhibited cardiomyocyte formation and downregulated the
expressions of Gata4 and Nkx2.5. Mimicking induction of the WNT pathway inhibited
Hdac1 expression with upregulated Nkx2.5 expression. WNT3a and WNT3 downregulated
the expression of Hdac1, contrary to the effect of SFRP2 and GSK3beta.
Cotransfection of beta-catenin and Lef1 significantly downregulated the
expression of Hdac1. Our data suggest that WNT signaling pathway plays important 
roles in the regulation of Hdac1 during the early stage of cardiomyocyte
differentiation and that the downregulation of Hdac1 promotes cardiac
differentiation.

PMID: 18851995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Oncogene. 2009 Jan 15;28(2):184-94. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.377. Epub 2008 Oct 13.

Hypoxic silencing of tumor suppressor RUNX3 by histone modification in gastric
cancer cells.

Lee SH(1), Kim J, Kim WH, Lee YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Natural Sciences, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology,
Kyungpook National University, Daegu, Republic of Korea.

RUNX3 is a tumor suppressor that is silenced in cancer following hypermethylation
of its promoter. The effects of hypoxia in tumor suppressor gene (TSG)
transcription are largely unknown. Here, we investigated hypoxia-induced
silencing mechanisms of RUNX3. The expression of RUNX3 was downregulated in
response to hypoxia in human gastric cancer cells at the transcriptional level.
This downregulation was abolished following treatment with the histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA) and cytosine methylation
inhibitor 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine (5-Aza), suggesting that an epigenetic regulatory
mechanism may be involved in RUNX3 silencing by hypoxia. DNA methylation PCR and 
bisulfite-sequencing data revealed that hypoxia did not affect the methylation of
RUNX3 promoter. A chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay revealed increased
histone H3-lysine 9 dimethylation and decreased H3 acetylation in the RUNX3
promoter following hypoxia. Hypoxia resulted in the upregulation of G9a histone
methyltransferase (HMT) and HDAC1; additionally, overexpression of G9a and HDAC1 
attenuated RUNX3 expression. The overexpression of G9a and HDAC1, but not their
mutants, inhibited the nuclear localization and expression of RUNX3. Diminished
mRNA expression and nuclear localization of RUNX3 during hypoxia was abolished by
siRNA-mediated knockdown of G9a and HDAC1. This study suggests that hypoxia
silences RUNX3 by epigenetic histone regulation during the progression of gastric
cancer.

PMID: 18850007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. J Biol Chem. 2008 Dec 12;283(50):35283-94. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M805590200. Epub 2008
Oct 10.

A novel germ cell-specific protein, SHIP1, forms a complex with chromatin
remodeling activity during spermatogenesis.

Choi E(1), Han C, Park I, Lee B, Jin S, Choi H, Kim do H, Park ZY, Eddy EM, Cho
C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science and Research Center for Biomolecular
Nanotechnology, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju 500-712,
Korea.

To determine the mechanisms of spermatogenesis, it is essential to identify and
characterize germ cell-specific genes. Here we describe a protein encoded by a
novel germ cell-specific gene, Mm.290718/ZFP541, identified from the mouse
spermatocyte UniGene library. The protein contains specific motifs and domains
potentially involved in DNA binding and chromatin reorganization. An antibody
against Mm.290718/ZFP541 revealed the existence of the protein in testicular
spermatogenic cells (159 kDa) but not testicular and mature sperm. Immunostaining
analysis of cells at various stages of spermatogenesis consistently showed that
the protein is present in spermatocytes and round spermatids only. Transfection
assays and immunofluorescence studies indicate that the protein is localized
specifically in the nucleus. Proteomic analyses performed to explore the
functional characteristics of Mm.290718/ZFP541 showed that the protein forms a
unique complex. Other major components of the complex included histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and heat-shock protein A2. Disappearance of
Mm.290718/ZFP541 was highly correlated with hyperacetylation in spermatids during
spermatogenesis, and specific domains of the protein were involved in the
regulation of interactions and nuclear localization of HDAC1. Furthermore, we
found that premature hyperacetylation, induced by an HDAC inhibitor, is
associated with an alteration in the integrity of Mm.290718/ZFP541 in
spermatogenic cells. Our results collectively suggest that the Mm.290718/ZFP541
complex is implicated in chromatin remodeling during spermatogenesis, and we
provide further information on the previously unknown molecular mechanism.
Consequently, we re-designate Mm.290718/ZFP541 as "SHIP1" representing
spermatogenic cell HDAC-interacting protein 1.

PMCID: PMC2596390
PMID: 18849567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Neuroscience. 2008 Dec 2;157(3):644-55. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2008.09.019. 
Epub 2008 Sep 16.

Additive effects of histone deacetylase inhibitors and amphetamine on histone H4 
acetylation, cAMP responsive element binding protein phosphorylation and
DeltaFosB expression in the striatum and locomotor sensitization in mice.

Shen HY(1), Kalda A, Yu L, Ferrara J, Zhu J, Chen JF.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuropharmacology Laboratory, Department of Neurology, Boston
University School of Medicine, 715 Albany Street, E301, Boston, MA 02118, USA.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) plays an important role in chromatin remodeling in
response to a variety of neurochemical signalings and behavioral manipulations,
and may be a therapeutic target for modulation of psychostimulant behavioral
sensitization. In this study, we investigated the molecular interaction between
histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi) and psychostimulant in vivo of mice after
repeated treatment with the HDACi, butyric acid (BA) and valproic acid (VPA),
alone or in combination with amphetamine. Repeated treatment with amphetamine
produced HDACi-like effects: enhanced global histone H4 acetylation level by
Western blot as well as specific histone H4 acetylation associated with fosB
promoter by chromatin immunoprecipitation in the striatum. Conversely, repeated
treatment with BA or VPA produced amphetamine-like effects: enhanced cAMP
responsive element binding protein (CREB) phosphorylation at Ser(133) position
and increased DeltaFosB protein levels in the striatum. Furthermore,
co-administration of BA or VPA with amphetamine produced additive effects on
histone H4 acetylation as well as CREB phosphorylation in the striatum. The
interplay of HDAC and CREB was also supported by co-immunoprecipitation assays
demonstrating that repeated treatment with VPA reduced the association of CREB
and HDAC1 in the striatum. Finally, the additive effect of VPA/BA and amphetamine
on histone H4 acetylation, phosphorylated CREB, and DeltaFosB was associated with
potentiated amphetamine-induced locomotor activity. Thus, HDACi may interact
additively with psychostimulants at both histone acetylation and CREB
phosphorylation through the CREB:HDAC protein complex in the striatum to modulate
DeltaFosB protein levels and psychomotor behavioral sensitization.

PMID: 18848971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Invest New Drugs. 2009 Aug;27(4):338-46. doi: 10.1007/s10637-008-9180-x. Epub
2008 Sep 30.

Screening of amide analogues of Trichostatin A in cultures of primary rat
hepatocytes: search for potent and safe HDAC inhibitors.

Fraczek J(1), Deleu S, Lukaszuk A, Doktorova T, Tourwé D, Geerts A, Vanhaecke T, 
Vanderkerken K, Rogiers V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium.
jfraczek@vub.ac.be

The vast majority of preclinical studies of HDAC inhibitors (HDAC-I) focus on the
drug-target (cancer) cell interaction, whereas little attention is paid to the
effects on non-target healthy cells, which could provide decisive information to 
eliminate potential cytotoxic compounds at a very early stage during drug
development. In the current study we used cultures of primary rat hepatocytes as 
a read out system to select for the most potent HDAC-I in the group of structural
analogues of an archetypal HDAC-I, namely Trichostatin A. This kind of approach
allowed selecting compounds with high biological activity and with no apparent
toxicity towards cultured hepatocytes.

PMID: 18825314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2008 Dec 1;233(2):297-307. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2008.08.015. Epub 2008 Sep 10.

Arsenic trioxide phosphorylates c-Fos to transactivate p21(WAF1/CIP1) expression.

Liu ZM(1), Huang HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology, College of
Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 701, Taiwan.

An infamous poison, arsenic also has been used as a drug for nearly 2400 years;
in recently years, arsenic has been effective in the treatment of acute
promyelocytic leukemia. Increasing evidence suggests that opposite effects of
arsenic trioxide (ATO) on tumors depend on its concentrations. For this reason,
the mechanisms of action of the drug should be elucidated, and it should be used 
therapeutically only with extreme caution. Previously, we demonstrated the
opposing effects of ERK1/2 and JNK on p21(WAF1/CIP1) (p21) expression in response
to ATO in A431 cells. In addition, JNK phosphorylates c-Jun (Ser(63/73)) to
recruit TGIF/HDAC1 to suppress p21 gene expression. Presently, we demonstrated
that a high concentration of ATO sustains ERK1/2 phosphorylation, and increases
c-Fos biosynthesis and stability, which enhances p21 gene expression. Using
site-directed mutagenesis, a DNA affinity precipitation assay, and functional
assays, we demonstrated that phosphorylation of the C-terminus of c-Fos
(Thr(232), Thr(325), Thr(331), and Ser(374)) plays an important role in its
binding to the p21 promoter, and in conjunction with N-terminus phosphorylation
of c-Fos (Ser(70)) to transactivate p21 promoter expression. In conclusion, a
high concentration of ATO can sustain ERK1/2 activation to enhance c-Fos
expression, then dimerize with dephosphorylated c-Jun (Ser(63/73)) and recruit
p300/CBP to the Sp1 sites (-84/-64) to activate p21 gene expression in A431
cells.

PMID: 18822310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Zhonghua Gan Zang Bing Za Zhi. 2008 Sep;16(9):657-9.

[Effects of trichostatin A on the interaction between HBx and histone deacetylase
protein 1].

[Article in Chinese]

Han JQ(1), Ye QN, Ding LH, Li JZ, Yang X, Huang CF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hepatology, Beijing Military General Hospital, Beijing 100700,
China.

OBJECTIVES: To study the effects of trichostatin A (TSA) on protein-protein
interaction between HBx and histone deacetylase protein 1 (HDAC1).
METHODS: Both HBx and HDAC1 expressing vectors were constructed by the method of 
routine molecular cloning. The expression of HBx and HDAC1 were observed by
Western blot assay. The protein-protein interaction was tested between HBx and
HDAC1 by GST pull-down in vitro as well as co-immunoprecipitation in vivo.
RESULTS: Both HBx and HDAC1 expressing vectors were successfully constructed.
Protein-protein interaction between HBx and HDAC1 existed both in vitro and in
vivo. TSA, an inhibitor of HDAC1, had no effect on the interaction between HBx
and HDAC1.
CONCLUSIONS: HBx interacts with HDAC1 in vivo and in vitro in a non- TSA
dependent way.

PMID: 18822204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2008 Oct 15;18(20):5528-32. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2008.09.003. Epub 2008 Sep 6.

Optimization of a series of potent and selective ketone histone deacetylase
inhibitors.

Pescatore G(1), Kinzel O, Attenni B, Cecchetti O, Fiore F, Fonsi M, Rowley M,
Schultz-Fademrecht C, Serafini S, Steinkühler C, Jones P.

Author information: 
(1)IRBM/Merck Research Laboratories, Via Pontina km 30,600, 00040 Pomezia, Italy.
giovanna_pescatore@merck.com

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors offer a promising strategy for cancer
therapy and the first generation HDAC inhibitors are currently in the clinic.
Herein we describe the optimization of a series of ketone small molecule HDAC
inhibitors leading to potent and selective class I HDAC inhibitors with good dog 
PK.

PMID: 18809328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. PLoS One. 2008 Sep 22;3(9):e3255. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003255.

ZNF198 stabilizes the LSD1-CoREST-HDAC1 complex on chromatin through its MYM-type
zinc fingers.

Gocke CB(1), Yu H.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Pharmacology, The University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.

Histone modifications in chromatin regulate gene expression. A transcriptional
co-repressor complex containing LSD1-CoREST-HDAC1 (termed LCH hereafter for
simplicity) represses transcription by coordinately removing histone
modifications associated with transcriptional activation. RE1-silencing
transcription factor (REST) recruits LCH to the promoters of neuron-specific
genes, thereby silencing their transcription in non-neuronal tissues. ZNF198 is a
member of a family of MYM-type zinc finger proteins that associate with LCH.
Here, we show that ZNF198-like proteins are required for the repression of
E-cadherin (a gene known to be repressed by LSD1), but not REST-responsive genes.
ZNF198 binds preferentially to the intact LCH ternary complex, but not its
individual subunits. ZNF198- and REST-binding to the LCH complex are mutually
exclusive. ZNF198 associates with chromatin independently of LCH. Furthermore,
modification of HDAC1 by small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) in vitro weakens
its interaction with CoREST whereas sumoylation of HDAC1 stimulates its binding
to ZNF198. Finally, we mapped the LCH- and HDAC1-SUMO-binding domains of ZNF198
to tandem repeats of MYM-type zinc fingers. Therefore, our results suggest that
ZNF198, through its multiple protein-protein interaction interfaces, helps to
maintain the intact LCH complex on specific, non-REST-responsive promoters and
may also prevent SUMO-dependent dissociation of HDAC1.

PMCID: PMC2532748
PMID: 18806873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Int J Cancer. 2008 Dec 15;123(12):2774-81. doi: 10.1002/ijc.23885.

Defining the molecular action of HDAC inhibitors and synergism with androgen
deprivation in ERG-positive prostate cancer.

Björkman M(1), Iljin K, Halonen P, Sara H, Kaivanto E, Nees M, Kallioniemi OP.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Biotechnology, VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, Institute for
Molecular Medicine Finland and University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
ext-mari.bjorkman@vtt.fi

Gene fusions between prostate-specific, androgen responsive TMPRSS2 gene and
oncogenic ETS factors, such as ERG, occur in up to 50% of all prostate cancers.
We recently defined a gene signature that was characteristic to prostate cancers 
with ERG activation. This suggested epigenetic reprogramming, such as
upregulation of histone deactylase 1 (HDAC1) gene and downregulation of its
target genes. We then hypothesized that patients with ERG-positive prostate
cancers may benefit from epigenetic therapy such as HDAC inhibition (HDACi),
especially in combination with antiandrogens. Here, we exposed ERG-positive
prostate cancer cell lines to HDAC inhibitors Trichostatin A (TSA), MS-275 and
suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) with or without androgen deprivation. We
explored the effects on cell phenotype, gene expression as well as ERG and
androgen receptor (AR) signaling. When compared with 5 other prostate cell lines,
ERG-positive VCaP and DuCap cells were extremely sensitive to HDACi, in
particular TSA, showing synergy with concomitant androgen deprivation increasing 
apoptosis. Both of the HDAC inhibitors studied caused repression of the
ERG-fusion gene, whereas the pan-HDAC inhibitor TSA prominently repressed the
ERG-associated gene signature. Additionally, HDACi and flutamide caused retention
of AR in the cytoplasm, indicating blockage of androgen signaling. Our results
support the hypothesis that HDACi, especially in combination with androgen
deprivation, is effective against TMPRSS2-ERG-fusion positive prostate cancer in 
vitro. Together with our previous in vivo observations of an "epigenetic
reprogramming gene signature" in clinical ERG-positive prostate cancers, these
studies provide mechanistic insights to ERG-associated tumorigenesis and suggest 
therapeutic paradigms to be tested in vivo.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18798265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Dec;28(23):7096-108. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00449-08. Epub 2008 Sep
15.

Activated androgen receptor downregulates E-cadherin gene expression and promotes
tumor metastasis.

Liu YN(1), Liu Y, Lee HJ, Hsu YH, Chen JH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Sciences, Tzu Chi University, Hualien, Taiwan.

The loss of E-cadherin gene expression can cause the dysfunction of the cell-cell
junction to trigger tumor metastasis. Members of the Snail family of
transcription factors are repressors of the expression of the E-cadherin gene. In
this study, we showed that the activated androgen receptor (AR) is a novel
repressor of E-cadherin gene expression and can promote metastasis. Our results
demonstrated that the activated AR could bind to the E-cadherin promoter in vitro
and in vivo. The activated AR and HDAC1 had synergistic effects in downregulating
E-cadherin gene expression. Treating cells with the AR ligand,
dihydrotestosterone (DHT), triggered the reduction of E-cadherin expression and
induced changes in cell morphology from an epithelial-like to a mesenchymal-like 
appearance. When nonmetastatic breast cancer cells expressing cytoplasmic AR were
transplanted into mice and the mice were treated with DHT, tumors were detected
at metastatic sites, whereas no tumors were detected in transplanted mice without
DHT treatment. Furthermore, clinical data from breast cancer patients with
invasive ductal carcinomas showed high levels of AR expression in the nuclei and 
low levels of E-cadherin expression. These results suggest that, similarly to
Snail and Twist, the activated AR can downregulate E-cadherin expression to
promote the activation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition and tumor metastasis.

PMCID: PMC2593382
PMID: 18794357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Nutr Cancer. 2008;60(5):692-702. doi: 10.1080/01635580802008278.

The short chain fatty acid butyrate induces promoter demethylation and
reactivation of RARbeta2 in colon cancer cells.

Spurling CC(1), Suhl JA, Boucher N, Nelson CE, Rosenberg DW, Giardina C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Connecticut, Storrs,
Connecticut 06269-3125, USA.

It has been proposed that cancer prevention results from multiple dietary agents 
acting together as "action packages." Here we obtain evidence that butyrate,
which is generated from dietary fiber, enhances the responsiveness of colon
cancer cells to all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA). Evidence was obtained that this
interaction depends on histone deactylase one (HDAC1) inhibition by butyrate and 
retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARalpha) activation by ATRA. The enhancement of
RAR beta 2 (RARbeta2) activation was accompanied by a rapid demethylation of the 
RARbeta2 promoter. This demethylation could be achieved by butyrate alone, and it
differed from that triggered by the DNA methyltransferase inhibitor 5-Aza-2'
deoxycytidine in that it was 1) sporadic on the RARbeta2 promoter, 2) not genome 
wide, and 3) independent of extensive DNA replication. An analysis of
inter-methylated sites assay indicated that only a few percent of loci analyzed
showed reduced methylation. In colon cancer cells that were particularly
resistant to RARbeta2 reactivation, the actions of butyrate could be further
enhanced by the soy isoflavone genistein, which has also been reported to work
through an epigenetic mechanism. These data suggest that dietary compounds that
modulate epigenetic programming are likely to function best in the presence of
retinoids and other cancer-preventing compounds that are sensitive to a cell's
epigenetic state.

PMID: 18791934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Mol Cancer. 2008 Sep 12;7:70. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-7-70.

Differential effects of class I isoform histone deacetylase depletion and
enzymatic inhibition by belinostat or valproic acid in HeLa cells.

Dejligbjerg M(1), Grauslund M, Litman T, Collins L, Qian X, Jeffers M,
Lichenstein H, Jensen PB, Sehested M.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Pathology Unit, National University Hospital, Biocentre,
Copenhagen, Denmark. mdejligbjerg@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Histone acetylation is an epigenetic modification involved in the
regulation of gene expression, balanced by histone acetyl transferases and
histone deacetylase (HDAC) enzymes. HDAC inhibitors (HDACi) induce growth arrest 
and cell death in transformed cells, and are currently in many clinical cancer
trials. The transcriptional response to HDACi is complex, as is the response to
HDAC isoform knockdown (KD). Here, we describe for the first time in a human
cancer cell line, a transcriptional comparison of treatment by two structurally
unrelated HDACi; belinostat and valproic acid with the KD of HDAC1, 2 and 3
isoforms.
RESULTS: HDAC KD showed anti-proliferative effects, although to a lesser extent
than HDACi treatment. Moreover, we found a 2-fold increased resistance of HDAC1
knockdown cells to belinostat, suggesting this isoenzyme as a selective target.
While both HDACi treatment and individual class I HDAC KD produce significant
transcriptional effects, three-times higher for HDACi, the gene-expression
profiles of class I HDAC KD compared with that obtained by HDACi treatment
exhibited less than 4% of altered genes in common between the two modes of
inhibition. Further, cell-specific effects of HDAC KD are evident by comparison
with a recent study in a different cell line.
CONCLUSION: The increased resistance to belinostat in response to HDAC1 depletion
indicates the possibility of using this isoform as a predictive biomarker of
response to HDACi treatment. Further, the transcriptional response to chemical
inhibition of HDACs is very different from that of KD of individual class I HDAC 
isoforms. These data suggest that the anti-tumor effect of HDACi is indeed linked
to class I inhibition, but may be more complex than simply targeting individual
HDAC enzymes.

PMCID: PMC2553797
PMID: 18789133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Biochem J. 2009 Jan 1;417(1):379-89. doi: 10.1042/BJ20081132.

Colon cancer cells maintain low levels of pyruvate to avoid cell death caused by 
inhibition of HDAC1/HDAC3.

Thangaraju M(1), Carswell KN, Prasad PD, Ganapathy V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical College of Georgia, 
Augusta, GA 30912, USA.

Human colon cancer cells and primary colon cancer silence the gene coding for LDH
(lactate dehydrogenase)-B and up-regulate the gene coding for LDH-A, resulting in
effective conversion of pyruvate into lactate. This is associated with markedly
reduced levels of pyruvate in cancer cells compared with non-malignant cells. The
silencing of LDH-B in cancer cells occurs via DNA methylation, with involvement
of the DNMTs (DNA methyltransferases) DNMT1 and DNMT3b. Colon cancer is also
associated with the expression of pyruvate kinase M2, a splice variant with low
catalytic activity. We have shown recently that pyruvate is an inhibitor of HDACs
(histone deacetylases). Here we show that pyruvate is a specific inhibitor of
HDAC1 and HDAC3. Lactate has no effect on any of the HDACs examined. Colon cancer
cells exhibit increased HDAC activity compared with non-malignant cells. HDAC1
and HDAC3 are up-regulated in colon cancer cells and in primary colon cancer, and
siRNA (small interfering RNA)-mediated silencing of HDAC1 and HDAC3 in colon
cancer cells induces apoptosis. Colon cancer cells silence SLC5A8, the gene
coding for a Na(+)-coupled pyruvate transporter. Heterologous expression of
SLC5A8 in the human colon cancer cell line SW480 leads to inhibition of HDAC
activity when cultured in the presence of pyruvate. This process is associated
with an increase in intracellular levels of pyruvate, increase in the acetylation
status of histone H4, and enhanced cell death. These studies show that cancer
cells effectively maintain low levels of pyruvate to prevent inhibition of
HDAC1/HDAC3 and thereby to evade cell death.

PMID: 18789002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Leukemia. 2008 Dec;22(12):2159-68. doi: 10.1038/leu.2008.243. Epub 2008 Sep 11.

Blockade of mTOR signaling potentiates the ability of histone deacetylase
inhibitor to induce growth arrest and differentiation of acute myelogenous
leukemia cells.

Nishioka C(1), Ikezoe T, Yang J, Koeffler HP, Yokoyama A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Respiratory Medicine, Kochi Medical School, Kochi
University, Nankoku, Kochi, Japan.

This study found that MS-275, a novel synthetic benzamide histone deacetylase
inhibitor (HDACI), blocked Akt/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling in 
acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) HL60 and acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) NB4 
cells, as assessed by decreased levels of the phosphorylated (p)-Akt, p-p70
ribosomal S6 kinase (p70S6K) and p-S6K by western blot analysis. Interestingly,
further inactivation of mTOR by rapamycin analog RAD001 (everolimus)
significantly enhanced MS-275-mediated growth inhibition and apoptosis of these
cells in parallel with enhanced upregulation of p27(kip1) and downregulation of
c-Myc. In addition, RAD001 potentiated the ability of MS-275 to induce
differentiation of HL60 and NB4 cells, as measured by the expression of CD11b
cell surface antigens, as well as reduction of nitroblue tetrazolium.
Importantly, RAD001 potentiated the ability of MS-275 to induce the expression of
the myeloid differentiation-related transcription factor, CCAAT enhancer-binding 
protein-epsilon, in these cells in association with enhanced acetylation of
histone H3 on its promoter. Furthermore, RAD001 (5 mg/kg) significantly enhanced 
the effects of MS-275 (10 mg/kg) to inhibit proliferation of HL60 tumor
xenografts in nude mice without adverse effects. Taken together, concomitant
administration of an HDACI and an mTOR inhibitor may be a promising treatment
strategy for the individuals with a subset of human leukemia.

PMID: 18784743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Nov;28(21):6632-45. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00697-08. Epub 2008 Sep 
8.

The ING4 tumor suppressor attenuates NF-kappaB activity at the promoters of
target genes.

Nozell S(1), Laver T, Moseley D, Nowoslawski L, De Vos M, Atkinson GP, Harrison
K, Nabors LB, Benveniste EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
AL 35294-0005, USA. snozell@uab.edu

The NF-kappaB family mediates immune and inflammatory responses. In many cancers,
NF-kappaB is constitutively activated and induces the expression of genes that
facilitate tumorigenesis. ING4 is a tumor suppressor that is absent or mutated in
several cancers. Herein, we demonstrate that in human gliomas, NF-kappaB is
constitutively activated, ING4 expression is negligible, and NF-kappaB-regulated 
gene expression is elevated. We demonstrate that an ING4 and NF-kappaB
interaction exists but does not prevent NF-kappaB activation, nuclear
translocation, or DNA binding. Instead, ING4 and NF-kappaB bind simultaneously at
NF-kappaB-regulated promoters, and this binding correlates with reductions in p65
phosphorylation, p300, and the levels of acetylated histones and H3-Me3K4, while 
enhancing the levels of HDAC-1 at these promoters. Using a knockdown approach, we
correlate reductions in ING4 protein levels with increased basal and inducible
NF-kappaB target gene expression. Collectively, these data suggest that ING4 may 
specifically regulate the activity of NF-kappaB molecules that are bound to
target gene promoters.

PMCID: PMC2573235
PMID: 18779315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Dev Biol. 2008 Nov 1;323(1):64-75. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.08.014. Epub 2008
Aug 22.

Drosophila C-terminal binding protein, dCtBP is required for sensory organ
prepattern and sharpens proneural transcriptional activity of the GATA factor
Pnr.

Biryukova I(1), Heitzler P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Institut de Génétique et de Biologie,
Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Illkirch Cedex, BP 10142, France.
innavld@igbmc.u-strasbg.fr

The peripheral nervous system is required for animals to detect and to relay
environmental stimuli to central nervous system for the information processing.
In Drosophila, the precise spatial and temporal expression of two proneural genes
achaete (ac) and scute (sc), is necessary for development of the sensory organs. 
Here we present an evidence that the transcription co-repressor, dCtBP acts as a 
negative regulator of sensory organ prepattern. Loss of dCtBP function mutant
exhibits ectopic sensory organs, while overexpression of dCtBP results in a
dramatic loss of sensory organs. These phenotypes are correlated with
mis-emerging of sensory organ precursors and perturbated expression of proneural 
transcription activator Ac. Mammalian CtBP-1 was identified via interaction with 
the consensus motif PXDLSX(K/R) of adenovirus E1A oncoprotein. We demonstrated
that dCtBP binds directly to PLDLS motif of Drosophila Friend of GATA-1 protein, 
U-shaped and sharpens the adult sensory organ development. Moreover, we found
that dCtBP mediates multivalent interaction with the GATA transcriptional
activator Pannier and acts as a direct co-repressor of the Pannier-mediated
activation of proneural genes. We demonstrated that Pannier genetically interacts
with dCtBP-interacting protein HDAC1, suggesting that the dCtBP-dependent
regulation of Pannier activity could utilize a repressive mechanism involving
alteration of local chromatine structure.

PMID: 18773887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. J Biol Chem. 2008 Oct 31;283(44):29671-80. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M802785200. Epub 2008
Sep 2.

Estrogen receptor (ER) beta or p53 attenuates ERalpha-mediated transcriptional
activation on the BRCA2 promoter.

Jin W(1), Chen Y, Di GH, Miron P, Hou YF, Gao H, Shao ZM.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Cancer Institute, Cancer Hospital, Department of Oncology, Shanghai
Medical College, Institutes of Biomedical Science, Fudan University, Shanghai
200032, China.

BRCA2 is closely related to the pathogenesis of breast cancer. In the present
study, we found that estrogen can activate BRCA2 transcription, which is estrogen
receptor (ER) alpha-dependent. During estrogen treatment, ERalpha interacted with
CREB-binding protein/p300, p68/p72, and MyoD and formed an activating
transcriptional complex that could bind to many Sp1 sites on the BRCA2 promoter
and activate its transcription by inducing histone acetylations. MyoD is a new
component of ERalpha complex. ERbeta or p53 attenuated ERalpha-mediated
transcriptional activation by preventing the recruitment of ERalpha
transcriptional complex and histone acetylations on the BRCA2 promoter. ERbeta
interacted with ERalpha and CREB-binding protein/p300 and formed a weak
activating transcriptional complex that competed for binding to Sp1 sites with
ERalpha transcriptional complex and slightly attenuated BRCA2 transcription.
Different from ERbeta, p53 interacted with HDAC1 and CtBP1 and formed an
inhibiting transcriptional complex that could compete for binding to Sp1 sites
with ERalpha transcriptional complex and inhibit BRCA2 transcription more
significantly.

PMCID: PMC2662053
PMID: 18765668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. J Med Chem. 2008 Sep 25;51(18):5542-51. doi: 10.1021/jm800081j. Epub 2008 Aug 27.

Residues in the 11 A channel of histone deacetylase 1 promote catalytic activity:
implications for designing isoform-selective histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Weerasinghe SV(1), Estiu G, Wiest O, Pflum MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Wayne State University, 5101 Cass Avenue, Detroit,
Michigan 48202, USA.

Histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) has been linked to cell growth and cell cycle
regulation, which makes it a widely recognized target for anticancer drugs.
Whereas variations of the metal-binding and capping groups of HDAC inhibitors
have been studied extensively, the role of the linker region is less well known, 
despite the potency of inhibitors with diverse linkers, such as MS-275. To
facilitate a drug design that targets HDAC1, we assessed the influence of
residues in the 11 A channel of the HDAC1 active site on activity by using an
alanine scan. The mutation of eight channel residues to alanine resulted in a
substantial reduction in deacetylase activity. Molecular dynamics simulations
indicated that alanine mutation results in significant movement of the
active-site channel, which suggests that channel residues promote HDAC1 activity 
by influencing substrate interactions. With little characterization of HDAC1
available, the combined experimental and computational results define the
active-site residues of HDAC1 that are critical for substrate/inhibitor binding
and provide important insight into drug design.

PMCID: PMC2593471
PMID: 18729444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Oct 31;375(4):576-80. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.08.042. Epub 2008 Aug 21.

Acetylation of Sirt2 by p300 attenuates its deacetylase activity.

Han Y(1), Jin YH, Kim YJ, Kang BY, Choi HJ, Kim DW, Yeo CY, Lee KY.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Drug Development, Chonnam
National University, Yongbong-dong 300, Gwangju 500-757, Republic of Korea.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are subdivided into three classes--HDAC I, HDAC II, 
and Sir2. Sirt proteins are mammalian members of the Sir2 family of NAD+
(nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide)-dependent protein deacetylases. The balance
between acetylation and deacetylation of histone and non-histone proteins,
regulated by protein acetyltransferases and deacetylases, affects the expression 
of genes involved in a variety of cellular processes. In addition, HDAC1 is
acetylated and regulated by p300, a transcriptional co-activator with protein
acetyltransferase activity, suggesting that protein acetyltransferases and
deacetylases they control the activities of each other. Although the regulation
of HDAC1 by p300 is well characterized, the relationship between Sir2 homologs
and p300 is not understood. Here, we report that p300 interacts with Sirt2, a
member of the Sir2 family, and triggers the acetylation and subsequent
down-regulation of the deacetylation activity of Sirt2, and that the acetylation 
of Sirt2 by p300 relieves the inhibitory effect of Sirt2 on the transcriptional
activity of p53. These observations demonstrate that p300 can inactivate Sirt2 by
acetylation and that p300 may regulate the activity of p53 indirectly through
Sirt2 in addition to its direct modification of p53.

PMID: 18722353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. BMC Res Notes. 2008 Aug 22;1:68. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-1-68.

The transcriptional cofactor MIER1-beta negatively regulates histone
acetyltransferase activity of the CREB-binding protein.

Blackmore TM(1), Mercer CF, Paterno GD, Gillespie LL.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Cancer Research Laboratories, Division of BioMedical Sciences,
Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St John's, NL, A1B 3V6,
Canada. tinablackmore@mun.ca

BACKGROUND: Mier1 encodes a novel transcriptional regulator and was originally
isolated as a fibroblast growth factor early response gene. Two major protein
isoforms have been identified, MIER1alpha and beta, which differ in their
C-terminal sequence. Previously, we demonstrated that both isoforms recruit
histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) to repress transcription. To further explore the
role of MIER1 in chromatin remodeling, we investigated the functional interaction
of MIER1 with the histone acetyltransferase (HAT), Creb-binding protein (CBP).
FINDINGS: Using GST pull-down assays, we demonstrate that MIER1 interacts with
CBP and that this interaction involves the N-terminal half (amino acids 1-283) of
MIER1, which includes the acidic activation and ELM2 domains and the C-terminal
half (amino acids 1094-2441) of CBP, which includes the bromo-, HAT, C/H3 and
glutamine-rich domains. Functional analysis, using HEK293 cells, shows that the
CBP bound to MIER1 in vivo has no detectable HAT activity. Histone 4 peptide
binding assays demonstrate that this inhibition of HAT activity is not the result
of interference with histone binding.
CONCLUSION: Our data indicate that an additional mechanism by which MIER1 could
repress transcription involves the inhibition of histone acetyltransferase
activity.

PMCID: PMC2546418
PMID: 18721470  [PubMed]


459. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2009 Mar;11(3):621-38. doi: 10.1089/ARS.2008.2198.

Transcriptional regulatory functions of mammalian AP-endonuclease (APE1/Ref-1),
an essential multifunctional protein.

Bhakat KK(1), Mantha AK, Mitra S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, and Sealy Center for
Molecular Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas 77555,
USA. kkbhakat@utmb.edu

The mammalian AP-endonuclease (APE1/Ref-1) plays a central role in the repair of 
oxidized and alkylated bases in mammalian genomes via the base excision repair
(BER) pathway. However, APE1, unlike its E. coli prototype Xth, has two unique
and apparently distinct transcriptional regulatory activities. APE1 functions as 
a redox effector factor (Ref-1) for several transcription factors including AP-1,
HIF1-alpha, and p53. APE1 was also identified as a direct trans-acting factor for
repressing human parathyroid hormone (PTH) and renin genes by binding to the
negative calcium-response element (nCaRE) in their promoters. We have
characterized APE1's post-translational modification, namely, acetylation which
modulates its transcriptional regulatory function. Furthermore, stable
interaction of APE1 with several other trans-acting factors including HIF-1alpha,
STAT3, YB-1, HDAC1, and CBP/p300 and formation of distinct trans-acting complexes
support APE1's direct regulatory function for diverse genes. Multiple functions
of mammalian APE1, both in DNA repair and gene regulation, warrant extensive
analysis of its own regulation and dissection of the mechanisms. In this review, 
we have discussed APE1's own regulation and its role as a transcriptional
coactivator or corepressor by both redox-dependent and redox-independent
(acetylation-mediated) mechanisms, and explore the potential utility of targeting
these functions for enhancing drug sensitivity of cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC2933571
PMID: 18715144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Neoplasia. 2008 Sep;10(9):1021-7.

Expression of class I histone deacetylases indicates poor prognosis in
endometrioid subtypes of ovarian and endometrial carcinomas.

Weichert W(1), Denkert C, Noske A, Darb-Esfahani S, Dietel M, Kalloger SE,
Huntsman DG, Köbel M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Charité Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are an emerging class of targeted cancer
therapeutics, and little is known about HDAC expression in gynecologic
malignancies. Therefore, we tested the hypothesis whether high-level expression
of class 1 HDACs (HDAC1, 2, and 3) is associated with clinically distinct subsets
of ovarian and endometrial carcinomas. Expression was assessed by
immunohistochemistry in a population-based cohort of 465 ovarian and 149
endometrial carcinomas and correlated with clinicopathologic parameters. Each of 
the HDACs was expressed at high levels in most ovarian (HDAC1, 61%; HDAC2, 93%;
HDAC3, 84%) and endometrial (HDAC1, 61%; HDAC2, 95%; HDAC3, 83%) carcinomas.
Further, 55% and 56% of ovarian and endometrial carcinomas, respectively,
expressed all three HDACs at high levels. Such cases were less common among
endometrioid subtypes of ovarian and endometrial carcinomas (36% and 52% positive
cases, respectively) compared with high-grade serous subtypes (64 and 69%,
respectively, P < .001). High-level expression of all three HDACs is associated
with a poor prognosis in ovarian endometrioid carcinomas (hazard ratio, 6.7; 95% 
confidence interval, 1.9-23.3). The independent prognostic information and the
overall high rate of expression for class I HDACs suggest that these targets
should be explored as predictive factors in ovarian and endometrial carcinomas
prospectively.

PMCID: PMC2517648
PMID: 18714364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. FEBS Lett. 2008 Sep 22;582(21-22):3193-200. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2008.08.010.
Epub 2008 Aug 15.

Selective repression of YKL-40 by NF-kappaB in glioma cell lines involves
recruitment of histone deacetylase-1 and -2.

Bhat KP(1), Pelloski CE, Zhang Y, Kim SH, deLaCruz C, Rehli M, Aldape KD.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Tumor Center, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 
Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA. kbhat@mdanderson.org

Here we show that in contrast to other cancer types, tumor necrosis factor
(TNF)-alpha suppresses YKL-40 expression in glioma cell lines in a nuclear factor
kappaB (NF-kappaB) dependent manner. Even though TNF-alpha causes recruitment of 
p65 and p50 subunits of NF-kappaB to the YKL-40 promoter in all cell types,
recruitment of histone deacetylases (HDAC)-1 and -2, and a consequent
deacetylation of histone H3 at the YKL-40 promoter occurs only in glioma cells.
Importantly, using chromatin immunoprecipitation assays in frozen glioblastoma
multiforme tissues, we show that YKL-40 levels decrease consistent with HDAC1
recruitment despite high levels of nuclear p-p65. This study presents a paradigm 
for NF-kappaB regulation of one of its targets in a strict cell type specific
manner.

PMID: 18708058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Oct;36(17):5427-40. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn527. Epub 2008
Aug 14.

The transcription factor Sox5 modulates Sox10 function during melanocyte
development.

Stolt CC(1), Lommes P, Hillgärtner S, Wegner M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Emil-Fischer-Zentrum, Universität Erlangen,
Fahrstrasse 17, D-91054 Erlangen, Germany.

The transcription factor Sox5 has previously been shown in chicken to be
expressed in early neural crest cells and neural crest-derived peripheral glia.
Here, we show in mouse that Sox5 expression also continues after neural crest
specification in the melanocyte lineage. Despite its continued expression, Sox5
has little impact on melanocyte development on its own as generation of
melanoblasts and melanocytes is unaltered in Sox5-deficient mice. Loss of Sox5,
however, partially rescued the strongly reduced melanoblast generation and marker
gene expression in Sox10 heterozygous mice arguing that Sox5 functions in the
melanocyte lineage by modulating Sox10 activity. This modulatory activity
involved Sox5 binding and recruitment of CtBP2 and HDAC1 to the regulatory
regions of melanocytic Sox10 target genes and direct inhibition of
Sox10-dependent promoter activation. Both binding site competition and
recruitment of corepressors thus help Sox5 to modulate the activity of Sox10 in
the melanocyte lineage.

PMCID: PMC2553580
PMID: 18703590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Bioorg Med Chem. 2008 Sep 1;16(17):7992-8002. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2008.07.066.
Epub 2008 Jul 29.

Design, synthesis and biological evaluation of novel compounds with conjugated
structure as anti-tumor agents.

Su H(1), Nebbioso A, Carafa V, Chen Y, Yang B, Altucci L, You Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, China Pharmaceutical University, People's
Republic of China.

A series of hydroxamic acids with conjugated structure was designed and
synthesized to explore the possible HDAC subtype selectivity by testing these
compounds against recombinant human HDAC1 and HDAC4. The most selective compound 
resulted 5a, with a SI of 11.9. The enzymatic inhibitory activity of these
conjugated compounds was relatively weak; however, some of these compounds showed
significant effect in inducing apoptosis. Moreover, the anti-proliferative
activity in cancer cells resulted quite promising, especially in the HCT119 cell 
line.

PMID: 18701301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Int J Cancer. 2008 Nov 1;123(9):2020-30. doi: 10.1002/ijc.23735.

Kinetics of repression by modified p53 on the PDGF beta-receptor promoter.

Yang W(1), Wetterskog D, Matsumoto Y, Funa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Chemistry and Cell Biology, Institute of Biomedicine,
Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.

Herein, we show that both exogenously transfected and endogenously activated p53 
repress promoter activity and expression of PDGFRB. p53 binds the proximal
promoter containing the CCAAT motif as examined by EMSA and chromatin
immunoprecipitation. However, gradual induction of p53 in tet-onSAOS2 cells
resulted in a transient increase of the PDGFRB-promoter activity and its
expression. As binding of p53 to the promoter increased, previously bound p73,
DeltaNp73, c-Myc, HDAC1 and HDAC4 were dismissed from the repressed promoter, and
p300 was recruited. The transient increase of the promoter activity was therefore
induced by the release of the p73, Myc and HDACs, previously shown to act as
repressors to this promoter. Along with further increase of p53, p300 was
replaced by HDAC1 and HDAC4, resulting in decreased PDGFRB expression. For the
repression, acetylation of the C-terminal lysines of p53 is important, and both
acetyl-K373p53 and methyl-K370p53 became bound to the promoter. The
acetyl-K373p53 was accumulated in the nucleus and colocalized with promyelocytic 
leukemia protein. Mitomycin treatment of MEF induced similar epigenetic
modification of p53 and its binding to the promoter chromatin. Addition of a
PDGFR tyrosine-kinase inhibitor to p53-inducing tet-onSAOS2 increased the number 
of apoptotic cells. These results suggest that p53 represses the PDGFRB promoter,
facilitating the p53-induced apoptosis, whereas tumor cells with p53 mutation or 
a high level of DeltaNp73 or Myc could become refractory to the regulation.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18697203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Aging Cell. 2008 Dec;7(6):783-94. doi: 10.1111/j.1474-9726.2008.00427.x. Epub
2008 Sep 16.

ING1a expression increases during replicative senescence and induces a senescent 
phenotype.

Soliman MA(1), Berardi P, Pastyryeva S, Bonnefin P, Feng X, Colina A, Young D,
Riabowol K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary,
Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

The ING family of tumor suppressor proteins affects cell growth, apoptosis and
response to DNA damage by modulating chromatin structure through association with
different HAT and HDAC complexes. The major splicing isoforms of the ING1 locus
are ING1a and INGlb. While INGlb plays a role in inducing apoptosis, the function
of ING1a is currently unknown. Here we show that alternative splicing of the ING1
message alters the INGla:INGlb ratio by approximately 30-fold in senescent
compared to low passage primary fibroblasts. INGla antagonizes INGlb function in 
apoptosis, induces the formation of structures resembling senescence-associated
heterochromatic foci containing heterochromatin protein 1 gamma, the accumulation
of senescence-associated beta-galactosidase activity and promotes senescent cell 
morphology and cell cycle arrest. Phenotypic effects may result from differential
effects on gene expression since ING1a increases levels of both retinoblastoma
and the p16 cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor and ING1a and ING1b have opposite
effects on the expression of proliferating nuclear cell antigen (PCNA), which is 
required for cell growth. Gene expression appears to be altered by targeting of
HDAC complexes to gene promoters since INGla associates with several-fold higher 
levels of HDAC1 in senescent, compared to replication-competent cells and ING1 is
found on the PCNA promoter by chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis. These data 
demonstrate a novel role for the ING1 proteins in differentially regulating
senescence-associated chromatin remodeling vs. apoptosis and support the idea
that altered ratios of the ING1 splicing isoforms may contribute to establishing 
the senescent phenotype through HDAC and HAT complex-mediated effects on
chromatin structure.

PMID: 18691180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Dev Biol. 2008 Oct 15;322(2):237-50. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.06.040. Epub 2008 
Jul 21.

Organ-specific requirements for Hdac1 in liver and pancreas formation.

Noël ES(1), Casal-Sueiro A, Busch-Nentwich E, Verkade H, Dong PD, Stemple DL,
Ober EA.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Medical Research, Division of Developmental Biology,
The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London, UK.

Liver, pancreas and lung originate from the presumptive foregut in temporal and
spatial proximity. This requires precisely orchestrated transcriptional
activation and repression of organ-specific gene expression within the same cell.
Here, we show distinct roles for the chromatin remodelling factor and
transcriptional repressor Histone deacetylase 1 (Hdac1) in endodermal
organogenesis in zebrafish. Loss of Hdac1 causes defects in timely liver
specification and in subsequent differentiation. Mosaic analyses reveal a
cell-autonomous requirement for hdac1 within the hepatic endoderm. Our studies
further reveal specific functions for Hdac1 in pancreas development. Loss of
hdac1 causes the formation of ectopic endocrine clusters anteriorly to the main
islet, as well as defects in exocrine pancreas specification and differentiation.
In addition, we observe defects in extrahepatopancreatic duct formation and
morphogenesis. Finally, loss of hdac1 results in an expansion of the foregut
endoderm in the domain from which the liver and pancreas originate. Our genetic
studies demonstrate that Hdac1 is crucial for regulating distinct steps in
endodermal organogenesis. This suggests a model in which Hdac1 may directly or
indirectly restrict foregut fates while promoting hepatic and exocrine pancreatic
specification and differentiation, as well as pancreatic endocrine islet
morphogenesis. These findings establish zebrafish as a tractable system to
investigate chromatin remodelling factor functions in controlling gene expression
programmes in vertebrate endodermal organogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3710974
PMID: 18687323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Cancer Res. 2008 Aug 1;68(15):6199-207. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6514.

Loss of MLL PHD finger 3 is necessary for MLL-ENL-induced hematopoietic stem cell
immortalization.

Chen J(1), Santillan DA, Koonce M, Wei W, Luo R, Thirman MJ, Zeleznik-Le NJ, Diaz
MO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stritch School of Medicine, Loyola 
University of Chicago Medical Center, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois,
USA.

Reciprocal chromosomal translocations at the MLL gene locus result in expression 
of novel fusion proteins, such as MLL-ENL, associated with leukemia. The three
PHD finger cassette, one of the highly conserved domains in MLL, is absent in all
fusion proteins. This domain has been shown to interact with Cyp33, a cyclophilin
which enhances the recruitment of histone deacetylases (HDAC) to the MLL
repression domain and mediates HOX gene repression. Insertion of the third PHD
finger of MLL into MLL-ENL allows the recruitment of Cyp33 and, subsequently,
HDAC1 to the fusion protein. Furthermore, expression of the fusion protein with
the PHD finger insertion mediates the down-regulation of the HOXC8 gene
expression in a Cyp33-dependent manner. Finally, the addition of the PHD finger
domain or the third PHD finger alone into MLL-ENL blocks the hematopoietic stem
cell immortalization potential of the fusion protein in serial plating colony
assays. Insertion of only the first and second PHD fingers has no such effect.
These data support the hypothesis that the binding of Cyp33 to the MLL third PHD 
finger switches the MLL function from transactivation to repression. In the
immortalizing MLL fusion protein, the loss of the PHD fingers, in combination
with the gain of the activation domain of ENL or of other partner proteins, makes
the fusion protein a constitutive transactivator. This leads to constitutive
overexpression of MLL target genes that block stem cell commitment and promote
stem cell renewal, probably the first step in MLL-related leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2734520
PMID: 18676843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Histopathology. 2008 Sep;53(3):267-77. doi: 10.1111/j.0309-0167.2008.03109.x.

Prognostic significance of the therapeutic targets histone deacetylase 1, 2, 6
and acetylated histone H4 in cutaneous T-cell lymphoma.

Marquard L(1), Gjerdrum LM, Christensen IJ, Jensen PB, Sehested M, Ralfkiaer E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Experimental Pathology Unit, Copenhagen Biocentre,
Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen. lmi@topotarget.com

AIMS: Aberrant histone acetylation has been associated with malignancy and
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are currently being investigated in
numerous clinical trials. So far, the malignancy most sensitive to HDAC
inhibitors has been cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL). The reason for this
sensitivity is unclear and studies on HDAC expression and histone acetylation in 
CTCL are lacking. The aim of this study was to address this issue.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The immunohistochemical expression of HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC6,
and acetylated H4 was examined in 73 CTCLs and the results related to
histological subtypes and overall survival. HDAC1 was most abundantly expressed
(P < 0.0001), followed by HDAC2; HDAC6 and H4 acetylation were equally expressed.
HDAC2 (P = 0.001) and H4 acetylation (P = 0.03) were significantly more common in
aggressive than indolent CTCL subtypes. In contrast, no differences were observed
for HDAC1 and HDAC6. In a Cox analysis, elevated HDAC6 was the only parameter
showing significant influence on survival (P = 0.04).
CONCLUSIONS: High expression of HDAC2 and acetylated H4 is more common in
aggressive than indolent CTCL. HDAC6 expression is associated with a favorable
outcome independent of the subtype.

PMCID: PMC2675007
PMID: 18671804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Mol Cell. 2008 Jul 25;31(2):167-77. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2008.05.017.

ATM signaling facilitates repair of DNA double-strand breaks associated with
heterochromatin.

Goodarzi AA(1), Noon AT, Deckbar D, Ziv Y, Shiloh Y, Löbrich M, Jeggo PA.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Damage and Stability Centre, University of Sussex, East Sussex BN1 9RQ,
UK.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2008 Aug 8;31(3):303-4.

Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated (ATM) signaling is essential for the repair of a
subset of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs); however, its precise role is unclear. 
Here, we show that < or =25% of DSBs require ATM signaling for repair, and this
percentage correlates with increased chromatin but not damage complexity.
Importantly, we demonstrate that heterochromatic DSBs are generally repaired more
slowly than euchromatic DSBs, and ATM signaling is specifically required for DSB 
repair within heterochromatin. Significantly, knockdown of the transcriptional
repressor KAP-1, an ATM substrate, or the heterochromatin-building factors HP1 or
HDAC1/2 alleviates the requirement for ATM in DSB repair. We propose that ATM
signaling temporarily perturbs heterochromatin via KAP-1, which is critical for
DSB repair/processing within otherwise compacted/inflexible chromatin. In support
of this, ATM signaling alters KAP-1 affinity for chromatin enriched for
heterochromatic factors. These data suggest that the importance of ATM signaling 
for DSB repair increases as the heterochromatic component of a genome expands.

PMID: 18657500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Dev Dyn. 2008 Aug;237(8):2256-67. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21626.

Histone deacetylases 1 and 2 are expressed at distinct stages of neuro-glial
development.

MacDonald JL(1), Roskams AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

The deacetylation of histone proteins, catalyzed by histone deacetylases (HDACs),
is a common epigenetic modification of chromatin, associated with gene silencing.
Although HDAC inhibitors are used clinically to treat nervous system disorders,
such as epilepsy, very little is known about the expression pattern of the HDACs 
in the central nervous system. Identifying the cell types and developmental
stages that express HDAC1 and HDAC2 within the brain is important for determining
the therapeutic mode of action of HDAC inhibitors, and evaluating potential side 
effects. Here, we examined the expression of HDAC1 and HDAC2 in the murine brain 
at multiple developmental ages. HDAC1 is expressed in neural stem
cells/progenitors and glia. In contrast, HDAC2 is initiated in neural progenitors
and is up-regulated in post-mitotic neuroblasts and neurons, but not in fully
differentiated glia. These results identify key developmental stages of HDAC
expression and suggest transitions of neural development that may utilize HDAC1
and/or HDAC2.

Copyright (c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18651664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Mol Cancer Res. 2008 Jul;6(7):1250-8. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-07-2110.

Destabilization of ERBB2 transcripts by targeting 3' untranslated region
messenger RNA associated HuR and histone deacetylase-6.

Scott GK(1), Marx C, Berger CE, Saunders LR, Verdin E, Schäfer S, Jung M, Benz
CC.

Author information: 
(1)Buck Institute for Age Research, Novato, CA 94945, USA.
gscott@buckinstitute.org

In addition to repressing ERBB2 promoter function, histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors induce the accelerated decay of mature ERBB2 transcripts; the
mechanism mediating this transcript destabilization is unknown but depends on the
3' untranslated region (UTR) of ERBB2 mRNA. Using ERBB2-overexpressing human
breast cancer cells (SKBR3), the mRNA stability factor HuR was shown to support
ERBB2 transcript integrity, bind and endogenously associate with a conserved
U-rich element within the ERBB2 transcript 3' UTR, coimmunoprecipitate with
RNA-associated HDAC activity, and colocalize with HDAC6. HDAC6 also
coimmunoprecipitates with HuR in an RNA-dependent manner and within 6 hours of
exposure to a pan-HDAC inhibitor dose, that does not significantly alter
cytosolic HuR levels or HuR binding to ERBB2 mRNA. Cellular ERBB2 transcript
levels decline while remaining physically associated with HDAC6. Knockdown of
HDAC6 protein by small interfering RNA partially suppressed the ERBB2 transcript 
decay induced by either pan-HDAC or HDAC6-selective enzymatic inhibitors. Three
novel hydroxamates, ST71, ST17, and ST80 were synthesized and shown to inhibit
HDAC6 with 14-fold to 31-fold greater selectivity over their binding and
inhibition of HDAC1. Unlike more potent pan-HDAC inhibitors, these
HDAC6-selective inhibitors produced dose-dependent growth arrest of
ERBB2-overexpressing breast cancer cells by accelerating the decay of mature
ERBB2 mRNA without repressing ERBB2 promoter function. In sum, these findings
point to the therapeutic potential of HuR and HDAC6-selective inhibitors,
contrasting ERBB2 stability effects induced by HDAC6 enzymatic inhibition and
HDAC6 protein knockdown, and show that ERBB2 transcript stability mechanisms
include exploitable targets for the development of novel anticancer therapies.

PMCID: PMC2583372
PMID: 18644987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Mol Cancer Res. 2008 Jul;6(7):1204-14. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-08-0123.

Modulation of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21(WAF1/Cip1) gene by Zac1
through the antagonistic regulators p53 and histone deacetylase 1 in HeLa Cells.

Liu PY(1), Chan JY, Lin HC, Wang SL, Liu ST, Ho CL, Chang LC, Huang SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei 114,
Taiwan, Republic of China.

Zac1 is a novel seven-zinc finger protein which possesses the ability to bind
specifically to GC-rich DNA elements. Zac1 not only promotes apoptosis and cell
cycle arrest but also acts as a transcriptional cofactor for p53 and a number of 
nuclear receptors. Our previous study indicated that the enhancement of p53
activity by Zac1 is much more pronounced in HeLa cells compared with other cell
lines tested. This phenomenon might be due to the coactivator effect of Zac1 on
p53 and the ability of Zac1 to reverse E6 inhibition of p53. In the present
study, we showed that Zac1 acted synergistically with either p53 or a histone
deacetylase inhibitor, trichostatin A, to enhance p21(WAF1/Cip1) promoter
activity. We showed that Zac1 physically interacted with some nuclear receptor
corepressors such as histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and mSin3a, and the induction 
of p21(WAF1/Cip1) gene and protein by Zac1 was suppressed by either
overexpressing HDAC1 or its deacetylase-dead mutant. In addition, our data
suggest that trichostatin A-induced p21(WAF1/Cip1) protein expression might be
mediated through a p53-independent and HDAC deacetylase-independent pathway.
Taken together, our data suggest that Zac1 might be involved in regulating the
p21(WAF1/Cip1) gene and protein expression through its protein-protein
interaction with p53 and HDAC1 in HeLa cells.

PMID: 18644983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Sep 26;374(3):437-41. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.07.038. Epub 2008 Jul 16.

Acidic domain is indispensable for MDM2 to negatively regulate the acetylation of
p53.

Wang Q(1), Yang Y, Wang L, Zhang PZ, Yu L.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Institute of Genetics, School of 
Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, PR China.

MDM2 is the most important negative regulator of tumor suppressor p53. Both RING 
finger domain and acidic domain of MDM2 contribute to the ubiquitination of p53. 
The crosstalk between ubiquitination and acetylation of p53 prompts us to examine
whether acidic domain is essential for MDM2 to regulate the acetylation of p53.
We find that the acidic domain of MDM2 is necessary to inhibit p300-mediated
acetylation of p53 as well as to mediate the deacetylation of p53. Our results
indicate that acidic domain of MDM2 provides essential information for
acetyltransferase p300 and deacetylase HDAC1 and is indispensable for MDM2 to
negatively regulate the acetylation of p53.

PMID: 18638452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. J Neurosci. 2008 Jul 16;28(29):7344-9. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1043-08.2008.

Delta FosB mediates epigenetic desensitization of the c-fos gene after chronic
amphetamine exposure.

Renthal W(1), Carle TL, Maze I, Covington HE 3rd, Truong HT, Alibhai I, Kumar A, 
Montgomery RL, Olson EN, Nestler EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Neuroscience, The University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390-9070, USA.

The molecular mechanisms underlying the transition from recreational drug use to 
chronic addiction remain poorly understood. One molecule implicated in this
process is DeltaFosB, a transcription factor that accumulates in striatum after
repeated drug exposure and mediates sensitized behavioral responses to
psychostimulants and other drugs of abuse. The downstream transcriptional
mechanisms by which DeltaFosB regulates drug-induced behaviors are incompletely
understood. We reported previously the chromatin remodeling mechanisms by which
DeltaFosB activates the expression of certain genes; however, the mechanisms
underlying DeltaFosB-mediated gene repression remain unknown. Here, we identify
c-fos, an immediate early gene rapidly induced in striatum after acute
psychostimulant exposure, as a novel downstream target that is repressed
chronically by DeltaFosB. We show that accumulation of DeltaFosB in striatum
after chronic amphetamine treatment desensitizes c-fos mRNA induction to a
subsequent drug dose. DeltaFosB desensitizes c-fos expression by recruiting
histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) to the c-fos gene promoter, which, in turn,
deacetylates surrounding histones and attenuates gene activity. Accordingly,
local knock-out of HDAC1 in striatum abolishes amphetamine-induced
desensitization of the c-fos gene. In concert, chronic amphetamine increases
histone H3 methylation on the c-fos promoter, a chromatin modification also known
to repress gene activity, as well as expression levels of the H3 histone
methyltransferase, KMT1A (lysine methyltransferase 1A, formerly SUV39H1). This
study reveals a novel epigenetic pathway through which DeltaFosB mediates
distinct transcriptional programs that may ultimately alter behavioral plasticity
to chronic amphetamine exposure.

PMCID: PMC2610249
PMID: 18632938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Carcinogenesis. 2008 Sep;29(9):1816-24. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgn165. Epub 2008 Jul
14.

Allyl mercaptan, a garlic-derived organosulfur compound, inhibits histone
deacetylase and enhances Sp3 binding on the P21WAF1 promoter.

Nian H(1), Delage B, Pinto JT, Dashwood RH.

Author information: 
(1)Linus Pauling Institute, Oregon State University, 571 Weniger Hall, Corvallis,
OR 97331-6512, USA.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors have the potential to derepress
epigenetically silenced genes in cancer cells, leading to cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis. In the present study, we screened several garlic-derived small
organosulfur compounds for their ability to inhibit HDAC activity in vitro. Among
the organosulfur compounds examined, allyl mercaptan (AM) was the most potent
HDAC inhibitor. Molecular modeling, structure activity and enzyme kinetics
studies with purified human HDAC8 provided evidence for a competitive mechanism
(K(i) = 24 microM AM). In AM-treated human colon cancer cells, HDAC inhibition
was accompanied by a rapid and sustained accumulation of acetylated histones in
total cellular chromatin. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays confirmed the
presence of hyperacetylated histone H3 on the P21WAF1 gene promoter within 4 h of
AM exposure, and there was increased binding of the transcription factor Sp3. At 
a later time, 24 h after AM treatment, there was enhanced binding of p53 in the
distal enhancer region of the P21WAF1 gene promoter. These findings suggest a
primary role for Sp3 in driving P21 gene expression after HDAC inhibition by AM, 
followed by the subsequent recruitment of p53. Induction of p21Waf1 protein
expression was detected at time points between 3 and 72 h after AM treatment and 
coincided with growth arrest in G(1) of the cell cycle. The results are discussed
in the context of other anticarcinogenic mechanisms ascribed to garlic
organosulfur compounds and the metabolic conversion of such compounds to
potential HDAC inhibitors in situ.

PMCID: PMC2722850
PMID: 18628250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. J Biol Chem. 2008 Sep 26;283(39):26484-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M803686200. Epub 2008 
Jul 14.

Transgenic overexpression of Hdac3 in the heart produces increased postnatal
cardiac myocyte proliferation but does not induce hypertrophy.

Trivedi CM(1), Lu MM, Wang Q, Epstein JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Class I and II histone deacetylases (HDACs) play vital roles in regulating
cardiac development, morphogenesis, and hypertrophic responses. Although the
roles of Hdac1 and Hdac2, class I HDACs, in cardiac hyperplasia, growth, and
hypertrophic responsiveness have been reported, the role in the heart of Hdac3,
another class I HDAC, has been less well explored. Here we report that
myocyte-specific overexpression of Hdac3 in mice results in cardiac abnormalities
at birth. Hdac3 overexpression produces thickening of ventricular myocardium,
especially the interventricular septum, and reduction of both ventricular
cavities in newborn hearts. Our data suggest that increased thickness of
myocardium in Hdac3-transgenic (Hdac3-Tg) mice is due to increased cardiomyocyte 
hyperplasia without hypertrophy. Hdac3 overexpression inhibits several
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors, including Cdkn1a, Cdkn1b, Cdkn1c, Cdkn2b, and
Cdkn2c. Hdac3-Tg mice did not develop cardiac hypertrophy at 3 months of age,
unlike previously reported Hdac2-Tg mice. Further, Hdac3 overexpression did not
augment isoproterenol-induced cardiac hypertrophy when compared with wild-type
littermates. These findings identify Hdac3 as a novel regulator of cardiac
myocyte proliferation during cardiac development.

PMCID: PMC2546558
PMID: 18625706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. J Biol Chem. 2008 Sep 19;283(38):26169-78. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M803544200. Epub 2008
Jul 11.

HDAC1 cooperates with C/EBPalpha in the inhibition of liver proliferation in old 
mice.

Wang GL(1), Salisbury E, Shi X, Timchenko L, Medrano EE, Timchenko NA.

Author information: 
(1)Huffington Center on Aging and Department of Pathology, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Epigenetic control of liver proliferation involves cooperation between
transcription factors and chromatin-remodeling proteins. In this work, we found
that the levels of HDAC1 (histone deacetylase 1) are increased in quiescent
livers of old mice. The elevation of HDAC1 in liver is mediated by the
RNA-binding protein CUGBP1. We found that the age-associated CUGBP1-eIF2 complex 
binds to the 5' region of HDAC1 mRNA and increases translation of HDAC1 in the
liver. Further analyses showed that CUGBP1 also increases expression of HDAC1 in 
cultured cells, in the livers of CUGBP1 transgenic mice, and in the livers of
mice injected with cyclin D3, which enhances the formation of the CUGBP1-eIF2
complex. In livers of old mice, HDAC1 interacts with the transcription factor
C/EBPalpha and is recruited by this protein to E2F-dependent promoters as a
component of high M(r) C/EBPalpha-Brm complexes. The recruitment of HDAC1 to
c-Myc and FoxM1B promoters leads to deacetylation of histone H3 at Lys-9 on these
E2F-dependent promoters. We show that HDAC1 is an important mediator of
growth-inhibitory activity of C/EBPalpha and that small interfering RNA-mediated 
inhibition of HDAC1 reduces the ability of C/EBPalpha to inhibit cell
proliferation. In addition, we have found that both elevation of HDAC1 and
interaction of C/EBPalpha with HDAC1 are controlled by cyclin D3-dependent
mechanisms. Treatment of old mice with growth hormone, which reduces cyclin D3
levels, leads to the reduction of the CUGBP1-eIF2 complex, normalization of HDAC1
levels, and inhibition of interactions of HDAC1 with C/EBPalpha-Brm complexes.
Thus, our data demonstrate that translational elevation of HDAC1 in livers of old
mice is involved in the assembly of high M(r) protein-protein complexes that
inhibit liver proliferation.

PMCID: PMC2533775
PMID: 18622015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. J Biol Chem. 2008 Sep 19;283(38):26179-87. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M803545200. Epub 2008
Jul 11.

HDAC1 promotes liver proliferation in young mice via interactions with C/EBPbeta.

Wang GL(1), Salisbury E, Shi X, Timchenko L, Medrano EE, Timchenko NA.

Author information: 
(1)Huffington Center on Aging and Department of Pathology, Department of
Medicine, and Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

HDAC1 (histone deacetylase 1) regulates a number of biological processes in
cells. Our previous studies revealed that HDAC1 inhibits proliferation of the
livers in old mice. We have surprisingly observed that HDAC1 is also increased in
young livers proliferating after partial hepatectomy (PH) and in human liver
tumors. Increased levels of HDAC1 after PH lead to its interaction with a member 
of the C/EBP family, C/EBPbeta, which is also elevated after PH. At early time
points after PH, the HDAC1-C/EBPbeta complex binds to the C/EBPalpha promoter and
represses expression of C/EBPalpha. A detailed analysis of the role of HDAC1 and 
C/EBPbeta proteins in the regulation of C/EBPalpha promoter showed that, whereas 
C/EBPbeta alone activates the promoter, HDAC1 represses the promoter in a
C/EBPbeta-dependent manner. The inhibition of HDAC1 in the livers of young mice
inhibits liver proliferation after PH, which is associated with high levels of
C/EBPalpha. Consistent with the positive role of HDAC1-C/EBPbeta complexes in
liver proliferation, we have found that the CUGBP1-HDAC1-C/EBPbeta pathway is
activated in human tumor liver samples, suggesting that HDAC1-C/EBPbeta complexes
are involved in the development of liver tumors. The causal role of the
CUGBP1-HDAC1 pathway in liver proliferation was examined in CUGBP1 transgenic
mice, which display high levels of the CUGBP1-eIF2 complex. We have demonstrated 
that elevation of the HDAC1-C/EBPbeta complexes in CUGBP1 transgenic mice reduces
expression of C/EBPalpha and increases the rate of liver proliferation. Thus,
these studies have identified a new pathway that promotes liver proliferation in 
young mice and might contribute to the malignant transformations in the liver.

PMCID: PMC2533797
PMID: 18622014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008 Oct;1783(10):1803-14. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2008.06.008. Epub 2008 Jun 19.

HDAC1/HDAC3 modulates PPARG2 transcription through the sumoylated CEBPD in
hepatic lipogenesis.

Lai PH(1), Wang WL, Ko CY, Lee YC, Yang WM, Shen TW, Chang WC, Wang JM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosignal Transduction, College of Bioscience and Biotechnology, 
National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 70101, Taiwan.

CCAAT/Enhancer binding proteins (C/EBPs) and peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptors gamma (PPARG) play critical roles in the regulation of lipid metabolism
genes. Overexpression of CEBPdelta (CEBPD) enhances lipid accumulation and
specifically activates PPARG2 transcription in HepG2 cells. By using 5'-serial
deletion reporter analysis, we show that the region comprising the -457 to +129
base pairs is required for CEBPD response of the PPARG2 promoter. Two critical
CEBPD-binding motifs on the -324/-311 and -158/-145 of human PPARG2 promoter are 
identified. We previously have shown that the human CEBPD is sumoylated by small 
ubiquitin-related modifier-1 (SUMO1). We further demonstrated that the
sumoylation of CEBPD lysine 120 is also detectable in HepG2 cells, and this
modification functions for binding of the recruits, HDAC1 and HDAC3. Meanwhile,
an in vivo chromatin IP assay demonstrated that the sumoylation mutant of CEBPD
lost a significant portion of HDAC1 and HDAC3 interaction. Combining that the
increasing amount of CEBPD and the sumoylated CEBPD (suCEBPD) consistently
responded to lipogenic stimulation, these results suggest that the excess
non-sumoylated CEBPD could be a critical activator which reverses
suCEBPD/HDAC1/HDAC3-mediated PPARG2 gene inactivation and promotes hepatic
lipogenesis. Taken together, we suggest that suCEBPD/HDAC1/HDAC3 complex
inactivates PPARG2 transcription, and the induction of CEBPD expression
transiently activates PPARG2 transcription which is involved in adipocyte-like
lipogenesis in HepG2 cells.

PMID: 18619497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Aug;36(13):4510-20. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn419. Epub 2008
Jul 8.

Requirement of histone deacetylase1 (HDAC1) in signal transducer and activator of
transcription 3 (STAT3) nucleocytoplasmic distribution.

Ray S(1), Lee C, Hou T, Boldogh I, Brasier AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, TX 77555-1060, USA. suray@utmb.edu

Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription 3 (STAT3) is a transcription
factor that plays a crucial role in interleukin-6 (IL-6) signaling, mediating the
acute-phase induction of the human Angiotensinogen (hAGT) gene in hepatocytes. We
showed earlier that IL-6 induces acetylation of the STAT3 NH(2)-terminus by the
recruitment of the p300 coactivator. We had also observed a physical interaction 
of STAT3 and Histone Deacetylase1 (HDAC1) in an IL-6-dependent manner that leads 
to transcriptional repression. In this study, we sought to elucidate the
mechanism by which HDAC1 controls STAT3 transcriptional activity. Here, we mapped
the interacting domains of both STAT3 and HDAC1 and found that the COOH-terminal 
domain of HDAC1 is necessary for IL-6-induced STAT3 transcriptional repression,
whereas the NH(2)-terminal acetylation domain of STAT3 is required for HDAC1
binding. Interestingly, over expression of HDAC1 in HepG2 cells leads to
significantly reduced amounts of nuclear STAT3 after IL-6 induction, whereas
silencing of HDAC1 resulted in accumulation of total and acetylated STAT3 in the 
nucleus. We have found that HDAC1 knockdown also interferes with the
responsiveness of the STAT3-dependent MCP1 target gene expression to IL-6, as
confirmed by real-time RT-PCR analysis. Together, our study reveals the novel
functional consequences of IL-6-induced STAT3-HDAC1 interaction on
nucleocytoplasmic distribution of STAT3.

PMCID: PMC2490754
PMID: 18611949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Jul 15;105(28):9633-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0803749105. Epub 2008 Jul 7.

HDAC6 is a specific deacetylase of peroxiredoxins and is involved in redox
regulation.

Parmigiani RB(1), Xu WS, Venta-Perez G, Erdjument-Bromage H, Yaneva M, Tempst P, 
Marks PA.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology and Molecular Biology Programs, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, 1275 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Eighteen histone deacetylases (HDACs) are present in humans, categorized into two
groups: zinc-dependent enzymes (HDAC1-11) and NAD(+)-dependent enzymes (sirtuins 
1-7). Among zinc-dependent HDACs, HDAC6 is unique. It has a cytoplasmic
localization, two catalytic sites, a ubiquitin-binding site, and it selectively
deacetylases alpha-tubulin and Hsp90. Here, we report the discovery that the
redox regulatory proteins, peroxiredoxin (Prx) I and Prx II are specific targets 
of HDAC6. Prx are antioxidants enzymes whose main function is H(2)O(2) reduction.
Prx are elevated in many cancers and neurodegenerative diseases. The acetylated
form of Prx accumulates in the absence of an active HDAC6. Acetylation of Prx
increases its reducing activity, its resistance to superoxidation, and its
resistance to transition to high-molecular-mass complexes. Thus, HDAC6 and Prx
are targets for modulating intracellular redox status in therapeutic strategies
for disorders as disparate as cancers and neurodegenerative diseases.

PMCID: PMC2443817
PMID: 18606987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. J Immunol. 2008 Jul 15;181(2):940-7.

Histone acetylation and flagellin are essential for Legionella
pneumophila-induced cytokine expression.

Schmeck B(1), Lorenz J, N'guessan PD, Opitz B, van Laak V, Zahlten J, Slevogt H, 
Witzenrath M, Flieger A, Suttorp N, Hippenstiel S.

Author information: 
(1)FORSYS Junior Research Group, Systems Biology of Lung Inflammation,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany. Bernd.Schmeck@charite.de

Legionella pneumophila causes severe pneumonia. Acetylation of histones is
thought to be an important regulator of gene transcription, but its impact on L. 
pneumophila-induced expression of proinflammatory cytokines is unknown. L.
pneumophila strain 130b induced the expression of the important chemoattractant
IL-8 and genome-wide histone modifications in human lung epithelial A549 cells.
We analyzed the IL-8-promoter and found that histone H4 was acetylated and H3 was
phosphorylated at Ser(10) and acetylated at Lys(14), followed by transcription
factor NF-kappaB. Recruitment of RNA polymerase II to the IL-8 promoter
corresponded with increases in gene transcription. Histone modification and IL-8 
release were dependent on p38 kinase and NF-kappaB pathways. Legionella-induced
IL-8 expression was decreased by histone acetylase (HAT) inhibitor anacardic acid
and enhanced by histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor trichostatin A. After
Legionella infection, HATs p300 and CREB-binding protein were time-dependently
recruited to the IL-8 promoter, whereas HDAC1 and HDAC5 first decreased and later
reappeared at the promoter. Legionella specifically induced expression of HDAC5
but not of other HDACs in lung epithelial cells, but knockdown of HDAC1 or 5 did 
not alter IL-8 release. Furthermore, Legionella-induced cytokine release,
promoter-specific histone modifications, and RNA polymerase II recruitment were
reduced in infection with flagellin-deletion mutants. Legionella-induced histone 
modification as well as HAT-/HDAC-dependent IL-8 release could also be shown in
primary lung epithelial cells. In summary, histone acetylation seems to be
important for the regulation of proinflammatory gene expression in L. pneumophila
infected lung epithelial cells. These pathways may contribute to the host
response in Legionnaires' disease.

PMID: 18606645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Immunol Lett. 2008 Aug 15;119(1-2):97-102. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2008.05.006. Epub
2008 Jun 17.

Rapid histone deacetylation and transient HDAC association in the IL-2 promoter
region of TSST-1-stimulated T cells.

Kametani Y(1), Wang L, Koduka K, Sato T, Katano I, Habu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Tokai University School of Medicine, Isehara-shi,
Kanagawa 259-1193, Japan.

It remains unclear how superantigen induces unresponsiveness in stimulated T
cells. We analyzed the chromatin status of the interleukin-2 (IL-2) promoter
region in T cells stimulated with toxic shock syndrome toxin-1 (TSST-1)
superantigen using T cell receptor-transgenic T cells responding to ovalbumin
(OVA) and TSST-1. Compared to OVA stimulation, naïve T cells cultured with TSST-1
showed lower IL-2 expression after transient enhancement. Coincidentally, the
acetylated histone H3 (AcH3) level at the IL-2 promoter region was first
enhanced, and then decreased, in TSST-1-stimulated T cells. At the reduction
stage of AcH3, histone deacetylase-1 (HDAC1) was markedly associated with the
IL-2 promoter region in a TSST-1-specific manner without HDAC1 over-expression.
The enhancement of HDAC1 association and IL-2 suppression was prevented by
pre-treatment with HDAC inhibitor, but not once the anergy status was
established. These results suggest that recruitment of HDAC1 in the IL-2 promoter
region at the early stimulation stage with TSST-1 plays a pivotal role in
sAg-induced anergy.

PMID: 18606456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Exp Cell Res. 2008 Aug 15;314(14):2661-73. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2008.05.019. Epub
2008 Jun 7.

Induction of truncated form of tenascin-X (XB-S) through dissociation of HDAC1
from SP-1/HDAC1 complex in response to hypoxic conditions.

Kato A(1), Endo T, Abiko S, Ariga H, Matsumoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Hokkaido University, Kita 12, Nishi 6, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan.

XB-S is an amino-terminal truncated protein of tenascin-X (TNX) in humans. The
levels of the XB-S transcript, but not those of TNX transcripts, were increased
upon hypoxia. We identified a critical hypoxia-responsive element (HRE) localized
to a GT-rich element positioned from -1410 to -1368 in the XB-S promoter. Using
an electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA), we found that the HRE forms a
DNA-protein complex with Sp1 and that GG positioned in -1379 and -1378 is
essential for the binding of the nuclear complex. Transfection experiments in SL2
cells, an Sp1-deficient model system, with an Sp1 expression vector demonstrated 
that the region from -1380 to -1371, an HRE, is sufficient for efficient
activation of the XB-S promoter upon hypoxia. The EMSA and a chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay showed that Sp1 together with the
transcriptional repressor histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) binds to the HRE of the
XB-S promoter under normoxia and that hypoxia causes dissociation of HDAC1 from
the Sp1/HDAC1 complex. The HRE promoter activity was induced in the presence of a
histone deacetylase inhibitor, trichostatin A, even under normoxia. Our results
indicate that the hypoxia-induced activation of the XB-S promoter is regulated
through dissociation of HDAC1 from an Sp1-binding HRE site.

PMID: 18588874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Biochem J. 2008 Dec 1;416(2):179-87. doi: 10.1042/BJ20080328.

ERalpha suppresses slug expression directly by transcriptional repression.

Ye Y(1), Xiao Y, Wang W, Yearsley K, Gao JX, Barsky SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Ohio State University College of Medicine, 129
Hamilton Hall, 1645 Neil Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Two of the most common signalling pathways in breast cancer are the ER (oestrogen
receptor) ligand activation pathway and the E-cadherin snai1 slug EMT
(epithelial-mesenchymal transition) pathway. Although these pathways have been
thought to interact indirectly, the present study is the first to observe direct 
interactions between these pathways that involves the regulation of slug
expression. Specifically we report that ligand-activated ERalpha suppressed slug 
expression directly by repression of transcription and that knockdown of ERalpha 
with RNA interference increased slug expression. More specifically, slug
expression was down-regulated in ERalpha-negative MDA-MB-468 cells transfected
with ERalpha after treatment with E2 (17beta-oestradiol). The down-regulation of 
slug in the ERalpha-positive MCF-7 cell line was mediated by direct repression of
slug transcription by the formation of a co-repressor complex involving
ligand-activated ERalpha protein, HDAC1 (histone deacetylase 1) and N-CoR
(nuclear receptor co-repressor). This finding was confirmed by sequential ChIP
(chromatin immunoprecipitation) studies. In the MCF-7 cell line, slug expression 
normally was low. In addition, knockdown of ERalpha with RNA interference in this
cell line increased slug expression. This effect could be partially reversed by
treatment of the cells with E2. The efficacy of the effect of ERalpha on slug
repression was dependent on the overall level of ERalpha. These observations
confirmed that slug was an E2-responsive gene.

PMCID: PMC2584332
PMID: 18588516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. DNA Repair (Amst). 2008 Aug 2;7(8):1352-63. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2008.04.016.
Epub 2008 Jun 13.

Promoter methylation of O(6)-methylguanine-DNA-methyltransferase in lung cancer
is regulated by p53.

Lai JC(1), Cheng YW, Goan YG, Chang JT, Wu TC, Chen CY, Lee H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical & Molecular Toxicology, Chung Shan Medical University,
Taichung, Taiwan, ROC.

Methylation of the O(6)-methylguanine-DNA-methyltransferase (MGMT) promoter is
associated with G:C to A:T transitions in the p53 gene in various human cancers, 
including lung cancer. In tumors with p53 mutation, MGMT promoter methylation is 
more common in advanced tumors than in early tumors. However, in tumors with
wild-type p53, MGMT promoter methylation is independent of tumor stage. To
elucidate whether p53 participates in MGMT promoter methylation, we engineered
three cell models: A549 cells with RNA interference (RNAi)-mediated knockdown of 
p53, and p53 null H1299 cells transfected with either wild-type p53 (WT-p53) or
mutant-p53 (L194R, and R249S-p53). Knockdown of endogenous p53 increased MGMT
promoter methylation in A549 cells, and transient expression of WT-p53 in p53
null H1299 cells diminished MGMT promoter methylation, whereas the MGMT promoter 
methylation status were unchanged by expression of mutant-p53. Previous work
showed that p53 modulates DNA-methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) expression; we
additionally examined chromatin remodeling proteins expression levels of histone 
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1). We found that p53 knockdown elevated expression of both
DNMT1 and HDAC1 in A549 cells. Conversely, expressing WT-p53 in p53 null H1299
cells reduced DNMT1 and HDAC1 expression, but the reduction of both proteins was 
not observed in expressing mutant-p53 H1299 cells. CHIP analysis further showed
that DNMT1 and HDAC1 binding to the MGMT promoter was increased by MGMT promoter 
methylation and decreased by MGMT promoter demethylation. In conclusion, MGMT
promoter methylation modulated by p53 status could partially promote p53 mutation
occurrence in advanced lung tumors.

PMID: 18555750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2008 Sep-Oct;41(2):148-53. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2008.04.002. 
Epub 2008 Jun 13.

Sodium butyrate activates erythroid-specific 5-aminolevulinate synthase gene
through Sp1 elements at its promoter.

Han L(1), Zhong Y, Huang B, Han L, Pan L, Xu X, Wang X, Huang B, Lu J.

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Molecular Epigenetics of MOE, Institute of Genetics and 
Cytology, Northeast Normal University, Changchun 130024, PR China.

Sodium butyrate (NaBu) has been shown to induce erythroid cell differentiation.
In this study, we investigated the mechanisms involved in NaBu-induced activation
of erythroid-specific 5-aminolevulinate synthase gene (ALAS2). We showed that
NaBu upregulated ALAS2 gene transcription in different cell lineages. By using
site-directed mutagenesis of putative responsive elements at ALAS2 promoter and
reporter gene analysis, we identified that the Sp1 binding sites within the ALAS2
promoter were responsive to NaBu stimulation. Results from the chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays indicated that upon the NaBu stimulation,
binding of Sp1 protein to ALAS2 promoter increased significantly, with concurrent
increases in acetylation level of histone H3 and dimethylation level of
H3-Lysine4 at ALAS2 promoter. Also, our data suggested that HDAC1 may be a target
enzyme of NaBu action.

PMID: 18555711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2008 Nov;49(11):4753-9. doi: 10.1167/iovs.08-2166.
Epub 2008 Jun 14.

Sensitization of RPE cells by alphaB-crystallin siRNA to SAHA-induced stage 1
apoptosis through abolishing the association of alphaB-crystallin with HDAC1 in
SC35 speckles.

Noh SJ(1), Jeong WJ, Rho JH, Shin DM, Ahn HB, Park WC, Rho SH, Soung YH, Kim TH, 
Park BS, Yoo YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Dong-A University College of Medicine 
and Medical Science Research Center, Busan, South Korea.

PURPOSE: To better understand the mechanism underlying the anti-apoptotic
activity of alphaB-crystallin in RPE cells.
METHODS: Cells of the human retinal pigment epithelial line ARPE-19 were treated 
with a histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACI), suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid
(SAHA), with or without alphaB-crystallin siRNA. To examine the mechanism
underlying the cell death induced in ARPE-19 cells, nuclear staining, flow
cytometry, DNA electrophoresis, pulse field gel electrophoresis, Western blot
analysis, confocal microscopy, and coimmunoprecipitation assay were undertaken.
RESULTS: The present study demonstrated that an HDACI, SAHA, at the usual doses
or the silencing of alphaB-crystallin by siRNA alone did not effectively induce
apoptosis in ARPE-19 cells. Silencing of alphaB-crystallin likely abolishes the
anti-apoptotic activity of alphaB-crystallin. The data indicated that silencing
of alphaB-crystallin sensitizes ARPE19 cells to SAHA-induced apoptosis and leads 
them to stage 1 apoptosis. alphaB-Crystallin associates with HDAC1 on SC35
speckles, and silencing of alphaB-crystallin abolishes this association,
resulting in the induction of apoptosis. The data indicated that the association 
between alphaB-crystallin and HDAC1 on SC35 speckles plays a pivotal role in
anti-apoptotic activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Knockout of alphaB-crystallin may be a promising new approach to
enhance therapeutic potency for proliferative vitreoretinopathy without
compromising efficacy.

PMID: 18552382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Cell Biol Int. 2008 Sep;32(9):1073-80. doi: 10.1016/j.cellbi.2008.04.018. Epub
2008 May 2.

Cell cycle dependent role of HDAC1 for proliferation control through modulating
ribosomal DNA transcription.

Meraner J(1), Lechner M, Schwarze F, Gander R, Jesacher F, Loidl P.

Author information: 
(1)Innsbruck-Biocenter, Division of Molecular Biology, Innsbruck Medical
University, Fritz-Pregl-Strasse 3, A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria.

Ribosome biogenesis and ribosomal DNA transcription are closely correlated with
the growth and proliferation of cells, with these processes being under tight
epigenetic control. We have investigated the effect of ectopically expressed
murine HDAC1 in reporter assays, on ribosomal DNA transcription, cell cycle
progression and proliferation in transfected mammalian cells. Ectopically
expressed mHDAC1 represses transcription in ribosomal reporter assays driven by
ribosomal promoter elements in NIH3T3 cells as well as Cos-7 cells. Following
stable transfection of NIH3T3 cells, flag-tagged HDAC1 is assembled into
functional, enzymatically active HDAC-complexes that display correct nuclear
localization. Induction of flag-HDAC1 expression in NIH3T3 cells caused a
cell-cycle phase specific reduction in the initiation of endogenous rDNA
transcription, reflected in a reduction of nascent rRNA as well as a marked
depression of proliferation due to prolongation of G2-phase. This was
substantiated by FACS analysis and cyclin B1 expression analysis. However,
prolongation of the G2-phase in HDAC1-overexpressing cells finally led to
overcompensation and thus to an increase in total ribosomal RNA. The transient
downregulation of rRNA synthesis after induction of HDAC1 overexpression led to a
prolongation of G2-phase. These observations were most likely a consequence of
HDAC1-mediated deacetylation of upstream binding factor (UBF).

PMID: 18550396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Eur J Pharmacol. 2008 Jul 28;589(1-3):45-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2008.04.058.
Epub 2008 May 7.

Clinically relevant concentrations of valproic acid modulate melatonin MT(1)
receptor, HDAC and MeCP2 mRNA expression in C6 glioma cells.

Kim B(1), Rincón Castro LM, Jawed S, Niles LP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioural Neurosciences, McMaster University,
HSC-4N77, Hamilton, ON, Canada.

C6 glioma cells were treated with clinically relevant concentrations of valproic 
acid (0.5 or 1.0 mM) for 1-7 days and RT-PCR used to examine expression of the
melatonin MT(1) receptor and selected epigenetic modulators. Valproic acid caused
significant time-dependent changes in the mRNA expression of the melatonin MT(1) 
receptor, histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1, 2 and 3, and methyl CpG binding protein 2
(MeCP2). A structurally distinct HDAC inhibitor, trichostatin A, also caused a
significant concentration-dependent induction of melatonin MT(1) receptor mRNA
expression, suggesting involvement of an epigenetic mechanism. The ability of
clinical concentrations of valproic acid to significantly alter melatonin MT(1)
receptor expression, suggests a role for this receptor in the diverse
neuropharmacological and oncostatic effects of this agent.

PMID: 18550052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. J Biol Chem. 2008 Aug 22;283(34):23353-63. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M709651200. Epub 2008
Jun 2.

Closed chromatin architecture is induced by an RNA duplex targeting the HIV-1
promoter region.

Suzuki K(1), Juelich T, Lim H, Ishida T, Watanebe T, Cooper DA, Rao S, Kelleher
AD.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Immunology, St. Vincent's Hospital, Darlinghurst, New South Wales
2010, Australia. k.suzuki@cfi.unsw.edu.au

In some mammalian systems small interfering RNAs (siRNA) targeting homologous
sequences in promoter regions of genes induce transcriptional gene silencing
(TGS). We have previously reported the induction of TGS by an siRNA (prom-A
siRNA) targeting the tandem NF-kappaB-binding motifs within the human
immunodeficiency virus, type 1 (HIV-1), promoter region. Here we report that
induction of TGS by prom-A siRNA is accompanied by immediate and sustained local 
recruitment of Argonaute-1 (Ago1), histone deacetylase-1 (HDAC1), and induction
of dimethylation of histone 3 at lysine 9 (H3K9me2), processes known to be
associated with transcriptional silencing. Elevated levels of H3K9me2 and HDAC1
spread upstream of the target sequence, and elevated H3K9me2 levels also spread
downstream into the coding region. Moreover, this siRNA induces an immediate
change in DNA accessibility to restriction enzyme digestion in the region of the 
transcription initiation site of the HIV-1. This change in accessibility is
because of the relocation of a nucleosome known to be associated with this region
of the integrated pro-virus. Although there is a theoretical possibility that the
observed viral suppression could be mediated by the PTGS mechanism with this
siRNA acting at the 3 (R)-long term repeat of the virus, we demonstrate that this
siRNA, and three other U3 targeted siRNAs, are inefficient inducers of PTGS.
These data strongly suggest that siRNA targeting the promoter region acts
predominantly at a site within the 5 (R)-long term repeat of HIV to induce
transcriptional silencing and alterations to chromatin structure of the HIV
promoter region that extend well beyond the immediate siRNA target site. These
induced changes are consistent with those described in latent HIV-1 infection.

PMCID: PMC2516975
PMID: 18519571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. J Mol Endocrinol. 2008 Aug;41(2):91-102. doi: 10.1677/JME-08-0025. Epub 2008 May 
30.

Developmental origins of disease and determinants of chromatin structure:
maternal diet modifies the primate fetal epigenome.

Aagaard-Tillery KM(1), Grove K, Bishop J, Ke X, Fu Q, McKnight R, Lane RH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
University of Utah Health Sciences, Salt Lake City 84158 Utah, USA.
kjersti131@prodigy.net

Chromatin structure is epigenetically altered via covalent modifications of
histones to allow for heritable gene regulation without altering the nucleotide
sequence. Multiple lines of evidence from rodents have established a role for
epigenetic remodeling in regulating gene transcription in response to an altered 
gestational milieu. However, to date, it is unknown whether variations in the
intrauterine environment in primates similarly induce changes in key determinants
of hepatic chromatin structure. We hypothesized that a maternal high-fat diet
would alter the epigenomic profile of the developing offspring, which would
result in alterations in fetal gene expression. Age- and weight-matched adult
female Japanese macaques were placed on control (13% fat) or high-fat (35% fat)
breeder diets and mated annually over a 4-year interval. Fetuses in successive
years were delivered near term (e130 of 167 days) and underwent necropsy with
tissue harvest. Fetal histones were acid extracted for characterization of H3
modification and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) with differential display
PCR; fetal RNA, DNA, and cytoplasmic and nuclear protein extracts were similarly 
extracted for comparison. Chronic consumption of a maternal high-fat diet results
in a threefold increase in fetal liver triglycerides and histologic correlates of
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. These gross changes in the fetal liver are
accompanied by a statistically significant hyperacetylation of fetal hepatic
tissue at H3K14 (199.85+/-9.64 vs 88.8+/-45.4; P=0.038) with a trend towards the 
increased acetylation at H3K9 (140.9+/-38.7 vs 46.6+/-6.53; P=0.097) and at H3K18
(69.0+/-3.54 vs 58.0+/-4.04; P=0.096). However, epigenetic modifications on fetal
hepatic H3 associated with gene repression were absent or subtle (P>0.05).
Subsequent characterization of key epigenetic determinants associated with H3
acetylation marks revealed similar significant alterations in association with a 
high-fat maternal diet (e.g., relative fetal histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) gene
expression 0.61+/-0.25; P=0.011). Consistent with our mRNA expression profile,
fetal nuclear extracts from offspring of high-fat diet animals were observed to
be significantly relatively deplete of HDAC1 protein (36.07+/-6.73 vs
83.18+/-7.51; P=0.006) and in vitro HDAC functional activity (0.252+/-0.03 vs
0.698+/-0.02; P<0.001). We employ these observations in ChIP differential display
PCR to attempt to identify potential fetal genes whose expression is reprogramed 
under conditions of a high-fat maternal diet. We quantitatively confirm a minimum
of a 40% alteration in the expression of several genes of interest: glutamic
pyruvate transaminase (alanine aminotransferase) 2 (GPT2) (1.59+/-0.23-fold;
P=0.08), DNAJA2 (1.36+/-0.21; P=0.09), and Rdh12 (1.88+/-0.15; P=0.01) are
appreciably increased in fetal hepatic tissue from maternal caloric-dense diet
animals when compared with control while Npas2, a peripheral circadian regulator,
was significantly downmodulated in the offspring of high-fat diet animals
(0.66+/-0.08; P=0.03). In this study, we show that a current significant in utero
exposure (caloric-dense high-fat maternal diet) induces site-specific alterations
in fetal hepatic H3 acetylation. Employing ChIP, we extend these observations to 
link modifications of H3 acetylation with alterations in gene-specific
expression. These results suggest that a caloric-dense maternal diet leading to
obesity epigenetically alters fetal chromatin structure in primates via covalent 
modifications of histones and hence lends a molecular basis to the fetal origins 
of adult disease hypothesis.

PMCID: PMC2959100
PMID: 18515302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. J Mol Biol. 2008 Jun 27;380(1):1-16. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.04.056. Epub 2008
Apr 30.

Recruitment of CREB1 and histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) to the mouse Ltbp-1
promoter regulates its constitutive expression in a dioxin receptor-dependent
manner.

Gomez-Duran A(1), Ballestar E, Carvajal-Gonzalez JM, Marlowe JL, Puga A, Esteller
M, Fernandez-Salguero PM.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Facultad de Ciencias,
Universidad de Extremadura, Avenida de Elvas s/n, 06071-Badajoz, Spain.

Latent TGFbeta-binding protein 1 (LTBP-1) is a key regulator of TGFbeta targeting
and activation in the extracellular matrix. LTBP-1 is recognized as a major
docking molecule to localize, and possibly to activate, TGFbeta in the
extracellular matrix. Despite this relevant function, the molecular mechanisms
regulating Ltbp-1 transcription remain largely unknown. Previous results from our
laboratory revealed that mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF) lacking dioxin
receptor (AhR) had increased Ltbp-1 mRNA expression and elevated TGFbeta
activity, suggesting that AhR repressed Ltbp-1 transcription. Here, we have
cloned the mouse Ltbp-1 gene promoter and analysed its mechanism of
transcriptional repression by AhR. Reporter gene assays, AhR over-expression and 
site-directed mutagenesis showed that basal Ltbp-1 transcription is
AhR-dependent. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and RNA interference (RNAi)
revealed that AhR regulates Ltbp-1 transcription by a mechanism involving
recruitment of co-activators such as CREB1 and co-repressors such as HDAC2 to the
Ltbp-1 promoter. In AhR-expressing (AhR+/+) MEF cells, the recruitment of HDAC1, 
2 and 4 correlated with decreased K8H4 acetylation and impaired binding of
pCREB(Ser133) to the Ltbp-1 promoter, likely maintaining a constitutive repressed
state. AhR-/- MEF cells had the opposite pattern of HDACs and pCREB1(Ser133)
binding to Ltbp-1 promoter, and therefore, over-expressed Ltbp-1 mRNA. In
agreement, siRNA for HDAC2 increased Ltbp-1 expression and K8H4 acetylation in
AhR+/+ but not in AhR-/- MEF cells. We suggest that HDAC2 binding keeps Ltbp-1
promoter repressed in AhR+/+ MEF cells, whereas in AhR-null MEF cells the absence
of HDAC2 and the binding of pCREB(Ser133) allow Ltbp-1 transcription. Thus,
epigenetics can contribute to constitutive Ltbp-1 repression by a mechanism
requiring AhR activity.

PMCID: PMC2824431
PMID: 18508077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2008;25(7):703-16. doi: 10.1007/s10585-008-9179-x. Epub 2008
May 28.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors: the anticancer, antimetastatic and antiangiogenic
activities of AN-7 are superior to those of the clinically tested AN-9 (Pivanex).

Tarasenko N(1), Nudelman A, Tarasenko I, Entin-Meer M, Hass-Kogan D, Inbal A,
Rephaeli A.

Author information: 
(1)Felsenstein Medical Research Center, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Beilinson Campus, Petach Tikva 49100, Israel.

Histone deacetylase inhibitory prodrugs that are metabolized to butyric acid and 
formaldehyde possess antineoplastic properties and low toxicity. We sought to
characterize the antiangiogenic and antimetastatic activities of two lead
prodrugs, pivaloyloxymethyl butyrate (AN-9) and butyroyloxymethyl-diethyl
phosphate (AN-7) in murine cancer models. In the sc implanted human colon
carcinoma HT-29 xenograft model AN-7, exhibited superior anticancer activity
compared to AN-9, as was evident by the significantly greater inhibition of tumor
growth and reduction of serum CEA. AN-7 was also more effective in reducing mean 
vessel density (MVD) by 7-fold, bFGF, Ki-67 (7-fold) and HIF-1alpha in
immunohistochemically stained tumor sections. Semi-quantitative evaluation of the
levels of bFGF, HDAC1 and HIF-1alpha by Western blot analysis showed a decrease
in expression only in the tumors of mice treated with AN-7. The level of bFGF was
reduced 3-fold in the tumor and that of TIMP1 was elevated (by 3-fold) in the
serum of AN-7 treated mice. In a 4T1 metastatic breast carcinoma model, AN-7
inhibited the formation of lung lesions by 76% and AN-9 by 47%, further
demonstrating the greater efficacy of AN-7 compared to AN-9 (P<0.02). Both AN-7
and AN-9 exhibited antimetastatic and antiangiogenic activities by reducing
vascularization, bFGF expression and HIF-1alpha. Yet, AN-7 was more potent than
AN-9.

PMID: 18506586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Ann Surg Oncol. 2008 Aug;15(8):2318-28. doi: 10.1245/s10434-008-9940-z. Epub 2008
May 28.

High histone deacetylase 7 (HDAC7) expression is significantly associated with
adenocarcinomas of the pancreas.

Ouaïssi M(1), Sielezneff I, Silvestre R, Sastre B, Bernard JP, Lafontaine JS,
Payan MJ, Dahan L, Pirrò N, Seitz JF, Mas E, Lombardo D, Ouaissi A.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Chirurgie Digestive et Oncologique, Pôle d'Oncologie et Spécialité 
Médico-Chirurgicales, Assistance Pubique-Hôpitaux de Marseille, Hôpital Timone,
264 Rue Saint Pierre, Marseille 13000, France. mehdi.ouaissi@mail.ap-hm.fr

BACKGROUND: Alterations in HDACs gene expression have been reported in a number
of human cancers. No information is available concerning the status of HDACs in
pancreatic cancer tumors. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the
expression levels of members of class I (HDAC1, 2,, 3), class II (HDAC4, 5, 6,
and 7), and class III (SIRT1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6) in a set of surgically resected 
pancreatic tissues.
METHODS: Total RNA was isolated from 11 pancreatic adenocarcinomas (PA): stage 0 
(n = 1), IB (n = 1), IIB (n = 6), III (n = 1), IV (n = 2), one serous cystadenoma
(SC), one intraductal papillary mucinous tumor of the pancreas (IMPN), one
complicating chronic pancreatitis (CP), and normal pancreas (NP) obtained during 
donor liver transplantation. Moreover, six other control pancreatic were
included. HDACs gene expression was conducted using quantitative real-time
polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). Protein expression levels were analyzed by
Western blot and their localization by immunohistochemistry analyses of cancer
tissues sections.
RESULTS: Remarkably, 9 of the 11 PA (approximately 81%) showed significant
increase of HDAC7 mRNA levels. In contrast to PA samples, message for HDAC7 was
reduced in CP, SC, and IMPN specimens. The Western blot analysis showed increased
expression of HDAC7 protein in 9 out of 11 PA samples, in agreement with the qPCR
data. Most of the PA tissue sections examined showed intense labeling in the
cytoplasm when reacted against antibodies to HDAC7.
CONCLUSION: The data showed alteration of HDACs gene expression in pancreatic
cancer. Increased expression of HDAC7 discriminates PA from other pancreatic
tumors.

PMID: 18506539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Mol Cancer Res. 2008 May;6(5):873-83. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-07-0330.

Inhibition of histone deacetylases promotes ubiquitin-dependent proteasomal
degradation of DNA methyltransferase 1 in human breast cancer cells.

Zhou Q(1), Agoston AT, Atadja P, Nelson WG, Davidson NE.

Author information: 
(1)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University, 1650 
Orleans Street, CRB Room 144, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

Histone deacetylases (HDAC) play a critical role in chromatin modification and
gene expression. Recent evidence indicates that HDACs can also regulate functions
of nonhistone proteins by catalyzing the removal of acetylated lysine residues.
Here, we show that the HDAC inhibitor LBH589 down-regulates DNA methyltransferase
1 (DNMT1) protein expression in the nucleus of human breast cancer cells.
Cotreatment with the proteasomal inhibitor MG-132 abolishes the ability of LBH589
to reduce DNMT1, suggesting that the proteasomal pathway mediates DNMT1
degradation on HDAC inhibition. Deletion of the NH(2)-terminal 120 amino acids of
DNMT1 diminishes LBH589-induced ubiquitination, indicating that this domain is
essential for its proteasomal degradation. DNMT1 recruits the molecular chaperone
heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) to form a chaperone complex. Treatment with LBH589 
induces hyperacetylation of Hsp90, thereby inhibiting the association of DNMT1
with Hsp90 and promoting ubiquitination of DNMT1. In addition, inactivation of
HDAC1 activity by small interfering RNA and MS-275 is associated with Hsp90
acetylation in conjunction with reduction of DNMT1 protein expression. We
conclude that the stability of DNMT1 is maintained in part through its
association with Hsp90. Disruption of Hsp90 function by HDAC inhibition is a
unique mechanism that mediates the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway for DNMT1
degradation. Our studies suggest a new role for HDAC1 and identify a novel
mechanism of action for the HDAC inhibitors as down-regulators of DNMT1.

PMCID: PMC3361136
PMID: 18505931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Dev Biol. 2008 Jul 1;319(1):110-20. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.04.011. Epub 2008
Apr 18.

Histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) regulates histone acetylation, development, and
gene expression in preimplantation mouse embryos.

Ma P(1), Schultz RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
19104-6018, USA.

Superimposed on activation of the embryonic genome in preimplantation mouse
embryos is the formation of a chromatin-mediated transcriptionally repressive
state that arises in the late two-cell embryo and becomes more pronounced with
development. In this study, we investigated expression and function of Class I
histone deacetylases (HDAC) HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3 during preimplantation
development. HDAC1 is likely a major deacetylase in preimplantation embryos and
its expression inversely correlates with changes in the acetylation state of
histone H4K5 during preimplantation development. RNAi-mediated reduction of HDAC1
leads to hyperacetylation of histone H4 and a developmental delay even though
expression of HDAC2 and HDAC3 is significantly induced in Hdac1-suppressed
embryos; increased expression of p21(Cip1/Waf) may contribute to the observed
developmental delay. RNAi-mediated reduction of HDAC2 has no noticeable effect on
preimplantation development, suggesting that individual HDACs have distinct
functions during preimplantation development. Although RNAi-mediated targeting of
Hdac3 mRNA was very efficient, maternal HDAC3 protein was stable during
preimplantation development, thereby preventing an examination of its role. HDAC1
knockdown does not increase the rate of global transcription in late 2-cell
embryos, but does result in elevated levels of expression of a subset of genes;
this increased expression correlates with hyperacetylation of histone H4. Results
of these experiments suggest that HDAC1 is involved in the development of a
transcriptionally repressive state that initiates in 2-cell embryos.

PMCID: PMC2475681
PMID: 18501342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Jul 25;372(2):298-304. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.05.056. Epub 2008 May 21.

Esco2 is a novel corepressor that associates with various chromatin modifying
enzymes.

Kim BJ(1), Kang KM, Jung SY, Choi HK, Seo JH, Chae JH, Cho EJ, Youn HD, Qin J,
Kim ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Sungkyunkwan University School of
Medicine, 300 Chunchun-dong, Jangan-gu, Suwon, Kyonggi-do 440-746, Republic of
Korea.

Accurate chromosome segregation during cell division requires that sister
chromatids are kept together by cohesin complex until anaphase, when the
chromatids separate and distribute to the two daughter cells. Esco2 is an
acetyltransferase that is required for the establishment of sister chromatid
cohesion during S phase. Here, we report that Esco2 interacts with several
component proteins of the CoREST complex, including a transcription corepressor
CoREST, histone demethlyase LSD1, HDAC1, HDAC2, BRAF35, and PHF21A. Esco2 also
interacts with various histone methyltransferases Suv39h1, SETDB1 and G9a. Esco2 
complex purified from HeLa nuclear extract possesses histone H3 K9 methylation
activity and functions as a transcription repressor. Esco2 fused to Gal4 DNA
binding domain represses transcription by increasing methylation of histone H3 K9
in the promoter region. These results suggest a novel function of Esco2 in
transcription repression through modulation of the chromatin structure.

PMID: 18501190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. J Med Chem. 2008 Jun 26;51(12):3437-48. doi: 10.1021/jm701606b.

A series of potent and selective, triazolylphenyl-based histone deacetylases
inhibitors with activity against pancreatic cancer cells and Plasmodium
falciparum.

Chen Y(1), Lopez-Sanchez M, Savoy DN, Billadeau DD, Dow GS, Kozikowski AP.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Discovery Program, Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacognosy,
University of Illinois at Chicago, 833 South Wood Street, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

The discovery of the rules governing the inhibition of the various HDAC isoforms 
is likely to be key to identifying improved therapeutics that act as epigenetic
modulators of gene transcription. Herein we present results on the modification
of the CAP region of a set of triazolylphenyl-based HDACIs, and show that the
nature of substitution on the phenyl ring plays a role in their selectivity for
HDAC1 versus HDAC6, with low to moderate selectivity (2-51-fold) being achieved. 
In light of the valuable selectivity and potency that were identified for the
triazolylphenyl ligand 6b in the inhibition of HDAC6 (IC50 = 1.9 nM), this
compound represents a valuable research tool and a candidate for further chemical
modifications. Lastly, these new HDACIs were studied for both their anticancer
and antimalarial activity, which serve to validate the superior activity of the
HDACI 10c.

PMID: 18494463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. FASEB J. 2008 Aug;22(8):3035-45. doi: 10.1096/fj.07-103390. Epub 2008 May 20.

Epigenetic regulation of the human mucin gene MUC4 in epithelial cancer cell
lines involves both DNA methylation and histone modifications mediated by DNA
methyltransferases and histone deacetylases.

Vincent A(1), Ducourouble MP, Van Seuningen I.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U837, Pl. de Verdun, 59045 Lille cedex, France.

The human gene MUC4 encodes a transmembrane mucin, ligand of ErbB2, that is
associated with pancreatic tumor progression. In the normal pancreas, MUC4 is not
expressed, whereas activation of its expression is observed in the early steps of
pancreatic carcinogenesis. The molecular mechanisms responsible for MUC4 gene
activation are however still unknown. The MUC4 5'-flanking region being GC-rich
and including two CpG islands, we hypothesized that epigenetic regulation may be 
involved and undertook to decipher the molecular phenomenons implied. By treating
cancer cell lines with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-aza) and trichostatin A (TSA),
we were able to restore MUC4 expression in a cell-specific manner. We showed by
bisulfite-treated genomic DNA sequencing and chromatin immunoprecipitation that
methylation of five CpG sites and establishment of a repressive histone code at
the 5'-untranslated region were associated with MUC4 silencing and impaired its
activation by Sp1. Direct involvement of DNMT3A, DNMT3B, HDAC1, and HDAC3 was
demonstrated by RNA interference and chromatin immunoprecipitation. Moreover,
inhibition of histone deacetylation by TSA was associated with strong MUC4
repression in high-expressing cells. In conclusion, this work shows for the first
time the importance of epigenetics in regulating MUC4 expression and may
represent a new strategy to inhibit its expression in epithelial tumors.

PMID: 18492726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2008 Jul 16;289(1-2):94-101. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2008.03.009.
Epub 2008 Mar 27.

Acetylation and deacetylation regulate CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta at K39
in mediating gene transcription.

Ceseña TI(1), Cui TX, Subramanian L, Fulton CT, Iñiguez-Lluhí JA, Kwok RP,
Schwartz J.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular & Molecular Biology Program, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
48109-5622, United States.

The transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta (C/EBPbeta) contains
multiple acetylation sites, including lysine (K) 39. Mutation of C/EBPbeta at
K39, an acetylation site in the transcriptional activation domain, impairs
transcription of C/EBPbeta target genes in a dominant-negative fashion. Further, 
K39 of C/EBPbeta can be deacetylated by HDAC1, and HDAC1 may decrease
C/EBPbeta-mediated transcription, suggesting that acetylation of C/EBPbeta at K39
is dynamically regulated in mediating gene transcription. Acetylation of
endogenous C/EBPbeta at K39 is detected in adipose tissue, and also occurs in
3T3-L1 cells undergoing adipocyte conversion. In addition, mutation of K39 in
C/EBPbeta impairs activation of its target genes encoding C/EBPalpha and
PPARgamma, essential mediators of adipogenesis, as well as adipocyte genes for
leptin and Glut4. These findings suggest that acetylation of C/EBPbeta at K39 is 
an important and dynamic regulatory event that contributes to its ability to
transactivate target genes, including those associated with adipogenesis and
adipocyte function.

PMID: 18486321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Jul 18;372(1):30-4. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.04.187. Epub 2008 May 14.

In vivo binding to and functional repression of the VDR gene promoter by SLUG in 
human breast cells.

Mittal MK(1), Myers JN, Misra S, Bailey CK, Chaudhuri G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbial Pathogenesis & Immune Response, Meharry Medical
College, 1005 D.B. Todd Jr. Boulevard, Nashville, TN 37208, USA.

The regulation of vitamin D receptor (VDR), a key mediator in the vitamin D
pathway, in breast cancer etiology has long been of interest. We have shown here 
that the transcriptional repressor protein SLUG inhibits the expression of VDR in
human breast cancer cells. To explore the possibility that SLUG regulates the VDR
gene promoter, we cloned a 628bp fragment (-613 to +15) of the human VDR gene
promoter. This region contains three E2-box sequences (CAGGTG/CACCTG), the
classical binding site of SLUG. SLUG specifically inhibited VDR gene promoter
activity. Chromatin-immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays revealed that SLUG is
recruited on the native VDR gene promoter along with the co-repressor protein
CtBP1 and the effector protein HDAC1. These data suggests that SLUG binds to the 
E2-box sequences of the VDR gene promoter and recruits CtBP1 and HDAC1, which
results in the inhibition of VDR gene expression by chromatin remodeling.

PMCID: PMC2846599
PMID: 18485278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Clin Invest. 2008 Jun;118(6):2316-24. doi: 10.1172/JCI33655.

Development of type 2 diabetes following intrauterine growth retardation in rats 
is associated with progressive epigenetic silencing of Pdx1.

Park JH(1), Stoffers DA, Nicholls RD, Simmons RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Department of
Medicine, and Institute for Diabetes, Obesity, and Metabolism, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR) has been linked to the onset of diseases
in adulthood, including type 2 diabetes, and has been proposed to result from
altered gene regulation patterns due to epigenetic modifications of developmental
genes. To determine whether epigenetic modifications may play a role in the
development of adult diabetes following IUGR, we used a rodent model of IUGR that
expresses lower levels of Pdx1, a pancreatic and duodenal homeobox 1
transcription factor critical for beta cell function and development, which
develops diabetes in adulthood. We found that expression of Pdx1 was permanently 
reduced in IUGR beta cells and underwent epigenetic modifications throughout
development. The fetal IUGR state was characterized by loss of USF-1 binding at
the proximal promoter of Pdx1, recruitment of the histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1)
and the corepressor Sin3A, and deacetylation of histones H3 and H4. Following
birth, histone 3 lysine 4 (H3K4) was demethylated and histone 3 lysine 9 (H3K9)
was methylated. During the neonatal period, these epigenetic changes and the
reduction in Pdx1 expression could be reversed by HDAC inhibition. After the
onset of diabetes in adulthood, the CpG island in the proximal promoter was
methylated, resulting in permanent silencing of the Pdx1 locus. These results
provide insight into the development of type 2 diabetes following IUGR and we
believe they are the first to describe the ontogeny of chromatin remodeling in
vivo from the fetus to the onset of disease in adulthood.

PMCID: PMC2373422
PMID: 18464933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. PLoS Genet. 2008 Feb 29;4(2):e1000009. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000009.

Drosophila histone deacetylase-3 controls imaginal disc size through suppression 
of apoptosis.

Zhu CC(1), Bornemann DJ, Zhitomirsky D, Miller EL, O'Connor MB, Simon JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Development, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States of America.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) execute biological regulation through
post-translational modification of chromatin and other cellular substrates. In
humans, there are eleven HDACs, organized into three distinct subfamilies. This
large number of HDACs raises questions about functional overlap and division of
labor among paralogs. In vivo roles are simpler to address in Drosophila, where
there are only five HDAC family members and only two are implicated in
transcriptional control. Of these two, HDAC1 has been characterized genetically, 
but its most closely related paralog, HDAC3, has not. Here we describe the
isolation and phenotypic characterization of hdac3 mutations. We find that both
hdac3 and hdac1 mutations are dominant suppressors of position effect
variegation, suggesting functional overlap in heterochromatin regulation.
However, all five hdac3 loss-of-function alleles are recessive lethal during
larval/pupal stages, indicating that HDAC3 is essential on its own for Drosophila
development. The mutant larvae display small imaginal discs, which result from
abnormally elevated levels of apoptosis. This cell death occurs as a
cell-autonomous response to HDAC3 loss and is accompanied by increased expression
of the pro-apoptotic gene, hid. In contrast, although HDAC1 mutants also display 
small imaginal discs, this appears to result from reduced proliferation rather
than from elevated apoptosis. The connection between HDAC loss and apoptosis is
important since HDAC inhibitors show anticancer activities in animal models
through mechanisms involving apoptotic induction. However, the specific HDACs
implicated in tumor cell killing have not been identified. Our results indicate
that protein deacetylation by HDAC3 plays a key role in suppression of apoptosis 
in Drosophila imaginal tissue.

PMCID: PMC2265479
PMID: 18454196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Nat Cell Biol. 2008 Jun;10(6):731-9. doi: 10.1038/ncb1736. Epub 2008 May 4.

Nanog and Oct4 associate with unique transcriptional repression complexes in
embryonic stem cells.

Liang J(1), Wan M, Zhang Y, Gu P, Xin H, Jung SY, Qin J, Wong J, Cooney AJ, Liu
D, Songyang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Verna and Marrs McLean Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Nanog and Oct4 are essential transcription factors that regulate self-renewal and
pluripotency of ES cells. However, the mechanisms by which Nanog and Oct4
modulate ES cell fate remain unknown. Through characterization of endogenous
Nanog and Oct4 protein complexes in mouse ES cells, we found that these
transcription factors interact with each other and associate with proteins from
multiple repression complexes, including the NuRD, Sin3A and Pml complexes. In
addition, Nanog, Oct4 and repressor proteins co-occupy Nanog-target genes in
mouse ES cells, suggesting that Nanog and Oct4 together may communicate with
distinct repression complexes to control gene transcription. To our surprise, of 
the various core components in the NuRD complex with which Nanog and Oct4
interact, Mta1 was preferred, whereas Mbd3 and Rbbp7 were either absent or
present at sub-stoichiometric levels. We named this unique Hdac1/2- and
Mta1/2-containing complex NODE (for Nanog and Oct4 associated deacetylase).
Interestingly, NODE contained histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity that seemed to 
be comparable to NuRD, and retained its association with Nanog and Oct4 in
Mbd3(-/-) ES cells. In contrast to Mbd3 loss-of-function, knockdown of NODE
subunits led to increased expression of developmentally regulated genes and
ES-cell differentiation. Our data collectively suggest that Nanog and Oct4
associate with unique repressor complexes on their target genes to control ES
cell fate.

PMID: 18454139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. EMBO Rep. 2008 Jun;9(6):555-62. doi: 10.1038/embor.2008.67. Epub 2008 May 2.

Atrophin recruits HDAC1/2 and G9a to modify histone H3K9 and to determine cell
fates.

Wang L(1), Charroux B, Kerridge S, Tsai CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, UMDNJ-Robert Wood Johnson Medical
School, 675 Hoes Lane, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA.

Atrophin family proteins, including the vertebrate arginine-glutamic acid
dipeptide repeats protein (RERE) and Drosophila Atrophin (Atro), constitute a new
class of nuclear receptor corepressors. Both RERE and Atro share the ELM2 (EGL-27
and MTA1 homology 2) and SANT (SWI3/ADA2/N-CoR/TFIII-B) domains, which are also
present in other important transcriptional cofactors. Here, we report that the
SANT domain in RERE binds to the histone methyltransferase G9a, and that both the
ELM2 and SANT domains orchestrate molecular events that lead to a stable
methylation of histone H3-lysine 9. We establish the physiological relevance of
these interactions among Atrophin, G9a, and histone deacetylases 1 and 2 in
Drosophila by showing that these proteins localize to overlapping chromosomal
loci, and act together to suppress wing vein and melanotic-mass formation. This
study not only shows a new function of the SANT domain and establishes its
connection with the ELM2 domain, but also implies that a similar strategy is used
by other ELM2-SANT proteins to repress gene transcription and to exert biological
effects.

PMCID: PMC2427389
PMID: 18451879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. PLoS One. 2008 Apr 23;3(4):e2047. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002047.

NF-Y dependent epigenetic modifications discriminate between proliferating and
postmitotic tissue.

Gurtner A(1), Fuschi P, Magi F, Colussi C, Gaetano C, Dobbelstein M, Sacchi A,
Piaggio G.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncogenesis Laboratory, Experimental Oncology Department, Regina
Elena Cancer Institute, Rome, Italy.

The regulation of gene transcription requires posttranslational modifications of 
histones that, in concert with chromatin remodeling factors, shape the structure 
of chromatin. It is currently under intense investigation how this structure is
modulated, in particular in the context of proliferation and differentiation.
Compelling evidence suggests that the transcription factor NF-Y acts as a master 
regulator of cell cycle progression, activating the transcription of many cell
cycle regulatory genes. However, the underlying molecular mechanisms are not yet 
completely understood. Here we show that NF-Y exerts its effect on transcription 
through the modulation of the histone "code". NF-Y colocalizes with nascent RNA, 
while RNA polymerase II is I phosphorylated on serine 2 of the YSPTSPS repeats
within its carboxyterminal domain and histones are carrying modifications that
represent activation signals of gene expression (H3K9ac and PAN-H4ac). Comparing 
postmitotic muscle tissue from normal mice and proliferating muscles from mdx
mice, we demonstrate by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) that NF-Y DNA
binding activity correlates with the accumulation of acetylated histones H3 and
H4 on promoters of key cell cycle regulatory genes, and with their active
transcription. Accordingly, p300 is recruited onto the chromatin of NF-Y target
genes in a NF-Y-dependent manner, as demonstrated by Re-ChIP. Conversely, the
loss of NF-Y binding correlates with a decrease of acetylated histones, the
recruitment of HDAC1, and a repressed heterochromatic state with enrichment of
histones carrying modifications known to mediate silencing of gene expression
(H3K9me3, H3K27me2 and H4K20me3). As a consequence, NF-Y target genes are
downregulated in this context. In conclusion, our data indicate a role of NF-Y in
modulating the structure and transcriptional competence of chromatin in vivo and 
support a model in which NF-Y-dependent histone "code" changes contribute to the 
proper discrimination between proliferating and postmitotic cells in vivo and in 
vitro.

PMCID: PMC2295263
PMID: 18431504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jun 20;283(25):17324-32. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M800224200. Epub 2008
Apr 22.

Enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) down-regulates RUNX3 by increasing histone
H3 methylation.

Fujii S(1), Ito K, Ito Y, Ochiai A.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Division, Research Center for Innovative Oncology, National Cancer
Center at Kashiwa, 6-5-1, Kashiwanoha, Kashiwa, Chiba 277-857 7 Japan.

Overexpression of enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) occurs in various
malignancies and is associated with a poor prognosis, especially because of
increased cancer cell proliferation. In this study we found an inverse
correlation between EZH2 and RUNX3 gene expression in five cancer cell lines,
i.e. gastric, breast, prostate, colon, and pancreatic cancer cell lines.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay showed an association between EZH2 bound to
the RUNX3 gene promoter, and trimethylated histone H3 at lysine 27, and HDAC1
(histone deacetylase 1) bound to the RUNX3 gene promoter in cancer cells. RNA
interference-mediated knockdown of EZH2 resulted in a decrease in H3K27
trimethylation and unbound HDAC1 and an increase in expression of the RUNX3 gene.
Restoration of RUNX3 expression was not associated with any change in DNA
methylation status in the RUNX3 promoter region. RUNX3 was repressed by histone
deacetylation and hypermethylation of a CpG island in the promoter region and
restored by trichostatin A or/and 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine. Immunofluorescence
staining confirmed restoration of expression of the RUNX3 protein after knockdown
of EZH2 and its restoration resulted in decreased cell proliferation. In vivo, an
inverse relationship between expression of the EZH2 and RUNX3 proteins was
observed at the individual cell level in gastric cancer patients in the absence
of DNA methylation in the RUNX3 promoter region. The results showed that RUNX3 is
a target for repression by EZH2 and indicated an underlying mechanism of the
functional role of EZH2 overexpression on cancer cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC2427338
PMID: 18430739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jun 20;283(25):17055-64. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M708449200. Epub 2008
Apr 22.

Gonadotropin-regulated testicular helicase (DDX25), an essential regulator of
spermatogenesis, prevents testicular germ cell apoptosis.

Gutti RK(1), Tsai-Morris CH, Dufau ML.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Molecular Endocrinology, Endocrinology and Reproduction Research
Branch, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4510, USA.

Gonadotropin-regulated testicular helicase (GRTH)/DDX25 is an essential
post-transcriptional regulator of spermatogenesis. In GRTH null mice severe
apoptosis was observed in spermatocytes entering the metaphase of meiosis. Pro-
and anti-apoptotic factors were found to be under GRTH regulation in comparative 
studies of spermatocytes from wild type and GRTH(-/-) knock-out (KO) mice. KO
mice displayed decreased levels of Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL (anti-apoptotic factors), an 
increase in Bid, Bak, and Bad (pro-apoptotic), reduced phospho-Bad, and release
of cytochrome c. Also, an increase on Smac, a competitor of inhibitor apoptotic
proteins that release caspases, was observed. These changes caused an increase in
cleavage of caspases 9 and 3, activation of caspase 3 and increases in cleavage
products of PARP. The half-life of caspase 3 transcripts was markedly increased
in KO, indicating that GRTH had a negative role on its mRNA stability.
IkappaBalpha, which sequesters NF-kappaB from its transcriptional activation of
pro-apoptotic genes, was highly elevated in KO, and its phospho-form, which
promotes its dissociation, was reduced. The increase of HDAC1 and abolition of
p300 expression in KO indicated a nuclear action of GRTH on the
NF-kappaB-mediated transcription of anti-apoptotic genes. It also regulates the
associated death domain pathway and caspase 8-mediated events. GRTH-mediated
apoptotic regulation was further indicated by its selective binding to pro- and
anti-apoptotic mRNAs. These studies have demonstrated that GRTH, as a component
of mRNP particles, acts as a negative regulator of the tumor necrosis factor
receptor 1 and caspase pathways and promotes NF-kappaB function to control
apoptosis in spermatocytes of adult mice.

PMCID: PMC2427358
PMID: 18430733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Cell Mol Med. 2008 Apr;12(2):607-21. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2007.00136.x.

Trichostatin A causes p53 to switch oxidative-damaged colorectal cancer cells
from cell cycle arrest into apoptosis.

Habold C(1), Poehlmann A, Bajbouj K, Hartig R, Korkmaz KS, Roessner A,
Schneider-Stock R.

Author information: 
(1)University of Magdeburg, Institute of Pathology, Magdeburg, Germany.

Erratum in
    J Cell Mol Med. 2008 Aug;12(4):1421.

Many studies aim at improving therapeutic efficacy by combining strategies with
oxidative stress-inducing drugs and histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors in
colorectal cancer. As p53 and p21(WAF1) are essential in oxidative stress-induced
DNA damage, we investigated epigenetic regulation of p21(WAF1) promoter. Firstly,
HCT116 p53(+)/(+) and p53(-)/(-) colorectal cancer cells were treated with
H(2)O(2) for 6 hrs and 24 hrs (early/late response). Chromatin
immunoprecipitation revealed transcriptional transactivation of p21(WAF1) in
HCT116 p53(+)/(+) cells as shown by increased binding of p53 and acetylated H4
around two p21(WAF1) promoter sites, the responsible element (RE) and the Sp1
site, while both proteins bound preferentially on the RE. Interestingly, H3 was
not involved, suggesting H4-specific transactivation of the p21(WAF1) promoter.
H(2)O(2) addition resulted in G(2)/M arrest of both HCT116 cell lines without
significant cell death. To investigate whether a HDAC inhibitor strengthens
G(2)/M arrest, we pretreated cells with Trichostatin A (TSA). In HCT116
p53(+)/(+) cells, we found (i) remarkably increased acetylated H4 around both
p21(WAF1) promoter regions, especially at the Sp1 site; (ii) increased
acetylation of p53 at lysines 320 and 382;(iii) displacement of HDAC1 from the
Sp1 site, thus inhibiting its repression effect and increasing p53 binding.p53
seems to trigger H4-acetylation around the p21(WAF1) promoter because there was
nearly no H4 acetylation in HCT116 p53(-)/(-) cells. For the first time we show
that there is a time-dependent TSA mode of action with increased p53-dependent
histone H4 acetylation at the p21(WAF1) promoter in early response, and decreased
acetylation in late response. Reduced p53-triggered transactivation of p21(WAF1) 
in late response allows cells to re-enter cell cycle, and TSA causes p53 to
simultaneously induce apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC3822547
PMID: 18419600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Mol Cancer Ther. 2008 Apr;7(4):759-68. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-07-2026.

MGCD0103, a novel isotype-selective histone deacetylase inhibitor, has broad
spectrum antitumor activity in vitro and in vivo.

Fournel M(1), Bonfils C, Hou Y, Yan PT, Trachy-Bourget MC, Kalita A, Liu J, Lu
AH, Zhou NZ, Robert MF, Gillespie J, Wang JJ, Ste-Croix H, Rahil J, Lefebvre S,
Moradei O, Delorme D, Macleod AR, Besterman JM, Li Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, MethylGene, Inc., 7220 Frederick-Banting,
Montreal, Quebec H4S 2A1, Canada.

Nonselective inhibitors of human histone deacetylases (HDAC) are known to have
antitumor activity in mice in vivo, and several of them are under clinical
investigation. The first of these, Vorinostat (SAHA), has been approved for
treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Questions remain concerning which HDAC
isotype(s) are the best to target for anticancer activity and whether increased
efficacy and safety will result with an isotype-selective HDAC inhibitor. We have
developed an isotype-selective HDAC inhibitor, MGCD0103, which potently targets
human HDAC1 but also has inhibitory activity against HDAC2, HDAC3, and HDAC11 in 
vitro. In intact cells, MGCD0103 inhibited only a fraction of the total HDAC
activity and showed long-lasting inhibitory activity even upon drug removal.
MGCD0103 induced hyperacetylation of histones, selectively induced apoptosis, and
caused cell cycle blockade in various human cancer cell lines in a dose-dependent
manner. MGCD0103 exhibited potent and selective antiproliferative activities
against a broad spectrum of human cancer cell lines in vitro, and HDAC inhibitory
activity was required for these effects. In vivo, MGCD0103 significantly
inhibited growth of human tumor xenografts in nude mice in a dose-dependent
manner and the antitumor activity correlated with induction of histone
acetylation in tumors. Our findings suggest that the isotype-selective HDAC
inhibition by MGCD0103 is sufficient for antitumor activity in vivo and that
further clinical investigation is warranted.

PMID: 18413790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Cereb Cortex. 2008 Dec;18(12):2909-19. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhn051. Epub 2008 Apr 
15.

Members of the NuRD chromatin remodeling complex interact with AUF1 in developing
cortical neurons.

Lee C(1), Gyorgy A, Maric D, Sadri N, Schneider RJ, Barker JL, Lawson M, Agoston 
DV.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Program, School of Medicine, USUHS, Bethesda, MD 20814, USA.

Chromatin remodeling plays an important role in coordinating gene expression
during cortical development, however the identity of molecular complexes present 
in differentiating cortical neurons that mediate the process remains poorly
understood. The A + U-rich element-binding factor 1 (AUF1) is a known regulator
of messenger RNA stability and also acts as a transcription factor upon binding
to AT-rich DNA elements. Here we show that AUF1 is specifically expressed in
subsets of proliferating neural precursors and differentiating postmitotic
neurons of the developing cerebral cortex. Moreover, AUF1 is coexpressed with
histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and metastasis-associated protein 2 (MTA2), members
of the nucleosome remodeling and histone deacetylase complex. AUF1 specifically
and simultaneously binds to HDAC1, MTA2, and AT-rich DNA element, its gene
regulatory function is modulated by the extent of histone acetylation and in
animals lacking AUF1, the composition of the complex is modified. These results
suggest that AUF1 is involved in integrating genetic and epigenetic signals
during cortical development through recruiting HDAC1 and MTA2 to AT-rich DNA
elements.

PMCID: PMC2724833
PMID: 18413351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Cereb Cortex. 2008 Dec;18(12):2932-40. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhn053. Epub 2008 Apr 
15.

Hemispheric asymmetry of frequency-dependent suppression in the ipsilateral
primary motor cortex during finger movement: a functional magnetic resonance
imaging study.

Hayashi MJ(1), Saito DN, Aramaki Y, Asai T, Fujibayashi Y, Sadato N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Sciences, The Graduate University for Advanced
Studies (Sokendai), Okazaki, Japan.

Electrophysiological studies have suggested that the activity of the primary
motor cortex (M1) during ipsilateral hand movement reflects both the ipsilateral 
innervation and the transcallosal inhibitory control from its counterpart in the 
opposite hemisphere, and that their asymmetry might cause hand dominancy. To
examine the asymmetry of the involvement of the ipsilateral motor cortex during a
unimanual motor task under frequency stress, we conducted block-design functional
magnetic resonance imaging with 22 normal right-handed subjects. The task
involved visually cued unimanual opponent finger movement at various rates. The
contralateral M1 showed symmetric frequency-dependent activation. The ipsilateral
M1 showed task-related deactivation at low frequencies without laterality. As the
frequency of the left-hand movement increased, the left M1 showed a gradual
decrease in the deactivation. This data suggests a frequency-dependent increased 
involvement of the left M1 in ipsilateral hand control. By contrast, the right M1
showed more prominent deactivation as the frequency of the right-hand movement
increased. This suggests that there is an increased transcallosal inhibition from
the left M1 to the right M1, which overwhelms the right M1 activation during
ipsilateral hand movement. These results demonstrate the dominance of the left M1
in both ipsilateral innervation and transcallosal inhibition in right-handed
individuals.

PMCID: PMC2583153
PMID: 18413350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Med Chem. 2008 May 22;51(10):2898-906. doi: 10.1021/jm7015254. Epub 2008 Apr
16.

Structural origin of selectivity in class II-selective histone deacetylase
inhibitors.

Estiu G(1), Greenberg E, Harrison CB, Kwiatkowski NP, Mazitschek R, Bradner JE,
Wiest O.

Author information: 
(1)Walther Cancer Research Center, Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry,
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556-5670, USA.

The development of class- and isoform-selective histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors is highly desirable for the study of the complex interactions of these
proteins central to transcription regulation as well as for the development of
selective HDAC inhibitors as drugs in epigenetics. To provide a structural basis 
for the rational design of such inhibitors, a combined computational and
experimental study of inhibition of three different histone deacetylase isoforms,
HDAC1, -6, and -8, with three different hydroxamate inhibitors is reported. While
SAHA was found to be unselective for the inhibition of class I and class II
HDACs, the other inhibitors were found to be selective toward class II HDACs.
Molecular dynamics simulations indicate that this selectivity is caused by both
the overall shape of the protein surface leading to the active site and specific 
interactions of an aspartate residue in a polar loop and two phenylalanines and a
methionine in a nonpolar loop. Monitoring the specific interactions as a function
of the simulation time identifies a key sulfur-pi interaction. The implications
of the structural motifs for the design of class II-selective HDAC inhibitors are
discussed.

PMID: 18412327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Dev Cell. 2008 Apr;14(4):481-93. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2008.01.018.

Epigenetic blocking of an enhancer region controls irradiation-induced
proapoptotic gene expression in Drosophila embryos.

Zhang Y(1), Lin N, Carroll PM, Chan G, Guan B, Xiao H, Yao B, Wu SS, Zhou L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, College of Medicine,
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

Drosophila embryos are highly sensitive to gamma-ray-induced apoptosis at early
but not later, more differentiated stages during development. Two proapoptotic
genes, reaper and hid, are upregulated rapidly following irradiation. However, in
post-stage-12 embryos, in which most cells have begun differentiation, neither
proapoptotic gene can be induced by high doses of irradiation. Our study
indicates that the sensitive-to-resistant transition is due to epigenetic
blocking of the irradiation-responsive enhancer region (IRER), which is located
upstream of reaper but is also required for the induction of hid in response to
irradiation. This IRER, but not the transcribed regions of reaper/hid, becomes
enriched for trimethylated H3K27/H3K9 and forms a heterochromatin-like structure 
during the sensitive-to-resistant transition. The functions of histone-modifying 
enzymes Hdac1(rpd3) and Su(var)3-9 and PcG proteins Su(z)12 and Polycomb are
required for this process. Thus, direct epigenetic regulation of two proapoptotic
genes controls cellular sensitivity to cytotoxic stimuli.

PMCID: PMC2901920
PMID: 18410726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Bone Miner Res. 2008 Aug;23(8):1227-37. doi: 10.1359/jbmr.080325.

Berberine promotes osteoblast differentiation by Runx2 activation with p38 MAPK.

Lee HW(1), Suh JH, Kim HN, Kim AY, Park SY, Shin CS, Choi JY, Kim JB.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.

Berberine (BBR) has been implicated in bone biology. Although BBR reduces
osteoporosis by enhancing BMD and inhibiting osteoclast activity, the effects of 
BBR on osteoblasts during the process of osteogenesis have not been thoroughly
studied. In osteoblastic cells, BBR enhanced the expression of osteogenic marker 
genes including osteopontin and osteocalcin and promoted the transcriptional
activity of the key osteogenic transcription factor Runx2. In osteoblasts, BBR
increased the binding of Runx2 to the promoter region of osteopontin. The
recruitment of co-factors such as p300 and HDAC1 to the promoter regions of
osteopontin and osteocalcin was regulated by BBR, resulting in an enhancement in 
the expression of those genes. Furthermore, BBR activated p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) and increased cyclooxygenase 2 (COX2) expression, which are
key factors in osteoblast differentiation. Consistently, a p38 MAPK-specific
inhibitor attenuated the effect of BBR on osteogenesis, whereas p38 MAPK
overexpression augmented BBR-induced osteogenic gene expression. Moreover, BBR
stimulated bone area formation in calvarial organ culture. Taken together, these 
findings indicate that BBR promotes osteoblast differentiation through activation
of Runx2 by p38 MAPK. Therefore, BBR may be a potential therapeutic agent to
treat bone-related disorders including osteoporosis.

PMID: 18410224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jun 13;283(24):16818-29. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M710177200. Epub 2008
Apr 11.

Lysophosphatidic acid protects cancer cells from histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitor-induced apoptosis through activation of HDAC.

Ishdorj G(1), Graham BA, Hu X, Chen J, Johnston JB, Fang X, Gibson SB.

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Cell Biology, Winnipeg, Manitoba R3E 0V9, Canada.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) catalyze the removal of acetyl groups from histones 
and contribute to transcriptional repression. In addition, the HDAC inhibitors
induce apoptosis in cancer cells through alterations in histone acetylation and
activation of the tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL)
apoptotic pathway. Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) is a growth factor that promotes
survival of cancer cells through activation of G protein-coupled receptors. Here 
we show that HDAC inhibitors can induce apoptosis through activation of the TRAIL
apoptotic pathway, and LPA prevented HDAC inhibitor-induced apoptosis and
increased TRAIL receptor DR4 (death receptor 4) protein expression. This was
associated with increased HDAC1 recruitment to the DR4 promoter following LPA
treatment and a reduction in HDAC inhibitor-induced histone acetylation in the
DR4 promoter. In addition, LPA induces HDAC enzyme activity in a dose- and
time-dependent manner, and this is associated with HDAC1 activation and increased
binding of HDAC1 to HDAC2. Reducing the expression of HDAC1 significantly lowered
LPA-induced HDAC activity and increased histone acetylation. LPA induction of
HDAC activity was blocked by the LPA receptor antagonist, Ki16425, or by
inhibiting receptor activation with pertussis toxin. Reducing the expression of
the LPA receptor LPA(1) also blocked LPA-induced HDAC activation. In addition,
LPA reduced histone acetyltransferase enzymatic activity. Finally, LPA attenuated
the ability of the HDAC inhibitor to reduce HDAC activity. Thus, LPA enhances
survival of cancer cells by increasing HDAC activity and reducing histone
acetylation.

PMCID: PMC2423270
PMID: 18408217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Proteins. 2008 Oct;73(1):134-49. doi: 10.1002/prot.22047.

Comparative molecular dynamics simulations of histone deacetylase-like protein:
binding modes and free energy analysis to hydroxamic acid inhibitors.

Yan C(1), Xiu Z, Li X, Li S, Hao C, Teng H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, School of Environmental and
Biological Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian
116024, People's Republic of China.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) play an important role in gene transcription, and
inhibitors of HDACs can induce cell differentiation and suppress cell
proliferation in tumor cells. Histone deacetylase1 (HDAC1) binds
suberanilohydroxamic acid (SAHA) and 7-phenyl-2, 4, 6-hepta-trienoyl hydroxamic
acid (CG-1521) with moderately low affinity (DeltaG = -8.6 and -7.8 kcal
mol(-1)). The structurally related
(E)-2-(3-(3-(hydroxyamino)-3-oxoprop-1-enyl)phenyl)-N(1),N(3)-diphenylmalonamide 
(SK-683), a Trichostatin A (TSA)-like HDAC1 inhibitor, and TSA are bound to the
HDAC1 with -12.3 and -10.3 kcal mol(-1) of DeltaG, higher binding free energies
than SAHA and CG-1521. Histone deacetylase-like protein (HDLP), an HDAC
homologue, shows a 35.2% sequence identity of HDLP and human HDAC1. Molecular
dynamics simulation and the molecular mechanics/generalized-Born surface area
(MM-GBSA) free energy calculations were applied to investigate the factors
responsible for the relatively activity of these four inhibitors to HDLP. In
addition, computational alanine scanning of the binding site residues was carried
out to determine the contribution components from van der Waals, electrostatic
interaction, nonpolar and polar energy of solvation as well as the effects of
backbones and side-chains with the MM-GBSA method. MM-GBSA methods reproduced the
experimental relative affinities of the four inhibitors in good agreement (R(2) =
0.996) between experimental and computed binding energies. The MM-GBSA
calculations showed that, the number of hydrogen bonds formed between the HDLP
and inhibitors, which varied in the system studied, and electrostatic
interactions determined the magnitude of the free energies for HDLP-inhibitor
interactions. The MM-GBSA calculations revealed that the binding of HDLP to these
four hydroxamic acid inhibitors is mainly driven by van der Waals/nonpolar
interactions. This study can be a guide for the optimization of HDAC inhibitors
and future design of new therapeutic agents for the treatment of cancer.

PMID: 18398905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Leuk Res. 2008 Sep;32(9):1382-92. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2008.02.018. Epub 2008
Apr 3.

MS-275, a novel histone deacetylase inhibitor with selectivity against HDAC1,
induces degradation of FLT3 via inhibition of chaperone function of heat shock
protein 90 in AML cells.

Nishioka C(1), Ikezoe T, Yang J, Takeuchi S, Koeffler HP, Yokoyama A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Respiratory Medicine, Kochi Medical School, Kochi
University, Nankoku, Kochi 783-8505, Japan.

This study explored the effect of MS-275, a novel histone deacetylase inhibitor
(HDACI), against a variety of human leukemia cells with defined genetic
alterations. MS-275 profoundly induced growth arrest of acute myelogenous
leukemia (AML) MOLM13 and biphenotypic leukemia MV4-11 cells, which possess
internal tandem duplication mutation in the fms-like tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3)
gene (FLT3-ITD), with IC50s less than 1 microM, as measured by
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2, 5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide assay on day two of
culture. Exposure of these cells to MS-275 decreased levels of total, as well as,
phosphorylated forms of FLT3, resulting in inactivation of its downstream signal 
pathways, including Akt, ERK, and STAT5. Further studies found that MS-275
induced acetylation of heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) in conjunction with
ubiquitination of FLT3, leading to degradation of FLT3 proteins in these cells.
This was blunted by treatment with the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib,
confirming that FLT was degraded via ubiquitin/proteasome pathway. Moreover, we
found that further inhibition of MEK/ERK signaling potentiated the action of
MS-275 in leukemia cells. Taken together, MS-275 may be useful for treatment of
individuals with leukemia possessing activating mutation of FLT3 gene.

PMID: 18394702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2008 Jun;294(6):R1797-806. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00804.2007. Epub 2008 Apr 2.

Hepatic insulin resistance induced by prenatal alcohol exposure is associated
with reduced PTEN and TRB3 acetylation in adult rat offspring.

Yao XH(1), Nyomba BL.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Research Group, University of Manitoba, 715 McDermot Avenue,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.

Prenatal alcohol exposure (EtOH) results in insulin resistance in rats of both
sexes with increased expression of hepatic gluconeogenic genes and glucose
production. To investigate whether hepatic insulin signaling is defective, we
studied 3-mo-old female offspring of dams that were given EtOH during pregnancy
compared with those from pair-fed and control dams. We performed an
intraperitoneal pyruvate tolerance test, determined the phosphorylation status of
hepatic phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase-1 (PDK1), Akt, and PKCzeta
before and after intravenous insulin bolus, and measured mRNA and in vivo
acetylation of TRB3 (tribbles 3) and PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted
on chromosome ten) as well as the expression of the histone acetylase (HAT) PCAF 
(p300/CREB-binding protein-associated factor), histone deacetylase-1 (HDAC1), and
HAT and HDAC activities. In EtOH compared with pair-fed and control offspring,
basal and pyruvate-induced blood glucose was increased, insulin-induced PDK1,
Akt, and PKCzeta phosphorylation was reduced, and expression of PTEN and TRB3 was
increased while their acetylation status was decreased in association with
increased HDAC and decreased HAT activities. Thus female adult rats prenatally
exposed to EtOH have increased gluconeogenesis, reduced insulin signaling, and
increased PTEN and TRB3 expression in the liver. In addition, PTEN and TRB3 are
hypoacetylated, which can contribute to Akt-inhibiting activity. These results
suggest that hepatic insulin resistance in rats prenatally exposed to EtOH is
explained, at least in part, by increased PTEN and TRB3 activity due to both
increased gene expression and reduced acetylation.

PMID: 18385463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Cancer Res. 2008 Apr 1;68(7):2375-83. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-5807.

Statins increase p21 through inhibition of histone deacetylase activity and
release of promoter-associated HDAC1/2.

Lin YC(1), Lin JH, Chou CW, Chang YF, Yeh SH, Chen CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
Taipei 10018, Taiwan.

Statins are 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase inhibitors broadly used for 
the control of hypercholesterolemia. Recently, they are reported to have
beneficial effects on certain cancers. In this study, we show that statins
inhibited the histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity and increased the accumulation 
of acetylated histone-H3 and the expression of p21(WAF/CIP) in human cancer
cells. Computational modeling showed the direct interaction of the carboxylic
acid moiety of statins with the catalytic site of HDAC2. In the subsequent
enzymatic assay, it was shown that lovastatin inhibited HDAC2 activity
competitively with a K(i) value of 31.6 micromol/L. Sp1 but not p53 sites were
found to be the statins-responsive element shown by p21 luciferase-promoter
assays. DNA affinity protein binding assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation
assay showed the dissociation of HDAC1/2 and association of CBP, leading to the
histone-H3 acetylation on the Sp1 sites of p21 promoter. In vitro cell
proliferation and in vivo tumor growth were both inhibited by statins. These
results suggest a novel mechanism for statins through abrogation of the HDAC
activity and promoter histone-H3 acetylation to regulate p21 expression.
Therefore, statins might serve as novel HDAC inhibitors for cancer therapy and
chemoprevention.

PMID: 18381445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2008 Apr 15;18(8):2525-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2008.03.058. 
Epub 2008 Mar 22.

Design and campaign synthesis of pyridine-based histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Andrews DM(1), Gibson KM, Graham MA, Matusiak ZS, Roberts CA, Stokes ES, Brady
MC, Chresta CM.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Infection Research, AstraZeneca, Mereside, Alderley Park,
Macclesfield, Cheshire SK10 4TG, UK. david.andrews@astrazeneca.com

A lead benzamide, bearing a cyanopyridyl moiety (3), was identified as a potent
and low molecular weight histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor. Various
replacements of the cyano group were explored at the C3-position, along with the 
exploration of solubility-enhancing groups at the C5-position. It was determined 
that cyano substitution at the C3-position of the pyridyl core, along with a
methylazetidinyl substituent at the C5-position yielded optimal HDAC1 inhibition 
and anti-proliferative activity in HCT-116 cells.

PMID: 18378451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Mol Endocrinol. 2008 Jun;22(6):1449-63. doi: 10.1210/me.2008-0035. Epub 2008 Mar 
27.

Protein kinase Calpha-induced derepression of the human luteinizing hormone
receptor gene transcription through ERK-mediated release of HDAC1/Sin3A repressor
complex from Sp1 sites.

Liao M(1), Zhang Y, Dufau ML.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Endocrinology and Genetics, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4510, USA.

LH receptor (LHR) gene transcription is subject to repression/derepression
through various modes and multiple effectors. Epigenetic silencing and activation
of the LHR is achieved through coordinated regulation at both histone and DNA
levels. The LHR gene is subject to repression by deacetylation and methylation at
its promoter region, where a HDAC/mSin3A repressor complex is anchored at Sp1
sites. The present studies revealed that protein kinase C (PKC) alpha/ERK
signaling is important for the activation of LHR promoter activity, and the
increase of endogenous transcripts induced by phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate
(PMA) in HeLa cells. Whereas these effects were attributable to PKCalpha
activity, the ERK pathway was the downstream effector in LHR activation. PMA
caused a significant enhancement of Sp1 phosphorylation at serine residue (s),
which was blocked by PKCalpha or ERK inhibition. The interaction of activated
phosphorylated ERK with Sp1 and ERK's association with the LHR promoter points to
Sp1 as a direct target of ERK. After Sp1 phosphorylation, the HDAC1/mSin3A
repressor complex dissociated from Sp1 sites, histone 3 was acetylated, and
transcription factor II B and RNA polymerase II were recruited. In addition,
overexpression of a constitutively active PKCalpha (PKCalpha CA) strongly
activated LHR transcription in MCF-7 cells (devoid of PKCalpha), induced Sp1
phosphorylation at serine residue (s) and caused derecruitment of HDAC1/mSin3A
complex from the promoter. These effects were negated by cotransfection of a
dominant-negative PKCalpha. In conclusion, these studies have revealed a novel
regulatory signaling mechanism of transcriptional control in which the LHR is
derepressed through PKCalpha/ERK-mediated Sp1 phosphorylation, causing the
release of HDAC1/mSin3A complex from the promoter.

PMCID: PMC2422830
PMID: 18372343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Mol Med (Berl). 2008 May;86(5):597-608. doi: 10.1007/s00109-008-0326-2. Epub
2008 Mar 27.

Transcription factor FBI-1 acts as a dual regulator in adipogenesis by
coordinated regulation of cyclin-A and E2F-4.

Laudes M(1), Bilkovski R, Oberhauser F, Droste A, Gomolka M, Leeser U, Udelhoven 
M, Krone W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II and Centre of Molecular Medicine Cologne
(CMMC), University of Cologne, Kerpener Strasse 62, 50937 Cologne, Germany.
matthias.laudes@uk-koeln.de

Generation of new adipocytes plays a major role in the development of obesity. We
previously have shown that transcriptional repressor factor that binds to IST
(FBI)-1 exerts a dual effect in the process of adipogenesis by inhibiting
proliferation and promoting differentiation of preadipocytes. The aim of the
present study was to identify FBI-1 regulated molecular effectors that could
account for these effects. Overexpressing FBI-1 in preadipocytes resulted in
reduced expression of the cell cycle regulator cyclin A, which may explain FBI-1 
induced inhibition of proliferation. Interestingly, FBI-1 repressed cyclin A
promoter activity through an indirect mechanisms that did not involve direct
binding of FBI-1 to the promoter sequence, but rather FBI-1 inhibition of
transcriptional activator Sp1 binding to a regulatory element at -452 to -443. We
also show that FBI-1 promotes terminal preadipocyte differentiation through a
mechanism involving decreased levels of expression of the PPARgamma inhibitor
E2F-4. FBI-1 significantly reduced E2F-4 promoter activity. Contrary to cyclin A,
we found FBI-1-induced repression of E2F-4 is mediated by a direct mechanism via 
a FBI-1 regulatory element at -11 to -5. As function of transcriptional
repressors normally depends on the presence of regulatory co-factors we also
performed expression profiling of potential FBI-1 co-repressors throughout
adipogenesis. In these experiments Sin3A and histon deacetylase (HDAC)-1 showed a
similar expression pattern compared to FBI-1. Strikingly, co-immunoprecipitation 
studies revealed that FBI-1 binds Sin3A and HDAC-1 to form a repressor complex.
Furthermore, by mutational analysis the amino terminal Poxvirus (POZ) domain of
FBI-1 was found to be important for Sin3A and HDAC-1 binding. Taken together,
FBI-1 is the first transcriptional repressor shown to act as a dual regulator in 
adipogenesis exerting repressor activities on target genes by both, direct and
indirect mechanisms.

PMID: 18368381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Dev Biol. 2008 May 1;317(1):336-53. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.02.034. Epub 2008
Feb 29.

Histone deacetylase 3 (hdac3) is specifically required for liver development in
zebrafish.

Farooq M(1), Sulochana KN, Pan X, To J, Sheng D, Gong Z, Ge R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, 117543,
Singapore.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are key transcription regulators that function by
deacetylating histones/transcription factors and modifying chromatin structure.
In this work, we showed that chemical inhibition of HDACs by valproic acid (VPA) 
led to impaired liver development in zebrafish mainly by inhibiting
specification, budding, and differentiation. Formation of exocrine pancreas but
not endocrine pancreas was also inhibited. The liver defects induced by VPA
correlate with suppressed total HDAC enzymatic activity, but are independent of
angiogenesis inhibition. Gene knockdown by morpholino demonstrated that hdac3 is 
specifically required for liver formation while hdac1 is more globally required
for multiple development processes in zebrafish including liver/exocrine pancreas
formation. Furthermore, overexpression of hdac3 but not hdac1 partially rescued
VPA induced small liver. One mechanism by which hdac3 regulates zebrafish liver
growth is through inhibiting growth differentiation factor 11 (gdf11), a unique
target of hdac3 and a member of the transforming growth factor beta family.
Simultaneous overexpression or morpholino knockdown showed that hdac3 and gdf11
function antagonistically in zebrafish liver development. These results revealed 
a novel and specific role of hdac3 in liver development and the distinct
functions between hdac1 and hdac3 in zebrafish embryonic development.

PMID: 18367159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Pancreas. 2008 Apr;36(3):e1-9. doi: 10.1097/MPA.0b013e31815f2c2a.

Expression of hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha, histone deacetylase 1, and
metastasis-associated protein 1 in pancreatic carcinoma: correlation with poor
prognosis with possible regulation.

Miyake K(1), Yoshizumi T, Imura S, Sugimoto K, Batmunkh E, Kanemura H, Morine Y, 
Shimada M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Institute of Health Biosciences, The University of
Tokushima Graduate School, Tokushima, Japan. kota166@clin.med.tokushima-u.ac.jp

OBJECTIVES: Hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha (HIF-1alpha) is a transcription
factor that plays an important role in tumor growth and metastasis. Inhibition of
histone deacetylase shows a marked inhibition of HIF-1alpha expression; however, 
the association between HIF-1alpha and histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1),
metastasis-associated protein 1 (MTA1) is not fully understood.
METHODS: Hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha, HDAC1, and MTA1 expressions were
detected by immunohistochemistry in 39 pancreatic carcinoma patients. The
correlations between the expression of HIF-1alpha, HDAC1, or MTA1 and clinical
features and the prognosis were analyzed.
RESULTS: Hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha, HDAC1, and MTA1 positive stainings were
found in 41%, 56%, and 31%, respectively. There was no correlation between
HIF-1alpha, HDAC1, or MTA1 expression levels and any clinical parameters. The
survival rate for patients with HIF-1alpha and HDAC1-positive stainings were
significantly lower than for patients with HIF-1alpha and HDAC1-negative
stainings. The MTA1 overexpression group did not have a significantly lower
prognosis than the MTA1 underexpression group. The survival rate for the
HDAC1(+)/MTA1(2-3) group was significantly lower than for the other groups.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that HIF-1alpha expression may be regulated
through HDAC1/MTA1, which is associated with a poor prognosis for pancreatic
carcinoma and indicates that HIF-1alpha and HDAC1/MTA1 are a promising
therapeutic target in pancreatic carcinoma treatment.

PMID: 18362831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2008 Apr;20(2):180-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ceb.2008.02.002. Epub
2008 Mar 21.

C/EBPs: recipients of extracellular signals through proteome modulation.

Nerlov C(1).

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Mouse Biology Unit, Via Ramarini 32,
00015 Monterotondo, Italy. nerlov@embl.it

C/EBP transcription factors are involved in the interpretation of extracellular
signaling through a variety of mechanisms. These include the signaling-induced
nuclear accumulation of C/EBP-interacting transcription factors such as Foxo1 and
SREBP-1, leading to the formation of complexes that may themselves be subject to 
regulation by signal-induced post-translational modification. Post-translational 
modification may also control the interaction between C/EBPs and chromatin
modifiers, as exemplified by decreased HDAC1-C/EBPbeta interaction upon
GCN5-mediated lysine acetylation, and the ability of sumoylation to inhibit
C/EBPalpha-SWI/SNF interaction. Finally, interaction with Smad proteins, which
are accumulated in the nucleus upon TGFbeta or BMP signaling, may lead to the
formation of C/EBP-Smad complexes and activation of Smad-C/EBPbeta coregulated
promoters, while at the same time inhibiting other C/EBP-dependent transcription.
These observations underline the importance of understanding signaling regulated 
transcription in terms of the proteomic changes that are induced, and how these
are interpreted in the relevant promoter contexts.

PMID: 18358708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Br J Cancer. 2008 Apr 8;98(7):1234-43. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6604295. Epub 2008 Mar
18.

MS-275 synergistically enhances the growth inhibitory effects of RAMBA VN/66-1 in
hormone-insensitive PC-3 prostate cancer cells and tumours.

Khandelwal A(1), Gediya L, Njar V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, University of
Maryland School of Medicine, 655 West Baltimore Street, Baltimore, MD 21201-1559,
USA.

Combining drugs, which target different signalling pathways, often decreases
adverse side effects while increasing the efficacy of treatment. The objective of
our study was to determine if the combination of our novel atypical retinoic acid
metabolism-blocking agent (RAMBA) VN/66-1 and a promising histone deacetylase
inhibitor
N-(2-aminophenyl)4-[N-(pyridine-3-yl-methoxy-carbonyl)aminomethyl]benzamide
(MS-275) would show enhanced antineoplastic activity on human PC-3 prostate
cancer cells/tumours and also to decipher the molecular mechanisms of action. The
combination of VN/66-1+MS-275 was found to be synergistic in inhibiting PC-3 cell
growth, caused cell cytostaticity/cytotoxicity and induced marked G2/M phase
arrest and apoptosis. In mice with well-established PC-3 tumours, VN/66-1 (5 and 
10 mg kg(-1) day(-1)) caused significant suppression of tumour growth compared
with mice receiving vehicle alone. Furthermore, treatment with VN/66-1 (10 mg
kg(-1) day(-1))+MS-275 (2.5 mg kg(-1) day(-1)) for 18 days resulted in an 85%
reduction in final mean tumour volume compared with control and was more
effective than either agent alone. Mechanistic studies indicated that treatment
of PC-3 cells/tumours with VN/66-1+MS-275 caused DNA damage (upregulation of
gammaH2AX), hyperacetylation of histones H3 and H4, upregulation of retinoic acid
receptor-beta, p21WAF1/CIP1, E-cadherin, and Bad and downregulation of Bcl-2.
These data suggest that the mechanism of action of the combination of agents is
DNA damage-induced p21 activation, resulting in inhibition of the Cdc2/cyclin B
complex and accumulation of cells in G2/M phase. In addition, the combination
caused modulation and induction of apoptosis. These results suggest that VN/66-1 
or its combination with MS-275 may be a novel therapy for the treatment of
prostate carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC2359640
PMID: 18349838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Clin Cancer Res. 2008 Mar 15;14(6):1669-77. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-0990.

Class I histone deacetylase expression has independent prognostic impact in human
colorectal cancer: specific role of class I histone deacetylases in vitro and in 
vivo.

Weichert W(1), Röske A, Niesporek S, Noske A, Buckendahl AC, Dietel M, Gekeler V,
Boehm M, Beckers T, Denkert C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pathologie, Charité Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany.
wilko.weichert@charite.de

PURPOSE: Recently, several studies reported a strong functional link between
histone deacetylases (HDAC) and the development of tumors of the large intestine.
However, despite the importance of these molecules, comparably little is known on
expression patterns and functions of specific HDAC isoforms in colorectal cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We characterized class I HDAC isoform expression patterns in
a cohort of 140 colorectal carcinomas by immunohistochemistry. In addition,
effects of HDAC inhibition by valproic acid and suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid, 
and specific HDAC isoform knockdown by short interfering RNA, were investigated
in a cell culture model.
RESULTS: We found class I HDACs highly expressed in a subset of colorectal
carcinomas with positivity for HDAC1 in 36.4%, HDAC2 in 57.9%, and HDAC3 in 72.9%
of cases. Expression was significantly enhanced in strongly proliferating (P =
0.002), dedifferentiated (P = 0.022) tumors. High HDAC expression levels
implicated significantly reduced patient survival (P = 0.001), with HDAC2
expression being an independent survival prognosticator (hazard ratio, 2.6; P =
0.03). Short interfering RNA-based inhibition of HDAC1 and HDAC2 but not HDAC3
suppressed growth of colon cancer cells in vitro, although to a lesser extent
than chemical HDAC inhibitors did.
CONCLUSIONS: The strong prognostic impact of HDAC isoforms in colorectal cancer, 
the interactions of HDACs with tumor cell proliferation and differentiation in
vivo, and our finding that HDACs are differentially expressed in colorectal
tumors suggest that the evaluation of HDAC expression in clinical trials for HDAC
inhibitors might help to identify a patient subgroup who will exceptionally
profit from such a treatment.

PMID: 18347167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Biomed Res. 2008 Feb;29(1):53-60.

Pirh2 interacts with and ubiquitylates signal recognition particle receptor beta 
subunit.

Abe K(1), Hattori T, Isobe T, Kitagawa K, Oda T, Uchida C, Kitagawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry 1, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine,
Hamamatsu, Shizuoka, Japan.

Pirh2 is a RING finger type ubiquitin ligase which ubiquitylates various proteins
including p53, p27(Kip1), HDAC1, and epsilon-COP. In this study, we identified
signal recognition particle receptor beta subunit (SRbeta), an integral membrane 
protein of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), as a novel Pirh2-interacting protein
by yeast two-hybrid screening. We confirmed that Pirh2 interacted with SRbeta in 
mammalian cells. An immunofluorescent staining revealed that Pirh2 colocalized
with SRbeta in the ER. Pirh2 poly-ubiquitylated SRbeta in an intact RING finger
domain-dependent manner in vivo and in vitro. Unexpectedly, different from other 
Pirh2 substrates, neither overexpression of Pirh2 nor depletion of cellular Pirh2
affected SRbeta protein stability. Pirh2 preferentially utilized lysine residues 
6 and 29 of the ubiquitin to mediate the formation of polyubiquitin chains on
SRbeta. These results suggest that Pirh2 may regulate SRbeta function by
mediating poly-ubiquitylation of SRbeta without affecting the stability of SRbeta
protein per se.

PMID: 18344599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 May 16;369(4):1179-83. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.03.019. Epub 2008 Mar 13.

Inhibition of histone deacetylase1 induces autophagy.

Oh M(1), Choi IK, Kwon HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Genomics Laboratory, Department of Biotechnology, Yonsei Biomedical
Science and Technology Initiative, College of Life Science & Biotechnology,
Yonsei University, 134 Shinchon-dong, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 120-749, Republic of
Korea.

Autophagy is a process where cytoplasmic materials are degraded by lysosomal
machinery. Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors induce autophagy, and HDAC6, one
of class II HDAC isotypes, is directly involved in autophagic degradation in the 
cell. However, it is unclear if class I HDAC isotype such as HDCA1 is involved in
this process. To investigate if class I HDAC isotype is involved in autophagy, a 
specific class I HDAC inhibitor and an siRNA of HDAC1 were used to treat HeLa
cells. Autophagic markers were then investigated. Both inhibition and genetic
knock-down of HDAC1 in the cells significantly induced autophagic vacuole
formation and lysosome function. Moreover, disruption of HDAC1 leads to the
conversion of LC3-I to LC3-II. Together, these results demonstrate that HDAC1
could play a role in autophagy and specific inhibition of HDAC1 can induce
autophagy.

PMID: 18342621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Curr Pharm Des. 2008;14(6):562-73.

Inhibitors of NAD+ dependent histone deacetylases (sirtuins).

Neugebauer RC(1), Sippl W, Jung M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are enzymes that deacetylate acetyl lysines in
histones and various non-histone proteins. Three classes of histone deacetylases 
have been described in humans: class I, II and IV were shown to be zinc dependent
amidohydrolases and eleven subtypes are known today (HDAC1-11). Class III enzymes
depend in their catalysis on NAD+ with the subsequent formation of nicotinamide
and O acetyl-ADP ribose. Based on the homology to the yeast histone deacetylase
Sir2p the NAD+-dependent deacetylases have been termed sirtuins and seven members
(SIRT1-7) have been described in humans. Whereas class I and II HDACs have been
identified as valid anticancer targets and clinical studies of their inhibitors
as new anticancer agents are under way much less is known about the consequences 
of class III histone deacetylase inhibition. Sirtuins have been linked to ageing 
and overexpression of sirtuins leads to a prolonged lifespan in yeast. Lately,
sirtuin activity has been tied to the pathogenesis of HIV, cancer and
neurodegenerative disease. In the last two years several reports of new sirtuin
inhibitors have emerged. Additionally, sirtuin activators have been identified
and have been implicated as potential drugs for the amelioration of metabolic
diseases. Thus, the field of sirtuin biology can be investigated with these new
tools which will allow in turn to assess the therapeutic potential of those
compounds. We will present an overview over sirtuins and their available
inhibitors and activators.

PMID: 18336301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Curr Pharm Des. 2008;14(6):529-44.

Isoform-selective histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Itoh Y(1), Suzuki T, Miyata N.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Nagoya City University, 3-1
Tanabe-dori, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya, Aichi 467-8603, Japan.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) catalyze the deacetylation of the acetylated lysine 
residues of histones and non-histone proteins, and are involved in various
fundamental life phenomena, such as gene expression and cell cycle progression.
Thus far, eighteen HDAC family members have been identified and they can be
divided into two categories, i.e., zinc-dependent enzymes (HDAC1-11) and
NAD(+)-dependent enzymes (SIRT1-7). Some of the HDAC isoforms have important
roles in cell functions, and are associated with various disease states,
including cancer. Therefore, isoform-selective HDAC inhibitors are of great
interest, not only as tools for probing the biological functions of the isoforms,
but also as candidate therapeutic agents with few side effects. In this review,
we cover isoform-selective HDAC inhibitors, including their biochemical and
pharmacological functions.

PMID: 18336298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Eur J Neurosci. 2008 Feb;27(4):865-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2008.06061.x.

SATB2 interacts with chromatin-remodeling molecules in differentiating cortical
neurons.

Gyorgy AB(1), Szemes M, de Juan Romero C, Tarabykin V, Agoston DV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Physiology and Genetics, School of Medicine USU,
Bethesda, MD 20814, USA.

During our search for developmental regulators of neuronal differentiation, we
identified special AT-rich sequence-binding protein (SATB)2 that is specifically 
expressed in the developing rat neocortex and binds to AT-rich DNA elements. Here
we investigated whether the regulatory function of SATB2 involves chromatin
remodeling at the AT-rich DNA site. In-vitro and in-vivo assays using a DNA
affinity pre-incubation specificity test of recognition and chromatin
immunoprecipitation showed that SATB2 specifically binds to histone deacetylase 1
and metastasis-associated protein 2, members of the nucleosome-remodeling and
histone deacetylase complex. Double immunohistochemistry showed that, in the
developing rat neocortex, SATB2 is coexpressed with both proteins. Using a cell
culture model, we showed that trichostatin A treatment, which blocks the
activities of histone deacetylases, reverses the AT-rich dsDNA-dependent
repressor effect of SATB2. These findings suggested that the molecular regulatory
function of SATB2 involves modification of the chromatin structure.
Semi-quantitative chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis of cortices from SATB2
mutant and wild-type animals indicated that, in the knock-out brains, SATB2 is
replaced in the chromatin-remodeling complex by AU-rich element RNA binding
protein 1, another AT-rich DNA binding protein also expressed in differentiating 
cortical neurons. These results suggested that an altered chromatin structure,
due to the presence of different AT-rich DNA binding proteins in the
chromatin-remodeling complex, may contribute to the developmental abnormalities
observed in the SATB2 mutant animals. These findings also raised the interesting 
possibility that SATB2, along with other AT-rich DNA binding proteins, is
involved in mediating epigenetic influences during cortical development.

PMID: 18333962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Biol Chem. 2008 May 16;283(20):13611-26. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M800128200. Epub 2008
Mar 7.

Histone code modifications repress glucose transporter 4 expression in the
intrauterine growth-restricted offspring.

Raychaudhuri N(1), Raychaudhuri S, Thamotharan M, Devaskar SU.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neonatology and Developmental Biology and the Neonatal Research
Center, Department of Pediatrics, David Geffen School of Medicine, UCLA, Los
Angeles, California 90095-1752, USA.

We examined transcriptional and epigenetic mechanism(s) behind diminished
skeletal muscle GLUT4 mRNA in intrauterine growth-restricted (IUGR) female rat
offspring. An increase in MEF2D (inhibitor) with a decline in MEF2A (activator)
and MyoD (co-activator) binding to the glut4 promoter in IUGR versus control was 
observed. The functional role of MEF2/MyoD-binding sites and neighboring three
CpG clusters in glut4 gene transcription was confirmed in C2C12 muscle cells. No 
differential methylation of these three and other CpG clusters in the glut4
promoter occurred. DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) in postnatal, DNMT3a, and
DNMT3b in adult was differentially recruited with increased MeCP2 (methyl
CpG-binding protein) concentrations to bind the IUGR glut4 gene. Covalent
modifications of the histone (H) code consisted of H3.K14 de-acetylation by
recruitment of histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1 and enhanced association of HDAC4
enzymes. This set the stage for Suv39H1 methylase-mediated di-methylation of
H3.K9 and increased recruitment of heterochromatin protein 1alpha, which
partially inactivates postnatal and adult IUGR glut4 gene transcription. Further 
increased interactions in the adult IUGR between DNMT3a/DNMT3b and HDAC1 and
MEF2D and HDAC1/HDAC4 and decreased association between MyoD and MEF2A existed.
We conclude that epigenetic mechanisms consisting of histone code modifications
repress skeletal muscle glut4 transcription in the postnatal period and persist
in the adult female IUGR offspring.

PMCID: PMC2376250
PMID: 18326493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Pathol Int. 2008 Apr;58(4):226-32. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.2008.02215.x.

RHEB expression in fibroadenomas of the breast.

Eom M(1), Han A, Yi SY, Shin JJ, Cui Y, Park KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Wonju College of Medicine, Yonsei University, Wonju, 
Korea.

Although fibroadenoma is one of the most common types of benign breast tumor,
genes specific to the tumor have not been identified. Microarrays were used to
identify differentially expressed genes between fibroadenoma and infiltrating
ductal carcinoma. The comparative expression of one of the identified genes, RAS 
homolog enriched in the brain (RHEB), was further explored using reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Microarray analysis was
performed on tissue samples from five patients with fibroadenoma. In the
fibroadenoma samples, the genes HDAC1, ROS1, TNFRSF10A, WASP2, TYRP1, WEE1, and
RHEB were expressed at levels more than twofold higher than in the normal
tissues. RT-PCR for RHEB indicated increased expression of RHEB in fibroadenoma
compared to breast cancer. When studied with real-time PCR, the average
RHEB/beta-actin ratio in fibroadenoma samples was 1.99, 2.46-fold greater than
the average RHEB/beta-actin ratio in breast carcinoma of 0.81 (P < 0.01).
Immunohistochemistry and PCR followed by microdissection shows increased
expression of RHEB in epithelial cells compared to the stromal cells of
fibroadenoma. Therefore, RHEB could be used cytopathologically to distinguish
fibroadenoma from malignant breast carcinomas as a secondary diagnostic tool.

PMID: 18324915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Neurosci. 2008 Mar 5;28(10):2576-88. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5467-07.2008.

Synergistic neuroprotective effects of lithium and valproic acid or other histone
deacetylase inhibitors in neurons: roles of glycogen synthase kinase-3
inhibition.

Leng Y(1), Liang MH, Ren M, Marinova Z, Leeds P, Chuang DM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Section, Mood and Anxiety Disorders Program, National
Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
20892-1363, USA.

Lithium and valproic acid (VPA) are two primary drugs used to treat bipolar mood 
disorder and have frequently been used in combination to treat bipolar patients
resistant to monotherapy with either drug. Lithium, a glycogen synthase kinase-3 
(GSK-3) inhibitor, and VPA, a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, have
neuroprotective effects. The present study was undertaken to demonstrate
synergistic neuroprotective effects when both drugs were coadministered.
Pretreatment of aging cerebellar granule cells with lithium or VPA alone provided
little or no neuroprotection against glutamate-induced cell death. However,
copresence of both drugs resulted in complete blockade of glutamate
excitotoxicity. Combined treatment with lithium and VPA potentiated serine
phosphorylation of GSK-3 alpha and beta isoforms and inhibition of GSK-3 enzyme
activity. Transfection with GSK-3alpha small interfering RNA (siRNA) and/or
GSK-3beta siRNA mimicked the ability of lithium to induce synergistic protection 
with VPA. HDAC1 siRNA or other HDAC inhibitors (phenylbutyrate, sodium butyrate
or trichostatin A) also caused synergistic neuroprotection together with lithium.
Moreover, combination of lithium and HDAC inhibitors potentiated
beta-catenin-dependent, Lef/Tcf-mediated transcriptional activity. An additive
increase in GSK-3 serine phosphorylation was also observed in mice chronically
treated with lithium and VPA. Together, for the first time, our results
demonstrate synergistic neuroprotective effects of lithium and HDAC inhibitors
and suggest that GSK-3 inhibition is a likely molecular target for the
synergistic neuroprotection. Our results may have implications for the combined
use of lithium and VPA in treating bipolar disorder. Additionally, combined use
of both drugs may be warranted for clinical trials to treat glutamate-related
neurodegenerative diseases.

PMID: 18322101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Cancer Res. 2008 Mar 1;68(5):1513-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-2822.

Selective inhibition of histone deacetylase 2 silences progesterone
receptor-mediated signaling.

Biçaku E(1), Marchion DC, Schmitt ML, Münster PN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Interdisciplinary Oncology, Experimental Therapeutics Program,
H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

Several histone deacetylases (HDAC) are involved in estrogen receptor
(ER)-mediated gene transactivation, and HDAC inhibitors have been reported to
restore sensitivity to antihormonal therapy. The modulation of ER is the most
promising approach to ER-expressing breast cancers. Recent studies further
suggest a critical role of the progesterone receptor (PR) on ER signaling.
Although HDAC inhibitors modulate ER, little is known about their effects on PR. 
We evaluated the roles of specific HDAC isoenzymes and their inhibition on both
ER and PR signaling and their importance in response to endocrine therapy. The
roles of individual HDAC isoenzymes on ER and PR expression and their functions
were evaluated by depletion of select HDAC enzymes using siRNA or pharmacologic
inhibition. Cotreatment of breast cancer cell lines with HDAC inhibitors and the 
antiestrogen, tamoxifen, resulted in synergistic antitumor activity with
simultaneous depletion of both ER and PR. Selective inhibition of HDAC2, but not 
HDAC1 or HDAC6, was sufficient to potentiate tamoxifen-induced apoptosis in
ER/PR-positive cells. Depletion of HDAC1 and HDAC6 was associated with
down-regulation of ER but not PR. Only the selective depletion of HDAC2 siRNA
down-regulated both ER and PR expression, and was sufficient to potentiate
tamoxifen. Selective depletion of HDAC2 resulted in simultaneous depletion of ER 
and PR, and potentiated the effects of antihormonal therapy in ER-positive cells.
A more effective pharmacologic inhibition of HDAC2 and evaluation of HDAC2 and PR
as therapeutic targets or as predictive markers in hormonal therapy may be
considered when combining HDAC inhibitors and hormonal therapy.

PMID: 18316616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2008 Mar 15;18(6):1859-63. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2008.02.012.
Epub 2008 Feb 10.

Phenylglycine and phenylalanine derivatives as potent and selective HDAC1
inhibitors (SHI-1).

Wilson KJ(1), Witter DJ, Grimm JB, Siliphaivanh P, Otte KM, Kral AM, Fleming JC, 
Harsch A, Hamill JE, Cruz JC, Chenard M, Szewczak AA, Middleton RE, Hughes BL,
Dahlberg WK, Secrist JP, Miller TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Drug Design and Optimization, Merck Research Laboratories, 33
Avenue Louis Pasteur, Boston, MA 02115, USA. kevin_wilson2@merck.com

An HTS screening campaign identified a series of low molecular weight phenols
that showed excellent selectivity (>100-fold) for HDAC1/HDAC2 over other Class I 
and Class II HDACs. Evolution and optimization of this HTS hit series provided
HDAC1-selective (SHI-1) compounds with excellent anti-proliferative activity and 
improved physical properties. Dose-dependent efficacy in a mouse HCT116 xenograft
model was demonstrated with a phenylglycine SHI-1 analog.

PMID: 18304810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2008 Nov;33(12):2981-92. doi: 10.1038/npp.2008.15. Epub 
2008 Feb 20.

Drug-induced activation of dopamine D(1) receptor signaling and inhibition of
class I/II histone deacetylase induce chromatin remodeling in reward circuitry
and modulate cocaine-related behaviors.

Schroeder FA(1), Penta KL, Matevossian A, Jones SR, Konradi C, Tapper AR,
Akbarian S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Brudnick Neuropsychiatric Research Institute,
University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01604, USA.

Chromatin remodeling, including histone modification, is involved in
stimulant-induced gene expression and addiction behavior. To further explore the 
role of dopamine D(1) receptor signaling, we measured cocaine-related locomotor
activity and place preference in mice pretreated for up to 10 days with the D(1) 
agonist SKF82958 and/or the histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi), sodium
butyrate. Cotreatment with D(1) agonist and HDACi significantly enhanced
cocaine-induced locomotor activity and place preference, in comparison to
single-drug regimens. However, butyrate-mediated reward effects were transient
and only apparent within 2 days after the last HDACi treatment. These behavioral 
changes were associated with histone modification changes in striatum and ventral
midbrain: (1) a generalized increase in H3 phosphoacetylation in striatal neurons
was dependent on activation of D(1) receptors; (2) H3 deacetylation at promoter
sequences of tyrosine hydroxylase (Th) and brain-derived neurotrophic factor
(Bdnf) in ventral midbrain, together with upregulation of the corresponding gene 
transcripts after cotreatment with D(1) agonist and HDACi. Collectively, these
findings imply that D(1) receptor-regulated histone (phospho)acetylation and gene
expression in reward circuitry is differentially regulated in a region-specific
manner. Given that the combination of D(1) agonist and HDACi enhances
cocaine-related sensitization and reward, the therapeutic benefits of D(1)
receptor antagonists and histone acetyl-transferase inhibitors (HATi) warrant
further investigation in experimental models of stimulant abuse.

PMCID: PMC2746694
PMID: 18288092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Cancer Sci. 2008 Feb;99(2):309-15. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2007.00689.x.

Induction of a novel histone deacetylase 1/c-Myc/Mnt/Max complex formation is
implicated in parity-induced refractoriness to mammary carcinogenesis.

Matsuoka Y(1), Fukamachi K, Uehara N, Tsuda H, Tsubura A.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Pathology, Kansai Medical University, 10-15 Fumizono-cho,
Moriguchi, Osaka 570-8506, Japan. matsuoyo@takii.kmu.ac.jp

Refractoriness to carcinogen-induced increases in epithelial cell proliferation
is a very important characteristic of parous mammary glands. We found that
N-methyl-N-nitrosourea (MNU)-induced proliferative burst in the mammary ductal
epithelium was blocked in parous glands but not in age-matched virgin (AMV)
glands. The inhibition of the proliferative burst in MNU-treated parous mammary
glands coincided with the upregulation of Mnt, a Myc-suppressor, and the
formation of histone deacetylase 1/Mnt/Max complexes that unexpectedly contained 
c-Myc. These complexes formed on the promoters of Myc targets, such as ornithine 
decarboxylase, cyclin D2, and transforming growth factor beta1 genes, in
quiescent fibroblasts, and were disassembled in serum-stimulated cells. These
results suggest that the complexes also function as transcription repressors of
the growth-related Myc targets in MNU-treated parous mammary glands. Using the
chemical mammary carcinogenesis model of human c-Ha-ras transgenic (Tg) rats, we 
confirmed that parity protected the mammary glands at the postinitiation phase of
tumorigenesis. Although the incidence of
7,12-dimethylbenz[alpha]anthracene-induced palpable tumors was reduced from 61.5%
in the AMV Tg rats to 28.5% in the parous animals, the incidence of early
neoplastic lesions in the parous rats was the same as that in the AMV rats.
Restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis detected mutations in the human
c-Ha-ras gene in most of the normal-appearing parous Tg glands, as well as in the
virgin glands. We propose that accelerated formation of HDAC1/c-Myc/Mnt/Max
complexes in response to carcinogen exposure results in down-regulation of
growth-related genes, leading to the refractoriness of parous mammary glands at
the postinitiation phase of carcinogenesis.

PMID: 18271930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Oncogene. 2008 May 29;27(24):3405-13. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1211000. Epub 2008 Feb 
11.

Hepatitis B virus X protein induces the expression of MTA1 and HDAC1, which
enhances hypoxia signaling in hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Yoo YG(1), Na TY, Seo HW, Seong JK, Park CK, Shin YK, Lee MO.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.

Expression level of metastasis-associated protein 1 (MTA1) is closely related to 
tumor growth and metastasis in various cancers. Although increased expression
level of MTA1 was observed in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), role of MTA1
complex containing histone deacetylase (HDAC) in hepatitis B virus
(HBV)-associated hepatocarcinogenesis has not been studied. Here, we demonstrated
that HBx strongly induced the expression of MTA1 and HDAC1 genes at transcription
level. MTA1 and HDAC1/2 physically associated with hypoxia-inducible factor-1
alpha (HIF-1 alpha) in vivo in the presence of HBx, which was abolished by
knockdown of MTA1 by short interfering RNA (siRNA). HBx induced deacetylation of 
the oxygen-dependent degradation domain of HIF-1 alpha, which was accompanied
with dissociation of prolyl hydroxylases and von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor
from HIF-1 alpha. These results indicate that HBx-induced deacetylation is
important for proteasomal degradation of HIF-1 alpha. Further, we observed that
protein levels of MTA1 and HDAC1 were increased in the liver of HBx-transgenic
mice. Also, there was a higher expression of HDAC1 in HCC than in the adjacent
non-tumorous cirrhotic nodules in 10 out of 12 human HBV-associated HCC
specimens. Together, our data indicate a positive cross talk between HBx and the 
MTA1/HDAC complex in stabilizing HIF-1 alpha, which may play a critical role in
angiogenesis and metastasis of HBV-associated HCC.

PMID: 18264140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Cancer Biol Ther. 2007 Oct;6(10):1606-13. Epub 2007 Jul 13.

Carnitine palmitoyltransferase I in human carcinomas: a novel role in histone
deacetylation?

Mazzarelli P(1), Pucci S, Bonanno E, Sesti F, Calvani M, Spagnoli LG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Anatomic Pathology, Dept. of Biopathology, University of Rome Tor
Vergata, Rome, Italy.

Carnitine palmitoyl transferase I (CPT1) catalyzes the transport of long-chain
fatty acids into mitochondria for beta-oxidation. A link between CPT1 and
apoptosis has been suggested on the basis of several experimental data.
Nevertheless, results are contradictory about the effective role of CPT1 in cell 
survival control and cancer development. Conversely, Fatty acid synthase (FAS)
enzyme, required for the synthesis of fatty acids, is found over-expressed in
tumors and inhibition of FAS triggers apoptosis in human cancer cells. We have
studied the tumor-specific modulation of CPT1 and FAS in human colorectal cancer 
(n = 11) and breast carcinomas (n = 24). CPT1 was significantly decreased in the 
cytoplasm of tumoral samples (p < or = 0.04), whereas FAS was increased (p < or =
0.04). A striking CPT1 nuclear localization was evident in the tumors (p < or =
0.04). In the nuclear environment the protein would modulate the levels of
acetyl/acyl-CoA implicated in the regulation of gene transcription. At this
purpose, we performed in vitro experiments using epithelial neoplastic (MCF-7,
Caco-2, HepG2 cells) and non neoplastic cell lines (MCF-12F) confirming a nuclear
localization of CPT1 protein exclusively in neoplastic cells. Moreover histone
deacetylase (HDAC) activity showed significantly higher levels in nuclear
extracts from neoplastic than from control cells. HDAC1 and CPT1 proteins
coimmunoprecipitated in nuclear extracts from MCF-7 cells. The treatment with
HDAC inhibitors such as trichostatin A and butyrate significantly decreased
nuclear expression of CPT1 and its bond to HDAC1. We also identified the
existence of CPT1A mRNA transcript variant 2 in MCF-7, beside to the classic
isoform 1. The peculiar localization of CPT1 in the nuclei of human carcinomas
and the disclosed functional link between nuclear CPT1 and HDAC1 propose a new
role of CPT1 in the histonic acetylation level of tumors.

PMID: 18253084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Mol Carcinog. 2008 Oct;47(10):739-43. doi: 10.1002/mc.20423.

Interferon-inducible protein IFIXalpha inhibits cell invasion by upregulating the
metastasis suppressor maspin.

Yamaguchi H(1), Ding Y, Lee JF, Zhang M, Pal A, Bornmann W, Yan DH, Hung MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

IFIXalpha, a member of the interferon-inducible HIN-200 family, has been
identified as a putative tumor suppressor. However, the molecular mechanisms
underlying IFIXalpha-mediated tumor suppression are poorly understood. In the
present study, we demonstrated that the metastasis suppressor maspin acts as the 
downstream target of IFIXalpha. IFIXalpha suppressed the invasion activity of
MDA-MB-468 breast cancer cells, and its inhibitory effect was reversed by the
knockdown of maspin. Both Maspin mRNA and protein were upregulated by IFIXalpha. 
Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors, but not DNA methyltransferase inhibitor
upregulated maspin, and HDAC1 inhibited the transactivation of maspin promoter.
Although the HDAC1 protein was downregulated in IFIXalpha-expressing cells,
IFIXalpha did not affect HDAC1 mRNA levels. Conversely, a proteasome inhibitor
restored the level of HDAC1 protein in IFIXalpha-expressing cells, and the
polyubiqutination of HDAC1 was promoted by IFIXalpha, suggesting that HDAC1 is
regulated by IFIXalpha through a ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Together, these
data provide novel insights into the tumor-suppressive function of IFIXalpha.

PMCID: PMC2596649
PMID: 18247378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Cancer Res. 2008 Feb 1;68(3):693-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-5012.

TBX3 is overexpressed in breast cancer and represses p14 ARF by interacting with 
histone deacetylases.

Yarosh W(1), Barrientos T, Esmailpour T, Lin L, Carpenter PM, Osann K,
Anton-Culver H, Huang T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Human Genetics, University of
California, Irvine, California 92697, USA.

TBX3 is a transcription factor of the T-box gene family. Mutations in the TBX3
gene can cause hypoplastic or absent mammary glands. Previous studies have shown 
that TBX3 might be associated with breast cancer. Here, we show that TBX3 is
overexpressed in malignant cells of primary breast cancer tissues by
immunohistochemistry. TBX3 interacts with histone deacetylases (HDAC) 1, 2, 3,
and 5. TBX3 interacts with HDAC1, 2, and 3 via two distinct binding sites.
However, deletion of the repression domain (amino acids 566-624) of TBX3
completely abolishes its interaction with HDAC5. Endogenous TBX3 and HDACs
interaction and colocalization are found in a breast cancer cell line by
coimmunoprecipitation and immunofluorescence, respectively. The functional
significance of the interaction between TBX3 and HDAC is also tested in a
p14(ARF)-luciferase reporter system. Results indicate that TBX3 represses
expression of p14(ARF) tumor suppressor and that a HDAC inhibitor is able to
reverse the TBX3 repressive function in a dosage-dependent manner. This study
suggests that TBX3 may function by recruiting HDACs to the T-box binding site in 
the promoter region. TBX3 repression to its targets is dependent on HDAC
activity. TBX3 may serve as a biomarker for breast cancer and have significant
applications in both breast cancer diagnosis and treatment.

PMID: 18245468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Mol Cancer Res. 2008 Feb;6(2):314-24. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-07-0354. Epub
2008 Feb 1.

Sterol regulatory element-binding protein-1c represses the transactivation of
androgen receptor and androgen-dependent growth of prostatic cells.

Suh JH(1), Gong EY, Kim JB, Lee IK, Choi HS, Lee K.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone Research Center, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Republic of
Korea.

Sterol regulatory element-binding protein-1c (SREBP-1c) is a basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor that plays an important role in lipid
homeostasis. Here, we show that SREBP-1c regulates androgen receptor (AR)
transactivation through direct interaction with AR and represses
androgen-dependent growth of prostatic cells. Transient transfection studies show
that SREBP-1c specifically inhibits the transactivation of AR. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays reveal that SREBP-1c is recruited with AR onto the
endogenous AR target promoter. Moreover, adenovirus-mediated overexpression of
SREBP-1c decreases the mRNA level of the prostate-specific antigen gene, an
endogenous target gene of AR, supporting SREBP-1c modulation of AR
transactivation. In vivo and in vitro protein interaction assays show that
SREBP-1c directly interacts with AR through the activation function-1 domain of
AR. In addition, transfection studies and glutathione S-transferase pull-down
competition experiments reveal that the SREBP-1c-mediated repression of AR
transactivation is accomplished through competition with certain AR coactivators 
for AR interaction. The SREBP-1c-mediated inhibition of AR transactivation also
involves the recruitment of histone deacetylase 1. Finally, adenovirus-mediated
overexpression of SREBP-1c inhibits androgen-induced proliferation of prostatic
cells in vitro and in vivo, and small interfering RNA-mediated down-regulation of
SREBP-1 enhances androgen-induced proliferation of prostatic cells as well as the
transactivation of AR. Taken together, these results suggest that SREBP-1c acts
as an AR corepressor and may play an important role in the regulation of
AR-dependent prostatic cell growth.

PMID: 18245227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Cloning Stem Cells. 2008 Mar;10(1):133-42. doi: 10.1089/clo.2007.0066.

The effects of trichostatin A on mRNA expression of chromatin structure-, DNA
methylation-, and development-related genes in cloned mouse blastocysts.

Li X(1), Kato Y, Tsuji Y, Tsunoda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Reproduction, College of Agriculture, Kinki University,
Nara, Japan.

Trichostatin A (TSA) is the most potent histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor
known. We previously reported that treatment of mouse somatic cell
nuclear-transferred (SCNT) oocytes with TSA significantly increased the
blastocyst rate, blastocyst cell number, and full-term development. How TSA
enhances the epigenetic remodeling ability of somatic nuclei and the expression
of development-related genes, however, is not known. In the present study, we
compared the expression patterns of nine genes involved in chromatin structure
and DNA methylation, and seven development-related genes in blastocysts developed
from SCNT oocytes treated with and without TSA, and in blastocysts developed in
vivo and in vitro using real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction. In vivo-recovered blastocysts and blastocysts developed from
TSA-treated SCNT oocytes exhibited similar expression patterns for Hdac1, 2, and 
3, CBP, PCAF, and Dnmt3b genes compared with in vitro-developed blastocysts and
blastocysts developed from SCNT oocytes without TSA treatment. There were
significantly lower expression levels of Hdac1 and Hdac2 transcripts in
TSA-treated and in vivo-recovered blastocysts than in TSA-untreated and in
vitro-developed blastocysts. The finding that TSA treatment of SCNT oocytes
significantly upregulated Sox2 and cMyc transcripts in blastocysts indicated that
both transcripts are TSA-responsive genes. Thus, TSA treatment of mouse SCNT
oocytes decreased the expression of chromatin structure- and DNA
methylation-related genes, and increased the expression of Sox2 and cMyc genes in
blastocysts. Such modifications might be a reason for the high developmental
potential of mouse SCNT oocytes treated with TSA.

PMID: 18241125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Cell Cycle. 2008 Mar 1;7(5):647-55. Epub 2007 Dec 12.

Inhibition of cyclin D1 gene transcription by Brg-1.

Rao M(1), Casimiro MC, Lisanti MP, D'Amico M, Wang C, Shirley LA, Leader JE, Liu 
M, Stallcup M, Engel DA, Murphy DJ, Pestell RG.

Author information: 
(1)Kimmel Cancer Center, Department of Cancer Biology, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

The evolutionarily conserved SWI-SNF chromatin remodeling complex regulates
cellular proliferation. A catalytic subunit, BRG-1, is frequently down regulated,
silenced or mutated in malignant cells, however, the mechanism by which BRG-1 may
function as a tumor suppressor or block breast cancer cellular proliferation is
not understood. The cyclin D1 gene is a collaborative oncogene overexpressed in
greater than 50% of human breast cancers. Herein, BRG-1 inhibited DNA synthesis
and cyclin D1 expression in human MCF-7 breast cancer epithelial cells. The
cyclin D1 promoter AP-1 and CRE sites were required for repression by BRG-1 in
promoter assays. BRG-1 deficient cells abolished and siRNA to BRG-1 reduced,
formation of the BRG-1 chromatin complex. The endogenous cyclin D1 promoter AP-1 
site bound BRG-1. Estradiol treatment of MCF-7 cells induced recruitment of BRG-1
to the endogenous hpS2 gene promoter. Estradiol, which induced cyclin D1
abundance, was associated with a reduction in recruitment of the co-repressors
HP1alpha/HDAC1 to the endogenous cyclin D1 promoter AP-1/BRG-1 binding sites.
These studies suggest the endogenous cyclin D1 promoter BRG-1 binding site
functions as a molecular scaffold in the context of local chromatin upon which
coactivators and corepressors are recruited to regulate cyclin D1.

PMID: 18239461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Mol Cancer Res. 2008 Jan;6(1):151-64. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-07-0175.

Histone modifications at the ABCG2 promoter following treatment with histone
deacetylase inhibitor mirror those in multidrug-resistant cells.

To KK(1), Polgar O, Huff LM, Morisaki K, Bates SE.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Therapeutics Section, Medical Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer
Research, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892-4255, USA.
tok@mail.nih.gov

ABCG2 is a ubiquitous ATP-binding cassette transmembrane protein that is
important in pharmacology and may play a role in stem cell biology and clinical
drug resistance. To study the mechanism(s) regulating ABCG2 expression, we used
ChIP to investigate the levels of acetylated histone H3, histone deacetylases
(HDAC), histone acetyltransferases, and other transcription regulatory proteins
associated with the ABCG2 promoter. Following selection for drug resistance and
the subsequent overexpression of ABCG2, an increase in acetylated histone H3 but 
a decrease in class I HDACs associated with the ABCG2 promoter was observed.
Permissive histone modifications, including an increase in histone H3 lysine 4
trimethylation (Me(3)-K4 H3) and histone H3 serine 10 phosphorylation (P-S10 H3),
were observed accompanying development of the resistance phenotype. These changes
mirrored those in some cell lines treated with a HDAC inhibitor, romidepsin. A
repressive histone mark, trimethylated histone H3 lysine 9 (Me(3)-K9 H3), was
found in untreated parental cells and cells that did not respond to HDAC
inhibition with ABCG2 up-regulation. Interestingly, although all five studied
cell lines showed global histone acetylation and MDR1 up-regulation upon HDAC
inhibition, only those cells with removal of the repressive mark, and recruitment
of RNA polymerase II and a chromatin remodeling factor Brg-1 from the ABCG2
promoter, showed increased ABCG2 expression. In the remaining cell lines, HDAC1
binding in association with the repressive Me3-K9 H3 mark apparently constrains
the effect of HDAC inhibition on ABCG2 expression. These studies begin to address
the differential effect of HDAC inhibitors widely observed in gene expression
studies.

PMCID: PMC3306834
PMID: 18234970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Biol Chem. 2008 Apr 4;283(14):9257-68. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M709388200. Epub 2008
Jan 30.

Transcription of genes encoding synaptic vesicle proteins in human neural stem
cells: chromatin accessibility, histone methylation pattern, and the essential
role of rest.

Ekici M(1), Hohl M, Schuit F, Martínez-Serrano A, Thiel G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of
Saarland Medical Center, Homburg, Germany.

Human HNSC.100 neural stem cells up-regulate expression of GFAP following
withdrawal of mitogens. Activation of the ERK signaling pathway prevented the
up-regulation of GFAP expression. Incubation of cells with retinoic acid in the
absence of mitogens enhanced basal neuronal differentiation that was accompanied 
by an up-regulation of neuronal gene expression and a down-regulation of GFAP and
nestin expression. Retinoic acid treatment changed the histone code of neuronal
genes encoding synapsin I, synaptophysin, and synaptotagmins II, IV, and VII from
a transcriptionally inactive (methylation of lysine residue 9 of histone 3) to a 
transcriptionally active state (methylation of lysine residue 4 of histone 3). In
contrast, the chromatin structure of the GFAP gene is transformed from a
transcriptionally active state in unstimulated neural stem cells to a
transcriptionally inactive state in retinoic acid-stimulated cells. Additionally,
retinoic acid treatment reduced the binding of histone deacetylase-1 and REST to 
neuronal genes. The inhibition of histone deacetylase activity induced expression
of genes encoding synaptic vesicle proteins in unstimulated neural stem cells.
Similarly, neuronal gene transcription was enhanced following expression of a
mutant of REST that contained a transcriptional activation domain. These data
indicate that in undifferentiated human neural stem cells, neuronal genes
encoding synaptic vesicle proteins are accessible for the REST mutant and are
sensitive to enhanced histone acetylation.

PMCID: PMC2431030
PMID: 18234667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Radiat Res. 2008 Feb;169(2):240-4. doi: 10.1667/RR1209.1.

A concern regarding the current confusion with the human homolog of mouse Np95,
ICBP90/UHRF1.

Unoki M(1), Bronner C, Mousli M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Human Carcinogenesis, Center for Cancer Research, National
Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4258, USA. unokim@mail.nih.gov

ICBP90/UHRF1, which is overexpressed in cancer cells and is down-regulated by
p53, possesses a methylated CpG binding affinity and binds to the methylated
promoters of tumor suppressor genes in cancer cells with HDAC1 and DNMT1,
suggesting suppression of these genes and maintenance of methylation status which
leads to carcinogenesis. Recently, it was reported that the human homolog of Np95
is different from ICBP90 but not from UHRF1. Because UHRF1 is the gene symbol of 
ICBP90, the claim is a little confusing; that is, UHRF1 and ICBP90 are identical.
Because the previously published genomic structure of the ICBP90 gene needed to
be revised and the registered ICBP90 sequence (AF129507) contains two rare
polymorphisms or sequence errors, we think that confusion could occur. Here we
show the revised ICBP90 gene structure and 366 polymorphisms in this gene. Our
conclusion is that the human homolog of Np95 is ICBP90, whose gene symbol is
UHRF1.

PMID: 18220474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Am Chem Soc. 2008 Feb 20;130(7):2184-94. doi: 10.1021/ja074138u. Epub 2008 Jan 
25.

Optimization of activity-based probes for proteomic profiling of histone
deacetylase complexes.

Salisbury CM(1), Cravatt BF.

Author information: 
(1)The Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La
Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are key enzymatic regulators of the epigenome and
serve as promising targets for anticancer therapeutics. Recently, we developed a 
photoreactive "clickable" probe, SAHA-BPyne, to report on HDAC activity and
complex formation in native biological systems. Here, we investigate the
selectivity, sensitivity, and inhibitory properties of SAHA-BPyne and related
potential activity-based probes for HDACs. While we identified several probes
that are potent HDAC inhibitors and label HDAC complex components in native
proteomic preparations, SAHA-BPyne was markedly superior for profiling HDAC
activities in live cells. Interestingly, the enhanced performance of SAHA-BPyne
as an in situ activity-based probe could not be solely ascribed to potency in
HDAC binding, implying that other features of the molecule were key to efficient 
active site-directed labeling in living systems. Finally, we demonstrate the
value of in situ profiling of HDACs by comparing the activity and expression of
HDAC1 in cancer cells treated with the cytotoxic agent parthenolide. These
results underscore the utility of activity-based protein profiling for studying
HDAC function and may provide insight for the future development of click
chemistry-based photoreactive probes for the in situ analysis of additional
enzyme activities.

PMID: 18217751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Br J Cancer. 2008 Feb 12;98(3):604-10. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6604199. Epub 2008 Jan
22.

Histone deacetylases 1, 2 and 3 are highly expressed in prostate cancer and HDAC2
expression is associated with shorter PSA relapse time after radical
prostatectomy.

Weichert W(1), Röske A, Gekeler V, Beckers T, Stephan C, Jung K, Fritzsche FR,
Niesporek S, Denkert C, Dietel M, Kristiansen G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany.

High activity of histone deacetylases (HDACs) causes epigenetic alterations
associated with malignant cell behaviour. Consequently, HDAC inhibitors have
entered late-phase clinical trials as new antineoplastic drugs. However, little
is known about expression and function of specific HDAC isoforms in human tumours
including prostate cancer. We investigated the expression of class I HDACs in 192
prostate carcinomas by immunohistochemistry and correlated our findings to
clinicopathological parameters including follow-up data. Class I HDAC isoforms
were strongly expressed in the majority of the cases (HDAC1: 69.8%, HDAC2: 74%,
HDAC3: 94.8%). High rates of HDAC1 and HDAC2 expression were significantly
associated with tumour dedifferentiation. Strong expression of all HDACs was
accompanied by enhanced tumour cell proliferation. In addition, HDAC2 was an
independent prognostic marker in our prostate cancer cohort. In conclusion, we
showed that the known effects of HDACs on differentiation and proliferation of
cancer cells observed in vitro can also be confirmed in vivo. The class I HDAC
isoforms 1, 2 and 3 are differentially expressed in prostate cancer, which might 
be important for upcoming studies on HDAC inhibitors in this tumour entity. Also,
the highly significant prognostic value of HDAC2 clearly deserves further study.

PMCID: PMC2243142
PMID: 18212746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Cell Prolif. 2008 Feb;41(1):86-97. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2184.2007.00499.x.

Induction of ID1 expression and apoptosis by the histone deacetylase inhibitor
(trichostatin A) in human acute myeloid leukaemic cells.

Yu WP(1), Scott SA, Dong WF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, College of Medicine, Southeast University,
Nanjing, Jiangsu, China. wpylg@hotmail.com

INTRODUCTION: ID1, founding member of the inhibitor of differentiation (ID)
family, is involved in cell population growth, apoptosis and tumourigenesis.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We investigated mRNA levels of ID1 in human myeloid
leukaemic cell lines and in specimens of patients with acute myeloid leukaemia
(AML), using semiquantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction,
and protein levels of ID1 in human myeloid leukaemic cell lines using Western
blot analysis. Six of seven AML cell lines and 12 of 15 AML patient samples were 
found to have barely detectable ID1 mRNA. All of these cell lines showed the same
levels of protein in proportion to levels of mRNA. Two of the AML cell lines with
low ID1 expression, KG1 and KG-1a, were chosen for treatment with either the DNA 
demethylation reagent, 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (DAC), or the histone deacetylase
(HDAC) inhibitor, trichostatin A (TSA). These treatments were alone or in
combination, and ID1 expression was induced by both DAC and TSA. No
hypermethylated ID1 gene promoter was detected in the majority of the cell lines 
and patient specimens, by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction,
suggesting that induction of ID1 in KG1 and KG-1a was not due to direct
demethylation of the ID1 gene promoter. Chromatin immunoprecipitation showed that
accumulation of acetyl-histone H3 and release of HDAC1 were correlated with ID1
induction by these drugs. Flow cytometric assay demonstrated more apoptosis
induced by TSA or TSA in combination with DAC, in both KG-1 and KG-1a cell lines.
Increase of intracellular reactive oxygen species was observed when treated with 
TSA.
CONCLUSION: Most AML cell lines and human AML samples have very low levels of
expression of ID1. TSA or TSA in combination with DAC is able to restore ID1
expression in low ID1-expressing AML cell lines by re-activating the aberrantly
deacetylated promoter, and this also results in more apoptotic cell death, in
which ID1 and the redox pathway may be involved.

PMID: 18211287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Biomed Sci. 2008 May;15(3):333-42. doi: 10.1007/s11373-007-9232-9. Epub 2008
Jan 22.

Inhibitory role of TGIF in the As2O3-regulated p21 WAF1/CIP1 expression.

Liu ZM(1), Huang HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology, College of
Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, 701, Taiwan.

Although arsenic is an infamous carcinogen, it has been effectively used to treat
acute promyelocytic leukemia, and can induce cell cycle arrest or apoptosis in
human solid tumors. Previously, we had demonstrated that opposing effects of
ERK1/2 and JNK on p21 expression in response to arsenic trioxide (As(2)O(3)) are 
mediated through the Sp1 responsive elements of the p21 promoter in A431 cells.
Presently, we demonstrate that Sp1, and c-Jun functionally cooperate to activate 
p21 promoter expression through Sp1 binding sites (-84/-64) by using DNA affinity
binding, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and promoter assays. Surprisingly,
As(2)O(3)-induced c-Jun(Ser63/73) phosphorylation can recruit TGIF/HDAC1 to the
Sp1 binding sites and then suppress p21 promoter activation. We suggest that,
after As(2)O(3 )treatment, the N-terminal domain of c-Jun phosphorylation by JNK 
recruits TGIF/HDAC1 to the Sp1 sites and then represses p21 expression. That is, 
TGIF is involved in As(2)O(3)-inhibited p21 expression, and then blocks the cell 
cycle arrest.

PMID: 18210215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Lancet Oncol. 2008 Feb;9(2):139-48. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(08)70004-4.

Association of patterns of class I histone deacetylase expression with patient
prognosis in gastric cancer: a retrospective analysis.

Weichert W(1), Röske A, Gekeler V, Beckers T, Ebert MP, Pross M, Dietel M,
Denkert C, Röcken C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Charité University Hospital, Berlin, Germany.
weichert@charite.de

Comment in
    Lancet Oncol. 2008 Feb;9(2):91-3.

BACKGROUND: Although histone deacetylases (HDACs) are known to have an important 
regulatory role in cancer cells, and HDAC inhibitors (HDIs) have entered
late-phase clinical trials for the treatment of several cancers, little is known 
about the expression patterns of HDAC isoforms in tumours. We aimed to clarify
these expression patterns and identify potential diagnostic and prognostic uses
of selected class I HDAC isoforms in gastric cancer.
METHODS: Tissue samples from a training cohort and a validation cohort of
patients with gastric cancer from two German institutions were used for analyses.
Tissue microarrays were generated from tumour tissue collected from patients in
the training group, whereas tissue slides were used in the validation group. The 
tissues were scored for expression of class I HDAC isoforms 1, 2, and 3. Overall 
expression patterns (gHDAC) were grouped as being negative (all three isoforms
negative), partially positive (one or two isoforms positive), or completely
positive (all isoforms positive), and correlated with clinicopathological
parameters and patient survival. The main endpoints were amount of expression of 
each of the three HDAC isoforms, patterns of expression of gHDAC, effect of
metastasis on expression of HDAC and gHDAC, and overall survival according to
HDAC expression patterns.
FINDINGS: 2617 tissue microarray spots from 143 patients in the training cohort
and 606 tissue slides from 150 patients in the validation cohort were studied. 52
of the 143 (36%) gastric tumours in the training cohort and 32 of the 150 (21%)
gastric tumours in the validation cohort showed nuclear expression of all three
HDAC isoforms. 60 (42%) of tumours in the training cohort and 65 (43%) in the
validation cohort expressed one or two isoforms in the nuclei, whereas 31 (22%)
of tumours in the training cohort and 53 (35%) in the validation cohort were
scored negative for all three proteins. gHDAC expression in both cohorts was
higher when lymph-node metastases were present (p=0.0175 for the training group
and p=0.0242 for the validation group). Survival data were available for 49
patients in the training group and 123 patients in the validation group. In the
validation cohort, 3-year survival was 44% (95% CI 34-57) in the HDAC1-negative
group, 50% (39-64) in the HDAC2-negative group, and 48% (34-67) in the
gHDAC-negative group. 3-year survival decreased to 21% (11-37) when HDAC1 was
positive, 16% (9-31) when HDAC2 was positive, and 5% (1-31) when gHDAC (all
isoforms) were positive. Those patients highly expressing one or two isoforms
(the gHDAC-intermediate group) had an estimated 3-year survival of 40% (29-56).
In multivariate analyses, high gHDAC and HDAC2 expression were associated with
shorter survival in the training cohort (gHDAC: hazard ratio [HR] 4.15
[1.23-13.99], p=0.0250; HDAC2: HR 3.58 [1.36-9.44], p=0.0100) and in the
validation cohort (gHDAC: HR 2.18 [1.19-4.01], p=0.0433; HDAC2: HR 1.72
[1.08-2.73], p=0.0225), independent of standard clinical predictors.
INTERPRETATION: High HDAC expression is significantly associated with nodal
spread and is an independent prognostic marker for gastric cancer. Additionally, 
we postulate that immunohistochemical detection of HDAC as a companion diagnostic
method might predict treatment response to HDIs, thereby enabling selection of
patients for this specific targeted treatment in gastric cancer.

PMID: 18207460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2008 Feb 15;18(4):1502-6. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2007.12.057. 
Epub 2007 Dec 25.

4-(Heteroarylaminomethyl)-N-(2-aminophenyl)-benzamides and their analogs as a
novel class of histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Fréchette S(1), Leit S, Woo SH, Lapointe G, Jeannotte G, Moradei O, Paquin I,
Bouchain G, Raeppel S, Gaudette F, Zhou N, Vaisburg A, Fournel M, Yan PT,
Trachy-Bourget MC, Kalita A, Robert MF, Lu A, Rahil J, Robert Macleod A,
Besterman JM, Li Z, Delorme D.

Author information: 
(1)MethylGene Inc., Department of Medicinal Chemistry, 7220 Frederick-Banting,
Montréal, QC, Canada.

The synthesis and biological evaluation of a variety of
4-(heteroarylaminomethyl)-N-(2-aminophenyl)-benzamides and their analogs is
described. Some of these compounds were shown to inhibit HDAC1 with IC(50) values
below the micromolar range, induce hyperacetylation of histones, upregulate
expression of the tumor suppressor p21(WAF1/Cip1), and inhibit proliferation of
human cancer cells. In addition, certain compounds of this class were active in
several human tumor xenograft models in vivo.

PMID: 18207391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Mol Cell. 2008 Jan 18;29(1):69-80. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2007.11.002.

Histone H2A monoubiquitination represses transcription by inhibiting RNA
polymerase II transcriptional elongation.

Zhou W(1), Zhu P, Wang J, Pascual G, Ohgi KA, Lozach J, Glass CK, Rosenfeld MG.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, School of Medicine, University of California,
San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Solving the biological roles of covalent histone modifications, including
monoubiquitination of histone H2A, and the molecular mechanisms by which these
modifications regulate specific transcriptional programs remains a central
question for all eukaryotes. Here we report that the N-CoR/HDAC1/3 complex
specifically recruits a specific histone H2A ubiquitin ligase, 2A-HUB/hRUL138, to
a subset of regulated gene promoters. 2A-HUB catalyzes monoubiquitination of H2A 
at lysine 119, functioning as a combinatoric component of the repression
machinery required for specific gene regulation programs. Thus, 2A-HUB mediates a
selective repression of a specific set of chemokine genes in macrophages,
critically modulating migratory responses to TLR activation. H2A
monoubiquitination acts to prevent FACT recruitment at the transcriptional
promoter region, blocking RNA polymerase II release at the early stage of
elongation. We suggest that distinct H2A ubiquitinases, each recruited based on
interactions with different corepressor complexes, contribute to distinct
transcriptional repression programs.

PMCID: PMC2327256
PMID: 18206970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Oncogene. 2008 May 29;27(24):3384-92. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1211014. Epub 2008 Jan 
14.

SIRT1 negatively regulates HDAC1-dependent transcriptional repression by the RBP1
family of proteins.

Binda O(1), Nassif C, Branton PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Both RBP1 and the highly related protein BCAA play a role in the induction of
growth arrest and cellular senescence via mechanisms involving transcriptional
repression. While investigating the transcriptional repression activities of
RBP1, we observed a genetic link between RBP1 and SIR2. Further work uncovered an
interaction between RBP1 family proteins and the mammalian homologue of SIR2,
SIRT1. Interestingly, the HDAC-dependent transcriptional repression domain of
RBP1 proteins, termed R2, is necessary and sufficient for the interaction with
SIRT1. In vitro and in vivo binding studies indicated that the p33(ING1b) and
p33(ING2) subunits of the mSIN3A/HDAC1 complex are responsible for the
recruitment of SIRT1 to the R2 domain. To investigate the biological relevance of
this interaction, we used the sirtuin activator resveratrol and the sirtuin
inhibitor sirtinol in transcriptional repression assays and demonstrated that
SIRT1 activity negatively regulates R2-mediated transcriptional repression
activity. We therefore propose a novel mechanism of class I HDAC regulation by a 
class III HDAC. Explicitly, SIRT1 is recruited by ING proteins and inhibits
R2-associated mSIN3A/HDAC1 transcriptional repression activity.

PMID: 18193082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2008 Feb 1;18(3):973-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2007.12.031.
Epub 2008 Jan 7.

Exploration of the internal cavity of histone deacetylase (HDAC) with selective
HDAC1/HDAC2 inhibitors (SHI-1:2).

Methot JL(1), Chakravarty PK, Chenard M, Close J, Cruz JC, Dahlberg WK, Fleming
J, Hamblett CL, Hamill JE, Harrington P, Harsch A, Heidebrecht R, Hughes B, Jung 
J, Kenific CM, Kral AM, Meinke PT, Middleton RE, Ozerova N, Sloman DL, Stanton
MG, Szewczak AA, Tyagarajan S, Witter DJ, Secrist JP, Miller TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Drug Design and Optimization, Merck Research Laboratories, 33
Avenue Louis Pasteur, Boston, MA 02115, USA. joey_methot@merck.com

We report herein the initial exploration of novel selective HDAC1/HDAC2
inhibitors (SHI-1:2). Optimized SHI-1:2 structures exhibit enhanced intrinsic
activity against HDAC1 and HDAC2, and are greater than 100-fold selective versus 
other HDACs, including HDAC3. Based on the SAR of these agents and our current
understanding of the HDAC active site, we postulate that the SHI-1:2 extend the
existing HDAC inhibitor pharmacophore to include an internal binding domain.

PMID: 18182289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Hum Reprod. 2007 Nov;22(11):2956-66. Epub 2007 Aug 29.

Class I histone deacetylase expression in the human cyclic endometrium and
endometrial adenocarcinomas.

Krusche CA(1), Vloet AJ, Classen-Linke I, von Rango U, Beier HM, Alfer J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Reproductive Biology, RWTH University of Aachen,
Wendlingweg 2, 52074, Aachen, Germany. ckrusche@ukaachen.de

BACKGROUND: Class I histone deacetylases (HDACs) and acetylases (HATs) are
members of transcriptional pre-initiation complexes assembled by steroid hormone 
receptors. Recently, HDAC inhibitors were shown to enhance differentiation of
endometrial fibroblasts and endometrial adenocarcinomas. However, there is only
rare information on HDAC and HAT expression in the human endometrium.
METHODS: HDAC-1, -2, -3 and HAT (PCAF and GCN5) mRNA expression was studied in
tissue from premenopausal women undergoing hysterectomy by real-time or
semiquantitative RT-PCR. HDAC protein expression was assessed by Western Blot and
immunohistochemistry. In endometrial adenocarcinomas (n = 17), HDAC-1 expression 
was studied by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: In the human endometrium, HDAC-1, -2, -3 and PCAF mRNA are expressed
without cyclical changes. Western blot analysis demonstrated that HDAC-2 protein 
expression was slightly, but significantly elevated in the secretory phase (P <
0.01 versus day 5-8), whereas HDAC-1 and -3 protein expression was constitutive
throughout the menstrual cycle. By immunohistochemistry, nuclear expression of
HDAC proteins was detected in all endometrial cell types. In the case of HDAC-3, 
immunostaining was significantly reduced in the endometrial surface epithelium on
day 6-10 (P < 0.01 versus days 15-18 and 24-28). Compared to normal endometrium, 
a high proportion of endometrial adenocarcinomas showed impaired HDAC-1 protein
expression in the epithelial and stromal compartment.
CONCLUSIONS: Class I HDACs and HATs are expressed in the human endometrium
throughout the menstrual cycle, suggesting the cyclic endometrium as a potential 
target for HDAC inhibitors. We hypothesis that alterations of HDAC and/or HAT
expression are potentially involved in impaired endometrial differentiation.

PMID: 17728353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Clin Pathol. 2007 Nov;60(11):1205-10. Epub 2007 Aug 24.

Expression of HDAC1 and CBP/p300 in human colorectal carcinomas.

Ishihama K(1), Yamakawa M, Semba S, Takeda H, Kawata S, Kimura S, Kimura W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yamagata University School of Medicine, Yamagata,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: The histone-modifying enzymes histone deacetylase (HDAC) and histone 
acetyltransferase (HAT) control gene transcriptional activation and repression in
human malignancies.
AIMS: To analyse the expression of HDAC/HAT-associated molecules such as HDAC1,
CREB-binding protein (CBP) and p300 in human colorectal carcinomas, and
investigate the relationship between their expression levels and
clinicopathological parameters.
METHODS: Expression levels of HDAC1, CBP, and p300 in human colorectal cancer
were investigated by immunohistochemistry. In situ hybridisation (ISH) and
reverse transcription (RT)-PCR analyses were also carried out to confirm mRNA
expression levels of these genes. Immunoreactivity was evaluated
semi-quantitatively using a staining index (SI). The relationships between the
SIs and clinicopathological findings were analysed and survival curves were
calculated using the Kaplan-Meier method and log-rank tests.
RESULTS: The mean SIs for HDAC1, CBP, and p300 in this series of tumours were
much higher than those in normal colonic mucosa. The presence of HDAC1 and CBP
mRNAs on colorectal carcinoma cells as well as normal epithelial cells was
confirmed by ISH analysis. A marked increase in p300 mRNA levels was detected in 
a majority of cases by RT-PCR. Among the patients with colorectal cancer,
overexpression of p300 (SI>11.9) correlated with a poor prognosis, whereas high
CBP expression levels (SI>16.6) indicated long-term survival.
CONCLUSION: Results showed the up-regulation of these three histone-modifying
molecules in this series of colorectal cancers and suggested that monitoring of
CBP and p300 may assist prediction of the prognosis in patients with colorectal
adenocarcinoma.

PMCID: PMC2095491
PMID: 17720775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Mech Dev. 2007 Sep-Oct;124(9-10):682-98. Epub 2007 Jul 14.

Zebrafish colgate/hdac1 functions in the non-canonical Wnt pathway during axial
extension and in Wnt-independent branchiomotor neuron migration.

Nambiar RM(1), Ignatius MS, Henion PD.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Neurobiology, Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology
Program, Department of Neuroscience, Ohio State University, 105 Rightmire Hall,
1060 Carmack Road, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Vertebrate gastrulation involves the coordinated movements of populations of
cells. These movements include cellular rearrangements in which cells polarize
along their medio-lateral axes leading to cell intercalations that result in
elongation of the body axis. Molecular analysis of this process has implicated
the non-canonical Wnt/Frizzled signaling pathway that is similar to the planar
cell polarity pathway (PCP) in Drosophila. Here we describe a zebrafish mutant,
colgate (col), which displays defects in the extension of the body axis and the
migration of branchiomotor neurons. Activation of the non-canonical Wnt/PCP
pathway in these mutant embryos by overexpressing DeltaNdishevelled, rho kinase2 
and van gogh-like protein 2 (vangl2) rescues the extension defects suggesting
that col acts as a positive regulator of the non-canonical Wnt/PCP pathway.
Further, we show that col normally regulates the caudal migration of nVII facial 
hindbrain branchiomotor neurons and that the mutant phenotype can be rescued by
misexpression of vangl2 independent of the Wnt/PCP pathway. We cloned the col
locus and found that it encodes histone deacetylase1 (hdac1). Our previous
results and studies by others have implicated hdac1 in repressing the canonical
Wnt pathway. Here, we demonstrate novel roles for zebrafish hdac1 in activating
non-canonical Wnt/PCP signaling underlying axial extension and in promoting
Wnt-independent caudal migration of a subset of hindbrain branchiomotor neurons.

PMCID: PMC2701655
PMID: 17716875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007 Sep-Oct;1769(9-10):569-78. Epub 2007 Jul 20.

HDAC1 bound to the Cyp1a1 promoter blocks histone acetylation associated with Ah 
receptor-mediated trans-activation.

Schnekenburger M(1), Peng L, Puga A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Environmental Genetics and Department of Environmental Health,
University of Cincinnati Medical Center, P.O. Box 670056, Cincinnati, Ohio
45267-0056, USA.

Metabolic bioactivation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, such as the
environmental procarcinogen benzo[a]pyrene, is catalyzed by a cytochrome P450
monooxygenase encoded by the substrate-inducible Cyp1a1 gene. Cyp1a1 induction
requires trans-activation by the heterodimeric transcriptional complex formed by 
the liganded Ah receptor (AHR) and its partner, ARNT. Previously, we showed that 
constitutively bound HDAC1 dissociates from Cyp1a1 promoter chromatin after
ligand-mediated induction, concomitantly with the recruitment of AHR/ARNT
complexes and p300. Here, we investigated the hypothesis that HDAC1 binding
maintains the Cyp1a1 gene in a silenced state in uninduced cells. We find that
Cyp1a1 induction by the AHR/ARNT is associated with modification of specific
chromatin marks, including hyperacetylation of histone H3K14 and H4K16,
trimethylation of histone H3K4, and phosphorylation of H3S10. HDAC1 and DNMT1
form complexes on the Cyp1a1 promoter of uninduced cells but HDAC1 inhibition
alone is not sufficient to induce Cyp1a1 expression, although it allows for the
hyperacetylation of H3K14 and H4K16 to levels similar to those found in
B[a]P-induced cells. These results show that by blocking the modification of
histone marks, HDAC1 plays a central role in Cyp1a1 expression and that its
removal is a necessary but not sufficient condition for Cyp1a1 induction,
underscoring the requirement for a concerted series of chromatin-remodeling
events to complete the initial steps of gene trans-activation by the Ah receptor.

PMCID: PMC2083643
PMID: 17707923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Oct 12;362(1):164-9. Epub 2007 Aug 9.

RhoB is epigenetically regulated in an age- and tissue-specific manner.

Yoon YS(1), Choo JH, Yoo T, Kang K, Chung JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology, 335 Gwahangno, Yuseoung-gu, Daejeon 305-701, South Korea.

RhoB, a member of the Rho family of small GTPases, regulates the organization of 
the actin cytoskeleton, malignant transformation, and genotoxic stress-induced
signaling. In order to characterize epigenetic regulation of RhoB transcription
during aging, the mRNA levels of RhoB were investigated using various mouse
tissues of different ages. Bisulfite sequencing revealed that the CpG
dinucleotide methylation patterns of the RhoB promoter region were not altered in
skeletal muscle and lung during aging. ChIP analysis showed that levels of
histone H3 and H4 acetylation were reduced in a tissue-specific manner during
aging due to direct HDAC1 binding. Histone H3 lysine 9 trimethylation level and
deposition of HP1beta increased in RhoB promoter during aging, whereas histone H3
lysine 4 dimethylation level gradually decreased. It was concluded that mouse
RhoB transcription is epigenetically regulated in a tissue-specific manner during
aging by histone modification, but not by CpG methylation.

PMID: 17706596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Biol Chem. 2007 Oct 12;282(41):29902-9. Epub 2007 Aug 17.

Regulation of E2F1 function by the nuclear corepressor KAP1.

Wang C(1), Rauscher FJ 3rd, Cress WD, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Program, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, Tampa, Florida 33612, USA.

KAP1 is a nuclear corepressor with conserved domains for RING finger, B boxes,
leucine zipper alpha helical coiled-coil region, plant homeo domain finger, and
bromo domain. The plant homeo domain finger and bromo domain of KAP1
cooperatively function as a transcription repression domain by recruiting the
histone deacetylase complex NuRD and histone H3 lysine 9-specific
methyltransferase SETDB1. Here we report that KAP1 binds the E2F1 transcription
factor in a retinoblastoma protein (pRb)-independent fashion and inhibits E2F1
activity. KAP1 stimulates formation of E2F1-HDAC1 complex and inhibits E2F1
acetylation. Ectopic expression of KAP1 represses E2F1 transcription and
apoptosis functions independent of pRb. Depletion of endogenous KAP1 in
pRb-deficient Saos2 cells by RNA interference increases E2F1 acetylation level,
stimulates E2F1 transcriptional activity, and sensitizes apoptosis response to
DNA damage. Therefore, KAP1 contributes to the negative regulation of E2F1 and
may serve as a partial backup to prevent E2F1-mediated apoptosis in the absence
of pRb.

PMID: 17704056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Endocrinology. 2007 Nov;148(11):5209-19. Epub 2007 Aug 16.

Prostaglandin F2alpha suppresses rat steroidogenic acute regulatory protein
expression via induction of Yin Yang 1 protein and recruitment of histone
deacetylase 1 protein.

Liu Q(1), Merkler KA, Zhang X, McLean MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of South Florida, Tampa,
FL 33612, USA.

Prostaglandin F2alpha (PGF2alpha) plays a pivotal role in ovarian luteolysis by
inhibiting the expression of steroidogenic acute regulatory (StAR) protein,
leading to a decrease in intracellular cholesterol transport and luteal steroid
production. Previously we have demonstrated that the transcription factor Yin
Yang 1 (YY1) bound to three regions in the StAR promoter in vitro and repressed
promoter activity. This study further defined the YY1-mediated PGF2alpha effect
on the inhibition of StAR protein expression through YY1 interaction with a
single region in the StAR promoter in vivo. PGF2alpha consistently suppressed
StAR mRNA and protein expression in cultured luteal cells in a dose-dependent
manner. PGF2alpha also enhanced YY1 protein expression and binding to its
cis-element in a time-dependent pattern that preceded the decline in StAR protein
levels. The StAR promoter region bound by YY1 was also associated with histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1). PGF2alpha treatment promoted HDAC1 binding to and
suppressed the histone H3 acetylation in this region. On the contrary, YY1
knockdown decreased HDAC1 binding, increased histone H3 acetylation, enhanced
StAR protein expression, and negated PGF2alpha effect on StAR protein expression.
Luciferase assays showed that YY1 overexpression inhibited StAR promoter activity
and the addition of a HDAC inhibitor, trichostatin A, abrogated the effect of
YY1. Trichostatin A-treated luteal cells displayed increased StAR protein
expression. These data indicate that PGF2alpha enhances a direct YY1/StAR
promoter interaction and the recruitment of HDAC1 to the promoter, thereby
preventing transcriptional activation of the StAR gene.

PMID: 17702849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Med Chem. 2007 Sep 6;50(18):4405-18. Epub 2007 Aug 11.

2-aroylindoles and 2-aroylbenzofurans with N-hydroxyacrylamide substructures as a
novel series of rationally designed histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Mahboobi S(1), Sellmer A, Höcher H, Garhammer C, Pongratz H, Maier T, Ciossek T, 
Beckers T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry I, University of Regensburg, D-93040
Regensburg, Germany. siavosh.mahboobi@chemie.uni-regensburg.de

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are considered to be drugs for targeted
cancer therapy and second-generation HDIs are currently being tested in clinical 
trials. Here, we report on the synthesis and biological evaluation of a novel
HDAC inhibitor scaffold with the hydroxamate Zn(2+) complexing headgroup,
selected from the 2-aroylindol motif. Inhibition of nuclear extract HDAC and
recombinant HDAC 1 as well as induction of histone H3K(9+14) hyperacetylation
mediated by E-N-hydroxy-(2-aroylindole)acrylamides or
E-N-hydroxy-(2-aroylbenzofuran)acrylamides were studied. Moreover, the cytotoxic 
activity, the effects on the cell cycle, and histone H3S(10) phosphorylation of
selected compounds were determined. By use of a panel of 24 different human tumor
cell lines, mean IC(50) values of the most potent analogues 6c and 7b were 0.75
and 0.65 microM, respectively. The novel compounds were shown to be no substrates
of the P-glycoprotein drug transporter. Comparable to
N(1)-hydroxy-N(8)-phenyloctanediamide "2 (SAHA)", cells in the S phase of the
cell cycle are depleted, with partial arrest in G1 and G2/M and finally induction
of massive apoptosis.

PMID: 17691763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Oct;27(20):7089-101. Epub 2007 Aug 6.

Chromium cross-links histone deacetylase 1-DNA methyltransferase 1 complexes to
chromatin, inhibiting histone-remodeling marks critical for transcriptional
activation.

Schnekenburger M(1), Talaska G, Puga A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, University of Cincinnati Medical Center,
P.O. Box 670056, Cincinnati, OH 45267-0056, USA.

Transcriptional regulation of gene expression requires posttranslational
modification of histone proteins, which, in concert with chromatin-remodeling
factors, modulate chromatin structure. Exposure to environmental agents may
interfere with specific histone modifications and derail normal patterns of gene 
expression. To test this hypothesis, we coexposed cells to binary mixtures of
benzo[a]pyrene (B[a]P), an environmental procarcinogen that activates Cyp1a1
transcriptional responses mediated by the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), and
chromium, a carcinogenic heavy metal that represses B[a]P-inducible AHR-mediated 
gene expression. We show that chromium cross-links histone deacetylase 1-DNA
methyltransferase 1 (HDAC1-DNMT1) complexes to Cyp1a1 promoter chromatin and
inhibits histone marks induced by AHR-mediated gene transactivation, including
phosphorylation of histone H3 Ser-10, trimethylation of H3 Lys-4, and various
acetylation marks in histones H3 and H4. These changes inhibit RNA polymerase II 
recruitment without affecting the kinetics of AHR DNA binding. HDAC1 and DNMT1
inhibitors or depletion of HDAC1 or DNMT1 with siRNAs blocks chromium-induced
transcriptional repression by decreasing the interaction of these proteins with
the Cyp1a1 promoter and allowing histone acetylation to proceed. By inhibiting
Cyp1a1 expression, chromium stimulates the formation of B[a]P DNA adducts.
Epigenetic modification of gene expression patterns may be a key element of the
developmental and carcinogenic outcomes of exposure to chromium and to other
environmental agents.

PMCID: PMC2168892
PMID: 17682057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Ai Zheng. 2007 May;26(5):469-72.

[Biological mechanism of full-length form of spleen tyrosine kinase regulating
gene transcription in breast cancer cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang L(1), Hu Y, Yang ZL, Song XM, Wang JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, The Sixth Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510080, PR China.

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVE: Full-length form of spleen tyrosine kinase [Syk(L)] is a 
tumor suppressor gene in breast cancer, which may translocate into cell nucleus
and act as a transcriptional repressor. This study was to explore the mechanism
of Syk(L) regulated gene transcription in breast cancer cells.
METHODS: Flag-tagged Syk(L) was transfected into human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293
cells, and the interaction of Syk(L) and histone deacetylases (HDACs) was
detected by immunoprecipitation. The binding of endogenous HDAC1 and Syk(L) in
breast cancer cell line MB468 was also detected by immunoprecipitation.
Flag-tagged Syk(L) domains SH2, KD, and IDB(L) were transfected into HEK293
cells, respectively, and their interaction with HDAC1 was detected. The activity 
of HDACs in the immunoprecipited complexes of Syk(L) was tested by HDAC activity 
detecting system.
RESULTS: Exogenous Syk(L) was bound with HDAC1, 3, 6, and 7 in HEK293 cells, and 
endogenous Syk(L) was bound with HDAC1 in MB468 cells. SH2 and KD, but not
IDB(L), were coimmunoprecipitated with HDAC1. The activity of HDACs was detected 
in the immunoprecipited complexes of Syk(L).
CONCLUSIONS: Syk(L) regulates gene transcription in breast cancer by binding with
HDACs to form transcription repressive complexes.

PMID: 17672934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Int J Oncol. 2007 Sep;31(3):633-41.

The histone deacetylase inhibitors suberoylanilide hydroxamic (Vorinostat) and
valproic acid induce irreversible and MDR1-independent resistance in human colon 
cancer cells.

Fedier A(1), Dedes KJ, Imesch P, Von Bueren AO, Fink D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, University Hospital of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. 
andre.fedier@usz.ch

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors such as suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid
(SAHA, Vorinostat), valproic acid (VPA), and FK228 are members of a relatively
novel class of small molecular weight chemicals that have high antineoplastic
activity. They cause growth inhibition and apoptosis specifically in tumor cells,
and they act also as chemo- and radio-sensitizers. In the present study, the
potential of SAHA and VPA to induce resistance was studied. To that aim HDAC
inhibitor-resistant sublines were generated by stepwise exposure of colon tumor
cells to increasing concentrations of these compounds. Clonogenic data
demonstrated that the SAHA- and VPA-induced sublines were 2-fold resistant to
these compounds. This resistance was non-reversible, as it was maintained even
when the sublines were cultured in the absence of SAHA or VPA. The SAHA- and
VPA-induced resistant sublines were also stably cross-resistant to VPA and SAHA, 
respectively, but retained sensitivity against non-HDAC inhibitor-type anticancer
agents. The SAHA-induced resistance correlated with loss of the G2/M checkpoint
but it was not accompanied by reduced induction of the endogenous cell cycle
inhibitors p21 and p27. Furthermore, SAHA-induced resistance was not due to
reduced apoptosis, and it was neither dependent on MDR expression nor was it due 
to increased expression of HDAC1 and HDAC3. Taken together, these data
demonstrate the potential of SAHA and VPA to induce resistance. This resistance
was not dependent on MDR expression, did not involve MMR, and seemed to underlie 
a mechanism that differs from that underlying the previously observed
FK228-induced resistance. The finding that SAHA and VPA induce only modest
resistance despite continuous treatment and that the resistance is
MDR-independent suggests a preference for these two drugs over FK228 for use in
combination treatment with classic anticancer agents.

PMID: 17671692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Cancer Res. 2007 Aug 1;67(15):7132-8.

Identification of Pax5 as a target of MTA1 in B-cell lymphomas.

Balasenthil S(1), Gururaj AE, Talukder AH, Bagheri-Yarmand R, Arrington T, Haas
BJ, Braisted JC, Kim I, Lee NH, Kumar R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Erratum in
    Cancer Res. 2015 Jun 15;75(12):2580-1.

Previously, we have shown that metastasis-associated protein 1 (MTA1)
overexpression in transgenic mice was accompanied by high incidence of
spontaneous B-cell lymphomas including diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCL). To
understand the molecular basis of lymphoma in MTA1-transgenic (MTA1-TG) mice, we 
wished to identify a putative MTA1 target with a causal role in B-cell
lymphogenesis. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, we identified paired
box gene 5 (Pax5), a molecule previously implicated in B-cell lymphogenesis, as a
potential downstream effector of MTA1. Lymphomas from MTA1-TG mice also showed
up-regulation of Pax5. We also found that MTA1 acetylated on Lys(626) interacted 
with p300 histone acetyltransferase, and that acetylated MTA1 was recruited to
the Pax5 promoter to stimulate Pax5 transcription. Global gene profiling
identified down-regulation of a set of genes, including those downstream of Pax5 
and directly implicated in the B-cell lymphogenesis. Significance of these murine
studies was established by evidence showing a widespread up-regulation of both
MTA1 and Pax5 in DLBCL from humans. These observations provide in vivo genetic
evidence for a role of MTA1 in lymphomagenesis.

PMID: 17671180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Virol. 2007 Oct;81(20):10914-23. Epub 2007 Aug 1.

c-Myc and Sp1 contribute to proviral latency by recruiting histone deacetylase 1 
to the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 promoter.

Jiang G(1), Espeseth A, Hazuda DJ, Margolis DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 3302
Michael Hooker Research Ctr., Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7435, USA.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors such as valproic acid (VPA) induce the
expression of quiescent proviral human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) and 
may deplete proviral infection in vivo. To uncover novel molecular mechanisms
that maintain HIV latency, we sought cellular mRNAs whose expression was
diminished in resting CD4(+) T cells of HIV-1-infected patients exposed to VPA.
c-Myc was prominent among genes markedly downregulated upon exposure to VPA.
c-Myc expression repressed HIV-1 expression in chronically infected cell lines.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays revealed that c-Myc and HDAC1 are
coordinately resident at the HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR) promoter and absent
from the promoter after VPA treatment in concert with histone acetylation, RNA
polymerase II recruitment, and LTR expression. Sequential ChIP assays
demonstrated that c-Myc, Sp1, and HDAC1 coexist in the same DNA-protein complex
at the HIV promoter. Short hairpin RNA inhibition of c-Myc reduces both c-Myc and
HDAC1 occupancy, blocks c-Myc repression of Tat activation, and increases LTR
expression. These results expand the understanding of mechanisms that recruit
HDAC and maintain the latency of HIV-1, suggesting novel therapeutic approaches
against latent proviral HIV infection.

PMCID: PMC2045540
PMID: 17670825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. PLoS One. 2007 Aug 1;2(7):e660.

p53 target gene SMAR1 is dysregulated in breast cancer: its role in cancer cell
migration and invasion.

Singh K(1), Mogare D, Giridharagopalan RO, Gogiraju R, Pande G, Chattopadhyay S.

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Cell Science, Pune University, Pune, Maharastra, India.

Tumor suppressor SMAR1 interacts and stabilizes p53 through phosphorylation at
its serine-15 residue. We show that SMAR1 transcription is regulated by p53
through its response element present in the SMAR1 promoter. Upon Doxorubicin
induced DNA damage, acetylated p53 is recruited on SMAR1 promoter that allows
activation of its transcription. Once SMAR1 is induced, cell cycle arrest is
observed that is correlated to increased phospho-ser-15-p53 and decreased p53
acetylation. Further we demonstrate that SMAR1 expression is drastically reduced 
during advancement of human breast cancer. This was correlated with defective p53
expression in breast cancer where acetylated p53 is sequestered into the
heterochromatin region and become inaccessible to activate SMAR1 promoter. In a
recent report we have shown that SMAR1 represses Cyclin D1 transcription through 
recruitment of HDAC1 dependent repressor complex at the MAR site of Cyclin D1
promoter. Here we show that downmodulation of SMAR1 in high grade breast
carcinoma is correlated with upregulated Cyclin D1 expression. We also
established that SMAR1 inhibits tumor cell migration and metastases through
inhibition of TGFbeta signaling and its downstream target genes including cutl1
and various focal adhesion molecules. Thus, we report that SMAR1 plays a central 
role in coordinating p53 and TGFbeta pathways in human breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC1924604
PMID: 17668048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Genes Cells. 2007 Aug;12(8):905-18.

The zinc finger repressor, ZBP-89, recruits histone deacetylase 1 to repress
vimentin gene expression.

Wu Y(1), Zhang X, Salmon M, Zehner ZE.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Biochemistry and the Massey Cancer Center, Medical College
of Virginia Campus of Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23298-0614, 
USA.

Vimentin, a member of the intermediate filament (IF) protein family, exhibits a
complex pattern of tissue- and developmental-specific expression. Although
vimentin is widely expressed in the embryo, its expression becomes restricted
during terminal differentiation. Moreover, it is often expressed in tissue
culture cells despite their embryological origin and is a marker for the
metastatic tumor cell. Previously, the vimentin promoter has been shown to
contain several positive- and negative-acting cis-elements. The negative elements
bind the transcription factor ZBP-89. Interestingly, ZBP-89 can be either an
activator or a repressor of gene expression. For instance, ZBP-89 has been shown 
to activate p21(waf1/cip1) expression by recruiting p300 to the p21 promoter.
Here, we have investigated the mechanism of ZBP-89 repression. The histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor TSA enhances vimentin gene expression requiring the 
proximal promoter region including GC-box 1, a known Sp1/Sp3 binding site.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays document an increase in the
acetylation status of histone H3 on the endogenous vimentin gene concomitant with
TSA treatment. However, EMSAs, DNA precipitation, co-immunoprecipitation and ChIP
data show that it is not Sp1, but rather ZBP-89, which recruits HDAC1. From these
studies we conclude that ZBP-89 functions as a repressor by recruiting HDAC1 to
the vimentin promoter.

PMID: 17663720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Chem Biol. 2007 Jul;14(7):813-23.

Parthenolide specifically depletes histone deacetylase 1 protein and induces cell
death through ataxia telangiectasia mutated.

Gopal YN(1), Arora TS, Van Dyke MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs), enzymes involved in chromatin remodeling, are
promising targets for anticancer drug development. Several HDAC inhibitors
(HDACi) are in clinical trials. One limitation of present HDACi is their
nonspecificity, affecting many HDACs with similar effectiveness. We have
identified a small molecule, the sesquiterpene lactone parthenolide (PN), which
specifically depletes HDAC1 protein without affecting other class I/II HDACs.
HDAC1 depletion occurred through proteasomal degradation and resulted in
transcriptional consequences comparable to those observed with pan-HDACi.
Surprisingly, HDAC1 depletion did not occur through the inflammation mediator
IKK2, a known PN target and regulator of HDAC1. Rather, PN promoted HDAC1
depletion and cell death through the DNA-damage-transducer ataxia telangiectasia 
mutated. Our study suggests that modulating cellular HDAC protein levels with
small molecules provides an alternative approach to specific HDAC inhibition and 
effective cancer treatment.

PMID: 17656318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Biochem. 2007 Oct;142(4):443-52. Epub 2007 Jul 25.

Regulatory factors involved in species-specific modulation of arylhydrocarbon
receptor (AhR)-dependent gene expression in humans and mice.

Suzuki T(1), Nohara K.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Health Sciences Division, National Institute for Environmental
Studies, 16-2 Onogawa, Tsukuba 305-8506, Japan.

The arylhydrocarbon receptor (AhR) mediates toxicities of dioxins, including the 
most potent congener 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), by being
translocated to the nucleus upon ligand-binding and inducing expression of target
genes. Although the species-specific activity of the AhR is primarily
attributable to species-specific AhR-ligand affinity, the precise mechanism has
not been clarified. We investigated the modulation mechanisms of AhR in Hepa1c1c7
and HepG2 hepatoma cells, which were derived from high-affinity-AhR-expressing
C57BL/6 mice and low-affinity-AhR-expressing humans, respectively. Although,
consistent with their AhR affinities, TCDD induced a greater amount of cytochrome
P450 1A1 (CYP1A1) mRNA, one of the most sensitive AhR-targets, in Hepa1c1c7 cells
than in HepG2 cells immediately after exposure, both cells expressed a similar
level of CYP1A1 mRNA from 4 h onward. A rapid decrease in the AhR protein after
nuclear translocation in Hepa1c1c7 cells was suggested to contribute to
suppression of CYP1A1 induction to the same level as in HepG2 cells. Different
profiles of histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1)-binding to the CYP1A1 promoter and
histone acetylation between both cell lines and lower degradation rate of CYP1A1 
mRNA in HepG2 cells were also implicated in regulating their target gene
expression. These factors have been highly suggested to be involved in the
species-specific modulation mechanism of AhR function.

PMID: 17652329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Sep 21;361(2):349-55. Epub 2007 Jul 16.

Histone deacetylase 1 phosphorylation at S421 and S423 is constitutive in vivo,
but dispensable in vitro.

Karwowska-Desaulniers P(1), Ketko A, Kamath N, Pflum MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Wayne State University, 5101 Cass Avenue, Detroit, MI
48202, USA.

Histone Deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) is a transcriptional regulator associated with
proliferation, apoptosis, and tumorigenesis, although its precise cellular role
is unclear. HDAC1 was previously characterized as a phosphoprotein where mutation
of phosphorylated S421 and S423 resulted in a loss of deacetylase activity and
protein association. Here, the role of phosphorylation in regulating HDAC1
function was examined using phospho-specific antibodies. The antibody studies
revealed that phosphorylation at S421 and S423 is constant during the cell cycle,
under stress conditions, or in the presence of kinase or phosphatase inhibitors. 
Further, phosphorylation is dispensable for catalysis or protein association in
vitro, as revealed by phosphatase studies. Truncation mutants of HDAC1
demonstrated that binding to Sin3A is promoted by S421 and S423 phosphorylation, 
while interaction with RbAp48 is not. Taken together, the data are consistent
with constitutive phosphorylation of HDAC1 at S421 and S423 in vivo, which is
dispensable for activity in vitro.

PMID: 17643391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Genes Dev. 2007 Jul 15;21(14):1790-802.

Histone deacetylases 1 and 2 redundantly regulate cardiac morphogenesis, growth, 
and contractility.

Montgomery RL(1), Davis CA, Potthoff MJ, Haberland M, Fielitz J, Qi X, Hill JA,
Richardson JA, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center at Dallas, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) tighten chromatin structure and repress gene
expression through the removal of acetyl groups from histone tails. The class I
HDACs, HDAC1 and HDAC2, are expressed ubiquitously, but their potential roles in 
tissue-specific gene expression and organogenesis have not been defined. To
explore the functions of HDAC1 and HDAC2 in vivo, we generated mice with
conditional null alleles of both genes. Whereas global deletion of HDAC1 results 
in death by embryonic day 9.5, mice lacking HDAC2 survive until the perinatal
period, when they succumb to a spectrum of cardiac defects, including
obliteration of the lumen of the right ventricle, excessive hyperplasia and
apoptosis of cardiomyocytes, and bradycardia. Cardiac-specific deletion of either
HDAC1 or HDAC2 does not evoke a phenotype, whereas cardiac-specific deletion of
both genes results in neonatal lethality, accompanied by cardiac arrhythmias,
dilated cardiomyopathy, and up-regulation of genes encoding skeletal
muscle-specific contractile proteins and calcium channels. Our results reveal
cell-autonomous and non-cell-autonomous functions for HDAC1 and HDAC2 in the
control of myocardial growth, morphogenesis, and contractility, which reflect
partially redundant roles of these enzymes in tissue-specific transcriptional
repression.

PMCID: PMC1920173
PMID: 17639084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Oct;27(19):6889-902. Epub 2007 Jul 16.

Epigenetic regulation of protein-coding and microRNA genes by the
Gfi1-interacting tumor suppressor PRDM5.

Duan Z(1), Person RE, Lee HH, Huang S, Donadieu J, Badolato R, Grimes HL,
Papayannopoulou T, Horwitz MS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Medicine, University of Washington
School of Medicine, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

Gfi1 transcriptionally governs hematopoiesis, and its mutations produce
neutropenia. In an effort to identify Gfi1-interacting proteins and also to
generate new candidate genes causing neutropenia, we performed a yeast two-hybrid
screen with Gfi1. Among other Gfi1-interacting proteins, we identified a
previously uncharacterized member of the PR domain-containing family of tumor
suppressors, PRDM5. PRDM5 has 16 zinc fingers, and we show that it acts as a
sequence-specific, DNA binding transcription factor that targets
hematopoiesis-associated protein-coding and microRNA genes, including many that
are also targets of Gfi1. PRDM5 epigenetically regulates transcription similarly 
to Gfi1: it recruits the histone methyltransferase G9a and class I histone
deacetylases to its target gene promoters and demonstrates repressor activity on 
synthetic reporters; on endogenous target genes, however, it functions as an
activator, in addition to a repressor. Interestingly, genes that PRDM5 activates,
as opposed to those it represses, are also targets of Gfi1, suggesting a
competitive mechanism through which two repressors could cooperate in order to
become transcriptional activators. In neutropenic patients, we identified PRDM5
protein sequence variants perturbing transcriptional function, suggesting a
potentially important role in hematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC2099216
PMID: 17636019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Cell Prolif. 2007 Aug;40(4):522-31.

HDAC3 is linked to cell cycle machinery in MiaPaCa2 cells by regulating
transcription of skp2.

Schneider G(1), Reichert M, Saur D, Hamacher R, Fritsch R, Schmid RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II, Technical University of Munich, Munich,
Germany. guenter.schneider@lrz.tum.de

OBJECTIVE: Histone deacetylases (HDACs) have been linked to cell cycle control in
various models, involving regulation of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor
p27(Kip1).
RESULTS: Here, we demonstrate that HDAC inhibition by trichostatin A reduces
S-phase kinase-associated protein 2 mRNA and protein abundance. Furthermore, in
contrast to HDAC1, recruited to the skp2 promoter in the G(0) phase, HDAC3 is
bound in early S phase. Activating function of HDAC3 towards the skp2 gene has
been validated using RNA interference techniques. siRNAs, targeting HDAC3
specifically, reduced skp2 transcription.
CONCLUSION: These findings propose that the skp2 gene is a novel target of HDAC3,
mediating cell cycle control and oncogenesis.

PMID: 17635519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Biol Reprod. 2007 Nov;77(5):754-64. Epub 2007 Jul 18.

Dynamic regulation of histone H3 methylation at lysine 4 in mammalian
spermatogenesis.

Godmann M(1), Auger V, Ferraroni-Aguiar V, Di Sauro A, Sette C, Behr R, Kimmins
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H9X 
3V9.

Spermatogenesis is a highly complex cell differentiation process that is governed
by unique transcriptional regulation and massive chromatin alterations, which are
required for meiosis and postmeiotic maturation. The underlying mechanisms
involve alterations to the epigenetic layer, including histone modifications and 
incorporation of testis-specific nuclear proteins, such as histone variants and
protamines. Histones can undergo methylation, acetylation, and phosphorylation
among other modifications at their N-terminus, and these modifications can signal
changes in chromatin structure. We have identified the temporal and spatial
distributions of histone H3 mono-, di-, and trimethylation at lysine 4 (K4), and 
the lysine-specific histone demethylase AOF2 (amine oxidase flavin-containing
domain 2, previously known as LSD1) during mammalian spermatogenesis. Our results
reveal tightly regulated distributions of H3-K4 methylation and AOF2, and that
H3-K4 methylation is very similar between the mouse and the marmoset. The AOF2
protein levels were found to be higher in the testes than in the somatic tissues.
The distribution of AOF2 matched the cell- and stage-specific patterns of H3-K4
methylation. Interaction studies revealed unique epigenetic regulatory complexes 
associated with H3-K4 methylation in the testis, including the association of
AOF2 and methyl-CpG-binding domain protein 2 (MBD2a/b) in a complex with histone 
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1). These studies enhance our understanding of epigenetic
modifications and their roles in chromatin organization during male germ cell
differentiation in both normal and pathologic states.

PMID: 17634443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Sep 14;361(1):55-61. Epub 2007 Jul 9.

Cloning, expression, and biochemical characterization of a new histone
deacetylase-like protein from Thermus caldophilus GK24.

Song YM(1), Kim YS, Kim D, Lee DS, Kwon HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Genomics Laboratory, Department of Biotechnology, College of
Engineering, Yonsei University, Seoul 120-749, Republic of Korea.

Histone deactylases (HDACs) are members of an ancient enzyme family found in
eukaryotes as well as in prokaryotes such as archaebacteria and eubacteria. We
here report a new histone deacetylase (Tca HDAC) that was cloned from the genomic
library of Thermus caldophilus GK24 based on homology analysis with human histone
deacetylase1 (HDAC1). The gene contains an open reading frame encoding 375 amino 
acids with a calculated molecular mass of 42,188 Da and the deduced amino acid
sequence of Tca HDAC showed a 31% homology to human HDAC1. The Tca HDAC gene was 
over-expressed in Escherichia coli using a Glutathione-S transferase (GST) fusion
vector (pGEX-4T-1) and the purified protein showed a deacetylase activity toward 
the fluorogenic substrate for HDAC. Moreover, the enzyme activity was inhibited
by trichostatin A, a specific HDAC inhibitor, in a dose-dependent manner. Optimum
temperature and pH of the enzyme was found to be approximately 70 degrees C and
7.0, respectively. In addition, zinc ion is required for catalytic activity of
the enzyme. Together, these data demonstrate that Tca HDAC is a new histone
deacetylase-like enzyme from T. caldophilus GK24 and will be a useful tool for
deciphering the role of HDAC in the prokaryote and development of new biochemical
reactions.

PMID: 17632079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Biol Chem. 2007 Sep 7;282(36):26167-77. Epub 2007 Jul 13.

RFX1 mediates the serum-induced immediate early response of Id2 gene expression.

Wang KR(1), Nemoto T, Yokota Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, Department of Biochemistry and Bioinformative 
Sciences, University of Fukui, Fukui, Japan.

Id2, a negative regulator of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors, is
involved in regulating cell differentiation and proliferation. To obtain insight 
into the role of Id2 in cell cycle control, we investigated the mechanisms
underlying the immediate early response of Id2 expression to serum stimulation in
NIH3T3 cells. Luciferase reporter analysis with deletion and point mutants
demonstrated the serum response element of Id2 (Id2-SRE) to be a consensus
binding site for RFX1 (regulatory factor for X-box 1) present 3.0 kb upstream of 
the transcription initiation site of Id2. Gel shift and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays confirmed the binding of RFX1 to Id2-SRE in vitro and 
in vivo, respectively. In both assays, RFX1 binding was observed not only in
serum-stimulated cells, but also in serum-starved cells. Knockdown of RFX1 by RNA
interference disturbed the immediate early response of Id2 expression in cells
and abrogated the Id2-SRE-mediated induction of luciferase activity by serum.
These alterations were rescued by the introduction of RNA interference-resistant 
RFX1 into cells. On the other hand, in the Id2-SRE-mediated reporter assay, RFX1 
with an N-terminal deletion abrogated the serum response, whereas RFX1 with a
C-terminal deletion enhanced the reporter activity in serum-starved cells.
Furthermore, HDAC1 was recruited to Id2-SRE in serum-starved cells. These results
demonstrate that RFX1 mediates the immediate early response of the Id2 gene by
serum stimulation and suggest that the function of RFX1 is regulated
intramolecularly in its suppression in growth-arrested cells. Our results unveil 
a novel transcriptional control of immediate early gene expression.

PMID: 17630394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Biol Chem. 2007 Sep 14;282(37):26725-39. Epub 2007 Jul 10.

v-Src-mediated down-regulation of SSeCKS metastasis suppressor gene promoter by
the recruitment of HDAC1 into a USF1-Sp1-Sp3 complex.

Bu Y(1), Gelman IH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Genetics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Elm and Carlton 
Streets, Buffalo, NY 14263, USA.

SSeCKS (Src-suppressed C kinase substrate), also called gravin/AKAP12, is a large
scaffolding protein with metastasis suppressor activity. Two major isoforms of
SSeCKS are expressed in most cell and tissue types under the control of two
independent promoters, designated alpha and beta, separated by 68 kb. SSeCKS
transcript and protein levels are severely decreased in Src- and Ras-transformed 
fibroblasts and in many epithelial tumors. By dissecting its promoters with
progressive deletion analysis, we identified the sequence between -106 and -49 in
the alpha proximal promoter as the minimal v-Src-responsive element, which
contains E- and GC-boxes bound by USF1 and Sp1/Sp3, respectively. Both E- and
GC-boxes are crucial for v-Src-responsive and basal promoter activities. v-Src
does not alter USF1 binding levels at the E-box, but it increases Sp1/Sp3 binding
to the GC-box despite no change in their cellular protein abundance. SSeCKS alpha
and beta transcript levels in v-Src/3T3 cells can be restored by treatment with
the histone deacetylase inhibitor, trichostatin A, but not with the DNA
demethylation agent, 5-azacytidine. Chromatin changes are found only on the alpha
promoter even though the beta proximal promoter contains a similar E- and GC-box 
arrangement. Recruitment of HDAC1 is necessary and sufficient to cause repression
of alpha proximal promoter activity, and the addition of Sp1 and/or Sp3
potentiates the repression. Our data suggest that suppression of the beta
promoter is facilitated by Src-induced changes in the alpha promoter
chromatinization mediated by a USF1-Sp1-Sp3 complex.

PMID: 17626016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Leukemia. 2007 Oct;21(10):2103-8. Epub 2007 Jul 12.

Regulation of the expression of MHC class I-related chain A, B (MICA, MICB) via
chromatin remodeling and its impact on the susceptibility of leukemic cells to
the cytotoxicity of NKG2D-expressing cells.

Kato N(1), Tanaka J, Sugita J, Toubai T, Miura Y, Ibata M, Syono Y, Ota S, Kondo 
T, Asaka M, Imamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Hokkaido University, Graduate School of
Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.

Innate immune cells such as natural killer (NK) cells play a crucial role in
antitumor immune responses. NKG2D is a major activating immunoreceptor expressed 
in not only NK cells but also CD8+ T cells and shows cytotoxicity against tumors 
by recognizing its ligands major histocompatibility complex class I-related chain
A and B (MICA and MICB) on tumor cells. Recently, it has been suggested that
NKG2D-mediated cytotoxicity correlates with the expression levels of NKG2D
ligands on target cells. In this study, we were able to increase the expression
levels of MICA and MICB on leukemic cell lines and patients' leukemic cells by
treatment with trichostatin A (TsA), a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays revealed that treatment with TsA
resulted in increased acetylation of histone H3 and decreased association with
HDAC1 at the promoters of MICA and MICB. Intriguingly, upregulation of MICA and
MICB by treatment with TsA led to enhancement of the susceptibility of leukemic
cells to the cytotoxicity of NKG2D-expressing cells. Our results suggest that
regulation of the expression of NKG2D ligands by treatment with
chromatin-remodeling drugs may be an attractive strategy for immunotherapy.

PMID: 17625602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2007 Jul 18;99(14):1107-19. Epub 2007 Jul 10.

Histone deacetylase 1 gene expression and sensitization of multidrug-resistant
neuroblastoma cell lines to cytotoxic agents by depsipeptide.

Keshelava N(1), Davicioni E, Wan Z, Ji L, Sposto R, Triche TJ, Reynolds CP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Pediatric Clinical Research and Division of Hematology-Oncology,
Childrens Hospital Los Angeles, University of South California, Los Angeles, CA
90027, USA. nkeshelava@chla.usc.edu

BACKGROUND: Genes that are overexpressed in multidrug-resistant neuroblastomas
relative to drug-sensitive neuroblastomas may provide targets for modulating drug
resistance.
METHODS: We used microarrays to compare the gene expression profile of two
drug-sensitive neuroblastoma cell lines with that of three multidrug-resistant
neuroblastoma cell lines. RNA expression of selected overexpressed genes was
quantified in 17 neuroblastoma cell lines by reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR). Small-interfering RNAs (siRNAs) were used for silencing 
gene expression. Cytotoxicity of melphalan, carboplatin, etoposide, and
vincristine and cytotoxic synergy (expressed as combination index calculated by
CalcuSyn software, where combination index < 1 indicates synergy and > 1
indicates antagonism) were measured in cell lines with a fluorescence-based assay
of cell viability. All statistical tests were two-sided.
RESULTS: A total of 94 genes were overexpressed in the multidrug-resistant cell
lines relative to the drug-sensitive cell lines. Nine genes were selected for
RT-PCR analysis, of which four displayed higher mRNA expression in the
multidrug-resistant lines than in the drug-sensitive lines: histone deacetylase 1
(HDAC1; 2.3-fold difference, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.0-fold to 3.5-fold,
P = .025), nuclear transport factor 2-like export factor (4.2-fold difference,
95% CI = 1.7-fold to 7.6-fold, P = .0018), heat shock 27-kDa protein 1 (2.5-fold 
difference, 95% CI = 1.0-fold to 87.7-fold, P = .028), and TAF12 RNA polymerase
II, TATA box-binding protein-associated factor, 20 kDa (2.2-fold, 95% CI =
0.9-fold to 6.0-fold, P = .051). siRNA knockdown of HDAC1 gene expression
sensitized CHLA-136 neuroblastoma cells to etoposide up to fivefold relative to
the parental cell line or scrambled siRNA-transfected cells (P<.001).
Cytotoxicity of the histone deacetylase inhibitor depsipeptide was tested in
combination with melphalan, carboplatin, etoposide, or vincristine in five
multidrug-resistant neuroblastoma cell lines, and synergistic cytotoxicity was
demonstrated at a 90% cell kill of treated cells (combination index < 0.8) in all
cell lines.
CONCLUSION: High HDAC1 mRNA expression was associated with multidrug resistance
in neuroblastoma cell lines, and inhibition of HDAC1 expression or activity
enhanced the cytotoxicity of chemotherapeutic drugs in multidrug-resistant
neuroblastoma cell lines. Thus, HDAC1 is a potential therapeutic target in
multidrug-resistant neuroblastoma.

PMID: 17623797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Leuk Res. 2008 Jan;32(1):89-96. Epub 2007 Jul 6.

Relationship between the induction of leukemia cell differentiation and the
enhancement of reporter gene expression in 3T3 Swiss cells.

Ishiguro K(1), Sartorelli AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Developmental Therapeutics Program, Cancer
Center, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Comment in
    Leuk Res. 2008 Jan;32(1):1-2.

The histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA) and hexamethylene
bisacetamide (HMBA), which lacks HDAC inhibitory activity, both possess the
capacity to induce leukemia cell differentiation and to enhance the expression of
a wide range of transiently transfected reporter genes in 3T3 Swiss cells. In
addition, known inducers of leukemia cell differentiation, including
hypoxanthine, diazepam, 6-thioguanine and phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate, also
exhibited the ability to enhance reporter gene expression, while randomly chosen 
compounds that did not induce leukemia cell differentiation did not enhance
reporter gene expression. The activity of TSA in the transfection system was
modified by co-expression of histone acetyltransferase p300 and HDAC1; whereas,
that of HMBA was enhanced by co-expression of the TATA-binding protein TBP. The
stimulatory effects of diverse chemical inducers on transiently transfected genes
suggest the existence of multiple exploitable targets for the selection of novel 
inducers of differentiation that function as modulators of gene activity.

PMCID: PMC2778346
PMID: 17617452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007 Oct;1773(10):1572-82. Epub 2007 Jun 12.

Histone deacetylase 4 is required for TGFbeta1-induced myofibroblastic
differentiation.

Glenisson W(1), Castronovo V, Waltregny D.

Author information: 
(1)Metastasis Research Laboratory, University of Liège, Belgium.

Transforming Growth Factor beta1 (TGFbeta1) is a crucial cytokine triggering
myofibroblastic (MF) differentiation, a process involved in tissue healing as
well as in pathologic conditions such as fibrosis and cancer. Together with cell 
shape modifications, TGFbeta1-mediated differentiation of fibroblasts into
myofibroblasts is characteristically associated with the neo-expression of smooth
muscle alpha-actin (alpha-SMA), a cytoskeletal protein that enhances their
contractile activity. Several cellular differentiation programs have been linked 
to epigenetic regulation of gene expression, including gene methylation and
histone acetylation. Herein, we sought to investigate the role of histone
deacetylases (HDAC) in TGFbeta1-induced MF differentiation. We found that TSA, a 
global inhibitor of class I and class II HDACs, prevented alpha-SMA transcript
and protein expression and morphological changes mediated by TGFbeta1 in cultured
human skin fibroblasts. In order to identify the HDAC(s) participating in MF
differentiation, the impact of specific HDAC silencing (HDAC1 through HDAC8)
using RNA interference was investigated in fibroblasts exposed to TGFbeta1. Among
the eight HDACs tested, silencing of HDAC4, HDAC6, and HDAC8 expression impaired 
TGFbeta1-induced alpha-SMA expression. HDAC4 silencing most efficiently abrogated
alpha-SMA expression and also prevented TGFss1-mediated morphological changes.
Forced down-regulation of HDAC4 stimulated the expression of 5'-TG-3'-Interacting
Factor (TGIF) and TGIF2 homeoproteins, two known endogenous repressors of the
TGFbeta signaling pathway, but not of the inhibitory Smad7. Collectively, these
data suggest that HDAC4 is an essential epigenetic regulator of MF
differentiation and unveil HDAC4 as a potential target for treating MF-related
disorders.

PMID: 17610967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Biol Chem. 2007 Aug 31;282(35):25231-9. Epub 2007 Jul 3.

Interactions of the vitamin D receptor with the corepressor hairless: analysis of
hairless mutants in atrichia with papular lesions.

Wang J(1), Malloy PJ, Feldman D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Gerontology, and Metabolism, Department of
Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California
94305-5103, USA.

Atrichia with papular lesions (APL) and hereditary vitamin D-resistant rickets
have a similar congenital hair loss disorder caused by mutations in hairless (HR)
and vitamin D receptor (VDR) genes, respectively. HR is a VDR corepressor, and it
has been hypothesized that VDR.HR suppress gene expression during specific phases
of the hair cycle. In this study, we examined the corepressor activity of HR
mutants (E583V, C622G, N970S, V1056M, D1012N, V1136D, and Q1176X) previously
described as the molecular cause of APL as well as HR variants (P69S, C397Y,
A576V, E591G, R620Q, T1022A) due to non-synonymous polymorphisms in the HR gene. 
We found that the corepressor activities of all but one of the pathogenic HR
mutants were completely abolished. HR mutant E583V exhibited normal corepressor
activity, suggesting that it may not be pathogenic. In co-immunoprecipitation
assays, all of the pathogenic HR mutants bound VDR but exhibited reduced binding 
to histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), suggesting that the impaired corepressor
activity is due in part to defective interactions with HDACs. The HR variants
exhibited two classes of corepressor activity, those with normal activity (C397Y,
E591G, R620Q) and those with partially reduced activity (P69S, A576V, T1022A).
All of the variants interacted with VDR and HDAC1 with the exception of P69S,
which was degraded. When coexpressed with VDR, all of the HR pathogenic mutants
and variants increased the level of VDR protein, demonstrating that this function
of HR was not impaired by these mutations. This study of HR mutations provides
evidence for the molecular basis of APL.

PMID: 17609203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Biochem J. 2007 Oct 1;407(1):79-87.

Oxidative stress regulates IGF1R expression in vascular smooth-muscle cells via
p53 and HDAC recruitment.

Kavurma MM(1), Figg N, Bennett MR, Mercer J, Khachigian LM, Littlewood TD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Cambridge, Box 110,
Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge CB2 2QQ, UK.

Apoptosis of VSMCs (vascular smooth-muscle cells) leads to features of
atherosclerotic plaque instability. We have demonstrated previously that
plaque-derived VSMCs have reduced IGF1 (insulin-like growth factor 1) signalling,
resulting from a decrease in the expression of IGF1R (IGF1 receptor) compared
with normal aortic VSMCs [Patel, Zhang, Siddle, Soos, Goddard, Weissberg and
Bennett (2001) Circ. Res. 88, 895-902]. In the present study, we show that
apoptosis induced by oxidative stress is inhibited by ectopic expression of
IGF1R. Oxidative stress repressed IGF1R expression at multiple levels, and this
was also blocked by mutant p53. Oxidative stress also induced p53 phosphorylation
and apoptosis in VSMCs. p53 negatively regulated IGF1R promoter activity and
expression and, consistent with this, p53-/- VSMCs demonstrated increased IGF1R
expression, both in vitro and in advanced atherosclerotic plaques in vivo.
Oxidative-stress-induced interaction of endogenous p53 with TBP (TATA-box-binding
protein) was dependent on p53 phosphorylation. Oxidative stress also increased
the association of p53 with HDAC1 (histone deacetylase 1). Trichostatin A, a
specific HDAC inhibitor, or p300 overexpression relieved the repression of IGF1R 
following oxidative stress. Furthermore, acetylated histone-4 association with
the IGF1R promoter was reduced in cells subjected to oxidative stress. These
results suggest that oxidative-stress-induced repression of IGF1R is mediated by 
the association of phosphorylated p53 with the IGF1R promoter via TBP, and by the
subsequent recruitment of chromatin-modifying proteins, such as HDAC1, to the
IGF1R promoter-TBP-p53 complex.

PMCID: PMC2267398
PMID: 17600529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Oncogene. 2007 Nov 29;26(54):7576-83. Epub 2007 Jun 18.

Irradiation modulates association of NF-Y with histone-modifying cofactors PCAF
and HDAC.

Peng Y(1), Stewart D, Li W, Hawkins M, Kulak S, Ballermann B, Jahroudi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA.

Post-irradiation complications including thrombus formation result from increased
procoagulant activity of vascular endothelial cells and elevated levels of von
Willebrand factor (VWF) contribute to this process. We have previously
demonstrated that irradiation induction of the VWF is mediated through
interaction of NF-Y transcription factor with its cognate binding site in the VWF
promoter. We have also demonstrated that irradiation increases the association of
NF-Y with histone acetyltransferase p300/CBP-associated factor (PCAF). We now
report that irradiation decreases the association of NF-Y with histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1). We demonstrate that irradiation-induced changes in
association of NF-Y with HDAC1 and PCAF lead to increased PCAF recruitment to the
VWF promoter, increased association of acetylated histone H4 with the VWF
promoter and subsequently increased transcription. We also demonstrate that this 
process is correlated to dephosphorylation of HDAC1 and is inhibited by calyculin
A, an inhibitor of protein phosphatase1.

PMID: 17599060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Aging Cell. 2007 Aug;6(4):577-91. Epub 2007 Jun 18.

Dynamic assembly of chromatin complexes during cellular senescence: implications 
for the growth arrest of human melanocytic nevi.

Bandyopadhyay D(1), Curry JL, Lin Q, Richards HW, Chen D, Hornsby PJ, Timchenko
NA, Medrano EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, and Huffington Center on Aging, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Comment in
    Aging Cell. 2007 Aug;6(4):425-7.

The retinoblastoma (RB)/p16(INK4a) pathway regulates senescence of human
melanocytes in culture and oncogene-induced senescence of melanocytic nevi in
vivo. This senescence response is likely due to chromatin modifications because
RB complexes from senescent melanocytes contain increased levels of histone
deacetylase (HDAC) activity and tethered HDAC1. Here we show that HDAC1 is
prominently detected in p16(INK4a)-positive, senescent intradermal melanocytic
nevi but not in proliferating, recurrent nevus cells that localize to the
epidermal/dermal junction. To assess the role of HDAC1 in the senescence of
melanocytes and nevi, we used tetracycline-based inducible expression systems in 
cultured melanocytic cells. We found that HDAC1 drives a sequential and
cooperative activity of chromatin remodeling effectors, including transient
recruitment of Brahma (Brm1) into RB/HDAC1 mega-complexes, formation of
heterochromatin protein 1 beta (HP1 beta)/SUV39H1 foci, methylation of H3-K9,
stable association of RB with chromatin and significant global
heterochromatinization. These chromatin changes coincide with expression of
typical markers of senescence, including the senescent-associated
beta-galactosidase marker. Notably, formation of RB/HP1 beta foci and early
tethering of RB to chromatin depends on intact Brm1 ATPase activity. As cells
reached senescence, ejection of Brm1 from chromatin coincided with its
dissociation from HP1 beta/RB and relocalization to protein complexes of lower
molecular weight. These results provide new insights into the role of the RB
pathway in regulating cellular senescence and implicate HDAC1 as a likely
mediator of early chromatin remodeling events.

PMCID: PMC1974778
PMID: 17578512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Dev Dyn. 2007 Jul;236(7):1891-904.

REREa/Atrophin-2 interacts with histone deacetylase and Fgf8 signaling to
regulate multiple processes of zebrafish development.

Plaster N(1), Sonntag C, Schilling TF, Hammerschmidt M.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck Institute of Immunobiology, Freiburg, Germany. nplaster@uci.edu

Erratum in
    Dev Dyn. 2007 Oct;236(10):2971.

The transcriptional regulator RERE/Atrophin-2 (RERE) is required for the normal
patterning of the early vertebrate embryo, including the central nervous system, 
pharyngeal arches, and limbs. Consistent with a role as a transcriptional
corepressor, RERE binds histone deacetylase 1 and 2 (HDAC1/2), and orphan nuclear
receptors such as Tlx. Here, we identify the zebrafish babyface (bab) as a mutant
in rerea and show that it interacts genetically with fibroblast growth factor 8
(fgf8). We suggest that this finding is largely due to its interactions with
HDAC, because genetic or pharmacological disruptions of HDAC phenocopy many
features of the bab mutant. Furthermore, removing the functions of either REREa
or HDAC synergizes with loss of Fgf8 function to disrupt posterior mesoderm
formation during somitogenesis, midbrain-hindbrain boundary maintenance, and
pharyngeal cartilage development. Together, these results reveal novel in vivo
roles for REREa in HDAC-mediated regulation of Fgf signaling. We present a model 
for RERE-dependent patterning in which tissue-specific transcriptional
repression, by means of an REREa-HDAC complex, modulates growth factor signaling 
during embryogenesis.

Copyright 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17576618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2007 Aug 15;17(16):4562-7. Epub 2007 Jun 6.

Benzo[b]thiophene-based histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Witter DJ(1), Belvedere S, Chen L, Secrist JP, Mosley RT, Miller TA.

Author information: 
(1)Merck Research Laboratories, Department of Drug Design & Optimization, 33
Avenue Louis Pasteur, Boston, MA 02115, USA. David_Witter@merck.com

Benzo[b]thienyl hydroxamic acids, a novel class of histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors, were identified via a targeted screen of small molecule hydroxamic
acids. Various substitutions were explored in the C5- and C6-positions of the
benzo[b]thiophene core to characterize SAR and develop optimal inhibitors. It was
determined that substitution at the C6-position of the benzo[b]thiophene core
with a three-atom spacer yielded optimal HDAC1 inhibition and anti-proliferative 
activity in murine erythroleukemia (SC-9) cells.

PMID: 17576064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2007 Sep;322(3):1084-92. Epub 2007 Jun 14.

Bcr-Abl-independent imatinib-resistant K562 cells show aberrant protein
acetylation and increased sensitivity to histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Lee SM(1), Bae JH, Kim MJ, Lee HS, Lee MK, Chung BS, Kim DW, Kang CD, Kim SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Research Center for Ischemic Tissue Regeneration, 
College of Medicine, Pusan National University, Pusan 602-739, South Korea.

Bcr-Abl-independent signaling pathways are known to be involved in imatinib
resistance in some patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). In this
study, to find new targets for imatinib-resistant CML displaying loss of Bcr-Abl 
kinase target dependence, we isolated imatinib-resistant variants, K562/R1,
K562/R2, and K562/R3, which showed profound declines of Bcr-Abl levels and its
tyrosine kinase activity, from K562 cells. Importantly, the imatinib resistance
mechanism in these variants also included aberrant acetylation of nonhistone
proteins such as p53, Ku70, and Hsp90 that was due to upregulation of histone
deacetylases (HDACs) and down-regulation of histone acetyltransferase (HAT). In
comparison with K562 cells, the imatinib-resistant variants showed up-regulation 
of HDAC1, -2, and -3 (class I HDACs) and class III SIRT1 and down-regulation of
CBP/p300 and PCAF with HAT activity, and thereby p53 and cytoplasmic Ku70 were
aberrantly acetylated. In addition, these were associated with down-regulation of
Bax and up-regulation of Bcl-2. In contrast, the class II HDAC6 level was
significantly decreased, and this was accompanied by an increase of Hsp90
acetylation in the imatinib-resistant variants, which was closely associated with
loss of Bcr-Abl. These results indicate that alteration of the normal balance of 
HATs and HDACs leads to deregulated acetylation of Hsp90, p53, and Ku70 and
thereby leads to imatinib resistance, suggesting the importance of the
acetylation status of apoptosis-related nonhistone proteins in
Bcr-Abl-independent imatinib resistance. We also revealed that imatinib-resistant
K562 cells were more sensitive to suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid, an HDAC
inhibitor, than K562 cells. These findings may have implications for HDAC as a
molecular target in imatinib-resistant leukemia cells.

PMID: 17569822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Reprod Dev. 2007 Aug;53(4):903-13. Epub 2007 Jun 8.

Effect of histone acetylation modification with sodium butyrate, a histone
deacetylase inhibitor, on cell cycle, apoptosis, ploidy and gene expression in
porcine fetal fibroblasts.

Mohana Kumar B(1), Song HJ, Cho SK, Balasubramanian S, Choe SY, Rho GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, Gyeongsang
National University, Jinju, Korea.

The present study evaluated the effective dose of sodium butyrate (NaB), a
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, for determination of the level of
enhancement of histone acetylation in porcine fetal fibroblasts (PFFs) based on
their morphology, growth, apoptosis and cell cycle status. Cells were analyzed
for their histone acetylation levels at H3, H4 and H2A and expression of genes
related to histone deacetylation (HDAC1, HDAC2 and HDAC3), pro-apoptosis (Bax and
Bak) and anti-apoptosis (Bcl-2). PFFs at passage 3-4 were cultured with 0, 0.5,
1.0, 2.0 and 3.0 mM NaB for 96 h. NaB inhibited cell proliferation at all tested 
concentrations in a dose-dependent manner. However, there was slow cell growth
for PFFs treated with 2.0 and 3.0 mM NaB compared with those of untreated PFFs
and those treated with other lower concentrations (0.5 and 1.0 mM). More than 85%
of the cells that were untreated or treated with 0.5 or 1.0 mM NaB had intact
membranes, whereas, approximately 30% of the cells treated with 2.0 or 3.0 mM NaB
had increased cell sizes and a more flattened and elongated appearance. NaB
induced apoptosis in a dose-dependent manner; the rates of apoptosis were 2.5 +/-
0.4% for 1.0 mM NaB, 7.6 +/- 1.1% for 2.0 mM NaB and 11.2 +/- 1.4% for 3.0 mM
NaB. The chromosomal sets of PFFs treated with 0.5 and 1.0 mM NaB were normal,
whereas a lower proportion of PFFs treated with 2.0 and 3.0 mM were classified as
normal. NaB at 0.5 and 1.0 mM showed little effect on cell cycle. However, 2.0
and 3.0 mM resulted in an increased cell population at the G(0)/G(1) phase.
Increased NaB concentrations led to elevated acetylation of H3, H4 and H2A. NaB
altered the expression of histone deacetylation and apoptosis-related genes. In
conclusion, 1.0 mM NaB induced histone hyperacetylation in the PFFs and produced 
less deleterious effects than other concentrations; these PFFs might serve as
suitable donors for porcine somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT).

PMID: 17558190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Jun 12;104(24):10164-9. Epub 2007 Jun 6.

Regulation of the GABA cell phenotype in hippocampus of schizophrenics and
bipolars.

Benes FM(1), Lim B, Matzilevich D, Walsh JP, Subburaju S, Minns M.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Structural and Molecular Neuroscience, McLean Hospital, Belmont, MA
02178, USA. fbenes@mclean.harvard.edu

GABAergic dysfunction is present in the hippocampus in schizophrenia (SZ) and
bipolar disorder (BD). The trisynaptic pathway was "deconstructed" into various
layers of sectors CA3/2 and CA1 and gene expression profiling performed. Network 
association analysis was used to uncover genes that may be related to regulation 
of glutamate decarboxylase 67 (GAD(67)), a marker for this system that has been
found by many studies to show decreased expression in SZs and BDs. The most
striking change was a down-regulation of GAD(67) in the stratum oriens (SO) of
CA2/3 in both groups; CA1 only showed changes in the SO of schizophrenics. The
network generated for GAD(67) contained 25 genes involved in the regulation of
kainate receptors, TGF-beta and Wnt signaling, as well as transcription factors
involved in cell growth and differentiation. In SZs, IL-1beta, (GRIK2/3),
TGF-beta2, TGF-betaR1, histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), death associated protein
(DAXX), and cyclin D2 (CCND2) were all significantly up-regulated, whereas in
BDs, PAX5, Runx2, LEF1, TLE1, and CCND2 were significantly down-regulated. In the
SO of CA1 of BDs, where GAD67 showed no expression change, TGF-beta and Wnt
signaling genes were all up-regulated, but other transcription factors showed no 
change in expression. In other layers/sectors, BDs showed no expression changes
in these GAD(67) network genes. Overall, these results are consistent with the
hypothesis that decreased expression of GAD(67) may be associated with an
epigenetic mechanism in SZ. In BD, however, a suppression of transcription
factors involved in cell differentiation may contribute to GABA dysfunction.

PMCID: PMC1888575
PMID: 17553960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. FASEB J. 2007 Oct;21(12):3386-97. Epub 2007 Jun 4.

Mechanisms of ceramide-mediated repression of the human telomerase reverse
transcriptase promoter via deacetylation of Sp3 by histone deacetylase 1.

Wooten-Blanks LG(1), Song P, Senkal CE, Ogretmen B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical University of South 
Carolina, 173 Ashley Ave., Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

In this study, distinct roles of de novo-generated endogenous ceramides and
mechanisms by which deacetylated Sp3 regulates the hTERT promoter activity in
response to ceramide signaling were explored. The generation of C18-ceramide via 
the expression of ceramide synthase 1 (CerS1), and not C16-ceramide by CerS5 or
CerS6 expression, resulted in repression of the hTERT promoter via deacetylation 
of Sp3 by histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) in A549 human lung adenocarcinoma cells. 
Then roles and mechanisms of action of ceramide-mediated deacetylation of Sp3 in 
inhibiting the hTERT promoter were determined using constitutively deacetylated
or acetylated Sp3 mutants at lysine (K) 551. Expression of the deacetylated Sp3
mutant resulted in repression, whereas its acetylated mutant induced basal hTERT 
promoter activity in Drosophila S2 cells, which do not express any endogenous
Sp3, and in A549 cells. Remarkably, chromatin immunoprecipitation data revealed
that acetylated Sp3 mutant (K551Q-Sp3) did not bind whereas deacetylated Sp3
(K551R-Sp3) mutant bound strongly to the promoter DNA, resulting in the
recruitment of histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and inhibition of the association of
RNA polymerase II with the promoter. Mechanistically, increased generation of
C18-ceramide by hCerS1 expression, but not by its catalytically inactive mutant, 
mediated the association and recruitment of the deacetylated Sp3/HDAC1 complex to
the hTERT promoter DNA, resulting in the local histone H3 deacetylation and
repression of the promoter.

PMID: 17548428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Blood. 2007 Sep 15;110(6):2110-20. Epub 2007 May 31.

Negative regulation of the SH2-homology containing protein-tyrosine phosphatase-1
(SHP-1) P2 promoter by the HTLV-1 Tax oncoprotein.

Cheng J(1), Kydd AR, Nakase K, Noonan KM, Murakami A, Tao H, Dwyer M, Xu C, Zhu
Q, Marasco WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Immunology and AIDS, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, MA, USA.

Expression of SH(2)-homology-containing protein-tyrosine phosphatase-1 (SHP-1), a
candidate tumor suppressor, is repressed in human T-cell leukemia virus type-1
(HTLV-1)-transformed lymphocyte cell lines, adult T-cell leukemia (ATL) cells,
and in other hematologic malignancies. However, the mechanisms underlying
regulation and repression of SHP-1 remain unclear. Herein, we cloned the putative
full-length, hematopoietic cell-specific SHP-1 P2 promoter and identified the
"core" promoter regions. HTLV-1 Tax profoundly represses P2 promoter activity and
histone deacetylase-1 (HDAC1) potentiates such inhibition. NF-kappaB was
implicated as both a rate-limiting factor for basal P2 promoter activity and
important for Tax-induced promoter silencing (TIPS). Chromatin
immunoprecipitation studies demonstrated that NF-kappaB dissociates from the
SHP-1 P2 promoter following the binding of Tax and HDAC1. This is in agreement
with coimmunoprecipitation studies where NF-kappaB competed with HDAC1 for
association with Tax protein. We propose that in TIPS, Tax recruits HDAC1 to the 
SHP-1 P2 promoter and forms an inhibitory complex that results in deacetylation
and dissociation of NF-kappaB from the promoter and attenuation of SHP-1
expression. TIPS provides a possible first step toward HTLV-1 leukemogenesis
through its down-modulation of this key immediate early negative regulator of
IL-2 signaling.

PMCID: PMC1976352
PMID: 17540846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Med Chem. 2007 Jun 28;50(13):3054-61. Epub 2007 Jun 1.

Functional differences in epigenetic modulators-superiority of
mercaptoacetamide-based histone deacetylase inhibitors relative to hydroxamates
in cortical neuron neuroprotection studies.

Kozikowski AP(1), Chen Y, Gaysin A, Chen B, D'Annibale MA, Suto CM, Langley BC.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Discovery Program, Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacognosy,
University of Illinois at Chicago, 833 South Wood Street, Chicago, Illinois
60612, USA. kozikowa@uic.edu

We compare the ability of two structurally different classes of epigenetic
modulators, namely, histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors containing either a
hydroxamate or a mercaptoacetamide as the zinc binding group, to protect cortical
neurons in culture from oxidative stress-induced death. This study reveals that
some of the mercaptoacetamide-based HDAC inhibitors are fully protective, whereas
the hydroxamates show toxicity at higher concentrations. Our present results
appear to be consistent with the possibility that the mercaptoacetamide-based
HDAC inhibitors interact with a different subset of the HDAC isozymes [less
activity at HDAC1 and 2 correlates with less inhibitor toxicity], or
alternatively, are interacting selectively with only the cytoplasmic HDACs that
are crucial for protection from oxidative stress.

PMID: 17539623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Int J Mol Med. 2007 Jun;19(6):925-32.

Transcriptional repression by the basic helix-loop-helix protein Dec2: multiple
mechanisms through E-box elements.

Fujimoto K(1), Hamaguchi H, Hashiba T, Nakamura T, Kawamoto T, Sato F, Noshiro M,
Bhawal UK, Suardita K, Kato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dental and Medical Biochemistry, Hiroshima University Graduate
School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima 734-8553, Japan.

Dec2, a member of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) superfamily, has been shown
to function as a transcriptional repressor and is implicated in cell
proliferation and differentiation. In addition, Dec2 transcripts exhibit a
striking circadian oscillation in the suprachiasmatic nucleus. To identify the
molecular mechanisms by which Dec2 regulates gene expression, we carried out
structure-function analyses. Gel retardation and luciferase assays showed that
Dec2, as well as its related protein Dec1, preferentially binds to class B E-box 
elements (CACGTG) as a homodimer and represses the transcription of target genes 
in a histone deacetylase (HDAC)-dependent manner. Functional studies with the
GAL4-DNA binding domain fusion proteins identified the domain responsible for the
repression activity of Dec2 in its C-terminal region, which is also necessary to 
recruit HDAC1. In addition, the basic and HLH domains of Dec2 were required for
DNA binding and homodimerization, respectively. In contrast, Dec proteins
repressed a MyoD-activated promoter activity of muscle creatine kinase gene
through class A E-box in an HDAC1-independent manner. Dec2 formed a heterodimer
with MyoD through the basic and HLH domains. Consistent with this, both the basic
and HLH domains were required for the ability of Dec2 to inhibit the
transcriptional activity of MyoD. These findings indicate that Dec2 employs
multiple mechanisms, including DNA-binding and protein-protein interactions, to
achieve E-box-dependent transcriptional repressions.

PMID: 17487425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Oncogene. 2007 Nov 1;26(50):7153-7. Epub 2007 May 7.

Reprogramming of the SWI/SNF complex for co-activation or co-repression in
prohibitin-mediated estrogen receptor regulation.

Zhang B(1), Chambers KJ, Faller DV, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Center, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA
02118, USA.

The SWI/SNF complex participates as a co-activator in the transcriptional
regulation of certain genes. Conversely, we and others have recently established 
that Brg1 and Brm, the central components of SWI/SNF, act instead as
co-repressors for E2F-mediated transcriptional repression, and for the
transcription of certain other promoters. We report here that Brg-1 and Brm can
switch their mode of function at same promoter between activation and repression 
by ligand-directed differential coordination with BAF155, BAF170, HDAC1, p300 and
prohibitin. This ligand and context-dependent reprogramming of the SWI/SNF
complex allows it to differentially serve as either a co-repressor or a
co-activator of transcription at the same promoter.

PMID: 17486062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Front Biosci. 2007 May 1;12:3899-910.

Transcriptional activation of cartilage oligomeric matrix protein by Sox9, Sox5, 
and Sox6 transcription factors and CBP/p300 coactivators.

Liu CJ(1), Zhang Y, Xu K, Parsons D, Alfonso D, Di Cesare PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, NYU Hospital for Joint Diseases, New York, 
NY 10003, USA. chuanju.liu@med.nyu.edu

The gene for cartilage oligomeric matrix protein (COMP) encodes a noncollagenous 
matrix protein that is expressed predominantly in cartilage. COMP gene expression
is deficient in the Sox9-null mouse, but the molecular mechanism remains unknown.
We have previously delineated a 30-bp negative regulatory element (NRE) and a
51-bp positive regulatory element (PRE) in the regulatory region of the COMP
gene. Subsequently we isolated LRF transcription repressor as an NRE-binding
protein and established that LRF inhibits COMP gene expression via recruiting
histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) to the COMP promoter. In this study we demonstrated
that Sox9, an essential transcription factor of chondrogenesis, binds to the COMP
promoter at the PRE in which 13 nucleotides (TGTTTACCTTGTG) are required for the 
binding of Sox9. Sox9 activates COMP gene expression and this activation is
PRE-dependent. Sox9 is required for COMP gene expression during chondrogenesis,
since repression of Sox9 expression using the small interfering RNA approach
inhibited COMP gene expression. In addition, activation of COMP gene expression
by Sox9 requires the participation of transcription factors Sox5 and Sox6 as well
as the coactivators CBP and p300 histone acetylase. It appears that there exists 
a balance between LRF repressor and Sox9 activator in the control of COMP gene,
since transactivation of COMP gene by Sox9 was abolished by the coexpression of
LRF, and excess Sox9 overcame the LRF-mediated inhibition. This study provides
the first evidence that Sox9 directly associates with COMP gene promoter and that
mediation of COMP gene activation by Sox9 involves Sox5, Sox6, CBP, and p300
coactivators.

PMID: 17485346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2007;39(7-8):1510-22. Epub 2007 Apr 4.

Novel pyrrole-containing histone deacetylase inhibitors endowed with
cytodifferentiation activity.

Mai A(1), Valente S, Rotili D, Massa S, Botta G, Brosch G, Miceli M, Nebbioso A, 
Altucci L.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Pasteur-Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti, Dipartimento di Studi
Farmaceutici, Università degli Studi di Roma La Sapienza, Piazzale A. Moro 5,
00185 Rome, Italy. antonello.mai@uniroma1.it

A novel series of aroyl-pyrrolyl-hydroxy-amides (APHAs) active as histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors has been reported. The new derivatives were
designed by replacing the benzene ring of the prototype 1 with both aromatic and 
aliphatic, monocyclic and polycyclic rings (compounds 3a-i), or by inserting a
number of substituents on the methylene linker of 1 (compounds 4a-l). Compounds
3a-i and 4a-l were active at sub-micromolar level against the maize deacetylases 
HD1-B (class I), HD1-A (class II), and HD2. Tested at 5 microM against human
HDAC1 and HDAC4, 3b, 4a, and 4j showed significant HDAC1 inhibition, whereas on
HDAC4 only 4a was highly effective. On the human leukemia U937 cell line, the
same compounds did not alter the cell cycle phases and failed in inducing
apoptosis. However, they displayed granulocytic differentiation at 5 microM, with
3b being the most potent (76% CD11c positive cells). Tested to evaluate their
effects on histone H3 and alpha-tubulin acetylation, 3b and 4a showed high H3
acetylation, whereas 4a and 4b were the most potent with alpha-tubulin as a
substrate.

PMID: 17482499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Jul;27(13):4784-95. Epub 2007 Apr 30.

Role for histone deacetylase 1 in human tumor cell proliferation.

Senese S(1), Zaragoza K, Minardi S, Muradore I, Ronzoni S, Passafaro A, Bernard
L, Draetta GF, Alcalay M, Seiser C, Chiocca S.

Author information: 
(1)European Institute of Oncology, Department of Experimental Oncology, Via
Ripamonti 435, 20141 Milan, Italy.

Posttranslational modifications of core histones are central to the regulation of
gene expression. Histone deacetylases (HDACs) repress transcription by
deacetylating histones, and class I HDACs have a crucial role in mouse, Xenopus
laevis, zebra fish, and Caenorhabditis elegans development. The role of
individual class I HDACs in tumor cell proliferation was investigated using RNA
interference-mediated protein knockdown. We show here that in the absence of
HDAC1 cells can arrest either at the G(1) phase of the cell cycle or at the
G(2)/M transition, resulting in the loss of mitotic cells, cell growth
inhibition, and an increase in the percentage of apoptotic cells. On the
contrary, HDAC2 knockdown showed no effect on cell proliferation unless we
concurrently knocked down HDAC1. Using gene expression profiling analysis, we
found that inactivation of HDAC1 affected the transcription of specific target
genes involved in proliferation and apoptosis. Furthermore, HDAC2 downregulation 
did not cause significant changes compared to control cells, while inactivation
of HDAC1, HDAC1 plus HDAC2, or HDAC3 resulted in more distinct clusters. Loss of 
these HDACs might impair cell cycle progression by affecting not only the
transcription of specific target genes but also other biological processes. Our
data support the idea that a drug targeting specific HDACs could be highly
beneficial in the treatment of cancer.

PMCID: PMC1951481
PMID: 17470557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Nature. 2007 May 31;447(7144):601-5. Epub 2007 Apr 29.

The histone H3K4 demethylase SMCX links REST target genes to X-linked mental
retardation.

Tahiliani M(1), Mei P, Fang R, Leonor T, Rutenberg M, Shimizu F, Li J, Rao A, Shi
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Hypertension, Department of Medicine 
and BCMP, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, 221 Longwood
Avenue Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Gene transcription is critically influenced by chromatin structure and the
modification status of histone tails. Methylation of lysine residues in histone
tails is dynamically regulated by the opposing activities of histone
methyltransferases and histone demethylases. Here we show that JARID1C/SMCX, a
JmjC-domain-containing protein implicated in X-linked mental retardation and
epilepsy, possesses H3K4 tri-demethylase activity and functions as a
transcriptional repressor. An SMCX complex isolated from HeLa cells contains
additional chromatin modifiers (the histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2, and the
histone H3K9 methyltransferase G9a) and the transcriptional repressor REST,
suggesting a direct role for SMCX in chromatin dynamics and REST-mediated
repression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation reveals that SMCX and REST co-occupy
the neuron-restrictive silencing elements in the promoters of a subset of REST
target genes. RNA-interference-mediated depletion of SMCX derepresses several of 
these targets and simultaneously increases H3K4 trimethylation at the sodium
channel type 2A (SCN2A) and synapsin I (SYN1) promoters. We propose that loss of 
SMCX activity impairs REST-mediated neuronal gene regulation, thereby
contributing to SMCX-associated X-linked mental retardation.

PMID: 17468742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Exp Mol Med. 2007 Apr 30;39(2):195-204.

Differential promoter methylation may be a key molecular mechanism in regulating 
BubR1 expression in cancer cells.

Park HY(1), Jeon YK, Shin HJ, Kim IJ, Kang HC, Jeong SJ, Chung DH, Lee CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Center for Molecular Medicine, Samsung
Biomedical Research Institute, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Suwon 
440-746, Korea.

The BubR1 mitotic-checkpoint protein monitors proper attachment of microtubules
to kinetochores, and links regulation of chromosome-spindle attachment to
mitotic-checkpoint signaling. Thus, disruption of BubR1 activity results in a
loss of checkpoint control, chromosomal instability caused by a premature
anaphase, and/or the early onset of tumorigenesis. The mechanisms by which
deregulation and/or abnormalities of BubR1 expression operate, however, remain to
be elucidated. In this study, we demonstrate that levels of BubR1 expression are 
significantly increased by demethylation. Bisulfite sequencing analysis revealed 
that the methylation status of two CpG sites in the essential BubR1 promoter
appear to be associated with BubR1 expression levels. Associations of MBD2 and
HDAC1 with the BubR1 promoter were significantly relieved by addition of
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, an irreversible DNA methyltransferase inhibitor. However,
genomic DNA isolated from 31 patients with colorectal carcinomas exhibited a
+84A/G polymorphic change in approximately 60% of patients, but this polymorphism
had no effect on promoter activity. Our findings indicate that differential
regulation of BubR1 expression is associated with changes in BubR1 promoter
hypermethylation patterns, but not with promoter polymorphisms, thus providing a 
novel insight into the molecular regulation of BubR1 expression in human cancer
cells.

PMID: 17464181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Int J Cancer. 2007 Sep 1;121(5):1138-48.

Distinct pharmacological properties of second generation HDAC inhibitors with the
benzamide or hydroxamate head group.

Beckers T(1), Burkhardt C, Wieland H, Gimmnich P, Ciossek T, Maier T, Sanders K.

Author information: 
(1)Therapeutic Area Oncology, ALTANA Pharma-a member of the Nycomed Group,
Byk-Gulden Street 2, 78467 Konstanz, Germany. Thomas.Beckers.com

Advanced second generation inhibitors of histone deacetylases (HDAC) are
currently used in clinical development. This study aimed at comparing the
pharmacological properties of selected second generation HDAC inhibitors with the
hydroxamate and benzamide head group, namely SAHA, LAQ824/LBH589, CI994, MS275
and MGCD0103. In biochemical assays using recombinant HDAC1, 3, 6 and 8
isoenzymes, SAHA and LAQ824/LBH589 behave as quite unselective HDAC inhibitors.
In contrast, the benzamides CI994, MS275 and MGCD0103 are more selective, potent 
inhibitors of at least HDAC1 and HDAC3. All HDAC inhibitors induce histone H3
hyperacetylation, correlating with inhibition of proliferation, induction of cell
differentiation and apoptosis. A broad cytotoxicity is seen across cell lines
from different tumor entities with LAQ824/LBH589 being the most potent agents.
The apoptosis inducing activity is evident in arrested and proliferating RKO
colon cancer cells with inducible, heterologous p21(waf1) expression, indicative 
for a cell-cycle independent mode-of-action. Differentiation of MDA-MB468 breast 
cancer cells is induced by benzamide and hydroxamate analogs. The reversibility
of drug action was evaluated by pulse treatment of A549 lung cancer cells.
Whereas paclitaxel induced irreversible cell cycle alterations already after 6 hr
treatment, HDAC inhibitor action was retarded and irreversible after >16 hr
treatment. Interestingly, pulse treatment was equally effective as continous
treatment. Finally, the efficacy of LAQ824, SAHA and MS275 in A549 nude mice
xenografts was comparable to that of paclitaxel at well tolerated doses. We
conclude that despite a different HDAC isoenzyme inhibition profile, hydroxamate 
and benzamide analogs as studied display similar cellular profiles.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17455259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Jul;27(13):4863-75. Epub 2007 Apr 23.

Transcriptional activity of androgen receptor is modulated by two RNA splicing
factors, PSF and p54nrb.

Dong X(1), Sweet J, Challis JR, Brown T, Lye SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, University of
Toronto, 600 University Avenue, Toronto, Canada.

Nuclear receptors regulate gene activation or repression through dynamic
interactions with coregulators. The interactions between nuclear receptors and
RNA splicing factors link gene transcription initiation with pre-mRNA splicing,
providing a coordinated control of the products of gene transcription. Here we
report that two RNA splicing factors, PTB-associated splicing factor (PSF) and
p54nrb, synergistically form protein complexes with the androgen receptor (AR) in
a ligand-independent manner and inhibit its transcriptional activity. PSF does
not affect AR protein stability, as in the case of the progesterone receptor, but
impedes the interaction of AR with the androgen response element. Both splicing
factors interact directly with mSin3A and attract mSin3A to the AR complex in a
synergistic manner. The suppression of AR transcriptional activity by PSF and
p54nrb is reversed by the inhibition of histone deacetylase activity. These data 
demonstrated that PSF and p54nrb complex with AR and play a key role in
modulating AR-mediated gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC1951499
PMID: 17452459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Med Chem. 2007 May 17;50(10):2497-505. Epub 2007 Apr 21.

Bispyridinium dienes: histone deacetylase inhibitors with selective activities.

Pérez-Balado C(1), Nebbioso A, Rodríguez-Graña P, Minichiello A, Miceli M,
Altucci L, de Lera AR.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química Orgánica, Universidade de Vigo, Lagoas-Marcosende,
36310 Vigo, Spain.

A novel synthetic route to the cyclostellettamines 1 using as the key step a
microwave-mediated macrocyclic ring-closing metathesis of precursors
bispyridinium dienes 10 followed by catalytic hydrogenation has been developed.
The open-chain bispyridinium dienes 10 showed uniformly higher histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitory potency than the natural products. Diene 10b
inhibited HDAC1 and was inactive on HDAC4, whereas 10a showed a weak inhibition
of HDAC1 and a higher activity on HDAC4. Neither 10b nor 10a inhibited isoforms
HDAC2 and HDAC3. Cell cycle analysis, cell differentiation, and apoptosis as well
as evaluation of the acetylation status of H3 lysine tails, up-regulation of
p21WAF1/CIP1, and alpha-tubulin acetylation induced by the dienes 10 and
cyclostellettamines 1 were also carried out on the human leukemia U937 cell line.
These enzymatic and functional assays suggest that 10b is a HDAC1-selective
inhibitor and 10a is a HDAC subclass IIa-selective inhibitor.

PMID: 17447750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Mol Reprod Dev. 2007 Dec;74(12):1514-24.

DNA methylation and histone acetylation patterns in cultured bovine fibroblasts
for nuclear transfer.

Giraldo AM(1), Lynn JW, Purpera MN, Godke RA, Bondioli KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, Louisiana State University Agricultural Center,
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 70803, USA.

Evidence indicates that failure of nuclear transfer (NT) embryos to develop
normally can be attributed, at least partially, to the use of a differentiated
cell nucleus as the donor karyoplast. It has been hypothesized that blastocyst
production and development to term of cloned embryos may differ between
population doublings (PDs) of the same cell line as a consequence of changes in
DNA methylation and histone acetylation patterns during in vitro culture. The
objective of this study was to determine gene expression patterns of the
chromatin remodeling proteins DNA methyltransferase-1 (Dnmt1), methyl CpG binding
protein-2 (MeCP2), and histone deacetyltransferse-1 (HDAC1), in addition, to
measuring levels of DNA methylation and histone acetylation of bovine fibroblast 
cells at different PDs. Bovine fibroblast cell lines were established from four
50-day fetuses. Relative levels of Dnmt1, MeCP2, HDAC1, methylated DNA, and
acetylated histone were analyzed at PDs 2, 7, 15, 30, 45, and 70. RNA levels of
Dnmt1, HDAC1, and MeCP2 were examined using Q-PCR. Global levels of methylated
DNA and acetylated histone were determined by incubation of fixed cells with an
anti-5-methylcytidine and anti-acetyl-histone H3 antibody, respectively. Cells
were labeled with a second antibody, counter-stained with propidium iodide and
analyzed by flow cytometry. These data demonstrate that chromatin remodeling
protein mRNAs involved in epigenetic modifications are altered during in vitro
culture. Methylated DNA and acetylated histone patterns of in vitro cells change 
with time in culture. Subsequent use of these cells for NT will provide insight
as to how these epigenetic modifications affect reprogramming.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17440941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Jun 1;357(2):439-45. Epub 2007 Apr 3.

Factors affecting the substrate specificity of histone deacetylases.

Riester D(1), Hildmann C, Grünewald S, Beckers T, Schwienhorst A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Preparative Molecular Biology, Institute 
for Microbiology and Genetics, University of Goettingen, Grisebachstr. 8, 37077
Goettingen, Germany.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) catalyze the deacetylation of epsilon-acetyl-lysine 
residues within the N-terminal tail of core histones and thereby mediate changes 
in the chromatin structure and regulate gene expression in eukaryotic cells. So
far, surprisingly little is known about the substrate specificities of different 
HDACs. Here, we prepared a library of fluorogenic tripeptidic substrates of the
general format Ac-P(-2)-P(-1)-Lys(Ac)-MCA (P(-1), P(-2)=all amino acids except
cysteine) and measured their HDAC-dependent conversion in a standard fluorogenic 
HDAC assay. Different HDAC subtypes can be ranked according to their substrate
selectivity: HDAH > HDAC8 > HDAC1 > HDAC3 > HDAC6. HDAC1, HDAC3, and HDAC6
exhibit a similar specificity profile, whereas both HDAC8 and HDAH have rather
distinct profiles. Furthermore, it was shown that second-site modification (e.g.,
phosphorylation) of substrate sequences as well as corepressor binding can
modulate the selectivity of enzymatic substrate conversion.

PMID: 17428445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Adv Cancer Res. 2007;97:61-80.

Mnt takes control as key regulator of the myc/max/mxd network.

Wahlström T(1), Henriksson M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor, and Cell Biology (MTC), Karolinska
Institutet, SE-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

Myc is the most frequently deregulated oncogene in human tumors. The protein
belongs to the Myc/Max/Mxd network of transcriptional regulators important for
cell growth, proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. The ratio between
Mnt/Max and c-Myc/Max on the 5'-CACGTG-3' E-box sequence at shared target genes
is of great importance for cell cycle progression and arrest. Serum stimulation
of quiescent cells results in phosphorylation of Mnt and disruption of the
critical Mnt-mSin3-HDAC1 interaction. This in turn leads to increased expression 
of the Myc/Mnt target gene cyclin D2. It is therefore possible that Myc function 
relies on its ability to overcome transcriptional repression by Mnt and that
relief of Mnt-mediated transcriptional repression is of greater importance for
regulation of target genes than the sole activation by Myc. In addition, Mnt has 
many features of a tumor suppressor and may thus be nonfunctional or inactivated 
in human tumors. In summary, accumulating evidence supports the model of Mnt as
the key regulator of the network in vivo.

PMID: 17419941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Med Chem. 2007 May 3;50(9):2003-6. Epub 2007 Apr 10.

Design and synthesis of a potent histone deacetylase inhibitor.

Liu T(1), Kapustin G, Etzkorn FA.

Author information: 
(1)Virginia Tech, Department of Chemistry MC 0212, Blacksburg, Virginia
24061-0212, USA.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors have potential for cancer therapy. An HDAC 
inhibitor based on a cyclic peptide mimic of known structure, linked by an
aliphatic chain to a hydroxamic acid, was designed and synthesized. The chimeric 
compound showed potent competitive inhibition of nuclear HDACs, with an IC50
value of 46 nM and a Ki value of 13.7 nM. The designed inhibitor showed 4-fold
selectivity for HDAC1 (57 nM) over HDAC8 (231 nM).

PMID: 17419603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Mol Neurosci. 2007;31(1):47-58.

Distribution of histone deacetylases 1-11 in the rat brain.

Broide RS(1), Redwine JM, Aftahi N, Young W, Bloom FE, Winrow CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Neurome, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Although protein phosphorylation has been characterized more extensively,
modulation of the acetylation state of signaling molecules is now being
recognized as a key means of signal transduction. The enzymes responsible for
mediating these changes include histone acetyl transferases and histone
deacetylases (HDACs). Members of the HDAC family of enzymes have been identified 
as potential therapeutic targets for diseases ranging from cancer to ischemia and
neurodegeneration. We initiated a project to conduct comprehensive gene
expression mapping of the 11 HDAC isoforms (HDAC1-11) (classes I, II, and IV)
throughout the rat brain using high-resolution in situ hybridization (ISH) and
imaging technology. Internal and external data bases were employed to identify
the appropriate rat sequence information for probe selection. In addition,
immunohistochemistry was performed on these samples to separately examine HDAC
expression in neurons, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and endothelial cells in the
CNS. This double-labeling approach enabled the identification of specific cell
types in which the individual HDACs were expressed. The signals obtained by ISH
were compared to radiolabeled standards and thereby enabled semiquantitative
analysis of individual HDAC isoforms and defined relative levels of gene
expression in >50 brain regions. This project produced an extensive atlas of 11
HDAC isoforms throughout the rat brain, including cell type localization,
providing a valuable resource for examining the roles of specific HDACs in the
brain and the development of future modulators of HDAC activity.

PMID: 17416969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jun 29;282(26):19052-61. Epub 2007 Apr 4.

SOX6 suppresses cyclin D1 promoter activity by interacting with beta-catenin and 
histone deacetylase 1, and its down-regulation induces pancreatic beta-cell
proliferation.

Iguchi H(1), Urashima Y, Inagaki Y, Ikeda Y, Okamura M, Tanaka T, Uchida A,
Yamamoto TT, Kodama T, Sakai J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Systems Biology and Medicine, Research Center for Advanced
Science and Technology, University of Tokyo, Tokyo 153-8904, Japan.

Sex-determining region Y-box (SOX) 6 negatively regulates glucose-stimulated
insulin secretion from beta-cells and is a down-regulated transcription factor in
the pancreatic islet cells of hyperinsulinemic obese mice. To determine the
contribution of SOX6 to insulin resistance, we analyzed the effects of SOX6 on
cell proliferation. Small interfering RNA-mediated attenuation of SOX6 expression
stimulated the proliferation of insulinoma INS-1E and NIH-3T3 cells, whereas
retroviral overexpression resulted in inhibition of cell growth. Quantitative
real time-PCR analysis revealed that the levels of cyclin D1 transcripts were
markedly decreased by SOX6 overexpression. Luciferase-reporter assay with
beta-catenin showed that SOX6 suppresses cyclin D1 promoter activities. In vitro 
binding experiments showed that the LZ/Q domain of SOX6 physically interacts with
armadillo repeats 1-4 of beta-catenin. Furthermore, chromatin immunoprecipitation
assay revealed that increased SOX6 expression significantly reduced the levels of
acetylated histones H3 and H4 at the cyclin D1 promoter. By using a histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor and co-immunoprecipitation analysis, we showed that 
SOX6 suppressed cyclin D1 activities by interacting withbeta-catenin and HDAC1.
The data presented suggest that SOX6 may be an important factor in
obesity-related insulin resistance.

PMID: 17412698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2007;39(7-8):1367-74. Epub 2007 Mar 7.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors: signalling towards p21cip1/waf1.

Ocker M(1), Schneider-Stock R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine 1, University Hospital Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.
Matthias.ocker@med1.imed.uni-erlangen.de

Chromatin-modifying enzymes such as histone deacetylases (HDAC) facilitate a
closed chromatin structure and hence transcriptional repression. HDAC are
commonly affected in human cancer diseases. Thus, inhibition of HDAC represents a
novel therapeutic approach. Several studies have shown that HDAC inhibitors
strongly activate the expression of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor
p21(cip1/waf1) through (i) enhanced histone acetylation around the p21(cip1/waf1)
promoter and (ii) the Sp1 sites on the p21(cip1/waf1) promoter releasing the
repressor HDAC1 from its binding. p21(cip1/waf1) expression is regulated in a
p53-dependent and p53-independent manner. The decision if p21(cip1/waf1)
up-regulation results in cell cycle arrest or apoptosis, decides about the
therapeutic efficacy of an anti-cancer treatment with HDAC inhibitors.

PMID: 17412634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Cancer Res. 2007 Apr 1;67(7):3145-52.

Histone deacetylase 2 modulates p53 transcriptional activities through regulation
of p53-DNA binding activity.

Harms KL(1), Chen X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama, USA.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are emerging as promising cancer
therapeutics. HDAC inhibitors have been found to induce cellular activities that 
are strikingly similar to p53-mediated responses to genotoxic stress. For
example, HDAC inhibitors induce cell cycle arrest, apoptosis, and cellular
senescence. Because at least 11 HDACs are affected by the current HDAC
inhibitors, the HDAC critical for tumor cell survival and proliferation remains
unknown. Thus, we sought to characterize the distinct roles of HDACs in the p53
pathway. Through the use of stable MCF7 cell lines which inducibly express short 
hairpin RNA targeting HDAC2, we found that HDAC2 plays important roles in the p53
pathway. Specifically, we found that knockdown of HDAC2 inhibited cellular
proliferation in a dose-dependent manner which was also partly p53-dependent.
Furthermore, knockdown of HDAC2 induced cellular senescence. Importantly, we
found that knockdown of HDAC2 enhanced p53-dependent trans-repression and
trans-activation of a subset of target genes. We found that the enhancement was
due to increased p53-DNA binding activity but not alterations in p53 stability or
posttranslational modification(s). Thus, for the first time, our data suggest
that HDAC inhibitors function through the p53 pathway, at least in part, by
activating p53-DNA binding activity.

PMID: 17409421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Exp Ther Oncol. 2007;6(2):117-27.

Dip1 inhibits growth and gene transcription in MCF-7 breast cancer cells.

Su T(1), Deguchi A, Yao Y, Luo J, Weinstein IB.

Author information: 
(1)Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbia University, New York, NY 
10032, USA.

In previous studies we identified a novel gene Dipl, also designated CCNDBP1,
which encodes a 42kDa helix-loop-helix (HLH) nuclear protein. Although this
protein was originally identified by its ability to bind to cyclin D1 its precise
biochemical functions are not known. In the present study we carried out
mechanistic studies on Dip1 focusing on the human breast cancer cell line MCF-7. 
We found that overexpression of Dip1 in MCF-7 cells inhibited colony formation
and cell proliferation. Reporter assays in MCF-7 cells indicated that Dip1
strongly inhibited the transcriptional activities of the cyclin D1, c-fos,
NF-kappaB, SRE and p21cP1 promoters. Furthermore studies with truncated and
mutant forms of the cyclin D1 promoter suggest that Dip1 does not act on specific
transcriptional elements. Assays with mutant and truncated forms of Dip1
indicated that both the LXXLL motif and the HLH domain play important, but not
exclusive, roles in these inhibitory effects. Dip1 co-immunoprecipitated with the
histone deacetylase (HDAC) proteins HDAC1 and HDAC3. Nevertheless Dip1 markedly
inhibited the stimulation of cyclin D1 promoter activity obtained with
trichostatin A [1], an inhibitor of HDAC. Taken together these findings suggest
that Dip1 functions as a general repressor of transcription. Although the precise
mechanism by which Dip1 inhibits gene transcription and the growth of MCF-7 cells
remain to be determined, the present results suggest that Dip1 is a candidate
tumor suppressor gene.

PMID: 17407970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2007 Aug;37(2):232-9. Epub 2007 Mar 29.

COX-2 expression induced by diesel particles involves chromatin modification and 
degradation of HDAC1.

Cao D(1), Bromberg PA, Samet JM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Environmental Medicine, Asthma and Lung Biology, University of
North Carolina, USA.

Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) plays an important role in the inflammatory response
induced by physiologic and stress stimuli. Exposure to diesel exhaust particulate
matter (DEP) has been shown to induce pulmonary inflammation and exacerbate
asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. DEP is a potent inducer of
inflammatory reponses in human airway epithelial cells. The mechanism through
which DEP inhalation induces inflammatory mediator expression is not understood. 
In this report, we demonstrate that DEP can induce the expression of COX-2 gene
in a human bronchial epithelial cell line (BEAS-2B) at both transcriptional and
protein levels. The induction of COX-2 gene expression involves chromatin
modification, in particular acetylation and deacetylation of histones. We show
that exposure to DEP increases the acetylation of histone H4 associated with the 
COX-2 promoter and causes degradation of histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1). Further, 
we establish that HDAC1 plays a pivotal role in mediating the transcriptional
activation of the COX-2 gene in BEAS-2B cells exposed to DEP, supported by
evidence that the down-regulation of HDAC1 using siRNA leads to activation of
COX-2 gene expression, whereas overexpression of HDAC1 results in its repression.
Finally, DEP exposure induced recruitment of histone acetyltransferase (HAT) p300
to the promoter of the COX-2 gene, suggesting that acetylation is also important 
in regulating its expression in response to DEP exposure. These results show for 
the first time acetylation via selective degradation of HDAC1, and that
recruitment of HAT plays an important role in DEP-induced expression of the COX-2
gene.

PMID: 17395887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Arthritis Rheum. 2007 Apr;56(4):1087-93.

Histone deacetylase/acetylase activity in total synovial tissue derived from
rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis patients.

Huber LC(1), Brock M, Hemmatazad H, Giger OT, Moritz F, Trenkmann M, Distler JH, 
Gay RE, Kolling C, Moch H, Michel BA, Gay S, Distler O, Jüngel A.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Experimental Rheumatology, University Hospital Zurich, and Zurich
Center of Integrative Human Physiology, Zurich, Switzerland. Lars.Huber@usz.ch

OBJECTIVE: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic inflammatory disorder of
unknown origin. Histone deacetylase (HDA) activity is considered to play a major 
role in the transcriptional regulation of proinflammatory genes. We undertook
this study to investigate the balance of histone acetylase and HDA activity in
synovial tissue from RA patients compared with that from patients with
osteoarthritis (OA) and normal controls.
METHODS: Activity of histone acetylases and HDAs was measured in nuclear extracts
of total synovial tissue samples, which were obtained from RA and OA patients
undergoing surgical joint replacement, and compared with the activity in synovial
tissues from patients without arthritis. Tissue expression of HDAs 1 and 2 was
quantified by Western blotting. In addition, immunohistochemistry was performed
for HDA-2.
RESULTS: Mean+/-SEM HDA activity in synovial tissue samples derived from patients
with RA was measured as 1.5+/-0.3 micromoles/microg, whereas the activity levels 
in OA (3.2+/-0.7 micromoles/microg) and normal (7.1+/-4.2 micromoles/microg)
synovial tissue samples were significantly higher. Histone acetylase activity
reached similar levels in RA and OA tissues and in normal tissues. The ratio of
HDA activity to histone acetylase activity in RA synovial tissue was
significantly reduced (12+/-2%) compared with that in OA synovial tissue
(26+/-3%). The activity ratio in normal control samples was arbitrarily set at
100+/-40%. In addition, the tissue expression of HDA-1 and HDA-2 proteins was
clearly lower in RA samples than in OA samples.
CONCLUSION: The balance of histone acetylase/HDA activities is strongly shifted
toward histone hyperacetylation in patients with RA. These results offer novel
molecular insights into the pathogenesis of the disease that might be relevant to
the development of future therapeutic approaches.

PMID: 17393417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Virol. 2007 Jun;81(11):5929-39. Epub 2007 Mar 28.

Suppression of viral gene expression in bovine leukemia virus-associated B-cell
malignancy: interplay of epigenetic modifications leading to chromatin with a
repressive histone code.

Merimi M(1), Klener P, Szynal M, Cleuter Y, Kerkhofs P, Burny A, Martiat P, Van
den Broeke A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, Bordet Institute, ULB, 121, Blvd. de
Waterloo, 1000 Brussels, Belgium.

Ovine leukemia/lymphoma resulting from bovine leukemia virus infection of sheep
offers a large animal model for studying mechanisms underlying leukemogenesis.
Silencing of viral information including Tax, the major contributor to the
oncogenic potential of the virus, is critical if not mandatory for tumor
progression. In this study, we have identified epigenetic mechanisms that govern 
the complete suppression of viral expression, using a lymphoma-derived B-cell
clone carrying a silent provirus. Silencing was not relieved by injection of the 
malignant B cells into sheep. However, exogenous expression of Tax or treatment
with either the DNA methyltransferase inhibitor 5'azacytidine or the histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor trichostatin A rescued viral expression, as
demonstrated by in vivo infectivity trials. Comparing silent and reactivated
provirus, we found mechanistic connections between chromatin conformation and
tumor-associated transcriptional repression. Silencing is associated with DNA
methylation and decreased accessibility of promoter sequences. HDAC1 and the
transcriptional corepressor mSin3A are associated with the inactive but not the
reactivated promoter. Silencing correlates with a repressed chromatin structure
marked by histone H3 and H4 hypoacetylation, a loss of methylation at H3 lysine
4, and an increase of H3 lysine 9 methylation. These observations point to the
critical role of epigenetic mechanisms in tumor-specific virus/oncogene
silencing, a potential strategy to evade immune response and favor the
propagation of the transformed cell.

PMCID: PMC1900279
PMID: 17392371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2007 Jun;321(3):953-60. Epub 2007 Mar 26.

Targeting AML1/ETO-histone deacetylase repressor complex: a novel mechanism for
valproic acid-mediated gene expression and cellular differentiation in
AML1/ETO-positive acute myeloid leukemia cells.

Liu S(1), Klisovic RB, Vukosavljevic T, Yu J, Paschka P, Huynh L, Pang J, Neviani
P, Liu Z, Blum W, Chan KK, Perrotti D, Marcucci G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, The Ohio State University, 320 West 10th Avenue,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

In t(8;21) acute myeloid leukemia (AML), the AML1/ETO fusion protein promotes
leukemogenesis by recruiting class I histone deacetylase (HDAC)-containing
repressor complex to the promoter of AML1 target genes. Valproic acid (VPA), a
commonly used antiseizure and mood stabilizer drug, has been shown to cause
growth arrest and induce differentiation of malignant cells via HDAC inhibition. 
VPA causes selective proteasomal degradation of HDAC2 but not other class I HDACs
(i.e., HDAC 1, 3, and 8). Therefore, we raised the question of whether this drug 
can effectively target the leukemogenic activity of the AML1/ETO fusion protein
that also recruits HDAC1, a key regulator of normal and aberrant histone
acetylation. We report here that VPA treatment disrupts the AML1/ETO-HDAC1
physical interaction, stimulates the global dissociation of AML1/ETO-HDAC1
complex from the promoter of AML1/ETO target genes, and induces relocation of
both AML1/ETO and HDAC1 protein from nuclear to perinuclear region. Furthermore, 
we show that mechanistically these effects associate with a significant
inhibition of HDAC activity, histone H3 and H4 hyperacetylation, and recruitment 
of RNA polymerase II, leading to transcriptional reactivation of target genes
(i.e., IL-3) otherwise silenced by AML1/ETO fusion protein. Ultimately, these
pharmacological effects resulted in significant antileukemic activity mediated by
partial cell differentiation and caspase-dependent apoptosis. Taken together,
these data support the notion that VPA might effectively target AML1/ETO-driven
leukemogenesis through disruption of aberrant HDAC1 function and that VPA should 
be integrated in novel therapeutic approaches for AML1/ETO-positive AML.

PMID: 17389244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Cancer Biol Ther. 2007 May;6(5):795-801. Epub 2007 Feb 14.

Drug-induced inactivation or gene silencing of class I histone deacetylases
suppresses ovarian cancer cell growth: implications for therapy.

Khabele D(1), Son DS, Parl AK, Goldberg GL, Augenlicht LH, Mariadason JM, Rice
VM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gynecologic Oncology, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee 37208, USA.

There is an urgent need to develop new strategies to treat ovarian cancer, the
most deadly gynecologic malignancy. Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are
emerging as novel therapeutic drugs in the treatment of a variety of cancers,
including those resistant to standard chemotherapy. Since there are multiple HDAC
isoforms, determining the precise role of individual HDAC isoenzymes in the
growth and progression of ovarian cancer has the potential to influence the use
of selective HDAC inhibitors as strategic therapeutic agents that elicit fewer
undesirable side effects. Unfortunately, there is limited information about the
expression of HDAC isoforms in human ovarian tissues. This report provides
evidence for the first time that Class I HDACs are expressed at significantly
higher levels in ovarian cancers in comparison to normal ovarian tissues, with no
significant difference in Class II HDAC expression between the two groups.
Furthermore, ovarian cancer cells are far more sensitive than normal ovarian
cells to the potent HDAC inhibitor romidepsin (FK228), a drug that displays
greater inhibitory selectivity for Class I HDACs over Class II isoforms. Using
small interfering RNA (siRNA) methodology, we demonstrate that knocking down the 
gene expression of HDAC3 and other members of the Class I HDAC family suppresses 
ovarian cancer cell growth. Taken together, the present studies offer several
novel findings that have direct relevance for the strategic use of inhibitors
that target Class I HDACs, particularly HDAC3, in the treatment of ovarian
cancer.

PMID: 17387270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Cell Sci. 2007 Apr 15;120(Pt 8):1350-7. Epub 2007 Mar 20.

Comparative roles of Twist-1 and Id1 in transcriptional regulation by BMP
signaling.

Hayashi M(1), Nimura K, Kashiwagi K, Harada T, Takaoka K, Kato H, Tamai K, Kaneda
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gene Therapy Science, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka
University 2-2 Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors are known as key regulators
for mesenchymal differentiation. The present study showed that overexpression of 
Twist-1, a bHLH transcription factor, suppresses bone morphogenetic protein
(BMP)-induced osteoblast differentiation, and downregulation of endogenous
Twist-1 enhances BMP signaling. Maximal inhibition of BMP signaling was observed 
when Twist-1 was bound to E47, which markedly enhanced the stability of Twist-1. 
Co-immunoprecipitation assays revealed that Twist-1 formed a complex with Smad4
and histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1 in MC3T3-E1 cells stably expressing Twist-1.
With trichostatin, an HDAC inhibitor, osteogenic factors such as alkaline
phosphatase, Runx2 and osteopontin increased. Those results suggested that
Twist-1 inhibited BMP signaling by recruiting HDAC1 to Smad4. Furthermore, the
inhibitory effects of Twist-1 on BMP signaling were overcome by Id1 through
induction of Twist-1 degradation. These findings suggest that Twist-1 can act as 
an inhibitor of BMP signaling, and Id1 can regulate BMP signaling through a
positive feedback loop repressing Twist-1 function. These two molecules may
therefore regulate differentiation of mesenchymal cells into progeny such as
osteoblasts by controlling BMP signaling.

PMID: 17374642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 May;27(10):3578-88. Epub 2007 Mar 19.

Corepressor MMTR/DMAP1 is involved in both histone deacetylase 1- and
TFIIH-mediated transcriptional repression.

Kang BG(1), Shin JH, Yi JK, Kang HC, Lee JJ, Heo HS, Chae JH, Shin I, Kim CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, College of Natural Sciences, Hanyang University,
Haengdang 17, Sungdong-gu, Seoul 133-791, South Korea.

A transcription corepressor, MAT1-mediated transcriptional repressor (MMTR), was 
found in mouse embryonic stem cell lines. MMTR orthologs (DMAP1) are found in a
wide variety of life forms from yeasts to humans. MMTR down-regulation in
differentiating mouse embryonic stem cells in vitro resulted in activation of
many unrelated genes, suggesting its role as a general transcriptional repressor.
In luciferase reporter assays, the transcriptional repression activity resided at
amino acids 221 to 468. Histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) interacts with MMTR both in
vitro and in vivo and also interacts with MMTR in the nucleus. Interestingly,
MMTR activity was only partially rescued by competition with dominant-negative
HDAC1(H141A) or by treatment with an HDAC inhibitor, trichostatin A (TSA). To
identify the protein responsible for HDAC1-independent MMTR activity, we
performed a yeast two-hybrid screen with the full-length MMTR coding sequence as 
bait and found MAT1. MAT1 is an assembly/targeting factor for cyclin-dependent
kinase-activating kinase which constitutes a subcomplex of TFIIH. The coiled-coil
domain in the middle of MAT1 was confirmed to interact with the C-terminal half
of MMTR, and the MMTR-mediated transcriptional repression activity was completely
restored by MAT1 in the presence of TSA. Moreover, intact MMTR was required to
inhibit phosphorylation of the C-terminal domain in the RNA polymerase II largest
subunit by TFIIH kinase in vitro. Taken together, these data strongly suggest
that MMTR is part of the basic cellular machinery for a wide range of
transcriptional regulation via interaction with TFIIH and HDAC.

PMCID: PMC1899998
PMID: 17371848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Oncogene. 2007 Aug 30;26(40):5866-76. Epub 2007 Mar 19.

SUMO modification of the DEAD box protein p68 modulates its transcriptional
activity and promotes its interaction with HDAC1.

Jacobs AM(1), Nicol SM, Hislop RG, Jaffray EG, Hay RT, Fuller-Pace FV.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Group, Division of Pathology and Neuroscience, University of
Dundee, Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, Ninewells Drive, Dundee, Tayside, 
UK.

The nuclear protein p68 (also known as Ddx5) is a prototypic member of the 'DEAD 
box' family of RNA helicases, which has been shown to be abnormally expressed and
modified in colorectal tumors and to function as an important transcriptional
regulator. Here, we show that p68 is modified in vivo on a single site (K53) by
the small ubiquitin-like modifier-2 (SUMO-2). We demonstrate that the SUMO E3
ligase PIAS1 interacts with p68 and enhances its SUMO modification in vivo. To
determine the functional consequences of SUMO modification, we compared the
transcriptional activity of p68 and a K53R mutant that could not be
SUMO-modified. Our data show that SUMO modification enhances p68 transcriptional 
repression activity and inhibits the ability of p68 to function as a coactivator 
of p53. These findings may be explained by the ability of wild type, but not K53R
p68, to alter the modification state of chromatin by recruitment of histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1).

PMID: 17369852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2007 Apr 15;460(2):218-26. Epub 2007 Feb 23.

Vitamin D receptor-mediated suppression of RelB in antigen presenting cells: a
paradigm for ligand-augmented negative transcriptional regulation.

Griffin MD(1), Dong X, Kumar R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Mayo
Clinic College of Medicine, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.
griffin.matthew@mayo.edu

The immunological effects of vitamin D receptor (VDR) ligands include inhibition 
of dendritic cell (DC) maturation, suppression of T-helper type 1 (Th1) T-cell
responses and facilitation of antigen-specific immune tolerance in vivo. While
studying the molecular profile of DCs cultured in the presence of 1alpha,25(OH)D3
or synthetic D3 analogs we observed that expression of the NF-kappaB family
member RelB, which plays an essential role in DC differentiation and maturation, 
is selectively suppressed by VDR ligands. Further in vitro and in vivo studies of
VDR-mediated RelB suppression indicated that the mechanism for this effect
involves direct binding of VDR/RXR alpha to a defined region of the relB promoter
and assembly of a negative regulatory complex containing HDAC3, HDAC1, SMRT and, 
most likely, other factors. Interestingly, promoter engagement by VDR and HDAC3, 
but not the other identified components, is enhanced by addition of a VDR ligand 
and inhibited by a pro-maturational stimulus (LPS) that results in RelB
upregulation. Promoter assays in a panel of cell lines suggest that the VDR
ligand-dependent component of relB suppression may occur selectively in antigen
presenting cells. Cell type-specific, ligand-enhanced negative transcriptional
regulation represents a potentially novel paradigm for VDR-controlled genes. In
this report we review the experimental data to support such a mechanism for relB 
regulation in DCs and present a model for the process.

PMCID: PMC1945094
PMID: 17367745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 May;27(10):3868-80. Epub 2007 Mar 12.

DeltaNp73 modulates nerve growth factor-mediated neuronal differentiation through
repression of TrkA.

Zhang J(1), Chen X.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Comparative Oncology, 2128 Tupper Hall, University of California at
Davis, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

p73, a member of the p53 family, expresses two classes of proteins: the
full-length TAp73 and the N-terminally truncated DeltaNp73. While TAp73 possesses
many p53-like features, DeltaNp73 is dominant negative towards TAp73 and p53 and 
appears to have distinct functions in tumorigenesis and neuronal development.
Given its biological importance, we investigated the role of DeltaNp73 in nerve
growth factor (NGF)-mediated neuronal differentiation in PC12 cells. We show that
overexpression of DeltaNp73alpha or DeltaNp73beta inhibits NGF-mediated neuronal 
differentiation in both p53-dependent and -independent manners. In line with
this, we showed that the level of endogenous DeltaNp73 is progressively
diminished in differentiating PC12 cells upon NGF treatment and knockdown of
DeltaNp73 promotes NGF-mediated neuronal differentiation. Interestingly, we found
that the ability of DeltaNp73 to suppress NGF-mediated neuronal differentiation
is correlated with its ability to regulate the expression of TrkA, the
high-affinity NGF receptor. Specifically, we found that DeltaNp73 directly binds 
to the TrkA promoter and transcriptionally represses TrkA expression, which in
turn attenuates the NGF-mediated mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway.
Conversely, the steady-state level of TrkA is increased upon knockdown of
DeltaNp73. Furthermore, we found that histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and HDAC2 are
recruited by DeltaNp73 to the TrkA promoter and act as corepressors to suppress
TrkA expression, which can be relieved by trichostatin A, an HDAC inhibitor.
Taken together, we conclude that DeltaNp73 negatively regulates NGF-mediated
neuronal differentiation by transrepressing TrkA.

PMCID: PMC1899982
PMID: 17353261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Biol Chem. 2007 May 4;282(18):13716-25. Epub 2007 Mar 12.

Enhanced deacetylation of p53 by the anti-apoptotic protein HSCO in association
with histone deacetylase 1.

Higashitsuji H(1), Higashitsuji H, Masuda T, Liu Y, Itoh K, Fujita J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, 54 Shogoin Kawaharacho, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

HSCO (hepatoma subtracted-cDNA library clone one, also called ETHE1) was
originally identified by its frequent overexpression in hepatocellular
carcinomas. HSCO inhibits function of NF-kappaB by binding to RelA and
accelerating its export from the nucleus. We show here that HSCO exhibits
anti-apoptotic activity in cells exposed to DNA-damaging agents by suppressing
transcriptional activity of p53. Induction of pro-apoptotic genes, Noxa, Perp,
PIG3, and Bax were suppressed in cells over-expressing HSCO. By increasing
ubiquitylation and degradation of p53, HSCO reduces p53 protein levels. HSCO
specifically associates with histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) independently of Mdm2 
and facilitates deacetylation of p53 at Lys-373/382 by HDAC1. The
metallo-beta-lactamase family consensus sequence in HSCO is important for its
effect on p53 deacetylation. Co-immunoprecipitation and immunofluorescence
studies suggested that HSCO, HDAC1, and p53 form a complex in the nucleus. Thus, 
HSCO is a cofactor that increases the deacetylase activity of HDAC1 toward p53,
leading to suppression of apoptosis. Treatment of hepatocellular carcinomas that 
retain wild-type p53 and overexpress HSCO with anti-HSCO agents might
re-establish the p53 response and revert chemoresistance.

PMID: 17353187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Int J Dermatol. 2007 Mar;46(3):239-46.

Under-expression of VHL and over-expression of HDAC-1, HIF-1alpha, LL-37, and
IAP-2 in affected skin biopsies of patients with psoriasis.

Tovar-Castillo LE(1), Cancino-Díaz JC, García-Vázquez F, Cancino-Gómez FG,
León-Dorantes G, Blancas-González F, Jiménez-Zamudio L, García-Latorre E,
Cancino-Díaz ME.

Author information: 
(1)Departamentos de Inmunologia and Microbiologia, Escuela Nacional de Ciencias
Biológicas, Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Servicio de Dermatología, Hospital
General de México, Mexico.

BACKGROUND: A feature of psoriasis is the rapid proliferation of keratinocytes,
during which apoptosis is blocked and angiogenesis starts. It is known that tumor
hypoxic cells produce histone deacetylase-1 (HDAC-1), which up-regulates
hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha) and down-regulates von Hippel-Lindau
(VHL) protein by up-regulating vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
expression. It has been reported recently that the porcine peptide PR39
(homologous to human LL-37) has angiogenic and antiapoptotic activity. Thus,
LL-37, induced by insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1), could help in the
production of VEGF. PR39 also induces the expression of inhibitor of apoptosis
protein-2 (IAP-2), which blocks apoptosis. The purpose of this work was to
analyze whether these genes and their proteins are expressed in psoriatic
biopsies.
METHODS: Using semiquantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) messenger RNA (mRNA) expression and immunohistochemical staining, we
studied VHL, IAP-2, and related genes in skin biopsies from psoriatic patients
and healthy subjects.
RESULTS: An over-expression of the mRNA for HDAC-1, HIF-1alpha, LL-37, and IGF-1 
in psoriatic skin, in comparison with skin from healthy subjects, was found. The 
antiangiogenic VHL mRNA and protein were under-expressed in psoriatic skin and
highly expressed in healthy skin. The antiapoptotic IAP-2 was over-expressed in
dermal endothelial cells from psoriatic skin. The pro-apoptotic Bax, Fas, and
FasL mRNAs were expressed.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that there could be an association of HDAC-1,
HIF-1alpha, LL-37, VHL, and IAP-2 with angiogenic and apoptotic mechanisms in
psoriasis.

PMID: 17343577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2006 Dec;1091:356-67.

Effects of histone deacetylase inhibitors, sodium phenyl butyrate and vitamin B3,
in combination with retinoic acid on granulocytic differentiation of human
promyelocytic leukemia HL-60 cells.

Merzvinskyte R(1), Treigyte G, Savickiene J, Magnusson KE, Navakauskiene R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Institute of Biochemistry, LT-08662
Vilnius, Lithuania.

Water-soluble vitamin B3, niacin, and its related compounds were suggested to be 
applicable for medical use. In this article, we examined the anti-leukemic
effects of two distinct histone deacetylase (HDAC1 and Sir2) inhibitors, sodium
phenyl butyrate (PB) and vitamin B3, respectively, on human promyelocytic
leukemia cells HL-60, using HDACIs alone and in combination with all trans
retinoic acid (RA). We demonstrated that the HDACI combinations exert different
effects on cell cycle arrest and differentiation as determined by nitro blue
reduction and the expression of the early myeloid differentiation marker CD11b.
The most beneficial effects were found by use of 6-h pretreatment with PB and
vitamin B3 before the exposition to RA alone or in combination with vitamin B3,
showing significant acceleration and a high level of granulocytic
differentiation. The effects were associated with a rapid histone H4 acetylation 
and later histone H3 modifications. Our results suggest that the use of two HDACI
altogether before the induction of differentiation and acting via chromatin
remodeling may be promising for the treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia.

PMID: 17341628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(6):1958-68. Epub 2007 Mar 6.

Involvement of chromatin and histone deacetylation in SV40 T antigen
transcription regulation.

Valls E(1), Blanco-García N, Aquizu N, Piedra D, Estarás C, de la Cruz X,
Martínez-Balbás MA.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología Molecular de Barcelona, CID, Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas, Parc Cientific de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

Simian Virus 40 (SV40) large T antigen (T Ag) is a multifunctional viral
oncoprotein that regulates viral and cellular transcriptional activity. However, 
the mechanisms by which such regulation occurs remain unclear. Here we show that 
T antigen represses CBP-mediated transcriptional activity. This repression is
concomitant with histone H3 deacetylation and is TSA sensitive. Moreover, our
results demonstrate that T antigen interacts with HDAC1 in vitro in an
Rb-independent manner. In addition, the overexpression of HDAC1 cooperates with T
antigen to antagonize CBP transactivation function and correlates with chromatin 
deacetylation of the TK promoter. Finally, decreasing HDAC1 levels with small
interfering RNA (siRNA) partially abolishes T antigen-induced repression. These
findings highlight the importance of the histone acetylation/deacetylation
balance in the cellular transformation mediated by oncoviral proteins.

PMCID: PMC1874590
PMID: 17341466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. EMBO Rep. 2007 Apr;8(4):394-400. Epub 2007 Feb 23.

Nucleophosmin acts as a novel AP2alpha-binding transcriptional corepressor during
cell differentiation.

Liu H(1), Tan BC, Tseng KH, Chuang CP, Yeh CW, Chen KD, Lee SC, Yung BY.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biochemistry Laboratory, Department of Pharmacology, Chang Gung
University, 259 Wen-Hwa 1st Road, Kwei-San, Tao-Yuan 333, Taiwan, Republic of
China.

Nucleophosmin (NPM) is an important nucleolar phosphoprotein with pleiotropic
functions in various cellular processes. In this study, we have further examined 
the largely uncharacterized role of NPM in transcriptional regulation by
uncovering novel NPM-binding transcriptional factors. Among potential
interactors, we found that activating protein transcription factor 2 (AP2)alpha
forms a complex with NPM during retinoic-acid-induced cell differentiation. We
show that this complex is recruited to the promoters of certain
retinoic-acid-responsive genes, including NPM itself. Such binding of AP2alpha,
and consequent recruitment of NPM, is selective and dependent on a consensus
AP2alpha-binding sequence. Remarkably, suppression of NPM by RNA interference
alleviates the repression of gene expression mediated by retinoic acid and
AP2alpha. Our findings further show that, on promoter binding, NPM probably
exerts its repressive effect by inducing a change in local chromatin structure
that also engages histone deacetylases. This study unveils a hitherto
unrecognized transcriptional corepressor function of the NPM protein, and
highlights a novel mechanism by which NPM regulates cell growth and
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1852768
PMID: 17318229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. FEBS Lett. 2007 Mar 20;581(6):1087-92. Epub 2007 Feb 14.

Oct-1 is involved in the transcriptional repression of the p15(INK4b) gene.

Hitomi T(1), Matsuzaki Y, Yasuda S, Kawanaka M, Yogosawa S, Koyama M, Tantin D,
Sakai T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular-Targeting Cancer Prevention, Graduate School of
Medical Science, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kawaramachi-Hirokoji, 
Kamigyo-ku, Kyoto 602-8566, Japan.

p15(INK4b) functions as a tumor suppressor and implicated in cellular senescence.
Here, we show that the Oct-1 binding site in the human p15(INK4b) gene promoter
functions as a silencer. Oct-1 specifically interacts with this binding site in
vitro and in vivo and SMRT and HDAC1 are present in the p15(INK4b) proximal
promoter region. Moreover, mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs) lacking Oct-1 have
shown significantly increased levels of p15(INK4b) protein compared to their
normal counterparts. Treatment with a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor has
activated the expression of p15(INK4b) in wild-type MEFs but has no effect in
MEFs lacking Oct-1, suggesting that Oct-1 represses p15(INK4b) gene expression in
an HDAC-dependent manner. Finally, we show that the expression of Oct-1 protein
significantly decreases, whereas p15(INK4b) protein significantly increases with 
the cellular aging process. Taken together, these results suggest that Oct-1 is
an important transcriptional repressor for p15(INK4b) gene and the
transcriptional repression of the p15(INK4b) gene by Oct-1 may be one of the
regulatory mechanisms of cellular senescence.

PMID: 17316622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. EMBO J. 2007 Feb 21;26(4):1117-28. Epub 2007 Feb 15.

Postsynaptic chromatin is under neural control at the neuromuscular junction.

Ravel-Chapuis A(1), Vandromme M, Thomas JL, Schaeffer L.

Author information: 
(1)Equipe Différenciation Neuromusculaire, IFR128, UMR5161, CNRS, INRA,
Université de Lyon, Lyon Cedex, France.

In adult skeletal muscle, the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (AChR)
specifically accumulates at the neuromuscular junction, to allow
neurotransmission. This clustering is paralleled by a compartmentalization of
AChR genes expression to subsynaptic nuclei, which acquire a unique gene
expression program and a specific morphology in response to neural cues. Our
results demonstrate that neural agrin-dependent reprogramming of myonuclei
involves chromatin remodelling, histone hyperacetylation and histone
hyperphosphorylation. Activation of AChR genes in subsynaptic nuclei is mediated 
by the transcription factor GABP. Here we demonstrate that upon activation, GABP 
recruits the histone acetyl transferase (HAT) p300 on the AChR epsilon subunit
promoter, whereas it rather recruits the histone deacetylase HDAC1 when the
promoter is not activated. Moreover, the HAT activity of p300 is required in vivo
for AChR expression. GABP therefore couples chromatin hyperacetylation and AChR
activation by neural factors in subsynaptic nuclei.

PMCID: PMC1852850
PMID: 17304221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Feb 20;104(8):2703-8. Epub 2007 Feb 14.

Glucocorticoid-stimulated preadipocyte differentiation is mediated through
acetylation of C/EBPbeta by GCN5.

Wiper-Bergeron N(1), Salem HA, Tomlinson JJ, Wu D, Haché RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Biochemistry and Department of Biochemistry, University of
Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada K1N 6N5.

Preadipocyte differentiation in culture is driven by an insulin and cAMP
dependant transcriptional cascade which induces the bzip transcription factors
C/EBPbeta and C/EBPdelta. We have previously shown that glucocorticoid treatment,
which strongly potentiates this differentiation pathway, stimulates the titration
of the corepressor histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) from C/EBPbeta. This results in 
a dramatic enhancement of C/EBPbeta-dependent transcription from the C/EBPalpha
promoter, concomitant with potentiation of preadipocyte differentiation. Here, we
show that C/EBPbeta is acetylated by GCN5 and PCAF within a cluster of lysine
residues between amino acids 98-102 and that this acetylation is strongly induced
by glucocorticoid treatment. Arginine substitution of the lysine residues within 
the acetylation motif of C/EBPbeta prevented acetylation and blocked the ability 
of glucocorticoids to enhance C/EBPbeta-directed transcription and to potentiate 
C/EBPbeta-dependent preadipocyte differentiation. Moreover, acetylation of
C/EBPbeta appeared to directly interfere with the interaction of HDAC1 with
C/EBPbeta, suggesting that PCAF/GCN5-dependent acetylation of C/EBPbeta serves as
an important molecular switch in determining the transcriptional regulatory
potential of this transcription factor.

PMCID: PMC1815245
PMID: 17301242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Feb 20;104(8):2849-54. Epub 2007 Feb 9.

Distinct modes of action applied by transcription factors STAT1 and IRF1 to
initiate transcription of the IFN-gamma-inducible gbp2 gene.

Ramsauer K(1), Farlik M, Zupkovitz G, Seiser C, Kröger A, Hauser H, Decker T.

Author information: 
(1)Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology,
University of Vienna, A1030 Vienna, Austria.

A subgroup of genes induced by IFN-gamma requires both STAT1 and IRF1 for
transcriptional activation. Using WT, stat1(-/-), or irf1(-/-) cells, we analyzed
the changes induced by IFN-gamma in gbp2 promoter chromatin. STAT1 associated
with the promoter independently of IRF1 and played an essential role in the
ordered recruitment of the coactivator/histone acetyl transferase CREB-binding
protein (CBP) and the histone deacetylase HDAC1. Hyperacetylation of histone 4
also required STAT1. Phosphorylation at S727 in the transactivating domain
increased transcriptional activity of STAT1. In cells expressing a
STAT1S727A-mutant CBP recruitment, histone 4 hyperacetylation and RNA polymerase 
II association with the gbp2 promoter were strongly reduced. IRF1 association
with the gbp2 promoter followed that of STAT1, but STAT1 association with DNA or 
histone hyperacetylation were not necessary for IRF1 binding. RNA polymerase II
association with the gbp2 promoter required both STAT1 and IRF1, suggesting that 
both proteins mediate essential steps in transcriptional activation. IRF1, but
not STAT1, was found to coimmunoprecipitate with RNA polymerase II. Together, the
data support the assumption that the main role of STAT1 in activating gbp2
transcription is to provide transcriptionally competent chromatin, whereas the
function of IRF1 may lie in directly contacting RNA polymerase II-containing
transcriptional complexes.

PMCID: PMC1815270
PMID: 17293456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Cancer Res. 2007 Feb 1;67(3):1203-11.

Evidence that tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand induction
by 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine sensitizes human breast cancer cells to adriamycin.

Xu J(1), Zhou JY, Tainsky MA, Wu GS.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Biology and Genetics, Department of Pathology, Karmanos
Cancer Institute, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201,
USA.

The DNA methyltransferase inhibitor 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-aza-CdR) inhibits
DNA methyltransferase activity and sensitizes cancer cells to chemotherapy, but
the mechanisms of its sensitization are not fully understood. Here, we show that 
5-aza-CdR induces tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL)
in the human breast cancer MDA-231 cells. Induction of TRAIL by 5-aza-CdR
correlated with inactivation of Akt. Furthermore, we show that overexpression of 
the active form of Akt by adenovirus infection or inhibition of the Akt
downstream target glycogen synthase kinase 3 by its pharmacologic inhibitors
abolishes TRAIL induction by 5-aza-CdR. Importantly, we show that the combined
treatment of breast cancer cells with 5-aza-CdR and Adriamycin significantly
increases apoptotic cell death compared with the treatment with either agent
alone. Moreover, the combined treatment activated both death receptor and
mitochondrial apoptotic pathways, whereas Adriamycin alone activated only the
mitochondrial pathway while 5-aza-CdR failed to activate either. More
importantly, down-regulation of TRAIL by small interference RNA silencing
decreased 5-aza-CdR-mediated Adriamycin-induced caspase activation and apoptosis,
thus conferring Adriamycin resistance. Taken together, our results suggest that
induction of TRAIL by 5-aza-CdR is critical for enhancing chemosensitivity of
breast cancer cells to Adriamycin.

PMID: 17283156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Oncol Rep. 2007 Mar;17(3):647-51.

Regulation of the HIF-1alpha stability by histone deacetylases.

Kim SH(1), Jeong JW, Park JA, Lee JW, Seo JH, Jung BK, Bae MK, Kim KW.

Author information: 
(1)NeuroVascular Coordination Research Center, Research Institute of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Seoul National University, Seoul
151-742, Korea.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs) are currently in clinical trials partly
due to their potent anti-angiogenic effects. However, the detailed mechanism of
their action is unclear. Here, we observed that several HDACIs (TSA, SB,
Apicidin, and VPA) dramatically decreased HIF-1alpha protein level and
transcriptional activity of HIF-1 in human and mouse tumor cell lines.
Furthermore, class I HDACs, HDAC1 and 3 enhanced HIF-1alpha stability and HIF-1
transactivation function in hypoxic conditions. In addition, immunoprecipitation 
and in vitro binding assays revealed that HDAC1 and 3 directly bind to the
oxygen-dependent degradation domain of HIF-1alpha. Collectively, these results
suggest that HDAC1 and 3 are considered as a positive regulator of HIF-1alpha
stability via direct interaction and may play an important role in HIF-1-induced 
tumor angiogenesis.

PMID: 17273746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Hepatology. 2007 Feb;45(2):433-44.

Hepatic HNF4alpha deficiency induces periportal expression of glutamine
synthetase and other pericentral enzymes.

Stanulovic VS(1), Kyrmizi I, Kruithof-de Julio M, Hoogenkamp M, Vermeulen JL,
Ruijter JM, Talianidis I, Hakvoort TB, Lamers WH.

Author information: 
(1)AMC Liver Center, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands.

In liver, most genes are expressed with a porto-central gradient. The
transcription factor hepatic nuclear-factor4alpha (HNF4alpha) is associated with 
12% of the genes in adult liver, but its involvement in zonation of gene
expression has not been investigated. A putative HNF4alpha-response element in
the upstream enhancer of glutamine synthetase (GS), an exclusively pericentral
enzyme, was protected against DNase-I and interacted with a protein that is
recognized by HNF4alpha-specific antiserum. Chromatin-immunoprecipitation assays 
of HNF4alpha-deficient (H4LivKO) and control (H4Flox) livers with HNF4alpha
antiserum precipitated the GS upstream enhancer DNA only from H4Flox liver.
Identical results were obtained with a histone-deacetylasel (HDAC1) antibody, but
antibodies against HDAC3, SMRT and SHP did not precipitate the GS upstream
enhancer. In H4Flox liver, GS, ornithine aminotransferase (OAT) and thyroid
hormone-receptor beta1 (TRbeta1) were exclusively expressed in pericentral
hepatocytes. In H4LivKO liver, this pericentral expression remained unaffected,
but the genes were additionally expressed in the periportal hepatocytes, albeit
at a lower level. The expression of the periportal enzyme phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxykinase had declined in HNF4alpha-deficient hepatocytes. GS-negative cells,
which were present as single, large hepatocytes or as groups of small cells near 
portal veins, did express HNF4alpha. Clusters of very small GS- and
HNF4alpha-negative, and PCNA- and OV6-positive cells near portal veins were
contiguous with streaks of brightly HNF4alpha-positive, OV6-, PCNA-, and
PEPCK-dim cells.CONCLUSION: Our findings show that HNF4alpha suppresses the
expression of pericentral proteins in periportal hepatocytes, possibly via a
HDAC1-mediated mechanism. Furthermore, we show that HNF4alpha deficiency induces 
foci of regenerating hepatocytes.

PMID: 17256722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. EMBO J. 2007 Feb 7;26(3):752-63. Epub 2007 Jan 25.

Distinct mammalian SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complexes with opposing roles in 
cell-cycle control.

Nagl NG Jr(1), Wang X, Patsialou A, Van Scoy M, Moran E.

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, Temple University
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA.

The mammalian SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex is becoming increasingly
recognized for its role in tumor suppression, based on its ability to regulate
accessibility of proliferation-associated genes to transcription factors.
However, understanding the biological role of the complex is complicated because 
the same complex seemingly plays both positive and negative roles in gene
expression. Work described here reveals that a choice between two independently
encoded, closely related variants of a major subunit of the ARID protein family
determines whether the SWI/SNF complex forms further associations with activator 
versus repressor complexes. The choice distinguishes assemblies with opposite
effects on cell-cycle activity. The specific complexes control access of factors 
such as E2F1, Tip60, and HDAC1/2/3 to the promoters of various
cell-cycle-specific genes, with c-Myc emerging as a particularly critical target.

PMCID: PMC1794396
PMID: 17255939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. EMBO J. 2007 Jan 24;26(2):412-23.

Recruitment of chromatin-modifying enzymes by CTIP2 promotes HIV-1
transcriptional silencing.

Marban C(1), Suzanne S, Dequiedt F, de Walque S, Redel L, Van Lint C, Aunis D,
Rohr O.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM unité 575 Pathophysiology of Nervous System, Centre de Neurochimie,
Strasbourg, France.

Following entry and reverse transcription, the HIV-1 genome is integrated into
the host genome. In contrast to productively infected cells, latently infected
cells frequently harbor HIV-1 genomes integrated in heterochromatic structures,
allowing persistence of transcriptionally silent proviruses. Microglial cells are
the main HIV-1 target cells in the central nervous system and constitute an
important reservoir for viral pathogenesis. In the present work, we show that, in
microglial cells, the co-repressor COUP-TF interacting protein 2 (CTIP2) recruits
a multienzymatic chromatin-modifying complex and establishes a heterochromatic
environment at the HIV-1 promoter. We report that CTIP2 recruits histone
deacetylase (HDAC)1 and HDAC2 to promote local histone H3 deacetylation at the
HIV-1 promoter region. In addition, DNA-bound CTIP2 also associates with the
histone methyltransferase SUV39H1, which increases local histone H3 lysine 9
methylation. This allows concomitant recruitment of HP1 proteins to the viral
promoter and formation of local heterochromatin, leading to HIV-1 silencing.
Altogether, our findings uncover new therapeutic opportunities for purging latent
HIV-1 viruses from their cellular reservoirs.

PMCID: PMC1783449
PMID: 17245431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Exp Cell Res. 2007 Mar 10;313(5):975-83. Epub 2006 Dec 23.

The histone methyltransferase activity of WHISTLE is important for the induction 
of apoptosis and HDAC1-mediated transcriptional repression.

Kim SM(1), Kee HJ, Choe N, Kim JY, Kook H, Kook H, Seo SB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, College of Natural Sciences, Chung-Ang University,
Seoul 156-756, Korea.

Posttranslational histone methylation has been correlated with transcriptional
regulation. However, the functional significance of methylation of lysine
residues of histone remains largely unknown. Previously, we have characterized a 
novel histone methyltransferase (HMTase), WHISTLE which methylates histone H3-K4 
and H3-K27 to repress transcription. In this study, we demonstrated that WHISTLE 
can induce apoptotic cell death through caspase-3 activation and that HMTase
activity is important for the apoptosis induction. Deletion mapping analysis
elicited that N-terminus PWWP region is required for HMTase activity by
interacting with putative associating factors. Point mutant analysis revealed
that SET domain cysteine 297 is a critical residue for the HMTase activity of
WHISTLE. WHISTLE repressed transcription through HDAC1 recruitment possibly
through the N-terminus region. Our results suggest that HMTase WHISTLE induces
apoptosis in an HMTase activity-dependent manner and represses transcription of
target genes through HDAC1 recruitment.

PMID: 17239852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007 Feb;1771(2):139-46. Epub 2006 Dec 13.

Modulation of apoptotic signalling by 9-hydroxystearic acid in osteosarcoma
cells.

Calonghi N(1), Pagnotta E, Parolin C, Molinari C, Boga C, Dal Piaz F, Brusa GL,
Santucci MA, Masotti L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry G. Moruzzi, Alma Mater Studiorum, University of
Bologna, Via Irnerio 48, 40126 Bologna, Italy.

9-hydroxystearic acid (9-HSA) belongs to the class of endogenous lipid
peroxidation by-products that greatly diminish in tumors, causing as a
consequence the loss of one of the control mechanisms on cell division. We have
previously shown that 9-HSA controls cell growth and differentiation by
inhibiting histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) activity. In this paper our attention
has not only been focused on HDAC1 inhibition but also on the hyperacetylation of
other substrates such as p53, that is involved in inducing cell cycle arrest
and/or apoptosis, and whose activity and stability are known to be regulated by
posttranslational modifications, particularly by acetylation at the C-terminus
region. 9-HSA administration to U2OS, an osteosarcoma cell line p53 wt, induces a
growth arrest of the cells in G2/M and apoptosis via a mitochondrial pathway. In 
particular hyperacetylation of p53 induced by the HDAC1 inhibitory activity of
9-HSA has been demonstrated to increase Bax synthesis both at the transcriptional
and the translational level. The subsequent translocation of Bax to the
mitochondria is associated to a significant increase in caspase 9 activity. Our
data demonstrate that the effects of 9-HSA on U2OS correlate with
posttranslational modifications of p53.

PMID: 17234448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007 Apr;1772(4):392-401. Epub 2006 Dec 13.

Cell cycle molecules define a pathway required for neuron death in development
and disease.

Greene LA(1), Liu DX, Troy CM, Biswas SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Center for Neurobiology and Behavior, Columbia
University College of Physicians and Surgeons, 630 W. 168th Street, New York, NY 
10032, USA. Lag3@columbia.edu

We review here evidence defining a molecular pathway that includes cell
cycle-related molecules and that appears to play a required role in neuron death 
during normal development as well as in disease and trauma. The pathway starts
with inappropriate activation of cyclin dependent kinase 4 (Cdk4) in neurons
which leads to hyper-phosphorylation of the pRb family member p130. This in turn 
results in dissociation of p130 and its associated chromatin modifiers Suv39H1
and HDAC1 from the transcription factor E2F4. Dissociation of this complex
results in de-repression of genes with E2F binding sites including those encoding
the transcription factors B- and C-Myb. Once elevated in neurons, B- and C-Myb
proteins bind to the promoter for the pro-apoptotic BH3-only protein Bim and
promote its induction. Bim then interacts with the core cellular apoptotic
machinery, leading to caspase activation and apoptotic death. This pathway is
supported by a variety of observations and experimental findings that implicate
it as a required element for neuron loss in development and in many nervous
system traumas and disorders. The components of this pathway appear to represent 
potential therapeutic targets for prevention of disease-associated neuron death.

PMCID: PMC1885990
PMID: 17229557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Apr;21(4):843-56. Epub 2007 Jan 16.

Dynamic histone acetylation/deacetylation with progesterone receptor-mediated
transcription.

Aoyagi S(1), Archer TK.

Author information: 
(1)Chromatin and Gene Expression Section, Laboratory of Molecular Carcinogenesis,
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, 111 Alexander Drive, P.O.
Box 12233 (MD D4-01), Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709, USA.

Histone acetylation is a highly dynamic posttranslational modification that plays
an important role in gene expression. Previous work showed that promoter histone 
deacetylation is accompanied by progesterone receptor (PR)-mediated activation of
the mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) promoter. We investigated the role of this
deacetylation and found that this histone deacetylation is not a singular event. 
In fact, histone acetylation at the MMTV promoter is highly dynamic, with an
initial increase in acetylation followed by an eventual net deacetylation of
histone H4. The timing of increase in acetylation of H4 coincides with the time
at which PR, RNA polymerase II, and histone acetyltransferases cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB)-binding protein and p300 are recruited to the MMTV
promoter. The timing in which histone H4 deacetylation occurs (after PR and RNA
polymerase II recruitment) and the limited effect that trichostatin A and small
interfering RNA knockdown of histone deacetylase (HDAC)3 have on MMTV
transcription suggests that this deacetylation activity is not required for the
initiation of PR-mediated transcription. Interestingly, two HDACs, HDAC1 and
HDAC3, are already present at the MMTV before transcription activation. HDAC
association at the MMTV promoter fluctuates during the hormone treatment. In
particular, HDAC3 is temporarily undetected at the MMTV promoter within minutes
after hormone treatment when the histone H4 acetylation increases but returns to 
the promoter near the time when histone acetylation levels start to decline.
These results demonstrate the dynamic nature of coactivator/corepressor-promoter 
association and histone modifications such as acetylation during a transcription 
activation event.

PMID: 17227884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. J Cell Physiol. 2007 Jun;211(3):638-48.

Dual transcriptional control of claudin-11 via an overlapping GATA/NF-Y motif:
positive regulation through the interaction of GATA, NF-YA, and CREB and negative
regulation through the interaction of Smad, HDAC1, and mSin3A.

Lui WY(1), Wong EW, Guan Y, Lee WM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong.

The expression of claudin-11, a key integral tight junction protein, is tightly
regulated to ensure that the integrity of the seminiferous epithelium could be
maintained during the translocation of spermatocytes at the blood-testis barrier 
at stages VIII-IX. In this study, we elucidate how the overlapping GATA/NF-Y
motif within the core promoter of claudin-11 gene is modulated by differential
binding of various transcription factors, resulting in dual transcriptional
control. Using electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) and chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay, we confirmed that GATA, nuclear factor YA
(NF-YA), and cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) form a complex in vivo 
and bind to the GATA/NF-Y region to promote claudin-11 gene transcription. Such
gene activations were significantly reduced in the presence of siRNA specific to 
these transcription factors. GATA and CREB transactivation could be further
modulated by the presence of Smad3 and Smad4 proteins. Binding of Smad proteins
at the GATA/NF-Y motif could repress the GATA and CREB transactivation of
claudin-11 gene. Such repression which required the recruitment and physical
interactions of histone deacetylase 1 and its co-repressor, mSin3A with Smad
proteins, was abolished by treatment with Trichostatin A, thus suggesting the
involvement of histone deacetylation at the site of the promoter region. It is
believed that cyclic changes in the ratio of positive regulators (GATA, NF-Y, and
CREB) to negative regulators (Smads) in the seminiferous epithelium during the
spermatogenic cycle might provide a precise control in claudin-11 gene
transcription.

PMID: 17226765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Mol Biol Cell. 2007 Mar;18(3):755-67. Epub 2006 Dec 20.

Cell fate determination factor DACH1 inhibits c-Jun-induced contact-independent
growth.

Wu K(1), Liu M, Li A, Donninger H, Rao M, Jiao X, Lisanti MP, Cvekl A, Birrer M, 
Pestell RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

The cell fate determination factor DACH1 plays a key role in cellular
differentiation in metazoans. DACH1 is engaged in multiple context-dependent
complexes that activate or repress transcription. DACH1 can be recruited to DNA
via the Six1/Eya bipartite transcription (DNA binding/coactivator) complex. c-Jun
is a critical component of the activator protein (AP)-1 transcription factor
complex and can promote contact-independent growth. Herein, DACH1 inhibited
c-Jun-induced DNA synthesis and cellular proliferation. Excision of c-Jun with
Cre recombinase, in c-jun(f1/f1) 3T3 cells, abrogated DACH1-mediated inhibition
of DNA synthesis. c-Jun expression rescued DACH1-mediated inhibition of cellular 
proliferation. DACH1 inhibited induction of c-Jun by physiological stimuli and
repressed c-jun target genes (cyclin A, beta-PAK, and stathmin). DACH1 bound
c-Jun and inhibited AP-1 transcriptional activity. c-jun and c-fos were
transcriptionally repressed by DACH1, requiring the conserved N-terminal (dac and
ski/sno [DS]) domain. c-fos transcriptional repression by DACH1 requires the SRF 
site of the c-fos promoter. DACH1 inhibited c-Jun transactivation through the
delta domain of c-Jun. DACH1 coprecipitated the histone deacetylase proteins
(HDAC1, HDAC2, and NCoR), providing a mechanism by which DACH1 represses c-Jun
activity through the conserved delta domain. An oncogenic v-Jun deleted of the
delta domain was resistant to DACH1 repression. Collectively, these studies
demonstrate a novel mechanism by which DACH1 blocks c-Jun-mediated
contact-independent growth through repressing the c-Jun delta domain.

PMCID: PMC1805093
PMID: 17182846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Cell Cycle. 2006 Dec;5(23):2738-43. Epub 2006 Dec 1.

Depletion of histone deacetylase protein: a common consequence of inflammatory
cytokine signaling?

Gopal YN(1), Van Dyke MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030-4009, USA.

The dynamics of histone acetylation and deacetylation have long been known to
influence gene expression by cellular signaling pathways. However, the mechanisms
that regulate histone acetyl transferases (HATs) and histone deacetylases (HDACs)
by these pathways have only recently become the focus of scientific
investigation, spurred by increasing knowledge that HDACs can promote cancer
growth. We recently reported that pro-inflammatory signals such as tumor necrosis
factor alpha (TNFalpha) induce HDAC1 ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation
through the IkappaB kinase IKKbeta. The resulting depletion of cellular HDAC1
levels lead to a consequent depletion of HDAC1 associated with the CDKN1A gene
promoter and increased expression of its protein product, p21(WAF1/CIP1). This
phenomenon heralds a unique mechanism of HDAC regulation that modulates the
pro-inflammatory activity of TNFalpha and other cytokines at the level of gene
expression. Here we discuss the current knowledge of pro-inflammatory
cytokine-induced regulation of gene expression, emphasizing the involvement of
HDAC1, and its possible implications in inflammation, cancer, and their therapy.

PMID: 17172847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Cancer Biol Ther. 2007 Jan;6(1):64-9.

Histone deacetylase inhibitor LBH589 reactivates silenced estrogen receptor alpha
(ER) gene expression without loss of DNA hypermethylation.

Zhou Q(1), Atadja P, Davidson NE.

Author information: 
(1)Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins, 1650 Orleans
Street, CRB Room 409, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

Our previous studies demonstrated that inhibition of histone deacetylases (HDACs)
by trichostatin A reactivates estrogen receptor alpha (ER) gene expression in
ER-negative breast cancer cells. Here, we use the clinically relevant HDAC
inhibitor, LBH589 (LBH) to explore the roles of HDAC in ER gene silencing. In the
ER-negative human breast cancer lines, MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-435, treatment with 
LBH for 24 hours restored ER mRNA and protein expression without a concomitant
demethylation of the CpG island at the ER promoter. The expression of ER mRNA was
sustained at least 96 hours after withdrawal of LBH treatment. Restoration of ER 
expression by LBH enhanced 4-hydroxy-tamoxifen sensitivity in MDA-MB-231 cells.
The molecular mechanisms by which LBH reactivated silenced ER gene in MDA-MB-231 
cells were examined with emphasis on chromatin structure reorganization. By
chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis, LBH treatment released DNMT1, HDAC1, and 
the H3 lysine 9 (H3-K9) methyltransferase SUV39H 1 from the ER promoter. Such
changes were associated with an active chromatin formation manifested as
accumulation of acetylated histones H3 and H4, a decrease in methylated H3-K9,
and an impaired binding of heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1 alpha) at the promoter.
Our findings suggest that HDAC inhibitors could restore expression of the
silenced ER gene by reorganizing the heterochromatin-associated proteins without 
alteration in promoter DNA hypermethylation.

PMID: 17172825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. J Biol Chem. 2007 Feb 16;282(7):4470-8. Epub 2006 Dec 17.

Multiple histone deacetylases and the CREB-binding protein regulate pre-mRNA
3'-end processing.

Shimazu T(1), Horinouchi S, Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Genetics Laboratory, Discovery Research Institute, RIKEN, Wako,
Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

Trichostatin A (TSA), a specific inhibitor of histone deacetylases (HDACs),
induces acetylation of various non-histone proteins such as p53 and
alpha-tubulin. We purified several acetylated proteins by the affinity to an
anti-acetylated lysine (AcLys) antibody from cells treated with TSA and
identified them by mass spectrometry. Here we report on acetylation of CFIm25, a 
component of mammalian cleavage factor Im (CF Im), and poly(A) polymerase (PAP), 
a polyadenylating enzyme for the pre-mRNA 3'-end. The residues acetylated in
these proteins were mapped onto the regions required for interaction with each
other. Whereas CBP acetylated these proteins, HDAC1, HDAC3, HDAC10, SIRT1, and
SIRT2 were involved in in vivo deacetylation. Acetylation of the CFIm25 occurred 
depending on the cleavage factor complex formation. Importantly, the interaction 
between PAP and CF Im complex was decreased by acetylation. We also demonstrated 
that acetylation of PAP inhibited the nuclear localization of PAP by inhibiting
the binding to the importin alpha/beta complex. These results suggest that CBP
and HDACs regulate the 3'-end processing machinery and modulate the localization 
of PAP through the acetylation and deacetylation cycle.

PMID: 17172643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Feb;27(4):1280-95. Epub 2006 Dec 11.

Histone deacetylase 3 interacts with and deacetylates myocyte enhancer factor 2.

Grégoire S(1), Xiao L, Nie J, Zhang X, Xu M, Li J, Wong J, Seto E, Yang XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, Royal Victoria Hospital, McGill University Health
Center, 687 Pine Avenue West, Montréal, Quebec H3A 1A1, Canada.

The myocyte enhancer factor 2 (MEF2) family of transcription factors is not only 
important for controlling gene expression in normal cellular programs, like
muscle differentiation, T-cell apoptosis, neuronal survival, and synaptic
differentiation, but has also been linked to cardiac hypertrophy and other
pathological conditions. Lysine acetylation has been shown to modulate MEF2
function, but it is not so clear which deacetylase(s) is involved. We report here
that treatment of HEK293 cells with trichostatin A or nicotinamide upregulated
MEF2D acetylation, suggesting that different deacetylases catalyze the
deacetylation. Related to the trichostatin A sensitivity, histone deacetylase 4
(HDAC4) and HDAC5, two known partners of MEF2, exhibited little deacetylase
activity towards MEF2D. In contrast, HDAC3 efficiently deacetylated MEF2D in
vitro and in vivo. This was specific, since HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC8 failed to do 
so. While HDAC4, HDAC5, HDAC7, and HDAC9 are known to recognize primarily the
MEF2-specific domain, we found that HDAC3 interacts directly with the MADS box.
In addition, HDAC3 associated with the acetyltransferases p300 and
p300/CBP-associated factor (PCAF) to reverse autoacetylation. Furthermore, the
nuclear receptor corepressor SMRT (silencing mediator of retinoid acid and
thyroid hormone receptor) stimulated the deacetylase activity of HDAC3 towards
MEF2 and PCAF. Supporting the physical interaction and deacetylase activity,
HDAC3 repressed MEF2-dependent transcription and inhibited myogenesis. These
results reveal an unexpected role for HDAC3 and suggest a novel pathway through
which MEF2 activity is controlled in vivo.

PMCID: PMC1800729
PMID: 17158926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Virol. 2007 Feb;81(4):1980-9. Epub 2006 Dec 6.

Mapping of key functions of the herpes simplex virus 1 U(S)3 protein kinase: the 
U(S)3 protein can form functional heteromultimeric structures derived from
overlapping truncated polypeptides.

Poon AP(1), Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)Marjorie B. Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, The University of Chicago, 910
East 58th Street, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Earlier studies have shown that the herpes simplex virus (HSV) U(S)3 encodes two 
transcriptional units directing the synthesis of the U(S)3 (residues 1 to 481)
and U(S)3.5 (residues 77 to 481) protein kinases. Both kinases phosphorylate
histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and HDAC2 and enable the expression of genes
cotransduced into U2OS cells by recombinant baculoviruses, an activity designated
the "helper function." The two kinases differ with respect to antiapoptotic
activity. In the studies reported here, we made a series of FLAG-tagged amino-
and carboxyl-terminal truncations of U(S)3 and these were tested for
antiapoptotic activity, phosphorylation of HDAC1, and the helper function. We
report the following. (i) HDAC1 phosphorylation and the helper function were
expressed in cells transduced by the truncation encoding residues 182 to 481 but 
not in cells transduced by the truncation encoding residues 189 to 481 or the
amino-terminal polypeptides encompassing the first 188 amino acids. (ii) The
self-posttranslational modification requires residues 164 to 481. (iii) The
antiapoptotic activity requires both the amino-terminal and the carboxyl-terminal
domains, of which the truncated protein containing residues 1 to 163 and that
containing residues 164 to 481, respectively, were the smallest fragments tested 
to be effective. The two domains need not be on the same molecule, but they must 
overlap. The smallest overlapping pair tested was the fragment containing
residues 1 to 181 and that containing residues 164 to 481. Consistent with the
hypothesis that the effective overlapping truncations form a heteromultimeric
structure, antibody to FLAG coprecipitated untagged U(S)3 from lysates of cells
cotransduced with FLAG-tagged, truncated U(S)3 constructs. Although U(S)3 has
been reported to be a monomeric enzyme, the results indicate that it can form
enzymatically active multimeric structures.

PMCID: PMC1797600
PMID: 17151133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. COPD. 2005 Dec;2(4):445-55.

Histone deacetylation: an important mechanism in inflammatory lung diseases.

Adcock IM(1), Ito K, Barnes PJ.

Author information: 
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, UK.
ian.adcock@imperial.ac.uk

Inflammatory lung diseases are characterised by increased expression of multiple 
inflammatory genes that are regulated by proinflammatory transcription factors,
such as NF-kappaB. Gene expression is regulated by modifications such as
acetylation of core histones through the concerted action of coactivators such as
CBP (cAMP-response element binding protein (CREB)-binding protein) which have
intrinsic histone acetyltransferase (HAT) activity and are able to recruit other 
HAT enzymes. Conversely gene repression is mediated via histone deacetylases
(HDAC) and other corepressors. In biopsies from asthmatic subjects there is an
increase in HAT activity and some reduction in HDAC activity. Both of these
changes are partially reversed by corticosteroid therapy. Corticosteroids switch 
off inflammatory genes in asthma through a combination of a direct inhibition of 
HAT activity and by the recruitment of HDAC2 to the activated
NF-kappaB-stimulated inflammatory gene complex. In chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD), a corticosteroid insensitive disease, there is a reduction in
HDAC activity and HDAC2 expression, which may account for the amplified
inflammation and resistance to the actions of corticosteroids. The reduction in
HDAC2 may be secondary to oxidative and nitrative stress as a result of cigarette
smoking and severe inflammation. This may also occur to differing degrees in
severe asthma, smoking asthmatic patients and cystic fibrosis. Similar mechanisms
may also account for the steroid resistance seen within latent adenovirus
infections. The reduction in HDAC activity induced by oxidative stress can be
restored by theophylline, acting through specific kinases, which may be able to
reverse steroid resistance in COPD and other inflammatory lung diseases. The
modulation of HAT/HDAC activity may lead to the development of novel
anti-inflammatory approaches to inflammatory lung diseases that are currently
difficult to treat.

PMID: 17147010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Cancer Gene Ther. 2007 Mar;14(3):287-96. Epub 2006 Nov 24.

A novel MASH1 enhancer with N-myc and CREB-binding sites is active in
neuroblastoma.

Watt F(1), Watanabe R, Yang W, Agren N, Arvidsson Y, Funa K.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Institute Australia for Medical Research, Randwick, New
South Wales, Australia.

Neuroblastoma is one of the most common solid tumors in childhood. With the aim
of developing a targeting vector for neuroblastoma, we cloned and characterized
an enhancer in the 5'-flanking regions of the MASH1 gene by a random-trap method 
from a 36 kb cosmid DNA. The enhancer-containing clone was identified by the
expression of GFP when transfected into neuroblastoma cell lines. The
enhancer-luciferase activity is higher in neuroblastoma cell lines, IMR32, BE2
and SH-SY5Y, compared with those in non-neuroblastoma cell lines, U1242 glioma,
N417 small cell lung cancer and EOMA hemangioma. The core enhancer was determined
within a 0.2 kb fragment, yielding three- to fourfold higher activity than that
of the MASH1 promoter alone in IMR32 and BE2. This area possesses GATA- and
CREB-binding sites, as well as the E-box. EMSA on this area demonstrated that
CREB/ATF could bind the DNA. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay revealed that
N-myc, CREB, and co-activators CBP and PCAF, but not HDAC1, are bound to the core
enhancer at the same time as the co-activators and N-myc bind to the promoter.
This supports the idea that the commonly overexpressed genes HASH1 and N-myc are 
regulated in concert, confirming their importance as prognostic markers or
targets for therapy.

PMID: 17124508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jan 26;282(4):2615-25. Epub 2006 Nov 22.

Molecular mechanisms of transactivation and doxorubicin-mediated repression of
survivin gene in cancer cells.

Estève PO(1), Chin HG, Pradhan S.

Author information: 
(1)New England Biolabs, Ipswich, Massachusetts 01938-2723, USA.

Human maintenance DNA cytosine methyltransferase (DNMT1) regulates gene
expression in a methylation-dependent and -independent manner. Anti-apoptotic
survivin gene down-regulation is mediated by p53 recruitment of DNMT1 to its
promoter. Survivin inhibits programmed cell death, regulates cell division, and
is expressed in cancer cells. The survivin gene promoter is CG-rich containing
several Sp1 canonical, Sp1-like, cell cycle-dependent element/cell cycle gene
homology region, and p53-binding sites. Here we demonstrate that Sp1
transcription factor(s) play a role in transcriptional activation of the survivin
promoter in Drosophila and human cells. Sp1 inhibition in vivo by mithramycin A
leads to down-regulation of a luciferase reporter driven by the human survivin
promoter in transfected cells. Mithramycin A or Sp1-specific short interfering
RNA down-regulated the endogenous survivin gene expression, confirming Sp1 as the
primary determinant for transcriptional activation. Furthermore, immobilized
DNMT1 ligand bound to seven consensus amino acids corresponding to the N-terminal
region of the Sp class of transcription factors in a phage display analysis. In
the co-immunoprecipitation assay, the endogenous Sp1 or Sp3 pulled down DNMT1 and
methyltransferase activity. Similarly, a glutathione S-transferase pulldown assay
between DNMT1 and Sp1 demonstrates a direct interaction between the two proteins.
Fluorescent fusions of DNMT1 and Sp1 co-localized in the mammalian nucleus, thus 
supporting binary complex formation between both the proteins. The kinetics of
survivin promoter occupancy via chromatin immunoprecipitation following
doxorubicin treatment show the presence of Sp1 and gradual accumulation of
transcriptional repressors p53, DNMT1, histone methyltransferase G9a, and HDAC1
onto the promoter along with histone H3K9me2. These data suggest that the Sp1
transcription factor acts as a platform for recruitment of transcriptional
repressors.

PMID: 17124180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Curr Drug Targets. 2006 Nov;7(11):1553-60.

The role of NAD+ dependent histone deacetylases (sirtuins) in ageing.

Trapp J(1), Jung M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are enzymes that are able to deacetylate lysine side
chains in histones and certain non-histone proteins which leads to altered states
of conformation and activity for the proteins in question. Three classes of
histone deacetylases have been recognized in humans. Class I and II are
zinc-dependent amidohydrolases and eleven subtypes have been discovered
(HDAC1-11). Class III enzymes depend in their catalysis on NAD(+) and
subsequently, O-acetyl ADP ribose and nicotinamide are formed as a consequence of
the acetyl transfer. Due to the homology to the yeast histone deacetylase Sir2p
the NAD(+)-dependent deacetylases are also termed sirtuins and seven members
(Sirt1-7) are known in humans. Sirtuins are found from bacteria to eukaryotes and
altogether about 60 isoforms have been characterized in different organisms.
Sirtuins have been implicated in the regulation of molecular mechanisms of aging.
The overexpression of sirtuin enzymatic activity leads to an increase of lifespan
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Caenorhabditis elegans that can also be reached
by calorie restriction. Sirtuins have been proposed to act as sensors for glucose
uptake that respond to the levels of NAD(+) but more complex ways of action have 
been suggested as well. This article will present the members of the human
sirtuin family with their respective functions and review the existing druglike
inhibitors and activators of sirtuin activity.

PMID: 17100594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Mol Neurosci. 2006;29(3):227-39.

CoREST-like complexes regulate chromatin modification and neuronal gene
expression.

Lakowski B(1), Roelens I, Jacob S.

Author information: 
(1)Nematode Genetics Group, Department of Neuroscience, Pasteur Institute, 75724 
Paris Cedex 15, France. lakowski@pasteur.fr

The mammalian CoREST ([co]repressor for element-1-silencing transcription factor)
complex was first identified associated with the repressor for element-1
silencing transcription factor (REST)/neuronal restrictive silencing factor. The 
CoREST complex is a chromatin-modifying corepressor complex that acts with REST
to regulate neuronal gene expression and neuronal stem cell fate. Components of a
CoREST-like complex have been identified recently in Xenopus laevis,
Caenorhabditis elegans, and Drosophila melanogaster. Like the mammalian complex, 
the Drosophila complex is required to regulate neuronal gene expression, whereas 
the C. elegans homologs regulate the expression of the hop-1 presenilin gene,
suggesting an ancient conserved function of CoREST complexes in regulating
neuronal gene expression.

PMID: 17085781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Circ Res. 2006 Dec 8;99(12):1347-54. Epub 2006 Nov 2.

Transcriptional silencing of the death gene BNIP3 by cooperative action of
NF-kappaB and histone deacetylase 1 in ventricular myocytes.

Shaw J(1), Zhang T, Rzeszutek M, Yurkova N, Baetz D, Davie JR, Kirshenbaum LA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences, St. Boniface General Hospital Research
Centre Rm. 3016, 351 Taché Avenue, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada, R2H 2A6.
Lorrie@sbrc.ca.

Earlier we identified a survival role for NF-kappaB in ventricular myocytes,
however, the underlying mechanism was undefined. In this report we provide new
mechanistic evidence that the hypoxia-inducible death factor BNIP3 is
transcriptionally silenced by NF-kappaB through a mechanism that involves the
cooperative actions of HDAC1. Activation of the NF-kappaB signaling pathway in
ventricular myocytes suppressed basal and hypoxia-inducible BNIP3 gene activity. 
Basal Bnip3 gene expression was increased in cells derived from p65(-/-)
deficient mice. The histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor Trichostatin A (TSA 10
nM) suppressed the inhibitory actions of NF-kappaB on Bnip3 gene transcription.
Basal and hypoxia- induced Bnip3 transcription was repressed by wild type but not
a catalytically inactive mutant of HDAC1. Immunoprecipitation assays verified
interaction of HDAC1 with wild type p65 NF-kappaB and mutations of p65 defective 
for transactivation in ventricular myocytes. Deletion analysis revealed canonical
NF-kappaB elements within the Bnip3 promoter to be important for repression of
Bnip3 gene expression by HDAC1. Further, the ability of HDAC1 to repress Bnip3
gene transcription was lost in cells derived from p65(-/-) deficient mice but was
restored by repletion of p65 NF-kappaB into p65(-/-) cells. Mutations of p65
NF-kappaB defective for DNA binding but not for transactivation abrogated the
inhibitory actions of HDAC1 on the Bnip3 gene transcription. Together, our
findings provide new mechanistic insight into the cytoprotective actions
conferred by NF-kappaB that extend to the active transcriptional repression of
the death factor Bnip3 through a mechanism that is mutually dependent on HDAC-1.

PMID: 17082476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Cancer Res. 2006 Nov 1;66(21):10242-6.

TMPRSS2 fusions with oncogenic ETS factors in prostate cancer involve unbalanced 
genomic rearrangements and are associated with HDAC1 and epigenetic
reprogramming.

Iljin K(1), Wolf M, Edgren H, Gupta S, Kilpinen S, Skotheim RI, Peltola M, Smit
F, Verhaegh G, Schalken J, Nees M, Kallioniemi O.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Biotechnology, VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland and University
of Turku, Turku, Finland.

Translocations fusing the strong androgen-responsive gene, TMPRSS2, with ERG or
other oncogenic ETS factors may facilitate prostate cancer development. Here, we 
studied 18 advanced prostate cancers for ETS factor alterations, using reverse
transcription-PCR and DNA and RNA array technologies, and identified putative ERG
downstream gene targets from the microarray data of 410 prostate samples. Out of 
the 27 ETS factors, ERG was most frequently overexpressed. Seven cases showed
TMPRSS2:ERG gene fusions, whereas the TMPRSS2:ETV4 fusion was seen in one case.
In five out of six tumors with high ERG expression, array-CGH analysis revealed
interstitial 2.8 Mb deletions between the TMPRSS2 and ERG loci, or smaller,
unbalanced rearrangements. In silico analysis of the ERG gene coexpression
patterns revealed an association with high expression of the histone deacetylase 
1 gene, and low expression of its target genes. Furthermore, we observed
increased expression of WNT-associated pathways and down-regulation of tumor
necrosis factor and cell death pathways. In summary, our data indicate that the
TMPRSS2:ERG translocation is common in advanced prostate cancer and occurs by
virtue of unbalanced genomic rearrangements. Activation of ERG by fusion with
TMPRSS2 may lead to epigenetic reprogramming, WNT signaling, and down-regulation 
of cell death pathways, implicating ERG in several hallmarks of cancer with
potential therapeutic importance.

PMID: 17079440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Immunol. 2006 Nov 1;177(9):6159-64.

The transcriptional repressor cAMP response element modulator alpha interacts
with histone deacetylase 1 to repress promoter activity.

Tenbrock K(1), Juang YT, Leukert N, Roth J, Tsokos GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Rheumatology, University Hospital,
University of Muenster, Röntgenstrasse 21, 48149 Muenster, Germany.
ktenbroc@uni-muenster.de

Transcriptional repression is a fundamental mechanism of gene regulation. cAMP
response element (CRE) modulator (CREM)alpha is an ubiquitously expressed
transcription factor and a counterpart of the activator CREB. In T cells, CREM is
responsible for the termination of the IL-2 expression by a chromatin-dependent
mechanism. We demonstrate in this study that CREMalpha associates with histone
deacetylase (HDAC)1 through its H domain, which is located between the kinase
inducible and DNA binding domains. The CREMalpha-mediated recruitment of HDAC1 to
the CRE sites of the IL-2 and c-Fos promoter causes histone deacetylation and
inaccessibility to restriction enzymes and limited transcriptional activity.
Importantly, the CRE sites of these promoters are crucial for the activity and
binding of HDAC1. Therefore, CREMalpha exerts its repressor activity by a
mechanism that involves recruitment of HDAC1, increased deacetylation of
histones, and repression of promoter activity.

PMID: 17056544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2006 Dec;102(1-5):32-40. Epub 2006 Oct 17.

Co-expression of steroid receptors (estrogen receptor alpha and/or progesterone
receptors) and Her-2/neu: Clinical implications.

Ciocca DR(1), Gago FE, Fanelli MA, Calderwood SK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Oncology, Institute of Experimental Medicine and Biology of Cuyo
(IMBECU-CONICET), Casilla de Correo 855, 5500 Mendoza, Argentina.
dciocca@lab.cricyt.edu.ar

The response of breast cancer patients to endocrine therapy is guided by the
expression of two steroid hormone receptors (HR): estrogen receptor alpha
(ERalpha) and/or progesterone receptors (PR). In most laboratories the expression
of these predictive markers is studied by immunohistochemistry (IHC) in the
breast cancer biopsy samples. Another molecular marker that is being increasingly
examined in breast cancer is the oncoprotein Her-2/neu, whose
expression/amplification predicts the response to anti-Her-2/neu immunotherapy.
The co-expression of HR with that of Her-2/neu is infrequent (most reports agree 
on this), however, there are some conflicting reports about the clinical
implications in term of response to endocrine therapy in the patients that
co-express HR and Her-2/neu. We have examined these molecular markers for a
number of years in our tumor bank, in this dissertation we will present the
method and cut-off to study these markers, the correlations between their
expression, and the follow-up of the patients that received tamoxifen-based
endocrine therapy, alone or following chemotherapy. We confirmed that the
co-expression of HR with Her-2/neu is infrequent, and that these patients
presented both a shorter disease free survival and overall survival. Our results 
will be compared with others related recently published. For example, the
aromatase inhibitor anastrozole appears to be an effective endocrine treatment in
HR+ patients, irrespective of the Her-2/neu status. We will present data on the
molecular mechanisms that could explain the relatively poor outcome of these
patients. Heregulin has been found to be a potent inducer of heat shock factor 1 
(HSF1) activity and of heat shock protein (Hsp) synthesis in breast cancer cells 
and HSF1 activation plays a role in the tumorigenic changes induced by heregulin,
heregulin exerts its tumorigenic changes through the cell surface tyrosine kinase
receptors c-erbB-3 and c-erbB-4 which are able to form dimers with the
"ligandless" Her-2/neu. We found that HSF1 associates with metastasis associated 
protein 1 (MTA1) on the promoters of genes as well as other molecules involved in
gene repression (HDAC1, HDAC2) in a manner that is enhanced by either heregulin
exposure or heat shock. ERs, although promoting the growth of breast cancer cells
are less associated with invasion/metastasis and ER-induced gene expression is
involve in this effect. Heregulin can overcome the protective effects of ER and
at least a component of this appears to be due to MTA1 repression of ERE
dependent transcription, HSF1 and MTA1 cooperate in gene repression. The
co-expression of HSF1 and MTA1 was confirmed by IHC in human breast cancer biopsy
samples.

PMID: 17049840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Biochem J. 2007 Feb 1;401(3):659-65.

An active site tyrosine residue is essential for amidohydrolase but not for
esterase activity of a class 2 histone deacetylase-like bacterial enzyme.

Moreth K(1), Riester D, Hildmann C, Hempel R, Wegener D, Schober A, Schwienhorst 
A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Preparative Molecular Biology, Institute 
for Microbiology and Genetics, Grisebachstr. 8, 37077 Goettingen, Germany.

HDACs (histone deacetylases) are considered to be among the most important
enzymes that regulate gene expression in eukaryotic cells acting through
deacetylation of epsilon-acetyl-lysine residues within the N-terminal tail of
core histones. In addition, both eukaryotic HDACs as well as their bacterial
counterparts were reported to also act on non-histone targets. However, we are
still far from a comprehensive understanding of the biological activities of this
ancient class of enzymes. In the present paper, we studied in more detail the
esterase activity of HDACs, focussing on the HDAH (histone deacetylase-like
amidohydrolase) from Bordetella/Alcaligenes strain FB188. This enzyme was
classified as a class 2 HDAC based on sequence comparison as well as functional
data. Using chromogenic and fluorogenic ester substrates we show that HDACs such 
as FB188 HDAH indeed have esterase activity that is comparable with those of
known esterases. Similar results were obtained for human HDAC1, 3 and 8. Standard
HDAC inhibitors were able to block both activities with similar IC(50) values.
Interestingly, HDAC inhibitors such as suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA)
also showed inhibitory activity against porcine liver esterase and Pseudomonas
fluorescens lipase. The esterase and the amidohydrolase activity of FB188 HDAH
both appear to have the same substrate specificity concerning the acyl moiety.
Interestingly, a Y312F mutation in the active site of HDAH obstructed
amidohydrolase activity but significantly improved esterase activity, indicating 
subtle differences in the mechanism of both catalytic activities. Our results
suggest that, in principle, HDACs may have other biological roles besides acting 
as protein deacetylases. Furthermore, data on HDAC inhibitors affecting known
esterases indicate that these molecules, which are currently among the most
promising drug candidates in cancer therapy, may have a broader target profile
requiring further exploration.

PMCID: PMC1770855
PMID: 17037985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. BMC Biochem. 2006 Oct 5;7:22.

Limited proteolysis of human histone deacetylase 1.

Kamath N(1), Karwowska-Desaulniers P, Pflum MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48202, USA.
nayana@chem.wayne.edu

BACKGROUND: Histone deacetylase (HDAC) proteins are associated with cell
proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, and cancer. Specifically, HDAC1 is
linked with cell growth, a hallmark of cancer formation. HDAC1 is a
phosphoprotein and phosphorylation at S421 and S423 promotes HDAC1 enzymatic
activity and protein association. While single and double point mutants of HDAC1 
at S421 and S423 appear functionally similar, the evidence suggests that HDAC1 is
phosphorylated simultaneously at both S421 and S423 in vivo. Additional
experiments are necessary to probe the role of double phosphorylation of HDAC1 at
S421 and S423.
RESULTS: To characterize HDAC1 phosphorylation at S421 and S423, limited
proteolysis of HDAC1 was performed for the first time. HDAC1 degraded without
production of discrete fragments. By performing concentration-dependent
proteolysis, HDAC1 double point mutants with disrupted phosphorylation at S421
and S423 displayed different trypsin sensitivities compared to wild type HDAC1.
Unexpectedly, HDAC1 single point mutants with disrupted phosphorylation at either
S421 or S423 demonstrated protease sensitivity similar to the wild type HDAC1.
CONCLUSION: Concentration-dependent proteolysis experiments provide evidence that
phosphorylation of S421 and S423 individually contribute to HDAC1 function. In
addition, the limited proteolysis experiments support a model where associated
proteins promote HDAC1 enzymatic activity, reinforcing the importance of protein 
interactions in HDAC1 structure and function. Finally, because HDAC1 does not
display distinct regions of protease sensitivity, the proteolysis studies suggest
that HDAC1 comprises inter-related structural regions.

PMCID: PMC1613246
PMID: 17022812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Mol Cancer. 2006 Oct 3;5:40.

Role of glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta (GSK3beta) in mediating the cytotoxic
effects of the histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA) in MCF-7 breast
cancer cells.

Alao JP(1), Stavropoulou AV, Lam EW, Coombes RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Lundberg Laboratory, Gothenburg
University, Gothenburg, Sweden. John.P.Alao@molbio.gu.se

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs) have been shown to induce apoptotic and
autophagic cell death in vitro and in vivo. The molecular mechanisms that
underlie these cytotoxic effects are not yet clearly understood. Recently, HDACIs
were shown to induce Akt dephosphorylation by disrupting HDAC-protein phosphatase
1 (PP1) complexes. This disruption results in the increased association of PP1
with Akt, resulting in the dephosphorylation and consequent inactivation of the
kinase. Akt enhances cellular survival through the phosphorylation-dependent
inhibition of several pro-apoptotic proteins. Akt is an important negative
regulator of GSK3beta, a kinase that has been shown to regulate apoptosis in
response to various stimuli. In the present study, we investigated the role of
GSK3beta in mediating the cytotoxic effects in MCF-7 breast cancer cells treated 
with trichostatin A (TSA), a prototype HDACI. We show that TSA induces Akt
dephosphorylation in a PP1-dependent manner, resulting in activation of GSK3beta 
in MCF-7 cells. Similarly, knockdown of HDAC1 and-2 by small interfering RNA
(siRNA) resulted in the dephosphorylation of Akt and GSK3beta. Selective
inhibition of GSK3beta attenuated TSA induced cytotoxicity and resulted in
enhanced proliferation following drug removal. Our findings identify GSK3beta as 
an important mediator of TSA-induced cytotoxicity in MCF-7 breast cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC1592505
PMID: 17018141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Cell Signal. 2007 Mar;19(3):504-10. Epub 2006 Aug 23.

ATM regulates ionizing radiation-induced disruption of HDAC1:PP1:Rb complexes.

Guo C(1), Mi J, Brautigan DL, Larner JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Virginia Health System,
Charlottesville, VA 22908, United States.

Ionizing radiation elicits signaling events that coordinate DNA repair and
interruption of cell cycle progression. We previously demonstrated that ionizing 
radiation (IR) of cells activates nuclear protein phosphatase-1 (PP1) by
promoting dephosphorylation of Thr320, an inhibitory site in the enzyme and that 
the ATM kinase is required for this response. We sought to identify potential
targets of IR-activated PP1. Untreated and IR-treated Jurkat cells were labeled
with (32)P orthophosphate, and nuclear extracts were subjected to microcystin
affinity chromatography to recover phosphatase complexes that were analyzed by
2D-PAGE and mass spectrometry. Several proteins associated with protein
phosphatases demonstrated a significant decrease in (32)P intensity following IR,
and one of these was identified as HDAC1. Co-immunoprecipitation revealed
complexes containing PP1 with HDAC1 and Rb in cell extracts. In response to IR,
there was an ATM-dependent activation of PP1, dephosphorylation of HDAC1,
dissociation of HDAC1-PP1-Rb complexes and increased HDAC1 activity. These
results suggest that IR regulates HDAC1 phosphorylation and activity through
ATM-dependent activation of PP1.

PMID: 17008050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Virol. 2006 Oct;80(20):9998-10009.

Autorepression of the human cytomegalovirus major immediate-early
promoter/enhancer at late times of infection is mediated by the recruitment of
chromatin remodeling enzymes by IE86.

Reeves M(1), Murphy J, Greaves R, Fairley J, Brehm A, Sinclair J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Box 157, Level 5, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Hills Road, 
Cambridge CB2 2QQ, United Kingdom.

The human cytomegalovirus major immediate-early protein IE86 is pivotal for
coordinated regulation of viral gene expression throughout infection. A
relatively promiscuous transactivator of viral early and late gene transcription,
IE86 also acts during infection to negatively regulate its own promoter via
direct binding to a 14-bp palindromic IE86-binding site, the cis repression
sequence (crs), located between the major immediate-early promoter (MIEP) TATA
box and the start of transcription. Although such autoregulation does not involve
changes in the binding of basal transcription factors to the MIEP in vitro, it
does appear to involve selective inhibition of RNA polymerase II recruitment.
However, how this occurs is unclear. We show that autorepression by IE86 at late 
times of infection correlates with changes in chromatin structure around the MIEP
during the course of infection and that this is likely to result from physical
and functional interactions between IE86 and chromatin remodeling enzymes
normally associated with transcriptional repression of cellular promoters.
Firstly, we show that IE86-mediated autorepression is inhibited by histone
deacetylase inhibitors. We also show that IE86 interacts, in vitro and in vivo,
with the histone deacetylase HDAC1 and histone methyltransferases G9a and
Suvar(3-9)H1 and that coexpression of these chromatin remodeling enzymes with
IE86 increases autorepression of the MIEP. Finally, we show that mutation of the 
crs in the context of the virus abrogates the transcriptionally repressive
chromatin phenotype normally found around the MIEP at late times of infection,
suggesting that negative autoregulation by IE86 results, at least in part, from
IE86-mediated changes in chromatin structure of the viral MIEP.

PMCID: PMC1617317
PMID: 17005678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. J Med Chem. 2006 Oct 5;49(20):6046-56.

Synthesis and biological properties of novel, uracil-containing histone
deacetylase inhibitors.

Mai A(1), Massa S, Rotili D, Simeoni S, Ragno R, Botta G, Nebbioso A, Miceli M,
Altucci L, Brosch G.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Pasteur - Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti, Dipartimento di Studi
Farmaceutici, Università degli Studi di Roma La Sapienza, P.le A. Moro 5, 00185
Roma, Italy. antonello.mai@uniroma1.it

A novel series of compounds containing a uracil moiety as the connection unit
between a phenyl/phenylalkyl portion and a N-hydroxy-polymethylenealkanamide or
-methylenecinnamylamide group (uracil-based hydroxamic acids, UBHAs) was tested
against maize histone deacetylases (HDACs) and mouse HDAC1. Compounds with a
phenyl/benzyl ring at the uracil-C6 position and bearing 4-5 carbon units as well
as a m- or p-methylenecinnamyl moiety as a spacer were the most potent
inhibitors. In cell-based human HDAC1 and HDAC4 assays, the two UBHAs tested
inhibited the HDAC1 but not HDAC4 immunoprecipitate activity. When tested in
human leukemia U937 cells, some UBHAs produced G1 phase arrest of the cell cycle.
Moreover, 1j showed high antiproliferative and dose-dependent granulocytic
differentiation properties. The tested UBHAs displayed weak p21WAF1/CIP1
induction in U937 cells, and 1d and 1j showed high histone H3 and alpha-tubulin
acetylation effects.

PMID: 17004718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Cell Physiol. 2006 Dec;209(3):631-5.

A role of novel serpin maspin in tumor progression: the divergence revealed
through efforts to converge.

Sheng S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Proteases and Cancer Program of the Karmanos
Cancer Institute, Wayne State University School of Medicine, 540 East Canfield
Avenue, Detroit, MI 48201, USA. ssheng@med.wayne.edu

Maspin, a 42 kDa protein, belongs to the serine protease inhibitor (serpin)
superfamily and is more closely related to the ovalbumin-like serpin subfamily
(ov-serpins). More than a decade after the discovery of the maspin gene, our
pursuit of the molecular mechanisms of maspin revealed a significant divergence
of maspin from other serpins. This review article summarizes recent advances in
the identification of maspin-binding proteins and the potential underlying
molecular mechanisms of maspin in tumor progression. Specifically, the molecular 
interactions of maspin with the cell surface-associated pro-urokinase-type
plasminogen activator (pro-uPA) and intracellular histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1)
are highlighted. Our new evidence suggests a new paradigm that maspin acts as a
serpin-like molecule to inhibit serine protease-like targets. From an evolution
point of view, the uniquely important function of maspin in development and tumor
progression is likely due to its ancestral sequence code, and accordingly, its
novel "meta"-serpin structure. It is reasonable to hypothesize that the
conservation of a serine protease-like catalytic center in many molecules
requires the co-existence of endogenous antagonists. The unique inhibitory
interaction of maspin with both HDAC1 and pro-uPA might not be substituted by
other serpins that have evolved to acquire higher target specificities. Thus,
tumor suppressive maspin offers a unique therapeutic opportunity.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17001674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Dec;26(23):8683-96. Epub 2006 Sep 25.

Breast cancer metastasis suppressor 1 functions as a corepressor by enhancing
histone deacetylase 1-mediated deacetylation of RelA/p65 and promoting apoptosis.

Liu Y(1), Smith PW, Jones DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Box 800679, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA
22908-0679, USA.

The antiapoptotic transcription factor NF-kappaB is constitutively activated in
many cancers and is important for cytokine-mediated progression and metastatic
movement of tumors. Breast cancer metastasis suppressor 1 (BRMS1) is a metastasis
suppressor gene whose mechanisms of action are poorly understood. In this report,
we demonstrate that BRMS1 decreases the transactivation potential of RelA/p65 and
ameliorates the expression of NF-kappaB-regulated antiapoptotic gene products.
BRMS1 immunoprecipitates with the RelA/p65 subunit of NF-kappaB with
protein-protein interactions occurring at the C terminus region of the rel
homology domain but not at its known transactivation domains. Moreover, BRMS1
functions as a corepressor by promoting binding of HDAC1 to RelA/p65, where it
deacetylates lysine K310 on RelA/p65, which suppresses RelA/p65 transcriptional
activity. Selective small interfering RNA knockdown of BRMS1 confirms that
chromatin-bound BRMS1 is required for deacetylation of RelA/p65, while enhancing 
chromatin occupancy of HDAC1 onto the NF-kappaB-regulated promoters cIAP2 and
Bfl-1/A1. We observed in cells lacking BRMS1 a dramatic increase in cell
viability after the loss of attachment from the extracellular matrix.
Collectively, these results suggest that BRMS1 suppresses metastasis through its 
ability to function as a transcriptional corepressor of antiapoptotic genes
regulated by NF-kappaB.

PMCID: PMC1636810
PMID: 17000776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Mol Cancer Ther. 2006 Sep;5(9):2203-10.

Valproate inhibition of histone deacetylase 2 affects differentiation and
decreases proliferation of endometrial stromal sarcoma cells.

Hrzenjak A(1), Moinfar F, Kremser ML, Strohmeier B, Staber PB, Zatloukal K, Denk 
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, Auenbruggerplatz 25, 8036
Graz, Austria. andelko.hrzenjak@klinikum-graz.at

Covalent modifications of histone proteins, in particular deacetylation of lysine
residues, are important for the regulation of gene transcription both in normal
and malignant cells. These processes are controlled by histone acetyltransferases
and histone deacetylases (HDAC) and have up to now not been described in solid
mesenchymal tumors. The present study shows differences in the HDAC1 and HDAC2
expression in endometrial stromal sarcomas (ESS) and a cognate cell line (ESS-1) 
compared with nonneoplastic endometrial stroma. We show for the first time that
HDAC2 expression is consistently increased in ESS. In contrast, HDAC1 expression 
is generally lower than HDAC2 both in nonneoplastic stroma and in ESS, suggesting
that these two proteins, although closely related, are regulated in different
ways. In vitro experiments with an ESS cell line showed that valproate, an
inhibitor of the class I HDACs, led to significant HDAC2 decrease and to cell
differentiation. HDAC2 inhibition in ESS-1 cells caused significant changes in
the cell cycle by inhibiting G1-S transition and influencing expression of
p21WAF1 and cyclin D1. Moreover, in ESS-1 cells, increased expression of the
p21WAF1 was associated with reduction of HDAC2 expression after transfection with
small interfering RNA directed against HDAC2. Our results suggest that HDAC2
might be considered as potential drug target in the therapy of ESS and that HDAC 
inhibitors should be further evaluated in clinical trials in ESS.

PMID: 16985053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Immunol. 2006 Oct 1;177(7):4605-11.

Molecular mechanisms for transcriptional regulation of human high-affinity IgE
receptor beta-chain gene induced by GM-CSF.

Takahashi K(1), Hayashi N, Kaminogawa S, Ra C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Cell Immunology and Allergology, Advanced Medical
Research Center, Nihon University Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 30-1
Oyaguchi Kamimachi, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo 173-8610, Japan.

The beta-chain of the high-affinity receptor for IgE (FcepsilonRI) plays an
important role in regulating activation of FcepsilonRI-expressing cells such as
mast cells in allergic reactions. We already reported that the transcription
factor myeloid zinc finger (MZF) 1 which formed a high m.w. complex including
four and a half LIM-only protein (FHL)3 in the nucleus repressed human beta-chain
gene expression through an element in the fourth intron. We also found that
GM-CSF induced expression of MZF-1 and nuclear translocation of FHL3. We screened
a human cDNA library and identified NFY which was reported to bind histone
deacetylases (HDACs) as a constituent of the complex. The C-subunit of NFY was
demonstrated to form a ternary complex with MZF-1/FHL3 and interact with a
beta-chain gene region including the element in the fourth intron. HDAC1 and
HDAC2 were also shown to interact with the fourth intron region of the beta-chain
gene. In a human mast cell line HMC-1 cultured with GM-CSF, both beta-chain
expression and acetylation of histones interacting with the fourth intron region 
of the beta-chain gene were decreased. Collectively, these results indicated that
HDACs, which were recruited to the beta-chain gene through the element in the
fourth intron by MZF-1/FHL3/NFY, repressed beta-chain gene transcription by
deacetylation of histones in the presence of GM-CSF. These mechanisms will be
involved in not only the cell type-specific repression of beta-chain gene
expression in differentiating hemopoietic cells but also the repression of
beta-chain gene expression in the peripheral cells under specific circumstances.

PMID: 16982898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Cancer Res. 2006 Sep 15;66(18):9323-9.

Endogenous inhibition of histone deacetylase 1 by tumor-suppressive maspin.

Li X(1), Yin S, Meng Y, Sakr W, Sheng S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Wayne State University, Detroit, 
MI 48201, USA.

Maspin, a noninhibitory serine protease inhibitor, exerts multifaceted
tumor-suppressive effects. Maspin expression is associated with better
differentiated phenotypes, better cancer prognosis, and better drug sensitivity. 
Consistently, maspin also correlates with increased expression of Bax and
p21WAF1/CIP1. Interestingly, histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), a major HDAC
responsible for histone deacetylation, was shown to interact with maspin in a
yeast two-hybrid screening. In this study, we confirmed the maspin/HDAC1
interaction in human prostate tissues, in prostate cancer cell lines, and with
purified maspin. We produced several lines of evidence that support an inhibitory
effect of maspin on HDAC1 through direct molecular interaction, which was
detected in both the nucleus and the cytoplasm. Both endogenously expressed
maspin and purified maspin inhibited HDAC1. In contrast, small interfering RNA
(siRNA) silencing of maspin in PC3 cells increased HDAC activity. Accordingly,
maspin-transfected DU145 cells exhibited increased expression of HDAC1 target
genes Bax, cytokeratin 18 (CK18), and p21(WAF1/CIP1), whereas maspin siRNA
decreased CK18 expression in PC3 cells. The maspin effect on HDAC1 correlated
with an increased sensitivity to cytotoxic HDAC inhibitor M344. Interestingly,
glutathione S-transferase (GST, another maspin partner) was detected in the
maspin/HDAC1 complex. Furthermore, a COOH-terminally truncated maspin mutant,
which bound to HDAC1 but not GST, did not increase histone acetylation. Although 
HDACs, especially the highly expressed HDAC1, are promising therapeutic targets
in cancer intervention, our data raise a novel hypothesis that the endogenous
inhibitory effect of maspin on HDAC1 is coupled with glutathione-based protein
modification, and provide new leads toward future developments of specific
HDAC1-targeting strategies.

PMID: 16982778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Cryobiology. 2006 Dec;53(3):310-8. Epub 2006 Sep 18.

Evidence for a reduced transcriptional state during hibernation in ground
squirrels.

Morin P Jr(1), Storey KB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Department of Chemistry, Carleton University,
1125 Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, Ont., Canada K1S 5B6. pier.morin@gmail.com

During mammalian hibernation, metabolic rate can be reduced to <5% of the
euthermic rate as a result of coordinated suppression of multiple energy
expensive metabolic processes. Gene transcription is one of these and the present
study examines mechanisms of transcriptional control that could contribute to
lowering the rate of gene expression in torpor. Histone deacetylases (HDAC) have 
been linked to gene silencing and measured HDAC activity was 1.82-fold higher in 
skeletal muscle of hibernating thirteen-lined ground squirrels, Spermophilus
tridecemlineatus, compared with euthermic controls. Western blotting also showed 
that HDAC1 and HDAC4 protein levels were 1.21-and 1.48-fold higher, respectively,
in muscle from torpid animals. Histone H3 was also evaluated by Western blotting.
Total histone H3 was unchanged but two forms of covalently modified histone H3
that are associated with active transcription (phosphorylated Ser 10 and
acetylated Lys 23) were significantly reduced by 38-39% in muscle during
hibernation. Finally, RNA polymerase II activity was measured using a PCR-based
approach; activity in muscle from hibernating squirrels was only 57% of the
euthermic value. These data support an overall decrease in transcriptional
activity in skeletal muscle of hibernating animals that is accomplished by
multiple molecular mechanisms.

PMID: 16979617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Nov 3;349(4):1315-21. Epub 2006 Sep 11.

HPV16E7 mediates HADC chromatin repression and downregulation of MHC class I
genes in HPV16 tumorigenic cells through interaction with an MHC class I
promoter.

Li H(1), Ou X, Xiong J, Wang T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genome Research and College of Life Science and Technology,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430074, PR China.
huili0930@163.com

Downregulation of the expression of major histocompatibility complex class I
antigens on the surface of high-risk HPVs-transformed cells may contribute to
their high tumorigenic potential, which enables them to escape immune recognition
by cytotoxic T lymphocytes. In this study, we show that the viral E7 oncoprotein 
mediates transcriptional downregulation of the major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) class I genes by targeting the class I promoter in HPV16 containing CaSki
tumor cells. Using the chromatin immunoprecipitation assay, we demonstrated that 
HPV16E7 and specific HADCs, including HADC1, HADC2, and HADC8, are physically
associated with the class I promoter and the histone of the class I promoter was 
deacetylated. Knocking down of HPV16E7 expression with the E7-specific small
interfering RNA induced the release of HPV17E7 as well as HDAC1 and HDAC2 from
the class I promoter. Furthermore, HPV16E7 siRNA resulted in a dramatic increase 
in histone acetylation. Importantly, MHC class I antigen expression was
up-regulated on the surface of cells transfected with the E7 siRNA, but not on
that of untransfected cells. Taken together, our results demonstrate that the
HPV16E7 protein is associated with the MHC class I promoter and mediates MHC
class I downregulation by repressing chromatin activation.

PMID: 16979588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Cell Cycle. 2006 Sep;5(18):2045-8. Epub 2006 Sep 15.

Critical role of the HMGA2 gene in pituitary adenomas.

Fedele M(1), Pierantoni GM, Visone R, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR, Dipartimento di 
Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare, Università di Napoli Federico II,
Naples, Italy.

The molecular pathway leading to pituitary tumorigenesis is still largely unknown
and is one of the challenges of the endocrine oncology. The development of
pituitary adenomas in HMGA2 transgenic mice and the finding of HMGA2
amplification and overexpression in human pituitary adenomas led us to
investigate the mechanism by which the HMGA2 gene plays a crucial role in
pituitary oncogenesis. This mechanism has been recently described by our group:
it entails the acetylation of E2F1, and its consequent enhanced activity,
following the displacement of HDAC1 from the pRB/E2F1 inhibitory complex. Based
on the mating between HMGA2 transgenic and E2F1 knockout mice, the activation of 
E2F1 appears to be the main mechanism of the onset of HMGA2-induced pituitary
adenoma development. Nevertheless, other events may be also involved in this
process, and are discussed here.

PMID: 16969098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Oncogene. 2007 Mar 15;26(12):1757-68. Epub 2006 Sep 11.

Prohibitin, a protein downregulated by androgens, represses androgen receptor
activity.

Gamble SC(1), Chotai D, Odontiadis M, Dart DA, Brooke GN, Powell SM, Reebye V,
Varela-Carver A, Kawano Y, Waxman J, Bevan CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, 
London, UK.

Prohibitin (PHB) is a cell cycle regulatory protein, known to repress
E2F1-mediated gene activation via recruitment of transcriptional regulatory
factors such as retinoblastoma and histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1). We previously
identified PHB as a target protein of androgen signaling in prostate cancer cells
and showed that downregulation of PHB is required for androgen-induced cell cycle
entry in these cells. We now present evidence that PHB, which has 54% homology at
the protein level to the oestrogen receptor corepressor REA (repressor of
oestrogen receptor activity), can repress androgen receptor (AR)-mediated
transcription and androgen-dependent cell growth. Depletion of endogenous PHB
resulted in an increase in expression of the androgen-regulated prostate-specific
antigen gene. The repression appears to be specific to androgen and closely
related receptors, as it is also evident for the glucocorticoid and progesterone,
but not oestrogen, receptors. In spite of interaction of PHB with HDAC1, HDAC
activity is not required for this repression. Although AR and PHB could be
co-immunoprecipitated, no direct interaction was detectable, suggesting that PHB 
forms part of a repressive complex with the AR. Competition with the co-activator
SRC1 further suggests that formation of a complex with AR, PHB and other
cofactors is the mechanism by which repression is achieved. It appears then that 
repression of AR activity is one mechanism by which PHB inhibits
androgen-dependent growth of prostate cells. Further, this study implies that the
AR itself could, by mediating downregulation of a corepressor, be involved in the
progression of prostate tumours to the hormone refractory stage.

PMID: 16964284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Histochem Cell Biol. 2007 Feb;127(2):175-81. Epub 2006 Sep 8.

DNMT1 and HDAC1 gene expression in impaired spermatogenesis and testicular
cancer.

Omisanjo OA(1), Biermann K, Hartmann S, Heukamp LC, Sonnack V, Hild A, Brehm R,
Bergmann M, Weidner W, Steger K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology and Pediatric Urology, Giessen, Germany.

DNA methylation catalyzed by DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) and histone
deacetylation catalyzed by histone deacetylases (HDACs) play an important role
for the regulation of gene expression during carcinogenesis and spermatogenesis. 
We therefore studied the cell-specific expression of DNMT1 and HDAC1 for the
first time in human testicular cancer and impaired human spermatogenesis. During 
normal spermatogenesis, DNMT1 and HDAC1 were colocalized in nuclei of
spermatogonia. While HDAC1 was additionally present in nuclei of Sertoli cells,
DNMT1 was restricted to germ cells exhibiting a different expression pattern of
mRNA (in pachytene spermatocytes and round spermatids) and protein (in round
spermatids). Interestingly, in infertile patients revealing round spermatid
maturation arrest, round spermatids lack DNMT1 protein, while pachytene
spermatocytes became immunopositive for DNMT1. In contrast, no changes in the
expression pattern could be observed for HDAC1. This holds true also in
testicular tumors, where HDAC1 has been demonstrated in embryonal carcinoma,
seminoma and teratoma. Interestingly, DNMT1 was not expressed in seminoma, but
upregulated in embryonal carcinoma.

PMID: 16960727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Nov;26(21):7913-28. Epub 2006 Aug 28.

Negative and positive regulation of gene expression by mouse histone deacetylase 
1.

Zupkovitz G(1), Tischler J, Posch M, Sadzak I, Ramsauer K, Egger G, Grausenburger
R, Schweifer N, Chiocca S, Decker T, Seiser C.

Author information: 
(1)Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Department of Medical Biochemistry, Medical
University of Vienna, A-1030 Vienna, Austria.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) catalyze the removal of acetyl groups from core
histones. Because of their capacity to induce local condensation of chromatin,
HDACs are generally considered repressors of transcription. In this report, we
analyzed the role of the class I histone deacetylase HDAC1 as a transcriptional
regulator by comparing the expression profiles of wild-type and HDAC1-deficient
embryonic stem cells. A specific subset of mouse genes (7%) was deregulated in
the absence of HDAC1. We identified several putative tumor suppressors (JunB,
Prss11, and Plagl1) and imprinted genes (Igf2, H19, and p57) as novel HDAC1
targets. The majority of HDAC1 target genes showed reduced expression accompanied
by recruitment of HDAC1 and local reduction in histone acetylation at regulatory 
regions. At some target genes, the related deacetylase HDAC2 partially masks the 
loss of HDAC1. A second group of genes was found to be downregulated in
HDAC1-deficient cells, predominantly by additional recruitment of HDAC2 in the
absence of HDAC1. Finally, a small set of genes (Gja1, Irf1, and Gbp2) was found 
to require HDAC activity and recruitment of HDAC1 for their transcriptional
activation. Our study reveals a regulatory cross talk between HDAC1 and HDAC2 and
a novel function for HDAC1 as a transcriptional coactivator.

PMCID: PMC1636735
PMID: 16940178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Oncogene. 2006 Aug 28;25(38):5220-7.

RB and cell cycle progression.

Giacinti C(1), Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Temple
University, Philadelphia, PA 19122, USA.

The Rb protein is a tumor suppressor, which plays a pivotal role in the negative 
control of the cell cycle and in tumor progression. It has been shown that Rb
protein (pRb) is responsible for a major G1 checkpoint, blocking S-phase entry
and cell growth. The retinoblastoma family includes three members, Rb/p105, p107 
and Rb2/p130, collectively referred to as 'pocket proteins'. The pRb protein
represses gene transcription, required for transition from G1 to S phase, by
directly binding to the transactivation domain of E2F and by binding to the
promoter of these genes as a complex with E2F. pRb represses transcription also
by remodeling chromatin structure through interaction with proteins such as hBRM,
BRG1, HDAC1 and SUV39H1, which are involved in nucleosome remodeling, histone
acetylation/deacetylation and methylation, respectively. Loss of pRb functions
may induce cell cycle deregulation and so lead to a malignant phenotype. Gene
inactivation of pRB through chromosomal mutations is one of the principal reasons
for retinoblastoma tumor development. Functional inactivation of pRb by viral
oncoprotein binding is also shown in many neoplasias such as cervical cancer,
mesothelioma and AIDS-related Burkitt's lymphoma.

PMID: 16936740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Sep;26(17):6502-10.

Human PIRH2 enhances androgen receptor signaling through inhibition of histone
deacetylase 1 and is overexpressed in prostate cancer.

Logan IR(1), Gaughan L, McCracken SR, Sapountzi V, Leung HY, Robson CN.

Author information: 
(1)University of Newcastle Upon Tyne, Northern Institute for Cancer Research,
Paul O'Gorman Building, Medical School, Framlington Place, Newcastle Upon Tyne
NE2 4HH, United Kingdom.

The androgen receptor (AR) is a hormone-dependent transcription factor critically
involved in human prostate carcinogenesis. Optimal transcriptional control of
androgen-responsive genes by AR may require complex interaction among multiple
coregulatory proteins. We have previously shown that the AR coregulator TIP60 can
interact with human PIRH2 (hPIRH2). In this study, we uncover important new
functional role(s) for hPIRH2 in AR signaling: (i) hPIRH2 interacts with AR and
enhances AR-mediated transcription with a dynamic pattern of recruitment to
androgen response elements in the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) gene; (ii)
hPIRH2 interacts with the AR corepressor HDAC1, leading to reduced HDAC1 protein 
levels and inhibition of transcriptional repression; (iii) hPIRH2 is required for
optimal PSA expression; and (iv) hPIRH2 is involved in prostate cancer cell
proliferation. In addition, overexpression of hPIRH2 protein was detected in 73
of 82 (89%) resected prostate cancers, with a strong correlation between
increased hPIRH2 expression and aggressive disease, as signified by high Gleason 
sum scores and the presence of metastatic disease (P = <0.0001 and 0.0004,
respectively). Collectively, our data establish hPIRH2 as a key modulator of AR
function, opening a new direction for targeted therapy in aggressive human
prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC1592843
PMID: 16914734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Sep;26(17):6395-402.

Functional interplay between histone demethylase and deacetylase enzymes.

Lee MG(1), Wynder C, Bochar DA, Hakimi MA, Cooch N, Shiekhattar R.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, 3601 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are a promising class of anticancer agents 
for the treatment of solid and hematological malignancies. The precise mechanism 
by which HDAC inhibitors mediate their effects on tumor cell growth,
differentiation, and/or apoptosis is the subject of intense research. Previously 
we described a family of multiprotein complexes that contain histone deacetylase 
1/2 (HDAC1/2) and the histone demethylase BHC110 (LSD1). Here we show that HDAC
inhibitors diminish histone H3 lysine 4 (H3K4) demethylation by BHC110 in vitro. 
In vivo analysis revealed an increased H3K4 methylation concomitant with
inhibition of nucleosomal deacetylation by HDAC inhibitors. Reconstitution of
recombinant complexes revealed a functional connection between HDAC1 and BHC110
only when nucleosomal substrates were used. Importantly, while the enzymatic
activity of BHC110 is required to achieve optimal deacetylation in vitro, in vivo
analysis following ectopic expression of an enzymatically dead mutant of BHC110
(K661A) confirmed the functional cross talk between the demethylase and
deacetylase enzymes. Our studies not only reveal an intimate link between the
histone demethylase and deacetylase enzymes but also identify histone
demethylation as a secondary target of HDAC inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC1592851
PMID: 16914725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Cell Div. 2006 Aug 17;1:17.

E2F1 activation is responsible for pituitary adenomas induced by HMGA2 gene
overexpression.

Fedele M(1), Pierantoni GM, Visone R, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Endocrinologia e Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR e Dipartimento di 
Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare, Università di Napoli Federico II,
via S, Pansini, 5 80131 Napoli, Italy. mfedele@unina.it

The High Mobility Group protein HMGA2 is a nuclear architectural factor that
plays a critical role in a wide range of biological processes including
regulation of gene expression, embryogenesis and neoplastic transformation.
Several studies are trying to identify the mechanisms by which HMGA2 protein is
involved in each of these activities, and only recently some new significant
insights are emerging from the study of transgenic and knock-out mice.
Overexpression of HMGA2 gene leads to the onset of prolactin and GH-hormone
induced pituitary adenomas in mice, suggesting a critical role of this protein in
pituitary tumorigenesis. This was also confirmed in the human pathology by the
finding that HMGA2 amplification and/or overexpression is present in human
prolactinomas. This review focuses on recent data that explain the mechanism by
which HMGA2 induces the development of pituitary adenomas in mice. This mechanism
entails the activation of the E2F1 protein by the HMGA2-mediated displacement of 
HDAC1 from pRB protein.

PMCID: PMC1563461
PMID: 16914062  [PubMed]


246. Oncogene. 2007 Feb 1;26(5):633-40. Epub 2006 Aug 14.

Farnesyltransferase and geranylgeranyltransferase I inhibitors upregulate RhoB
expression by HDAC1 dissociation, HAT association and histone acetylation of the 
RhoB promoter.

Delarue FL(1), Adnane J, Joshi B, Blaskovich MA, Wang DA, Hawker J, Bizouarn F,
Ohkanda J, Zhu K, Hamilton AD, Chellappan S, Sebti SM.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Discovery Program at H Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, 
Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

Recently, we have shown that RhoB suppresses EGFR-, ErbB2-, Ras- and Akt-mediated
malignant transformation and metastasis. In this paper, we demonstrate that the
novel antitumor agents farnesyltransferase inhibitors (FTIs) and
geranylgeranyltransferase I inhibitors (GGTIs) upregulate RhoB expression in a
wide spectrum of human cancer cells including those from pancreatic, breast,
lung, colon, bladder and brain cancers. RhoB induction by FTI-277 and GGTI-298
occurs at the transcriptional level and is blocked by actinomycin D. Reverse
transcription-PCR experiments documented that the increase in RhoB protein levels
is due to an increase in RhoB transcription. Furthermore, treatment with FTIs and
GGTIs of cancer cells results in HDAC1 dissociation, HAT association and histone 
acetylation of the RhoB promoter. Thus, promoter acetylation is a novel mechanism
by which RhoB expression levels are regulated following treatment with the
anticancer agents FTIs and GGTIs.

PMID: 16909123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. ChemMedChem. 2006 Feb;1(2):225-37.

Aroyl-pyrrolyl hydroxyamides: influence of pyrrole C4-phenylacetyl substitution
on histone deacetylase inhibition.

Mai A(1), Massa S, Valente S, Simeoni S, Ragno R, Bottoni P, Scatena R, Brosch G.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Pasteur-Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti, Dipartimento di Studi
Farmaceutici, Università degli Studi di Roma La Sapienza, P.le A. Moro 5, 00185
Roma, Italy. antonello.mai@uniroma1.it

The novel aroyl-pyrrolyl hydroxyamides 4 a-a' are analogues of the lead compound 
3-(1-methyl-4-phenylacetyl-1H-pyrrol-2-yl)-N-hydroxy-2-propenamide (2) and are
active as HDAC inhibitors. The benzene ring of 2 was substituted with a wide
range of electron-donating and electron-withdrawing groups, and the effect was
evaluated on three HDACs from maize, namely HD2, HD1-B (a class I HDAC), and
HD1-A (a class II HDAC). Inhibition studies show that the benzene 3' and, to a
lesser extent, 4' positions of 2 were the most suitable for the introduction of
substituents, with the 3'-chloro (in 4 b) and the 3'-methyl (in 4 k) derivatives 
being the most potent compounds, reaching the same activity as SAHA. Inhibition
data for 4 b,k against mouse HDAC1 were consistent with those observed in the
maize enzyme. The substituent insertion on the benzene ring of 2 (compounds 4
a-a') abated the slight (3-fold) selectivity for class II HDACs displayed by 2.
Compound 4 b showed interesting, dose-dependent antiproliferative and
cytodifferentiation properties against human acute promyelocytic leukemia HL-60
cells.

PMID: 16892355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Mol Cancer Ther. 2006 Jul;5(7):1693-701.

CRA-026440: a potent, broad-spectrum, hydroxamic histone deacetylase inhibitor
with antiproliferative and antiangiogenic activity in vitro and in vivo.

Cao ZA(1), Bass KE, Balasubramanian S, Liu L, Schultz B, Verner E, Dai Y, Molina 
RA, Davis JR, Misialek S, Sendzik M, Orr CJ, Leung L, Callan O, Young P,
Dalrymple SA, Buggy JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Celera Genomics, 180 Kimball Way, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA.
alex_cao001@hotmail.com

CRA-026440 is a novel, broad-spectrum, hydroxamic acid-based inhibitor of histone
deacetylase (HDAC) that shows antitumor and antiangiogenic activities in vitro
and in vivo preclinically. CRA-026440 inhibited pure recombinant isozymes HDAC1, 
HDAC2, HDAC3/SMRT, HDAC6, HDAC8, and HDAC10 in the nanomolar range. Treatment of 
cultured tumor cell lines grown in vitro with CRA-026440 resulted in the
accumulation of acetylated histone and acetylated tubulin, leading to an
inhibition of tumor cell growth and the induction of apoptosis. CRA-026440
inhibited ex vivo angiogenesis in a dose-dependent manner. CRA-026440
parenterally given to mice harboring HCT116 or U937 human tumor xenografts
resulted in a statistically significant reduction in tumor growth. CRA-026440,
when used in combination with Avastin, achieved greater preclinical efficacy in
HCT 116 colorectal tumor model. Inhibition of tumor growth was accompanied by an 
increase in the acetylation of alpha-tubulin in peripheral blood mononuclear
cells and an alteration in the expression of many genes in the tumors, including 
several involved in angiogenesis, apoptosis, and cell growth. These results
reveal CRA-026440 to be a novel HDAC inhibitor with potent antitumor activity.

PMID: 16891455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Med Chem. 2006 Aug 10;49(16):4809-12.

Highly potent and selective histone deacetylase 6 inhibitors designed based on a 
small-molecular substrate.

Suzuki T(1), Kouketsu A, Itoh Y, Hisakawa S, Maeda S, Yoshida M, Nakagawa H,
Miyata N.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Nagoya City University, 3-1
Tanabe-dori, Nagoya, Aichi 467-8603, Japan. suzuki@phar.nagoya-cu.ac.jp

To find novel histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6)-selective inhibitors and clarify the 
structural requirements for HDAC6-selective inhibition, we prepared thiolate
analogues designed based on the structure of an HDAC6-selective substrate and
evaluated the histone/alpha-tubulin acetylation selectivity by Western blot
analysis. Aliphatic compounds 17b-20b selectively caused alpha-tubulin
acetylation over histone H4 acetylation. In enzyme assays using HDAC1, HDAC4, and
HDAC6, compounds 17a-19a exhibited HDAC6-selective inhibition over HDAC1 and
HDAC4.

PMID: 16884291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. J Cell Physiol. 2006 Nov;209(2):363-9.

1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 transcriptionally represses p45Skp2 expression via the
Sp1 sites in human prostate cancer cells.

Huang YC(1), Hung WC.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, China.

Upregulation of p27Kip1 protein in 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3-treated cancer cells 
is mediated via enhancement of gene transcription and reduction of protein
degradation. 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 inhibits the expression of p45Skp2, the
F-box protein which is implicated in p27Kip1 degradation, to reduce turnover of
p27Kip1 protein. In this study, we elucidate the underlying mechanism by which
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 inhibits p45Skp2 in human LNCaP prostate cancer cells.
Western blot and RT-PCR analysis suggest that 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 suppresses
p45Skp2 via transcriptional repression. Promoter activity assays indicate that
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 directly inhibits p45Skp2 promoter activity. Deletion
analysis shows that 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 response element is localized at
-447/-291 bp region from the translational start site of the p45Skp2 promoter.
Mutation analysis suggests that two Sp1 sites localized at -386/-380 and
-309/-294 bp region are required for transcriptional repression. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (CHIP) assay demonstrates that VDR indirectly binds to these 
Sp1 sites in vivo and this binding is increased after 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3
treatment. Re-CHIP assay suggests that VDR and Sp1 form a complex to bind to the 
Sp1 sites. DNA affinity precipitation assay (DAPA) shows that histone deacetylase
1 (HDAC1) is recruited to the Sp1 sites after 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3
stimulation. Re-CHIP assay verifies that binding of Sp1 and HDAC1 to p45Skp2
promoter is enhanced after 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 treatment. HDAC inhibitor
trichostatin A (TSA) reverses the inhibition of p45Skp2 promoter activity by
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3. Collectively, our results suggest that
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 induces the formation of VDR/Sp1 complex and acts via a 
Sp1- and HDAC1-depedent pathway to inhibit p45Skp2 transcription.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16883603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Oncogene. 2007 Feb 8;26(6):802-12. Epub 2006 Jul 31.

Hypoxic repression of STAT1 and its downstream genes by a pVHL/HIF-1 target
DEC1/STRA13.

Ivanov SV(1), Salnikow K, Ivanova AV, Bai L, Lerman MI.

Author information: 
(1)Basic Research Program, SAIC-Frederick, Inc., Frederick, MD 21702, USA.
Sergey.Ivanov@med.nyu.edu

DEC1/STRA13 is a bHLH type transcriptional regulator involved with immune
regulation, hypoxia response and carcinogenesis. We recently demonstrated that
STRA13 interacts with STAT3 in the transcriptional activation of STAT-dependent
promoters. Here, we pursue STRA13 involvement in the JAK/STAT pathway by studying
its role in STAT1 expression. First, we showed that VHL deficiency or HIF-1
activation resulted in the repression of endogenous STAT1 mediated by STRA13. We 
then characterized the STAT1 proximal promoter to assess its response to STRA13
by transient coexpression in a luciferase reporter assay. Using sequential
truncation and site-directed mutagenesis of the STAT1 promoter with STRA13
deletion constructs, we showed that the STRA13 C-terminal trans-activation
domain, which is known to bind HDAC1, mostly determines the repressive activity. 
Involvement of HDAC activity in STAT1 regulation was validated by TSA inhibition 
and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay. Thus, we demonstrate that
STRA13-mediated repression of STAT1 transcription utilizes an HDAC1-dependent
mechanism. Furthermore, we show that targets of unphosphorylated STAT1, such as
antigen presenting genes and CASP1, are also repressed by hypoxia possibly
through the same STRA13-mediated mechanism. Thus, the newly discovered link
between HIF-1 and STAT1 reveals a previously unknown role of STRA13 in hypoxia
and carcinogenesis.

PMID: 16878149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Sep 8;347(4):1088-93. Epub 2006 Jul 14.

Involvement of HDAC1 and the PI3K/PKC signaling pathways in NF-kappaB activation 
by the HDAC inhibitor apicidin.

Kim YK(1), Seo DW, Kang DW, Lee HY, Han JW, Kim SN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Kwandong University College of Medicine, Gangneung
210-701, Republic of Korea. yksnbk@kwandong.ac.kr

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are appreciated as one of promising
anticancer drugs, but they exert differential responses depending on the cell
type. We recently reported the critical role of NF-kappaB as a modulator in
determining cell fate for apoptosis in response to an HDAC inhibitor. In this
study, we investigate a possible signaling pathway required for NF-kappaB
activation in response to the HDAC inhibitor apicidin. Treatment of HeLa cells
with apicidin leads to an increase in transcriptional activity of NF-kappaB and
the expression of its target genes, IL-8 and TNF-alpha. TNF-alpha expression by
apicidin is induced at earlier time points than NF-kappaB activation or IL-8
expression. In addition, our data show that the early expression of TNF-alpha
does not lead to activation of NF-kappaB, because disruption of TNF-alpha
activity by a neutralizing antibody does not affect nuclear translocation of
NF-kappaB, IkappaBalpha degradation or reporter gene activation by apicidin.
However, this activation of NF-kappaB requires the PI3K and PKC signaling
pathways, but not ERK or JNK. Furthermore, apicidin activation of NF-kappaB seems
to result from HDAC1 inhibition, as evidenced by the observation that
overexpression of HDAC1, but not HDAC2, 3 or 4, dramatically inhibits NF-kappaB
reporter gene activity. Collectively, our results suggest that activation of
NF-kappaB signaling by apicidin requires both the PI3K/PKC signaling pathways and
HDAC1, and functions as a critical modulator in determining the cellular effect
of apicidin.

PMID: 16870149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Oncol Rep. 2006 Sep;16(3):581-5.

Histone deacetylase 3 represses HTLV-1 tax transcription.

Villanueva R(1), Iglesias AH, Camelo S, Sanin LC, Gray SG, Dangond F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Transcriptional and Immune Regulation, Brigham and Women's
Hospital Laboratories, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

We examined the epigenetic mechanisms involved in human T-cell lymphotropic virus
type 1 (HTLV-1) Tax expression. Blockade of histone deacetylation with
trichostatin A (TSA) resulted in Tax upregulation. Using a chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay, we verified local histone hyperacetylation at
the HTLV-1 LTR in response to TSA. In agreement, HDAC3 transfection led to
reductions in both Tax expression and histone acetylation. HDAC3 mutations and
deletions spanning the catalytic site had variable ability to repress Tax, but
HDAC activity was not essential for repression. Immunoprecipitation studies
revealed that Tax co-exists in a complex containing both histone deacetylase 1
(HDAC1) and 3 (HDAC3). Our results suggest that HDACs may actively participate in
the repression of HTLV-1 Tax transcription.

PMID: 16865259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Huazhong Univ Sci Technolog Med Sci. 2006;26(2):199-201, 210.

HDAC1 expression and effect of curcumin on proliferation of Raji cells.

Wu Q(1), Chen Y, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hematology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College of Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC1) has a high expression in many cancer cells and
curcumin can inhibit the growth of cancer cells. This paper was designed to
investigate the expression of HDAC1 of Raji cells and the effect of curcumin on
their proliferation and apoptosis. Raji cells were treated with 3.125-50
micromol/L curcumin for 8-48 h and the growth inhibition rates of Raji cells were
measured by MTT. The expression of HDAC1 on Raji cells were examined by mRNA,
Western blot at 24 h various concertrations (1.6-50 micromol/L). Curcumin could
selectively inhibit the proliferation of Raji cells in a dose- and time-dependent
manner, with the inhibition rate being 52.47 %-82.18 % (P<0.01). The
up-regulation of HDAC1 expression was observed within 24 h after the treatment
with curcumin as shown by RT-PCR and Western blot. With the increase of
concentration, the expression was down-regulated in a dose- dependent manner. It 
is concluded that the expression of HDAC1 plays an important role in the
proliferation and apoptosis of Raji cells and curcumin can inhibit the growth of 
Raji cells at various concentrations and promote the apoptosis of Raji cells.

PMID: 16850746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Blood. 2006 Nov 1;108(9):3179-86. Epub 2006 Jul 18.

Short-chain fatty acids induce gamma-globin gene expression by displacement of a 
HDAC3-NCoR repressor complex.

Mankidy R(1), Faller DV, Mabaera R, Lowrey CH, Boosalis MS, White GL, Castaneda
SA, Perrine SP.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Regulation Laboratories, Inc, Newton, MA, USA.

High-level induction of fetal (gamma) globin gene expression for therapy of
beta-hemoglobinopathies likely requires local chromatin modification and
dissociation of repressor complexes for gamma-globin promoter activation. A novel
gamma-globin-inducing short-chain fatty acid derivative (SCFAD), RB7, which was
identified through computational modeling, produced a 6-fold induction in a
reporter assay that detects only strong inducers of the gamma-globin gene
promoter and in cultured human erythroid progenitors. To elucidate the molecular 
mechanisms used by high-potency SCFADs, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
assays performed at the human gamma- and beta-globin gene promoters in GM979
cells and in erythroid progenitors demonstrate that RB7 and butyrate induce
dissociation of HDAC3 (but not HDAC1 or HDAC2) and its adaptor protein NCoR,
specifically from the gamma-globin gene promoter. A coincident and proportional
recruitment of RNA polymerase II to the gamma-globin gene promoter was observed
with exposure to these gamma-globin inducers. Knockdown of HDAC3 by siRNA induced
transcription of the gamma-globin gene promoter, demonstrating that displacement 
of HDAC3 from the gamma-globin gene promoter by the SCFAD is sufficient to induce
gamma-globin gene expression. These studies demonstrate new dynamic alterations
in transcriptional regulatory complexes associated with SCFAD-induced activation 
of the gamma-globin gene and provide a specific molecular target for potential
therapeutic intervention.

PMCID: PMC1895523
PMID: 16849648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Immunol. 2006 Jul 15;177(2):822-30.

Mechanism of IFN-beta-mediated inhibition of IL-8 gene expression in astroglioma 
cells.

Nozell S(1), Laver T, Patel K, Benveniste EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 1918
University Boulevard, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA. snozell@uab.edu

IL-8 is a chemokine that recruits migrating neutrophils and leukocytes to areas
of inflammation. In noninflamed tissue, IL-8 expression is low but can be rapidly
induced by proinflammatory cytokines. Typically, inflammation and transient IL-8 
expression are beneficial. However, some diseases are characterized by excessive 
inflammation and high levels of IL-8. Previous studies have shown that IFN-beta
can inhibit the expression of IL-8, although the mechanism is unknown. Using
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, we define the IL-8 transcriptional program 
in the absence or presence of inducing stimuli and/or inhibition by IFN-beta. In 
the absence of stimuli, the IL-8 promoter is acetylated but negatively regulated 
by corepressor proteins. Upon PMA stimulation, the levels of these corepressors
are reduced and the promoter is rapidly bound and activated by transcription
factors, including NF-kappaB p65, C/EBPbeta, and c-Fos. In addition, RNA
polymerase II is recruited to the IL-8 promoter to initiate transcription.
However, in the presence of both PMA and IFN-beta, there are diminished levels of
histone acetylation, reduced levels of transcription factors such as NF-kappaB
p65 and RNA polymerase II, and an increased presence of corepressor proteins such
as histone deacetylases 1 and 3 and silencing mediator of retinoic acid and
thyroid hormone receptors. IFN-gamma-inducible protein-10 and MCP-1 genes, also
regulated by NF-kappaB, are unaffected by IFN-beta, and IFN-beta does not prevent
the activation, nuclear migration, or binding of NF-kappaB p65 to the kappaB
element of the IFN-gamma-inducible protein-10 promoter. As such, these data show 
that the inhibitory effects of IFN-beta are specific to the IL-8 promoter.

PMID: 16818736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Cancer Res. 2006 Jul 1;66(13):6785-92.

Inhibition of histone deacetylase class I but not class II is critical for the
sensitization of leukemic cells to tumor necrosis factor-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand-induced apoptosis.

Inoue S(1), Mai A, Dyer MJ, Cohen GM.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Toxicology Unit, University of Leicester, Lancaster
Road, Leicester LE1 9HN, United Kingdom.

From work done largely on derived cell lines, it has been suggested that tumor
necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) might be a therapeutic 
target for many forms of malignancy. However, use of primary tumor cells,
including chronic lymphocytic leukemic (CLL) cells, has shown inherent resistance
to TRAIL. Although the molecular basis for this resistance remains unknown,
treatment with histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) often sensitizes resistant 
cells to TRAIL-induced apoptosis. We used structurally diverse HDACi to ascertain
which HDAC needs to be inhibited for the sensitization. Inhibition of HDAC class 
I but not class II is required for sensitization to TRAIL-induced apoptosis of
CLL cells and various cell lines. Using different HDACi together with small
interfering RNA for HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3, and HDAC6, we report that inhibition of 
HDAC1 and HDAC2 but not HDAC3, HDAC6, and HDAC8 are primarily responsible for
sensitization to TRAIL-induced apoptosis. Based on these data and our previous
studies, we propose that a clinical trial in CLL is warranted using a combination
of a selective HDACi that inhibits HDAC1 and/or HDAC2 together with a form of
TRAIL that signals through TRAIL receptor 1.

PMID: 16818655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Biol Chem. 2006 Aug 25;281(34):24161-70. Epub 2006 Jun 28.

DNA damage-induced down-regulation of human Cdc25C and Cdc2 is mediated by
cooperation between p53 and maintenance DNA (cytosine-5) methyltransferase 1.

Le Gac G(1), Estève PO, Ferec C, Pradhan S.

Author information: 
(1)New England Biolabs, Ipswich, Massachusetts 01938, USA.

The Cdc25C phosphatase mediates cellular entry into mitosis in mammalian cells.
Cdc25C activates Cdc2 for entry into mitosis by dephosphorylating Thr and Tyr at 
the site of inhibitory phosphorylation. The Cdc25C gene contains tumor suppressor
p53 binding sites and is demonstrated to contribute to the p53-dependent cell
cycle arrest upon DNA damage. Here we show that both Cdc25C and Cdc2 were
down-regulated in wild-type HCT116 cells but not in p53-null, DNMT1-null or
DNMT1and DNMT3b-null cells, upon p53 stabilization following doxorubicin-mediated
DNA damage. Furthermore, zebularine, a drug that selectively traps and depletes
nuclear DNMT1 and DNMT3b, relieved p53-mediated repression of endogenous Cdc25C
and Cdc2. Methylation analysis of the Cdc25C and Cdc2 promoter displayed internal
CG methylation proximal to the p53 binding site upon DNA damage in a
p53-dependent manner. Chromatin immunoprecipitation of doxorubicin treated
wild-type HCT116 cells showed the presence of DNMT1, p53, H3K9me2, and the
transcriptional repressor HDAC1 on the Cdc25C and Cdc2 promoters, suggesting
their involvement as repressive complexes in Cdc25C and Cdc2 gene silencing.
Thus, the general mechanism of p53-mediated gene repression may involve
recruitment of other repressive factors.

PMID: 16807237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. J Biol Chem. 2006 Aug 25;281(34):24544-52. Epub 2006 Jun 19.

Regulation of murine TGFbeta2 by Pax3 during early embryonic development.

Mayanil CS(1), Pool A, Nakazaki H, Reddy AC, Mania-Farnell B, Yun B, George D,
McLone DG, Bremer EG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neural Tube Research, Department of Pediatric Neurosurgery,
Children's Memorial Research Center and Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern
University, Chicago, Illinois 60614, USA. smayanil@northwestern.edu

Previously our laboratory identified TGFbeta2 as a potential downstream target of
Pax3 by utilizing microarray analysis and promoter data base mining (Mayanil, C. 
S. K., George, D., Freilich, L., Miljan, E. J., Mania-Farnell, B. J., McLone, D. 
G., and Bremer, E. G. (2001) J. Biol. Chem. 276, 49299-49309). Here we report
that Pax3 directly regulates TGFbeta2 transcription by binding to cis-regulatory 
elements within its promoter. Chromatin immunoprecipitation revealed that Pax3
bound to the cis-regulatory elements on the TGFbeta2 promoter (GenBanktrade mark 
accession number AF118263). Both TGFbeta2 promoter-luciferase activity
measurements in transient cotransfection experiments and electromobility shift
assays supported the idea that Pax3 regulates TGFbeta2 by directly binding to its
cis-regulatory regions. Additionally, by using a combination of
co-immunoprecipitation and chromatin immunoprecipitation, we show that the
TGFbeta2 cis-regulatory elements between bp 741-940 and bp 1012-1212 bind
acetylated Pax3 and are associated with p300/CBP and histone deacetylases. The
cis-regulatory elements between bp 741 and 940 in addition to associating with
acetylated Pax3 and HDAC1 also associated with SIRT1. Whole mount in situ
hybridization and quantitative real time reverse transcription-PCR showed
diminished levels of TGFbeta2 transcripts in Pax3(-/-) mouse embryos (whose
phenotype is characterized by neural tube defects) as compared with Pax3(+/+)
littermates (embryonic day 10.0; 30 somite stage), suggesting that Pax3
regulation of TGFbeta2 may play a pivotal role during early embryonic
development.

PMID: 16787918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Jun 27;103(26):9993-8. Epub 2006 Jun 19.

ICP0 and the US3 protein kinase of herpes simplex virus 1 independently block
histone deacetylation to enable gene expression.

Poon AP(1), Gu H, Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)The Marjorie B. Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, University of Chicago, 910
East 58th Street, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

SK-N-SH cells exposed to low ratios of ICP0-null (DeltaICP0) mutants of herpes
simplex virus per cell express the viral alpha proteins, but the progression to
beta and gamma gene expression does not ensue. In these restrictive cells,
post-alpha gene expression can be induced after exposure of the infected cells to
sodium butyrate, an indication that VP16 brought into cells by the virus and the 
alpha gene products made after infection cannot block the silencing of viral
post-alpha genes by histone deacetylases (HDACs). This observation is consistent 
with evidence reported earlier that ICP0 dissociates HDAC1/2 from the CoREST/REST
complex. In permissive U2OS cells, replication is independent of the ratio of
DeltaICP0 mutant per cell. To determine whether other viral genes are involved in
blocking HDACs, we used a surrogate system consisting of baculoviruses carrying
viral or cellular genes driven by CMV immediate-early promoter. Expression of
these genes requires blocking of histone deacetylation. We report that (i)
cotransduced U(S)3 or U(S)3.5 protein kinase substitutes for sodium butyrate in
enabling the expression of a reporter gene in restrictive cells and enhancing it 
in permissive cells; (ii) HDAC1 is phosphorylated concomitant with the expression
of reporter genes; and (iii) the amounts and appearance of HDAC1 are altered in
transduced cells expressing U(S)3 protein kinase in the absence of other viral
proteins. We conclude that the U(S)3 protein kinase blocks histone deacetylation 
by a mechanism distinct from that of ICP0 and that debilitated histone
deacetylation contributes to the permissiveness of U2OS cells for DeltaICP0
mutants.

PMCID: PMC1502567
PMID: 16785443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Virology. 2006 Sep 1;352(2):338-44. Epub 2006 Jun 15.

E1A is the component of the MHC class I enhancer complex that mediates HDAC
chromatin repression in adenovirus-12 tumorigenic cells.

Zhao B(1), Ricciardi RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Dental Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Levy Research Building, Room 221, 4010 Locust Street, Philadelphia,
PA 19104, USA.

In adenovirus-12 tumorigenic cells, the viral E1A-12 protein mediates
transcriptional down-regulation of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
class I genes by targeting the class I enhancer. Here, we demonstrate by a
combination of antisense and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis that
E1A-12 is a physical component of the class I enhancer repression complex, known 
to comprise COUP-TFII and histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1). Significantly, E1A
antisense was shown to co-eliminate E1A-12 as well as HDAC1 and HDAC8, but not
HDAC3, from the enhancer repression complex. Consistent with elimination of HDAC1
and HDAC8, E1A antisense also resulted in a dramatic increase in histone
acetylation, a hallmark of transcriptionally active chromatin. Importantly, MHC
class I antigen expression was restored on the surface of E1A
antisense-transfected cells. These results demonstrate that E1A-12 is associated 
with the MHC class I complex and apparently mediates class I transcriptional
down-regulation by enacting chromatin repression through HDAC1 and HDAC8.

PMID: 16780916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Oncogene. 2006 Nov 30;25(56):7391-400. Epub 2006 Jun 12.

Regulation of SV40 large T-antigen stability by reversible acetylation.

Shimazu T(1), Komatsu Y, Nakayama KI, Fukazawa H, Horinouchi S, Yoshida M.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Genetics Laboratory, RIKEN, Hirosawa 2-1, Wako, Saitama, Japan.

Erratum in
    Oncogene. 2014 Jul 17;33(29):3886.

Reversible acetylation on protein lysine residues has been shown to regulate the 
function of both nuclear proteins such as histones and p53 and cytoplasmic
proteins such as alpha-tubulin. To identify novel acetylated proteins, we
purified several proteins by the affinity to an anti-acetylated-lysine antibody
from cells treated with trichostatin A (TSA). Among the proteins identified, here
we report acetylation of the SV40 large T antigen (T-Ag). The acetylation site
was determined to be lysine-697, which is located adjacent to the C-terminal Cdc4
phospho-degron (CPD). Overexpression of the CBP acetyltransferase acetylated
T-Ag, whereas HDAC1, HDAC3 and SIRT1 bound and deacetylated T-Ag. The acetylation
and deacetylation occurred independently of p53, a binding partner of T-Ag, but
the acetylation was enhanced in the presence of p53. T-Ag in the cells treated
with TSA and NA or the acetylation mimic mutant (K697Q) became unstable in COS-7 
cells, suggesting that acetylation regulates stability of T-Ag. Indeed, NIH3T3
cells stably expressing K697Q showed decreased anchorage-independent growth
compared with those expressing wild type or the K697R mutant. These results
demonstrate that acetylation destabilizes T-Ag and regulates the transforming
activity of T-Ag in NIH3T3 cells.

PMID: 16767160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Cancer Cell. 2006 Jun;9(6):459-71.

HMGA2 induces pituitary tumorigenesis by enhancing E2F1 activity.

Fedele M(1), Visone R, De Martino I, Troncone G, Palmieri D, Battista S,
Ciarmiello A, Pallante P, Arra C, Melillo RM, Helin K, Croce CM, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR and Dipartimento 
di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare, Università di Napoli Federico II,
80131 Naples, Italy.

HMGA2 gene amplification and overexpression in human prolactinomas and the
development of pituitary adenomas in HMGA2 transgenic mice showed that HMGA2
plays a crucial role in pituitary tumorigenesis. We have explored the pRB/E2F1
pathway to investigate the mechanism by which HMGA2 acts. Here we show that HMGA2
interacts with pRB and induces E2F1 activity in mouse pituitary adenomas by
displacing HDAC1 from the pRB/E2F1 complex-a process that results in E2F1
acetylation. We found that loss of E2F1 function (obtained by mating HMGA2 and
E2F1(-/-) mice) suppressed pituitary tumorigenesis in HMGA2 mice. Thus,
HMGA2-mediated E2F1 activation is a crucial event in the onset of these tumors in
transgenic mice and probably also in human prolactinomas.

PMID: 16766265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Mol Cell. 2006 Jun 9;22(5):669-79.

HDAC1 acetylation is linked to progressive modulation of steroid receptor-induced
gene transcription.

Qiu Y(1), Zhao Y, Becker M, John S, Parekh BS, Huang S, Hendarwanto A, Martinez
ED, Chen Y, Lu H, Adkins NL, Stavreva DA, Wiench M, Georgel PT, Schiltz RL, Hager
GL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Receptor Biology and Gene Expression, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Building 41, B602, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Although histone deacetylases (HDACs) are generally viewed as corepressors, we
show that HDAC1 serves as a coactivator for the glucocorticoid receptor (GR).
Furthermore, a subfraction of cellular HDAC1 is acetylated after association with
the GR, and this acetylation event correlates with a decrease in promoter
activity. HDAC1 in repressed chromatin is highly acetylated, while the
deacetylase found on transcriptionally active chromatin manifests a low level of 
acetylation. Acetylation of purified HDAC1 inactivates its deacetylase activity, 
and mutation of the critical acetylation sites abrogates HDAC1 function in vivo. 
We propose that hormone activation of the receptor leads to progressive
acetylation of HDAC1 in vivo, which in turn inhibits the deacetylase activity of 
the enzyme and prevents a deacetylation event that is required for promoter
activation. These findings indicate that HDAC1 is required for the induction of
some genes by the GR, and this activator function is dynamically modulated by
acetylation.

PMID: 16762839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J Gen Virol. 2006 Jul;87(Pt 7):1843-51.

Bovine herpesvirus 1 immediate-early protein (bICP0) interacts with the histone
acetyltransferase p300, which stimulates productive infection and gC promoter
activity.

Zhang Y(1), Jiang Y, Geiser V, Zhou J, Jones C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, Nebraska Center for
Virology, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE 68503, USA.

The immediate-early protein, bICP0, of Bovine herpesvirus 1 (BHV-1)
transactivates viral promoters and stimulates productive infection. bICP0 is
expressed constitutively during productive infection, as its gene contains an
immediate-early and an early promoter. Like other ICP0 homologues encoded by
members of the subfamily Alphaherpesvirinae, bICP0 contains a zinc RING finger
located near its N terminus. Mutations that disrupt the bICP0 zinc RING finger
impair its ability to activate transcription, stimulate productive infection,
inhibit interferon-dependent transcription in certain cell types and regulate
subnuclear localization. bICP0 also interacts with a cellular
chromatin-remodelling enzyme, histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), and can relieve
HDAC1-mediated transcriptional repression, suggesting that bICP0 inhibits
silencing of the viral genome. In this study, it was shown that bICP0 interacted 
with the histone acetyltransferase p300 during productive infection and in
transiently transfected cells. In addition, p300 enhanced BHV-1 productive
infection and transactivated a late viral promoter (gC). In contrast, a
CH3-domain deletion mutant of p300, which is a dominant-negative mutant, did not 
activate the gC promoter. bICP0 and p300 cooperated to activate the gC promoter, 
suggesting that there is a synergistic effect on promoter activation. As p300 can
activate certain antiviral signalling pathways (for example, interferon), it was 
hypothesized that interactions between p300 and bICP0 may dampen the antiviral
response following infection.

PMID: 16760386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006 Jun 6;34(10):3095-106. Print 2006.

Hepatitis B virus X protein and the estrogen receptor variant lacking exon 5
inhibit estrogen receptor signaling in hepatoma cells.

Han J(1), Ding L, Yuan B, Yang X, Wang X, Li J, Lu Q, Huang C, Ye Q.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Institute of Biotechnology, 27 Tai-Ping Lu Road, Beijing 100850,
People's Republic of China.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) X protein (HBx) is considered to play a role in the
development of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) during HBV infection. HCC was shown
to be more prevalent in men than in women. Estrogen, which exerts its biological 
function through estrogen receptor (ER), can inhibit HBV replication. ERDelta5,
an ERalpha variant lacking exon 5, was found to be preferentially expressed in
patients with HCC compared with patients with normal livers. Here, we report the 
biological role of ERDelta5 and a novel link between HBx and ERalpha signaling in
hepatoma cells. ERDelta5 interacts with ERalpha in vitro and in vivo and
functions as a dominant negative receptor. Both ERalpha and ERDelta5 associate
with HBx. HBx decreases ERalpha-dependent transcriptional activity, and HBx and
ERDelta5 have additive effect on suppression of ERalpha transactivation. The HBx 
deletion mutant that lacks the ERalpha-binding site abolishes the HBx repression 
of ERalpha. HBx, ERalpha and histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) form a ternary
complex. Trichostatin A, a specific inhibitor of HDAC enzyme, can restore the
transcriptional activity of ERalpha inhibited by HBx. Our data suggest that HBx
and ERDelta5 may play a negative role in ERalpha signaling and that ERalpha
agonists may be developed for HCC therapy.

PMCID: PMC1475750
PMID: 16757575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Cell Physiol. 2006 Sep;208(3):575-85.

Regulation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt and nuclear factor-kappa B
signaling pathways in dystrophin-deficient skeletal muscle in response to
mechanical stretch.

Dogra C(1), Changotra H, Wergedal JE, Kumar A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Division, Jerry L. Pettis Memorial VA Medical Center, Loma 
Linda, California 92357, USA.

Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt and nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kappaB)
signaling pathways play a critical role in mediating survival signals. In this
study we have investigated how loss of dystrophin (the primary cause of Duchenne 
muscular dystrophy) modulates the activation of PI3K/Akt and NF-kappaB signaling 
pathways in skeletal muscle in response to mechanical stimulation. Activation of 
Akt was significantly higher in diaphragm muscle from dystrophin-deficient mdx
mice compared to normal mice at both prenecrotic and necrotic states. Higher
activation of Akt was also observed in cultured dystrophin-deficient primary
myotubes differentiated in vitro. Application of passive mechanical stretch ex
vivo synergistically increased the activation of Akt in diaphragm of mdx mice.
Stretch-induced activation of PDK-1 and PI3K were also higher in diaphragm of mdx
mice compared to normal mice. Pretreatment of diaphragm with PI3K inhibitor
LY294002 blocked the activation of Akt in normal and mdx mice. Higher activation 
of Akt was associated with increased phosphorylation of its downstream targets
glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK3beta), FKHR, and mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR). Treatment of diaphragm muscle with LY294002 inhibited the
stretch-induced activation of IkappaB (IkappaB) kinase (IKK) and NF-kappaB
transcription factor in normal and mdx mice. Mechanical stretch also reduced the 
interaction of HDAC1 with RelA subunit of NF-kappaB in diaphragm muscle. Finally,
cellular levels of Bcl-2, cIAP1, and integrin beta1 and activation of integrin
linked kinase were higher in diaphragm muscle of mdx mice compared to normal
mice. Taken together, our data suggest that loss of dystrophin and/or mechanical 
stretch results in the up-regulation of P13K/Akt and NF-kappaB signaling pathways
in skeletal muscle.

PMID: 16741926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Jun;26(12):4519-28.

SUMO modification enhances p66-mediated transcriptional repression of the
Mi-2/NuRD complex.

Gong Z(1), Brackertz M, Renkawitz R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetics, Justus Liebig University Giessen, Heinrich-Buff-Ring
58-62, D-35392 Giessen, Germany.

Human p66alpha and p66beta are two potent transcriptional repressors that
interact with the methyl-CpG-binding domain proteins MBD2 and MBD3. An analysis
of the molecular mechanisms mediating repression resulted in the identification
of two major repression domains in p66alpha and one in p66beta. Both p66alpha and
p66beta are SUMO-modified in vivo: p66alpha at two sites (Lys-30 and Lys-487) and
p66beta at one site (Lys-33). Expression of SUMO1 enhanced the transcriptional
repression activity of Gal-p66alpha and Gal-p66beta. Mutation of the SUMO
modification sites or using a SUMO1 mutant or a dominant negative Ubc9 ligase
resulted in a significant decrease of the transcriptional repression of p66alpha 
and p66beta. The Mi-2/NuRD components MBD3, RbAp46, RbAp48, and HDAC1 were found 
to bind to both p66alpha and p66beta in vivo. Most of the interactions were not
affected by the SUMO site mutations in p66alpha or p66beta, with two exceptions. 
HDAC1 binding to p66alpha was lost in the case of a p66alphaK30R mutant, and
RbAp46 binding was reduced in the case of a p66betaK33R mutant. These results
suggest that interactions within the Mi-2/NuRD complex as well as optimal
repression are mediated by SUMOylation.

PMCID: PMC1489110
PMID: 16738318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Circulation. 2006 Jun 6;113(22):2579-88. Epub 2006 May 30.

Suppression of class I and II histone deacetylases blunts pressure-overload
cardiac hypertrophy.

Kong Y(1), Tannous P, Lu G, Berenji K, Rothermel BA, Olson EN, Hill JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-8573, USA.

BACKGROUND: Recent work has demonstrated the importance of chromatin remodeling, 
especially histone acetylation, in the control of gene expression in the heart.
In cell culture models of cardiac hypertrophy, pharmacological suppression of
histone deacetylases (HDACs) can either blunt or amplify cell growth. Thus, HDAC 
inhibitors hold promise as potential therapeutic agents in hypertrophic heart
disease.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In the present investigation, we studied 2 broad-spectrum
HDAC inhibitors in a physiologically relevant banding model of hypertrophy,
observing dose-responsive suppression of ventricular growth that was well
tolerated in terms of both clinical outcome and cardiac performance measures. In 
both short-term (3-week) and long-term (9-week) trials, cardiomyocyte growth was 
blocked by HDAC inhibition, with no evidence of cell death or apoptosis. Fibrotic
change was diminished in hearts treated with HDAC inhibitors, and collagen
synthesis in isolated cardiac fibroblasts was blocked. Preservation of systolic
function in the setting of blunted hypertrophic growth was documented by
echocardiography and by invasive pressure measurements. The
hypertrophy-associated switch of adult and fetal isoforms of myosin heavy chain
expression was attenuated, which likely contributed to the observed preservation 
of systolic function in HDAC inhibitor-treated hearts.
CONCLUSIONS: Together, these data suggest that HDAC inhibition is a viable
therapeutic strategy that holds promise in the treatment of load-induced heart
disease.

PMCID: PMC4105979
PMID: 16735673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Mol Cancer Ther. 2006 May;5(5):1309-17.

CRA-024781: a novel synthetic inhibitor of histone deacetylase enzymes with
antitumor activity in vitro and in vivo.

Buggy JJ(1), Cao ZA, Bass KE, Verner E, Balasubramanian S, Liu L, Schultz BE,
Young PR, Dalrymple SA.

Author information: 
(1)Celera Genomics, 180 Kimball Way, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA.
drjbuggy@yahoo.com

CRA-024781 is a novel, broad spectrum hydroxamic acid-based inhibitor of histone 
deacetylase (HDAC) that shows antitumor activity in vitro and in vivo
preclinically and is under evaluation in phase I clinical trials for cancer.
CRA-024781 inhibited pure recombinant HDAC1 with a K(i) of 0.007 mumol/L, and
also inhibited the other HDAC isozymes HDAC2, HDAC3/SMRT, HDAC6, HDAC8, and
HDAC10 in the nanomolar range. Treatment of cultured tumor cell lines grown in
vitro with CRA-024781 resulted in the accumulation of acetylated histone and
acetylated tubulin, resulting in an inhibition of tumor cell growth and the
induction of apoptosis. CRA-024781 parenterally administered to mice harboring
HCT116 or DLD-1 colon tumor xenografts resulted in a statistically significant
reduction in tumor growth at doses that were well tolerated as measured by body
weight. Inhibition of tumor growth was accompanied by an increase in the
acetylation of alpha-tubulin in peripheral blood mononuclear cells, and an
alteration in the expression of many genes in the tumors, including several
involved in apoptosis and cell growth. These results reveal CRA-024781 to be a
novel HDAC inhibitor with potent antitumor activity.

PMID: 16731764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Nature. 2006 Jul 6;442(7098):96-9. Epub 2006 May 21.

ING2 PHD domain links histone H3 lysine 4 methylation to active gene repression.

Shi X(1), Hong T, Walter KL, Ewalt M, Michishita E, Hung T, Carney D, Peña P, Lan
F, Kaadige MR, Lacoste N, Cayrou C, Davrazou F, Saha A, Cairns BR, Ayer DE,
Kutateladze TG, Shi Y, Côté J, Chua KF, Gozani O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Stanford University, Stanford, California
94305, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2006 Jul 6;442(7098):31-2.

Dynamic regulation of diverse nuclear processes is intimately linked to covalent 
modifications of chromatin. Much attention has focused on methylation at lysine 4
of histone H3 (H3K4), owing to its association with euchromatic genomic regions. 
H3K4 can be mono-, di- or tri-methylated. Trimethylated H3K4 (H3K4me3) is
preferentially detected at active genes, and is proposed to promote gene
expression through recognition by transcription-activating effector molecules.
Here we identify a novel class of methylated H3K4 effector domains--the PHD
domains of the ING (for inhibitor of growth) family of tumour suppressor
proteins. The ING PHD domains are specific and highly robust binding modules for 
H3K4me3 and H3K4me2. ING2, a native subunit of a repressive mSin3a-HDAC1 histone 
deacetylase complex, binds with high affinity to the trimethylated species. In
response to DNA damage, recognition of H3K4me3 by the ING2 PHD domain stabilizes 
the mSin3a-HDAC1 complex at the promoters of proliferation genes. This pathway
constitutes a new mechanism by which H3K4me3 functions in active gene repression.
Furthermore, ING2 modulates cellular responses to genotoxic insults, and these
functions are critically dependent on ING2 interaction with H3K4me3. Together,
our findings establish a pivotal role for trimethylation of H3K4 in gene
repression and, potentially, tumour suppressor mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3089773
PMID: 16728974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Oct;20(10):2432-43. Epub 2006 May 25.

Histone deacetylase 1-mediated histone modification regulates osteoblast
differentiation.

Lee HW(1), Suh JH, Kim AY, Lee YS, Park SY, Kim JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Research Center for Functional Cellulomics,
Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.

Osteogenesis is a complex process associated with dramatic changes in gene
expression. To elucidate whether modifications in chromatin structure are
involved in osteoblast differentiation, we examined the expression levels of
histone deacetylases (HDACs) and the degree of histone acetylation at the
promoter regions of osteogenic genes. During osteogenesis, total HDAC enzymatic
activity was decreased with significant reduction in HDAC1 expression.
Consistently, recruitment of HDAC1 to the promoters of osteoblast marker genes,
including osterix and osteocalcin, was down-regulated, whereas histone H3 and H4 
were hyperacetylated at those promoters during osteoblast differentiation.
Moreover, suppression of HDAC activity with a HDAC inhibitor, sodium butyrate,
accelerated osteogenesis by inducing osteoblast marker genes including
osteopontin and alkaline phosphatase. Consistently, knockdown of HDAC1 by the
short interference RNA system stimulated osteoblast differentiation. Taken
together, these data propose that down-regulation of HDAC1 is an important
process for osteogenesis.

PMID: 16728531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Nat Cell Biol. 2006 Jun;8(6):631-9. Epub 2006 May 14.

Roles of sumoylation of a reptin chromatin-remodelling complex in cancer
metastasis.

Kim JH(1), Choi HJ, Kim B, Kim MH, Lee JM, Kim IS, Lee MH, Choi SJ, Kim KI, Kim
SI, Chung CH, Baek SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Research Center for Functional Cellulomics,
Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, South Korea.

Defining the functional modules within transcriptional regulatory factors that
govern switching between repression and activation events is a central issue in
biology. Recently, we have reported the dynamic role of a beta-catenin-reptin
chromatin remodelling complex in regulating a metastasis suppressor gene KAI1
(ref.1), which is capable of inhibiting the progression of tumour metastasis.
Here, we identify signalling factors that confer repressive function on reptin
and hence repress the expression of KAI1. Biochemical purification of a
reptin-containing complex has revealed the presence of specific desumoylating
enzymes that reverse the sumoylation of reptin that underlies its function as a
repressor. Desumoylation of reptin alters the repressive function of reptin and
its association with HDAC1. Furthermore, the sumoylation status of reptin
modulates the invasive activity of cancer cells with metastatic potential. These 
data clearly define a functional model and provide a novel link for SUMO
modification in cancer metastasis.

PMID: 16699503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Cancer Cell. 2006 May;9(5):367-78.

NKX3.1 stabilizes p53, inhibits AKT activation, and blocks prostate cancer
initiation caused by PTEN loss.

Lei Q(1), Jiao J, Xin L, Chang CJ, Wang S, Gao J, Gleave ME, Witte ON, Liu X, Wu 
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, David Geffen School of
Medicine at the University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California
90095, USA.

We demonstrate that PTEN loss causes reduced NKX3.1 expression in both murine and
human prostate cancers. Restoration of Nkx3.1 expression in vivo in Pten null
epithelium leads to decreased cell proliferation, increased cell death, and
prevention of tumor initiation. Whereas androgen receptor (AR) positively
regulates NKX3.1 expression, NKX3.1 negatively modulates AR transcription and
consequently the AR-associated signaling events. Consistent with its tumor
suppressor functions, NKX3.1 engages cell cycle and cell death machinery via
association with HDAC1, leading to increased p53 acetylation and half-life
through MDM2-dependent mechanisms. Importantly, overexpression of Nkx3.1 has
little effect on Pten wild-type epithelium, suggesting that PTEN plays a
predominant role in PTEN-NKX3.1 interplay. Manipulating NKX3.1 expression may
serve as a therapeutic strategy for treating PTEN-deficient prostate cancers.

PMID: 16697957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Cell. 2006 May 5;125(3):593-605.

Homeodomain-mediated beta-catenin-dependent switching events dictate cell-lineage
determination.

Olson LE(1), Tollkuhn J, Scafoglio C, Krones A, Zhang J, Ohgi KA, Wu W, Taketo
MM, Kemler R, Grosschedl R, Rose D, Li X, Rosenfeld MG.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department and School of Medicine, University
of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

While the biological roles of canonical Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in development
and disease are well documented, understanding the molecular logic underlying the
functionally distinct nuclear transcriptional programs mediating the diverse
functions of beta-catenin remains a major challenge. Here, we report an
unexpected strategy for beta-catenin-dependent regulation of cell-lineage
determination based on interactions between beta-catenin and a specific
homeodomain factor, Prop1, rather than Lef/Tcfs. beta-catenin acts as a binary
switch to simultaneously activate expression of the critical lineage-determining 
transcription factor, Pit1, and to repress the gene encoding the
lineage-inhibiting transcription factor, Hesx1, acting via TLE/Reptin/HDAC1
corepressor complexes. The strategy of functionally distinct actions of a
homeodomain factor in response to Wnt signaling is suggested to be prototypic of 
a widely used mechanism for generating diverse cell types from pluripotent
precursor cells in response to common signaling pathways during organogenesis.

PMID: 16678101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Cancer Res. 2006 May 1;66(9):4584-90.

Trans-repressive effect of NUP98-PMX1 on PMX1-regulated c-FOS gene through
recruitment of histone deacetylase 1 by FG repeats.

Bai XT(1), Gu BW, Yin T, Niu C, Xi XD, Zhang J, Chen Z, Chen SJ.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics and Shanghai Institute of Hematology,
Ruijin Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai,
P.R. China.

The formation of fusion genes between NUP98 and members of the HOX family
represents a critical factor for the genesis of acute leukemia or acute
transformation of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). To gain insights into the
molecular mechanisms underlying the leukemogenesis of NUP98-HOX fusion products, 
we cloned NUP98-PMX1 from a CML-blast crisis patient with t(1;11) as a secondary 
chromosomal translocation, and functionally studied the fusion products in detail
through various molecular and protein biochemical assays. In addition to many
interesting features, we have found that the NUP98-PMX1 fusion protein exerts a
repressive effect on PMX1 or serum response factor-mediated c-FOS activation,
probably through the recruitment of a common corepressor histone deacetylase 1 by
FG domains of the NUP98-PMX1 fusion protein. Moreover, we have provided evidence 
that the FG domains of NUP98-PMX1 and two other NUP98-containing fusion proteins,
i.e., NUP98-HOXA9 and NUP98-HOXC11, all exhibit dual binding ability to both CREB
binding protein, a coactivator, and histone deacetylase 1, a corepressor.
Accordingly, we have hypothesized that this dual binding activity is shared by
most, if not all, NUP98-HOX-involved fusion proteins, enabling these fusion
proteins to act as both trans-activators and trans-repressors, and contributing
to the genesis of acute leukemia or acute transformation of CML.

PMID: 16651408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Apr;14(2):293-7.

[Regulatory effect of curcumin on p300 and HDAC1 in B-NHL cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu Q(1), Chen Y, Li XG, Tang YY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hematology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430022, China.

The purpose of this study was to investigate the effect of curcumin on
proliferation of B-NHL Raji cell line and explore the relationship between this
effect and regulatory expression of p300 and HDAC1 transcription. The in vitro
cultured Raji cells were treated with curcumin at various concentrations (6.25-50
micromol/L) and at different time points (0, 6, 12, 24 and 48 hours), the
inhibitory ratio of cell growth was measured by MTT assay, the cell apoptosis
rate was detected by flow cytometry with Annexin V-FITC/PI double staining, the
changes of p300 and HDAC1 mRNA expression and protein level in Raji cells were
determined by RT-PCR and Western blot. The results showed that the curcumin could
inhibit Raji cell proliferation in significant time-and concentration-dependent
manners, IC50 at 24 hours was 25 micromol/L; the curcumin could induce apoptosis 
of Raji cells in concentration-dependent manner, apoptosis rate was
14.38%-61.18%. The curcumin significantly inhibited activity and expression of
p300 and HDAC1. At IC50 concentration, expression of p300 and HDAC1 mRNA and
protein level decreased with time-dependent manner, difference between tested and
control groups was significant (P < 0.05). It is concluded that the curcumin can 
inhibit proliferation of B-NHL Raji cells and promote apoptosis of those cells.
Curcumin can inhibit the activity and expression of the transcriptional
co-activator p300 and HDAC1, which may be involved in its pharmacological
mechanisms on B lymphoma cells.

PMID: 16638200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. BMC Genomics. 2006 Apr 25;7:90.

Differential expression of selected histone modifier genes in human solid
cancers.

Ozdag H(1), Teschendorff AE, Ahmed AA, Hyland SJ, Blenkiron C, Bobrow L,
Veerakumarasivam A, Burtt G, Subkhankulova T, Arends MJ, Collins VP, Bowtell D,
Kouzarides T, Brenton JD, Caldas C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Hutchison/MRC Research Centre, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 2XZ, UK. hilalozdag@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Post-translational modification of histones resulting in chromatin
remodelling plays a key role in the regulation of gene expression. Here we report
characteristic patterns of expression of 12 members of 3 classes of chromatin
modifier genes in 6 different cancer types: histone acetyltransferases (HATs)-
EP300, CREBBP, and PCAF; histone deacetylases (HDACs)- HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC4,
HDAC5, HDAC7A, and SIRT1; and histone methyltransferases (HMTs)- SUV39H1and
SUV39H2. Expression of each gene in 225 samples (135 primary tumours, 47 cancer
cell lines, and 43 normal tissues) was analysedby QRT-PCR, normalized with 8
housekeeping genes, and given as a ratio by comparison with a universal reference
RNA.
RESULTS: This involved a total of 13,000 PCR assays allowing for rigorous
analysis by fitting a linear regression model to the data. Mutation analysis of
HDAC1, HDAC2, SUV39H1, and SUV39H2 revealed only two out of 181 cancer samples
(both cell lines) with significant coding-sequence alterations. Supervised
analysis and Independent Component Analysis showed that expression of many of
these genes was able to discriminate tumour samples from their normal
counterparts. Clustering based on the normalized expression ratios of the 12
genes also showed that most samples were grouped according to tissue type. Using 
a linear discriminant classifier and internal cross-validation revealed that with
as few as 5 of the 12 genes, SIRT1, CREBBP, HDAC7A, HDAC5 and PCAF, most samples 
were correctly assigned.
CONCLUSION: The expression patterns of HATs, HDACs, and HMTs suggest these genes 
are important in neoplastic transformation and have characteristic patterns of
expression depending on tissue of origin, with implications for potential
clinical application.

PMCID: PMC1475574
PMID: 16638127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jun 30;281(26):17968-76. Epub 2006 Apr 21.

Dissecting the biological functions of Drosophila histone deacetylases by RNA
interference and transcriptional profiling.

Foglietti C(1), Filocamo G, Cundari E, De Rinaldis E, Lahm A, Cortese R,
Steinkühler C.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Ricerche di Biologia Molecolare P. Angeletti-IRBM, Merck Research 
Laboratories Rome, Via Pontina Km. 30,600, 00040 Pomezia, Italy.

Zinc-dependent histone deacetylases (HDACs) are a family of hydrolases first
identified as components of transcriptional repressor complexes, where they act
by deacetylating lysine residues at the N-terminal extensions of core histones,
thereby affecting transcription. To get more insight into the biological
functions of the individual HDAC family members, we have used RNA interference in
combination with microarray analysis in Drosophila S2 cells. Silencing of
Drosophila HDAC1 (DHDAC1), but not of the other DHDAC family members, leads to
increased histone acetylation. Silencing of either DHDAC1 or DHDAC3 leads to cell
growth inhibition and deregulated transcription of both common and distinct
groups of genes. Silencing DHDAC2 leads to increased tubulin acetylation levels
but was not associated with a deregulation of gene expression. No growth of
phenotype and no significant deregulation of gene expression was observed upon
silencing of DHDAC4 and DHDACX. Loss of DHDAC1 or exposure of S2 cells to the
small molecule HDAC inhibitor trichostatin both lead to a G(2) arrest and were
associated with significantly overlapping gene expression signatures in which
genes involved in nucleobase and lipid metabolism, DNA replication, cell cycle
regulation, and signal transduction were over-represented. A large number of
these genes were shown to also be deregulated upon loss of the co-repressor SIN3 
(Pile, L. A., Spellman, P. T., Katzenberger, R. J., and Wassarman, D. A. (2003)
J. Biol. Chem. 278, 37840-37848). We conclude the following. 1) DHDAC1 and -3
have distinct functions in the control of gene expression. 2) Under the tested
conditions, DHDAC2, -4, and X have no detectable transcriptional functions in S2 
cells. 3) The anti-proliferative and transcriptional effects of trichostatin are 
largely recapitulated by the loss of DHDAC1. 4) The deacetylase activity of
DHDAC1 significantly contributes to the repressor function of SIN3.

PMID: 16632473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Mol Cell. 2006 Apr 21;22(2):231-43.

Phosphorylation of SATB1, a global gene regulator, acts as a molecular switch
regulating its transcriptional activity in vivo.

Pavan Kumar P(1), Purbey PK, Sinha CK, Notani D, Limaye A, Jayani RS, Galande S.

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Cell Science, Ganeshkhind, Pune 411007, India.

SATB1 regulates gene expression by acting as a "docking site" for several
chromatin remodeling enzymes and also by recruiting corepressors (HDACs) or
coactivators (HATs) directly to promoters. However, how these contrasting
effectors act at the level of SATB1 is not clear. We show here that
phosphorylation by PKC acts as a switch to determine whether SATB1 interacts with
HDAC1 or PCAF. Phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of SATB1 exerted opposing
effects on MAR-linked reporter activity in vivo. SATB1 interacted with both
CBP/p300 and PCAF HATs; however, these interactions resulted in the acetylation
of the PDZ-like domain of SATB1 by PCAF but not by CBP/p300 and resulted in loss 
of its DNA binding activity. Using the T cell activation model, we provide
mechanistic insights into how IL-2 transcription is reciprocally governed by the 
phosphorylation status of SATB1 and propose that a similar mechanism may dictate 
the ability of SATB1 to function as a global regulator.

PMID: 16630892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jun 23;281(25):16943-50. Epub 2006 Apr 19.

Excess HDM2 impacts cell cycle and apoptosis and has a selective effect on
p53-dependent transcription.

Ohkubo S(1), Tanaka T, Taya Y, Kitazato K, Prives C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, New York
10027, USA.

Mutational inactivation of p53 is only one of the ways that tumors lose p53
function. An alternate route is through overexpression of HDM2, the negative
regulator of p53. To further understand how excess HDM2 regulates p53-mediated
functions, we generated H1299 cell clones that constitutively express both
ectopic HDM2 and tetracycline-regulated inducible p53. We found that over a range
of p53 concentrations constitutively expressed HDM2 did not affect the levels of 
p53 protein. Nevertheless, cells with excess HDM2 displayed numerous changes in
their response to p53. After DNA damage, such cells had both increased
p53-mediated G2 arrest and reduced cell death. They also showed selective
impairment of p53 target gene induction in that some p53 targets were unaffected 
whereas others were markedly less well induced in the presence of extra HDM2
protein. We also found that excess HDM2 was correlated with reduced p53
acetylation but did not affect p53 association with target promoters in vivo.
Indeed, there was no significant difference in the amount of HDM2 associated with
p53 at target promoters that differed in their expression depending on the
presence of extra HDM2. Thus, HDM2 can selectively down-regulate the
transcription function of p53 without either degrading p53 or affecting the
interaction of p53 with target promoters.

PMID: 16624812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. J Cell Sci. 2006 May 15;119(Pt 10):1985-91. Epub 2006 Apr 18.

Inefficient reprogramming of the hematopoietic stem cell genome following nuclear
transfer.

Inoue K(1), Ogonuki N, Miki H, Hirose M, Noda S, Kim JM, Aoki F, Miyoshi H, Ogura
A.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Bioresource Center, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0074, Japan.

In general, cloning undifferentiated preimplantation embryos (blastomeres) or
embryonic stem cells is more efficient than cloning differentiated somatic cells.
Therefore, there has been an assumption that tissue-specific stem cells might
serve as efficient donors for nuclear transfer because of the undifferentiated
state of their genome. Here, we show that this is not the case with adult
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). Although we have demonstrated for the first time
that mouse HSCs can be cloned to generate offspring, the birth rates (0-0.7%)
were lowest among the clones tested (cumulus, immature Sertoli and fibroblast
cells). Only 6% of reconstructed embryos reached the morula or blastocyst stage
in vitro (versus 46% for cumulus clones; P < 5 x 10(-10)). Transcription and gene
expression analyses of HSC clone embryos revealed that they initiated zygotic
gene activation (ZGA) at the appropriate timing, but failed to activate five out 
of six important embryonic genes examined, including Hdac1 (encoding histone
deacetylase 1), a key regulator of subsequent ZGA. These results suggest that the
HSC genome has less plasticity than we imagined, at least in terms of
reprogrammability in the ooplasm after nuclear transfer.

PMID: 16621892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Cell Biochem. 2006 Aug 15;98(6):1408-23.

Regulatory processes affecting androgen receptor expression, stability, and
function: potential targets to treat hormone-refractory prostate cancer.

Reddy GP(1), Barrack ER, Dou QP, Menon M, Pelley R, Sarkar FH, Sheng S.

Author information: 
(1)Vattikuti Urology Institute, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, Michigan 48202,
USA. preddy1@hfhs.org

Prostate cancer cells rely on androgen receptor (AR) for proliferation and
survival. Therefore, curing prostate cancer will require elimination of AR.
Although androgen is the natural ligand that activates AR, AR activity is also
subject to regulation by growth factor/growth factor receptor-stimulated
signaling pathways that control the cell cycle. Cell cycle regulatory proteins
and protein kinases in signaling pathways affected by growth factors can lead to 
AR activation in the absence of androgen. While downstream signaling proteins
such as cyclins, cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs), and pRB can modulate AR
activity, upstream signaling pathways involving protein kinases such as
mitogen-activated protein kinases, protein kinase A, and protein kinase B/Akt can
affect post-translational modification of AR to affect not only AR function but
also AR stability. Calcium and calmodulin (CaM), essential for proliferation and 
viability of a number of cells, including prostate cancer cells, play an
important role in AR expression, stability, and function. CaM affects AR partly
by interacting directly with AR and partly by activating protein kinases such as 
Akt and DNA-PK that can phosphorylate AR. The ubiquitin/26S proteasome pathway
responsible for timely destruction of cell cycle regulatory proteins whose levels
impede cell cycle progression also induces AR expression by activating NF-kappaB,
and promotes AR activity by participating in the assembly of an AR transcription 
complex. Maspin, a serine protease inhibitor that is known mostly for its role as
a tumor suppressor can also regulate AR intracellular localization and function
by competing with AR for binding to the chaperone protein Hsp90 and co-repressor 
HDAC1, respectively. This perspective reviews the experimental evidence
implicating these diverse cellular processes in AR expression, stability, and/or 
function, and presents a rationale for disrupting these cellular processes as a
viable option for the treatment of both the hormone-sensitive and the
hormone-insensitive prostate cancer.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16619263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Cancer Cell. 2006 Apr;9(4):249-60.

The tetramer structure of the Nervy homology two domain, NHR2, is critical for
AML1/ETO's activity.

Liu Y(1), Cheney MD, Gaudet JJ, Chruszcz M, Lukasik SM, Sugiyama D, Lary J, Cole 
J, Dauter Z, Minor W, Speck NA, Bushweller JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2006 Apr;9(4):241-2.

AML1/ETO is the chimeric protein resulting from the t(8;21) in acute myeloid
leukemia. The Nervy homology 2 (NHR2) domain in ETO mediates oligomerization and 
AML1/ETO's interactions with ETO, MTGR1, and MTG16, and with the corepressor
molecules mSin3A and HDAC1 and HDAC3. We solved the NHR2 domain structure and
found it to be an alpha-helical tetramer. We show that oligomerization
contributes to AML1/ETO's inhibition of granulocyte differentiation, is essential
for its ability to enhance the clonogenic potential of primary mouse bone marrow 
cells, and affects AML1/ETO's activity on several endogenous genes.
Oligomerization is also required for AML1/ETO's interactions with ETO, MTGR1, and
MTG16, but not with other corepressor molecules.

PMID: 16616331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 May;26(9):3550-64.

Neuroprotection by histone deacetylase-related protein.

Morrison BE(1), Majdzadeh N, Zhang X, Lyles A, Bassel-Duby R, Olson EN, D'Mello
SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Texas at Dallas, 2601 
N. Floyd Road, Richardson, TX 75083, USA.

The expression of histone deacetylase-related protein (HDRP) is reduced in
neurons undergoing apoptosis. Forced reduction of HDRP expression in healthy
neurons by treatment with antisense oligonucleotides also induces cell death.
Likewise, neurons cultured from mice lacking HDRP are more vulnerable to cell
death. Adenovirally mediated expression of HDRP prevents neuronal death, showing 
that HDRP is a neuroprotective protein. Neuroprotection by forced expression of
HDRP is not accompanied by activation of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-Akt or
Raf-MEK-ERK signaling pathway, and treatment with pharmacological inhibitors of
these pathways fails to inhibit the neuroprotection by HDRP. Stimulation of c-Jun
phosphorylation and expression, an essential feature of neuronal death, is
prevented by HDRP. We found that HDRP associates with c-Jun N-terminal kinase
(JNK) and inhibits its activity, thus explaining the inhibition of c-Jun
phosphorylation by HDRP. HDRP also interacts with histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1)
and recruits it to the c-Jun gene promoter, resulting in an inhibition of histone
H3 acetylation at the c-Jun promoter. Although HDRP lacks intrinsic deacetylase
activity, treatment with pharmacological inhibitors of histone deacetylases
induces apoptosis even in the presence of ectopically expressed HDRP,
underscoring the importance of c-Jun promoter deacetylation by HDRP-HDAC1 in
HDRP-mediated neuroprotection. Our results suggest that neuroprotection by HDRP
is mediated by the inhibition of c-Jun through its interaction with JNK and
HDAC1.

PMCID: PMC1447420
PMID: 16611996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Hepatology. 2006 Mar;43(3):425-34.

HDAC inhibitor treatment of hepatoma cells induces both TRAIL-independent
apoptosis and restoration of sensitivity to TRAIL.

Pathil A(1), Armeanu S, Venturelli S, Mascagni P, Weiss TS, Gregor M, Lauer UM,
Bitzer M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, Medical University Clinic, Tübingen,
Germany.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) displays a striking resistance to chemotherapeutic
drugs or innovative tumor cell apoptosis-inducing agents such as tumor necrosis
factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL). Recently, we found 2 histone
deacetylase inhibitors (HDAC-I), valproic acid and ITF2357, exhibiting inherent
therapeutic activity against HCC. In TRAIL-sensitive cancer cells, the mechanism 
of HDAC-I-induced cell death has been identified to be TRAIL-dependent by
inducing apoptosis in an autocrine fashion. In contrast, in HCC-derived cells, a 
prototype of TRAIL-resistant tumor cells, we found a HDAC-I-mediated apoptosis
that works independently of TRAIL and upregulation of death receptors or their
cognate ligands. Interestingly, TRAIL resistance could be overcome by a
combinatorial application of HDAC-I and TRAIL, increasing the fraction of
apoptotic cells two- to threefold compared with HDAC-I treatment alone, whereas
any premature HDAC-I withdrawal rapidly restored TRAIL resistance. Furthermore, a
tumor cell-specific downregulation of the FLICE inhibitory protein (FLIP) was
observed, constituting a new mechanism of TRAIL sensitivity restoration by
HDAC-I. In contrast, FLIP levels in primary human hepatocytes (PHH) from
different donors were upregulated by HDAC-I. Importantly, combination
HDAC-I/TRAIL treatment did not induce any cytotoxicity in nonmalignant PHH. In
conclusion, HDAC-I compounds, exhibiting a favorable in vivo profile and inherent
activity against HCC cells, are able to selectively overcome the resistance of
HCC cells toward TRAIL. Specific upregulation of intracellular FLIP protein
levels in nonmalignant hepatocytes could enhance the therapeutic window for
clinical applications of TRAIL, opening up a highly specific new treatment option
for advanced HCC.

PMID: 16583461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Cell Cycle. 2006 Apr;5(7):766-74. Epub 2006 Apr 1.

Histone deacetylation is required for orderly meiosis.

Wang Q(1), Yin S, Ai JS, Liang CG, Hou Y, Chen DY, Schatten H, Sun QY.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, Institute of Zoology and
Graduate School, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Histone acetylation is associated with a diversity of chromatin-related processes
in mitosis. However, its roles in mammalian oocyte meiosis are largely unknown.
In the present study, we first investigated in detail the acetylation changes
during porcine oocyte maturation using a panel of antibodies specific for the
critical acetylated forms of histone H3 and H4, and showed meiosis
stage-dependent and lysine residue-specific patterns of histone acetylation. By
using trichostatin A (TSA), a general inhibitor of histone deacetylases (HDACs), 
we further determined that selective inhibition of histone deacetylation (thereby
maintaining hyperacetylation) delayed the onset of germinal vesicle breakdown and
produced a high frequency of lagging chromosomes or chromatin bridges at anaphase
and telophase I (AT-I), suggesting that histone deacetylation is required for
orderly meiotic resumption and accurate chromosome segregation in porcine
oocytes. In addition, we examined the localization and expression of HDAC1 by
performing immunofluorescence and immunoblotting analysis. The results showed
that subcellular translocation, expression level and phosphorylated modification 
of HDAC1 were temporally regulated and likely to coparticipate in the
establishment of histone acetylation profiles in oocyte meiosis.

PMID: 16582639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006 Mar 31;34(6):1798-806. Print 2006.

Acetylation of UBF changes during the cell cycle and regulates the interaction of
UBF with RNA polymerase I.

Meraner J(1), Lechner M, Loidl A, Goralik-Schramel M, Voit R, Grummt I, Loidl P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology, Biocenter, Innsbruck Medical University, A-6020
Innsbruck, Austria.

The upstream binding factor UBF, an activator of RNA polymerase I transcription, 
is posttranslationally modified by phosphorylation and acetylation. We found that
in NIH3T3 cells, UBF is acetylated in S-phase but not in G1-phase. To assess the 
role of acetylation in regulation of UBF activity, we have established an NIH3T3 
cell line that inducibly overexpresses HDAC1. Both in vivo and in vitro, HDAC1
efficiently hypoacetylates UBF. Immunoprecipitation with antibodies against the
Pol I-associated factor PAF53 co-precipitated UBF in mock cells but not in cells 
overexpressing HDAC1. Pull-down experiments showed that acetylation of UBF
augments the interaction with Pol I. Consistent with acetylation of UBF being
important for association of PAF53 and recruitment of Pol I, the level of Pol I
associated with rDNA and pre-rRNA synthesis were reduced in cells overexpressing 
HDAC1. The results suggest that acetylation and deacetylation of UBF regulate
rRNA synthesis during cell cycle progression.

PMCID: PMC1421502
PMID: 16582105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Apr;26(8):3106-13.

Positive and negative regulation of the innate antiviral response and beta
interferon gene expression by deacetylation.

Nusinzon I(1), Horvath CM.

Author information: 
(1)Pancoe-ENH Research Pavilion, Northwestern University, 2200 Campus Drive,
Evanston, IL 60208, USA.

Beta interferon (IFN-beta) gene expression in response to virus infection relies 
on the dynamic assembly of a multiprotein enhanceosome complex that is initiated 
by the activation of two inducible transcription factors, interferon regulatory
factor 3 (IRF3) and NF-kappaB. Virus or double-stranded RNA-induced activation of
IFN-beta gene expression is prevented by the addition of protein deacetylase
inhibitors. The isolated IRF-responsive positive regulatory domain was found to
require deacetylation for its activity, but IRF3 protein activation leading to
its nuclear translocation and DNA binding was not impaired by deacetylase
inhibition. In contrast, NF-kappaB activity was not affected by deacetylase
inhibitors. RNA interference indicated that several deacetylase enzymes,
including histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), HDAC8, and HDAC6, influence IFN-beta
gene expression with opposing effects. While HDAC1 and HDAC8 repress IFN-beta
expression, HDAC6 acts as a coactivator essential for enhancer activity. Virus
replication is enhanced in HDAC6-depleted cells, demonstrating HDAC6 is an
essential component of innate antiviral immunity.

PMCID: PMC1446935
PMID: 16581785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Virol. 2006 Apr;80(8):3752-64.

U(S)3 and U(S)3.5 protein kinases of herpes simplex virus 1 differ with respect
to their functions in blocking apoptosis and in virion maturation and egress.

Poon AP(1), Benetti L, Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)The Marjorie B. Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, The University of Chicago,
910 East 58th Street, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Previously, we reported that the U(S)3 protein kinase blocks apoptosis, that it
activates protein kinase A (PKA), that activation of PKA blocks apoptosis in
cells infected with a U(S)3 deletion mutant, and that an overlapping
transcriptional unit encodes a truncated kinase designated U(S)3.5. Here, we
report the properties of the kinases based on comparisons of herpes simplex virus
and baculoviruses expressing U(S)3 or U(S)3.5 kinase. Specifically, we report the
following. (i) Both kinases mediate the phosphorylation of HDAC1, HDAC2, and the 
PKA regulatory IIalpha subunit in the absence of other viral proteins. (ii) Both 
enzymes mediate the phosphorylation of largely identical sets of proteins
carrying the phosphorylation consensus site of PKA, but only U(S)3 blocks
apoptosis, suggesting that it is U(S)3 and not PKA that is responsible for the
phosphorylation of the proteins bearing the shared consensus phosphorylation site
and the antiapoptotic activity. (iii) Both kinases cofractionate with
mitochondria. Immune depletion of the U(S)3 and U(S)3.5 kinases from the
cytoplasm removed the kinases from the supernatant fraction, but not from the
mitochondrial fraction, and therefore, if the antiapoptotic activity of the U(S)3
kinase is expressed in mitochondria, the localization signal and the
antiapoptotic functions are located on different parts of the protein. (iv) The
U(S)3 protein kinase is required for the translocation of virus particles from
the nucleus. Although the U(L)31 protein is phosphorylated in cells infected with
the mutant expressing U(S)3.5 kinase, the release of virus particles from nuclei 
was impeded in some cells, suggesting that the U(S)3 kinase affects the
modification of the nuclear membrane more efficiently than the U(S)3.5 kinase.

PMCID: PMC1440442
PMID: 16571792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Biochem J. 2006 Jul 1;397(1):169-77.

INSM1 functions as a transcriptional repressor of the neuroD/beta2 gene through
the recruitment of cyclin D1 and histone deacetylases.

Liu WD(1), Wang HW, Muguira M, Breslin MB, Lan MS.

Author information: 
(1)The Research Institute for Children, Children's Hospital, New Orleans, LA
70118, USA.

INSM1/IA-1 (insulinoma-associated 1) is a developmentally regulated zinc-finger
transcription factor, exclusively expressed in the foetal pancreas and nervous
system, and in tumours of neuroendocrine origin. We have identified an INSM1
binding site in the neuroD/beta2 promoter and demonstrated transcriptional
repressor activity of INSM1 by transient transfection assay. A chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay confirmed that in vivo INSM1 is situated on the
promoter region of the neuroD/beta2 gene. In an attempt to elucidate the
molecular mechanism of transcriptional repression by the INSM1 gene, cyclin D1
was identified as an interacting protein by using a 45-day-old human foetal brain
cDNA library and a yeast two-hybrid screen. The physical association between
INSM1 and cyclin D1 was confirmed by in vitro and in vivo pull-down assay. Cyclin
D1 co-operates with INSM1 and suppresses neuroD/beta2 promoter activity.
Co-immunoprecipitation of INSM1, cyclin D1 and HDACs (histone deacetylases) in
mammalian cells revealed that INSM1 interacts with HDAC-1 and -3 and that this
interaction is mediated through cyclin D1. Overexpression of cyclin D1 and HDAC-3
significantly enhanced the transcriptional repression activity of INSM1 on the
neuroD/beta2 promoter. A further chromatin immunoprecipitation assay confirmed
that HDAC-3 occupies this same region of the neuroD/beta2 promoter, by forming a 
transcription complex with INSM1. Thus we conclude that INSM1 recruits cyclin D1 
and HDACs, which confer transcriptional repressor activity.

PMCID: PMC1479746
PMID: 16569215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Exp Med. 2006 Apr 17;203(4):821-8. Epub 2006 Mar 20.

In vivo analysis of the role of aberrant histone deacetylase recruitment and RAR 
alpha blockade in the pathogenesis of acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Matsushita H(1), Scaglioni PP, Bhaumik M, Rego EM, Cai LF, Majid SM, Miyachi H,
Kakizuka A, Miller WH Jr, Pandolfi PP.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology and Genetics Program, Department of Pathology, Weill Graduate
School of Medical Sciences, Cornell University, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY 10021, USA.

The promyelocytic leukemia-retinoic acid receptor alpha (PML-RARalpha) protein of
acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is oncogenic in vivo. It has been hypothesized
that the ability of PML-RARalpha to inhibit RARalpha function through
PML-dependent aberrant recruitment of histone deacetylases (HDACs) and chromatin 
remodeling is the key initiating event for leukemogenesis. To elucidate the role 
of HDAC in this process, we have generated HDAC1-RARalpha fusion proteins and
tested their activity and oncogenicity in vitro and in vivo in transgenic mice
(TM). In parallel, we studied the in vivo leukemogenic potential of dominant
negative (DN) and truncated RARalpha mutants, as well as that of PML-RARalpha
mutants that are insensitive to retinoic acid. Surprisingly, although
HDAC1-RARalpha did act as a bona fide DN RARalpha mutant in cellular in vitro and
in cell culture, this fusion protein, as well as other DN RARalpha mutants, did
not cause a block in myeloid differentiation in vivo in TM and were not
leukemogenic. Comparative analysis of these TM and of TM/PML(-/-) and p53(-/-)
compound mutants lends support to a model by which the RARalpha and PML blockade 
is necessary, but not sufficient, for leukemogenesis and the PML domain of the
fusion protein provides unique functions that are required for leukemia
initiation.

PMCID: PMC2118271
PMID: 16549595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. J Biol Chem. 2006 May 5;281(18):12495-505. Epub 2006 Mar 15.

Transcriptional repression of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 by AP-4.

Imai K(1), Okamoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Nagoya City University Graduate 
School of Medical Sciences, 1 Kawasumi, Mizuho-cho, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya, Aichi
467-8601, Japan.

Elucidation of the mechanism of transcriptional silencing of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) provirus in latently infected cells is
crucial to understand the pathophysiology of HIV-1 infection and to develop novel
therapies. Here we demonstrate that AP-4 is responsible for the transcriptional
repression of HIV-1. We found that AP-4 site within the viral long terminal
repeat (LTR) is well conserved in the majority of HIV-1 subtypes and that AP-4
represses HIV-1 gene expression by recruiting histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1 as
well as by masking TATA-binding protein to TATA box. AP-4-mediated
transcriptional repression was inhibited by an HDAC inhibitor, tricostatin A, and
could be exerted even at distant locations from the TATA box. In addition, AP-4
interacted with HDAC1 both in vivo and in vitro. Moreover, chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays have revealed that AP-4 and HDAC1 are present in the
HIV-1 LTR promoter in latently infected ACH2 and U1 cells, and they are
dissociated from the promoter concomitantly with the association of acetylated
histone H3, TBP, and RNA polymerase II upon TNF-alpha stimulation of HIV-1
replication. Furthermore, when AP-4 is knocked down by siRNA, HIV-1 production
was greatly augmented in cells transfected with a full-length HIV-1 clone. These 
results suggest that AP-4 may be responsible for transcriptional quiescence of
latent HIV-1 provirus and give a molecular basis to the reported efficacy of
combination therapy of conventional anti-HIV drugs with an HDAC inhibitor in
accelerating the clearance of HIV-1 from individuals infected with the virus.

PMID: 16540471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. J Biol Chem. 2006 May 12;281(19):13548-58. Epub 2006 Mar 13.

Histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3) and other class I HDACs regulate colon cell
maturation and p21 expression and are deregulated in human colon cancer.

Wilson AJ(1), Byun DS, Popova N, Murray LB, L'Italien K, Sowa Y, Arango D,
Velcich A, Augenlicht LH, Mariadason JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Albert Einstein Cancer Center, Montefiore Medical
Center, Bronx, New York 10467, USA.

Inhibitors of histone deacetylases (HDACs) induce growth arrest, differentiation,
and apoptosis of colon cancer cell lines in vitro and have demonstrated
anti-cancer efficacy in clinical trials. Whereas a role for HDAC1 and -2 in
mediating components of the HDAC inhibitor response has been reported, the role
of HDAC3 is unknown. Here we demonstrate increased protein expression of HDAC3 in
human colon tumors and in duodenal adenomas from Apc1638(N/+) mice. HDAC3 was
also maximally expressed in proliferating crypt cells in normal intestine.
Silencing of HDAC3 expression in colon cancer cell lines resulted in growth
inhibition, a decrease in cell survival, and increased apoptosis. Similar effects
were observed for HDAC2 and, to a lesser extent, for HDAC1. HDAC3 silencing also 
selectively induced expression of alkaline phosphatase, a marker of colon cell
maturation. Concurrent with its effect on cell growth, overexpression of HDAC3
and other Class I HDACs inhibited basal and butyrate-induced p21 transcription in
a Sp1/Sp3-dependent manner, whereas silencing of HDAC3 stimulated p21 promoter
activity and expression. However, the magnitude of the effects elicited by
silencing of individual Class I HDACs was significantly less than that induced by
HDAC inhibitors. These findings identify HDAC3 as a gene deregulated in human
colon cancer and as a novel regulator of colon cell maturation and p21
expression. These findings also demonstrate that multiple Class I HDACs are
involved in repressing p21 and suggest that the growth-inhibitory and apoptotic
effects induced by HDAC inhibitors are probably mediated through the inhibition
of multiple HDACs.

PMID: 16533812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006 Mar 9;34(5):1459-69. Print 2006.

Histone deacetylase 3 binds to and regulates the GCMa transcription factor.

Chuang HC(1), Chang CW, Chang GD, Yao TP, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Biochemical Sciences, National Taiwan University, Taipei
106, Taiwan.

Human GCMa transcription factor regulates expression of syncytin, a placental
fusogenic protein mediating trophoblastic fusion. Recently, we have demonstrated 
that CBP-mediated GCMa acetylation underlies the activated cAMP/PKA signaling
pathway that stimulates trophoblastic fusion. Because protein acetylation is a
reversible modification governed by histone acetyltransferases (HATs) and histone
deacetylase (HDACs), in this study we investigated the key HDACs responsible for 
deacetylation of GCMa and thus the reduction in GCMa activity to avoid unwanted
fusion events that may have adverse effects on placental morphogenesis. We herein
demonstrate that the HDAC inhibitor, trichostatin A (TSA), increases the level of
acetylated GCMa and that HDAC1, 3, 4 and 5 interact with and deacetylate GCMa.
Glutathione S-transferase (GST) pull-down assays further verified direct
interaction between GCMa and HDAC3 or CBP and HDAC3. HDAC3 counteracts the
transcriptional coactivator activity of CBP and the enhancement effect of CBP on 
GCMa-mediated transcriptional activation. Correlatively, we found in placental
cells that HDAC3 associates with the proximal GCMa-binding site (pGBS) in the
syncytin promoter and dissociates from pGBS in the presence of forskolin, which
stimulates the association of CBP and GCMa with pGBS. Our studies support that
trophoblastic fusion in placental morphogenesis depends on the regulation of GCMa
activity by HAT and HDAC.

PMCID: PMC1401512
PMID: 16528103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Exp Cell Res. 2006 Apr 15;312(7):951-61. Epub 2006 Mar 3.

Grow-ING, Age-ING and Die-ING: ING proteins link cancer, senescence and
apoptosis.

Russell M(1), Berardi P, Gong W, Riabowol K.

Author information: 
(1)Southern Alberta Cancer Research Institute, Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, University of Calgary, 3330 Hospital Dr. NW, Calgary, Alberta,
Canada T2N 4N1.

The INhibitor of Growth (ING) family of plant homeodomain (PHD) proteins induce
apoptosis and regulate gene expression through stress-inducible binding of
phospholipids with subsequent nuclear and nucleolar localization. Relocalization 
occurs concomitantly with interaction with a subset of nuclear proteins,
including PCNA, p53 and several regulators of acetylation such as the p300/CBP
and PCAF histone acetyltransferases (HATs), as well as the histone deacetylases
HDAC1 and hSir2. These interactions alter the localized state of chromatin
compaction, subsequently affecting the expression of subsets of genes, including 
those associated with the stress response (Hsp70), apoptosis (Bax, MDM2) and cell
cycle regulation (p21WAF1, cyclin B) in a cell- and tissue-specific manner. The
expression levels and subcellular localization of ING proteins are altered in a
significant number of human cancer types, while the expression of ING isoforms
changes during cellular aging, suggesting that ING proteins may play a role in
linking cellular transformation and replicative senescence. The variety of
functions attributed to ING proteins suggest that this tumor suppressor serves to
link the disparate processes of cell cycle regulation, cell suicide and cellular 
aging through epigenetic regulation of gene expression. This review examines
recent findings in the ING field with a focus on the functions of protein-protein
interactions involving ING family members and the mechanisms by which these
interactions facilitate the various roles that ING proteins play in
tumorigenesis, apoptosis and senescence.

PMID: 16516887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Reproduction. 2006 Mar;131(3):439-47.

Activities of maturation-promoting factor (MPF) and mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) are not required for the global histone deacetylation observed
after germinal vesicle breakdown (GVBD) in porcine oocytes.

Endo T(1), Naito K, Kume S, Nishimura Y, Kashima K, Tojo H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Applied Genetics, Graduate School of Agriculture and Life
Sciences, University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.

The acetylation of nuclear core histone has been suggested to work as an
epigenetic mark for transmitting gene expression patterns to daughter cells.
Global histone deacetylations, presumably involved in the reprogramming of the
gene expression, have been observed after germinal vesicle breakdown (GVBD) in a 
cell cycle-dependent manner during meiotic maturation of mouse and porcine
oocytes, although the regulation mechanism of histone deacetylation has not been 
studied well. In the present study, we examined the involvement of a crucial
cell-cycle-regulator, maturation-promoting factor (MPF), and a meiosis-related
kinase, mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), in the global histone
deacetylation during porcine oocyte maturation. In order to know whether the
activities of MPF and MAPK were required, or the breakdown of GV membrane was
sufficient, for the global histone deacetylation observed after GVBD, we
artificially destroyed the GV membrane of the porcine immature oocytes. The
artificial GV destruction (AGVD) induced histone deacetylation without the
activation of MPF and MAPK. This deacetylation after AGVD was not affected by an 
MPF inhibitor, roscovitine, or an inhibitor of protein synthesis, cycloheximide, 
but was completely prevented by an inhibitor of histone deactylases (HDACs),
trichostatine A. HDAC1 was present in the GV of the immature oocytes and
localized on chromosomes after GVBD and AGVD. These results suggest that the MPF 
and MAPK activities were dispensable and the breakdown of the GV membrane was
sufficient for the global histone deacetylation, which was catalyzed by HDAC
activity.

PMID: 16514187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. EMBO J. 2006 Mar 22;25(6):1231-41. Epub 2006 Mar 2.

Metastasis-associated protein 1 enhances stability of hypoxia-inducible
factor-1alpha protein by recruiting histone deacetylase 1.

Yoo YG(1), Kong G, Lee MO.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy and Bio-MAX Institute, Seoul National University, Seoul,
Korea.

The expression of metastasis-associated protein 1 (MTA1) correlates well with
tumor metastases; however, the associated molecular mechanism is not fully
understood. Here, we explored the possibility of cross-talk between MTA1 and
hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha), a key regulator of angiogenic
factors. We observed that the expression of MTA1 was strongly induced under
hypoxia in breast cancer cell lines such as MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231. When MTA1 was
overexpressed, the transcriptional activity and stability of HIF-1alpha protein
were enhanced. MTA1 and HIF-1alpha are physically associated in vivo and they
were localized completely in the nucleus when coexpressed. MTA1 induced the
deacetylation of HIF-1alpha by increasing the expression of histone deacetylase 1
(HDAC1). MTA1 counteracted to the action of acetyltransferase, ARD1, and it did
not stabilize the HIF-1alpha mutant that lacks the acetylation site, K532R. These
results indicate that acetylation is the major target of MTA1/HDAC1 function.
Collectively, our data provide evidence of a positive cross-talk between
HIF-1alpha and MTA1, which is mediated by HDAC1 recruitment, and indicate a close
connection between MTA1-associated metastasis and HIF-1-induced tumor
angiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1422150
PMID: 16511565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Genes Dev. 2006 Mar 1;20(5):586-600.

The APC tumor suppressor counteracts beta-catenin activation and H3K4 methylation
at Wnt target genes.

Sierra J(1), Yoshida T, Joazeiro CA, Jones KA.

Author information: 
(1)Regulatory Biology Laboratory, The Salk Insitute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, California 92037, USA.

The APC tumor suppressor controls the stability and nuclear export of
beta-catenin (beta-cat), a transcriptional coactivator of LEF-1/TCF HMG proteins 
in the Wnt/Wg signaling pathway. We show here that beta-cat and APC have opposing
actions at Wnt target genes in vivo. The beta-cat C-terminal activation domain
associates with TRRAP/TIP60 and mixed-lineage-leukemia (MLL1/MLL2) SET1-type
chromatin-modifying complexes in vitro, and we show that beta-cat promotes H3K4
trimethylation at the c-Myc gene in vivo. H3K4 trimethylation in vivo requires
prior ubiquitination of H2B, and we find that ubiquitin is necessary for
transcription initiation on chromatin but not nonchromatin templates in vitro.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments reveal that beta-cat recruits Pygopus, 
Bcl-9/Legless, and MLL/SET1-type complexes to the c-Myc enhancer together with
the negative Wnt regulators, APC, and betaTrCP. Interestingly, APC-mediated
repression of c-Myc transcription in HT29-APC colorectal cancer cells is
initiated by the transient binding of APC, betaTrCP, and the CtBP corepressor to 
the c-Myc enhancer, followed by stable binding of the TLE-1 and HDAC1
corepressors. Moreover, nuclear CtBP physically associates with full-length APC, 
but not with mutant SW480 or HT29 APC proteins. We conclude that, in addition to 
regulating the stability of beta-cat, APC facilitates CtBP-mediated repression of
Wnt target genes in normal, but not in colorectal cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC1410807
PMID: 16510874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Cancer Res. 2006 Feb 15;66(4):2224-32.

The ligand status of the aromatic hydrocarbon receptor modulates transcriptional 
activation of BRCA-1 promoter by estrogen.

Hockings JK(1), Thorne PA, Kemp MQ, Morgan SS, Selmin O, Romagnolo DF.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Interdisciplinary Graduate Program, University of Arizona,
Tucson, USA.

In sporadic breast cancers, BRCA-1 expression is down-regulated in the absence of
mutations in the BRCA-1 gene. This suggests that disruption of BRCA-1 expression 
may contribute to the onset of mammary tumors. Environmental contaminants found
in industrial pollution, tobacco smoke, and cooked foods include benzo(a)pyrene
[B(a)P] and 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), which have been shown to 
act as endocrine disruptors and tumor promoters. In previous studies, we
documented that estrogen (E2) induced BRCA-1 transcription through the
recruitment of an activator protein-1/estrogen receptor-alpha (ER alpha) complex 
to the proximal BRCA-1 promoter. Here, we report that activation of BRCA-1
transcription by E2 requires occupancy of the BRCA-1 promoter by the unliganded
aromatic hydrocarbon receptor (AhR). The stimulatory effects of E2 on BRCA-1
transcription are counteracted by (a) cotreatment with the AhR antagonist
3'-methoxy-4'-nitroflavone; (b) transient expression in ER alpha-negative HeLa
cells of ER alpha lacking the protein-binding domain for the AhR; and (c)
mutation of two consensus xenobiotic-responsive elements (XRE, 5'-GCGTG-3')
located upstream of the ER alpha-binding region. These results suggest that the
physical interaction between the unliganded AhR and the liganded ER alpha plays a
positive role in E2-dependent activation of BRCA-1 transcription. Conversely, we 
show that the AhR ligands B(a)P and TCDD abrogate E2-induced BRCA-1 promoter
activity. The repressive effects of TCDD are paralleled by increased recruitment 
of the liganded AhR and HDAC1, reduced occupancy by p300, SRC-1, and diminished
acetylation of H4 at the BRCA-1 promoter region flanking the XREs. We propose
that the ligand status of the AhR modulates activation of the BRCA-1 promoter by 
estrogen.

PMID: 16489025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Apr 7;342(2):585-8. Epub 2006 Feb 10.

9-Hydroxystearic acid interferes with EGF signalling in a human colon
adenocarcinoma.

Calonghi N(1), Pagnotta E, Parolin C, Tognoli C, Boga C, Masotti L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry G. Moruzzi, Alma Mater Studiorum, University of
Bologna, Italy. natalia.calonghi@unibo.it

The epidermal growth factor has long been known to be strictly correlated with
the highly proliferating activities of cancer cells and primary tumors. Moreover,
in the nucleus, the epidermal growth factor/epidermal growth factor receptor
complex (EGF/EGFR) functions as a transcriptional regulator that activates the
cyclin D1 gene. 9-hydroxystearic acid (9-HSA) induces cell proliferation arrest
and differentiation in HT29 colon cancer cells by inhibiting histone deacetylase 
1 (HDAC1). 9-HSA-treated HT29, when stimulated with EGF, are not responsive and
surprisingly undergo a further arrest. In order to understand the mechanisms of
this effect, we analyzed the degree of internalization of the EGF/EGFR complex
and its interactions with HDAC1. It appears that HDAC1, as modified by 9-HSA, is 
unable to associate with cyclin D1, interfering with the cell proliferation
program, and sequesters the EGF/EGFR complex interrupting the transduction of the
mitogenic signal.

PMID: 16487928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. J Biol Chem. 2006 Apr 14;281(15):10010-5. Epub 2006 Feb 16.

Role of histone deacetylase in the expression of CTP:phosphocholine
cytidylyltransferase alpha.

Banchio C(1), Lingrell S, Vance DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Canadian Institutes of Health Research Group in
Molecular and Cell Biology of Lipids, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta
T6G 2S2, Canada. cbanchio@fbioyf.unr.edu.ar

Histone acetylation plays an important role in chromatin remodeling and gene
expression. The molecular mechanisms involved in cell-specific expression of
CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase alpha (CTalpha) are not fully understood.
In this study, we investigated whether or not histone deacetylation is involved
in repression of CTalpha expression in quiescent C3H10T1/2 mouse embryo
fibroblasts. We have examined the contributions of the Sp1 and E2F binding sites 
in the repression of CTalpha gene expression. Immunoprecipitation experiments
showed that histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and HDAC activity are associated with
Sp1 in serum-starved cells or during serum stimulation. However, HDAC1
association with E2F was only detected in serum-starved cells. By chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays, we detected both direct and indirect association of
HDAC1 with the CTalpha promoter. Treatment with the HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A
induced CTalpha expression. Our data suggest that HDAC1 plays a critical role in 
CTalpha repression and that Sp1 and E2F may serve as key targets for
HDAC1-mediated CTalpha repression in fibroblasts.

PMID: 16484221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2006 Feb;1763(2):182-7. Epub 2006 Jan 6.

A combined treatment TNF-alpha/doxorubicin alleviates the resistance of MCF-7/Adr
cells to cytotoxic treatment.

Cao W(1), Ma SL, Tang J, Shi J, Lu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology, Fudan University, 138 Yixueyuan
Road, Shanghai 200032, China.

The efficiency of anticancer therapy is often restricted by the development of
drug resistance. Here, we report that the doxorubicin (DOX)-resistant MCF-7/Adr
cells were more resistant to DOX-treatment than MCF-7 cells. However, an
alternative treatment of DOX/TNF-alpha enhanced the cytotoxic effect in multidrug
resistant MCF-7/Adr cell line. Treatment of cells with TNF-alpha following
doxorubicin (DOX) resulted in a decrease of the activated Rel A/p65 in nuclei.
Histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) was found to interact with Rel A/p65 in the
complex, suggesting that HDAC1 is involved in mediating nuclear export of Rel
A/p65. The combined treatment of TNF-alpha/DOX also resulted in a significant
decrease of mRNA levels of anti-apoptotic genes, such as the cellular inhibitor
of apoptosis-1 (c-IAP1), and the long isoform of B cell leukemia/lymphoma x gene 
(Bcl-xL), leading to efficient induction of caspase-8 cleavage and cell death. In
previous work, we demonstrated that TNF-alpha promotes DOX-induced cell death and
anti-cancer effect through downregulation of p21 in p53-deficient tumor cells.
Thus, we proposed that alternative administration of TNF-alpha and DOX may be a
new and efficient therapeutic strategy for patients that develop resistance to
cytotoxic treatment.

PMID: 16483679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Genes Dev. 2006 Mar 1;20(5):525-30. Epub 2006 Feb 15.

Histone deacetylase-associating Atrophin proteins are nuclear receptor
corepressors.

Wang L(1), Rajan H, Pitman JL, McKeown M, Tsai CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Medicine and Dentistry 
of New Jersey-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854,
USA.

Drosophila Tailless (Tll) is an orphan nuclear receptor involved in embryonic
segmentation and neurogenesis. Although Tll exerts potent transcriptional
repressive effects, the underlying molecular mechanisms have not been determined.
Using the established regulation of knirps by tll as a paradigm, we report that
repression of knirps by Tll involves Atrophin, which is related to vertebrate
Atrophin-1 and Atrophin-2. Atrophin interacts with Tll physically and
genetically, and both proteins localize to the same knirps promoter region.
Because Atrophin proteins interact with additional nuclear receptors and
Atrophin-2 selectively binds histone deacetylase 1/2 (HDAC1/2) through its ELM2
(EGL-27 and MTA1 homology 2)/SANT (SWI3/ADA2/N-CoR/TFIII-B) domains, our study
establishes that Atrophin proteins represent a novel class of nuclear receptor
corepressors.

PMCID: PMC1410805
PMID: 16481466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Mar;26(5):1770-85.

Sp1 deacetylation induced by phorbol ester recruits p300 to activate
12(S)-lipoxygenase gene transcription.

Hung JJ(1), Wang YT, Chang WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan 701, Taiwan, Republic of China.

We previous reported that Sp1 recruits c-Jun to the promoter of the
12(S)-lipoxygenase gene in 12-myristate 13-acetate-treated cells. We now show
that Sp1 that recruited HDAC1 to the Sp1/cJun complex was constitutively
acetylated when cells were exposed to phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) (3
h). Prolonged stimulation of the cells with PMA (9 h), however, caused the
dissociation of histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and the deacetylation of Sp1, with 
the latter being able to recruit p300 that in turn caused the acetylation and
dissociation of histone 3, thus enhancing the expression of 12(S)-lipoxygenase.
We also overexpressed an Sp1 mutant (K703/A, lacking acetylation sites) in the
cell and found that cells recruited more p300 and expressed more
12(S)-lipoxygenase. Taken together, our results indicated that Sp1 recruits HDAC1
together with c-Jun to the gene promoter, followed by deacetylation of Sp1 upon
PMA treatment. p300 is then recruited to the gene promoter through the
interaction with deacetylated Sp1 to acetylate histone 3, leading to the
enhancement of the expression of 12(S)-lipoxygenase.

PMCID: PMC1430254
PMID: 16478997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2006 Jul;291(1):L46-57. Epub 2006 Feb 10.

Cigarette smoke induces proinflammatory cytokine release by activation of
NF-kappaB and posttranslational modifications of histone deacetylase in
macrophages.

Yang SR(1), Chida AS, Bauter MR, Shafiq N, Seweryniak K, Maggirwar SB, Kilty I,
Rahman I.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Environmental Medicine, Lung Biology and Disease Program, Univ. of
Rochester Medical Center, 601 Elmwood Ave., Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Cigarette smoke-mediated oxidative stress induces an inflammatory response in the
lungs by stimulating the release of proinflammatory cytokines. Chromatin
remodeling due to histone acetylation and deacetylation is known to play an
important role in transcriptional regulation of proinflammatory genes. The aim of
this study was to investigate the molecular mechanism(s) of inflammatory
responses caused by cigarette smoke extract (CSE) in the human macrophage-like
cell line MonoMac6 and whether the treatment of these cells with the antioxidant 
glutathione (GSH) monoethyl ester, or modulation of the thioredoxin redox system,
can attenuate cigarette smoke-mediated IL-8 release. Exposure of MonoMac6 cells
to CSE (1% and 2.5%) increased IL-8 and TNF-alpha production vs. control at 24 h 
and was associated with significant depletion of GSH levels associated with
increased reactive oxygen species release in addition to activation of NF-kappaB.
Inhibition of IKK ablated the CSE-mediated IL-8 release, suggesting that this
process is dependent on the NF-kappaB pathway. CSE also reduced histone
deacetylase (HDAC) activity and HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3 protein levels. This was 
associated with posttranslational modification of HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3 protein
by nitrotyrosine and aldehyde-adduct formation. Pretreatment of cells with GSH
monoethyl ester, but not thioredoxin/thioredoxin reductase, reversed cigarette
smoke-induced reduction in HDAC levels and significantly inhibited IL-8 release. 
Thus cigarette smoke-induced release of IL-8 is associated with activation of
NF-kappaB via IKK and reduction in HDAC levels/activity in macrophages. Moreover,
cigarette smoke-mediated proinflammatory events are regulated by the redox status
of the cells.

PMID: 16473865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Biol Chem. 2006 Apr 7;281(14):9260-70. Epub 2006 Feb 6.

Regulatory factor for X-box family proteins differentially interact with histone 
deacetylases to repress collagen alpha2(I) gene (COL1A2) expression.

Xu Y(1), Sengupta PK, Seto E, Smith BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts 02118, USA.

Our studies indicate that the regulatory factor for X-box (RFX) family proteins
repress collagen alpha2(I) gene (COL1A2) expression (Xu, Y., Wang, L., Buttice,
G., Sengupta, P. K., and Smith, B. D. (2003) J. Biol. Chem. 278, 49134-49144; Xu,
Y., Wang, L., Buttice, G., Sengupta, P. K., and Smith, B. D. (2004) J. Biol.
Chem. 279, 41319-41332). In this study, we examined the mechanism(s) underlying
the repression of collagen gene by RFX proteins. Two members of the RFX family,
RFX1 and RFX5, associate with distinct sets of co-repressors on the collagen
transcription start site in vitro. RFX5 specifically interacts with histone
deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) and the mammalian transcriptional repressor (mSin3B),
whereas RFX1 preferably interacts with HDAC1 and mSin3A. HDAC2 cooperates with
RFX5 to down-regulate collagen promoter activity, whereas HDAC1 enhances
inhibition of collagen promoter activity by RFX1. Interferon-gamma promotes the
recruitment of RFX5/HDAC2/mSin3B to the collagen transcription start site but
decreases the occupancy by RFX1/mSin3A as manifested by chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay. RFX1 binds to the methylated collagen sequence with
much higher affinity than unmethylated sequence, recruiting more HDAC1 and
mSin3A. The DNA methyltransferase inhibitor 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, which
inhibits DNA methylation, reduces RFX1/HDAC1 binding to the collagen
transcription start site in chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. Finally, both
RFX1 and RFX5 are acetylated in vivo. Trichostatin A stimulates the acetylation
of RFX proteins and activates the collagen promoter activity. Collectively, our
data strongly indicate two separate pathways for RFX proteins to repress collagen
gene expression as follows: one for RFX5/HDAC2 in interferon-gamma-mediated
repression, and the other for RFX1/HDAC1 in methylation-mediated collagen
silencing.

PMCID: PMC1434794
PMID: 16464847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Oncogene. 2006 Jun 8;25(24):3375-86. Epub 2006 Jan 23.

Pro-proliferative function of the long isoform of PML-RARalpha involved in acute 
promyelocytic leukemia.

Tussié-Luna MI(1), Rozo L, Roy AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA
02111, USA.

The promyelocytic leukemia (PML) gene codes for a tumor suppressor protein that
is associated with distinct subnuclear macromolecular structures called the PML
bodies. The PML gene is frequently involved in the t(15;17) chromosomal
translocation of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). The translocation results in
a fusion gene product, PML-RARalpha, in which the PML gene fuses to the retinoic 
acid receptor alpha (RARalpha) gene. PML-RARalpha has been shown to promote
transcriptional repression of genes involved in myeloid terminal differentiation 
and to disrupt the architecture of PML bodies, a phenotype reversed by treatment 
with all trans retinoic acid (ATRA). However, there are several alternatively
spliced isoforms of PML-RARalpha. Here, we addressed the differences between the 
short and the long isoforms of PML-RARalpha (L and S) since both are associated
with APL. We demonstrate that PML-RARalphaL, but not PML-RARalphaS, can directly 
promote cell growth by transcriptionally activating the pro-proliferative gene,
c-fos, in response to mitogenic stimulation. The activity of the PML-RARalphaL is
completely sensitive to ATRA. We further show that this activation is not via
direct recruitment of the protein to the c-fos promoter but indirectly by
altering the chromosomal environment of the c-fos gene, thereby rendering it more
accessible to the signal induced transcriptional activators. Our results suggest 
that in addition to antagonizing the PML-tumor suppressor or the
PML-pro-apoptotic activity, PML-RARalpha proteins can also directly promote cell 
growth by activating c-fos.

PMID: 16434964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. J Biol Chem. 2006 Mar 24;281(12):7960-7. Epub 2006 Jan 23.

Activation of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) alpha expression by C/EBP
beta during adipogenesis requires a peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-gamma-associated repression of HDAC1 at the C/ebp alpha gene promoter.

Zuo Y(1), Qiang L, Farmer SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts 02118, USA.

Studies have shown that CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta (C/EBP beta) can
stimulate adipogenesis in noncommitted fibroblasts by activating expression of
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPARgamma). Other
investigations have established a role for C/EBP alpha as well as PPARgamma in
orchestrating the complex program of adipogenic gene expression during terminal
preadipocyte differentiation. Consequently, it is important to identify factors
regulating transcription of the C/ebp alpha gene. In this study, we demonstrated 
that inhibition of PPARgamma activity by exposure of 3T3-L1 preadipocytes to a
potent and selective PPARgamma antagonist inhibits adipogenesis but also blocks
the activation of C/EBP alpha expression at the onset of differentiation. Ectopic
expression of C/EBP beta in Swiss 3T3 mouse fibroblasts (Swiss-LAP cells) induces
PPARgamma expression without any significant enhancement of C/EBP alpha
expression. Treatment of Swiss-LAP cells with a PPARgamma agonist induces
adipogenesis, which includes activation of C/EBP alpha expression. To further
establish a role for PPARgamma in regulating C/EBP alpha expression, we expressed
C/EBP beta in PPARgamma-deficient mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs). The data show 
that C/EBP beta is capable of inducing PPARgamma in Ppar gamma+/- MEFs, which
leads to activation of adipogenesis, including C/EBP alpha expression following
exposure to a PPARgamma ligand. In contrast, C/EBP beta is not able to induce
C/EBP alpha expression or adipogenesis in Ppar gamma-/- MEFs. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis reveals that C/EBP beta is bound to the minimal
promoter of the C/ebp alpha gene in association with HDAC1 in unstimulated
Swiss-LAP cells. Exposure of the cells to a PPARgamma ligand dislodges HDAC1 from
the proximal promoter of the C/ebp alpha gene, which involves degradation of
HDAC1 in the 26 S proteasome. These data suggest that C/EBP beta activates a
single unified pathway of adipogenesis involving its stimulation of PPARgamma
expression, which then activates C/EBP alpha expression by dislodging HDAC1 from 
the promoter for degradation in the proteasome.

PMID: 16431920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Shi Yan Sheng Wu Xue Bao. 2005 Dec;38(6):513-9.

[Expression patterns of GCN5 and HDAC1 in preimplantational mouse embryos and
effects of in-vitro cultures on their expressions].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao DM(1), Xu CM, Huang HF, Qian YL, Jin F.

Author information: 
(1)Women's Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine.

To investigate the expression patterns of histone acetyltransferase (GCN5) and
histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) in preimplantation mouse embryos and the effects of
in-vitro cultures on their expressions, immunocytochemistry was used to detect
the expressions of GCN5 and HDAC1 in mouse embryos at the stages of two-cell,
four-cell, eight-cell, morula and blastocyst in both in-vivo and invitro groups. 
In in-vivo group, the obvious expressions of GCN5 were observed in the cytoplasm 
of all kinds of mouse embryos but blastocysts. Meanwhile, HDAC1 was highly
expressed in the nuclei of four and eight-cell embryos and morula but mainly seen
in the cytoplasm of two-cell embryos. In blastocysts, the HDAC1 fluorescence was 
limited to the nuclei of trophoblast cells. In in-vitro group, there were no
obvious GCN5 expressions in all kinds of embryos and the expression of HDAC1 was 
significantly reduced although its expression pattern was similar to that of
in-vivo group. Those results showed that in -vitro culture environments could
inhibit GCN5 expression and decrease the expression of HDAC1 in mouse
preimplantation embryos, which might affect the correct embryonic gene
expression.

PMID: 16416968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Br J Haematol. 2006 Feb;132(3):359-69.

P210 Bcr-abl tyrosine kinase interaction with histone deacetylase 1 modifies
histone H4 acetylation and chromatin structure of chronic myeloid leukaemia
haematopoietic progenitors.

Brusa G(1), Zuffa E, Mancini M, Benvenuti M, Calonghi N, Barbieri E, Santucci MA.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Ematologia e Oncologia Medica Lorenzo e Ariosto Seràgnoli,
Universita di Bologna, Bologna, Italy. gbrusa@alma.unibo.it

The BCR-ABL fusion gene, originating from the balanced (9;22) translocation, is
the molecular hallmark and the causative event of chronic myeloid leukaemia
(CML). The interactions of its p210 protein constitutively activated and
improperly confined to the cytoplasm with multiple regulatory signals of cell
cycle progression, apoptosis and self-renewal, induce the illegitimate
enlargement of clonal haematopoiesis and genetic instability that drives its
progression towards the fully transformed phenotype of blast crisis. However, its
effects on the basic transcription machinery and chromatin remodelling are
unknown. Our study underscored histone H4 hyperacetylation associated with p210
tyrosine kinase in vitro and in vivo and its role in BCR-ABL transcription.
Histone H4 hyperacetylation proceeds, at least partly, from the 'loss of
function' of histone deacetylase 1 protein, a critical component of Rb-mediated
transcriptional repression, in consequence of its cytoplasmatic
compartmentalisation.

PMID: 16409301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Br J Haematol. 2006 Feb;132(3):293-302.

Transactivation of CCL20 gene by Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein 1.

Okudaira T(1), Yamamoto K, Kawakami H, Uchihara JN, Tomita M, Masuda M, Matsuda
T, Sairenji T, Iha H, Jeang KT, Matsuyama T, Takasu N, Mori N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Virology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine,
University of the Ryukyus, Nishihara, Japan.

Retraction in
    Br J Haematol. 2011 Mar;152(6):787.

CCL20 is expected to play a crucial role in the initiation of immune responses
and tumour growth. However, expression of CCL20 in Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV)-associated diseases has not been studied. We examined the contribution of
EBV infection and EBV-encoded latent membrane protein (LMP)-1 to CCL20
expression. EBV infection and LMP-1 induced CCL20 mRNA expression in the
EBV-negative Burkitt lymphoma (BL) cell lines and the embryonic kidney cell line.
Histone deacetylase inhibitor-stimulated endogenous LMP-1 also induced CCL20
expression in an EBV-positive BL cell line. Analysis of the CCL20 promoter showed
that it was activated by LMP-1 C-terminal activation region (CTAR)-1 and CTAR-2. 
Co-expression of IkappaB alpha, IkappaB beta, IkappaB kinase (IKK)alpha, IKKbeta,
IKKgamma, nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB-inducing kinase and tumour necrosis factor
receptor-associated factor 2 dominant-negative constructs with LMP-1 inhibited
the activation of the CCL20 promoter by LMP-1, suggesting that LMP-1 induces
CCL20 via NF-kappaB signalling. The requirement for the NF-kappaB-binding site in
the CCL20 promoter in LMP-1 responsiveness was established. Our results indicate 
that activation of the NF-kappaB pathway by LMP-1 is required for the activation 
of CCL20 expression.

PMID: 16409294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Biol Chem. 2006 Mar 10;281(10):6608-15. Epub 2006 Jan 5.

Down-regulation of histone deacetylases stimulates adipocyte differentiation.

Yoo EJ(1), Chung JJ, Choe SS, Kim KH, Kim JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Research Center for Functional
Cellulomics, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, South Korea.

Specific cell type differentiation is driven by programmed regulation of gene
expression, which is the result of coordinated modulation of the transcription
machinery and chromatin-remodeling factors. We present evidence here that the
down-regulation of histone deacetylases is an important process during adipocyte 
differentiation. In 3T3-L1 cells, histone hyperacetylation was selectively
induced at the promoter regions of adipogenic genes during adipocyte
differentiation. Interestingly, this was accompanied by a dramatic decrease in
the expression level of several histone deacetylases including HDAC1, -2, and -5 
and a reduction in overall histone deacetylase enzyme activity. Inhibition of
histone deacetylase activity using sodium butyrate resulted in stimulation of
adipogenic gene expression and adipocyte differentiation. Consistently, HDAC1
knock-down promoted adipogenesis whereas HDAC1 overexpression attenuated
adipocyte differentiation in 3T3-L1 cells. Together, these results suggest that
the regulation of not only adipogenic transcription factors, but also
chromatin-modifying enzymes is crucial for the execution of bona fide
adipogenesis.

PMID: 16407282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Cell Death Differ. 2006 Sep;13(9):1515-22. Epub 2006 Jan 6.

Cytoplasmic and nuclear interaction between Rb family proteins and PAI-2: a
physiological crosstalk in human corneal and conjunctival epithelial cells.

Macaluso M(1), Montanari M, Marshall CM, Gambone AJ, Tosi GM, Giordano A,
Massaro-Giordano M.

Author information: 
(1)Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Center of
Biotechnology, College of Science and Technology, Temple University,
Philadelphia, PA, USA. macaluso@temple.edu

Extracellular plasminogen activator inhibitor type-2 (PAI-2) is a potent
inhibitor of urokinase-type plasminogen activator (u-PA) and also acts as a
multifunctional protein. However, the biological activity of intracellular PAI-2,
as well as its intracellular targets, until now remain an enigma. Here, we show
that pRb2/p130 and Rb1/p105, but not p107, interact with PAI-2 in both the
cytoplasm and nucleus of normal primary human corneal and conjunctival epithelial
cells. We provided the first in vivo evidence that a specific fragment of the
PAI-2 promoter is bound simultaneously by pRb2/ p130, PAI-2, E2F5, histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1), and histone
methyltransferase (SUV39H1), in normal primary human corneal epithelial cells,
and by pRb2/p130, PAI-2, E2F5, HDAC1, and DNMT1, in normal primary human
conjunctiva epithelial cells. Our results strongly indicate a physiological
interaction between pRb family members and PAI-2, suggesting the hypothesis that 
pRb2/p130 and PAI-2 may cooperate in modulating PAI-2 gene expression by
chromatin remodeling, in normal corneal and conjunctival cells.

PMID: 16397580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Jan;26(2):457-71.

IkappaB kinase alpha-mediated derepression of SMRT potentiates acetylation of
RelA/p65 by p300.

Hoberg JE(1), Popko AE, Ramsey CS, Mayo MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Box 800733, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.

Over the last several years, significant progress has been made in identifying
chromatin-regulated events that govern NF-kappaB transcription. Using either
laminin attachment or tumor necrosis factor alpha as a physiological stimulus of 
NF-kappaB activation, we demonstrate that IkappaB kinase alpha (IKKalpha) is
recruited to chromatin in distinct phases. In the initial phase, IKKalpha is
responsible for derepressing the silencing mediator for retinoic acid and thyroid
hormone receptor (SMRT)-histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3) corepressor complex from
the p50 homodimer. However, in the latter phase, chromatin-bound IKKalpha
coordinates the simultaneous phosphorylation of RelA/p65(S536) and SMRT(S2410) as
detected by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays. Although phosphorylated 
SMRT remains bound to the active p50-RelA/p65 heterodimer of NF-kappaB,
derepression of SMRT is evidenced by the loss of chromatin-associated HDAC3
activity. ChIP and re-ChIP analysis demonstrates that phosphorylation of
RelA/p65(S536) and SMRT(S2410) occurs prior to acetylation of RelA/p65 at K310.
Moreover, IKKalpha-induced phosphorylation of RelA/p65(S536) displaces
corepressor activity, allowing p300-mediated acetylation of RelA/p65.
Introduction of nonphosphorylatable mutants of RelA/p65 and SMRT proteins or the 
inhibition of IKK activity results in active repression of NF-kappaB promoters by
tethering the SMRT-HDAC3 complex. Similar to phosphorylation within the Rel
homology domain of RelA/p65, which governs an exchange of HDAC1 for CBP/p300
acetyltransferases, we demonstrate that phosphorylation within the
transactivation domain of RelA/p65(S536) displaces SMRT-HDAC3 repressor activity,
allowing p300 to acetylate RelA/p65.

PMCID: PMC1346914
PMID: 16382138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. J Biol Chem. 2006 Feb 24;281(8):4718-25. Epub 2005 Dec 23.

HER-2/neu represses the metastasis suppressor RECK via ERK and Sp transcription
factors to promote cell invasion.

Hsu MC(1), Chang HC, Hung WC.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung 807,
Taiwan.

Matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) inhibitory proteins may negatively regulate MMP
activity to suppress tumor metastasis. In this study, we demonstrate that the
HER-2/neu oncogene inhibits the expression of the MMP inhibitor RECK to promote
cell invasion. RECK was inhibited via transcriptional repression in B104-1-1
cells, which express constitutively active HER-2/neu. Overexpression of HER-2/neu
in NIH/3T3 or HaCaT cells also suppressed RECK expression. Deletion and mutation 
assays showed that HER-2/neu repressed RECK via the Sp1-binding site localized in
the -82/-71 region from the translational start site. DNA affinity precipitation 
and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays indicated that binding of Sp1 and Sp3 to
this consensus site was increased in B104-1-1 cells. We also found that HER-2/neu
inhibited RECK via the ERK signaling pathway. Sp1 proteins phosphorylated at
Thr453 and Thr739 by ERK bound preferentially to the RECK promoter, and this
binding was reversed by HER-2/neu and ERK inhibitors. Furthermore, our data
indicate that HER-2/neu obviously increased HDAC1 binding to the Sp1-binding site
localized in the -82/-71 region of the RECK promoter. The histone deacetylase
inhibitor trichostatin A reversed HER-2/neu-induced inhibition of RECK. HER-2/neu
activation was associated with increased MMP-9 secretion and activation.
Re-expression of RECK in HER-2/neu-overexpressing cells inhibited MMP-9 secretion
and cell invasion. Taken together, our results suggest that HER-2/neu induces the
binding of Sp proteins and HDAC1 to the RECK promoter to inhibit RECK expression 
and to promote cell invasion. Restoration of RECK provides a novel strategy for
the inhibition of HER-2/neu-induced metastasis.

PMID: 16377629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. EMBO Rep. 2006 Mar;7(3):291-6. Epub 2005 Dec 23.

Tumour necrosis factor-alpha depletes histone deacetylase 1 protein through IKK2.

Vashisht Gopal YN(1), Arora TS, Van Dyke MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, Unit 079, UT M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030-4009, USA.

Class I histone deacetylases (HDACs) are ubiquitous enzymes that repress gene
expression by deacetylating histone tails and promoting chromatin compaction.
Pro-inflammatory agents activate programmes of gene expression through
transcription factors such as nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB), even in the
context of ubiquitous HDAC activity. How this is accomplished remains unknown. We
found that cells treated with the pro-inflammatory cytokine tumour necrosis
factor-alpha rapidly and substantially reduced HDAC1 protein levels without
affecting other class I HDACs. In addition, HDAC1 depletion occurred through
protein degradation, required IKK2 activity and resulted in increased
transcription from both NF-kappaB-associated and unassociated gene promoters. Our
study suggests that the activation of programmes of gene expression by
pro-inflammatory agents requires global changes in specific critical epigenetic
regulators such as HDAC1.

PMCID: PMC1456891
PMID: 16374504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2005 Nov-Dec;7(11-12):1767-72.

Augmentation of sodium butyrate-induced apoptosis by p38 MAP kinase inhibition in
rat liver epithelial cells.

Jung JW, Cho SD, Ahn NS, Yang SR, Park JS, Jo EH, Hwang JW, Aruoma OI, Kang KS,
Lee YS.

Sodium butyrate (NaBu) has an inhibitory effect on histone deacetylases (HDACs). 
The mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases, such as extracellular
signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) and p38 MAP, kinase are known to be
modulated during NaBu-induced apoptosis. In the present study, we showed that low
concentrations of NaBu could induce apoptosis synergistically with the inhibition
of p38 MAP kinase as proven by using specific p38 MAP kinase inhibitor and
dominant negative p38 transfection in a ras-transformed rat liver epithelial cell
line (WB-ras). There were no changes in HDAC1, suggesting that NaBu might be able
to kill transformed cells bypassing the HDAC inhibitory effect. We further
demonstrated that inhibition of p38 MAP kinase potentiated apoptotic cascades,
including cleavage of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase, caspase-3, and decrease in
Bcl-2/Bax ratio even at a lower concentration of NaBu. Thus, p38 MAP kinase
played inhibitory roles in NaBu-induced apoptosis, and simultaneous modulation of
MAP kinases in NaBu treatment could increase the efficiency of the
chemotherapeutic effect of NaBu.

Antioxid. Redox Signal. 7, 1767-1772.

PMID: 16356138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Endocr Res. 2005;31(2):111-9.

Sexually dimorphic expression of co-repressor Sin3A in mouse kidneys.

Xu J(1), Arnold AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Science, UCLA, 621 Charles E. Young Drive South,
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1606, USA. xu@physci.ucla.edu

Using Western blot analysis we found transcriptional co-repressor Sin3A to be
expressed at a higher level in male mouse kidney than in females. HDAC1 (histone 
deacetylase 1) protein, another co-repressor forming complexes with Sin3A, was
not higher in males. No sex differences in Sin3A expression were found after
gonadectomy, suggesting that gonadal secretions in adulthood cause the sex
difference in kidney expression of Sin3A. In contrast, HDAC1 levels were higher
in castrated gonadal males than in females, which presumably reflects a
long-lasting differentiating effect of testicular secretions in early development
on this protein in kidneys. In gonadectomized mice in which sex chromosome
complement (XX vs. XY) is independent of gonadal type (testes vs. ovaries), there
was no difference in the level of Sin3A or HDAC1 expression in kidney in XX or XY
mice of the same gonadal sex.

PMID: 16355490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Jan 27;339(4):1069-75. Epub 2005 Dec 6.

Acetylation and alternative splicing regulate ZNF76-mediated transcription.

Zheng G(1), Yang YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Center, School of Medicine, Case Western
Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

We previously showed that ZNF76 is a general transcription repressor targeting
TATA-binding protein (TBP), through a process regulated by sumoylation [G. Zheng,
Y.C. Yang, ZNF76, a novel transcriptional repressor targeting TATA-binding
protein, is modulated by sumoylation, J. Biol. Chem. 279 (2004) 42410-42421]. In 
this study, two additional regulatory mechanisms for ZNF76 were identified. ZNF76
is acetylated by p300 and deacetylated by HDAC1, and acetylation of ZNF76 leads
to its loss of sumoylation and attenuation of TBP interaction. Consistent with
their physical antagonism, acetylation, and sumoylation play opposite roles in
regulating the transactivation of ZNF76. Besides acetylation and sumoylation,
ZNF76 is also regulated through mRNA splicing: two isoforms of ZNF76 have
different abilities of interacting with TBP. Our study shows that ZNF76, a
TBP-interacting transcriptional modulator, is regulated by both lysine
modifications and alternative splicing.

PMID: 16337145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. J Cell Biochem. 2006 Apr 15;97(6):1300-16.

Epigenetic regulation of metallothionein-i gene expression: differential
regulation of methylated and unmethylated promoters by DNA methyltransferases and
methyl CpG binding proteins.

Majumder S(1), Kutay H, Datta J, Summers D, Jacob ST, Ghoshal K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, College of Medicine, Ohio
State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

Metallothioneins (MTs) are a group of cysteine-rich stress response proteins that
scavenge reactive oxygen species and heavy metals. Recently, we have shown that
MT-I promoter is methylated and suppressed in some solid and liquid tumors and
can be robustly activated following treatment with inhibitors of DNA
methyltransferase (DNMT) and histone deacetylase (HDAC). Here, we have analyzed
MT-I chromatin structure in active, unmethylated (Hepa cells) and in repressed,
methylated state (lymphosarcoma cells). Restriction enzyme accessibility assay
showed that the MT-I promoter has an open conformation in unmethylated state as
opposed to refractory chromatin structure in methylated state. Positioning of
nucleosomal arrays on the methylated promoter further confirmed the closed
chromatin structure of the methylated promoter. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) assay demonstrated that the unmethylated promoter is associated with
K9-acetyl, K4-methyl, and S10-phospho histone H3 whereas the methylated promoter 
is predominantly associated with K9-methyl H3. HP1alpha that recognizes K9-methyl
H3 inhibited methylated MT-1 promoter activity whereas closely related HP1gamma
repressed the promoter irrespective of its methylation status. Ubiquitously
expressed DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) suppressed MT-I promoter activity
irrespective of its methylation status that does not require its catalytic
activity. The DNMT1-mediated repression of MT-I promoter was relieved by
trichostatin A, an HDAC inhibitor. Among the methyl CpG binding proteins, MBD2
and MBD4 specifically associated with the methylated promoter and inhibited its
activity. In contrast, MBD1 and MeCP2 interacted with both promoters and
suppressed the promoter activity irrespective of its methylation status. These
results demonstrate that the methylated and unmethylated MT-I promoter are
differentially regulated by DNA methyltransferase and methyl-CpG binding
proteins, and DNMT1 could suppress MT promoter by a transcriptional mechanism
independent of its enzymatic function. These studies suggest that the components 
of epigenetic machinery differentially regulate methylated and unmethylated MT-I 
gene expression.

Copyright (c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16329111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Cell. 2005 Dec 2;123(5):931-44.

TWEAK attenuates the transition from innate to adaptive immunity.

Maecker H(1), Varfolomeev E, Kischkel F, Lawrence D, LeBlanc H, Lee W, Hurst S,
Danilenko D, Li J, Filvaroff E, Yang B, Daniel D, Ashkenazi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Genentech, Inc., 1 DNA Way, South San
Francisco, CA 94080, USA.

Innate immunity is the first line of defense against infection, protecting the
host during the development of adaptive immunity and critically affecting the
nature of the adaptive response. We show that, in contrast to tumor necrosis
factor alpha (TNF-alpha), the related protein TWEAK attenuates the transition
from innate to adaptive mechanisms. TWEAK-/- mice had overabundant natural killer
(NK) cells and displayed hypersensitivity to bacterial endotoxin, with their
innate immune cells producing excess interferon (IFN)-gamma and interleukin
(IL)-12. TWEAK inhibited stimulation of the transcriptional activator STAT-1 and 
induced p65 nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB association with histone deacetylase 1,
repressing cytokine production. TWEAK-/- mice developed oversized spleens with
expanded memory and T helper 1 (TH1) subtype cells upon aging and mounted
stronger innate and adaptive TH1-based responses against tumor challenge. Thus,
TWEAK suppresses production of IFN-gamma and IL-12, curtailing the innate
response and its transition to adaptive TH1 immunity.

PMID: 16325585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Mech Dev. 2006 Jan;123(1):24-30. Epub 2005 Dec 1.

Histone deacetylase 1 is essential for oligodendrocyte specification in the
zebrafish CNS.

Cunliffe VT(1), Casaccia-Bonnefil P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, Centre for Developmental and Biomedical
Genetics, University of Sheffield, Firth Court, Western Bank, Sheffield, South
Yorks, S10 2TN, UK. v.t.cunliffe@shef.ac.uk

Histone deacetylases are critical components of transcriptional silencing
mechanisms that regulate embryonic development. Recent work has shown that
histone deacetylase 1 (hdac1) is required for neuronal specification during
zebrafish CNS development. We show here that specification of oligodendrocytes,
the myelinating cells of the CNS, also fails to occur in the hdac1 mutant
hindbrain, but persistence of neural progenitors in the hindbrain ventricular
zone, which express pax6a and sox2, is independent of hdac1 activity. Commitment 
of ventral neural progenitors to the oligodendrocyte fate is thought to require
co-ordinate, hedgehog-dependent expression of olig2 and nkx2.2a in these cells,
leading to expression of sox10 and subsequent differentiation of
oligodendrocytes. Remarkably, transcription of olig2 is extinguished in ventral
neural progenitors of the hdac1 mutant hindbrain, whereas expression of nkx2.2a
is up-regulated in these cells, and sox10 expression is suppressed. Our results
identify hdac1 as a novel, essential component of the mechanism that allocates
neural progenitors to the oligodendrocyte fate, by attenuating expression of a
subset of neural progenitor genes and rendering olig2 expression responsive to
Hedgehog signalling.

PMID: 16324829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Cancer Res. 2005 Dec 1;65(23):10891-900.

Physical and functional interaction of DNA methyltransferase 3A with Mbd3 and
Brg1 in mouse lymphosarcoma cells.

Datta J(1), Majumder S, Bai S, Ghoshal K, Kutay H, Smith DS, Crabb JW, Jacob ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b are de novo DNA methyltransferases that also act as
transcriptional repressors independent of methyltransferase activity. To
elucidate the underlying mechanism of transcriptional repression, Dnmt3a was
purified from mouse lymphosarcoma cells (P1798) by extensive fractionation on
five different chromatographic matrices followed by glycerol density gradient
centrifugation. Liquid chromatography electrospray tandem mass spectrometry
analysis of Dnmt3a-associated polypeptides identified the methyl CpG binding
protein Mbd3, histone deacetylase 1(Hdac1), and components of Brg1 complex (Brg1,
Baf155, and Baf57) in the purified preparation. Association of Dnmt3a with Mbd3
and Brg1 was confirmed by coimmunoprecipitation and coimmunolocalization studies.
Glutathione S-transferase pulldown assay showed that the NH2-terminal ATRX
homology domain of Dnmt3a interacts with the methyl CpG binding domain of Mbd3
and with both bromo and ATPase domains of Brg1. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
assay revealed that all three proteins are associated with transcriptionally
silent methylated metallothionein (MT-I) promoter in the mouse lymphosarcoma
cells. To understand the functional significance of their association with the
promoter, their role on the MT-I promoter activity was analyzed by transient
transfection assay. The results showed that Mbd3 and Dnmt3a specifically
inhibited the methylated promoter, and the catalytic activity of Dnmt3a was
dispensable for the suppression. In contrast, the wild-type but not the
ATPase-inactive mutant of Brg1 suppressed MT-I promoter irrespective of its
methylation status, implicating involvement of ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling
in the process. Coexpression of two of the three interacting proteins at a time
augmented their repressor function. This study shows physical and functional
interaction of Dnmt3a with components of nucleosome remodeling machinery.

PMCID: PMC2241737
PMID: 16322236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. EMBO J. 2006 Jan 11;25(1):139-49. Epub 2005 Dec 1.

NF-kappaB p50 promotes HIV latency through HDAC recruitment and repression of
transcriptional initiation.

Williams SA(1), Chen LF, Kwon H, Ruiz-Jarabo CM, Verdin E, Greene WC.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Virology and Immunology, University of California, San 
Francisco, CA 94158, USA.

Cells latently infected with HIV represent a currently insurmountable barrier to 
viral eradication in infected patients. Using the J-Lat human T-cell model of HIV
latency, we have investigated the role of host factor binding to the kappaB
enhancer elements of the HIV long terminal repeat (LTR) in the maintenance of
viral latency. We show that NF-kappaB p50-HDAC1 complexes constitutively bind the
latent HIV LTR and induce histone deacetylation and repressive changes in
chromatin structure of the HIV LTR, changes that impair recruitment of RNA
polymerase II and transcriptional initiation. Knockdown of p50 expression with
specific small hairpin RNAs reduces HDAC1 binding to the latent HIV LTR and
induces RNA polymerase II recruitment. Similarly, inhibition of histone
deacetylase (HDAC) activity with trichostatin A promotes binding of RNA
polymerase II to the latent HIV LTR. This bound polymerase complex, however,
remains non-processive, generating only short viral transcripts. Synthesis of
full-length viral transcripts can be rescued under these conditions by expression
of Tat. The combination of HDAC inhibitors and Tat merits consideration as a new 
strategy for purging latent HIV proviruses from their cellular reservoirs.

PMCID: PMC1356344
PMID: 16319923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. J Neurochem. 2005 Dec;95(5):1227-36.

Novel targets for valproic acid: up-regulation of melatonin receptors and
neurotrophic factors in C6 glioma cells.

Castro LM(1), Gallant M, Niles LP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioural Neurosciences, McMaster University,
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

Valproic acid (VPA) is a potent anti-epileptic and effective mood stabilizer. It 
is known that VPA enhances central GABAergic activity and activates the
mitogen-activated protein kinase-extracellular signal-regulated kinase (MAPK-ERK)
pathway. It can also inhibit various isoforms of the enzyme, histone deacetylase 
(HDAC), which is associated with modulation of gene transcription. Recent in vivo
studies indicate a neuroprotective role for VPA, which has been found to
up-regulate the expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) in the rat
brain. Given the interaction between the pineal hormone, melatonin, and GABAergic
systems in the central nervous system, the effects of VPA on the expression of
the mammalian melatonin receptor subtypes, MT1 and MT2, were examined in rat C6
glioma cells. The effects of VPA on the expression of glial cell line-derived
neurotrophic factor (GDNF) and BDNF were also examined. RT-PCR studies revealed a
significant induction of melatonin MT1 receptor mRNA in C6 cells following
treatment with 3 or 5 mm VPA for 24 h or 5 mm VPA for 48 h. Western analysis and 
immunocytochemical detection confirmed that the VPA-induced increase in MT1 mRNA 
results in up-regulation of MT1 protein expression. Blockade of the MAPK-ERK
pathway by PD98059 enhanced the effect of VPA on MT1 expression, suggesting a
negative role for this pathway in MT1 receptor regulation. In addition,
significant increases in BDNF, GDNF and HDAC mRNA expression were observed after 
treatment with VPA for 24 or 48 h. Taken together, the present findings suggest
that the neuroprotective properties of VPA involve modulation of neurotrophic
factors and receptors for melatonin, which is also thought to play a role in
neuroprotection. Moreover, the foregoing suggests that combinations of VPA and
melatonin could provide novel therapeutic strategies in neurological and
psychiatric disorders.

PMID: 16313512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Genomics. 2006 Jan;87(1):113-8. Epub 2005 Nov 28.

Mouse cDNA microarray analysis uncovers Slug targets in mouse embryonic
fibroblasts.

Bermejo-Rodríguez C(1), Pérez-Caro M, Pérez-Mancera PA, Sánchez-Beato M, Piris
MA, Sánchez-García I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio 13, Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular del Cáncer,
CSIC/Universidad de Salamanca, Campus Unamuno, 37007 Salamanca, Spain.

There is a need to reveal mechanisms that account for maintenance of the
mesenchymal phenotype in normal development and cancer. Slug (approved gene
symbol Snai2), a member of the Snail gene family of zinc-finger transcription
factors, is believed to function in the maintenance of the nonepithelial
phenotype. This study identified candidate Slug target genes linked to Slug gene 
suppression in primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts. Expression analyses were
performed with a mouse cDNA microarray (Mousechip-CNIO) containing 15,000 clones.
A total of 15 novel Slug target species were validated by real-time PCR or
Western analyses. These included self-renewal genes (Bmi1, Nanog, Gfi1),
epithelial-mesenchymal genes (Tcfe2a, Ctnb1, Sin3a, Hdac1, Hdac2, Muc1, Cldn11), 
survival genes (Bcl2, Bbc3), and cell cycle/damage genes (Cdkn1a, Rbl1, Mdm2).
Expression patterns were studied in wild-type MEFs and Slug-deficient MEFs.
Slug-complementation studies recovered aberrant gene expression in cells lacking 
Slug, indicating that these genes were regulated directly by Slug. These results 
highlight their potential roles in mediating Slug function in mesenchymal cells
and may help to identify novel therapeutic biomarkers in cancers linked to Slug.

PMID: 16311016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Anticancer Res. 2005 Nov-Dec;25(6B):4287-92.

Expression analysis of a subset of coregulators and three nuclear receptors in
human colorectal carcinoma.

Giannini R(1), Cavallini A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, National Institute for Digestive Diseases,
I.R.C.C.S. Saverio de Bellis, 70013-Castellana Grotte, BA, Italy.

In human colorectal tissue samples, the gene expressions of 4 coactivators, p300,
pCAF, TIF-2 and TRAP 220, and 7 corepressors, N-CoR, REA, MTA1, MTA1L1, HDAC1,
HDAC2 and HDAC3, linked to estrogen receptors (ER), were revealed by traditional 
RT-PCR. Cofactors ERalpha, ERbeta and ERRalpha mRNA levels were then measured in 
40 tumor tissue samples matched with respective normal mucosa by real-time PCR.
The decline of mRNA levels of all coactivators and the increase of NCoR, HDAC1,
HDAC2 and MTA1 were observed from normal to tumor tissue, whereas REA, HDAC3 and 
MTA1L1 expressions were similar in both tissue compartments. The gene expression 
of ERbeta correlated with those of p300, TIF-2 and REA in normal mucosa, and with
that of REA in tumor tissue only. No association was found between ERalpha and
coregulators and between each coregulator and different clinical parameters. Our 
findings suggest that the co-induction of ERbeta and some cofactors may play an
important role during the development of human colorectal carcinoma.

PMID: 16309230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. J Virol. 2005 Dec;79(24):15302-13.

Respiratory syncytial virus-inducible BCL-3 expression antagonizes the STAT/IRF
and NF-kappaB signaling pathways by inducing histone deacetylase 1 recruitment to
the interleukin-8 promoter.

Jamaluddin M(1), Choudhary S, Wang S, Casola A, Huda R, Garofalo RP, Ray S,
Brasier AR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, MRB 8.138, The University of Texas Medical Branch, 
301 University Blvd., Galveston, TX 77555-1060, USA.

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a paramyxovirus that produces airway
inflammation, in part by inducing interleukin-8 (IL-8) expression, a CXC-type
chemokine, via the NF-kappaB/RelA and STAT/IRF signaling pathways. In
RSV-infected A549 cells, IL-8 transcription attenuates after 24 h in spite of
ongoing viral replication and persistence of nuclear RelA, suggesting a mechanism
for transcriptional attenuation. RSV infection induces B-cell lymphoma protein -3
(Bcl-3) expression 6 to 12 h after viral infection, at times when IL-8
transcription is inhibited. By contrast, 293 cells, deficient in inducible Bcl-3 
expression, show no attenuation of IL-8 transcription. We therefore examined
Bcl-3's role in terminating virus-inducible IL-8 transcription. Transient
expression of Bcl-3 potently inhibited virus-inducible IL-8 transcription by
disrupting both the NF-kappaB and STAT/IRF pathways. Although previously Bcl-3
was thought to capture 50-kDa NF-kappaB1 isoforms in the cytoplasm,
immunoprecipitation (IP) and electrophoretic mobility shift assays indicate that 
nuclear Bcl-3 associates with NF-kappaB1 without affecting DNA binding.
Additionally, Bcl-3 potently inhibited the STAT/IRF pathway. Nondenaturing co-IP 
assays indicate that nuclear Bcl-3 associates with STAT-1 and histone deacetylase
1 (HDAC-1), increasing HDAC-1 recruitment to the IL-8 promoter. Treatment with
the HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A blocks attenuation of IL-8 transcription. A
nuclear targeting-deficient Bcl-3 is unable to enhance HDAC-1-mediated chemokine 
repression. Finally, small inhibitory RNA-mediated Bcl-3 "knockdown" resulted in 
enhanced RSV-induced chemokine expression in A549 cells. These data indicate that
Bcl-3 is a virus-inducible inhibitor of chemokine transcription by interfering
with the NF-kappaB and STAT/IRF signaling pathways by complexing with them and
recruiting HDAC-1 to attenuate target promoter activity.

PMCID: PMC1316019
PMID: 16306601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jan 20;281(3):1620-9. Epub 2005 Nov 16.

A splice variant of stress response gene ATF3 counteracts NF-kappaB-dependent
anti-apoptosis through inhibiting recruitment of CREB-binding protein/p300
coactivator.

Hua B(1), Tamamori-Adachi M, Luo Y, Tamura K, Morioka M, Fukuda M, Tanaka Y,
Kitajima S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical Genetics, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo Medical 
and Dental University, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan.

Activating transcription factor (ATF) 3 plays a role in determining cell fate and
generates a variety of alternatively spliced isoforms in stress response. We have
reported previously that splice variant ATF3deltaZip2, which lacks the leucine
zipper region, is induced in response to various stress stimuli. However, its
biological function has not been elucidated. By using cells treated with tumor
necrosis factor-alpha and actinomycin D or cells overexpressing ATF3deltaZip2, we
showed that ATF3deltaZip2 sensitizes cells to apoptotic cell death in response to
tumor necrosis factor-alpha, at least in part through suppressing nuclear factor 
(NF)-kappaB-dependent transcription of anti-apoptotic genes such as cIAP2 and
XIAP. ATF3deltaZip2 interacts with a p65 (RelA)-cofactor complex containing
CBP/p300 and HDAC1 at NF-kappaB sites of the proximal promoter region of the
cIAP2 gene in vivo and down-regulates the recruitment of CBP/p300. Our study
revealed that ATF3deltaZip2 counteracts anti-apoptotic activity of NF-kappaB, at 
least in part, by displacing positive cofactor CBP/p300 and provides insight into
the mechanism by which ATF3 regulates cell fate through alternative splicing in
stress response.

PMID: 16291753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Dec;25(23):10338-51.

Gfi1 coordinates epigenetic repression of p21Cip/WAF1 by recruitment of histone
lysine methyltransferase G9a and histone deacetylase 1.

Duan Z(1), Zarebski A, Montoya-Durango D, Grimes HL, Horwitz M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Medicine, University of Washington
School of Medicine, Box 357720, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

The growth factor independent 1 (Gfi1) transcriptional regulator oncoprotein
plays a crucial role in hematopoietic, inner ear, and pulmonary neuroendocrine
cell development and governs cell processes as diverse as self-renewal of
hematopoietic stem cells, proliferation, apoptosis, differentiation, cell fate
specification, and oncogenesis. However, the molecular basis of its
transcriptional functions has remained elusive. Here we show that Gfi1 recruits
the histone lysine methyltransferase G9a and the histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) in
order to modify the chromatin of genes targeted for repression by Gfi1. G9a and
HDAC1 are both in a repressive complex assembled by Gfi1. Endogenous Gfi1
colocalizes with G9a, HDAC1, and K9-dimethylated histone H3. Gfi1 associates with
G9a and HDAC1 on the promoter of the cell cycle regulator p21Cip/WAF1, resulting 
in an increase in K9 dimethylation at histone H3. Silencing of Gfi1 expression in
myeloid cells reverses G9a and HDAC1 recruitment to p21Cip/WAF1 and elevates its 
expression. These findings highlight the role of epigenetics in the regulation of
development and oncogenesis by Gfi1.

PMCID: PMC1291230
PMID: 16287849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Mol Cells. 2005 Oct 31;20(2):241-6.

PI3-kinase and PDK-1 regulate HDAC1-mediated transcriptional repression of
transcription factor NF-kappaB.

Choi YS(1), Jeong S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Institute of Nanosensor and Biotechnology,
Dankook University, Seoul 140-714, Korea.

PDK-1 activates PI3-kinase/Akt signaling and regulates fundamental cellular
functions, such as growth and survival. NF-kB is involved in the induction of a
variety of cellular genes affecting immunity, inflammation and the resistance to 
apoptosis induced by some anti-cancer drugs. Even though the crucial involvement 
of the PI3-kinase/Akt pathway in the anti-apoptotic activation of NF-kB is well
known, the exact role of PDK-1 as well as PI3-kinase/Akt in NF-kB activation is
not understood. Here we demonstrate that PDK-1 plays a pivotal role in
transcriptional activation of NF-kB by dissociating the transcriptional
co-repressor HDAC1 from the p65 subunit of NF-kB. The association of CBP with p65
was not directly modulated by PDK-1 or by PI3-kinase. Etoposide activated NF-kB
through PI3-kinase/Akt, and the transcription activation domain (TAD) of p65 was 
further activated by wild-type PDK-1. Overexpression of a dominant negative PDK-1
mutant decreased etoposide-induced NF-kB transcription and further down-regulated
the ectopic HDAC1-mediated decrease in NF-kB transcriptional activity. Thus
activation of PDK-1 relieves the HDAC1-mediated repression of NF-kB that may be
related to basal as well as activated transcription by NF-kB. This effect may
also explain the role of the PI3-kinase/PDK-1 pathway in the anti-apoptotic
function of NF-kB associated with the chemoresistance of cancer cells.

PMID: 16267399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Theriogenology. 2006 Jun;65(9):1704-15. Epub 2005 Oct 26.

Anomalous mRNA levels of chromatin remodeling genes in swamp buffalo (Bubalus
bubalis) cloned embryos.

Suteevun T(1), Smith SL, Muenthaisong S, Yang X, Parnpai R, Tian XC.

Author information: 
(1)Embryo Technology and Stem Cell Research Center and School of Biotechnology,
Institute of Agricultural Technology, Suranaree University of Technology, Nakhon 
Ratchasima 30000, Thailand.

The swamp buffalo (Bubalus bubalis) is a multi-purpose animal in agriculture that
is challenged by extinction due to low reproductive efficiency. Nuclear transfer 
(NT) has been used to preserve special breeds of buffalo, as well as to increase 
the number of animals. However, cloned buffalo embryos have impaired development,
as in other species. To understand the chromatin remodeling activities in cloned 
embryos and to improve NT technology, we examined the expression profiles of five
genes involved in DNA and histone modifications, DNMT1, DNMT3A, DNMT3B, HAT1 and 
HDAC1, in single swamp buffalo metaphase II oocytes, NT and in vitro fertilized
(IVF) embryos from the two-cell to the blastocyst stage, by quantitative real
time RT-PCR. We observed similar expression dynamics for all genes studied in the
NT and IVF embryos: relatively constant levels of expression for all genes were
found from the MII oocyte up to the eight-cell stage; the levels of mRNA for HAT1
and DNMT3B continued to be stably expressed up to the blastocyst stage; while
dramatic increases were seen for DNMT3A and HDAC1. Alternatively, the levels of
DNMT1 started to decrease at the eight-cell stage. Despite the similarity in the 
dynamics of gene expression, dramatic differences in the relative levels of these
genes between NT and IVF embryos were observed. The expression levels of all DNA 
modifying genes were higher in the NT embryos than in the IVF embryos at the
eight-cell and blastocyst stages. The genes HDAC1 and HAT1 were also expressed
significantly higher at the blastocyst stage in the NT embryos. Our results
suggested differences in chromatin remodeling between NT and IVF embryos and that
lower levels of DNA passive demethylation and higher levels of DNA de novo
methylation occurred in the NT embryos. These observations are novel in the
species of buffalo, and may be associated with developmental failure of cloned
buffalo embryos due to the transcriptional repression effect of most genes
studied here.

PMID: 16256185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. BMC Cell Biol. 2005 Oct 26;6:37.

HDACs and the senescent phenotype of WI-38 cells.

Place RF(1), Noonan EJ, Giardina C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Connecticut, Storrs,
Connecticut 06269, USA. place.robert@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Normal cells possess a limited proliferative life span after which
they enter a state of irreversible growth arrest. This process, known as
replicative senescence, is accompanied by changes in gene expression that give
rise to a variety of senescence-associated phenotypes. It has been suggested that
these gene expression changes result in part from alterations in the histone
acetylation machinery. Here we examine the influence of HDAC inhibitors on the
expression of senescent markers in pre- and post-senescent WI-38 cells.
RESULTS: Pre- and post-senescent WI-38 cells were treated with the HDAC
inhibitors butyrate or trichostatin A (TSA). Following HDAC inhibitor treatment, 
pre-senescent cells increased p21WAF1 and beta-galactosidase expression, assumed 
a flattened senescence-associated morphology, and maintained a lower level of
proteasome activity. These alterations also occurred during normal replicative
senescence of WI-38 cells, but were not accentuated further by HDAC inhibitors.
We also found that HDAC1 levels decline during normal replicative senescence.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that HDACs impact numerous phenotypic changes
associated with cellular senescence. Reduced HDAC1 expression levels in senescent
cells may be an important event in mediating the transition to a senescent
phenotype.

PMCID: PMC1285358
PMID: 16250917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Med Chem. 2005 Nov 3;48(22):6936-47.

Toward selective histone deacetylase inhibitor design: homology modeling, docking
studies, and molecular dynamics simulations of human class I histone
deacetylases.

Wang DF(1), Helquist P, Wiech NL, Wiest O.

Author information: 
(1)Walther Cancer Research Center and Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry,
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556-5670, USA.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) play an important role in gene transcription.
Inhibitors of HDACs induce cell differentiation and suppress cell proliferation
in tumor cells. Although many HDAC inhibitors have been designed and synthesized,
selective inhibition for class I HDAC isoforms is a goal that has yet to be
achieved. To understand the difference between class I HDAC isoforms that could
be exploited for the design of isoform-specific HDAC inhibitors, we have built
three-dimensional models of four class I histone deacetylases, HDAC1, HDAC2,
HDAC3, and HDAC8. Comparison of the homology model of HDAC8 with the recently
published X-ray structure shows excellent agreement and validates the approach. A
series of HDAC inhibitors were docked to the homology models to understand the
similarities and differences between the binding modes. Molecular dynamic
simulations of these HDAC-inhibitor complexes indicate that the interaction
between the protein surface and inhibitor is playing an important role; also some
active site residues show some flexibility, which is usually not included in
routine docking protocols. The implications of these results for the design of
isoform-selective HDAC inhibitors are discussed.

PMID: 16250652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Nov 1;102(44):16007-12. Epub 2005 Oct 20.

Regulation of relB in dendritic cells by means of modulated association of
vitamin D receptor and histone deacetylase 3 with the promoter.

Dong X(1), Lutz W, Schroeder TM, Bachman LA, Westendorf JJ, Kumar R, Griffin MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Mayo Clinic
College of Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

The NF-kappaB component RelB is essential for dendritic cell (DC) differentiation
and maturation. The vitamin D receptor (VDR) is a nuclear receptor that mediates 
inhibition of DC maturation and transcriptional repression of relB after
engagement of its ligand, 1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3), or related analogs
(D(3) analogs). Ligand-dependent relB suppression was abolished by a histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor. Constitutive association of VDR with the relB
promoter was demonstrated in DCs by chromatin immunoprecipitation. Promoter
binding by VDR was enhanced by ligand and reduced by LPS. Association of HDAC3
and HDAC1 with the relB VDR-binding site was observed, but only HDAC3 was
reciprocally modulated by D(3) analog and LPS. Overexpression of HDAC3 caused
relB promoter suppression, increased sensitivity to D(3) analog, and resistance
to LPS. Depletion of HDAC3 attenuated relB suppression by D(3) analog. In vivo,
D(3) analog resulted in reduced RelB in DCs from VDR WT mice but not VDR knockout
mice. Other NF-lation of RelB and c-Rel in control animals. We conclude that
vitamin D-regulated relB transcription in DCs is controlled by chromatin
remodeling by means of recruitment of complexes including HDAC3.

PMCID: PMC1257750
PMID: 16239345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Biol Pharm Bull. 2005 Oct;28(10):1966-70.

Histone deacetylase 1 contributes to cell cycle and apoptosis.

Wang AG(1), Kim SU, Lee SH, Kim SK, Seo SB, Yu DY, Lee DS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Human Genomics, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology (KRIBB); Daejeon 305-806, Korea.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are generally thought to play important roles in
human disease. However, little information is available concerning the specific
functions of individual HDACs. We previously reported on transgenic mice that
expressed human HDAC1 and experienced steatosis and nuclear pleomorphism in their
hepatic tissues. To find out if the over-expression of HDAC1 contributes to the
expression of genes related to the cell cycle, apoptosis, and lipid metabolism
that eventually contribute to the pathological changes in the livers of the
transgenic mice, the expression profiles of the related genes in liver tissues
were determined by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and
Western blot analysis. The activated human HDAC1 significantly induced the
expression levels of mRNA for p53, PPAR-gamma and Bak and reduced the p21
expression level compared with the levels in control littermates. However, the
protein levels of p53 and PPAR-gamma were significantly decreased. In conclusion,
our results indicate that HDAC1 can regulate gene expression at the mRNA and
protein levels independently and that this may be a potential cytopathic factor
for hepatic tissue in transgenic mice that over-express HDAC1.

PMID: 16204956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Br J Haematol. 2005 Oct;131(2):214-8.

Transcription repression activity is associated with the type I isoform of the
MMSET gene involved in t(4;14) in multiple myeloma.

Todoerti K(1), Ronchetti D, Agnelli L, Castellani S, Marelli S, Deliliers GL,
Zanella A, Lombardi L, Neri A.

Author information: 
(1)U.O. Ematologia 2, Centro Trapianti di Midollo, Dipartimento di Scienze
Mediche, Università degli Studi di Milano, Ospedale Maggiore IRCCS Milano, Milan,
Italy.

The WHSC1/MMSET gene, involved in t(4;14)(p16.3;q32) in multiple myeloma, encodes
putative isoforms (MMSET I, MMSET II and RE-IIBP) which are thought to be
involved in transcription regulation. We investigated their activity in
transfected 293T and HeLa cells. Both MMSET I and MMSET II were localised in the 
nucleus, whereas RE-IIBP showed cytoplasmic and nucleolar staining. MMSET I
dose-dependently repressed the transcriptional activity of the promoter region of
the thymidine kinase gene, whereas MMSET II and RE-IIBP had no effect. The HDAC
inhibitor, trichostatin A, reduced MMSET I repression activity and in vitro
co-immunoprecipitation analyses indicated that MMSET I specifically recruits
HDAC1 and mSin3b, but not HDAC2 or HDAC4. Our data support the hypothesis that
MMSET may act as a transcription regulator; different functions may be associated
with distinct isoforms.

PMID: 16197452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. J Cell Biochem. 2006 Jan 1;97(1):145-55.

Distinct localizations and repression activities of MM-1 isoforms toward c-Myc.

Hagio Y(1), Kimura Y, Taira T, Fujioka Y, Iguchi-Ariga SM, Ariga H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido University, Sapporo
060-0812, Japan.

MM-1 was identified as a c-Myc-binding protein and has been reported to repress
the E-box-dependent transcription activity of c-Myc by recruiting HDAC1 complex
via TIF1 beta/KAP1. In this study, originally isolated MM-1 was found to be a
fusion protein comprised of the N-terminal 13 amino acids from the sequence of
chromosome 14 and of the rest of the amino acids from that of chromosome 12 and
was found to be expressed ubiquitously in all human tissues. Four splicing
isoforms of MM-1, MM-1alpha, MM-1beta, MM-1gamma, and MM-1delta, which are
derived from the sequence of chromosome 12, were then identified. Of these
isoforms, MM-1alpha, MM-1gamma, and MM-1delta were found to be expressed in
tissue-specific manners and MM-1beta was found to be expressed ubiquitously.
Although all of the isoforms potentially possessed c-Myc- and TIF1beta-binding
activities, MM-1beta and MM-1delta were found to be mainly localized in the
cytoplasm and MM-1alpha and MM-1gamma were found to be localized in the nucleus
together with both c-Myc and TIF1beta. Furthermore, when repression activities of
MM-1 isoforms toward c-Myc transcription activity were examined by reporter gene 
assays in HeLa cells, MM-1alpha, MM-1gamma, and MM-1gamma, but not MM-1beta, were
found to repress transcription activity of c-Myc, and the degrees of repression
by MM-1gamma and MM-1delta were smaller than those by MM-1 and MM-1alpha. These
results suggest that each MM-1 isoform distinctly regulates c-Myc transcription
activity in respective tissues.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16173081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2005 Nov;94(1):11-6.

Quantitation of HDAC1 mRNA expression in invasive carcinoma of the breast*.

Zhang Z(1), Yamashita H, Toyama T, Sugiura H, Ando Y, Mita K, Hamaguchi M, Hara
Y, Kobayashi S, Iwase H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast and Endocrine Surgery, Medical School, Nagoya City
University Hospital, Kawasumi 1, 467-8601, Nagoya, Japan.

Estrogen is well-established as a mitogenic factor implicated in the
tumorigenesis and progression of breast cancer via its binding to the estrogen
receptor alpha (ERalpha). Recent data indicate that chromatin inactivation
mediated by histone deacetylation (HDAC) and DNA methylation is a critical
component of ERalpha silencing in human breast cancer cells. The aim of this
study was to determine the expression of the HDAC1 gene in malignant human breast
tissue and to correlate our observations with available clinical information. In 
the present study, the level of expression of HDAC1 mRNA was assessed by
LightCycler-based quantitative real-time reverse transcriptase (RT)-PCR analysis 
in 162 cases of invasive carcinoma of the breast. Associations between HDAC1 mRNA
expression and different clinicopathological factors were sought. It was found
that HDAC1 mRNA was expressed at significantly higher levels in tumors from
patients over 50 years of age and in those tumors without axillary lymph node
involvement, that are less than 2 cm, that are of a non-high histological grade, 
that are HER2 negative and that are ERalpha/PgR positive. Patients with tumors
displaying high levels of HDAC1 mRNA expression tended to have a better prognosis
in terms of both disease-free and overall survival. However, univariate and
multivariate analysis did not show HDAC1 mRNA expression level to be an
independent prognostic factor for either disease-free or overall survival. These 
results imply that HDAC1 mRNA expression could have potential as an endocrine
response marker and may have prognostic implications for breast cancer
progression.

PMID: 16172792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Oct;25(19):8415-29.

Tumor suppressor SMAR1 mediates cyclin D1 repression by recruitment of the
SIN3/histone deacetylase 1 complex.

Rampalli S(1), Pavithra L, Bhatt A, Kundu TK, Chattopadhyay S.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Cell Science, Pune University Campus, Ganeshkhind, Pune
411007, India.

Matrix attachment region binding proteins have been shown to play an important
role in gene regulation by altering chromatin in a stage- and tissue-specific
manner. Our previous studies report that SMAR1, a matrix-associated protein,
regresses B16-F1-induced tumors in mice. Here we show SMAR1 targets the cyclin D1
promoter, a gene product whose dysregulation is attributed to breast
malignancies. Our studies reveal that SMAR1 represses cyclin D1 gene expression, 
which can be reversed by small interfering RNA specific to SMAR1. We demonstrate 
that SMAR1 interacts with histone deacetylation complex 1, SIN3, and pocket
retinoblastomas to form a multiprotein repressor complex. This interaction is
mediated by the SMAR1(160-350) domain. Our data suggest SMAR1 recruits a
repressor complex to the cyclin D1 promoter that results in deacetylation of
chromatin at that locus, which spreads to a distance of at least the 5 kb studied
upstream of the cyclin D1 promoter. Interestingly, we find that the high
induction of cyclin D1 in breast cancer cell lines can be correlated to the
decreased levels of SMAR1 in these lines. Our results establish the molecular
mechanism exhibited by SMAR1 to regulate cyclin D1 by modification of chromatin.

PMCID: PMC1265755
PMID: 16166625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Gene. 2005 Oct 10;359:35-43.

The Krüppel-like zinc-finger protein ZNF224 represses aldolase A gene
transcription by interacting with the KAP-1 co-repressor protein.

Medugno L(1), Florio F, De Cegli R, Grosso M, Lupo A, Costanzo P, Izzo P.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biochimica e Biotecnologie Mediche, Università di Napoli
Federico II, Via S. Pansini 5, 80131 Napoli, Italy.

Transcription factors belonging to the Krüppel-like zinc finger family of
proteins participate in the regulation of cell differentiation and development.
Although many of these proteins have been identified, little is known about their
structure and function. We recently purified ZNF224, a new Krüppel-like zinc
finger protein, that contains a Krüppel-associated box (KRAB) domain at the NH2
terminus, and 19 Cys2-His2 zinc-finger domains at the COOH terminus. Using
chromatin immunoprecipitation and transient transfection assays, we demonstrate
that ZNF224 binds in vivo to the distal promoter of the aldolase A gene and
represses its transcription. The results of transient co-transfection experiments
show that ZNF224-mediated transcription repression requires the 45-amino acid
long KRAB A domain. The ability of KRAB-containing ZNF224 protein to repress
transcription depends on specific interaction with the KAP-1 co-repressor
molecule. Finally, using selective treatment with the HDAC1 inhibitor
trichostatin A, we demonstrate that ZNF224-mediated repression requires histone
deacetylases.

PMID: 16150558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Cancer Res. 2005 Sep 1;65(17):7603-11.

The distal zinc finger domain of AML1/MDS1/EVI1 is an oligomerization domain
involved in induction of hematopoietic differentiation defects in primary cells
in vitro.

Senyuk V(1), Li D, Zakharov A, Mikhail FM, Nucifora G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and The Cancer Center, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60607, USA. vsenyuk@uic.edu

AML1/MDS1/EVI1 (AME) is a chimeric transcription factor produced by the
(3;21)(q26;q22) translocation. This chromosomal translocation is associated with 
de novo and therapy-related acute myeloid leukemia and with the blast crisis of
chronic myelogenous leukemia. AME is obtained by in-frame fusion of the AML1 and 
MDS1/EVI1 (ME) genes. The mechanisms by which AME induces a neoplastic
transformation in bone marrow cells are unknown. AME interacts with the
corepressors CtBP and HDAC1, and it was shown that AME is a repressor in contrast
to the parent transcription factors AML1 and ME, which are transcription
activators. Studies with murine bone marrow progenitors indicated that the
introduction of a point mutation that destroys the CtBP-binding consensus impairs
but does not abolish the disruption of cell differentiation and replication
associated with AME expression, suggesting that additional events are required.
Several chimeric proteins, such as AML1/ETO, BCR/ABL, and PML/RARa, are
characterized by the presence of a self-interaction domain critical for
transformation. We report that AME is also able to oligomerize and displays a
complex pattern of self-interaction that involves at least three oligomerization 
regions, one of which is the distal zinc finger domain. Although the deletion of 
this short domain does not preclude the self-interaction of AME, it significantly
reduces the differentiation defects caused in vitro by AME in primary murine bone
marrow progenitors. The addition of a point mutation that inhibits CtBP binding
completely abrogates the effects of AME on differentiation, suggesting that AME
induces hematopoietic differentiation defects through at least two separate but
cooperating pathways.

PMID: 16140925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Mol Cell. 2005 Sep 16;19(6):857-64.

Regulation of LSD1 histone demethylase activity by its associated factors.

Shi YJ(1), Matson C, Lan F, Iwase S, Baba T, Shi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

LSD1 is a recently identified human lysine (K)-specific histone demethylase. LSD1
is associated with HDAC1/2; CoREST, a SANT domain-containing corepressor; and
BHC80, a PHD domain-containing protein, among others. We show that CoREST endows 
LSD1 with the ability to demethylate nucleosomal substrates and that it protects 
LSD1 from proteasomal degradation in vivo. We find hyperacetylated nucleosomes
less susceptible to CoREST/LSD1-mediated demethylation, suggesting that
hypoacetylated nucleosomes may be the preferred physiological substrates. This
raises the possibility that histone deacetylases and LSD1 may collaborate to
generate a repressive chromatin environment. Consistent with this model, TSA
treatment results in derepression of LSD1 target genes. While CoREST positively
regulates LSD1 function, BHC80 inhibits CoREST/LSD1-mediated demethylation in
vitro and may therefore confer negative regulation. Taken together, these
findings suggest that LSD1-mediated histone demethylation is regulated
dynamically in vivo. This is expected to have profound effects on gene expression
under both physiological and pathological conditions.

PMID: 16140033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Aug 30;33(15):4857-64. Print 2005.

dSAP18 and dHDAC1 contribute to the functional regulation of the Drosophila Fab-7
element.

Canudas S(1), Pérez S, Fanti L, Pimpinelli S, Singh N, Hanes SD, Azorín F,
Espinás ML.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Biologia Molecular i Cel.lular, Institut de Biologia Molecular 
de Barcelona, CSIC Parc Científic de Barcelona, Josep Samitier, 1-5 08028
Barcelona, Spain.

It was described earlier that the Drosophila GAGA factor [Trithorax-like (Trl)]
interacts with dSAP18, which, in mammals, was reported to be a component of the
Sin3-HDAC co-repressor complex. GAGA-dSAP18 interaction was proposed to
contribute to the functional regulation of the bithorax complex (BX-C). Here, we 
show that mutant alleles of Trl, dsap18 and drpd3/hdac1 enhance A6-to-A5
transformation indicating a contribution to the regulation of Abd-B expression at
A6. In A6, expression of Abd-B is driven by the iab-6 enhancer, which is
insulated from iab-7 by the Fab-7 element. Here, we report that GAGA, dSAP18 and 
dRPD3/HDAC1 co-localize to ectopic Fab-7 sites in polytene chromosomes and that
mutant Trl, dsap18 and drpd3/hdac1 alleles affect Fab-7-dependent silencing.
Consistent with these findings, chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis shows
that, in Drosophila embryos, the endogenous Fab-7 element is hypoacetylated at
histones H3 and H4. These results indicate a contribution of GAGA, dSAP18 and
dRPD3/HDAC1 to the regulation of Fab-7 function.

PMCID: PMC1196206
PMID: 16135462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Cell Cycle. 2005 Oct;4(10):1342-5. Epub 2005 Oct 25.

The two faces of NFkappaB in cell survival responses.

Graham B(1), Gibson SB.

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Cell Biology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
Manitoba, Canada.

Activation of NFkappaB is controlled by a diverse range of stimuli including
growth factors, and apoptotic inducers, but paradoxically these stimuli seem to
activate the same NFkappaB signaling pathways. In particular, growth factors
leading to cell survival and DNA damaging agents leading to apoptosis seem to
activate the same NFkappaB signaling pathway. Post-translational modifications of
NFkappaB and surrounding histones give selective targeting of NFkappaB regulated 
genes contributing to cell survival or apoptosis. NFkappaB activation induces
death receptor 5 (DR5) expression following DNA damaging agent etoposide
treatment but not following growth factor EGF treatment. This differential
expression is regulated by the recruitment of histone deacytelasse 1 (HDAC1) to
the DR5 gene by NFkappaB following EGF treatment but not etoposide treatment. In 
addition, HDAC inhibitors induce NFkappaB binding to the DR5 gene and DR5
expression, contributing to HDAC inhibitor induced apoptosis. These findings
provide a possible model for selective NFkappaB transcriptional regulation based 
upon the context of post-translational modifications in surrounding histones on
NFkappaB regulated target genes.

PMID: 16123594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2005;16(1-3):23-30.

Histone deacetylase-1 represses transcription by interacting with zinc-fingers
and interfering with the DNA binding activity of Sp1.

Kang JE(1), Kim MH, Lee JA, Park H, Min-Nyung L, Auh CK, Hur MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, BK21 Projects for Medical
Sciences, Institute of Genetic Sciences, Yonsei University School of Medicine,
Seoul, Korea.

Sp1 activates the transcription of many cellular and viral genes, and histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) removes the acetyl group of nucleosomal core histones.
Treatment of cells with the histone deacetylase 1 inhibitor, TSA, robustly
activates the transcription of the Sp1-dependent promoters, suggesting the
inhibition of Sp1 activity which is critical in the activation of transcription, 
by HDAC1. We assessed the protein-protein interactions occurring between Sp1 and 
HDAC1, and the transcriptional regulatory mechanism controlled by this
interaction. In vitro GST fusion pull down assays, co-immunoprecipitation, and
mammalian two-hybrid assays revealed that the HDAC1 noncatalytic domain (a.a.
237-482) interacts directly with the zinc-finger DNA binding domain of Sp1. DNase
I footprinting revealed that this interaction prevents the binding of Sp1
zinc-fingers to the target GC-box. Gal4-HDAC1 fusion, targeted proximally to the 
GC-boxes, potently repressed the transcription of pG5-5x(GC)-Luc, in which Sp1
potently activates transcription. This repression of transcription does not
involve the deacetylase activity of HDAC1, and is accomplished by the direct
protein-protein interactions which occur between the Sp1 zinc-finger DNA binding 
domain and HDAC1, which interferes with the promoter GC-box binding of Sp1.

Copyright (c) 2005 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16121030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. J Biol Chem. 2005 Nov 11;280(45):37868-76. Epub 2005 Aug 23.

Molecular determinants for the complex formation between the retinoblastoma
protein and LXCXE sequences.

Singh M(1), Krajewski M, Mikolajka A, Holak TA.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany.

The retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein (pRb) is a key negative regulator of 
cell proliferation that is frequently disregulated in human cancer. Many viral
oncoproteins (for example, HPV E7 and E1A) are known to bind to the pRb pocket
domain via a LXCXE binding motif. There are also some 20 cellular proteins that
contain a LXCXE motif and have been reported to associate with the pocket domain 
of pRb. Using NMR spectroscopy and isothermal calorimetry titration, we show that
LXCXE peptides of viral oncoproteins bind strongly to the pocket domain of pRb.
Additionally, we show that LXCXE-like peptides of HDAC1 bind to the same site on 
pRb with a weak (micromolar) and transient association. Systematic substitution
of residues other than conserved Leu, Cys, and Glu show that the residues
flanking the LXCXE are important for the binding, whereas positively charged
amino acids in the XLXCXEXXX sequence significantly weaken the interaction.

PMID: 16118215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Jan;20(1):100-13. Epub 2005 Aug 18.

Association of the mSin3A-histone deacetylase 1/2 corepressor complex with the
mouse steroidogenic acute regulatory protein gene.

Clem BF(1), Clark BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Louisville
School of Medicine, Louisville, Kentucky 40292, USA.

Several factors have been identified in the transcriptional repression of the
steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR) gene promoter; yet, no associating 
corepressor complexes have been characterized for the mouse promoter in MA-10
mouse Leydig tumor cells. We now report that Sp3, CAGA element binding proteins, 
and a corepressor complex consisting of mSin3A, histone deacetylase (HDAC)1, and 
HDAC2 associates with a transcriptional repressor region within the mouse StAR
promoter. 5'-Promoter deletion analysis localized the negative regulatory region 
between -180 and -150 bp upstream of the transcription start site, and mutations 
in both the CAGA and Sp binding elements were required to relieve the repression 
of basal StAR promoter activity. Protein-DNA binding analysis revealed Sp3 and
specific CAGA element-binding protein(s) associated with the repressor region.
Coimmunoprecipitation analysis identified the presence of the mSin3A, HDAC1, and 
HDAC2 corepressor complex in MA-10 cells. Furthermore, chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays revealed Sp3, mSin3A, and HDAC1/2 association with the
proximal region of the StAR promoter in situ. In addition, HDAC inhibition
resulted in a dose-dependent activation of a mouse StAR reporter construct,
whereas mutations within the repressor region diminished this effect by 44%. In
sum, these data support a novel regulatory mechanism for transcriptional
repression of the mouse StAR promoter by DNA binding of Sp3 and CAGA
element-binding proteins, and association of the Sin3 corepressor complex
exhibiting HDAC activity.

PMID: 16109738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. EMBO J. 2005 Sep 21;24(18):3279-90. Epub 2005 Aug 18.

MDM2 interaction with nuclear corepressor KAP1 contributes to p53 inactivation.

Wang C(1), Ivanov A, Chen L, Fredericks WJ, Seto E, Rauscher FJ 3rd, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Program, H Lee Moffitt Comprehensive Cancer Center and
Research Institute, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

MDM2 is a RING domain ubiquitin E3 ligase and a major regulator of the p53 tumor 
suppressor. MDM2 binds to p53, inactivates p53 transcription function, inhibits
p53 acetylation, and promotes p53 degradation. Here, we present evidence that
MDM2 interacts with the nuclear corepressor KAP1. The binding is mediated by the 
N-terminal coiled-coil domain of KAP1 and the central acidic domain of MDM2. KAP1
stimulates formation of p53-HDAC1 complex and inhibits p53 acetylation by
interacting with MDM2. Expression of KAP1 cooperates with MDM2 to promote p53
ubiquitination and degradation. The tumor suppressor ARF competes with KAP1 in
MDM2 binding; oncogene induction of ARF expression reduces MDM2-KAP1 interaction.
Depletion of endogenous KAP1 expression by RNAi stimulates p53 transcriptional
activity, sensitizes p53 response to DNA damage, and increases apoptosis.
Therefore, MDM2 interaction with KAP1 contributes to p53 functional regulation.
ARF may regulate p53 acetylation and stability in part by inhibiting KAP1-MDM2
binding.

PMCID: PMC1224681
PMID: 16107876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Oncogene. 2005 Dec 15;24(56):8326-37.

Mnt transcriptional repressor is functionally regulated during cell cycle
progression.

Popov N(1), Wahlström T, Hurlin PJ, Henriksson M.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Tumor Biology Center, Karolinska Institutet, Box 280, SE-171 
77 Stockholm, Sweden.

The Myc/Max/Mad network of transcription factors regulates cell proliferation,
differentiation, and transformation. Similar to other proteins of the network,
Mnt forms heterodimers with Max and binds CACGTG E-Box elements. Transcriptional 
repression by Mnt is mediated through association with mSin3, and deletion of the
mSin3-interacting domain (SID) converts Mnt to a transcriptional activator. Mnt
is coexpressed with Myc in proliferating cells and has been suggested to be a
modulator of Myc function. We report that Mnt is expressed both in
growth-arrested and proliferating mouse fibroblasts and is phosphorylated when
resting cells are induced to re-enter the cell cycle. Importantly, the
interaction between Mnt and mSin3 is disrupted upon serum stimulation resulting
in decreased Mnt-associated HDAC activity. Furthermore, we demonstrate that Mnt
binds and recruits mSin3 to the Myc target gene cyclin D2 in quiescent mouse
fibroblasts. Interference with Mnt expression by RNAi resulted in upregulation of
cyclin D2 expression in growth-arrested fibroblasts, supporting the view that Mnt
represses cyclin D2 transcription in quiescent cells. Our data suggest a model in
which phosphorylation of Mnt at cell cycle entry results in disruption of
Mnt-mSin3-HDAC1 interaction, which allows induction of Myc target genes by
release of Mnt-mediated transcriptional repression.

Oncogene (2005) 24, 8326-8337. doi:10.1038/sj.onc.1208961; published online 15
August 2005.

PMID: 16103876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Science. 2005 Aug 12;309(5737):999-1000.

HIV/AIDS. Report of novel treatment aimed at latent HIV raises the 'c word'.

Cohen J.

PMID: 16099956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Lancet. 2005 Aug 13-19;366(9485):549-55.

Depletion of latent HIV-1 infection in vivo: a proof-of-concept study.

Lehrman G(1), Hogue IB, Palmer S, Jennings C, Spina CA, Wiegand A, Landay AL,
Coombs RW, Richman DD, Mellors JW, Coffin JM, Bosch RJ, Margolis DM.

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, Department of
Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX
753901, USA.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2005 Aug 13-19;366(9485):523-4.

BACKGROUND: Persistent infection in resting CD4+ T cells prevents eradication of 
HIV-1. Since the chromatin remodeling enzyme histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1)
maintains latency of integrated HIV, we tested the ability of the HDAC inhibitor 
valproic acid to deplete persistent, latent infection in resting CD4+ T cells.
PROCEDURES: We did a proof-of-concept study in four volunteers infected with HIV 
and on highly-active antiretroviral therapy (HAART). After intensifying the
effect of HAART with subcutaneous enfuvirtide 90 mug twice daily for 4-6 weeks to
prevent the spread of HIV, we added oral valproic acid 500-750 mg twice daily to 
their treatment regimen for 3 months. We quantified latent infection of resting
CD4+ T cells before and after augmented treatment by limiting-dilution culture of
resting CD4+ T cells after ex-vivo activation.
FINDINGS: The frequency of resting cell infection was stable before addition of
enfuvirtide and valproic acid, but declined thereafter. This decline was
significant in three of four patients (mean reduction 75%, range 68% to >84%).
Patients had slight reactions to enfuvirtide at the injection site, but otherwise
tolerated treatment well.
INTERPRETATION: Combination therapy with an HDAC inhibitor and intensified HAART 
safely accelerates clearance of HIV from resting CD4+ T cells in vivo, suggesting
a new and practical approach to eliminate HIV infection in this persistent
reservoir. This finding, though not definitive, suggests that new approaches will
allow the cure of HIV in the future.

PMCID: PMC1894952
PMID: 16099290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Sep 23;335(2):477-84.

Impaired repressor activity and biological functions of PU.1 in MEL cells induced
by mutations in the acetylation motifs within the ETS domain.

Kihara-Negishi F(1), Suzuki M, Yamada T, Sakurai T, Oikawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Genetics, Sasaki Institute, 2-2 Kanda-Surugadai,
Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 101-0062, Japan.

PU.1, a hematopoietic Ets transcription factor, is required for development of
the lymphoid and myeloid lineages. We have previously shown that PU.1 functions
as both a transcriptional activator and repressor through complex formation with 
CBP/p300 and HDAC1/mSin3A/MeCP2, respectively. To determine whether modification 
of PU.1 is responsible for switching its association between co-activators and
co-repressors, we examined whether acetylation regulates the physical and
functional activities of PU.1. PU.1 was acetylated in vivo and its repressor
activity was reduced when the putative acetylation motifs in the Ets domain were 
mutated. The mutant cooperated with CBP similar to wild type PU.1, but
insufficiently with GATA-1 and mSin3A. Whereas overexpression of wild type PU.1
induced differentiation block, growth inhibition, and apoptotic cell death in MEL
erythroleukemia cells as we reported previously, overexpression of the
mutant-acetylation motif PU.1 did not. Taken together, our data suggest that
acetylation might regulate the biological functions of PU.1 in erythroid cells.

PMID: 16098914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Am J Med Genet A. 2005 Aug 30;137(2):136-8.

Mutation analysis of the HDAC 1, 2, 8 and CDKL5 genes in Rett syndrome patients
without mutations in MECP2.

Huppke P(1), Ohlenbusch A, Brendel C, Laccone F, Gärtner J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Pediatric Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, Georg
August University, Robert-Koch-Strasse 40, D-37075 Göttingen, Germany.
phuppke@med.uni-goettingen.de

Mutations in the MECP2 gene are found in only 80% of patients with Rett syndrome 
(RTT). Therefore other genes have to be involved in the pathogenesis of RTT. By
using our defined diagnostic criteria we first re-evaluated 50 girls with
possible RTT in whom the sequencing of the MECP2 gene had not revealed any
mutations. Only 15 of theses patients fulfilled all criteria for RTT and could be
considered to have classical RTT. In eight of these, further molecular analyses
revealed large deletions of the MECP2 gene. In the remaining seven girls we then 
analyzed the genes HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC8 that encode for the histone
deacetylases 1, 2, and 8 which interact with MeCP2 and are essential for its
function. Although these histone deacetylase genes have been considered as good
candidate genes for RTT our molecular analysis of these genes did not detect any 
mutations. Because recently mutations in CDKL5 were reported in patients with
RTT, we included this gene in our analysis but failed to detect any mutations. We
conclude that only a subgroup of girls with possible RTT and no detectable
mutation in the sequencing of the MECP2 gene do really have classical RTT. In
many of those large MECP2 gene deletions can be detected by further analysis. The
genes HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC8 do not seem to play a role in the pathogenesis of
RTT and at least in our subgroup no mutations in the CDKL5 gene were detected.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16086395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Curr Biol. 2005 Aug 9;15(15):1434-8.

The PHD finger/bromodomain of NoRC interacts with acetylated histone H4K16 and is
sufficient for rDNA silencing.

Zhou Y(1), Grummt I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology of the Cell II, Deutsches
Krebsforschungszentrum, Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

The SNF2h-containing chromatin-remodeling complex NoRC is responsible for
silencing a fraction of mammalian rRNA genes (rDNA). NoRC silences transcription 
by establishing heterochromatic features-including DNA methylation,
hypoacetylation of histone H4, and methylation of H3K9-at the rDNA promoter [].
We have investigated the mechanism of NoRC-mediated rDNA silencing and show that 
binding of the bromodomain of TIP5, the large subunit of NoRC, to acetylated
nucleosomes is a prerequisite for NoRC function. A point mutation within the
bromodomain impairs the association of NoRC with chromatin, prevents
heterochromatin formation, and abolishes transcriptional repression. Moreover,
the association of NoRC with chromatin requires acetylation of histone H4 at
lysine 16 (acH4K16), and binding to acH4K16 is required for subsequent
deacetylation of H4K5, H4K8, and H4K12, indicating that acetylation of H4K16
plays an active role in NoRC-mediated heterochromatin formation. The bromodomain 
cooperates with an adjacent PHD finger to recruit HDAC1, DNMT1, DNMT3, and SNF2h 
to rDNA. If specifically targeted to the rDNA promoter, the PHD
finger/bromodomain is capable of establishing heterochromatic features and rDNA
silencing. Thus, the PHD finger/bromodomain represents an autonomous unit that
binds to acH4K16 and coordinates the chain of events that establish the repressed
state of rDNA.

PMID: 16085498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Cell Cycle. 2005 Aug;4(8):1019-21. Epub 2005 Aug 7.

The first 30 minutes in the life of a virus: unREST in the nucleus.

Roizman B(1), Gu H, Mandel G.

Author information: 
(1)Marjorie B. Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA. Bernard.Roizman@bsd.uchicago.edu

On entry of viral DNA into cells, a competition ensues between cellular factors
that silence viral genes and transcriptional factors that block silencing and
transcribe the DNA. In the case of herpes simplex virus 1, the first set of genes
expressed after infection-are induced by a viral protein (alphaTIF or VP16).
Expression of later (beta,gamma) genes in cells infected at low ratios of virus
per cells requires a transcriptional activator (ICP4) that cannot block silencing
and a protein, ICP0, hitherto characterized as a promiscuous transactivator.
Recent studies indicate that ICP0 blocks silencing of viral DNA by dissociating
HDACs 1 and 2 from the CoREST/REST repressor complex. HDACs 1/2 are
phosphorylated and translocated to the nucleus. The findings have broad
implications regarding silencing of the viral genome during latency and,
potentially, the expression of genes encoded by other DNA viruses as well.

PMID: 16082207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Cell Cycle. 2005 Aug;4(8):1113-9. Epub 2005 Aug 1.

p21WAF1/CIP1 regulates the p300 sumoylation motif CRD1 through a C-terminal
domain independently of cyclin/CDK binding.

Garcia-Wilson E(1), Perkins ND.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Division of Gene Regulation and Expression,
University of Dundee, Dundee, Scotland, United Kingdom.

Although best known for its ability to inhibit Cyclin/Cdk complexes and the
replication protein PCNA, p21(WAF1/CIP1) is a multifunctional protein that
interacts with many cellular binding partners, including a number of
transcriptional regulators. Previously, we characterized p21 derepression of the 
p300 sumoylation-dependent transcriptional repression domain, CRD1. Such
repression domains are at least partially dependent upon recruitment of histone
deacetylase (HDAC) complexes but the mechanism through which p21 selectively
disrupts CRD1 activity remains unknown. Here, we demonstrate that distinct motifs
in the C-terminus of p21 are required for regulation of p300 CRD1 function and
that this effect does not correlate with Cyclin or PCNA binding. Through the
creation of N-terminal glutathione-s-transferase fusion proteins, which also
overcome the problems of instability that result from many p21 mutations, we
investigated p21 binding to HDACs. Although p21 binds both Class I and Class II
HDACs in vitro, only weak association with HDAC1 and 2 is seen in cells. Mutation
of the p21 PCNA binding domain significantly increases this interaction
suggesting that binding is mutually exclusive and only naturally occurs under
certain conditions. Binding of HDACs also failed to correlate with CRD1
inducibility, suggesting that p21 targets other transcriptional repression
complexes to mediate this effect.

PMID: 16082198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 Sep 15;14(18):2641-8. Epub 2005 Aug 4.

Functional promoter SNPs in cell cycle checkpoint genes.

Bélanger H(1), Beaulieu P, Moreau C, Labuda D, Hudson TJ, Sinnett D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Oncology, Research Center, Sainte-Justine Hospital,
3175 chemin de la Côte-Sainte-Catherine, Montreal, Canada QC H3T 1C5.

A substantial number of genes mutated in human cancers encode components of the
cell cycle processes. As the G1/S transition in the cell cycle is a finely
regulated biological process, we hypothesized that sequence variations in the
promoter region of the related genes might indeed lead to abnormal expression,
thus predisposing the individuals carrying these genetic variants to cancer. In
this report, we screened the promoter regions of 16 cell cycle checkpoint genes
for DNA variants and assessed the functional impact of these promoter region
single nucleotide polymorphisms (pSNPs) by combining in silico analysis and in
vitro functional assays. We identified 127 pSNPs including 90 with predicted
impact on putative binding sites of known transcription factors. Eleven pSNPs
were selected for electrophoresis mobility shift assays because of their
association with predicted gains of binding sites, and nine pSNPs showed
differential allelic shifts in at least one cell line tested. Following the
subcloning of the promoter regions into a gene reporter system, we found that at 
least four promoter haplotypes associated with CCND1, E2F1, HDAC1 and RB1
significantly influenced transcriptional activity in an allele-specific manner.
Although the biological significance of these observations still remains to be
demonstrated, the expected variability of expression levels in key cell cycle
components might influence individual's risk of cancer.

PMID: 16081466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Nature. 2005 Sep 15;437(7057):432-5. Epub 2005 Aug 3.

An essential role for CoREST in nucleosomal histone 3 lysine 4 demethylation.

Lee MG(1), Wynder C, Cooch N, Shiekhattar R.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, 3601 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104,
USA.

We have previously described a multiprotein complex termed the BHC or BRAF-HDAC
complex, which is required for the repression of neuronal-specific genes. We have
shown that the BHC complex is recruited by a neuronal silencer, REST
(RE1-silencing transcription factor), and mediates the repression of
REST-responsive genes. BHC is a multiprotein complex consisting of two enzymatic 
activities: a histone deacetylase (HDAC1 or 2) and a recently described histone
demethylase (BHC110, also known as LSD1 or AOF2). Here we show that
BHC110-containing complexes show a nearly fivefold increase in demethylation of
histone H3 lysine 4 (H3K4) compared to recombinant BHC110. Furthermore,
recombinant BHC110 is unable to demethylate H3K4 on nucleosomes, but
BHC110-containing complexes readily demethylate nucleosomes. In vitro
reconstitution of the BHC complex using recombinant subunits reveals an essential
role for the REST corepressor CoREST, not only in stimulating demethylation on
core histones but also promoting demethylation of nucleosomal substrates. We find
that nucleosomal demethylation is the result of CoREST enhancing the association 
between BHC110 and nucleosomes. Depletion of CoREST in in vivo cell culture
results in de-repression of REST-responsive gene expression and increased
methylation of H3K4. Together, these results highlight an essential role for
CoREST in demethylation of H3K4 both in vitro and in vivo.

PMID: 16079794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Dec 17;325(3):683-90.

Differential protein acetylation induced by novel histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Glaser KB(1), Li J, Pease LJ, Staver MJ, Marcotte PA, Guo J, Frey RR, Garland RB,
Heyman HR, Wada CK, Vasudevan A, Michaelides MR, Davidsen SK, Curtin ML.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research R47J-AP9, Global Pharmaceutical Research and Development,
Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL 60064-6121, USA. keith.glaser@abbott.com

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors induce the hyperacetylation of nucleosomal 
histones in carcinoma cells resulting in the expression of repressed genes that
cause growth arrest, terminal differentiation, and/or apoptosis. In vitro
selectivity of several novel hydroxamate HDAC inhibitors including succinimide
macrocyclic hydroxamates and the non-hydroxamate alpha-ketoamide inhibitors was
investigated using isolated enzyme preparations and cellular assays. In vitro
selectivity for the HDAC isozymes (HDAC1/2, 3, 4/3, and 6) was not observed for
these HDAC inhibitors or the reference HDAC inhibitors, MS-275 and SAHA. In T24
and HCT116 cells these compounds caused the accumulation of acetylated histones
H3 and H4; however, the succinimide macrocyclic hydroxamates and the
alpha-ketoamides did not cause the accumulation of acetylated alpha-tubulin.
These data suggest "selectivity" can be observed at the cellular level with HDAC 
inhibitors and that the nature of the zinc-chelating moiety is an important
determinant of activity against tubulin deacetylase.

PMID: 15541343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jan 21;280(3):2388-94. Epub 2004 Nov 10.

Glucocorticoids inhibit the transcriptional activity of LEF/TCF in
differentiating osteoblasts in a glycogen synthase kinase-3beta-dependent and
-independent manner.

Smith E(1), Frenkel B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery and Institute for Genetic Medicine, Keck
School of Medicine at the University of Southern California, Los Angeles,
California 90033, USA.

Glucocorticoids, widely used as immune suppressors, cause osteoporosis by
inhibiting bone formation. In MC3T3-E1 osteoblast-like cultures, dexamethasone
(DEX) activates glycogen synthase kinase-3beta (GSK3beta) and inhibits a
differentiation-related cell cycle that occurs at a commitment stage immediately 
after confluence. Here we show that DEX inhibition of the differentiation-related
cell cycle is associated with a decrease in beta-catenin levels and inhibition of
LEF/TCF-mediated transcription. These inhibitory activities are no longer
observed in the presence of lithium, a GSK3beta inhibitor. DEX decreased the
serum-responsive phosphorylation of protein kinase B/Akt-Ser(473) within minutes,
and this inhibition was also observed after 12 h. When the phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt pathway was inhibited by wortmannin, DEX no longer inhibited 
beta-catenin levels. Furthermore, DEX-mediated inhibition of LEF/TCF
transcriptional activity was attenuated in the presence of dominant negative
forms of either PI3K or protein kinase B/Akt. These results suggest cross-talk
between the PI3K/Akt and Wnt signaling pathways. Consistent with a role for Wnt
signaling in the osteoblast differentiation-related cell cycle, wortmannin
partially negated the DEX inhibition of this cell cycle. DEX also induced histone
deacetylase (HDAC) 1, which is known to inhibit LEF/TCF transcriptional activity.
Overexpression of HDAC1 negated the inhibitory effect of DEX on LEF/TCF
transcriptional activity. In the presence of trichostatin A, a deacetylase
inhibitor, DEX-mediated inhibition of the differentiation-related cell cycle was 
partially negated. When administered together, wortmannin and trichostatin A
completely negated the inhibitory effect of DEX on the differentiation-related
cell cycle. These results suggest that inhibition of a
PI3K/Akt/GSK3beta/beta-catenin/LEF axis and stimulation of HDAC1 cooperate to
mediate the inhibitory effect of DEX on Wnt signaling and the osteoblast
differentiation-related cell cycle.

PMID: 15537647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Nov 23;101(47):16537-42. Epub 2004 Nov 9.

Recruitment of IkappaBalpha to the hes1 promoter is associated with
transcriptional repression.

Aguilera C(1), Hoya-Arias R, Haegeman G, Espinosa L, Bigas A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre Oncologia Molecular, Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica de
Bellvitge-Institut de Recerca Oncologica, Barcelona 08907, Spain.

The NF-kappaB pathway plays a pivotal role in proliferation, differentiation,
apoptosis, and immune responses in mammals. The NF-kappaB inhibitor, IkappaB, has
classically been characterized for its ability to sequester NF-kappaB
transcription factors in the cytoplasm. Nevertheless, a nuclear fraction of
IkappaBalpha has consistently been detected and associated with repression of
nuclear NF-kappaB. Now we show that IkappaBalpha physically associates with
different repression elements such as nuclear corepressors and histone
acetyltransferases and deacetylases (HDACs). More remarkably, chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrate that IkappaBalpha is recruited to the
promoter regions of the Notch-target gene, hes1, together with HDAC1 and -5,
whereas we did not detect IkappaBalpha associated with classical NF-kappaB target
genes such as IL6 and RANTES. TNF-alpha treatment results in a temporary release 
of IkappaBalpha from the hes1 promoter that correlates with increased histone
acetylation and transcriptional activation. In addition, we demonstrate that both
IkappaB kinase-alpha and -beta are simultaneously recruited to the hes1 promoter 
in response to TNF-alpha, coinciding with a maximum of IkappaBalpha release and
gene activation. Moreover, TNF-alpha-dependent histone H3 acetylation, release of
IkappaBalpha from the hes1 promoter, and hes1 mRNA synthesis are affected in
IKK-alpha(-/-) mouse embryonic fibroblasts. We propose that IkappaBalpha plays a 
previously undescribed role in regulating the recruitment of repression elements 
to specific promoters. Recruitment of IKKs to the nucleus in response to
TNF-alpha may induce chromatin-associated IkappaBalpha release and gene
activation. These findings provide additional insight in the cross-talk between
NF-kappaB and other signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC534509
PMID: 15536134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Genes Dev. 2004 Nov 1;18(21):2627-38.

The Polycomb Ezh2 methyltransferase regulates muscle gene expression and skeletal
muscle differentiation.

Caretti G(1), Di Padova M, Micales B, Lyons GE, Sartorelli V.

Author information: 
(1)Muscle Gene Expression Group, Laboratory of Muscle Biology, NIAMS, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Erratum in
    Genes Dev. 2005 Mar 15;19(6):768.

The Ezh2 protein endows the Polycomb PRC2 and PRC3 complexes with histone lysine 
methyltransferase (HKMT) activity that is associated with transcriptional
repression. We report that Ezh2 expression was developmentally regulated in the
myotome compartment of mouse somites and that its down-regulation coincided with 
activation of muscle gene expression and differentiation of
satellite-cell-derived myoblasts. Increased Ezh2 expression inhibited muscle
differentiation, and this property was conferred by its SET domain, required for 
the HKMT activity. In undifferentiated myoblasts, endogenous Ezh2 was associated 
with the transcriptional regulator YY1. Both Ezh2 and YY1 were detected, with the
deacetylase HDAC1, at genomic regions of silent muscle-specific genes. Their
presence correlated with methylation of K27 of histone H3. YY1 was required for
Ezh2 binding because RNA interference of YY1 abrogated chromatin recruitment of
Ezh2 and prevented H3-K27 methylation. Upon gene activation, Ezh2, HDAC1, and YY1
dissociated from muscle loci, H3-K27 became hypomethylated and MyoD and SRF were 
recruited to the chromatin. These findings suggest the existence of a two-step
activation mechanism whereby removal of H3-K27 methylation, conferred by an
active Ezh2-containing protein complex, followed by recruitment of positive
transcriptional regulators at discrete genomic loci are required to promote
muscle gene expression and cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC525543
PMID: 15520282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Cancer Res. 2004 Nov 1;64(21):7706-10.

Overexpression of histone deacetylase 1 confers resistance to sodium
butyrate-mediated apoptosis in melanoma cells through a p53-mediated pathway.

Bandyopadhyay D(1), Mishra A, Medrano EE.

Author information: 
(1)Huffington Center on Aging and Department of Dermatology, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. dbandyop@bcm.tmc.edu

Melanoma cells typically express wild-type p53, yet they are notoriously
resistant to DNA-damaging agents. Here, we show that sodium butyrate (NaB), a
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, induced apoptosis in human melanoma cells
in a dose- and time-dependent manner. Apoptosis was associated with
HDAC1-dependent induction of Bax and acetylation of p53. Down-regulation of HDAC1
by an antisense vector sensitized the cells to NaB-induced apoptosis, whereas its
overexpression conferred resistance to this agent. Increased HDAC1 levels and
activity impaired NaB-mediated activation of Bax promoter and Bax protein levels.
Finally, using p53-null melanoma cell line and RNA interference in cells
expressing wild-type p53 protein, we show that Bax induction and NaB-mediated
apoptosis is p53 dependent.

PMID: 15520174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. J Biol Chem. 2004 Dec 24;279(52):54241-7. Epub 2004 Oct 20.

The pancreatic duodenal homeobox-1 protein (Pdx-1) interacts with histone
deacetylases Hdac-1 and Hdac-2 on low levels of glucose.

Mosley AL(1), Ozcan S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Chandler Medical Center,
University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky 40536, USA.

We have previously demonstrated that high concentrations of glucose stimulate
insulin gene expression by causing hyperacetylation of histone H4 at the insulin 
gene promoter. Furthermore, we have shown that the glucose-mediated
hyperacetylation of histone H4 depends on the recruitment of the histone
acetyltransferase p300 by the beta cell-specific transcription factor Pdx-1. In
this study, we demonstrate that the histone deacetylases Hdac-1 and Hdac-2 are
rapidly recruited to the insulin promoter in the mouse insulinoma cell line MIN6 
when cells are switched from high to low glucose media. Moreover, we demonstrate 
that the beta cell-specific homeodomain protein Pdx-1 interacts with histone
deacetylases Hdac-1 and Hdac-2 at low levels of glucose. In vitro studies
indicate that the interaction between Pdx-1 and Hdac-1 or Hdac-2 is direct and
requires the C terminus of Pdx-1. Treatment of MIN6 cells with okadaic acid,
which inhibits the activity of protein phosphatases, abolishes the interaction of
Pdx-1 with Hdac-1 and Hdac-2 on low levels of glucose, suggesting the requirement
of a dephosphorylation event for this interaction to occur. These data indicate
that insulin gene expression is decreased on low levels of glucose by recruitment
of Hdac-1 and Hdac-2 to the insulin promoter by the transcription factor Pdx-1.

PMID: 15496408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Physiol Genomics. 2004 Dec 15;20(1):108-16. Epub 2004 Oct 19.

Uteroplacental insufficiency induces site-specific changes in histone H3 covalent
modifications and affects DNA-histone H3 positioning in day 0 IUGR rat liver.

Fu Q(1), McKnight RA, Yu X, Wang L, Callaway CW, Lane RH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Utah School of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Division of
Neonatology, Salt Lake City 84132-2202, USA.

Uteroplacental insufficiency and subsequent intrauterine growth retardation
(IUGR) increase the risk of adult onset insulin resistance and dyslipidemia in
humans and rats. IUGR rats are further characterized by postnatal alterations in 
hepatic PPAR-gamma coactivator (PGC-1) and carnitine-palmitoyl-transferase I
(CPTI) expression, as well as overall hyperacetylation of histone H3. However, it
is unknown whether the histone H3 hyperacetylation is site specific or relates to
the changes in gene expression previously described in IUGR rats. We therefore
hypothesized that uteroplacental insufficiency causes site-specific modifications
in hepatic H3 acetylation and affects the association of acetylated histone H3
with PGC-1 and CPTI promoter sequences. Uteroplacental insufficiency was used to 
produce asymmetrical IUGR rats. IUGR significantly increased acetylation of H3
lysine-9 (H3/K9), lysine-14 (H3/K14), and lysine-18 (H3/K18) at day 0 of life,
and these changes occurred in association with decreased nuclear protein levels
of histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and HDAC activity. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
using acetyl-H3/K9 antibody and day 0 chromatin revealed that uteroplacental
insufficiency affected the association between acetylated H3/K9 and the promoters
of PGC-1 and CPTI, respectively, in IUGR liver. At day 21 of life, the neonatal
pattern of H3 hyperacetylation persisted only in the IUGR males. We conclude that
uteroplacental insufficiency increases H3 acetylation in a site-specific manner
in IUGR liver and that these changes persist in male IUGR animals. The altered
association of the PGC-1 and CPTI promoters with acetylated H3/K9 correlates with
previous reports of IUGR altering the expression of these genes. We speculate
that in utero alterations of chromatin structure contribute to fetal programming.

PMID: 15494474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Cell Cycle. 2004 Oct;3(10):1240-2. Epub 2004 Oct 26.

Specific and redundant functions of histone deacetylases in regulation of cell
cycle and apoptosis.

Zhu P(1), Huber E, Kiefer F, Göttlicher M.

Author information: 
(1)Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe, Institute of Toxicology and Genetics, Eggenstein,
Germany.

Inappropriate control of expression of genetic information is the cause of many
forms of cancer. Aberrant transcriptional repression by recruitment of histone
deacetylases (HDACs) is a key step in pathogenesis of myeloid leukemia. We
recently reported that development of colonic cancer involves alterations in the 
transcriptional repression machinery by increased expression of HDAC2 upon loss
of the APC tumor suppressor. Increased expression of HDAC2 is essential for
prevention of apoptosis of HT-29 colonic cancer cells. We now discuss whether
HDAC2 also plays a role for aberrant cell cycle regulation and expression of the 
p21(Cip/Waf) cell cycle inhibitor. Whereas inhibition of HDACs by valproic acid
or trichostatin A increases p21 expression, selective interference with HDAC2 by 
siRNA transfection or reconstitution of wildtype APC does not affect p21
expression. Likewise, treatment of HT-29 cells with the HDAC inhibitor valproic
acid leads to a moderate inhibition of cell cycle progression in the G1 phase
whereas interference with HDAC2 expression does not. Thus, HDAC2 appears to serve
a preferential role in the prevention of apoptosis and not in cell cycle control 
similar to the specific importance of HDAC1 for cell cycle regulation or HDAC 9
for the stress response of the heart.

PMID: 15477762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Lung Cancer. 2004 Nov;46(2):171-8.

Histone deacetylase 1 mRNA expression in lung cancer.

Sasaki H(1), Moriyama S, Nakashima Y, Kobayashi Y, Kiriyama M, Fukai I, Yamakawa 
Y, Fujii Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery II, Nagoya City University Medical School, 1 Kawasumi,
Mizuho-cho, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya 467-8601, Japan. hisasaki@med.nagoya-cu.ac.jp

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) play a crucial role in tumorigenesis, however, the
expression status of HDACs in lung cancer tissues has not been reported. We have 
investigated that HIDAC 1 mRNA levels and other clinico-pathological data,
including MTA 1 mRNA expression in lung cancer. The study included 102 lung
cancer cases. The HDAC1 mRNA levels were quantified by real time reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) using LightCycler (Roche
Molecular Biochemicals, Mannheim, Germany). The HDAC1/GAPDH mRNA levels were not 
significantly different in tumor tissues from lung cancer (30.654 +/- 33.047) and
adjacent non-malignant lung tissues (18.953 +/- 56.176 , P = 0.1827). No
significant difference in HDAC1/GAPDH mRNA levels was found among age, gender,
and lymph node metastasis. The HDAC1/GAPDH mRNA levels were significantly higher 
in stage III or IV lung cancer (50.929 +/- 120.433) than in stage I lung cancer
(11.430 +/- 25.611, P = 0.0472). HDAC1/GAPDH mRNA levels were significantly
higher in T3 or T4 lung carcinoma (54.326 +/- 127.018) than in T1 or T2 lung
cancers (14.790 +/- 48.670, P = 0.1601). HDAC1/GAPDH mRNA levels were correlated 
with MTA1/GAPDH mRNA levels (y = 0.0106x + 2.5827 , P = 0.0352 ). HDAC1/GAPDH
mRNA levels were also correlated with HDAC1 protein (P = 0.0484) expression by
immunohistochemistry. Using the LightCycler RT-PCR assay, the HDAC1 gene
expression might correlate with progression of lung cancers. However, further
studies are needed to confirm the impact of HDAC1 for the molecular target of the
lung cancer.

PMID: 15474665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Mol Cell. 2004 Oct 8;16(1):35-45.

GSK3-mediated BCL-3 phosphorylation modulates its degradation and its
oncogenicity.

Viatour P(1), Dejardin E, Warnier M, Lair F, Claudio E, Bureau F, Marine JC,
Merville MP, Maurer U, Green D, Piette J, Siebenlist U, Bours V, Chariot A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Medical Chemistry and Human Genetics, Liège, Belgium.

The oncoprotein BCL-3 is a nuclear transcription factor that activates NF-kappaB 
target genes through formation of heterocomplexes with p50 or p52. BCL-3 is
phosphorylated in vivo, but specific BCL-3 kinases have not been identified so
far. In this report, we show that BCL-3 is a substrate for the protein kinase
GSK3 and that GSK3-mediated BCL-3 phosphorylation, which is inhibited by Akt
activation, targets its degradation through the proteasome pathway. This
phosphorylation modulates its association with HDAC1, -3, and -6 and attenuates
its oncogenicity by selectively controlling the expression of a subset of newly
identified target genes such as SLPI and Cxcl1. Our results therefore suggest
that constitutive BCL-3 phosphorylation by GSK3 regulates BCL-3 turnover and
transcriptional activity.

PMID: 15469820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Oncogene. 2004 Nov 18;23(54):8777-84.

HDAC4 mediates transcriptional repression by the acute promyelocytic
leukaemia-associated protein PLZF.

Chauchereau A(1), Mathieu M, de Saintignon J, Ferreira R, Pritchard LL, Mishal Z,
Dejean A, Harel-Bellan A.

Author information: 
(1)UPR 9079 CNRS-Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer, Institut André Lwoff, 7 rue
Guy Môquet, 94800 Villejuif, France.

PLZF, the promyelocytic leukaemia zinc-finger protein, is a transcriptional
repressor essential to development. In some acute leukaemias, a chromosomal
translocation fusing the PLZF gene to that encoding the retinoic acid receptor
RARalpha gives rise to a fusion protein, PLZF-RARalpha, thought to be responsible
for constitutive repression of differentiation-associated genes in these cells.
Repression by both PLZF and PLZF-RARalpha is sensitive to the histone deacetylase
inhibitor TSA, and PLZF was previously shown to interact physically with HDAC1, a
class I histone deacetylase. We here asked whether class II histone deacetylases,
known to be generally involved in differentiation processes, participate in the
repression mediated by PLZF and PLZF-RARalpha, and found that PLZF interacts with
HDAC4 in both GST-pull-down and co-immunoprecipitation assays. Furthermore, HDAC4
is indeed involved in PLZF and PLZF-RARalpha-mediated repression, since an
enzymatically dead mutant of HDAC4 released the repression, as did an siRNA that 
blocks HDAC4 expression. Taken together, our data indicate that recruitment of
HDAC4 is necessary for PLZF-mediated repression in both normal and leukaemic
cells.

PMID: 15467736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. J Biol Chem. 2004 Dec 10;279(50):52456-64. Epub 2004 Sep 28.

MBD3L1 is a transcriptional repressor that interacts with methyl-CpG-binding
protein 2 (MBD2) and components of the NuRD complex.

Jiang CL(1), Jin SG, Pfeifer GP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, Duarte,
California 91010, USA.

Methyl-CpG-binding domain proteins 2 and 3 (MBD2 and MBD3) are transcriptional
repressors that contain methyl-CpG binding domains and are components of a
CpG-methylated DNA binding complex named MeCP1. Methyl-CpG-binding protein 3-like
1 (MBD3L1) is a protein with substantial homology to MBD2 and MBD3, but it lacks 
the methyl-CpG binding domain. MBD3L1 interacts with MBD2 and MBD3 in vitro and
in yeast two-hybrid assays. Gel shift experiments with a CpG-methylated DNA probe
indicate that recombinant MBD3L1 can supershift an MBD2-methylated DNA complex.
In vivo, MBD3L1 associates with and colocalizes with MBD2 but not with MBD3 and
is recruited to 5-methylcytosine-rich pericentromeric heterochromatin in mouse
cells. In glutathione S-transferase pull-down assays MBD3L1 is found associated
with several known components of the MeCP1.NuRD complex, including HDAC1, HDAC2, 
MTA2, MBD2, RbAp46, and RbAp48, but MBD3 is not found in the MBD3L1-bound
fraction. MBD3L1 enhances transcriptional repression of methylated DNA by MBD2.
The data are consistent with a role of MBD3L1 as a methylation-dependent
transcriptional repressor that may interchange with MBD3 as an MBD2-interacting
component of the NuRD complex. MBD3L1 knockout mice were created and were found
to be viable and fertile, indicating that MBD3L1 may not be essential or there is
functional redundancy (through MBD3) in this pathway. Overall, this study reveals
additional complexities in the mechanisms of transcriptional repression by the
MBD family proteins.

PMID: 15456747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. J Cell Sci. 2004 Oct 15;117(Pt 22):5323-31. Epub 2004 Sep 28.

p73 competes with co-activators and recruits histone deacetylase to NF-Y in the
repression of PDGF beta-receptor.

Uramoto H(1), Wetterskog D, Hackzell A, Matsumoto Y, Funa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Göteborg
University, Box 420, SE-405 30 Gothenburg, Sweden.

We investigated mechanisms of the p73alpha-mediated repression of the
platelet-derived growth factor beta-receptor (PDGFRB) promoter caused by its
interaction with NF-Y. Treatment of cells with the histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitor, Trichostatin A, increases PDGFRB promoter activity through the CCAAT
motif and counteracts the repression caused by p73alpha. Activation of the PDGFRB
promoter by the co-activator p300 also occurs through the CCAAT motif. Expression
of p73alpha counteracts both p300- and P/CAF-mediated activation of the PDGFRB
promoter, and expression of p300 or P/CAF attenuates the p73alpha-mediated
repression of the promoter activity. In concordance, p73alpha decreases the
p300-mediated acetylation of NF-YC, p300 competes with p73alpha for binding
NF-YB, and P/CAF competes with p73alpha for binding NF-YB and NF-YC. Furthermore,
p73alpha, but not the oncogenic DeltaNp73alpha, binds directly to HDAC1. We
performed chromatin immunoprecipitation with antibodies against p73, DeltaNp73,
NFYB, p300 and HDAC1 at different periods after serum stimulation in
serum-starved NIH3T3 cells. A marked decrease of DeltaNp73, NF-YB and p300 was
detected 6 hours after serum stimulation when the expression of PDGFRB decreased.
Conversely, HDAC1 was found bound at its maximum and the anti-p73 detecting both 
TAp73 and DeltaNp73 was found at all time points, indicating that p73, but not
DeltaNp73, remains bound at this time. Double immunofluorescence staining of
TAp73 and HDAC1 revealed that both of these molecules exist in the nucleus at
this time point, supporting the presence of endogenous interaction. These results
suggest that p73 and DeltaNp73 behave as physiological regulators for the
transcription of the PDGFRB promoter.

PMID: 15454570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Oct 29;323(4):1216-22.

Identification of a novel BRMS1-homologue protein p40 as a component of the
mSin3A/p33(ING1b)/HDAC1 deacetylase complex.

Nikolaev AY(1), Papanikolaou NA, Li M, Qin J, Gu W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Institute for Cancer Genetics, College of Physicians 
and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Repression of gene transcription is mediated by histone deacetylases containing
repressor-co-repressor complexes, which are recruited to promoters of target
genes via interactions with sequence-specific transcription factors. The
mammalian Sin3A co-repressor complex contains a core of at least seven proteins
including the pRb-interacting protein RBP1 and a putative tumor suppressor
p33(ING1b). By biochemical purification and mass spectrometry, we have identified
a novel component p40 from this complex. p40 bears homology to both yeast Sds3, a
component of yeast histone deacetylase complexes, and its mammalian homologue
mSds3. The p40-associated complex purified from human cells shows a strong
histone deacetylase activity. When tethered to a Gal-DNA binding domain, the
Gal-p40 is able to significantly repress transcription of a Gal-luciferase
promoter. Interestingly, database analysis reveals that p40 is also highly
homologous to BRMS1, a breast carcinoma metastasis suppressor, and overexpression
of p40 in human cells can significantly inhibit cell growth. Thus, our data
indicate that p40 may be critically involved in transcription repression of cell 
growth-associated gene expression by recruiting the HDAC1 deacetylase complex.

PMID: 15451426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Dev Dyn. 2004 Nov;231(3):647-54.

Histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC-1) required for the normal formation of craniofacial 
cartilage and pectoral fins of the zebrafish.

Pillai R(1), Coverdale LE, Dubey G, Martin CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1N 6N5.

Histone deacetylases interact with nucleosomes to facilitate the formation of
transcriptionally repressed chromatin. In the present study, we show that histone
deacetylase 1 (hdac-1) is expressed throughout embryonic development of the
zebrafish. The expression of hdac-1 is ubiquitous in early embryos (2-16 hr
postfertilization), but at later stages (36 and 48 hr postfertilization), it is
primarily restricted to the branchial arches, fin bud mesenchyme, and hindbrain. 
We report the phenotypes of hdac-1 homozygous mutant embryos and embryos injected
with an hdac-1 antisense morpholino. These embryos possess a complex phenotype
affecting several embryonic structures. We observed developmental abnormalities
in the heart and neural epithelial structures, including the retina and the loss 
of craniofacial cartilage and pectoral fins.

(c) 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15376317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Oncogene. 2004 Oct 7;23(46):7601-10.

ICBP90, an E2F-1 target, recruits HDAC1 and binds to methyl-CpG through its SRA
domain.

Unoki M(1), Nishidate T, Nakamura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical
Science, The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shiorokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639,
Japan.

ICBP90, inverted CCAAT box-binding protein of 90 kDa, has been reported as a
regulator of topoisomerase IIalpha expression. We present evidence here that
ICBP90 binds to methyl-CpG when at least one symmetrically methylated-CpG
dinucleotides is presented as its recognition sequence. A SET and RING
finger-associated (SRA) domain accounts for the high binding affinity of ICBP90
for methyl-CpG dinucleotides. This protein constitutes a complex with HDAC1 also 
via its SRA domain, and bound to methylated promoter regions of various tumor
suppressor genes, including p16INK4Aand p14ARF, in cancer cells. It has been
reported that expression of ICBP90 was upregulated by E2F-1, and we confirmed
that the upregulation was caused by binding of E2F-1 to the intron1 of ICBP90,
which contains two E2F-1-binding motifs. Our data also revealed accumulation of
ICBP90 in breast-cancer cells, where it might suppress expression of tumor
suppressor genes through deacetylation of histones after recruitment of HDAC1.
The data reported here suggest that ICBP90 is involved in cell proliferation by
way of methylation-mediated regulation of certain genes.

PMID: 15361834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Microsc Res Tech. 2004 Jun 1;64(2):89-95.

From cells to tissues: fluorescence confocal microscopy in the study of
histological samples.

Transidico P(1), Bianchi M, Capra M, Pelicci PG, Faretta M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, 20141
Milan, Italy.

Our knowledge of the genetic mechanisms controlling cell proliferation and
differentiation usually originates from in vitro cultured cell line models.
However, the definition of the molecular switches involved in control of
homeostasis and the understanding of the changes occurring in neoplastic
transformation require looking at single cells as the components of a complex
tissue network. Histological examination of tissue samples can gain a substantial
amount of information from high-resolution fluorescence analysis. In particular, 
confocal microscopy can help in the definition of functional pathways using
multiparameter analysis. In this report, we present acquisition and analysis
procedures to obtain high-resolution data from tissue sections. Confocal
microscopy coupled to computational restoration, statistical evaluation of
spatial correlations, and morphological analysis over large tissue areas were
applied to colorectal samples providing a molecular fingerprint of the biological
differences inferred from classical histological examination.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15352079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. J Biol Chem. 2004 Nov 5;279(45):47081-91. Epub 2004 Aug 26.

Leukemia/lymphoma-related factor, a POZ domain-containing transcriptional
repressor, interacts with histone deacetylase-1 and inhibits cartilage oligomeric
matrix protein gene expression and chondrogenesis.

Liu CJ(1), Prazak L, Fajardo M, Yu S, Tyagi N, Di Cesare PE.

Author information: 
(1)Musculoskeletal Research Center, New York University-Hospital for Joint
Diseases Department of Orthopedic Surgery, New York, New York 10003, USA.

Mutations in the human cartilage oligomeric matrix protein (COMP) gene have been 
linked to the development of pseudoachondroplasia and multiple epiphyseal
dysplasia. We previously cloned the promoter region of the COMP gene and
delineated a minimal negative regulatory element (NRE) that is both necessary and
sufficient to repress its promoter (Issack, P. S., Fang, C. H., Leslie, M. P.,
and Di Cesare, P. E. (2000) J. Orthop. Res. 18, 345-350; Issack, P. S., Liu, C.
J., Prazak, L., and Di Cesare, P. E. (2004) J. Orthop. Res. 22, 751-758). In this
study, a yeast one-hybrid screen for proteins that associate with the NRE led to 
the identification of the leukemia/lymphoma-related factor (LRF), a
transcriptional repressor that contains a POZ (poxvirus zinc finger) domain, as
an NRE-binding protein. LRF bound directly to the NRE both in vitro and in living
cells. Nine nucleotides (GAGGGTCCC) in the 30-bp NRE are essential for binding to
LRF. LRF showed dose-dependent inhibition of COMP-specific reporter gene
activity, and exogenous overexpression of LRF repressed COMP gene expression in
both rat chondrosarcoma cells and bone morphogenetic protein-2-treated C3H10T1/2 
progenitor cells. In addition, LRF also inhibited bone morphogenetic
protein-2-induced chondrogenesis in high density micromass cultures of C3H10T1/2 
cells, as evidenced by lack of expression of other chondrocytic markers, such as 
aggrecan and collagen types II, IX, X, and XI, and by Alcian blue staining. LRF
associated with histone deacetylase-1 (HDAC1), and experiments utilizing the HDAC
inhibitor trichostatin A revealed that LRF-mediated repression requires
deacetylase activity. LRF is the first transcription factor found to bind
directly to the COMP gene promoter, to recruit HDAC1, and to regulate both COMP
gene expression and chondrogenic differentiation.

PMID: 15337766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Sep 17;322(2):601-8.

Characterization of BHC80 in BRAF-HDAC complex, involved in neuron-specific gene 
repression.

Iwase S(1), Januma A, Miyamoto K, Shono N, Honda A, Yanagisawa J, Baba T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Life and Environmental Sciences and Institute of Applied
Biochemistry, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba Science City, Ibaraki 305-8572,
Japan.

BRAF-HDAC complex (BHC) has been shown to contain six components, including
BHC80, and to mediate REST-dependent transcriptional repression of
neuron-specific genes in non-neuronal cells. In this study, we have examined the 
functional role(s) of BHC80 in mouse tissues and human cultured cells. Two
isoforms of mouse BHC80 were predominantly present in the central nervous system 
and spermatogenic cells. Human cultured cells also contained two isoforms of
BHC80. Immunohistochemical analysis showed the presence of mouse BHC80 in the
nucleus of neuronal cells in the hippocampus and cerebellum. The C-terminal
region of human BHC80 containing PHD zinc-finger domain was capable of binding
directly to each of five other components of BHC, and of organizing BHC mediating
transcriptional repression. Moreover, two isoforms of human BHC80 were
distinguished from each other by reduced binding to HDAC1 and HDAC2, despite the 
presence of the PHD finger domain. These results suggest that BHC80 presumably
serves as a scaffold protein in BHC in neuronal as well as non-neuronal cells. A 
possible role of BHC80 in spermatogenesis is also suggested.

PMID: 15325272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Biochemistry. 2004 Aug 31;43(34):11083-91.

Kinetics and comparative reactivity of human class I and class IIb histone
deacetylases.

Schultz BE(1), Misialek S, Wu J, Tang J, Conn MT, Tahilramani R, Wong L.

Author information: 
(1)Celera, 180 Kimball Way, South San Francisco, California 94080, USA.
brian.schultz@celera.com

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) enzymes modulate gene expression through the
deacetylation of acetylated lysine residues on histone proteins. They operate in 
biological systems as part of multiprotein corepressor complexes. To understand
the reactivity of isolated HDACs and the contribution of cofactor binding to
reactivity, the reaction kinetics of isolated, recombinant human HDACs 1, 2, 3,
6, 8, and 10 were measured using a novel, continuous protease-coupled enzyme
assay. Values of k(cat) and k(cat)/K(m) and the pH dependence of these values
were determined for the reactions of each isozyme with
acetyl-Gly-Ala-(N(epsilon)-acetyl-Lys)-AMC. Values of k(cat) spanned the range of
0.006-2.8 s(-1), and k(cat)/K(m) values ranged from 60 to 110000 M(-1) s(-1). The
pH profiles for both k(cat) and k(cat)/K(m) were bell-shaped for all of the HDAC 
isozymes, with pH optima at approximately pH 8. Values of K(i) for the inhibitor 
trichostatin A were determined for each isozyme. The inhibition constants were
generally similar for all HDAC isozymes, except that the value for HDAC8 was
significantly higher than that for the other isozymes. The reaction of HDAC8 with
an alternative substrate was performed to assess the steric requirements of the
HDAC8 active site, and the effect of phosphorylation on HDAC1 activity was
examined. The results are discussed in terms of the biological roles of the HDAC 
enzymes and the proposed reaction mechanism of acetyllysine hydrolysis by these
enzymes.

PMID: 15323567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Aug 17;32(14):4340-50. Print 2004.

MAGE-A1 interacts with adaptor SKIP and the deacetylase HDAC1 to repress
transcription.

Laduron S(1), Deplus R, Zhou S, Kholmanskikh O, Godelaine D, De Smet C, Hayward
SD, Fuks F, Boon T, De Plaen E.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Brussels branch, and Cellular Genetics
Unit, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels B1200, Belgium.

MAGE-A1 belongs to a family of 12 genes that are active in various types of
tumors and silent in normal tissues except in male germ-line cells. The
MAGE-encoded antigens recognized by T cells are highly tumor-specific targets for
T cell-oriented cancer immunotherapy. The function of MAGE-A1 is currently
unknown. To analyze it, we attempted to identify protein partners of MAGE-A1.
Using yeast two-hybrid screening, we detected an interaction between MAGE-A1 and 
Ski Interacting Protein (SKIP). SKIP is a transcriptional regulator that connects
DNA-binding proteins to proteins that either activate or repress transcription.
We show that MAGE-A1 inhibits the activity of a SKIP-interacting transactivator, 
namely the intracellular part of Notch1. Deletion analysis indicated that this
inhibition requires the binding of MAGE-A1 to SKIP. Moreover, MAGE-A1 was found
to actively repress transcription by binding and recruiting histone deacetylase 1
(HDAC1). Our results indicate that by binding to SKIP and by recruiting HDACs,
MAGE-A1 can act as a potent transcriptional repressor. MAGE-A1 could therefore
participate in the setting of specific gene expression patterns for tumor cell
growth or spermatogenesis.

PMCID: PMC514365
PMID: 15316101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Sep;24(17):7707-19.

Role of an mSin3A-Swi/Snf chromatin remodeling complex in the feedback repression
of bile acid biosynthesis by SHP.

Kemper JK(1), Kim H, Miao J, Bhalla S, Bae Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Illinois,
Urbana, IL 61801, USA. jongsook@uiuc.edu

The orphan receptor SHP interacts with many nuclear receptors and inhibits their 
transcriptional activities. SHP is central to feedback repression of cholesterol 
7alpha hydroxylase gene (CYP7A1) expression by bile acids, which is critical for 
maintaining cholesterol homeostasis. Using CYP7A1 as a model system, we studied
the molecular mechanisms of SHP repression at the level of native chromatin.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation studies showed that mSin3A and a Swi/Snf complex
containing Brm as a central ATPase were recruited to the promoter. This
recruitment was associated with chromatin remodeling after bile acid treatment
that was blunted by inhibition of the endogenous Swi/Snf function by
dominant-negative ATPase mutants. Biochemical studies indicated that SHP was
associated with the mSin3A-Swi/Snf complex by direct interaction with Brm and
mSin3A through its repression domain. Expression of Brm, but not an ATPase
mutant, inhibited CYP7A1 promoter activity and further enhanced SHP-mediated
repression. Bile acid-induced recruitment of mSin3A/Brm, chromatin remodeling,
and concomitant repression of endogenous CYP7A1 expression were impaired when SHP
expression was inhibited by SHP small interfering RNA. Our results suggest that
SHP mediates recruitment of mSin3A-Swi/Snf to the CYP7A1 promoter, resulting in
chromatin remodeling and gene repression, which may also be a mechanism for the
repression by SHP of genes activated by many nuclear receptors. Our study
establishes the first link between a Swi/Snf complex and regulation of
cholesterol metabolism.

Copyright 2004 American Society for Microbiology

PMCID: PMC506991
PMID: 15314177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Cancer Res. 2004 Aug 15;64(16):5767-74.

A novel mechanism of chemoprotection by sulforaphane: inhibition of histone
deacetylase.

Myzak MC(1), Karplus PA, Chung FL, Dashwood RH.

Author information: 
(1)Linus Pauling Institute, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon 97331,
USA.

Sulforaphane (SFN), a compound found at high levels in broccoli and broccoli
sprouts, is a potent inducer of phase 2 detoxification enzymes and inhibits
tumorigenesis in animal models. SFN also has a marked effect on cell cycle
checkpoint controls and cell survival and/or apoptosis in various cancer cells,
through mechanisms that are poorly understood. We tested the hypothesis that SFN 
acts as an inhibitor of histone deacetylase (HDAC). In human embryonic kidney 293
cells, SFN dose-dependently increased the activity of a beta-catenin-responsive
reporter (TOPflash), without altering beta-catenin or HDAC protein levels.
Cytoplasmic and nuclear extracts from these cells had diminished HDAC activity,
and both global and localized histone acetylation was increased, compared with
untreated controls. Studies with SFN and with media from SFN-treated cells
indicated that the parent compound was not responsible for the inhibition of
HDAC, and this was confirmed using an inhibitor of glutathione S-transferase,
which blocked the first step in the metabolism of SFN, via the mercapturic acid
pathway. Whereas SFN and its glutathione conjugate (SFN-GSH) had little or no
effect, the two major metabolites SFN-cysteine and SFN-N-acetylcysteine were
effective HDAC inhibitors in vitro. Finally, several of these findings were
recapitulated in HCT116 human colorectal cancer cells: SFN dose-dependently
increased TOPflash reporter activity and inhibited HDAC activity, there was an
increase in acetylated histones and in p21(Cip1/Waf1), and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays revealed an increase in acetylated histones bound to
the P21 promoter. Collectively, these findings suggest that SFN may be effective 
as a tumor-suppressing agent and as a chemotherapeutic agent, alone or in
combination with other HDAC inhibitors currently undergoing clinical trials.

PMID: 15313918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. BMC Mol Biol. 2004 Aug 6;5:11.

The p68 and p72 DEAD box RNA helicases interact with HDAC1 and repress
transcription in a promoter-specific manner.

Wilson BJ(1), Bates GJ, Nicol SM, Gregory DJ, Perkins ND, Fuller-Pace FV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pathology, Ninewells Medical School,
University of Dundee, DD1 9SY, UK. brian.wilson@molonc.mcgill.ca

BACKGROUND: p68 (Ddx5) and p72 (Ddx17) are highly related members of the DEAD box
family and are established RNA helicases. They have been implicated in growth
regulation and have been shown to be involved in both pre-mRNA and pre-rRNA
processing. More recently, however, these proteins have been reported to act as
transcriptional co-activators for estrogen-receptor alpha (ER alpha). Furthermore
these proteins were shown to interact with co-activators p300/CBP and the RNA
polymerase II holoenzyme. Taken together these reports suggest a role for p68 and
p72 in transcriptional activation.
RESULTS: In this report we show that p68 and p72 can, in some contexts, act as
transcriptional repressors. Targeting of p68 or p72 to constitutive promoters
leads to repression of transcription; this repression is promoter-specific.
Moreover both p68 and p72 associate with histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), a
well-established transcriptional repression protein.
CONCLUSIONS: It is therefore clear that p68 and p72 are important transcriptional
regulators, functioning as co-activators and/or co-repressors depending on the
context of the promoter and the transcriptional complex in which they exist.

PMCID: PMC514542
PMID: 15298701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Clin Cancer Res. 2004 Aug 1;10(15):5271-81.

Class I histone deacetylase-selective novel synthetic inhibitors potently inhibit
human tumor proliferation.

Park JH(1), Jung Y, Kim TY, Kim SG, Jong HS, Lee JW, Kim DK, Lee JS, Kim NK, Kim 
TY, Bang YJ.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Laboratory for Cancer Epigenetics, Cancer Research
Institute, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

We have developed previously a class of synthetic hybrid histone deacetylase
(HDAC) inhibitors, which were built from hydroxamic acid of trichostatin A and
pyridyl ring of MS-275. In this study we evaluated the antitumor effects of these
novel hybrid synthetic HDAC inhibitors, SK-7041 and SK-7068, on human cancer
cells. Both SK-7041 and SK-7068 effectively inhibited cellular HDAC activity at
nanomolar concentrations and induced the time-dependent hyperacetylation of
histones H3 and H4. These HDAC inhibitors preferentially inhibited the enzymatic 
activities of HDAC1 and HDAC2, as compared with the other HDAC isotypes,
indicating that class I HDAC is the major target of SK-7041 and SK-7068. We found
that these compounds exhibited potent antiproliferative activity against various 
human cancer cells in vitro. Growth inhibition effect of SK-7041 and SK-7068 was 
related with the induction of aberrant mitosis and apoptosis in human gastric
cancer cells. Both compounds induced the accumulation of cells at mitosis after 6
h of treatment, which was demonstrated by accumulation of tetraploid cells, lack 
of G(2) cyclin/cyclin-dependent kinase inactivation, and higher mitotic index.
After 12 h of treatment, apoptotic cells were increased through mitochondrial and
caspase-mediated pathway. Finally, in vivo experiment showed that SK-7041 or
SK-7068 was found to reduce the growth of implanted human tumors in nude mice.
Therefore, based on isotype specificity and antitumor activity, SK-7041 and
SK-7068 HDAC inhibitors are expected to be promising anticancer therapeutic
agents and need additional clinical development.

PMID: 15297431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. J Biol Chem. 2004 Oct 1;279(40):41477-86. Epub 2004 Jul 24.

Site-specific acetylation of the fetal globin activator NF-E4 prevents its
ubiquitination and regulates its interaction with the histone deacetylase, HDAC1.

Zhao Q(1), Cumming H, Cerruti L, Cunningham JM, Jane SM.

Author information: 
(1)Rotary Bone Marrow Research Laboratory, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville,
Victoria 3050, Australia.

Acetylation provides one mechanism by which the functional diversity of
individual transcription factors can be expanded. This is valuable in the setting
of complex multigene loci that are regulated by a limited number of proteins,
such as the human beta-globin locus. We have studied the role of acetylation in
the regulation of the transcription factor NF-E4, a component of a protein
complex that facilitates the preferential expression of the human gamma-globin
genes in fetal erythroid cells. We have shown that NF-E4 interacts directly with,
and serves as a substrate for, the acetyltransferase co-activator PCAF.
Acetylation of NF-E4 is restricted to a single residue (Lys(43)) in the
amino-terminal domain of the protein and results in two important functional
consequences. Acetylation of NF-E4 prolongs the protein half-life by preventing
ubiquitin-mediated degradation. This stabilization is PCAF-dependent, since
enforced expression in fetal/erythroid cells of a mutant form of PCAF lacking the
histone acetyltransferase domain (PCAFDeltaHAT) decreases NF-E4 stability.
Acetylation of Lys(43) also reduces the interaction between NF-E4 and HDAC1,
potentially maximizing the activating ability of the factor at the
gamma-promoter. These results provide further demonstration that co-activators,
such as PCAF, can influence individual transcription factor properties at
multiple levels to alter their effects on gene expression.

PMID: 15273251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Clin Cancer Res. 2004 Jul 1;10(13):4314-24.

Chromatin remodeling factors and BRM/BRG1 expression as prognostic indicators in 
non-small cell lung cancer.

Fukuoka J(1), Fujii T, Shih JH, Dracheva T, Meerzaman D, Player A, Hong K,
Settnek S, Gupta A, Buetow K, Hewitt S, Travis WD, Jen J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Population Genetics, Biometric Research Branch, Center for
Bioinformatics, Laboratory of Pathology, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA.

We immunohistochemically examined 12 core proteins involved in the chromatin
remodeling machinery using a tissue microarray composed of 150 lung
adenocarcinoma (AD) and 150 squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) cases. Most of the
proteins showed nuclear staining, whereas some also showed cytoplasmic or
membranous staining. When the expression patterns of all tested antigens were
considered, proteins with nuclear staining clustered into two major groups.
Nuclear signals of BRM, Ini-1, retinoblastoma, mSin3A, HDAC1, and HAT1 clustered 
together, whereas nuclear signals of BRG1, BAF155, HDAC2, BAF170, and RbAP48
formed a second cluster. Additionally, two thirds of the cases on the lung tissue
array had follow-up information, and survival analysis was performed for each of 
the tested proteins. Positive nuclear BRM (N-BRM) staining correlated with a
favorable prognosis in SCC and AD patients with a 5 year-survival of 53.5%
compared with 32.3% for those whose tumors were negative for N-BRM (P = 0.015).
Furthermore, patients whose tumors stained positive for both N-BRM and nuclear
BRG1 had a 5 year-survival of 72% compared with 33.6% (P = 0.013) for those whose
tumors were positive for either or negative for both markers. In contrast,
membranous BRM (M-BRM) staining correlated with a poorer prognosis in AD patients
with a 5 year-survival of 16.7% compared with those without M-BRM staining
(38.1%; P = 0.016). These results support the notion that BRM and BRG1
participate in two distinct chromosome remodeling complexes that are functionally
complementary and that the nuclear presence of BRM, its coexpression with nuclear
BRG1, and the altered cellular localization of BRM (M-BRM) are useful markers for
non-small cell lung cancer prognosis.

PMID: 15240517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Neurosci Lett. 2004 Jul 15;365(1):64-8.

Selective regulation of class I and class II histone deacetylases expression by
inhibitors of histone deacetylases in cultured mouse neural cells.

Ajamian F(1), Salminen A, Reeben M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, A.I. Virtanen Institute for Molecular Science,
University of Kuopio, P.O. Box 1627 (Neulaniementie 2), FIN 70211 Kuopio,
Finland.

The expression of 10 histone deacetylases (HDAC1-10) mRNAs in mouse neuroblastoma
Neuro-2a and microglia N9 cell cultures after treatment by inhibitors of HDACs,
sodium butyrate and trichostatin A was studied to elucidate whether HDAC
inhibitors affect the gene expression of HDACs themselves. Northern blot analysis
demonstrated two- to four-fold elevated levels of mRNAs for HDAC1, -3, -5, and -6
after drug treatment in comparison with untreated cells, while mRNA levels for
HDAC2 and -7 did not change significantly. In both Neuro-2a and N9 cells the
highest increase was observed for HDAC5 and -6 mRNA, whereas, HDAC4 had a
prominent increase in mRNA levels after drug treatment only in N9 microglia cell 
line but not in Neuro-2a. Immunocytochemical examination confirmed that changes
in protein levels of HDACs were similar to changes in their mRNA levels. There
exists an auto-regulatory feedback loop to the expression levels of several HDACs
after inhibition of their biochemical activity, adding several HDAC genes to the 
list of genes regulated by HDAC inhibitors.

PMID: 15234474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jul;24(13):6021-8.

SENP1 enhances androgen receptor-dependent transcription through desumoylation of
histone deacetylase 1.

Cheng J(1), Wang D, Wang Z, Yeh ET.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, The University of Texas-M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

SUMO (also called Sentrin) is a ubiquitin-like protein that plays an important
role in regulating protein function and localization. It is known that several
nuclear receptors are modified by SUMO; however, the effect of desumoylation in
regulating nuclear receptor function has not been elucidated. Here we show that
androgen receptor (AR)-mediated transcription is markedly enhanced by SENP1, a
member of SUMO-specific protease family. SENP1's ability to enhance AR-dependent 
transcription is not mediated through desumoylation of AR, but rather through its
ability to deconjugate histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), thereby reducing its
deacetylase activity. HDAC1's repressive effect on AR-dependent transcription
could be reversed by SENP1 and by deletion of its sumoylation sites. RNA
interference depletion of endogenous HDAC1 also reduced SENP1's effect. Thus,
SENP1 could regulate AR-dependent transcription through desumoylation of HDAC1.
These studies provide insights on the potential role of desumoylation in the
regulation of nuclear receptor activity.

PMCID: PMC480885
PMID: 15199155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. J Virol. 2004 Jul;78(13):6735-43.

Tax relieves transcriptional repression by promoting histone deacetylase 1
release from the human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 long terminal repeat.

Lu H(1), Pise-Masison CA, Linton R, Park HU, Schiltz RL, Sartorelli V, Brady JN.

Author information: 
(1)Virus Tumor Biology Section, Basic Research Laboratory, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Expression of human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) is regulated by the
viral transcriptional activator Tax. Tax activates viral transcription through
interaction with the cellular transcription factor CREB and the coactivators
CBP/p300. In this study, we have analyzed the role of histone deacetylase 1
(HDAC1) on HTLV-1 gene expression from an integrated template. First we show that
trichostatin A, an HDAC inhibitor, enhances Tax expression in HTLV-1-transformed 
cells. Second, using a cell line containing a single-copy HTLV-1 long terminal
repeat, we demonstrate that overexpression of HDAC1 represses Tax
transactivation. Furthermore, a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay allowed us to
analyze the interaction of transcription factors, coactivators, and HDACs with
the basal and activated HTLV-1 promoter. We demonstrate that HDAC1 is associated 
with the inactive, but not the Tax-transactivated, HTLV-1 promoter. In vitro and 
in vivo glutathione S-transferase-Tax pull-down and coimmunoprecipitation
experiments demonstrated that there is a direct physical association between Tax 
and HDAC1. Importantly, biotinylated chromatin pull-down assays demonstrated that
Tax inhibits and/or dissociates the binding of HDAC1 to the HTLV-1 promoter. Our 
results provide evidence that Tax interacts directly with HDAC1 and regulates
binding of the repressor to the HTLV-1 promoter.

PMCID: PMC421680
PMID: 15194748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Carcinogenesis. 2004 Oct;25(10):1991-2003. Epub 2004 Jun 10.

Insufficient p65 phosphorylation at S536 specifically contributes to the lack of 
NF-kappaB activation and transformation in resistant JB6 cells.

Hu J(1), Nakano H, Sakurai H, Colburn NH.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Regulation Section, Laboratory of Cancer Prevention, Center for Cancer
Research, National Cancer Institute at Frederick, MD 21702, USA. huji@ncifcrf.gov

NF-kappaB activation is required for TNF-alpha-induced transformation of JB6
mouse epidermal cells. Deficient activation of p65 contributes to the lack of
NF-kappaB activation in transformation-resistant (P-) cells. We hypothesized that
the differential NF-kappaB activation involves differential p65 phosphorylation
arising from enzyme activity differences. Here we show that TNF-alpha induces
greater ERK-dependent p65 phosphorylation at S536 in transformation sensitive
(P+) cells than in P- cells. Our results establish that limited ERK content
contributes to a low IkappaB kinase (IKKbeta) level, in turn resulting in
insufficient p65 phosphorylation at S536 upon TNF-alpha stimulation in P- cells. 
Phosphorylation of p65 at S536 appears to play a role in TNF-alpha-induced p65
DNA binding and recruitment of p300 to the p65 complex as well as in release of
p65 bound to HDAC1 and 3. Blocking p65 phosphorylation at S536, but not at S276
or S529, abolishes p65 transactivational activity. Over-expression of p65 but not
p65 phosphorylation mutant (S536A) in transformation-resistant P- cells renders
these cells sensitive to TNF-alpha-induced transformation. Over-expression of p65
phosphorylation mimics p65-S536D or p65-S536E in P- cells and also rescues the
transformation response. These findings provide direct evidence that
phosphorylation of p65 at S536 is required for TNF-alpha-induced NF-kappaB
activation in the JB6 transformation model. The lack of NF-kappaB activation seen
in P- cells can be attributed to an insufficient level of p65 phosphorylation on 
S536 that arises from insufficient IKKbeta that in turn arises from insufficient 
ERK. Thus, p65 phosphorylation at S536 offers a potential molecular target for
cancer prevention.

PMID: 15192014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Novartis Found Symp. 2004;259:197-205; discussion 205-7, 223-5.

Dynamics of the p53 acetylation pathway.

Gu W(1), Luo J, Brooks CL, Nikolaev AY, Li M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics, Department of Pathology, College of Physicians 
& Surgeons, Columbia University, 1150 St. Nicholas Avenue, New York, NY 10032,
USA.

The p53 tumour suppressor exerts anti-proliferative effects, including growth
arrest, apoptosis and cell senescence, in response to various types of stress.
However, p53 is a short-lived protein and its activity is maintained at low
levels in normal cells. Numerous studies indicate that CBP/p300-mediated
acetyl-transferase activity is critical for its role in both catalysing p53
acetylation and activating p53-mediated function during stress response.
Interestingly, two additional regulators have also been identified in the p53
acetylation pathway. PID/MTA2 is a p53-interacting protein that induces p53
deacetylation by recruiting the HDAC1 complex. Subsequent work has also
identified Sir2alpha, a NAD-dependent histone deacetylase that can attenuate p53 
transcriptional activity through deacetylation. The prominence of deacetylase
activity on p53 certainly raises the defining question of its physiological
purpose. It is likely that deacetylation proxides a quick acting mechanism to
stop p53 function once transcriptional activation of target genes is no longer
needed. We present data indicating that both HDAC1 and Sir2alpha are critical for
p53-dependent stress response. Furthermore, we also try to define the functional 
consequence of p53 acetylation at the molecular level. Finally, we propose a
model regarding the differential roles of HDAC1 and Sir2alpha in the regulation
of p53 function.

PMID: 15171255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Development. 2004 Jun;131(12):2983-95.

Histone deacetylase 1 is required to repress Notch target gene expression during 
zebrafish neurogenesis and to maintain the production of motoneurones in response
to hedgehog signalling.

Cunliffe VT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Developmental Genetics, School of Medicine and Biomedical Science, 
University of Sheffield, Firth Court, Western Bank, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK.
v.t.cunliffe@shef.ac.uk

Histone deacetylases (Hdacs) are widely implicated as key components of
transcriptional silencing mechanisms. Here, I show that hdac1 is specifically
required in the zebrafish embryonic CNS to maintain neurogenesis. In hdac1 mutant
embryos, the Notch-responsive E(spl)-related neurogenic gene her6 is ectopically 
expressed at distinct sites within the developing CNS and proneural gene
expression is correspondingly reduced or eliminated. Using an hdac1-specific
morpholino, I show that this requirement for hdac1 is epistatic to the
requirement for Notch signalling. Consequently, hdac1-deficient embryos exhibit
several defects of neuronal specification and patterning, including a dramatic
deficit of hedgehog-dependent branchiomotor neurones that is refractory to
elevated levels of hedgehog signalling. Thus, in the zebrafish embryo, hdac1 is
an essential component of the transcriptional silencing machinery that supports
the formation and subsequent differentiation of neuronal precursors.

PMID: 15169759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 May 17;32(9):2716-29. Print 2004.

Isolation and characterization of a novel DNA methyltransferase complex linking
DNMT3B with components of the mitotic chromosome condensation machinery.

Geiman TM(1), Sankpal UT, Robertson AK, Chen Y, Mazumdar M, Heale JT, Schmiesing 
JA, Kim W, Yokomori K, Zhao Y, Robertson KD.

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetic Gene Regulation and Cancer Section, LRBGE/NCI/NIH, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA.

Proper patterns of genome-wide DNA methylation, mediated by DNA
methyltransferases DNMT1, -3A and -3B, are essential for embryonic development
and genomic stability in mammalian cells. The de novo DNA methyltransferase
DNMT3B is of particular interest because it is frequently overexpressed in tumor 
cells and is mutated in immunodeficiency, centromere instability and facial
anomalies (ICF) syndrome. In order to gain a better understanding of DNMT3B, in
terms of the targeting of its methylation activity and its role in genome
stability, we biochemically purified endogenous DNMT3B from HeLa cells. DNMT3B
co-purifies and interacts, both in vivo and in vitro, with several components of 
the condensin complex (hCAP-C, hCAP-E and hCAP-G) and KIF4A. Condensin mediates
genome-wide chromosome condensation at the onset of mitosis and is critical for
proper segregation of sister chromatids. KIF4A is proposed to be a motor protein 
carrying DNA as cargo. DNMT3B also interacts with histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), 
the co-repressor SIN3A and the ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling enzyme hSNF2H. 
Further more, DNMT3B co-localizes with condensin and KIF4A on condensed
chromosomes throughout mitosis. These studies therefore reveal the first direct
link between the machineries regulating DNA methylation and mitotic chromosome
condensation in mammalian cells.

PMCID: PMC419596
PMID: 15148359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jun 4;279(23):24834-43. Epub 2004 Mar 31.

Transcriptional regulation by the repressor of estrogen receptor activity via
recruitment of histone deacetylases.

Kurtev V(1), Margueron R, Kroboth K, Ogris E, Cavailles V, Seiser C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Biochemistry, Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter, Dr. Bohr-Gasse 9/2, A-1030 Vienna,
Austria.

Histone acetyltransferases and deacetylases are recruited by transcription
factors and adapter proteins to regulate specific subsets of target genes. We
were interested in identifying interaction partners of histone deacetylase 1
(HDAC1) that might be involved in conferring target or substrate specificity.
Using the yeast two-hybrid system, we isolated the repressor of estrogen receptor
activity (REA) as a novel HDAC1-associated protein. We demonstrated the in vivo
interaction of REA with HDAC1 and characterized the respective domains required
for their interaction in vitro. In addition, we found that REA also associates
with the class II histone deacetylase HDAC5. In luciferase reporter assays, REA
decreased transcription, and this repression was sensitive to the deacetylase
inhibitor trichostatin A. Finally, we showed that REA specifically interacts with
the chicken ovalbumin upstream binding transcription factors and II. The nuclear 
receptor chicken ovalbumin upstream binding transcription factor I was found to
cooperate with REA and histone deacetylases in the repression of target genes.
We, therefore, propose a novel function for REA as a mediator of transcriptional 
repression by nuclear hormone receptors via recruitment of histone deacetylases.

PMID: 15140878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Mech Ageing Dev. 2004 May;125(5):351-7.

Histone deacetylases, HDAC1 and HSIR2, act as a negative regulator of ageing
through p53 in human gingival fibroblast.

Kim MM(1), Yoon SO, Cho YS, Chung AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology, Daejeon 305-701, South Korea. mmkim@kaist.ac.kr

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) such as HDAC1 and HSIR2 have been known to be
involved in the regulation of life-span extension. However, its underlying
mechanism remains unclear in human. Using the primary human gingival fibroblasts 
(HGFs) derived from donors of different ages, which exhibit clear features of
senescence in aged HGFs, we demonstrated that histone deacetylase, HDAC1 and
HSIR2, repressed the ageing through the transcriptional inactivation of p53 and
p21 promoters. These results suggest that primary HGFs can be a useful human
ageing model, and HDAC1, HSIR2, p53 and p21 may play an important role in ageing 
process of human beings.

PMID: 15130752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 16;279(29):30358-68. Epub 2004 May 3.

Requirement of histone deacetylase activity for signaling by STAT1.

Klampfer L(1), Huang J, Swaby LA, Augenlicht L.

Author information: 
(1)Albert Einstein Cancer Center, Montefiore Medical Center, Department of
Oncology, Bronx, New York 10467, USA. lklampf@aecom.yu.edu

STAT1 is a transcription factor that plays a crucial role in signaling by
interferons (IFNs). In this study we demonstrated that inhibitors of histone
deacetylase (HDAC) activity, butyrate, trichostatin A, and suberoylanilide
hydroxamic acid, prevented IFNgamma-induced JAK1 activation, STAT1
phosphorylation, its nuclear translocation, and STAT1-dependent gene activation. 
Furthermore, we showed that silencing of HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3 through RNA
interference markedly decreased IFNgamma-driven gene activation and that
overexpression of HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3 enhanced STAT1-dependent
transcriptional activity. Our data therefore established the essential role of
deacetylase activity in STAT1 signaling. Induction of IRF-1 by IFNgamma requires 
functional STAT1 signaling and was abrogated by butyrate, trichostatin A,
suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid, and STAT1 small interfering RNA. In contrast,
silencing of STAT1 did not interfere with IFNgamma-induced expression of STAT2
and caspase-7, and HDAC inhibitors did not preclude IFNgamma-induced expression
of STAT1, STAT2, and caspase-7, suggesting that HDAC inhibitors impede the
expression of IFNgamma target genes whose expression depends on STAT1 but do not 
interfere with STAT1-independent signaling by IFNgamma. Finally, we showed that
inhibitors of deacetylase activity sensitized colon cancer cells to
IFNgamma-induced apoptosis through cooperative negative regulation of Bcl-x
expression, demonstrating that interruption of the balance between
STAT1-dependent and STAT1-independent signaling significantly alters the
biological activity of IFNgamma.

PMID: 15123634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 May 28;318(2):544-55.

DNMT3B interacts with hSNF2H chromatin remodeling enzyme, HDACs 1 and 2, and
components of the histone methylation system.

Geiman TM(1), Sankpal UT, Robertson AK, Zhao Y, Zhao Y, Robertson KD.

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetic Gene Regulation and Cancer Section, LRBGE/NCI/NIH, Bldg. 41, Rm.
C306, 41 Library Dr., Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The non-random pattern of genome-wide DNA methylation in mammalian cells is
established and maintained by DNA methyltransferases DNMT1, 3A, and 3B. De novo
DNA methyltransferase DNMT3B is critical for embryonic development and is mutated
in ICF syndrome. Despite its importance in normal cellular functioning, little is
known about how DNMT3B operates in the context of chromatin. Here we demonstrate 
that DNMT3B associates with four chromatin-associated enzymatic activities common
to transcriptionally repressed, heterochromatic regions of the genome: DNA
methyltransferase, histone deacetylase, ATPase, and histone methylase activities.
By immunoprecipitation and GST pull-down, we show that DNMT3B interacts with
HDAC1, HDAC2, HP1 proteins, Suv39h1, and the ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling
enzyme hSNF2H. Endogenous hSNF2H is also associated with DNA methyltransferase
activity. These proteins co-localize extensively with DNMT3B in heterochromatic
regions. Our results therefore link DNMT3B to three other components of the
epigenetic machinery and provide important insights into how DNA methylation
patterns may be established within the chromatin environment.

PMID: 15120635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Leuk Res. 2004 Apr;28(4):409-14.

Domains involved in ETO and human N-CoR interaction and ETO transcription
repression.

Wang J(1), Wang M, Liu JM.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, Institute of Hematology,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College, 288 Nanjing
Road, Tianjin, PR China.

The (8;21) translocation between the AML1 and ETO genes is seen in approximately 
12-15% of all acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and is a frequently observed nonrandom
genetic alteration associated with AML. The ETO moiety was shown to interact with
the nuclear receptor co-repressor (N-CoR) complex, which includes mSin3A and the 
histone deacetylase, HDAC1. Repression of AML1-responsive hematopoietic genes by 
AML1-ETO and the N-CoR complex may play a mechanistic role in t(8;21)
leukemogenesis. In order to characterize the interaction between ETO and N-CoR,
mutants of either protein were constructed and tested for binding in both yeast
two-hybrid and immunoprecipitation assays. We found that two domains of human
N-CoR, amino acid residues 988-1126 and 1551-1803, were necessary for interaction
with ETO. Previously, we and other investigators had reported that two unusual
zinc finger motifs at the C-terminus of ETO mediated binding to N-CoR. Here,
using mammalian two-hybrid assays, we found that transcription repression by ETO 
was substantially decreased when either zinc finger motif of ETO is deleted or
mutated. In addition, we identified a second transcription repression domain
located between residues 275 and 487. Characterization of the ETO interaction
domains within human N-CoR and of the transcription domains of ETO is a first
step in designing targeted molecular therapy for t(8;21) AML.

PMID: 15109542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Cell Signal. 2004 Jun;16(6):675-9.

Involvement of histone deacetylation in ras-induced down-regulation of the
metastasis suppressor RECK.

Chang HC(1), Liu LT, Hung WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung 807, Taiwan.

RECK is a membrane-anchored glycoprotein that may negatively regulate matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP) activity and inhibit tumor metastasis. Previous study
demonstrated that oncogenic ras inhibited RECK expression via an Sp1 binding site
in the RECK promoter. In this study, we investigated the molecular mechanism by
which ras inhibited RECK expression. Co-transfection assay showed that Sp1 and
Sp3 are transactivators, rather than repressors, for RECK gene. So, we tested
whether ras activation induced the binding of histone deacetylases (HDACs) to Sp1
to repress RECK expression. Our data showed Sp1-associated HDAC1 in cells was
increased after ras induction. By using DNA affinity precipitation assay, we
found that induction of oncogenic ras enhanced the binding of HDAC1 to the DNA
probe corresponding to the Sp1 site in the RECK promoter. Additionally, a HDAC
inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA) potently antagonized the inhibitory action of ras 
on RECK. The signaling pathway by which ras suppresses RECK was also addressed.
Induction of oncogenic ras activated extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK),
but not c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and p38(HOG) kinase in 2-12 cells. Addition
of PD98059 or overexpression of dominant-negative mutant of ERK2 indeed reversed 
ras-mediated inhibition of RECK promoter activity. Taken together, our results
suggest that oncogenic ras represses RECK expression via a histone deacetylation 
mechanism.

PMID: 15093608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Dev Biol. 2004 May 1;269(1):276-85.

RNAi and expression of retrotransposons MuERV-L and IAP in preimplantation mouse 
embryos.

Svoboda P(1), Stein P, Anger M, Bernstein E, Hannon GJ, Schultz RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
19104-6018, USA.

Both murine endogenous retrovirus-L (MuERV-L) and intracisternal A particle
(IAP), two autonomous long terminal repeat (LTR) retrotransposons, are activated 
during genome activation in the preimplantation mouse embryo, and both sense and 
antisense transcripts are detected in 2-cell and 8-cell stage embryos. Because
RNA interference (RNAi) functions in the preimplantation mouse embryo, we
analyzed the relationship between RNAi and MuERV-L and IAP expression by
inhibiting RNAi and measuring relative changes of the levels of these
transcripts. We inhibited the initial step in the RNAi pathway by injecting
1-cell embryos with mDicer siRNA or long mDicer dsRNA and analyzed MuERV-L and
IAP expression at the 8-cell stage. This approach resulted in the targeted
destruction of mDicer mRNA, but not Hdac1 mRNA, inhibited the RNAi pathway, and
resulted in a 50% increase in IAP and MuERV-L transcript abundance. These results
suggest that RNAi constrains expression of repetitive parasitic sequences in
preimplantation embryos, and thereby contributes to preserving genomic integrity 
at a stage of development when the organism consists of only a few cells.

PMID: 15081373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Oncogene. 2004 Jun 17;23(28):4807-17.

HDAC inhibitors trigger apoptosis in HPV-positive cells by inducing the E2F-p73
pathway.

Finzer P(1), Krueger A, Stöhr M, Brenner D, Soto U, Kuntzen C, Krammer PH, Rösl
F.

Author information: 
(1)Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Forschungsschwerpunkt Angewandte
Tumorvirologie, Abteilung Virale Transformationsmechanismen, Im Neuenheimer Feld 
242, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. p.finzer@dkfz.de

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors induce an intrinsic type of apoptosis in
human papillomavirus (HPV)-positive cells by disrupting the mitochondrial
transmembrane potential (deltapsim). Loss of deltapsim was only detected in E7,
but not in E6 oncogene-expressing cells. HDAC inhibition led to a time-dependent 
degradation of the pocket proteins pRb, p107 and p130, releasing 'free' E2F-1
following initial G1 arrest. Inhibition of proteasomal proteolysis, but not of
caspase activity rescued pRb from degradation and functionally restored its
inhibitory effect on the cyclin E gene, known to be suppressed by pRb-E2F-1 in
conjunction with HDAC1. Using siRNA targeted against p53, E2F-1 still triggered
apoptosis by inducing the E2F-responsive proapoptotic alpha- and beta-isoforms of
p73. These data may determine future therapeutic strategies in which HDAC
inhibitors can effectively eliminate HPV-positive cells by an apoptotic route
that does not rely on the reactivation of the 'classical' p53 pathway through a
preceding shut-off of viral gene expression.

Copyright 2004 Nature Publishing Group

PMID: 15077164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Oncogene. 2004 Jun 17;23(28):4930-7.

Ezh2 reduces the ability of HDAC1-dependent pRb2/p130 transcriptional repression 
of cyclin A.

Tonini T(1), Bagella L, D'Andrilli G, Claudio PP, Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Center for
Biotechnology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19122, USA.

The polycomb group (PcG) proteins are known to be involved in maintaining the
silenced state of several developmentally regulated genes. Enhancer of zeste
homolog 2 (Ezh2), a member of this large protein family, has also been shown to
be deregulated in different tumor types and its role, both as a potential primary
effector and as a mediator of tumorigenesis, has become a subject of increased
interest. We observed that Ezh2 binds to pRb2/p130, a member of the
retinoblastoma family; as such, we were led to consider the possible ability of
Ezh2 to modulate cell cycle progression. Both Ezh2 and pRb2/p130 repress gene
expression by recruiting histone deacetylase (HDAC1), which decreases DNA
accessibility for activating transcription factors. Additionally, we observed
that Ezh2 interacts with the C-terminal region of pRb2/p130, essential for
interaction with HDAC1. We show that Ezh2 is able to reverse
pRb2/p130-HDAC1-mediated repression of the cyclin A promoter. This indicates a
functional role of this complex in regulating cyclin A expression, known to be
crucial in mediating cell cycle advancement. We also detected a significant
decrease in the retention of HDAC1 activity associated with pRb2/p130 when Ezh2
was overexpressed. Finally, electromobility shift assays (EMSA) demonstrated that
overexpression of Ezh2 caused the abrogation of the pRb2/p130-HDAC1 complex on
the cyclin A promoter. These data, taken together, suggest that Ezh2 competes
with HDAC1 in binding to pRb2/p130, disrupting their occupancy on the cyclin A
promoter. In this study, we propose a new mechanism for the functional
inactivation of pRb2/p130 that ultimately contributes to cell cycle progression
and malignant transformation.

Copyright 2004 Nature Publishing Group

PMID: 15077161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Cancer Res. 2004 Apr 1;64(7):2619-26.

Androgen receptor signaling: mechanism of interleukin-6 inhibition.

Jia L(1), Choong CS, Ricciardelli C, Kim J, Tilley WD, Coetzee GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology and Preventive Medicine, Norris Cancer Center,
University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles,
California 90089, USA.

Nonsteroidal signaling via the androgen receptor (AR) plays an im-portant role in
hormone-refractory prostate cancer. Previously, we have reported that the
pleiotropic cytokine, interleukin (IL)-6, inhibited dihydrotestosterone-mediated 
expression of prostate-specific antigen in LNCaP cells (Jia et al., Mol Can Res
2003;1:385-92). In the present study, we explored the mechanisms involved in this
inhibition and considered possible effects on AR nuclear translocation,
recruitment of transcription cofactors, and the signaling pathways that may
mediate this inhibitory effect. IL-6 neither induced nuclear localization of the 
AR nor inhibited dihydrotestosterone-induced nuclear translocation of the
receptor. IL-6 did not affect AR or p160 coactivator recruitment to the
transcription initiation complex on the prostate-specific antigen enhancer and
promoter. Moreover, it did not lead to the recruitment of the corepressor
silencing mediator of retinoic acid and thyroid hormone receptor (SMRT) or
histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) at the same sites. IL-6 did, however, prevent the
recruitment of the secondary coactivator, p300, to the complex and partially
inhibited histone H3 acetylation at the same loci. Furthermore, inhibition by
IL-6 was not mediated by the mitogen-activated protein kinase or the Akt pathways
and was partially abrogated by signal transducers and activators of
transcription-3 knock-down using small interfering RNA. Our results show that
IL-6 modulates androgen action through the differential recruitment of cofactors 
to target genes. These findings may account for the pleiotropic actions of IL-6
in malignant prostate cells.

PMID: 15059919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. J Nutr. 2004 Apr;134(4):792-8.

Krüppel-like factor 4 is transactivated by butyrate in colon cancer cells.

Chen ZY(1), Rex S, Tseng CC.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Gastroenterology, VA Boston Healthcare System and Boston University
School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02118, USA. zhiyi.chen@bmc.org

High-fiber diets decrease the incidence of colorectal cancers, and SCFA, derived 
from dietary fiber, are involved in the regulation of cell growth,
differentiation, and apoptosis of the colonic epithelium. The mediators of these 
effects remain poorly defined. Krüppel-like factor-4 (KLF4/GKLF) is a zinc-finger
transcription factor that exhibits some physiologic properties similar to those
of SCFA in the colon. The present study was undertaken to examine the role of
KLF4 in the butyrate-mediated effect in colon cancer HT-29 cells. Butyrate
induced KLF4 mRNA expression and stimulated KLF4 promoter activity in a dose- and
time-dependent manner in HT-29 cells. Similar effects were observed in SCFA
possessing different carbon lengths (C3-C7), but not in branched isobutyric acid,
indicating that the stimulatory properties of SCFA were related to fatty acid
structure. Transfection studies using 5' deletion and mutant constructs of the
KLF4 promoter demonstrated that the butyrate-responsive element was located at a 
putative stimulatory protein (Sp)1-binding site. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays using an oligonucleotide containing a consensus Sp1-binding element
revealed a DNA-protein complex that was enhanced by butyrate treatment and
supershifted by the Sp1 antiserum. Furthermore, the effects of butyrate on cell
growth and KLF4 mRNA expression were the same as those of trichostatin A (TSA), a
specific inhibitor of histone deacetylase (HDAC1). Overexpression of HDAC1
significantly attenuated transcriptional activation of the KLF4 promoter by
butyrate or TSA. These results suggest that KLF4 may function as one of the
downstream effectors of butyrate that mediates its growth arrest effect in the
colon. Moreover, transactivation of KLF4 by butyrate appears to be mediated
through interaction with a Sp1-binding domain on the promoter and is also likely 
to involve histone acetylation.

PMID: 15051827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Life Sci. 2004 Apr 16;74(22):2693-705.

Expression and functional characterization of recombinant human HDAC1 and HDAC3.

Li J(1), Staver MJ, Curtin ML, Holms JH, Frey RR, Edalji R, Smith R, Michaelides 
MR, Davidsen SK, Glaser KB.

Author information: 
(1)Global Pharmaceutical Research and Development, Cancer Research, R47J-AP9,
Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL 60064-6121, USA.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are a family of enzymes involved in transcription
regulation. HDACs are known to play key roles in the regulation of cell
proliferation; consequently, inhibition of HDACs has become an interesting
approach for anti-cancer therapy. However, expression of mammalian HDACs has
proven to be difficult. All attempts to express these HDACs in E.coli, Pichia and
baculovirus systems were unsuccessful. Here we present the stable expression of
human recombinant His-tagged HDAC1 and HDAC3 in mammalian cells. Full-length
human genes for HDAC1 and HDAC3 were cloned into the pcDNA 3.1 vector containing 
a N-terminal His-tag with an enterokinase cleavage site. Recombinant HDAC enzyme 
activity was only detected after nickel affinity purification due to high
activity of endogenous HDACs; and removal of the His-tag increased activity 2-4
fold. Western blots demonstrated the nickel affinity purified rhHDAC1 preparation
also contained endogenous HDAC2 and HDAC3; likewise, rhHDAC3 preparation
contained endogenous HDAC1 and HDAC2. Therefore, the active HDAC preparation is
actually a multi-protein and a multi-HDAC containing complex. This provides one
explanation for the similar IC50 values exhibited by SAHA and MS-275 against
nuclear HDACs and rhHDAC1 and 3 preparations. These results demonstrate that
recombinant forms of the HDACs can be over-expressed in mammalian cells, isolated
as active multi-protein complexes that contain multiple HDAC enzymes, and caution
must be used when determining HDAC inhibitor in vitro selectivity.

PMID: 15043985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Prostate. 2004 May 1;59(2):177-89.

Upregulation and nuclear recruitment of HDAC1 in hormone refractory prostate
cancer.

Halkidou K(1), Gaughan L, Cook S, Leung HY, Neal DE, Robson CN.

Author information: 
(1)School of Surgical and Reproductive Sciences, The Medical School, University
of Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) is a co-repressor involved in
differentiation and proliferation control. It is upregulated in malignant
compared to benign tissue, and targets a number of transcription factors
including p53.
METHODS: By immunohistochemistry, HDAC1 protein expression was investigated in
human prostate specimens and the CWR22 mouse xenograft model. Flow cytometry and 
deconvolution immunofluorescence were also performed.
RESULTS: HDAC1 was upregulated in pre-malignant and malignant lesions, with the
highest increase in expression in hormone refractory (HR) cancer. Using the CWR22
xenograft model we showed androgen dependent regulation of HDAC1. HDAC1
overexpression led to a significant increase in proliferation and a shift towards
the undifferentiated cytokeratin (CK) profile in a PC3M derivative clone
constitutively expressing HDAC1.
CONCLUSION: This study underlines the importance of HDAC1 in cell proliferation
and the development of prostate cancer (CaP) and proposes a mechanism for HDAC1
nuclear recruitment. HDAC1 may constitute a crucial therapeutic target
particularly in the most lethal phase of androgen independence.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15042618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. J Biol Chem. 2004 May 28;279(22):23376-83. Epub 2004 Mar 11.

Rb inhibits E2F-1-induced cell death in a LXCXE-dependent manner by active
repression.

Pennaneach V(1), Barbier V, Regazzoni K, Fotedar R, Fotedar A.

Author information: 
(1)Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, San Diego, California 92121, USA.

Rb (retinoblastoma protein) inhibits E2F-1-induced cell death. We now show that
the ability of Rb to inhibit E2F-1-induced cell death is dependent on a
functional LXCXE-binding site in Rb, thereby suggesting that proteins that bind
the LXCXE-binding site in Rb may regulate the anti-apoptotic activity of Rb.
HDAC1, an LXCXE protein that plays a critical role in Rb-mediated transcription
repression, abrogates the effect of Rb on E2F-1-induced cell death. In contrast, 
RF-Cp145, another LXCXE protein, cooperates with Rb to inhibit E2F-1-induced cell
death. Both proteins exert their effect in an LXCXE-dependent manner. Rb
regulates E2F-induced cell death by acting upstream of p73. Rb represses the p73 
promoter. Our results further suggest a model in which Rb-E2F-1 complexes mediate
the anti-apoptotic activity of Rb through active repression of target genes
without recruiting HDAC1.

PMID: 15016799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. J Huazhong Univ Sci Technolog Med Sci. 2003;23(4):359-61.

Expression of P53, P21 in human lung adenocarcinoma A549 cell strains under
hypoxia conditions and the effect of TSA on their expression.

Huang H(1), Zhang Z, Xu Y, Shao J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030.

This paper was designed to investigate the expression of p53, p21 of A549 cell
strains under hypoxic condition and the effect of trichostatin A (TSA), the
inhibitor of histone deacetylasel (HDAC1) on their expression. The authors
designed 1 normoxia group (control group) and 6 hypoxia groups (experimental
group): hypoxia 6 h group (A), TSA+hypoxia 6 h (B), hypoxia 12 h group (C),
hypoxia 24 h group (D), TSA+hypoxia 24 h (E), hypoxia 48 h group (F). The
expression of HDAC1 in A549 cells was examined by using Western blot and the
expression of p53, p21 in A549 cells and the effect of TSA on them were
determined by using immunohistochemistry and reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR). The A value expressed by HDAC1 in A549 cell strains was 
138+/-11 in the control group, 78+/-4, 86+/-5, 124+/-3, 120+/-9 in experimental
groups A, C, D, F, respectively. The A value of the expression of the protein and
mRNA of p53 in A549 cell strains were 0.12+/-0.02, 0.62+/-0.02 in the control
group, 0.10+/-0.03, 0.32 +/-0.03; 0.11+/-0.01, 0.33+/-0.02; 0.13+/-0.03,
0.58+/-0.01; 0.12+/-0.02, 0.56+/-0.02 in experimental group A, B, D, E,
respectively. The A value of the expression of the protein and mRNA of p21 in
A549 cell strains were 0.17+/-0.03, 0.62+/-0.03 in the control group,
0.16+/-0.02, 0.50+/-0.02; 0.14+/-0.02, 0.36+/-0.02; 0.15+/-0.03, 0.49+/-0.03;
0.13+/-0.02, 0.33+/-0.02 in experimental groups A, B, D, E, respectively. These
results indicate that the expression of HDAC1 is regulated by hypoxia and the
effect of TSA is closely related to the expression of P21 under hypoxia
condition.

PMID: 15015635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Mar 26;316(1):252-5.

Cdk-mediated phosphorylation of pRB regulates HDAC binding in vitro.

Takaki T(1), Fukasawa K, Suzuki-Takahashi I, Hirai H.

Author information: 
(1)Banyu Tsukuba Research Institute in collaboration with Merck Research
Laboratories, 3 Okubo, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 300-2611, Japan. takakitr@banyu.co.jp

Retinoblastoma protein (pRB) controls the G1/S transition in the cell cycle by
binding and inactivating E2F transcription factor. pRB changes the chromatin
structure at the E2F-responsive promoter by recruiting histone deacetylase (HDAC)
to the pRB-E2F complex, thus controlling the transcriptional activity of E2F.
Cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks) phosphorylate pRB and disrupt association between
pRB and E2F. We investigated the effects of pRB phosphorylation on HDAC-1 binding
in vitro. Phosphorylation of pRB by Cdk4-cyclin D2, Cdk2-cyclin E, and
Cdk2-cyclin A inhibited association of pRB with HDAC. Among these Cdks,
Cdk4-cyclin D2 showed particularly effective inhibition of pRB-HDAC complex
formation. Using pRB mutants with various deletions in the N- and C-terminal
domains, we found that both the pocket and C-terminal domains are important for
regulating association between pRB and HDAC.

PMID: 15003538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. DNA Cell Biol. 2004 Feb;23(2):81-91.

Repression of CAR-mediated transactivation of CYP2B genes by the orphan nuclear
receptor, short heterodimer partner (SHP).

Bae Y(1), Kemper JK, Kemper B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular & Integrative Physiology, College of Medicine at
Urbana-Champaign, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois,
USA.

The induction of CYP2B gene expression by phenobarbital (PB) is mediated by the
translocation of the constitutive androstane receptor (CAR) from the cytoplasm to
the nucleus. The CAR/RXR heterodimer binds to two DR-4 sites in a complex
phenobarbital responsive unit (PBRU) in the CYP2B gene. The short heterodimer
partner (SHP), an orphan nuclear receptor that lacks a conventional DNA binding
domain, was initially identified by its interaction with CAR. We have examined
the role of SHP in CAR-mediated transactivation of the CYP2B gene. Coexpression
of SHP inhibited the transactivation of the CYP2B gene by CAR in cultured
hepatoma cells and the p160 coactivator GRIP1 reversed the inhibition. The
interaction of CAR with SHP was confirmed by GST pulldown experiments. SHP did
not block the binding of either CAR/RXR to the PBRU or binding of GRIP1 to the
CAR/RXR complex in gel mobility shift assays, but slightly increased CAR/RXR
binding and slightly altered the mobility of the CAR/RXR/GRIP1 complex,
suggesting an interaction of SHP with these complexes. The presence of SHP in the
complexes, however, could not be detected in an antibody supershift assay.
Recombinant corepressors mSin3A, SMRT, and HDAC1, but not NCoR1, interacted with 
GST-SHP but each of these corepressors in liver nuclear extracts bound to
GST-SHP. SMRT and NCoR1 inhibited CAR-mediated activation independent of SHP, but
mSin3A and HDAC1 had little effect alone, and were additive with SHP. These
studies demonstrate that SHP does not inhibit CAR-mediated trans-activation by
interfering with DNA binding or by competition with GRIP1. Instead, SHP may
either inhibit recruitment of other coactivators by GRIP1 or actively recruit
corepressors directly to the CAR/RXR/PBRU complex.

PMID: 15000748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. J Med Chem. 2004 Mar 11;47(6):1351-9.

3-(4-Aroyl-1-methyl-1H-pyrrol-2-yl)-N-hydroxy-2-propenamides as a new class of
synthetic histone deacetylase inhibitors. 3. Discovery of novel lead compounds
through structure-based drug design and docking studies.

Ragno R(1), Mai A, Massa S, Cerbara I, Valente S, Bottoni P, Scatena R, Jesacher 
F, Loidl P, Brosch G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Studi di Chimica e Tecnologia delle Sostanze Biologicamente
Attive, Università degli Studi di Roma "La Sapienza", P. le A. Moro 5, 00185
Roma, Italy. antonello.mai@uniroma1.it

Aroyl-pyrrole-hydroxy-amides (APHAs) are a new class of synthetic HDAC inhibitors
recently described by us. Through three different docking procedures we designed,
synthesized, and tested two new isomers of APHA lead compound
3-(4-benzoyl-1-methyl-1H-pyrrol-2-yl)-N-hydroxy-2-propenamide (1), compounds 3
and 4, characterized by different insertions of benzoyl and propenoylhydroxamate 
groups onto the pyrrole ring. Biological activities of 3 and 4 were predicted by 
computational tools up to 617-fold more potent than that of 1 against HDAC1;
thus, 3 and 4 were synthesized and tested against both mouse HDAC1 and maize HD2 
enzymes. Predictions of biological affinities (K(i) values) of 3 and 4, performed
by a VALIDATE model (applied on either SAD or automatic DOCK or Autodock results)
and by the Autodock internal scoring function, were in good agreement with
experimental activities. Ligand/receptor positive interactions made by 3 and 4
into the catalytic pocket, in addition to those showed by 1, could at least in
part account for their higher HDAC1 inhibitory activities. In particular, in
mouse HDAC1 inhibitory assay 3 and 4 were 19- and 6-times more potent than 1,
respectively, and 3 and 4 antimaize HD2 activities were 16- and 76-times higher
than that of 1, 4 being as potent as SAHA in this assay. Compound 4, tested as
antiproliferative and cytodifferentiating agent on MEL cells, showed
dose-dependent growth inhibition and hemoglobin accumulation effects.

PMID: 14998325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. J Biol Chem. 2004 May 7;279(19):20194-9. Epub 2004 Feb 26.

The post-translational modifications of proliferating cell nuclear antigen:
acetylation, not phosphorylation, plays an important role in the regulation of
its function.

Naryzhny SN(1), Lee H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research, Northeastern Ontario Regional Cancer Centre, 41 Ramsey
Lake Road, Sudbury, Ontario P3E 5J1, Canada.

The diverse function of proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) is thought to
be due, in large part, to post-translational modifications. Here we show by high 
resolution two-dimensional PAGE analysis that there are three distinct PCNA
isoforms that differ in their acetylation status. The moderately acetylated main 
(M) form was found in all of the subcellular compartments of cycling cells,
whereas the highly acetylated acidic form was primarily found in the nucleoplasm,
nuclear matrix, and chromatin. Interestingly, the deacetylated basic form was
most pronounced in the nucleoplasm of cycling cells. The cells in G(0) and the
cytoplasm of cycling cells contained primarily the M form only. Because p300 and 
histone deacetylase (HDAC1) were co-immunoprecipitated with PCNA, they are likely
responsible for the acetylation and deacetylation of PCNA, respectively. We also 
found that deacetylation reduced the ability of PCNA to bind to DNA polymerases
beta and delta. Taken together, our data support a model where the acidic and M
forms participate in DNA replication, whereas the basic form is associated with
the termination of DNA replication.

PMID: 14988403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Feb 24;101(8):2259-64.

Acetylation of p53 augments its site-specific DNA binding both in vitro and in
vivo.

Luo J(1), Li M, Tang Y, Laszkowska M, Roeder RG, Gu W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics and Department of Pathology, College of
Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

p53 promotes tumor suppression through its ability to function as a
transcriptional factor and is activated by posttranslational modifications that
include acetylation. Our earlier study demonstrated that p53 acetylation can
enhance its sequence-specific DNA binding in vitro, and this notion was later
confirmed in several other studies. However, a recent study has reported that in 
vitro acetylation of p53 fails to stimulate its DNA binding to large DNA
fragments, raising an important issue that requires further investigation. Here, 
we show that unacetylated p53 is able to bind weakly to its consensus site within
the context of large DNA fragments, although it completely fails to bind the same
site within short oligonucleotide probes. Strikingly, by using highly purified
and fully acetylated p53 proteins obtained from cells, we show that acetylation
of the C-terminal domain can dramatically enhance site-specific DNA binding on
both short oligonucleotide probes and long DNA fragments. Moreover, endogenous
p53 apparently can be fully acetylated in response to DNA damage when both
histone deacetylase complex 1 (HDAC1)- and Sir2-mediated deacetylation are
inhibited, indicating dynamic p53 acetylation and deacetylation events during the
DNA damage response. Finally, we also show that acetylation of endogenous p53
indeed significantly augments its ability to bind an endogenous target gene and
that p53 acetylation levels correlate well with p53-mediated transcriptional
activation in vivo. Thus, our results clarify some of the confusion surrounding
acetylation-mediated effects on p53 binding to DNA and suggest that acetylation
of p53 in vivo may contribute, at least in part, to its transcriptional
activation functions.

PMCID: PMC356938
PMID: 14982997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Oncogene. 2004 Apr 15;23(17):3059-66.

PIASy-mediated repression of the androgen receptor is independent of sumoylation.

Gross M(1), Yang R, Top I, Gasper C, Shuai K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of
California, 11-934 Factor Bldg, 10833 Le Conte Avenue, Los Angeles, CA
90095-1678, USA.

PIASy, a member of the protein inhibitor of activated STAT (PIAS) family,
represses the transcriptional activity of the androgen receptor (AR). In this
report, we investigate the mechanism of PIASy-mediated repression of AR. We show 
that AR binds to the RING-finger like domain of PIASy. PIASy contains two
transcriptional repression domains, RD1 and RD2. RD1, but not RD2, is required
for PIASy-mediated repression of AR. We show that the RD1 domain binds HDAC1 and 
HDAC2 and that HDAC activity is required for PIASy-mediated AR repression. PIAS
proteins possess small ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO) E3 ligase activity.
Conjugation of SUMO-1 to AR has been implicated in the regulation of AR activity.
We examine if the SUMO ligase activity of PIASy is required for PIASy to repress 
AR. We show that a mutant PIASy, defective in promoting sumoylation, retains the 
ability to repress AR transcription. In addition, mutation of all the known
sumoylation acceptor sites of AR does not affect the transrepression activity of 
PIASy on AR. Our results suggest that PIASy may repress AR by recruiting histone 
deacetylases, independent of its SUMO ligase activity.

PMID: 14981544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Oncogene. 2004 Mar 18;23(12):2177-87.

Deacetylase recruitment by the C/H3 domain of the acetyltransferase p300.

Simone C(1), Stiegler P, Forcales SV, Bagella L, De Luca A, Sartorelli V,
Giordano A, Puri PL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Expression, Dulbecco Telethon Institute (DTI) at Fondazione
A Cesalpino, University of Roma La Sapienza, Italy.

The balance between acetylation and deacetylation of histone and nonhistone
proteins controls gene expression in a variety of cellular processes, with
transcription being activated by acetyltransferases and silenced by deacetylases.
We report here the formation and enzymatic characterization of a complex between 
the acetyltransferase p300 and histone deacetylases. The C/H3 region of p300 was 
found to co-purify deacetylase activity from nuclear cell extracts. A prototype
of class I histone deacetylases, HDAC1, interacts with p300 C/H3 domain in vitro 
and in vivo. The p300-binding protein E1A competes with HDAC1 for C/H3 binding;
and, like E1A, HDAC1 overexpression interferes with either activation of Gal4p300
fusion protein or p300-dependent co-activation of two C/H3-binding proteins, MyoD
and p53. The exposure to deacetylase inhibitors could reverse the
dominant-negative effect of a C/H3 fragment insulated from the rest of the
molecule, on MyoD- and p53-dependent transcription, whereas inhibition by E1A was
resistant to trichostatin A. These data support the hypothesis that association
between acetyltransferases and deacetylases can control the expression of genes
implicated in cellular growth and differentiation, and suggest that the
dominant-negative effect of the p300 C/H3 fragment relies on deacetylase
recruitment.

PMID: 14968110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. EMBO J. 2004 Feb 25;23(4):950-8. Epub 2004 Feb 5.

ATF6 modulates SREBP2-mediated lipogenesis.

Zeng L(1), Lu M, Mori K, Luo S, Lee AS, Zhu Y, Shyy JY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biomedical Sciences, University of California, Riverside,
Riverside, CA 92521-0121, USA.

Erratum in
    EMBO J. 2008 Nov 5;27(21):2941.

Activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6) and sterol regulatory element-binding
proteins (SREBPs) are activated by proteolytic cleavage. The ensuing nuclear
translocation of their N-termini (i.e., ATF6(N) and SREBP(N)) activates the
respective target genes involved in unfolded protein response and lipogenesis.
Here, we report that glucose deprivation activated ATF6 but suppressed the
SREBP2-regulated transcription. Overexpression of ATF6(N) had similar inhibitory 
effects on SREBP2-targeted genes. The blockade of ATF6 cleavage by BiP/grp78
reversed this inhibitory effect. GST pull-down and immunoprecipitation assays
revealed that ATF6(N) bound to SREBP2(N). Deletion analysis of the various
functional domains of ATF6 indicated that the interaction was through its
leucine-zipper domain. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed that ATF6(N)
formed a complex with the SRE-bound SREBP2(N). The attenuated transcriptional
activity of SREBP2 was due, in part, to the recruitment of HDAC1 to the
ATF6-SREBP2 complex. As a functional consequence, the lipogenic effect of
SREBP2(N) in liver cells was suppressed by ATF6(N). Our results provide a novel
mechanism by which ATF6 antagonizes SREBP2 to regulate the homeostasis of lipid
and glucose.

PMCID: PMC381012
PMID: 14765107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Jan 29;32(2):598-610. Print 2004.

Modification of de novo DNA methyltransferase 3a (Dnmt3a) by SUMO-1 modulates its
interaction with histone deacetylases (HDACs) and its capacity to repress
transcription.

Ling Y(1), Sankpal UT, Robertson AK, McNally JG, Karpova T, Robertson KD.

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetic Gene Regulation and Cancer Section, LRBGE/NCI/NIH, Building 41, 41 
Library Dr., Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The de novo DNA methyltransferase Dnmt3a is one of three mammalian DNA
methyltransferases that has been shown to play crucial roles in embryonic
development, genomic imprinting and transcriptional silencing. Despite its
importance, very little is known about how the enzymatic activity and
transcriptional repression functions of Dnmt3a are regulated. Here we show that
Dnmt3a interacts with multiple components of the sumoylation machinery, namely
the E2 sumo conjugating enzyme Ubc9 and the E3 sumo ligases PIAS1 and PIASxalpha,
all of which are involved in conjugating the small ubiquitin-like modifier
polypeptide, SUMO-1, to its target proteins. Dnmt3a is modified by SUMO-1 in vivo
and in vitro and the region of Dnmt3a responsible for interaction maps to the
N-terminal regulatory domain. Functionally, sumoylation of Dnmt3a disrupts its
ability to interact with histone deacetylases (HDAC1/2), but not with another
interaction partner, Dnmt3b. Conditions that enhance the sumoylation of Dnmt3a in
vivo abolish its capacity to repress transcription. These studies reveal a new
level of regulation governing Dnmt3a whereby a post-translational modification
can dramatically regulate its interaction with specific protein partners and
alter its ability to repress transcription.

PMCID: PMC373322
PMID: 14752048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Int J Cancer. 2004 Mar 20;109(2):207-13.

Acetylation of histones associated with the p21WAF1/CIP1 gene by butyrate is not 
sufficient for p21WAF1/CIP1 gene transcription in human colorectal adenocarcinoma
cells.

Kobayashi H(1), Tan EM, Fleming SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Science and Toxicology, University of California,
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

Butyric acid is well recognized as a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, and
changes in histone acetylation are thought to alter gene expression. The
mechanism by which sodium butyrate (NaB) induces p21WAF1/CIP1, a critical gene
involved in the antiproliferative effect of NaB, was studied at the chromatin
level. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay, acetylation of histone
H3 was observed at the proximal region of the promoter within 30 min of NaB
exposure and this extended to the distal region within 2 hr. By contrast, histone
H4 was acetylated both at the proximal and the distal regions of the promoter
within 30 min. NaB did not influence other histone modifications. NaB stimulated 
recruitment of the transcription factors ZBP89 and Sp1 as well as GCN5, but did
not influence recruitment of Sp3, HDAC1, p300, or CBP. As recruitment of HDAC1 to
the promoter appeared not to account for NaB-induced changes in histone
acetylation, we aimed to influence HDAC activity by altering its phosphorylation 
status. The kinase inhibitor, H7, suppressed p21WAF1/CIP1 mRNA in both the
absence and the presence of NaB without influencing the butyrate-induced
hyperacetylation of H3 and H4 associated with the p21WAF1/CIP1 promoter. These
results suggest that acetylation of histones at the p21WAF1/CIP1 promoter is not 
sufficient for NaB to exert antiproliferative effects via transcription of the
p21WAF1/CIP1 gene. Induction of p21WAF1/CIP1 transcription by the phosphatase
inhibitor, okadaic acid, in the absence of changes in association of acetylated
histones with the p21WAF1/CIP1 promoter provides further evidence of the
importance of phosphorylation to p21WAF1/CIP1 transcription.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14750171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Feb;24(4):1809-21.

Mutant MyoD lacking Cdc2 phosphorylation sites delays M-phase entry.

Tintignac LA(1), Sirri V, Leibovitch MP, Lécluse Y, Castedo M, Metivier D,
Kroemer G, Leibovitch SA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Oncologique, Institut Gustave Roussy, 94805
Villejuif, France.

The transcription factors MyoD and Myf-5 control myoblast identity and
differentiation. MyoD and Myf-5 manifest opposite cell cycle-specific expression 
patterns. Here, we provide evidence that MyoD plays a pivotal role at the G(2)/M 
transition by controlling the expression of p21(Waf1/Cip1) (p21), which is
believed to regulate cyclin B-Cdc2 kinase activity in G(2). In growing myoblasts,
MyoD reaccumulates during G(2) concomitantly with p21 before entry into mitosis; 
MyoD is phosphorylated on Ser5 and Ser200 by cyclin B-Cdc2, resulting in a
decrease of its stability and down-regulation of both MyoD and p21. Inducible
expression of a nonphosphorylable MyoD A5/A200 enhances the MyoD interaction with
the coactivator P/CAF, thereby stimulating the transcriptional activation of a
luciferase reporter gene placed under the control of the p21 promoter. MyoD
A5/A200 causes sustained p21 expression, which inhibits cyclin B-Cdc2 kinase
activity in G(2) and delays M-phase entry. This G(2) arrest is not observed in
p21(-/-) cells. These results show that in cycling cells MyoD functions as a
transcriptional activator of p21 and that MyoD phosphorylation is required for
G(2)/M transition.

PMCID: PMC344165
PMID: 14749395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Feb 3;101(5):1241-6. Epub 2004 Jan 20.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor activation of p21WAF1 involves changes in
promoter-associated proteins, including HDAC1.

Gui CY(1), Ngo L, Xu WS, Richon VM, Marks PA.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York
Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors (HDACi) cause cancer cell growth arrest
and/or apoptosis in vivo and in vitro. The HDACi suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid 
(SAHA) is in phase I/II clinical trials showing significant anticancer activity. 
Despite wide distribution of HDACs in chromatin, SAHA alters the expression of
few genes in transformed cells. p21(WAF1) is one of the most commonly induced.
SAHA does not alter the expression of p27(KIPI), an actively transcribed gene, or
globin, a silent gene, in ARP-1 cells. Here we studied SAHA-induced changes in
the p21(WAF1) promoter of ARP-1 cells to better understand the mechanism of HDACi
gene activation. Within 1 h, SAHA caused modifications in acetylation and
methylation of core histones and increased DNase I sensitivity and restriction
enzyme accessibility in the p21(WAF1) promoter. These changes did not occur in
the p27(KIPI) or epsilon-globin gene-related histones. The HDACi caused a marked 
decrease in HDAC1 and Myc and an increase in RNA polymerase II in proteins bound 
to the p21(WAF1) promoter. Thus, this study identifies effects of SAHA on
p21(WAF1)-associated proteins that explain, at least in part, the selective
effect of HDACi in altering gene expression.

PMCID: PMC337037
PMID: 14734806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2004 Feb;19(2):218-24.

Downregulation of gelsolin and retinoic acid receptor beta expression in gastric 
cancer tissues through histone deacetylase 1.

Kim JH(1), Choi YK, Kwon HJ, Yang HK, Choi JH, Kim DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathology, Seoul National University, Korea.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Overexpression of histone deacetylase (HDAC)1, which controls
the expression of genes related to cell cycle and apoptosis, has recently been
reported in gastric cancer (GC) tissues. In the present study, the pattern of
gelsolin and retinoic acid receptor (RAR)beta expression in GC tissues showing
HDAC1 overexpression was investigated.
METHODS: Expression profiles of HDAC1, gelsolin, and RARbeta were evaluated and
compared using reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction, immunoblotting,
and immunohistochemical analyses with 22 paired primary human GC tissues and
corresponding normal tissues.
RESULTS: Compared with normal gastric tissue, increased expression of HDAC1 mRNA 
and protein was detected in 17 (77.3%) of 22 GC tissues, while decreased
expressions of gelsolin mRNA and protein were shown in 15 (68.1%) samples.
Concomitantly, expressions of RARbeta mRNA and protein were decreased in 16
(72.7%) and 17 (77.3%), respectively. Among 17 GC tissues with increased HDAC1
expression, the expressions of gelsolin and RARbeta were simultaneously decreased
in 14 (82.4%) and 15 (88.2%) GC tissues, which indicates a strong inverse
correlation between HDAC1 and gelsolin/RARbeta expressions. Correlation between
HDAC1 and gelsolin/RARbeta was also confirmed by immunohistochemistry.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, the results of the present study reveal that
silencing of gelsolin and RARbeta occurs in GC tissues probably through HDAC1
overexpression and might play some role in gastric carcinogenesis.

PMID: 14731134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 9;279(15):15050-8. Epub 2004 Jan 13.

Recruitment of distinct chromatin-modifying complexes by tamoxifen-complexed
estrogen receptor at natural target gene promoters in vivo.

Liu XF(1), Bagchi MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA.

Tamoxifen, a breast cancer therapeutic, is a tissue-selective estrogen receptor
modulator (SERM), which acts as an antiestrogen in the mammary tissue and
displays estrogenic activity in other tissues such as bone and uterus. In order
to understand the mechanisms underlying the antiestrogenic effect of this
prototype SERM, we performed an analysis of the cofactors that interact with ER
complexed with 4-hydroxytamoxifen (OHT) at natural target genes in a human breast
tumor cell line MCF-7. Employing chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP), we
observed that treatment with OHT rapidly induces the binding of ERalpha to the
E-responsive promoter regions of pS2 and c-myc genes. Promoter-bound
OHT-complexed ERa coordinately recruited the components of a multiprotein complex
containing the corepressor NCoR, histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3), and a WD40-repeat
protein TBL1. Surprisingly, the OHT-complexed ERalpha also recruited a
chromatin-remodeling NuRD complex in which histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) is
associated with several polypeptides including metastasis-associated protein 1/2 
(MTA1/2), and SWI2/SNF2-related ATPase Mi2. Kinetic studies revealed that
following OHT addition the recruitment of these HDAC complexes to pS2 or the
c-myc promoter occurs in a sequential manner; the NCoR-HDAC3 complex is recruited
earlier than the NuRD complex. Serial ChIP experiments indicated that the
ER-NCoR-HDAC3 and ER-NuRD complexes are distinct, and they do not occupy the
target gene promoter simultaneously. We also established a close temporal link
between the appearance of the HDAC complexes at the E-responsive regions of pS2
and c-myc promoters, local hypoacetylation of specific lysine residues in
N-terminal tails of histones H3 and H4, and disappearance of RNA polymerase II
from the target gene loci. Collectively, our studies indicated that
transcriptional repression by tamoxifen-bound ER at E-regulated gene promoters
involves a dynamic interplay of multiple distinct chromatin-modifying/remodeling 
complexes.

PMID: 14722073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jan;24(2):765-73.

Negative regulation of histone deacetylase 8 activity by cyclic AMP-dependent
protein kinase A.

Lee H(1), Rezai-Zadeh N, Seto E.

Author information: 
(1)H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, 12902 Magnolia Drive,
Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are enzymes that catalyze the removal of acetyl
groups from lysine residues of histone and nonhistone proteins. Recent studies
suggest that they are key regulators of many cellular events, including cell
proliferation and cancer development. Human class I HDACs possess homology to the
yeast RPD3 protein and include HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3, and HDAC8. While HDAC1,
HDAC2, and HDAC3 have been characterized extensively, almost nothing is known
about HDAC8. Here we report that HDAC8 is phosphorylated by cyclic AMP-dependent 
protein kinase A (PKA) in vitro and in vivo. The PKA phosphoacceptor site of
HDAC8 is Ser(39), a nonconserved residue among class I HDACs. Mutation of Ser(39)
to Ala enhances the deacetylase activity of HDAC8. In contrast, mutation of
Ser(39) to Glu or induction of HDAC8 phosphorylation by forskolin, a potent
activator of adenyl cyclase, decreases HDAC8's enzymatic activity. Remarkably,
inhibition of HDAC8 activity by hyperphosphorylation leads to hyperacetylation of
histones H3 and H4, suggesting that PKA-mediated phosphorylation of HDAC8 plays a
central role in the overall acetylation status of histones.

PMCID: PMC343812
PMID: 14701748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Mol Biol Cell. 2004 Mar;15(3):963-72. Epub 2003 Dec 29.

Interaction with Smad4 is indispensable for suppression of BMP signaling by
c-Ski.

Takeda M(1), Mizuide M, Oka M, Watabe T, Inoue H, Suzuki H, Fujita T, Imamura T, 
Miyazono K, Miyazawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of 
Tokyo, Japan.

c-Ski is a transcriptional corepressor that interacts strongly with Smad2, Smad3,
and Smad4 but only weakly with Smad1 and Smad5. Through binding to Smad proteins,
c-Ski suppresses signaling of transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) as well 
as bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs). In the present study, we found that a
mutant of c-Ski, termed c-Ski (ARPG) inhibited TGF-beta/activin signaling but not
BMP signaling. Selectivity was confirmed in luciferase reporter assays and by
determination of cellular responses in mammalian cells (BMP-induced osteoblastic 
differentiation of C2C12 cells and TGF-beta-induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transdifferentiation of NMuMG cells) and Xenopus embryos. The ARPG mutant
recruited histone deacetylases 1 (HDAC1) to the Smad3-Smad4 complex but not to
the Smad1/5-Smad4 complex. c-Ski (ARPG) was unable to interact with Smad4, and
the selective loss of suppression of BMP signaling by c-Ski (ARPG) was attributed
to the lack of Smad4 binding. We also found that c-Ski interacted with Smad3 or
Smad4 without disrupting Smad3-Smad4 heteromer formation. c-Ski (ARPG) would be
useful for selectively suppressing TGF-beta/activin signaling.

PMCID: PMC363053
PMID: 14699069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2003 Dec;24(4):1038-50.

Rb binding protein Che-1 interacts with Tau in cerebellar granule neurons.
Modulation during neuronal apoptosis.

Barbato C(1), Corbi N, Canu N, Fanciulli M, Serafino A, Ciotti M, Libri V, Bruno 
T, Amadoro G, De Angelis R, Calissano P, Passananti C.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Neurobiologia e Medicina Molecolare, CNR, Viale Marx 43, 00137
Rome, Italy.

Che-1 is a recently identified human Rb binding protein that inhibits the Rb
growth-suppressing function and regulates cell proliferation. Che-1 contacts the 
Rb and competes with HDAC1 for Rb-binding site, removing HDAC1 from the Rb/E2F
cell cycle-regulated promoters. We have investigated the expression of Che-1 in
neuronal cells and we showed that Che-1 directly interacts with Tau. Tau is a
microtubule-associated protein involved in the assembly and stabilization of
neuronal microtubules network that plays a crucial role modulating neuronal
morphogenesis, axonal shape, and transport. In rat cerebellar granule neurons
(CGNs) Che-1 partially colocalizes with Tau in the cytoplasm. Che-1 binds the
amino-terminal region of Tau protein, which is not involved in microtubule
interactions. Tau and Che-1 endogenous proteins coimmunoprecipitate from CGNs
cellular lysates. In addition, Che-1/Tau interaction was demonstrated both in
overexpressing COS-7 cells and CGNs by FRET analysis. Finally, we observed that
Tau/Che-1 interaction is modulated during neuronal apoptosis.

PMID: 14697667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Jan 6;101(1):99-104. Epub 2003 Dec 22.

Activation of Smad transcriptional activity by protein inhibitor of activated
STAT3 (PIAS3).

Long J(1), Wang G, Matsuura I, He D, Liu F.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, Department of Chemical
Biology, Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy, Rutgers, The State University of New
Jersey, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

Smad proteins play pivotal roles in mediating the transforming growth factor beta
(TGF-beta) transcriptional responses. We show in this report that PIAS3, a member
of the protein inhibitor of activated STAT (PIAS) family, activates TGF-beta/Smad
transcriptional responses. PIAS3 interacts with Smad proteins, most strongly with
Smad3. PIAS3 and Smad3 interact with each other at the endogenous protein level
in mammalian cells and also in vitro, and the association occurs through the
C-terminal domain of Smad3. We further show that PIAS3 can interact with the
general coactivators p300/CBP, the first evidence that a PIAS protein can
associate with p300/CBP. In contrast, PIASy, which inhibits Smad transcriptional 
activity and other transcriptional responses, is unable to interact with
p300/CBP. The RING domain of PIAS3 is essential for interaction with p300/CBP,
and a RING domain mutant PIAS3, which cannot bind p300/CBP, no longer activates
TGF-beta/Smad-dependent transcription. Furthermore, we show that PIAS3, Smad3,
and p300 can form a ternary complex, which is markedly increased by TGF-beta
treatment. Taken together, our studies indicate that on TGF-beta treatment, PIAS3
can form a complex with Smads and p300/CBP and activate Smad transcriptional
activity.

PMCID: PMC314145
PMID: 14691252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jan;24(1):306-19.

Snail mediates E-cadherin repression by the recruitment of the Sin3A/histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1)/HDAC2 complex.

Peinado H(1), Ballestar E, Esteller M, Cano A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquimica, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas "Alberto
Sols," Madrid, Spain.

The transcription factor Snail has been described as a direct repressor of
E-cadherin expression during development and carcinogenesis; however, the
specific mechanisms involved in this process remain largely unknown. Here we show
that mammalian Snail requires histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity to repress
E-cadherin promoter and that treatment with trichostatin A (TSA) is sufficient to
block the repressor effect of Snail. Moreover, overexpression of Snail is
correlated with deacetylation of histones H3 and H4 at the E-cadherin promoter,
and TSA treatment in Snail-expressing cells reverses the acetylation status of
histones. Additionally, we demonstrate that Snail interacts in vivo with the
E-cadherin promoter and recruits HDAC activity. Most importantly, we demonstrate 
an interaction between Snail, histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and HDAC2, and the
corepressor mSin3A. This interaction is dependent on the SNAG domain of Snail,
indicating that the Snail transcription factor mediates the repression by
recruitment of chromatin-modifying activities, forming a multimolecular complex
to repress E-cadherin expression. Our results establish a direct causal
relationship between Snail-dependent repression of E-cadherin and the
modification of chromatin at its promoter.

PMCID: PMC303344
PMID: 14673164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. J Biol Chem. 2004 Feb 27;279(9):7685-91. Epub 2003 Dec 10.

Deactylase inhibitors disrupt cellular complexes containing protein phosphatases 
and deacetylases.

Brush MH(1), Guardiola A, Connor JH, Yao TP, Shenolikar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

Affinity isolation of protein serine/threonine phosphatases on the immobilized
phosphatase inhibitor microcystin-LR identified histone deacetylase 1(HDAC1),
HDAC6, and HDAC10 as novel components of cellular phosphatase complexes. Other
HDACs, specifically HDAC2, -3, -4, and -5, were excluded from such complexes. In 
vitro biochemical studies showed that recombinant HDAC6, but not HDAC4, bound
directly to the protein phosphatase (PP)1 catalytic subunit. No association was
observed between HDAC6 and PP2A, another major protein phosphatase. PP1 binding
was mapped to the second catalytic domain and adjacent C-terminal sequences in
HDAC6, and treatment of cells with trichostatin A (TSA) disrupted endogenous
HDAC6.PP1 complexes. Consistent with the inhibition of tubulin deactylase
activity of HDAC6, TSA enhanced cellular tubulin acetylation, and acetylated
tubulin was present in the PP1 complexes from TSA-treated cells. Trapoxin B, a
weak HDAC6 inhibitor, and calyculin A, a cell-permeable phosphatase inhibitor,
had no effect on the stability of the HDAC6.PP1 complexes or on tubulin
acetylation. Mutations that inactivated HDAC6 prevented its incorporation into
cellular PP1 complexes and suggested that when bound together both enzymes were
active. Interestingly, TSA disrupted all the cellular HDAC.phosphatase complexes 
analyzed. This study provided new insight into the mechanism by which HDAC
inhibitors elicited coordinate changes in cellular protein phosphorylation and
acetylation and suggested that changes in these protein modifications at multiple
subcellular sites may contribute to the known ability of HDAC inhibitors to
suppress cell growth and transformation.

PMID: 14670976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Gene Expr Patterns. 2003 Dec;3(6):697-702.

Expression and localization of components of the histone deacetylases
multiprotein repressory complexes in the mouse preimplantation embryo.

Kantor B(1), Makedonski K, Shemer R, Razin A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry and Human Genetics, The Hebrew
University-Hadassah Medical School, 91120, Jerusalem, Israel.

DNA methylation had been implicated in the assembly of multiprotein repressory
complexes that affect chromatin architecture thereby rendering genes inactive.
Proteins containing methyl binding domains (MBDs) are major components of these
complexes. MBD3 is a component of the HDAC associated chromatin remodeling
complex Mi2/NuRD. The addition of MBD2 to the Mi2/NuRD complex creates MeCP1, a
complex that is known to inactivate methylated promoters. The undermethylated
state of the mouse preimplantation embryo prompted us to investigate the known
repressory complexes at this developmental stage. We found individual components 
of Mi2/NuRD: MBD3, Mi2, HDAC1 and HDAC2 to be expressed from a very early stage
of embryo development and to localize in close proximity with each other and with
constitutive heterochromatin by the blastula stage. Expression of MBD2, a
component of MeCP1, starts in the blastula stage. Then it is also found to be in 
proximity with heterochromatin (based on DAPI staining) and with MBD3, Mi2 and
HDAC1. In contrast, expression of MeCP2, an MBD containing component of a third
repressory complex (MeCP2/Sin3A), is not seen in the preimplantation embryo. Our 
results suggest that both Mi2/NuRD and MeCP1 complexes are already present at the
very early stages of embryo development, while a MeCP2 complex is added to the
arsenal of repressory complexes post-implantation at a stage when DNA methylation
takes place.

PMID: 14643676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Dec 9;100(25):14742-7. Epub 2003 Nov 25.

Interferon-stimulated transcription and innate antiviral immunity require
deacetylase activity and histone deacetylase 1.

Nusinzon I(1), Horvath CM.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Center, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, One Gustave L. Levy
Place, Box 1630, New York, NY 10029, USA.

The use of histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors has revealed an essential role
for deacetylation in transcription of IFN-responsive genes. The HDAC1 protein
associates with both signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 1
and STAT2, and IFN-alpha stimulation induces deacetylation of histone H4.
Inhibition of HDAC1 by small interfering RNA (siRNA) decreases IFN-alpha
responsiveness whereas expression of HDAC1 augments the IFN-alpha response,
demonstrating that HDAC1 modulates IFN-alpha-induced transcription. Importantly, 
the innate antiviral response is inhibited in the absence of deacetylase
activity. The requirement for deacetylase is shared by IFN-gamma transcription
response and may represent a general requirement for STAT-dependent gene
expression.

PMCID: PMC299790
PMID: 14645718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Blood. 2004 Mar 15;103(6):2135-42. Epub 2003 Nov 20.

Role of p300 and PCAF in regulating cyclooxygenase-2 promoter activation by
inflammatory mediators.

Deng WG(1), Zhu Y, Wu KK.

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Biology Research Center, Institute of Molecular Medicine and Division
of Hematology, University of Texas Health Science Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Coactivators p300 and CREB (cyclic adenosine monophosphate [cAMP]-response
element binding protein)-binding protein (CBP) serve as an integrator for gene
transcription. Their relative involvement in regulating cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) 
promoter activity had not been characterized. Using fibroblast and macrophage
COX-2 transcription as a model, we determined p300 and CBP levels in nuclear
extracts and their binding to a COX-2 promoter probe. CBP level was barely
detectable and there was little CBP binding. In contrast, p300 was detectable in 
nucleus and its binding to a COX-2 promoter probe was enhanced by phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA), interleukin-1 beta(IL-1 beta), or
lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Binding of p300/CBP-associated factor (PCAF) was also
up-regulated. COX-2 proteins and promoter activities induced by these agonists
were augmented by p300 overexpression. Early region 1A (E1A), but not its
deletion mutant, abrogated COX-2 expression induced by inflammatory mediators and
with or without p300 overexpression. Molecular analysis of p300 revealed the
requirement of multiple domains, including histone acetyltransferase (HAT) for
COX-2 transactivation. Furthermore, roscovitine, an indirect inhibitor of p300
HAT, and histone deacetylase-1 transfection completely abolished COX-2 promoter
activity. We conclude that p300 is the predominant coactivator that is essential 
for COX-2 transcriptional activation by proinflammatory mediators.

PMID: 14630807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. J Biol Chem. 2004 Feb 6;279(6):4110-9. Epub 2003 Nov 18.

Chromium inhibits transcription from polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon-inducible
promoters by blocking the release of histone deacetylase and preventing the
binding of p300 to chromatin.

Wei YD(1), Tepperman K, Huang MY, Sartor MA, Puga A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Environmental Genetics and Department of Environmental Health,
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio 45220-0056, USA.

Co-contamination with complex mixtures of carcinogenic metals, such as chromium, 
and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons is a common environmental problem with
multiple biological consequences. Chromium exposure alters inducible gene
expression, forms chromium-DNA adducts and chromium-DNA cross-links, and disrupts
transcriptional activator-co-activator complexes. We have shown previously that
exposure of mouse hepatoma Hepa-1 cells to chromate inhibits the induction of the
Cyp1a1 and Nqo1 genes by dioxin. Here we have tested the hypothesis that chromium
blocks gene expression by interfering with the assembly of productive
transcriptional complexes at the promoter of inducible genes. To this end, we
have studied the effects of chromium on the expression of genes induced by
benzo[a]pyrene (B[a]P), another aryl hydrocarbon receptor agonist, and
characterized the disruption of Cyp1a1 transcriptional induction by chromium.
Gene expression profiling by using high density microarray analysis revealed that
the inhibitory effect of chromium on B[a]P-dependent gene induction was
generalized, affecting the induction of over 50 different genes involved in a
variety of signaling transduction pathways. The inhibitory effect of chromium on 
Cyp1a1 transcription was found to depend on the presence of promoter-proximal
sequences and not on the cis-acting enhancer sequences that bind the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor-aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator complex. By
using transient reporter assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses, we
found that chromium prevented the B[a]P-dependent release of HDAC-1 from Cyp1a1
chromatin and blocked p300 recruitment. These results provide a mechanistic
explanation for the observation that chromium inhibits inducible but not
constitutive gene expression.

PMID: 14625279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Dec;23(23):8704-17.

Smad-dependent recruitment of a histone deacetylase/Sin3A complex modulates the
bone morphogenetic protein-dependent transcriptional repressor activity of
Nkx3.2.

Kim DW(1), Lassar AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

We have previously shown that Nkx3.2, a transcriptional repressor that is
expressed in the sclerotome and developing cartilage, can activate the
chondrocyte differentiation program in somitic mesoderm in a bone morphogenetic
protein (BMP)-dependent manner. In this work, we elucidate how BMP signaling
modulates the transcriptional repressor activity of Nkx3.2. We have found that
Nkx3.2 forms a complex, in vivo, with histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and Smad1 and
-4 in a BMP-dependent manner. The homeodomain and NK domain of Nkx3.2 support the
interaction of this transcription factor with HDAC1 and Smad1, respectively, and 
both of these domains are required for the transcriptional repressor activity of 
Nkx3.2. Furthermore, the recruitment of an HDAC/Sin3A complex to Nkx3.2 requires 
that Nkx3.2 interact with Smad1 and -4. Indeed, Nkx3.2 both fails to associate
with the HDAC/Sin3A complex and represses target gene transcription in a cell
line lacking Smad4, but it performs these functions if exogenous Smad4 is added
to these cells. While prior work has indicated that BMP-dependent Smads can
support transcriptional activation, our findings indicate that BMP-dependent
Smads can also potentiate transcriptional repression, depending upon the identity
of the Smad-interacting transcription factor.

PMCID: PMC262671
PMID: 14612411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. J Virol. 2003 Dec;77(23):12671-8.

Herpes simplex virus 1 gene expression is accelerated by inhibitors of histone
deacetylases in rabbit skin cells infected with a mutant carrying a cDNA copy of 
the infected-cell protein no. 0.

Poon AP(1), Liang Y, Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)The Marjorie B. Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

An earlier report showed that the expression of viral genes by a herpes simplex
virus 1 mutant [HSV-1(vCPc0)] in which the wild-type, spliced gene encoding
infected-cell protein no. 0 (ICP0) was replaced by a cDNA copy is dependent on
both the cell type and multiplicity of infection. At low multiplicities of
infection, viral gene expression in rabbit skin cells was delayed by many hours, 
although ultimately virus yield was comparable to that of the wild-type virus.
This defect was rescued by replacement of the cDNA copy with the wild-type gene. 
To test the hypothesis that the delay reflected a dysfunction of ICP0 in altering
the structure of host protein-viral DNA complexes, we examined the state of
histone deacetylases (HDACs) (HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3). We report the following. 
(i) HDAC1 and HDAC2, but not HDAC3, were modified in infected cells. The
modification was mediated by the viral protein kinase U(S)3 and occurred between 
3 and 6 h after infection with wild-type virus but was delayed in rabbit skin
cells infected with HSV-1(vCPc0) mutant, concordant with a delay in the
expression of viral genes. (ii) Pretreatment of rabbit skin cells with inhibitors
of HDAC activity (e.g., sodium butyrate, Helminthosporium carbonum toxin, or
trichostatin A) accelerated the expression of HSV-1(vCPc0) but not that of
wild-type virus. We conclude the following. (i) In the interval in which
HSV-1(vCPc0) DNA is silent, its DNA is in chromatin-like structures amenable to
modification by inhibitors of histone deacetylases. (ii) Expression of wild-type 
virus genes in these cells precluded the formation of DNA-protein structures that
would be affected by either the HDACs or their inhibitors. (iii) Since the defect
in HSV-1(vCPc0) maps to ICP0, the results suggest that this protein initiates the
process of divestiture of viral DNA from tight chromatin structures but could be 
replaced by other viral proteins in cells infected with a large number of
virions.

PMCID: PMC262575
PMID: 14610189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jan 9;279(2):1562-9. Epub 2003 Oct 26.

Breast cancer metastasis suppressor 1 (BRMS1) forms complexes with
retinoblastoma-binding protein 1 (RBP1) and the mSin3 histone deacetylase complex
and represses transcription.

Meehan WJ(1), Samant RS, Hopper JE, Carrozza MJ, Shevde LA, Workman JL, Eckert
KA, Verderame MF, Welch DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Jake Gittlen Cancer Research Institute, The
Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania
17033-0850, USA.

Breast cancer metastasis suppressor 1 (BRMS1) suppresses metastasis of multiple
human and murine cancer cells without inhibiting tumorigenicity. By yeast
two-hybrid and co-immunoprecipitation, BRMS1 interacts with retinoblastoma
binding protein 1 and at least seven members of the mSin3 histone deacetylase
(HDAC) complex in human breast and melanoma cell lines. BRMS1
co-immunoprecipitates enzymatically active HDAC proteins and represses
transcription when recruited to a Gal4 promoter in vivo. BRMS1 exists in large
mSin3 complex(es) of approximately 1.4-1.9 MDa, but also forms smaller complexes 
with HDAC1. Deletion analyses show that the carboxyl-terminal 42 amino acids of
BRMS1 are not critical for interaction with much of the mSin3 complex and that
BRMS1 appears to have more than one binding point to the complex. These results
further show that BRMS1 may participate in transcriptional regulation via
interaction with the mSin3.HDAC complex and suggest a novel mechanism by which
BRMS1 might suppress cancer metastasis.

PMID: 14581478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Oncogene. 2003 Oct 23;22(48):7661-6.

Transient expression of E1A and Ras oncogenes causes downregulation of c-fos gene
transcription in nontransformed REF52 cells.

Usenko T(1), Kukushkin A, Pospelova T, Pospelov V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cytology, Russian Academy of Sciences, 194064 St-Petersburg,
Russia.

Stable transformation of rat embryo fibroblast (REF) cells with E1A and cHa-ras
oncogenes leads to downmodulation of c-fos gene transcription. This repression is
provided in part by the association of Elk-1 transcription factor with histone
deacetylases mediated through effects of Ras on MAP-kinase cascades. Here, we
focus on the primary effects of E1A and Ras displayed in transient transfection
assay on the transactivating capability of Elk-1, which is a key transcription
factor of c-fos gene regulation. Our data show that E1A is able to suppress
serum- and Ras-induced stimulation of Gal-luc reporter activity by a full-length 
Gal-Elk1-428 fusion protein as well as the expression of c-fos promoter-driven
luciferase constructs (fos-luc). The repression can be relieved by trichostatin
A, a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, implying the involvement of HDACs and 
an inactive chromatin structure formed due to underacetylation of nucleosomal
histones. Thus, upon transient transfection of E1A and Ras oncogenes in REF52
cells or their stable expression in E1A+cHa-ras cells, E1A contributes to the
formation of inactive chromatin structure through association with p300/CBP
histone acetyltransferases at c-fos promoters, whereas Ras mediates its effect
through constitutive activation of the MAP/ERK kinase cascade, thereby promoting 
the recruitment of HDAC1 to the Elk-1 transcription factor. As a result,
downregulation of c-fos gene transcription revealed in established E1A+Ras
transformants is unlikely to be a consequence of cell transformation itself, but 
follows from primary effects of E1A and Ras on chromatin remodeling factors.

PMID: 14576829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Exp Cell Res. 2003 Nov 1;290(2):427-36.

Elevated levels of polyamines alter chromatin in murine skin and tumors without
global changes in nucleosome acetylation.

Hobbs CA(1), Paul BA, Gilmour SK.

Author information: 
(1)Lankenau Institute for Medical Research, 100 Lancaster Avenue, Wynnewood, PA
19096, USA.

Polyamines affect nucleosome oligomerization and DNA conformation in vitro, yet
little information exists regarding the influence of naturally synthesized
polyamines on mammalian chromatin. Capitalizing on the relative inefficiency of a
moderate ionic strength extraction buffer to dissociate histones, we obtained
evidence of altered chromatin in transgenic mice that overexpress ornithine
decarboxylase (ODC), which catalyzes polyamine synthesis. Dissociation of
histones from chromatin in ODC transgenic mouse skin, as well as in tumors that
develop spontaneously in ODC/Ras bigenic mice, is dramatically reduced relative
to normal littermate skin. This could reflect tighter tethering of nucleosomes to
DNA or a more compacted chromatin structure due to elevated intracellular
concentrations of polyamines since this effect is reversible upon treatment with 
alpha-difluoromethylornithine (DFMO), a specific inhibitor of ODC enzymatic
activity. Impeded release of nonhistone chromatin proteins HP-1beta and
nucleophosmin, but not Lamin B, HDAC-1, HMGB, HMGN2, or HMGA1, suggests that
polyamines exert selective effects on specific chromatin protein complexes.
Moreover, overall acetylation, as well as specific methylation, of nucleosomes in
ODC mice is unaffected, implying that access by histone modifying enzymes is not 
generally restricted. The abnormal chromatin environment fostered by elevated
levels of polyamines may be a necessary prerequisite for epithelial tumor growth 
and maintenance.

PMID: 14568000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jan 2;279(1):556-61. Epub 2003 Oct 15.

Distinct RE-1 silencing transcription factor-containing complexes interact with
different target genes.

Belyaev ND(1), Wood IC, Bruce AW, Street M, Trinh JB, Buckley NJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2
9JT, UK.

Establishment of neuronal identity requires co-ordinated expression of specific
batteries of genes. These programs of gene expression are executed by activation 
of neuron-specific genes in neuronal cells and their repression in non-neuronal
cells. Such co-ordinate regulation requires that individual activators and
repressors regulate transcription from specific subsets of their potential target
genes, yet we know little of the mechanisms that underlie this selective process.
The RE-1 silencing transcription factor (REST) is a repressor that is proposed to
silence transcription of numerous neuron-specific genes in non-neuronal cells via
recruitment of two independent histone deacetylase (HDAC)-containing co-repressor
complexes. However, in vivo, REST appears to be an obligate silencer for only a
minority of RE-1-bearing genes. Here we examine the interaction of REST, Co-REST,
Sin3A, HDAC1, and HDAC2 with two archetypical endogenous target genes, the M4
muscarinic receptor and the sodium type II channel (NaV1.2) genes. We find that
these genes are present in distinct chromosomal domains. The NaV1.2 gene is
actively transcribed but repressed by REST independently of histone deacetylation
or DNA methylation and does not co-localize with epigenetic markers of silence,
including dimethylation of H3K9 and HP1. In contrast, the M4 gene is maintained
in a silent state independently of REST and co-localizes with dimethylated H3K9
and HP1alpha and HP1gamma, characteristic of silenced or senescent euchromatic
DNA. This contrasts with the coordinate REST-dependent regulation of this locus
reported previously. Taken together, we infer that distinct repressor complexes
and mechanisms are operative at particular loci even in cell lines derived from a
common embryological origin.

PMID: 14561745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. J Virol. 2003 Nov;77(21):11425-35.

Chromatin remodeling of the Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus ORF50
promoter correlates with reactivation from latency.

Lu F(1), Zhou J, Wiedmer A, Madden K, Yuan Y, Lieberman PM.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute. Department of Microbiology, School of Dental Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The switch from latent to lytic infection of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus is initiated by the immediate early transcriptional activator protein
Rta/open reading frame 50 (ORF50). We examined the transcriptional regulation of 
the ORF50 core promoter in response to lytic cycle stimulation. We show that the 
ORF50 promoter is highly responsive to sodium butyrate (NaB) and trichostatin A
(TSA), two chemicals known to inhibit histone deacetylases. The NaB and TSA
responsive element was mapped to a 70-bp minimal promoter containing an essential
GC box that binds Sp1/Sp3 in vitro and in vivo. Micrococcal nuclease mapping
studies revealed that a nucleosome is positioned over the transcriptional
initiation and the Sp1/3 binding sites. Stimulation with NaB or TSA increased
histone acetylation and restriction enzyme accessibility of the ORF50 promoter
transcription initiation site. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay was used to
demonstrate that the ORF50 promoter is associated with several different histone 
deacetylase proteins (including HDAC1, 5, and 7) in latently infected cells. NaB 
treatment led to the rapid association of Ini1/Snf5, a component of the Swi/Snf
family of chromatin remodeling proteins, with the ORF50 promoter. Ectopic
expression of the CREB-binding protein (CBP) histone acetyltransferase (HAT)
stimulated plasmid-based ORF50 transcription in a HAT-dependent manner,
suggesting that CBP recruitment to the ORF50 promoter can be an initiating event 
for transcription and viral reactivation. Together, these results suggest that
remodeling of a stably positioned nucleosome at the transcriptional initiation
site of ORF50 is a regulatory step in the transition from latent to lytic
infection.

PMCID: PMC229253
PMID: 14557628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Dev Biol. 2003 Oct 15;262(2):350-60.

Polyhomeotic stably associates with molecular chaperones Hsc4 and Droj2 in
Drosophila Kc1 cells.

Wang YJ(1), Brock HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of British Columbia, 6270 University
Boulevard, V6T 1Z4, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins silence target loci in Drosophila. Although the
mechanism of PcG-mediated silencing remains unknown, there is considerable
evidence that PcG proteins act via multiple complexes. We have epitope-tagged
Polyhomeotic Proximal, PHP, the major isoform of the proximal product of the
polyhomeotic locus, at both termini (F-PHP-HA) and generated a stable Kc1 cell
line in order to isolate F-PHP-HA-associated proteins. Using either column
chromatography followed by immunoaffinity precipitation or a double
immunoaffinity precipitation procedure, we observed multiple proteins that stably
associate with F-PHP-HA. Sequencing the five major bands identified PHP-170 and
PHP-140 isoforms, Polycomb, Heat shock cognate 4 (Hsc4), and a novel Drosophila J
class chaperone we term Droj2. Mutations in both chaperone genes enhance homeotic
transformations in PcG genes, suggesting that they have a role in silencing. We
show by Western blotting that minor components of F-PHP-HA-associated proteins
include TBP, TAF(II)42, TAF(II)85, and p55. However, unlike in PRC1, Psc,
TAF(II)62, Modulo, dMI-2, or Rpd3/HDAC1 do not associate with F-PHP-HA. We
discuss the role of chaperones and F-PHP-HA-associated proteins in PcG-mediated
silencing and the evidence for different complexes containing Polyhomeotic in
vivo.

PMID: 14550797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Cancer Res. 2003 Sep 15;63(18):5785-92.

ING1 represses transcription by direct DNA binding and through effects on p53.

Kataoka H(1), Bonnefin P, Vieyra D, Feng X, Hara Y, Miura Y, Joh T, Nakabayashi
H, Vaziri H, Harris CC, Riabowol K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

The ING family of proteins is involved in the regulation of diverse processes
ranging from cell cycle and cellular senescence to apoptosis. These effects are
most likely through activation of acetylation-dependent pathways that ultimately 
alter gene expression. Despite reports linking ING to p53 activation, the
molecular basis of how ING activates p53 function has not been elucidated. In
this study, we found that a subset of ING family members strongly repressed human
alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) promoter activity but stimulated the p21(WAF1) promoter
in parallel experiments in the same cell type, similar to the effects of p53. The
p47(ING1a) isoform also repressed AFP promoter activity, but in contrast to other
ING isoforms, it repressed the p21(WAF1) promoter. p47(ING3) up-regulated
p21(WAF1) promoter activity, but it did not have any effect on the AFP promoter. 
ING1b and ING2 also repressed the AFP promoter in Hep3B p53-null cell lines, and 
p53 coexpression enhanced this transcriptional repression. Suppression of AFP
gene transcription by ING was strongly dependent on AT-motifs that bind to the
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) transcription factor. Indeed, electrophoretic 
mobility shift assays confirmed that HNF1 binds to AT-motifs, but we found,
surprisingly, that the ING1 complexes binding to these AT-motifs were devoid of
HNF1 protein. Both ING1 and p53 were able to suppress AFP transcription and cause
p21 induction; hSIR2, a negative regulator of the p53 protein, showed the
opposite effects on the AFP promoter and, like HDAC1, repressed p21 promoter
activity. In addition, we found that p33(ING1b) physically interacts with hSIR2, 
reverses its ability to induce the AFP promoter, and induces acetylation of p53
residues at Lys(373) and/or Lys(382). These findings provide novel evidence that 
p33(ING1b) represses AFP transcription by at least two mechanisms, one of which
includes p53. The first is by binding to the AT-motif and excluding HNF1 binding 
while possibly targeting HAT activity to promoter regions, and the second is by
increasing the levels of active, acetylated p53 via binding and inhibiting the
ability of hSIR2 to deacetylate p53 protein.

PMID: 14522900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Oct 17;310(2):529-36.

Role of class I and class II histone deacetylases in carcinoma cells using siRNA.

Glaser KB(1), Li J, Staver MJ, Wei RQ, Albert DH, Davidsen SK.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research, R47J-AP9, Global Pharmaceutical Research and Development,
Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL 60064-6121, USA. keith.glaser@abbott.com

The role of the individual histone deacetylases (HDACs) in the regulation of
cancer cell proliferation was investigated using siRNA-mediated protein
knockdown. The siRNA for HDAC3 and HDAC1 demonstrated significant morphological
changes in HeLa S3 consistent with those observed with HDAC inhibitors. SiRNA for
HDAC 4 or 7 produced no morphological changes in HeLa S3 cells. HDAC1 and 3 siRNA
produced a concentration-dependent inhibition of HeLa cell proliferation;
whereas, HDAC4 and 7 siRNA showed no effect. HDAC3 siRNA caused histone
hyperacetylation and increased the percent of apoptotic cells. These results
demonstrate that the Class I HDACs such as HDACs 1 and 3 are important in the
regulation of proliferation and survival in cancer cells. These results and the
positive preclinical results with non-specific inhibitors of the HDAC enzymes
provide further support for the development of Class I selective HDAC inhibitors 
as cancer therapeutics.

PMID: 14521942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Dec 1;12(23):3109-21. Epub 2003 Sep 30.

Analysis of mammalian proteins involved in chromatin modification reveals new
metaphase centromeric proteins and distinct chromosomal distribution patterns.

Craig JM(1), Earle E, Canham P, Wong LH, Anderson M, Choo KH.

Author information: 
(1)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne,
Victoria, Australia.

We have examined the metaphase chromosomal localization of 15 proteins that have 
previously been described as involved in mammalian chromatin modification and/or 
transcriptional modulation. Immunofluorescence data indicate that all the
proteins localize to human and mouse centromeres, a neocentromere, and the active
centromere of a dicentric chromosome, with six of these proteins (Sin3A, PCAF,
MYST, MBD2, ORC2, P300/CBP) being demonstrated at mammalian centromeres for the
first time. Most of these proteins fall into two distinct chromosomal
distribution patterns: (a) kinetochore-associated proteins (Sin3A, PCAF, MYST and
BAF180), which colocalize with metaphase kinetochores, but not any of the
pericentric and other major heterochromatic regions; and (b)
heterochromatin-associated proteins (MeCP2, MBD1, MBD2, ATRX, HP1alpha, HDAC1,
HDAC2, DNMT1 and DNMT3b), which colocalize with centromeric/pericentric
heterochromatin and all other major heterochromatic sites. A heterogeneous third 
group (c) consists of the origin recognition complex subunit ORC2 and the histone
acetyltransferase P300/CBP, which associate generally with kinetochores in humans
and centromeric/pericentric heterochromatin in mouse, with some minor differences
in localization. These observations indicate an extensive sharing of protein
components involved in chromatin modification at gene loci, centromeres and
various chromosomal heterochromatic landmarks. The definition of distinct
patterns of chromosomal distribution for these proteins provides a useful basis
for the further investigation of the broad-ranging roles of these proteins.

PMID: 14519686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Int J Cancer. 2003 Nov 10;107(3):353-8.

Overexpression of histone deacetylase HDAC1 modulates breast cancer progression
by negative regulation of estrogen receptor alpha.

Kawai H(1), Li H, Avraham S, Jiang S, Avraham HK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The interaction between 17beta-estradiol and estrogen receptor alpha (ER-alpha)
plays an important role in breast carcinogenesis and breast cancer treatment.
ER-alpha is a critical growth regulatory gene in breast cancer and its expression
level is tightly linked to the prognosis and treatment outcomes of breast cancer 
patients. Loss of ER-alpha expression in breast epithelial cells is critical for 
breast cancer progression. The underlying molecular mechanisms for this loss,
however, are poorly defined. Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are implicated in the
alteration of chromatin assembly and tumorigenesis. We show that histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) interacts with ER-alpha in vitro and in vivo and suppresses
ER-alpha transcription activity. The interaction of HDAC1 with ER-alpha was
mediated by the AF-2 and DBD domains of ER-alpha. We observed an endogenous
interaction of HDAC1 with ER-alpha in breast cancer cells, which was decreased in
the presence of estrogen. Interestingly, overexpression of HDAC1 in stable
transfected MCF-7 clones induced loss of ER-alpha and significantly increased
cell proliferation and colony formation, as compared to the control MCF-7 cells, 
whereas treatment of stable MCF-7 clones with the HDAC specific inhibitor
trichostatin A (TSA) induced re-expression of ER-alpha mRNA and protein. Our
findings strongly suggest that HDAC1 affects breast cancer progression by
promoting cellular proliferation in association with a reduction in both ER-alpha
protein expression and transcriptional activity. Thus, HDAC1 may be a potential
target for therapeutic intervention in the treatment of a subset of ER-negative
breast cancers.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14506733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Biol Chem. 2003 Dec 5;278(49):49618-24. Epub 2003 Sep 23.

MRGX is a novel transcriptional regulator that exhibits activation or repression 
of the B-myb promoter in a cell type-dependent manner.

Tominaga K(1), Leung JK, Rookard P, Echigo J, Smith JR, Pereira-Smith OM.

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas Health Science Center, Sam and Ann Barshop Center for
Longevity and Aging Studies, San Antonio, Texas 78245-3207, USA.

MRGX is a novel transcription factor that is a member of the mortality factor 4
(MORF4)-related gene family. MRG15, a closely related family member, is in a
complex with the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein Rb and activates the
B-myb promoter, which is tightly controlled by Rb/E2F through the E2F binding
site. In this study we investigated the effect of MRGX on the B-myb promoter.
Interestingly, MRGX repressed the B-myb promoter in EJ cells (human bladder
carcinoma cells), which have a functional Rb, but activated B-myb in HeLa cells
(human cervical carcinoma cells), which express a lower amount of Rb. This
repression and activation was dependent on the helix-loop-helix and leucine
zipper regions of the MRGX protein but not the N-terminal region. MRGX interacts 
with Rb through the helix-loop-helix and leucine zipper regions. Using a
treatment of trichostatin A, which is a potent inhibitor of histone deacetylase
(HDAC), we determined that the repression of the B-myb promoter by MRGX in EJ
cells was dependent on HDAC activity. We confirmed the association of MRGX with
HDAC1 by immunoprecipitation/Western analysis and determined that MRGX complexes 
had HDAC activity. The data indicate that MRGX can repress or activate the B-myb 
promoter depending on the cell type studied, suggesting that there may be
tissue-specific functions of this protein.

PMID: 14506250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Oncogene. 2003 Sep 18;22(40):6204-13.

Histone deacetylase 1 represses the small GTPase RhoB expression in human
nonsmall lung carcinoma cell line.

Wang S(1), Yan-Neale Y, Fischer D, Zeremski M, Cai R, Zhu J, Asselbergs F,
Hampton G, Cohen D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Functional Genomics, Novartis Pharmaceutical Corporation, East
Hanover, Summit, NJ 07901, USA.

The dynamic balance between histone acetylation and deacetylation plays a
significant role in the regulation of gene transcription. Much of our current
understanding of this transcriptional control comes from the use of HDAC
inhibitors such as trapoxin A (TPX), which leads to hyperacetylated histone,
alters local chromatin architecture and transcription and results in tumor cell
death. In this study, we treated tumor cells with TPX and HDAC1 antisense
oligonucleotides, and analysed the transcriptional consequences of HDAC
inhibition. Among other genes, the small GTPase RhoB was found to be
significantly upregulated by TPX and repressed by HDAC1. The induction of RhoB by
HDAC inhibition was mediated by an inverted CCAAT box in the RhoB promoter.
Interestingly, measurement of RhoB transcription in approximately 130
tumor-derived cell lines revealed low expression in almost all of these samples, 
in contrast to RhoA and RhoC. Accumulating evidence indicates that the small
GTPase Rho proteins are involved in a variety of important processes in cancer,
including cell transformation, survival, invasion, metastasis and angiogenesis.
This study for the first time demonstrates a link between HDAC inhibition and
RhoB expression and provides an important insight into the mechanisms of
HDAC-mediated transcriptional control and the potential therapeutic benefit of
HDAC inhibition.

PMID: 13679859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2003 Nov;307(2):720-8. Epub 2003 Sep 15.

Identification of novel isoform-selective inhibitors within class I histone
deacetylases.

Hu E(1), Dul E, Sung CM, Chen Z, Kirkpatrick R, Zhang GF, Johanson K, Liu R, Lago
A, Hofmann G, Macarron R, de los Frailes M, Perez P, Krawiec J, Winkler J, Jaye
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Biology, GlaxoSmithKline, Rm. 25-1084, 709 Swedeland
Road, King of Prussia, PA 19406, USA. erding_hu-1@gsk.com

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) represent an expanding family of protein
modifying-enzymes that play important roles in cell proliferation, chromosome
remodeling, and gene transcription. We have previously shown that recombinant
human HDAC8 can be expressed in bacteria and retain its catalytic activity. To
further explore the catalytic activity of HDACs, we expressed two additional
human class I HDACs, HDAC1 and HDAC3, in baculovirus. Recombinant HDAC1 and HDAC3
fusion proteins remained soluble and catalytically active and were purified to
near homogeneity. Interestingly, trichostatin (TSA) was found to be a potent
inhibitor for all three HDACs (IC50 value of approximately 0.1-0.3 microM),
whereas another HDAC inhibitor MS-27-275
(N-(2-aminophenyl)-4-[N-(pyridin-3-methyloxycarbonyl)-aminomethyl]benzamide)
preferentially inhibited HDAC1 (IC50 value of approximately 0.3 microM) versus
HDAC3 (IC50 value of approximately 8 microM) and had no inhibitory activity
toward HDAC8 (IC50 value >100 microM). MS-27-275 as well as TSA increased histone
H4 acetylation, induced apoptosis in the human colon cancer cell line SW620, and 
activated the simian virus 40 early promoter. HDAC1 protein was more abundantly
expressed in SW620 cells compared with that of HDAC3 and HDAC8. Using purified
recombinant HDAC proteins, we identified several novel HDAC inhibitors that
preferentially inhibit HDAC1 or HDAC8. These inhibitors displayed distinct
properties in inducing histone acetylation and reporter gene expression. These
results suggest selective HDAC inhibitors could be identified using recombinantly
expressed HDACs and that HDAC1 may be a promising therapeutic target for
designing HDAC inhibitors for proliferative diseases such as cancer.

PMID: 12975486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Oct;23(19):6993-7004.

Autoregulation of mouse histone deacetylase 1 expression.

Schuettengruber B(1), Simboeck E, Khier H, Seiser C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology, Institute of Medical Biochemistry, University
of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter, A-1030 Vienna, Austria.

Histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) is a major regulator of chromatin structure and
gene expression. Tight control of HDAC1 expression is essential for development
and normal cell cycle progression. In this report, we analyzed the regulation of 
the mouse HDAC1 gene by deacetylases and acetyltransferases. The murine HDAC1
promoter lacks a TATA box consensus sequence but contains several putative SP1
binding sites and a CCAAT box, which is recognized by the transcription factor
NF-Y. HDAC1 promoter-reporter studies revealed that the distal SP1 site and the
CCAAT box are crucial for HDAC1 promoter activity and act synergistically to
constitute HDAC1 promoter activity. Furthermore, these sites are essential for
activation of the HDAC1 promoter by the deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A
(TSA). Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed that HDAC1 is recruited to the
promoter by SP1 and NF-Y, thereby regulating its own expression. Coexpression of 
acetyltransferases elevates HDAC1 promoter activity when the SP1 site and the
CCAAT box are intact. Increased histone acetylation at the HDAC1 promoter region 
in response to TSA treatment is dependent on binding sites for SP1 and NF-Y.
Taken together, our results demonstrate for the first time the autoregulation of 
a histone-modifying enzyme in mammalian cells.

PMCID: PMC193942
PMID: 12972616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 21;278(47):46541-8. Epub 2003 Sep 12.

Cytoplasmic IkappaBalpha increases NF-kappaB-independent transcription through
binding to histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1 and HDAC3.

Viatour P(1), Legrand-Poels S, van Lint C, Warnier M, Merville MP, Gielen J,
Piette J, Bours V, Chariot A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Medical Chemistry and Human Genetics, Center for Cellular and
Molecular Therapy, University of Liège, Sart-Tillman, 4000 Liège, Belgium.

IkappaBalpha is an inhibitory molecule that sequesters NF-kappaB dimers in the
cytoplasm of unstimulated cells. Upon stimulation, NF-kappaB moves to the nucleus
and induces the expression of a variety of genes including IkappaBalpha. This
newly synthesized IkappaBalpha also translocates to the nucleus, removes
activated NF-kappaB from its target genes, and brings it back to the cytoplasm to
terminate the phase of NF-kappaB activation. We show here that IkappaBalpha
enhances the transactivation potential of several homeodomain-containing proteins
such as HOXB7 and Pit-1 through a NF-kappaB-independent association with histone 
deacetylase (HDAC) 1 and HDAC3 but not with HDAC2, -4, -5, and -6. IkappaBalpha
bound both HDAC proteins through its ankyrin repeats, and this interaction was
disrupted by p65. Immunofluorescence experiments demonstrated further that
IkappaBalpha acts by partially redirecting HDAC3 to the cytoplasm. At the same
time, an IkappaBalpha mutant, which lacked a functional nuclear localization
sequence, interacted very efficiently with HDAC1 and -3 and intensively enhanced 
the transactivation potential of Pit-1. Our results support the hypothesis that
the NF-kappaB inhibitor IkappaBalpha regulates the transcriptional activity of
homeodomain-containing proteins positively through cytoplasmic sequestration of
HDAC1 and HDAC3, a mechanism that would assign a new and unexpected role to
IkappaBalpha.

PMID: 12972430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Ai Zheng. 2003 Sep;22(9):922-6.

[HDAC1 expression and effect of TSA on proliferation and apoptosis of A549
cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Huang H(1), Zhang ZX, Xu YJ, Shao JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Diseases, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, 430030, PR China.
hhongtj@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVE: Histone deacetylase (HDAC) shows a high expression in
many cancer cells and the inhibitor of HDAC1, trichostatin A (TSA), can inhibit
the growth of cancer cells. Hypoxia is a common feature of malignant tumors. This
paper was designed to investigate the expression of HDAC1 of A549 cell strains in
hypoxia condition and the effect of TSA on their proliferation and apoptosis.
METHODS: The authors designed 1 normoxia group (control group) and 5 hypoxia
groups (test groups): hypoxia 6h group (A), TSA + hypoxia 6h (B), hypoxia 12h
group (C), hypoxia 24h group (D), TSA + hypoxia 24h (E), hypoxia 48h group (F).
The expression of HDAC1 in A549 cells was examined using Western blot analysis.
Proliferation, the apoptotic rates of A549 cells and the effect of TSA on them
were determined using MTT method, immunohistochemistry, TUNEL method, and flow
cytometry. The expression of mRNA of HDAC1 and the effect of TSA on it were
determined using reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: The A values expressed by HDAC1 in A549 cell strains were 138+/-11 in
the control group, 78+/-4, 86+/-5, 124+/-3, and 120+/-9 in test groups A, C, D,
and F, respectively. The A values of HDAC1mRNA versus the A values of beta-Atin
mRNA were 0.68+/-0.03 in the control group, 0.46+/-0.03, 0.45+/-0.02,
0.70+/-0.03, and 0.33+/-0.02 in test groups A, C, D, and F, respectively. The A
values of the expression of PCNA in A549 cell strains were 0.13+/-0.03 in the
control group, 0.10+/-0.02, 0.11+/-0.02, 0.16+/-0.02, and 0.11+/-0.03 in test
groups A, B, D, and E, respectively. The A values of MTT in A549 cell strains
were 0.50+/-0.06 in the control group, 0.41+/-0.04, 0.45+/-0.03, 0.59+/-0.02, and
0.45+/-0.03 in test groups A, B, D, and E, respectively. The A values of positive
cells of apoptosis in A549 cell strains were 0.16+/-0.04 in the control group,
0.18+/-0.02, 0.18+/-0.05, 0.20+/-0.05, and 0.23+/-0.05 in test groups A, B, D,
and E, respectively. The apoptotic rates in A549 cells were 1.11% in the control 
group, 18.91%,14.30%, 36.99%, and 51.92% in test groups A, B, D, and E,
respectively.
CONCLUSION: The expression of HDAC1 plays an important role in the proliferation 
and apoptosis of A549 cells, which is regulated by hypoxia. TSA may serve as a
new target for therapy of lung cancer.

PMID: 12969522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Neurochem. 2003 Oct;87(1):257-67.

Histone deacetylase activity is retained in primary neurons expressing mutant
huntingtin protein.

Hoshino M(1), Tagawa K, Okuda T, Murata M, Oyanagi K, Arai N, Mizutani T,
Kanazawa I, Wanker EE, Okazawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Therapeutics, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute for
Neuroscience, Tokyo, Japan.

Perturbation of histone acetyl-transferase (HAT) activity is implicated in the
pathology of polyglutamine diseases, and suppression of the counteracting histone
deacetylase (HDAC) proteins has been proposed as a therapeutic candidate for
these intractable disorders. Meanwhile, it is not known whether mutant
polyglutamine disease protein affects the HDAC activity in declining neurons,
though the answer is essential for application of anti-HDAC drugs for
polyglutamine diseases. Here, we show the effect of mutant huntingtin (htt)
protein on the expression and activity of HDAC proteins in rat primary cortical
neurons as well as in human Huntington's disease (HD) brains. Our findings
indicate that expression and activity of HDAC proteins are not repressed by
mutant htt protein. Furthermore, expression of normal and mutant htt protein
slightly increased HDAC activity although the effects of normal and mutant htt
were not remarkably different. In human HD cerebral cortex, HDAC5
immunoreactivity was increased in the nucleus of striatal and cortical neurons,
suggesting accelerated nuclear import of this class II HDAC. Meanwhile, western
blot and immunohistochemical analyses showed no remarkable change in the
expression of class I HDAC proteins such as HDAC1 and HDCA8. Collectively,
retained activity in affected neurons supports application of anti-HDAC drugs to 
the therapy of HD.

PMID: 12969272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. EMBO Rep. 2003 Sep;4(9):877-82. Epub 2003 Aug 8.

Cdyl: a new transcriptional co-repressor.

Caron C(1), Pivot-Pajot C, van Grunsven LA, Col E, Lestrat C, Rousseaux S,
Khochbin S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire de la
Différenciation--INSERM U309, Equipe Chromatine et Expression des Gènes, Institut
Albert Bonniot, Faculté de Médecine de Grenoble, Domaine de la Merci, 38706 La
Tronche Cedex, France.

Cdyl (chromodomain-Y-like) is a chromodomain-containing protein that is
predominantly expressed during mouse spermiogenesis. In its carboxy-terminal
portion, there is a domain with homology to the coenzyme A (CoA) pocket of the
enoyl-CoA hydratase/isomerase, which is shown here to be able to bind CoA and
histone deacetylases (HDACs). It also efficiently represses transcription.
Moreover, the binding of Hdac1 represses the ability of Cdyl to bind CoA, and a
Cdyl-CoA interaction only occurs in the absence of HDACs. These data suggest that
Cdyl is primarily a transcriptional co-repressor. However, the degradation of
cellular Hdac1 and Hdac2, as observed here in the elongating spermatids, may
provide an HDAC-free environment in which Cdyl could bind CoA and participate in 
the global chromatin remodelling that occurs in these cells.

PMCID: PMC1326355
PMID: 12947414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2003 Jun;85(2-5):401-14.

Dual mechanisms of regulation of transcription of luteinizing hormone receptor
gene by nuclear orphan receptors and histone deacetylase complexes.

Zhang Y(1), Dufau ML.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Endocrinology Section, Endocrinology and Reproduction Research
Branch, National Institute of Child Health & Human Development/NIH, 49 Convent
Drive, Building 49, Room 6A-36, Bethesda, MD 20892-4510, USA.

The luteinizing hormone receptor (LHR), a member of the G protein-coupled, seven 
transmembrane receptor family, is essential for normal sexual development and
reproductive function. LHR are expressed primarily in the gonads, but also are
found in non-gonadal and cancer tissues. LH acts through LH receptors in Leydig
cells to maintain general metabolic processes and steroidogenic enzymes, and in
the ovary enhances follicular development and steroidogenesis in granulosa and
luteal cells. The major transcriptional start sites of the LHR gene are located
within the 176bp promoter domain. In the rat, the LHR gene is constitutively
inhibited by upstream sequences (-176/-2056bp) in several cell systems, while in 
the human only a minor inhibitory effect was observed in JAR and HeLa cells
(>20%). The TATA-less human promoter is driven by Sp1 and Sp3 transactivators
that bind to two Sp1 domains at -79bp [Sp1(I)] and -119bp [Sp1(II)] (from ATG)
with additive effects. An imperfect estrogen receptor half-site response element 
direct-repeat within the LHR promoter is an inhibitory locus. Endogenous orphan
receptors, EAR2 and EAR3/COUP-TFI, bind this motif and repress promoter activity 
by 70%. TR4 also binds this motif and stimulates promoter activity (up to
2.5-fold). This is reversed by coexpression of EAR2 or EAR3/COUP-TFI through
competitive binding to this site. Comparative studies of hDR and rDR orphan
receptors binding and function revealed sequence-specific requirements. The A/C
mismatch between hDR and rDR is responsible for the lack of TR4 binding and
function in the rat. The G 3'-adjacent to the hDR core is important for
EAR2/EAR3-COUP-TFI high-affinity binding. The Sp1-1 site is critical for
EAR3/COUP-TFI repression, with minor participation for EAR2, and is not involved 
in the TR4 effect. Interaction of EAR3/COUP-TFI with Sp1 perturbs association of 
TFIIB with Sp1, independently of HDACs, and caused impairment of LHR
transcription. Other aspect of control is through HDAC/mSin3A mechanism.
Inhibition of HDACs by TSA increases LHR promoter activity in JAR cells
(40-fold), association of acetylated H3/H4 with the LHR promoter, recruitment of 
Pol II to the promoter, and LHR mRNA levels. A multiprotein complex is recruited 
to the hLHR promoter via interaction with Sp1/Sp3: HDACs dock directly to Sp1-1
bound DNA and indirectly to Sp3-1 bound DNA through RbAp48, while mSin3A
interacts HDACs and potentiates HDAC1-mediated repression. Our studies have
demonstrated that orphan receptor-ERE complexes, and the HDAC1-HDAC2-mSin3A
complex have important roles in the regulation of LHR gene transcription by
interaction with Sp1/Sp3, and by region-specific changes in histone acetylation
and Pol II recruitment within the LHR promoter.

PMID: 12943729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Immunity. 2003 Aug;19(2):281-94.

CD8 T cell-specific downregulation of histone hyperacetylation and gene
activation of the IL-4 gene locus by ROG, repressor of GATA.

Omori M(1), Yamashita M, Inami M, Ukai-Tadenuma M, Kimura M, Nigo Y, Hosokawa H, 
Hasegawa A, Taniguchi M, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, 1-8-1 Inohana Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

Chromatin remodeling of type 2 cytokine gene loci occurs during differentiation
of naive CD4 and CD8 T cells into type 2 helper (Th2) and cytotoxic (Tc2) T
cells. IL-4 production and histone hyperacetylation in IL-4-associated
nucleosomes in developing Tc2 cells were significantly lower than those of Th2
cells; however, cytokine production and histone hyperacetylation of IL-5 and
IL-13 genes were equivalent. Developing Tc2 cells expressed lower GATA3 levels
and dramatically increased levels of repressor of GATA (ROG). A ROG response
element in the IL-13 gene exon 4 displayed Tc2-specific binding of ROG, HDAC1,
and HDAC2 and exhibited repression of IL-4 gene activation. Thus, ROG may confer 
CD8 T cell-specific repression of histone hyperacetylation and activation of the 
IL-4 gene locus.

PMID: 12932361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 24;278(43):42560-8. Epub 2003 Aug 13.

The metastasis-associated proteins 1 and 2 form distinct protein complexes with
histone deacetylase activity.

Yao YL(1), Yang WM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Zoology, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan, Republic of China.

The metastasis-associated protein MTA1 has been shown to express differentially
to high levels in metastatic cells. MTA2, which is homologous to MTA1, is a
component of the NuRD ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling and histone deacetylase 
complex. Here we report evidence that although both human MTA1 and MTA2 repress
transcription specifically, are located in the nucleus, and contain associated
histone deacetylase activity, they exist in two biochemically distinct protein
complexes and may perform different functions pertaining to tumor metastasis.
Specifically, both MTA1 and MTA2 complexes exert histone deacetylase activity.
However, the MTA1 complex contained HDAC1/2, RbAp46/48, and MBD3, but not Sin3 or
Mi2, two important components of the MTA2 complex. Moreover, the MTA2 complex is 
similar to the HDAC1 complex, suggesting a housekeeping role of the MTA2 complex.
The MTA1 complex could be further separated, resulting in a core MTA1-HDAC
complex, showing that the histone deacetylase activity and transcriptional
repression activity were integral properties of the MTA1 complex. Finally, MTA1, 
unlike MTA2, did not interact with the pleotropic transcription factor YY1 or the
immunophilin FKBP25. We suggest that MTA1 associates with a different set of
transcription factors from MTA2 and that this property may contribute to the
metastatic potential of cells overexpressing MTA1. We also report the finding of 
human MTA3, which is highly homologous to both MTA1 and MTA2. However, MTA3 does 
not repress transcription to a significant level and appears to have a diffused
pattern of subcellular localization, suggesting a biological role distinct from
that of the other two MTA proteins.

PMID: 12920132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Sep;23(17):6243-54.

Acetylation-mediated transcriptional activation of the ETS protein ER81 by p300, 
P/CAF, and HER2/Neu.

Goel A(1), Janknecht R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota 55905, USA.

The regulated expression of the ETS transcription factor ER81 is a prerequisite
for normal development, and its dysregulation contributes to neoplasia. Here, we 
demonstrate that ER81 is acetylated by two coactivators/acetyltransferases, p300 
and p300- and CBP-associated factor (P/CAF) in vitro and in vivo. Whereas p300
acetylates two lysine residues (K33 and K116) within the ER81 N-terminal
transactivation domain, P/CAF targets only K116. Acetylation of ER81 not only
enhances its ability to transactivate but also increases its DNA binding activity
and in vivo half-life. Furthermore, oncogenic HER2/Neu, which induces
phosphorylation and thereby activation of ER81, was less able to activate
acetylation-deficient ER81 mutants, indicating that both acetyltransferase and
protein kinase-specific regulatory mechanisms control ER81 activity. Importantly,
HER2/Neu overexpression stimulates the ability of p300 to acetylate ER81, likely 
by inducing phosphorylation of p300 through the Ras-->Raf-->mitogen-activated
protein kinase pathway. This represents a novel mechanism by which oncogenic
HER2/Neu, Ras, or Raf may promote tumor formation by enhancing acetylation not
only of ER81 but also of other downstream effector transcription factors as well 
as histones.

PMCID: PMC180970
PMID: 12917345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Aug 19;100(17):9791-6. Epub 2003 Aug 6.

Repression of Smad transcriptional activity by PIASy, an inhibitor of activated
STAT.

Long J(1), Matsuura I, He D, Wang G, Shuai K, Liu F.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, Susan Lehman Cullman
Laboratory for Cancer Research, Department of Chemical Biology, Ernest Mario
School of Pharmacy, Rutgers, State University of New Jersey, 679 Hoes Lane,
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

Smad proteins mediate transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta)-inducible
transcriptional responses. Protein inhibitor of activated signal transducer and
activator of transcription (PIAS) represents a family of proteins that inhibits
signal transducer and activator of transcription and also regulates other
transcriptional responses. In an effort to identify Smad-interacting proteins by 
a yeast three-hybrid screen with Smad3 and Smad4 as baits, we identified PIASy, a
member of the PIAS family. In yeast, PIASy interacts strongly with Smad4 and also
with receptor-regulated Smads. In mammalian cells, PIASy binds most strongly with
Smad3 and also associates with other receptor-regulated Smads and Smad4. The
interaction between Smad3 and PIASy is increased in the presence of TGF-beta and 
occurs through the C-terminal domain of Smad3. Moreover, Smad3, Smad4, and PIASy 
can form a ternary complex. PIASy does not inhibit Smad complex binding to DNA,
but it represses Smad transcriptional activity. Interestingly, conditional
overexpression of PIASy selectively inhibits a subset of endogenous
TGF-beta-responsive genes, which includes the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor
p15, and the plasminogen activator inhibitor 1. We further show that PIASy can
interact constitutively with histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and that addition of
HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA) can prevent the inhibitory function of PIASy.
Taken together, our studies indicate that PIASy can inhibit TGF-beta/Smad
transcriptional responses through interactions with Smad proteins and HDAC.

PMCID: PMC187844
PMID: 12904571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Genes Dev. 2003 Aug 1;17(15):1909-20.

A conserved structural motif reveals the essential transcriptional repression
function of Spen proteins and their role in developmental signaling.

Ariyoshi M(1), Schwabe JW.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council, Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge CB2 2QH, 
UK.

Spen proteins regulate the expression of key transcriptional effectors in diverse
signaling pathways. They are large proteins characterized by N-terminal
RNA-binding motifs and a highly conserved C-terminal SPOC domain. The specific
biological role of the SPOC domain (Spen paralog and ortholog C-terminal domain),
and hence, the common function of Spen proteins, has been unclear to date. The
Spen protein, SHARP (SMRT/HDAC1-associated repressor protein), was identified as 
a component of transcriptional repression complexes in both nuclear receptor and 
Notch/RBP-Jkappa signaling pathways. We have determined the 1.8 A crystal
structure of the SPOC domain from SHARP. This structure shows that essentially
all of the conserved surface residues map to a positively charged patch.
Structure-based mutational analysis indicates that this conserved region is
responsible for the interaction between SHARP and the universal transcriptional
corepressor SMRT/NCoR (silencing mediator for retinoid and thyroid
receptors/nuclear receptor corepressor. We demonstrate that this interaction
involves a highly conserved acidic motif at the C terminus of SMRT/NCoR. These
findings suggest that the conserved function of the SPOC domain is to mediate
interaction with SMRT/NCoR corepressors, and that Spen proteins play an essential
role in the repression complex.

PMCID: PMC196244
PMID: 12897056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Mol Cell. 2003 Jul;12(1):15-25.

p53- and Mdm2-independent repression of NF-kappa B transactivation by the ARF
tumor suppressor.

Rocha S(1), Campbell KJ, Perkins ND.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Division of Gene Regulation and Expression, MSI/WTB
Complex, Dow Street, University of Dundee, Dundee, DD1 5EH, Scotland, United
Kingdom.

One mechanism by which a cell affords protection from the transforming effects of
oncogenes is via the action of the tumor suppressor, ARF, which activates p53 by 
inactivating Mdm2. Many oncogenes have also been shown to activate the
transcription factor NF-kappa B, which can contribute toward the malignant
phenotype in many ways, including an ability to antagonize p53. Here we find that
ARF inhibits NF-kappa B function and its antiapoptotic activity independent of
Mdm2 and p53. ARF represses the transcriptional activation domain of the NF-kappa
B family member RelA by inducing its association with the histone deacetylase,
HDAC1. Further, we show that the response of NF-kappa B to the oncogene Bcr-Abl
is determined by the ARF status of the cell. These results reveal an important
function of ARF that can regulate the NF-kappa B response to oncogene activation.

PMID: 12887889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 10;278(41):39383-91. Epub 2003 Jul 23.

Binding of the thyroid hormone receptor to a negative element in the basal growth
hormone promoter is associated with histone acetylation.

Sánchez-Pacheco A(1), Aranda A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas Alberto Sols, Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas and Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, 28029 Madrid,
Spain.

Nuclear thyroid hormone receptors (TRs) act as ligand-dependent activators, but
paradoxically unliganded TRs can increase transcription of promoters containing
negative response elements (nTRE), and hormone binding represses this activation.
The rat growth hormone (GH) promoter contains a positive TRE and a nTRE.
Ligand-dependent negative regulation mediated by the nTRE could play an important
physiological role in restricting GH gene expression in non-pituitary cells that 
express TRs. With chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, we show here that the
nTRE is responsible for binding of TR to the promoter in non-pituitary HeLa cells
and that this element also governs transactivation by the unoccupied receptor and
repression by triiodothyronine. Occupancy of the promoter by TR is concomitant
with appearance of acetylated histone H3, and triiodothyronine causes release of 
the receptor as well as disappearance of the acetylated histone from the
promoter. Although the nTRE overlaps the TATA box, the receptor does not exclude 
binding of TATA-binding protein, but could rather facilitate formation of the
preinitiation complex. Furthermore, the proximal GH promoter is synergistically
stimulated by unliganded TR and TATA-binding protein, whereas the ligand
represses this cooperation. Constitutive receptor activity and synergism with
TATA-binding protein require binding of corepressors. Furthermore, inhibitors of 
histone deacetylases enhance promoter activation by the unliganded receptor and
reduce triiodothyronine-dependent repression, whereas expression of HDAC1
reverses promoter stimulation. This suggests that partitioning of histone
acetylases and deacetylases between the receptors and basal transcription factors
could be involved in regulation of the basal GH promoter by TRs.

PMID: 12878587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Exp Cell Res. 2003 Aug 1;288(1):218-23.

The insulator binding protein CTCF associates with the nuclear matrix.

Dunn KL(1), Zhao H, Davie JR.

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Cell Biology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba
R3E 0V9, Canada.

Nuclear DNA is organized into chromatin loop domains. At the base of these loops,
matrix-associated regions (MARs) of the DNA interact with nuclear matrix
proteins. MARs act as structural boundaries within chromatin, and MAR binding
proteins may recruit multiprotein complexes that remodel chromatin. The potential
tumor suppressor protein CTCF binds to vertebrate insulators and is required for 
insulator activity. We demonstrate that CTCF is associated with the nuclear
matrix and can be cross-linked to DNA by cisplatin, an agent that preferentially 
cross-links nuclear matrix proteins to DNA in situ. These results suggest that
CTCF anchors chromatin to the nuclear matrix, suggesting that there is a
functional connection between insulators and the nuclear matrix. We also show
that the chromatin-modifying enzymes HDAC1 and HDAC2, which are intrinsic nuclear
matrix components and thought to function as corepressors of CTCF, are incapable 
of associating with CTCF. Hence, the insulator activity of CTCF apparently
involves an HDAC-independent association with the nuclear matrix. We propose that
CTCF may demarcate nuclear matrix-dependent points of transition in chromatin,
thereby forming topologically independent chromatin loops that may support gene
silencing.

PMID: 12878173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Biol Chem. 2003 Sep 26;278(39):37439-50. Epub 2003 Jul 22.

Transcriptional regulation of mitotic checkpoint gene MAD1 by p53.

Chun AC(1), Jin DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, the University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

p53 regulates a number of genes through transcriptional activation and
repression. p53-dependent mitotic checkpoint has been described, but the
underlying mechanism is still obscure. Here we examined the effect of p53 on the 
expression of a human mitotic checkpoint protein, Mitosis Arrest Deficiency 1
(MAD1), in cultured human cells. The expression of MAD1 was reduced when the
cells were overexpressing exogenously introduced wild-type p53. The same
reduction was also observed when the cells were treated with anticancer agents
5-fluorouracil and cisplatin or were irradiated with UV. Consistently, MAD1
promoter activity diminished in a dose-dependent manner when induced by p53,
indicating that p53 repressed MAD1 at a transcriptional level. Intriguingly,
several tumor hot spot mutations in p53 (V143A, R175H, R248W, and R273H) did not 
abolish the ability of p53 to repress MAD1 expression. By serial truncation of
the MAD1 promoter, we confined the p53-responsive element to a 38-bp region that 
represents a novel sequence distinct from the known p53 consensus binding site.
Trichostatin A, a histone deacetylase inhibitor, relieved the p53 transrepression
activity on MAD1. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay revealed that p53, histone 
deacetylase 1, and co-repressor mSin3a associated with the MAD1 promoter in vivo.
Taken together, our findings suggest a regulatory mechanism for the mitotic
checkpoint in which MAD1 is inhibited by p53.

PMID: 12876282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Aug;23(15):5122-31.

The N-CoR/histone deacetylase 3 complex is required for repression by thyroid
hormone receptor.

Ishizuka T(1), Lazar MA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, Department of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 415 Curie Boulevard, Philadelphia,
PA 19104, USA.

Nuclear receptor corepressors (N-CoR) and silencing mediator for retinoid and
thyroid receptors (SMRT) have both been implicated in thyroid hormone receptor
(TR)-mediated repression. Here we show that endogenous N-CoR, TBL1, and histone
deacetylase 3 (HDAC3), but not HDAC1, -2, or -4, are recruited to a stably
integrated reporter gene repressed by unliganded TR as well as the orphan
receptor RevErb. Unliganded TR also recruits this complex to a transiently
transfected reporter, and transcriptional repression is associated with local
histone deacetylation that is reversed by the presence of thyroid hormone.
Knockdown of N-CoR using small interfering RNAs markedly reduces repression by
the TR ligand binding domain in human 293T cells, whereas knockdown of SMRT has
little effect. RevErb repression appears to involve both corepressors in this
system. Knockdown of HDAC3 markedly reduces repression by both TR and RevErb,
while knockdown of HDAC1 or 2 has more modest, partly nonspecific effects. Thus, 
HDAC3 is critical for repression by multiple nuclear receptors and the N-CoR
HDAC3 complex plays a unique and necessary role in TR-mediated gene repression in
human 293T cells.

PMCID: PMC165720
PMID: 12861000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Biol Chem. 2003 Sep 19;278(38):36496-504. Epub 2003 Jul 7.

Che-1 arrests human colon carcinoma cell proliferation by displacing HDAC1 from
the p21WAF1/CIP1 promoter.

Di Padova M(1), Bruno T, De Nicola F, Iezzi S, D'Angelo C, Gallo R, Nicosia D,
Corbi N, Biroccio A, Floridi A, Passananti C, Fanciulli M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory B.

Che-1 is a recently identified human RNA polymerase II binding protein involved
in the regulation of gene transcription and cell proliferation. We previously
demonstrated that Che-1 inhibits the Rb growth-suppressing function by
interfering with Rb-mediated HDAC1 recruitment on E2F target gene promoters. By
hybridization of cancer profile arrays, we found that Che-1 expression is
strongly down-regulated in several tumors, including colon and kidney carcinomas,
compared with the relative normal tissues. Consistent with these data, Che-1
overexpression inhibits proliferation of HCT116 and LoVo human colon carcinoma
cell lines by activation of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21WAF1/Cip1 in
a p53-independent manner and by promoting growth arrest at the G1 phase of the
cell cycle. Che-1 activates p21WAF1/Cip1 by displacing histone deacetylase
(HDAC)1 from the Sp1 binding sites of the p21WAF1/Cip1 gene promoter and
accumulating acetylated histone H3 on these sites. Accordingly, Che-1-specific
RNA interference negatively affects p21WAF1/Cip1 transactivation and increases
cell proliferation in HCT116 cells. Taken together, our results indicate that
Che-1 can be considered a general HDAC1 competitor and its down-regulation is
involved in colon carcinoma cell proliferation.

PMID: 12847090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Nutr. 2003 Jul;133(7 Suppl):2485S-2493S.

Inhibition of histone deacetylase activity by butyrate.

Davie JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Cell Biology, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.
davie@cc.umanitoba.ca

This article reviews the effects of the short-chain fatty acid butyrate on
histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity. Sodium butyrate has multiple effects on
cultured mammalian cells that include inhibition of proliferation, induction of
differentiation and induction or repression of gene expression. The observation
that butyrate treatment of cells results in histone hyperacetylation initiated a 
flurry of activity that led to the discovery that butyrate inhibits HDAC
activity. Butyrate has been an essential agent for determining the role of
histone acetylation in chromatin structure and function. Interestingly,
inhibition of HDAC activity affects the expression of only 2% of mammalian genes.
Promoters of butyrate-responsive genes have butyrate response elements, and the
action of butyrate is often mediated through Sp1/Sp3 binding sites (e.g.,
p21(Waf1/Cip1)). We demonstrated that Sp1 and Sp3 recruit HDAC1 and HDAC2, with
the latter being phosphorylated by protein kinase CK2. A model is proposed in
which inhibition of Sp1/Sp3-associated HDAC activity leads to histone
hyperacetylation and transcriptional activation of the p21(Waf1/Cip1) gene;
p21(Waf1/Cip1) inhibits cyclin-dependent kinase 2 activity and thereby arrests
cell cycling. Pending the cell background, the nonproliferating cells may enter
differentiation or apoptotic pathways. The potential of butyrate and HDAC
inhibitors in the prevention and treatment of cancer is presented.

PMID: 12840228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Cell Biol. 2003 Jul 7;162(1):37-46. Epub 2003 Jun 30.

Changes in histone acetylation during mouse oocyte meiosis.

Kim JM(1), Liu H, Tazaki M, Nagata M, Aoki F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrated Biosciences, Graduate School of Frontier Sciences,
University of Tokyo, Chiba 277-8562, Japan. aokif@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

We examined global changes in the acetylation of histones in mouse oocytes during
meiosis. Immunocytochemistry with specific antibodies against various acetylated 
lysine residues on histones H3 and H4 showed that acetylation of all the lysines 
decreased to undetectable or negligible levels in the oocytes during meiosis,
whereas most of these lysines were acetylated during mitosis in preimplantation
embryos and somatic cells. When the somatic cell nuclei were transferred into
enucleated oocytes, the acetylation of lysines decreased markedly. This type of
deacetylation was inhibited by trichostatin A, a specific inhibitor of histone
deacetylase (HDAC), thereby indicating that HDAC is able to deacetylate histones 
during meiosis but not during mitosis. Meiosis-specific deacetylation may be a
consequence of the accessibility of HDAC1 to the chromosome, because HDAC1
colocalized with the chromosome during meiosis but not during mitosis. As histone
acetylation is thought to play a role in propagating the gene expression pattern 
to the descendent generation during mitosis, and the gene expression pattern of
differentiated oocytes is reprogrammed during meiosis to allow the initiation of 
a new program by totipotent zygotes of the next generation, our results suggest
that the oocyte cytoplasm initializes a program of gene expression by
deacetylating histones.

PMCID: PMC2172711
PMID: 12835313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Jul 8;100(14):8342-7. Epub 2003 Jun 26.

MLL repression domain interacts with histone deacetylases, the polycomb group
proteins HPC2 and BMI-1, and the corepressor C-terminal-binding protein.

Xia ZB(1), Anderson M, Diaz MO, Zeleznik-Le NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Molecular Oncology Program, Cardinal Bernardin Cancer 
Center, Loyola University Medical Center, Maywood, IL 60153, USA.

The MLL (mixed-lineage leukemia) gene is involved in many chromosomal
translocations associated with acute myeloid and lymphoid leukemia. We previously
identified a transcriptional repression domain in MLL, which contains a region
with homology to DNA methyltransferase. In chromosomal translocations, the MLL
repression domain is retained in the leukemogenic fusion protein and is required 
for transforming activity of MLL fusion proteins. We explored the mechanism of
action of the MLL repression domain. Histone deacetylase 1 interacts with the MLL
repression domain, partially mediating its activity; binding of Cyp33 to the
adjacent MLL-PHD domain potentiates this binding. Because the MLL repression
domain activity was only partially relieved with the histone deacetylase
inhibitor trichostatin A, we explored other protein interactions with this
domain. Polycomb group proteins HPC2 and BMI-1 and the corepressor
C-terminal-binding protein also bind the MLL repression domain. Expression of
exogenous BMI-1 potentiates MLL repression domain activity. Functional antagonism
between Mll and Bmi-1 has been shown genetically in murine knockout models for
Mll and Bmi-1. Our new data suggest a model whereby recruitment of BMI-1 to the
MLL protein may be able to modulate its function. Furthermore, repression
mediated by histone deacetylases and that mediated by polycomb group proteins may
act either independently or together for MLL function in vivo.

PMCID: PMC166231
PMID: 12829790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Oncogene. 2003 Jun 26;22(26):4035-46.

VDUP1 upregulated by TGF-beta1 and 1,25-dihydorxyvitamin D3 inhibits tumor cell
growth by blocking cell-cycle progression.

Han SH(1), Jeon JH, Ju HR, Jung U, Kim KY, Yoo HS, Lee YH, Song KS, Hwang HM, Na 
YS, Yang Y, Lee KN, Choi I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Yusong, Taejon 305-333, Republic of Korea.

Vitamin D(3) upregulated protein 1 (VDUP1) is a 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3)
(1,25(OH)(2)D(3)) upregulated protein, and it is induced by various stresses. In 
human tumor tissues, VDUP1 expression was downregulated. Upon stimulation by
growth-inhibitory signals such as TGF-beta1 and 1,25(OH)(2)D(3), its expression
was rapidly upregulated as the cell growth was retarded. The transfection of
VDUP1 in tumor cells reduced cell growth. The VDUP1 expression was also increased
when the cell-cycle progression was arrested. Transfection of VDUP1 induced
cell-cycle arrest at the G0/G1 phase, indicating that VDUP1 possesses a
tumor-suppressive activity. In addition, it was found that VDUP1 interacted with 
promyelocytic leukemia zinc-finger, Fanconi anemia zinc-finger, and histone
deacetylase 1, which are known to be transcriptional corepressors. VDUP1 itself
suppressed IL-3 receptor and cyclin A2 promoter activity. Taken together, these
results suggest that VDUP1 is a novel antitumor gene which forms a
transcriptional repressor complex.

PMID: 12821938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Jul;23(13):4713-27.

p53 represses cyclin D1 transcription through down regulation of Bcl-3 and
inducing increased association of the p52 NF-kappaB subunit with histone
deacetylase 1.

Rocha S(1), Martin AM, Meek DW, Perkins ND.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Division of Gene Expression and Regulation,
University of Dundee, Scotland, United Kingdom.

The p53 and NF-kappaB transcription factor families are important,
multifunctional regulators of the cellular response to stress. Here we have
investigated the regulatory mechanisms controlling p53-dependent cell cycle
arrest and cross talk with NF-kappaB. Upon induction of p53 in H1299 or U-2 OS
cells, we observed specific repression of cyclin D1 promoter activity,
correlating with a decrease in cyclin D1 protein and mRNA levels. This repression
was dependent on the proximal NF-kappaB binding site of the cyclin D1 promoter,
which has been shown to bind the p52 NF-kappaB subunit. p53 inhibited the
expression of Bcl-3 protein, a member of the IkappaB family that functions as a
transcriptional coactivator for p52 NF-kappaB and also reduced p52/Bcl-3 complex 
levels. Concomitant with this, p53 induced a significant increase in the
association of p52 and histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1). Importantly, p53-mediated
suppression of the cyclin D1 promoter was reversed by coexpression of Bcl-3 and
inhibition of p52 or deacetylase activity. p53 therefore induces a
transcriptional switch in which p52/Bcl-3 activator complexes are replaced by
p52/HDAC1 repressor complexes, resulting in active repression of cyclin D1
transcription. These results reveal a unique mechanism by which p53 regulates
NF-kappaB function and cell cycle progression.

PMCID: PMC164841
PMID: 12808109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Oncogene. 2003 Jun 5;22(23):3518-29.

Triggering of p73-dependent apoptosis in osteosarcoma is under the control of
E2Fs-pRb2/p130 complexes.

La Sala D(1), Macaluso M, Trimarchi C, Giordano A, Cinti C.

Author information: 
(1)ITOI-CNR, Unit of Bologna, c/o IOR, 40136 Bologna, Italy.

Mechanisms underlying multidrug resistance (MDR), one of the major causes of
cancer treatment failure, are still poorly understood. We selected the
osteosarcoma MDR HosDXR150 cell line by culturing Hos cells in the presence of
increasing doxorubicin doses and showed that it is crossresistant to vinblastine.
Similarly to the Hos parental cell line, HosDXR150 cells present mutated p53,
functionally inactivated pRb/p105 and wild-type pRb2/p130. Owing to p53 mutation,
MDR-1 gene, codifying for P-glycoprotein, is upregulated. Evasion of apoptosis in
HosDXR150 cells is only partially explained by drug extrusion because of
P-glycoprotein overexpression. Analysis of gene expression level profiles showed 
that parental cell line undergoes apoptosis through an E2F1/p73-dependent pathway
while its resistant variant evades it. This result can be explained by the
presence of distinct E2Fs-pRb2/p130 complexes on the p73 promoter. Namely, in Hos
p73 transcription is activated by E2F1-Rb2/p130-p300 complexes, while in
HosDXR150 it is kept repressed by E2F4-Rb2/p130-HDAC1 complexes.

PMID: 12789260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Oncogene. 2003 Jun 5;22(23):3511-7.

pRb2/p130-E2F4/5-HDAC1-SUV39H1-p300 and pRb2/p130-E2F4/5-HDAC1-SUV39H1-DNMT1
multimolecular complexes mediate the transcription of estrogen receptor-alpha in 
breast cancer.

Macaluso M(1), Cinti C, Russo G, Russo A, Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, College of
Science and Technology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

The estrogen receptor-alpha (ER) plays a crucial role in normal breast
development and is also linked to development and progression of mammary
carcinoma. The transcriptional repression of ER-alpha gene in breast cancer is an
area of active investigation with potential clinical significance. However, the
molecular mechanisms that regulate the ER-alpha gene expression are not fully
understood. Here we show a new molecular mechanism of ER-alpha gene inactivation 
mediated by pRb2/p130 in ER-negative breast cancer cells. We investigated in vivo
occupancy of ER-alpha promoter by pRb2/p130-E2F4/5-HDAC1-SUV39 H1-p300 and
pRb2/p130-E2F4/5-HDAC1-SUV39H1-DNMT1 complexes, and provided a link between
pRb2/p130 and chromatin-modifying enzymes in the regulation of ER-alpha
transcription in a physiological setting. These findings suggest that
pRb2/p130-multimolecular complexes can be key elements in the regulation of
ER-alpha gene expression and may be viewed as promising targets for the
development of novel therapeutic strategies in the treatment of breast cancer,
especially for those tumors that are ER negative.

PMID: 12789259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Jun 20;306(1):267-75.

Modulation of YY1 activity by SAP30.

Huang NE(1), Lin CH, Lin YS, Yu WC.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, ROC,
Taipei, Taiwan.

Yin Yang 1 (YY1) is a highly conserved and multifunctional transcription factor. 
The diverse activities of YY1 are regulated and sometimes modified by interaction
with various other proteins. By using a yeast two-hybrid screening system, SAP30 
was identified as a protein that associates with YY1 and it is able to enhance
YY1-mediated repression in a dose-dependent manner. SAP30 is a 30kDa nuclear
protein and is a component of the human histone deacetylase complex. In this
study, the interaction of SAP30 and YY1 was confirmed both by in vitro and in
vivo assays. The interaction domains between YY1 and SAP30 were mapped to the
C-terminal segment of YY1 (295-414) and the C-terminal 91 amino acid region of
SAP30. The observation that YY1, SAP30, and HDAC1 form a complex in vivo provides
evidence that YY1 also recruits HDAC1 indirectly via its binding to SAP30. These 
results describe a novel mechanism for YY1-mediated repression.

PMID: 12788099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Jun 20;306(1):239-43.

Modulation of Sp1-dependent transcription by a cis-acting E2F element in dhfr
promoter.

Park KK(1), Rue SW, Lee IS, Kim HC, Lee IK, Ahn JD, Kim HS, Yu TS, Kwak JY,
Heintz NH, Magae J, Chang YC.

Author information: 
(1)Kidney Institute, Keimyung University School of Medicine, 700-712, Daegu,
Republic of Korea.

The dihydrofolate reductase (dhfr) promoter contains cis-acting elements for Sp1 
and E2F. Here we examined the cooperative regulation of dhfr gene transcription
by Sp1 and E2F in human osteosarcoma cells, U2OS. Trichostatin A, an inhibitor of
histone deacetylases, markedly stimulated dhfr promoter activity, a response that
was enhanced by the deletion of an E2F element. In contrast, deletion of the dhfr
Sp1 binding sites completely abolished promoter stimulation by trichostatin A.
Cotransfection assays showed that activation of dhfr transcription by expression 
of E2F1/DP1 requires the reiterated Sp1 elements, whereas activation by Sp1 was
enhanced by the deletion of the E2F element. Expression of HDAC1 with Sp1
suppressed promoter activity and suppression was not alleviated by coexpression
of E2F1/DP1. These results suggest that HDAC1 acts through Sp1 to repress dhfr
promoter activity, and that the E2F element modulates the activity of Sp1 at the 
dhfr promoter through a cis-acting mechanism.

PMID: 12788094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. EMBO J. 2003 Jun 2;22(11):2798-809.

Epigenetic consequences of AML1-ETO action at the human c-FMS locus.

Follows GA(1), Tagoh H, Lefevre P, Hodge D, Morgan GJ, Bonifer C.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, University of Leeds, St James's University Hospital, 
Leeds LS9 7TF, UK.

Although many leukaemia-associated nuclear oncogenes are well characterized,
little is known about the molecular details of how they alter gene expression.
Here we examined transcription factor complexes and chromatin structure of the
human c-FMS gene in normal and leukaemic cells. We demonstrate by in vivo
footprinting and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays that this gene is bound by 
the transcription factor AML1 (RUNX1). In t(8;21) leukaemic cells expressing the 
aberrant fusion protein AML1-ETO, we demonstrate that this protein is part of a
transcription factor complex binding to extended sequences of the c-FMS intronic 
regulatory region rather than the promoter. The AML1-ETO complex does not disrupt
binding of other transcription factors, indicating that c-FMS is not irreversibly
epigenetically silenced. However, AML1-ETO binding correlates with changes in the
histone modification pattern and increased association of histone deacetylases.
Our experiments provide for the first time a direct insight into the chromatin
structure of an AML1-ETO-bound target gene.

PMCID: PMC156747
PMID: 12773394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Cancer Res. 2003 May 15;63(10):2624-30.

Requirement of a specific Sp1 site for histone deacetylase-mediated repression of
transforming growth factor beta Type II receptor expression in human pancreatic
cancer cells.

Zhao S(1), Venkatasubbarao K, Li S, Freeman JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Medical Oncology, University of Texas
Health Science Center, San Antonio, Texas 78229-3900, USA.

In this study, we demonstrate a novel mechanism by which down-regulation of
transforming growth factor beta type II receptor (TbetaRII) is mediated by a
histone deacetylase (HDAC) in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) cells.
Treatment of PDAC cell lines BxPC-3 and MIA PaCa-2 with a specific HDAC
inhibitor, trichostatin A (TSA), strongly activates TbetaRII promoter activity
and induces TbetaRII expression. The transcriptional activation of TbetaRII by
TSA was correlated with a decrease in HDAC activity and an increase in acetylated
histone H4 protein. Correspondingly, an increase in the association of TbetaRII
promoter with acetylated histone H4 was detected in the TSA-treated cells as
determined by a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. We found that a specific Sp1
site (Sp1C, located at -102 bp relative to the transcription start site) adjacent
to an inverted CCAAT box (-83 bp) is required for TSA-mediated activation of the 
TbetaRII promoter. Furthermore, we determined that HDAC1 complexed with Sp1 in
PDAC cells and that TSA treatment interfered with this association. Diminished
binding of HDAC1 to the -112 to -65 bp region of the TbetaRII promoter after TSA 
treatment was confirmed by a DNA affinity precipitation assay. This is the first 
study to demonstrate the requirement of a specific Sp1 site for TSA-mediated
transcriptional activation of TbetaRII. This study further suggests that the
specificity of this Sp1 site for HDAC-mediated repression of TbetaRII may involve
the interaction of the Sp1-HDAC1 complex with components of the cognate
transcriptional regulators that bind to the inverted CCAAT box.

PMID: 12750289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Oncogene. 2003 May 1;22(17):2541-7.

Modulation of p120E4F transcriptional activity by the Gam1 adenoviral early
protein.

Colombo R(1), Draetta GF, Chiocca S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, via
Ripamonti, 435, 20141 Milan, Italy.

Gam1, an early adenoviral CELO protein, is required for viral replication.
Consistent with its ability to inhibit histone deacetylation by HDAC1, Gam1
activates transcription. In this report, we identify the cellular transcription
factor p120(E4F) as a Gam1 interaction partner. p120(E4F) is a low-abundance
transcription factor that represses the adenovirus E4 promoter. Here we
demonstrate that p120(E4F) interacts with HDAC1 in vivo and in vitro, and that
E4F-mediated transcriptional repression is alleviated by the HDAC inhibitor
trichostatin A or by overexpressing Gam1. A mutant E4 promoter unresponsive to
E4F-mediated transcriptional repression is also not stimulated by Gam1. Moreover,
our cofractionation experiments demonstrate that p120(E4F), HDAC1 and Gam1 may be
concomitantly present in protein complexes. We conclude that Gam1 activates
E4-dependent transcription possibly by inactivating HDAC1.

PMID: 12730668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. EMBO J. 2003 May 1;22(9):2135-45.

Stimulation of preadipocyte differentiation by steroid through targeting of an
HDAC1 complex.

Wiper-Bergeron N(1), Wu D, Pope L, Schild-Poulter C, Haché RJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Ottawa Health Research Institute, University of Ottawa, 725 Parkdale
Avenue, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1Y 4E9.

Glucocorticoids potentiate the early steps of preadipocyte differentiation and
promote obesity in Cushing's syndrome and during prolonged steroid therapy. We
show that glucocorticoids stimulate 3T3 L1 preadipocyte differentiation through a
non-transcriptional mechanism mediated through the ligand-binding domain of the
glucocorticoid receptor. This enhanced the onset of CCAAT/enhancer binding
protein (C/EBPalpha) expression by potentiating its initial transcriptional
activation by C/EBPbeta. In the absence of steroid, C/EBPbeta associated with a
transcriptional corepressor complex containing mSin3A and histone deacetylase 1
(HDAC1), but lacking HDAC2 and RbAp46/48. HDAC1/mSin3A were recruited to the
C/EBPalpha promoter with C/EBPbeta and promoted the deacetylation of histone H4. 
Steroid induced the specific depletion of this corepressor by targeting the HDAC1
within the complex for degradation through the 26S proteasome. Treatment with
histone deacetylase inhibitors replaced the effects of steroid treatment on
preadipocyte differentiation and C/EBPalpha expression, while overexpression of
HDAC1 abrogated the stimulatory effects of steroid. Recapitulation of the
glucocorticoid effect by progestin treatment in the presence of the progesterone 
receptor ligand-binding domain suggests a conserved mechanism relevant to many
aspects of steroid-mediated differentiation.

PMCID: PMC156090
PMID: 12727880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 May;23(10):3456-67.

Identification and characterization of three new components of the mSin3A
corepressor complex.

Fleischer TC(1), Yun UJ, Ayer DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of
Utah, 2000 Circle of Hope, Salt Lake City, UT 84112-5555, USA.

The mSin3A corepressor complex contains 7 to 10 tightly associated polypeptides
and is utilized by many transcriptional repressors. Much of the corepressor
function of mSin3A derives from associations with the histone deacetylases HDAC1 
and HDAC2; however, the contributions of the other mSin3A-associated polypeptides
remain largely unknown. We have purified an mSin3A complex from K562
erythroleukemia cells and identified three new mSin3A-associated proteins (SAP): 
SAP180, SAP130, and SAP45. SAP180 is 40% identical to a previously identified
mSin3A-associated protein, RBP1. SAP45 is identical to mSDS3, the human ortholog 
of the SDS3p component of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae Sin3p-Rpd3p corepressor
complex. SAP130 does not have detectable homology to other proteins.
Coimmunoprecipitation and gel filtration data suggest that the new SAPs are, at
the very least, components of the same mSin3A complex. Each new SAP repressed
transcription when tethered to DNA. Furthermore, repression correlated with
mSin3A binding, suggesting that the new SAPs are components of functional mSin3A 
corepressor complexes. SAP180 has two repression domains: a C-terminal domain,
which interacts with the mSin3A-HDAC complex, and an N-terminal domain, which
functions independently of mSin3A-HDAC. SAP130 has a repression domain at its C
terminus that interacts with the mSin3A-HDAC complex and an N-terminal domain
that probably mediates an interaction with a transcriptional activator. Together,
our data suggest that these novel SAPs function in the assembly and/or enzymatic 
activity of the mSin3A complex or in mediating interactions between the mSin3A
complex and other regulatory complexes. Finally, all three SAPs bind to the
HDAC-interaction domain (HID) of mSin3A, suggesting that the HID functions as the
assembly interface for the mSin3A corepressor complex.

PMCID: PMC164750
PMID: 12724404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jul 4;278(27):24594-9. Epub 2003 Apr 25.

The role of p53 deacetylation in p21Waf1 regulation by laminar flow.

Zeng L(1), Zhang Y, Chien S, Liu X, Shyy JY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biomedical Sciences, University of California, Riverside 92521,
USA.

Laminar flow arrests vascular endothelial cells at the G0/G1 phase with
concurrent increase in p53 and p21Waf1. We investigated the molecular mechanism
by which laminar flow activates p53 and p21Waf1 in endothelial cells. The
application of a laminar flow (12 dyn/cm2) increased the deacetylation at Lys-320
and Lys-373 of p53 and the acetylation at Lys-382 in human umbilical vein
endothelial cells. Laminar flow increased the activity of histone deacetylase
(HDAC) and the association of p53 with HDAC1. Treating human umbilical vein
endothelial cells with trichostatin A (TSA), an HDAC inhibitor, abolished the
flow-induced p53 deacetylation at Lys-320 and Lys-373. To investigate the role of
the HDAC-deacetylated p53 in the flow activation of p21Waf1, we found that TSA
inhibited the activation at both the mRNA and protein levels. Deletion and
mutation analyses of the p21Waf1 promoter revealed that flow activated p21Waf1
through p53 and TSA abrogated this p53-dependent activation. The expression
plasmid encoding the p53 mutant, with Lys-320 and Lys-373 replaced by Arg,
increased the activity of the co-transfected p21Waf1 promoter, which demonstrates
that HDAC-deacetylated p53 can transactivate the p21Waf1 gene. The regulation of 
the p53-p21Waf1 pathway by laminar flow was further supported by observations
that flow caused an increase of p21Waf1 level in the wild-type HCT116 (p53+/+)
cells but not in the p53-null HCT116 cells.

PMID: 12716906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jun 27;278(26):23515-21. Epub 2003 Apr 21.

Functional characterization of an amino-terminal region of HDAC4 that possesses
MEF2 binding and transcriptional repressive activity.

Chan JK(1), Sun L, Yang XJ, Zhu G, Wu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hong Kong University of Science & Technology, Hong
Kong, China.

Like the full-length histone deacetylase (HDAC) 4, its amino terminus (amino
acids 1-208) without the carboxyl deacetylase domain is also known to effectively
bind and repress myocyte enhancer factor 2 (MEF2). Within this repressive amino
terminus, we further show that a stretch of 90 amino acids (119-208) displays
MEF2 binding and repressive activity. The same region is also found to associate 
specifically with HDAC1 which is responsible for the repressive effect. The amino
terminus of HDAC4 can associate with the DNA-bound MEF2 in vitro, suggesting that
it does not repress MEF2 simply by disrupting the ability of MEF2 to bind DNA. In
vivo, MEF2 induces nuclear translocation of both the full-length HDAC4 and
HDAC4-(1-208), whereas the nuclear HDAC4 as well as HDAC4-(1-208) in turn
specifically sequesters MEF2 to distinct nuclear bodies. In addition, we show
that MyoD and HDAC4 functionally antagonize each other to regulate MEF2 activity.
Combined with data from others, our data suggest that the full-length HDAC4 can
repress MEF2 through multiple independent repressive domains.

PMID: 12709441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 May;23(9):3091-102.

Histone deacetylase 1/mSin3A disrupts gamma interferon-induced CIITA function and
major histocompatibility complex class II enhanceosome formation.

Zika E(1), Greer SF, Zhu XS, Ting JP.

Author information: 
(1)Curriculum in Genetics and Molecular Biology, The University of North Carolina
at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

The class II transactivator (CIITA) is a master transcriptional regulator of
major histocompatibility complex class II (MHC-II) promoters. CIITA does not bind
DNA, but it interacts with the transcription factors RFX5, NF-Y, and CREB and
associated chromatin-modifying enzymes to form an enhanceosome. This report
examines the effects of histone deacetylases 1 and 2 (HDAC1/HDAC2) on MHC-II gene
induction by gamma interferon (IFN-gamma) and CIITA. The results show that an
inhibitor of HDACs, trichostatin A, enhances IFN-gamma-induced MHC-II expression,
while HDAC1/HDAC2 inhibits IFN-gamma- and CIITA-induced MHC-II gene expression.
mSin3A, a corepressor of HDAC1/HDAC2, is important for this inhibition, while
NcoR, a corepressor of HDAC3, is not. The effect of this inhibition is directed
at CIITA, since HDAC1/HDAC2 reduces transactivation by a GAL4-CIITA fusion
protein. CIITA binds to overexpressed and endogenous HDAC1, suggesting that HDAC 
and CIITA may affect each other by direct or indirect association. Inhibition of 
HDAC activity dramatically increases the association of NF-YB and RFX5 with
CIITA, the assembly of CIITA, NF-YB, and RFX5 enhanceosome, and the extent of H3 
acetylation at the MHC-II promoter. These results suggest a model where
HDAC1/HDAC2 affect the function of CIITA through a disruption of MHC-II
enhanceosome and relevant coactivator-transcription factor association and
provide evidence that CIITA may act as a molecular switch to modulate MHC-II
transcription by coordinating the functions of both histone acetylases and HDACs.

PMCID: PMC153210
PMID: 12697811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Apr 15;31(8):2168-77.

Repression of E2F1-mediated transcription by the ErbB3 binding protein Ebp1
involves histone deacetylases.

Zhang Y(1), Woodford N, Xia X, Hamburger AW.

Author information: 
(1)Greenebaum Cancer Center, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Ebp1, an ErbB3 binding protein that is a member of the proliferation-associated
PA2G4 family, inhibits the proliferation and induces the differentiation of human
ErbB positive breast and prostate cancer cell lines. Ebp1 binds the tumor
suppressor retinoblastoma protein (Rb) both in vivo and in vitro, and Rb and Ebp1
cooperate to inhibit the transcription of the E2F1-regulated cyclin E promoter.
We show here that Ebp1 can inhibit the transcription of other E2F-regulated
reporter genes and of several endogenous E2F-regulated genes important in cell
cycle progression in both Rb positive and Rb null cells. The Ebp1-mediated
transcriptional repression depended on the presence of an E2F1 consensus element 
in the promoters. A fusion of Ebp1 with the GAL4 DNA binding domain protein had
independent transcriptional repression activity that mapped to the C-terminal
region of Ebp1. This C-terminal region of Ebp1 bound functional histone
deacetylase (HDAC) activity and inhibitors of HDAC significantly reduced
Ebp1-mediated repression. Ebp1 bound HDAC2, but not HDAC1, in vitro. An Ebp1
mutant lacking the HDAC binding domain failed to inhibit transcription. Our
results suggest that Ebp1 can repress transcription of some E2F-regulated
promoters and that one mechanism of Ebp1- mediated transcriptional repression is 
via its ability to recruit HDAC activity.

PMCID: PMC153746
PMID: 12682367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Apr;23(8):2669-79.

The tumor suppressor p53 and histone deacetylase 1 are antagonistic regulators of
the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21/WAF1/CIP1 gene.

Lagger G(1), Doetzlhofer A, Schuettengruber B, Haidweger E, Simboeck E, Tischler 
J, Chiocca S, Suske G, Rotheneder H, Wintersberger E, Seiser C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Biochemistry, Division of Molecular Biology, Vienna
Biocenter, University of Vienna, A-1030 Vienna, Austria.

The cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21/WAF1/CIP1 is an important regulator of 
cell cycle progression, senescence, and differentiation. Genotoxic stress leads
to activation of the tumor suppressor p53 and subsequently to induction of p21
expression. Here we show that the tumor suppressor p53 cooperates with the
transcription factor Sp1 in the activation of the p21 promoter, whereas histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) counteracts p53-induced transcription from the p21 gene.
The p53 protein binds directly to the C terminus of Sp1, a domain which was
previously shown to be required for the interaction with HDAC1. Induction of p53 
in response to DNA-damaging agents resulted in the formation of p53-Sp1 complexes
and simultaneous dissociation of HDAC1 from the C terminus of Sp1. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrated the association of HDAC1 with the
p21 gene in proliferating cells. Genotoxic stress led to recruitment of p53,
reduced binding of HDAC1, and hyperacetylation of core histones at the p21
promoter. Our findings show that the deacetylase HDAC1 acts as an antagonist of
the tumor suppressor p53 in the regulation of the cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor p21 and provide a basis for understanding the function of histone
deacetylase inhibitors as antitumor drugs.

PMCID: PMC152549
PMID: 12665570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Apr;23(8):2645-57.

Antithetic effects of MBD2a on gene regulation.

Fujita H(1), Fujii R, Aratani S, Amano T, Fukamizu A, Nakajima T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Science, St. Marianna University School of Medicine,
Miyamae-ku, Kawasaki, Kanagawa 216-8512, Japan.

DNA methylation is essential for epigenetic gene regulation during development.
The cyclic AMP (cAMP)-responsive element (CRE) is found in the promoter of many
cAMP-regulated genes and plays important roles in their gene expression.
Methylation occurs on the CRE site and results in transcriptional repression via 
a direct mechanism, that is, prevention by the methyl group of binding of the
cAMP-responsive factor CREB to this site. A recent study indicated that the
nucleosome is also important in repressing transcription. In this study, we
investigated the regulation of transcriptional repression on methylated CRE. We
focused on methyl-CpG binding domain protein 2 (MBD2). MBD2 consists of two
forms, MBD2a and MBD2b, the latter lacking the N-terminal extension of MBD2a.
Unexpectedly, we found that MBD2a, but not MBD2b, promoted activation of the
unmethylated cAMP-responsive genes. An in vivo binding assay revealed that MBD2a 
selectively interacted with RNA helicase A (RHA), a component of CREB
transcriptional coactivator complexes. MBD2a and RHA cooperatively enhanced
CREB-dependent gene expression. Interestingly, coimmunoprecipitation assays
demonstrated that MBD2a binding to RHA was not associated with histone
deacetylase 1. Our results indicate a novel role for MBD2a in gene regulation.

PMCID: PMC152551
PMID: 12665568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Mar 21;302(4):759-66.

Methyl-CpG-DNA binding proteins in human prostate cancer: expression of CXXC
sequence containing MBD1 and repression of MBD2 and MeCP2.

Patra SK(1), Patra A, Zhao H, Carroll P, Dahiya R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Urology Research Center (112F), University of
California at San Francisco and Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 4150 Clement
Street, San Francisco, CA 94121, USA.

We analyzed gene expression of MBD1, MBD2, MBD3, MBD4, and MeCP2 and protein
expression of MBD1, MBD2, and MeCP2 in prostate cancer cell lines, benign
prostate epithelium (BPH-1) cell line, 49 BPH tissues, and 46 prostate cancer
tissues. The results of this study demonstrate that MBD2 gene is expressed in all
samples and MeCP2 gene is expressed in all cancer cell lines but not in BPH-1
cell line. However, there was no protein expression for MBD2 and MeCP2 in cancer 
cell lines and cancer tissues. For CXXC sequence containing MBD1, both protein
and mRNA were expressed in cancer cell lines, cancer tissues, BPH-1 cell line,
and BPH tissues. We observed that, in BPH tissues and low-grade cancer tissues,
MBD1 protein expression was very high and gradually decreased with increase of
cancer grade. Treatment of cancer cell lines with proteasome inhibitor (MG-132)
did not restore expression of MBD2 and MeCP2 proteins. When prostate cancer cell 
lines were treated with hypomethylating agent, 5-aza-2(')-deoxycytidine (DNMT
inhibitor), HDAC1 and HDAC2 expression was decreased. This is the first report
demonstrating that CXXC sequence containing MBD1 is overexpressed and can be the 
major factor of hypermethylated chromatin segments through HDAC1/2 translocation 
and histone deacetylation in human prostate cancer.

PMID: 12646234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Virol. 2003 Apr;77(7):4261-72.

Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen 3C recruits histone deacetylase activity and
associates with the corepressors mSin3A and NCoR in human B-cell lines.

Knight JS(1), Lan K, Subramanian C, Robertson ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Abramson Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of Pennsylvania Medical School, Philadelphia 19104, USA.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) nuclear antigen 3C (EBNA3C) is a known regulatory
transcription factor that has been shown to interact with histone deacetylase 1
(HDAC1) when cotransfected in human cell lines and by in vitro binding
experiments. Previous studies have shown that EBNA3C interacts with p300 and
prothymosin alpha (ProTalpha) in EBV-infected cells and may be involved in
recruiting acetyltransferases to the chromatin for acetylation of histones and
transcriptional activation. EBNA3C has also been shown to function as a repressor
of transcription when directed to promoters. In this report, we show that EBNA3C 
complexed with ProTalpha can also recruit deacetylase activity and associates in 
a complex that includes HDAC1 and HDAC2 in human B cells. A complex of EBNA3C and
ProTalpha coimmunoprecipitated with HDAC1 and HDAC2 in cell lines stably
expressing EBNA3C. Additionally, this complex associated with the mSin3A and NCoR
corepressors in EBNA3C-expressing cell lines and may function in a complex with
additional transcription factors known to be repressors of transcription. EBNA3C 
in complex with ProTalpha recruited deacetylase activity in cell lines stably
expressing EBNA3C, and this activity was shown to be partially sensitive to
trichostatin A (TSA). This suggests an association with other deacetylases that
are insensitive to the general inhibitory effects of TSA, as the entire activity 
was not abolished in multiple assays. The association between EBNA3C and the
corepressors as well as HDACs is likely to depend on the presence of ProTalpha in
the complex. Immunoprecipitation with anti-ProTalpha antibody immunoprecipitated 
EBNA3C and the other repressors, whereas immunoprecipitation with anti-EBNA3C
antibody resulted in little or no association with these molecules associated
with transcription repression. Clearly, EBNA3C functions as a component of a
number of dynamic complexes which function in repression and activation of
transcription.

PMCID: PMC150657
PMID: 12634383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Mar 18;100(6):3245-50. Epub 2003 Mar 10.

Regulated subset of G1 growth-control genes in response to derepression by the
Wnt pathway.

Baek SH(1), Kioussi C, Briata P, Wang D, Nguyen HD, Ohgi KA, Glass CK,
Wynshaw-Boris A, Rose DW, Rosenfeld MG.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Medicine, University of
California-San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0648, USA.

Pitx2 is a bicoid-related homeodomain factor that is required for effective cell 
type-specific proliferation directly activating a specific growth-regulating gene
cyclin D2. Here, we report that Pitx2, in response to the Wntbeta-catenin pathway
and growth signals, also can regulate c-Myc and cyclin D1. Investigation of
molecular mechanisms required for Pitx2-dependent proliferation, in these cases, 
further supports a nuclear role for beta-catenin in preventing the histone
deacetylase 1-dependent inhibitory functions of several DNA-binding
transcriptional repressors, potentially including E2F4p130 pocket protein
inhibitory complex, as well as lymphoid enhancer factor 1 and Pitx2, by dismissal
of histone deacetylase 1 and loss of its enzymatic activity. Thus, beta-catenin
plays a signal-integrating role in Wnt- and growth factor-dependent proliferation
events in mammalian development by both derepressing several classes of
repressors and by activating Pitx2, regulating the activity of several growth
control genes.

PMCID: PMC152277
PMID: 12629224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Mar 15;31(6):1693-703.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors stimulate mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase gene
expression via a promoter proximal Sp1 site.

Camarero N(1), Nadal A, Barrero MJ, Haro D, Marrero PF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Pharmacy,
University of Barcelona, Av. Diagonal 643, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.

The expression of mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase in the colon has been correlated
with the levels of butyrate present in this tissue. We report here that the
effect of butyrate on mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase gene expression is exerted
in vivo at the transcriptional level, and that trichostatin A (TSA), a specific
histone deacetylase inhibitor, also induces transcriptional activity and mRNA
expression of the gene in human cell lines derived from colon carcinoma. Using
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, we show that histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) 
is associated with the endogenous mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase promoter and
that TSA induction correlates with hyperacetylation of H4 histone associated with
the 5' flanking region of the gene. Overexpression of HDAC1 activity leads
consistently to mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase promoter hypoacetylation and
reduces its transcriptional activity. The effect of butyrate and TSA maps to a
single Sp1 site present in the proximal promoter of the gene, which is able to
bind Sp1 and Sp3 proteins. Interestingly, the binding affinity of Sp1 and Sp3
proteins to the Sp1 site correlates with the TSA responsiveness of the promoter. 
Using a one-hybrid system (GAL4-Sp1 and GAL4-Sp3), we show that both proteins can
mediate responsiveness to TSA in CaCo-2 cells employing distinct mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC152864
PMID: 12626711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Cell Biochem. 2003 Apr 1;88(5):855-64.

Biochemical fractionation reveals association of DNA methyltransferase (Dnmt) 3b 
with Dnmt1 and that of Dnmt 3a with a histone H3 methyltransferase and Hdac1.

Datta J(1), Ghoshal K, Sharma SM, Tajima S, Jacob ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, College of Medicine, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

De novo DNA methyltransferases, Dnmt3a and 3b, were purified by fractionation of 
S-100 extract from mouse lymphosarcoma cells through several chromatographic
matrices followed by glycerol density gradient centrifugation. Dnmt3a was
separated from Dnmt3b and Dnmt1 in the first column, Q-Sepharose whereas Dnmt3b
co-purified with Dnmt1 after further fractionation through Mono-S and Mono-Q
columns and glycerol density gradient centrifugation. Following purification, the
majority of de novo DNA methyltransfearse activity was associated with
Dnmt3b/Dnmt1 fractions. By contrast, the fractions containing Dnmt3a alone
exhibited markedly reduced activity, which correlated with diminished expression 
of this isoform in these cells. Histone deacetylase 1(Hdac1) cofractionated with 
Dnmt3a throughout purification whereas Hdac1 was separated from Dnmt3b/Dnmt1
following chromatography on Mono-Q column. Dnmt3a purified through glycerol
gradient centrifugation was also associated with a histone H3 methyltransferase
(HMTase) activity whereas purified Dnmt3b/Dnmt1 was devoid of any HMTase
activity. The activity of this HMTase was abolished when lysine 9 of N-terminal
histone H3 peptide was replaced by leucine whereas mutation of lysine 4 to
leucine inhibited this activity only partially. This is the first report on the
identification of a few key co-repressors associated with endogenous Dnmt3a and
of a complex containing Dnmt3b and a minor form of Dnmt1 following extensive
biochemical fractionation.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12616525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Mol Cancer Res. 2003 Feb;1(4):247-61.

DJBP: a novel DJ-1-binding protein, negatively regulates the androgen receptor by
recruiting histone deacetylase complex, and DJ-1 antagonizes this inhibition by
abrogation of this complex.

Niki T(1), Takahashi-Niki K, Taira T, Iguchi-Ariga SM, Ariga H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences and College of Medical Technology, 
Hokkaido University, Kita-ku, Sapporo, Japan.

DJ-1 was identified by us as a novel oncogene that transforms mouse NIH3T3 cells 
in cooperation with ras. We later identified PIAS (protein inhibitor of activated
STAT)xalpha as a DJ-1-binding protein, and found that DJ-1 restored androgen
receptor (AR) transcription activity that was repressed by PIASxalpha. To further
characterize the function of DJ-1, we cloned cDNA encoding a novel DJ-1-binding
protein, DJBP, by a yeast two-hybrid system. DJBP mRNA was found to be
specifically expressed in the testis. In addition to the binding of DJBP to the
COOH-terminal region of DJ-1, DJBP was also found to bind in vitro and in vivo to
the DNA-binding domain of the AR in a testosterone-dependent manner and to be
colocalized with DJ-1 or AR in the nucleus. Furthermore, a co-immunoprecipitation
assay showed that the formation of a ternary complex between DJ-1, DJBP, and AR
occurred in cells in which DJ-1 bound to the AR via DJBP. It was found that DJBP 
repressed a testosterone-dependent AR transactivation activity in monkey Cos1
cells by recruiting histone deacetylase (HDAC) complex, including HDAC1 and
mSin3, and that DJ-1 partially restored its repressed activity by abrogating
DJBP-HDAC complex. These results suggest that AR is positively regulated by DJ-1,
which antagonizes the function of negative regulators, including DJBP.

PMID: 12612053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Nat Struct Biol. 2003 Mar;10(3):151-2.

The decline of induced transcription: a case of enzymatic symbiosis.

Sassone-Corsi P.

Comment on
    Nat Struct Biol. 2003 Mar;10(3):175-81.

PMID: 12605216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Plant J. 2003 Feb;33(3):531-41.

Structure and expression of the rice class-I type histone deacetylase genes
OsHDAC1-3: OsHDAC1 overexpression in transgenic plants leads to increased growth 
rate and altered architecture.

Jang IC(1), Pahk YM, Song SI, Kwon HJ, Nahm BH, Kim JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Myongji University, Yongin 449-728, Korea.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) modulate chromatin structure and transcription.
HDACs have been studied as negative regulators in eukaryotic transcription. We
isolated the rice OsHDAC1-3 genes for class I-type histone deacetylases, which
are related to the RPD3 family. The OsHDAC1 gene encoded a protein of
approximately 57 kDa that shared 73.5, 72.7, 79.9, and 57.1% amino acid sequence 
identity with the OsHDAC2, OsHDAC3, maize RPD3, and human HDAC1 proteins,
respectively. Genomic structures and Southern blot analyses revealed that
OsHDAC1-3 contained seven, six, and seven exons, respectively, and constituted a 
class I-type family in the rice genome. OsHDAC1 was expressed at similar levels
in the leaves, roots, and callus cells, whereas OsHDAC2 and 3 were expressed in
the roots and callus cells, but not in the leaves, exhibiting distinct tissue
specificity. To explore the role of histone deacetylases in transgenic plants, we
inserted the OsHDAC1 cDNA fragment into the expression vector Ai::OsHDAC1 under
the control of the ABA-inducible promoter Ai, and transformed the construct into 
rice. Levels of mRNA, protein, and HDAC activity were significantly increased in 
Ai::OsHDAC1 callus cells. The amount of tetra-acetylated H4 in the transgenic
cells was greatly reduced, and the reduction was abolished upon treatment with
trichostatin A. These results demonstrate that OsHDAC1 overexpression in
transgenic cells both yields enzymatically active HDAC complexes and induces
changes in histone acetylation in vivo. The overexpression leads to a range of
novel phenotypes, involving increased growth rate and altered plant architecture,
suggesting that OsHDAC1 functions in the genome-wide programming of gene
expression.

PMID: 12581311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Oncol Rep. 2003 Mar-Apr;10(2):333-8.

Histone H4 acetylation and histone deacetylase 1 expression in esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma.

Toh Y(1), Yamamoto M, Endo K, Ikeda Y, Baba H, Kohnoe S, Yonemasu H, Hachitanda
Y, Okamura T, Sugimachi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, National Kyushu Cancer Center,
Fukuoka 811-1395, Japan. ytoh@nk-cc.go.jp

The alterations of the chromatin structure by histone acetylases (HATs) and
histone deacetylases (HDACs) are implicated in the regulation of gene
transcription and also in the process of carcinogenesis. HDAC inhibitors have
been shown to be potent inducers of growth arrest, differentiation and/or
apoptotic cell death of transformed cells and, as a result, they are currently
receiving considerable attention as antitumor agents. In this study, we examined 
the status of histone H4 acetylation and the level of HDAC1 expression in
surgically resected specimens of human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma by
immunohistochemistry. We herein demonstrate that histone H4 of esophageal
carcinoma cells was significantly hyperacetylated in the early stage of cancer
invasion and thereafter changed into a hypoacetylated state according to the
degree of cancer progression. The cases in which HDAC1 was less expressed in
esophageal carcinoma cells than in the normal mucosa significantly increased as
the carcinoma invaded into the deeper layers of the esophageal wall. Furthermore,
both the hyperacetylation of histone H4 and the high expression of HDAC1 were
shown to topologically colocalize in the same tumor. These results suggested that
a dynamic equilibrium between the HAT and HDAC activities is disrupted in
esophageal carcinoma, thus implying that a certain interaction may exist between 
the hyperacetylation of histone H4 and the HDAC1 expression.

PMID: 12579268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Feb 18;100(4):1735-9. Epub 2003 Feb 10.

MyoD is functionally linked to the silencing of a muscle-specific regulatory gene
prior to skeletal myogenesis.

Mal A(1), Harter ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Most of the genes that are central to the process of skeletal muscle
differentiation remain in a transcriptionally silent or "off" state until muscle 
cells (myoblasts) are induced to differentiate. Although the mechanisms that
contribute to this phenomenon are still unclear, it is likely that histone
deacetylases (HDACs), which play an important role in the repression of genes,
are principally involved. Recent studies indicate that the initiator of the
myogenic program, namely MyoD, can associate with the deacetylase HDAC1 in vivo, 
and because HDACs are usually recruited to promoters by specific proteins, we
considered the possibility that these two proteins might be acting together at
the promoters of muscle-specific genes to repress their transcription in
myoblasts. In this work, we show by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays
that MyoD and HDAC1 are both occupying the promoter of myogenin and that this
gene is in a region of repressed chromatin, as revealed by enrichment in histone 
H3 lysine 9 (Lys-9) methylation and the underacetylation of histones.
Surprisingly, after the myoblasts are induced to differentiate, the promoter
becomes absent of HDAC1, and eventually the acetyltransferase P/CAF takes it
place alongside MyoD. In addition, enrichment of histone H3 acetylation
(Lys-9/14) and phosphorylation of Ser-10 can now be observed at the myogenin
promoter. These data strongly suggest that in addition to its widely accepted
role as an activator of differentiation-specific genes, MyoD also can perform as 
a transcriptional repressor in proliferating myoblasts while in partnership with 
a HDAC.

PMCID: PMC149902
PMID: 12578986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. EMBO J. 2003 Feb 17;22(4):893-904.

STAT5-induced Id-1 transcription involves recruitment of HDAC1 and deacetylation 
of C/EBPbeta.

Xu M(1), Nie L, Kim SH, Sun XH.

Author information: 
(1)Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, 825 NE 13th Street, Oklahoma City, OK
73104, USA.

Transcriptional activation is associated commonly with recruitment of histone
acetylases, while repression involves histone deacetylases (HDACs). Here, we
provide evidence to suggest that STAT5 activates gene expression by recruiting
HDAC. The interleukin-3 (IL-3)-dependent expression of the Id-1 gene, encoding a 
helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcriptional inhibitor, is activated by both C/EBPbeta 
and STAT5 transcription factors bound to its pro-B-cell enhancer (PBE), but is
inhibited by HDAC inhibitors in Ba/F3 cells. STAT5 interacts with HDAC1 in the
PBE region, resulting in deacetylation of histones, as well as C/EBPbeta, whose
acetylation diminishes its DNA-binding activity. Consistently, expression of an
acetylation-resistant mutant of C/EBPbeta results in IL-3-independent expression 
of the Id-1 gene. Thus, we propose a novel mechanism by which STAT5 mediates the 
deacetylation of C/EBPbeta, allowing transcriptional activation.

PMCID: PMC145454
PMID: 12574125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Med Chem. 2003 Feb 13;46(4):512-24.

3-(4-Aroyl-1-methyl-1H-2-pyrrolyl)-N-hydroxy-2-alkylamides as a new class of
synthetic histone deacetylase inhibitors. 1. Design, synthesis, biological
evaluation, and binding mode studies performed through three different docking
procedures.

Mai A(1), Massa S, Ragno R, Cerbara I, Jesacher F, Loidl P, Brosch G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Studi Farmaceutici, Università degli Studi di Roma "La
Sapienza", P. le A. Moro 5, 00185 Roma, Italy.

Recently we reported a novel series of hydroxamates, called
3-(4-aroyl-1H-2-pyrrolyl)-N-hydroxy-2-propenamides (APHAs), acting as HDAC
inhibitors (Massa, S.; et al. J. Med. Chem. 2001, 44, 2069-2072). Among them,
3-(4-benzoyl-1-methyl-1H-2-pyrrolyl)-N-hydroxy-2-propenamide 1 was chosen as lead
compound, and its binding mode into the modeled HDAC1 catalytic core together
with its histone hyperacetylation, antiproliferative, and cytodifferentiating
properties in cell-based assays were investigated (Mai, A.; et al. J. Med. Chem. 
2002, 45, 1778-1784). Here we report the results of some chemical manipulations
performed on (i) the aroyl portion at the C4-pyrrole position, (ii) the
N(1)-pyrrole substituent, and (iii) the hydroxamate moiety of 1 to determine
structure-activity relationships and to improve enzyme inhibitory activity of
APHAs. In the 1 structure, pyrrole N(1)-substitution with groups larger than
methyl gave a reduction in HDAC inhibiting activity, and replacement of
hydroxamate function with various non-hydroxamate, metal ion-complexing groups
yielded poorly active or totally inactive compounds. On the contrary, proper
substitution at the C4-position favorably affected enzyme inhibiting potency,
leading to 8 (IC50 = 0.1 micro M) and 9 (IC50 = 1.0 micro M) which were 38- and
3.8-fold more potent than 1 in in vitro anti-HD2 assay. Against mouse HDAC1, 8
showed an IC50 = 0.5 micro M (IC50 of 1 = 4.9 micro M), and also in cell-based
assay, 8 was endowed with higher histone hyperacetylating activity than 1,
although it was less potent than TSA and SAHA. Such enhancement of inhibitory
activity can be explained by the higher flexibility of the pyrrole C4-substituent
of 8 which accounts for a considerably better fitting into the HDAC1 pocket and a
more favorable enthalpy ligand receptor energy compared to 1. The enhanced fit
allows a closer positioning of 8 hydroxamate moiety to the zinc ion. These
findings were supported by extensive docking studies (SAD, DOCK, and Autodock)
performed on both APHAs and reference drugs (TSA and SAHA).

PMID: 12570373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Nat Struct Biol. 2003 Mar;10(3):175-81.

Attenuation of a phosphorylation-dependent activator by an HDAC-PP1 complex.

Canettieri G(1), Morantte I, Guzmán E, Asahara H, Herzig S, Anderson SD, Yates JR
3rd, Montminy M.

Author information: 
(1)Peptide Biology Laboratories, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 10010
North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Struct Biol. 2003 Mar;10(3):151-2.

The second messenger cAMP stimulates transcription with burst-attenuation
kinetics that mirror the PKA-dependent phosphorylation and subsequent protein
phosphatase 1 (PP1)-mediated dephosphorylation of the cAMP responsive element
binding protein (CREB) at Ser133. Phosphorylation of Ser133 promotes recruitment 
of the co-activator histone acetylase (HAT) paralogs CBP and P300, which in turn 
stimulate acetylation of promoter-bound histones during the burst phase.
Remarkably, histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors seem to potentiate CREB
activity by prolonging Ser133 phosphorylation in response to cAMP stimulus,
suggesting a potential role for HDAC complexes in silencing CREB activity. Here
we show that HDAC1 associates with and blocks Ser133 phosphorylation of CREB
during pre-stimulus and attenuation phases of the cAMP response. HDAC1 promotes
Ser133 dephosphorylation via a stable interaction with PP1, which we detected in 
co-immunoprecipitation and co-purification studies. These results illustrate a
novel mechanism by which signaling and chromatin-modifying activities act
coordinately to repress the activity of a phosphorylation-dependent activator.

PMID: 12567184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Biol Reprod. 2003 Feb;68(2):383-9.

Quantification of histone acetyltransferase and histone deacetylase transcripts
during early bovine embryo development.

McGraw S(1), Robert C, Massicotte L, Sirard MA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Biologie de la Reproduction, Department of Animal
Sciences, Laval University, Québec, Canada G1K 7P4.

Mammalian oocytes are very unique cells with an unlimited developmental
potential. These totipotent cells are able to remove existing gene-expression
patterns and to impose new ones. However, genome reprogramming is still a
mystery. Posttranslational modifications by acetylation of the N-termini portion 
of histones composing the nucleosome are involved in genome reprogramming. These 
modifications alter the higher-order chromatin structure to render the DNA
accessible to the regulatory and transcriptional machinery. In the present study,
we have investigated, to our knowledge for the first time, precise expression
patterns of seven genes involved in chromatin structure throughout bovine embryo 
development. Oocytes harvested from bovine ovaries were used for in vitro
production of germinal vesicle oocytes, metaphase II oocytes, 2- and 8-cell
embryos, and blastocysts. Total RNA was extracted from pools (triplicates) of 20 
oocytes or from embryos of each developmental stage. By means of quantitative
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction using SYBR Green to detect
double-stranded DNA, mRNA expression profiles for histone deacetylases (HDAC1,
HDAC2, HDAC3, and HDAC7), histone acetyltransferases (GCN5 and HAT1), and histone
H2A were established. Transcripts for all genes were detected at all stages from 
the oocyte to the blastocyst. The HDAC1, HDAC2 (class I HDAC), and HAT1 (type B
HAT) revealed similar expression profiles. The HDAC3 (class I HDAC) tends to have
an expression profile similar to those of HDAC1, HDAC2, and HAT1, whereas the
HDAC7 (class II HDAC) and GCN5 (type A HAT) profiles were different from those
three. These results indicate variable levels of histone deacetylases and histone
acetyltransferases throughout embryonic development and may indicate the ones
that are involved in somatic remodeling.

PMID: 12533400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Feb;23(3):1025-33.

Interaction of histone acetylases and deacetylases in vivo.

Yamagoe S(1), Kanno T, Kanno Y, Sasaki S, Siegel RM, Lenardo MJ, Humphrey G, Wang
Y, Nakatani Y, Howard BH, Ozato K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Growth Regulation, National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892,
USA.

Having opposing enzymatic activities, histone acetylases (HATs) and deacetylases 
affect chromatin and regulate transcription. The activities of the two enzymes
are thought to be balanced in the cell by an unknown mechanism that may involve
their direct interaction. Using fluorescence resonance energy transfer analysis, 
we demonstrated that the acetylase PCAF and histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) are in 
close spatial proximity in living cells, compatible with their physical
interaction. In agreement, coimmunoprecipitation assays demonstrated that
endogenous HDACs are associated with PCAF and another acetylase, GCN5, in HeLa
cells. We found by glycerol gradient sedimentation analysis that HATs are
integrated into a large multiprotein HDAC complex that is distinct from the
previously described HDAC complexes containing mSin3A, Mi-2/NRD, or CoREST. This 
HDAC-HAT association is partly accounted for by a direct protein-protein
interaction observed in vitro. The HDAC-HAT complex may play a role in
establishing a dynamic equilibrium of the two enzymes in vivo.

PMCID: PMC140702
PMID: 12529406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Feb;23(3):950-60.

Homeodomain-interacting protein kinase 1 modulates Daxx localization,
phosphorylation, and transcriptional activity.

Ecsedy JA(1), Michaelson JS, Leder P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

We describe an interaction between homeodomain-interacting protein kinase 1
(HIPK1) and Daxx, two transcriptional regulators important in transducing
growth-regulatory signals. We demonstrate that HIPK1 is ubiquitously expressed in
mice and humans and localizes predominantly to the nucleus. Daxx normally resides
within the nucleus in promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) oncogenic domains
(PODs), where it physically interacts with PML. Under certain circumstances, Daxx
is relocalized from PODs to chromatin, where it then acts as a transcriptional
repressor through an association with histone deacetylase (HDAC1). We propose two
novel mechanisms for regulating the activity of Daxx, both mediated by HIPK1.
First, HIPK1 physically interacts with Daxx in cells and consequently relocalizes
Daxx from PODs. Daxx relocalization disrupts its interaction with PML and
augments its interaction with HDAC1, likely influencing Daxx activity. Although
the relocalization of Daxx from PODs is phosphorylation independent, an active
HIPK1 kinase domain is required, suggesting that HIPK1 autophosphorylation is
important in this interaction. Second, HIPK1 phosphorylates Daxx on Ser 669, and 
phosphorylation of this site is important in modulating the ability of Daxx to
function as a transcriptional repressor. Mutation of Daxx Ser 669 to Ala results 
in increased repression in three of four transcriptional reporters, suggesting
that phosphorylation by HIPK1 diminishes Daxx transcriptional repression of
specific promoters. Taken together, our results indicate that HIPK1 and Daxx
collaborate in regulating transcription.

PMCID: PMC140690
PMID: 12529400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 28;278(9):7234-9. Epub 2002 Dec 18.

A candidate X-linked mental retardation gene is a component of a new family of
histone deacetylase-containing complexes.

Hakimi MA(1), Dong Y, Lane WS, Speicher DW, Shiekhattar R.

Author information: 
(1)Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Eukaryotic genes are under the control of regulatory complexes acting through
chromatin structure to control gene expression. Here we report the identification
of a family of multiprotein corepressor complexes that function through modifying
chromatin structure to keep genes silent. The polypeptide composition of these
complexes has in common a core of two subunits, HDAC1,2 and BHC110, an
FAD-binding protein. A candidate X-linked mental retardation gene and the
transcription initiation factor II-I (TFII-I) are components of a novel member of
this family of complexes. Other subunits of these complexes include polypeptides 
associated with cancer causing chromosomal translocations. These findings not
only delineate a novel class of multiprotein complexes involved in
transcriptional repression but also reveal an unanticipated role for TFII-I in
transcriptional repression.

PMID: 12493763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Jan;23(1):250-8.

Human MI-ER1 alpha and beta function as transcriptional repressors by recruitment
of histone deacetylase 1 to their conserved ELM2 domain.

Ding Z(1), Gillespie LL, Paterno GD.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Cancer Research Laboratories, Division of Basic Medical Sciences,
Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John's, Canada A1B 
3V6.

mi-er1 (previously called er1) was first isolated from Xenopus laevis embryonic
cells as a novel fibroblast growth factor-regulated immediate-early gene. Xmi-er1
was shown to encode a nuclear protein with an N-terminal acidic transcription
activation domain. The human orthologue of mi-er1 (hmi-er1) displays 91%
similarity to the Xenopus sequence at the amino acid level and was shown to be
upregulated in breast carcinoma cell lines and tumors. Alternative splicing at
the 3' end of hmi-er1 produces two major isoforms, hMI-ER1alpha and hMI-ER1beta, 
which contain distinct C-terminal domains. In this study, we investigated the
role of hMI-ER1alpha and hMI-ER1beta in the regulation of transcription. Using
fusion proteins of hMI-ER1alpha or hMI-ER1beta tethered to the GAL4 DNA binding
domain, we show that both isoforms, when recruited to the G5tkCAT minimal
promoter, function to repress transcription. We demonstrate that this repressor
activity is due to interaction and recruitment of a trichostatin A-sensitive
histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1). Furthermore, deletion analysis revealed that
recruitment of HDAC1 to hMI-ER1alpha and hMI-ER1beta occurs through their common 
ELM2 domain. The ELM2 domain was first described in the Caenorhabditis elegans
Egl-27 protein and is present in a number of SANT domain-containing transcription
factors. This is the first report of a function for the ELM2 domain, highlighting
its role in the regulation of transcription.

PMCID: PMC140656
PMID: 12482978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 14;278(7):4806-12. Epub 2002 Dec 6.

Methyl-CpG-binding protein, MeCP2, is a target molecule for maintenance DNA
methyltransferase, Dnmt1.

Kimura H(1), Shiota K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Biochemistry, Department of Animal Resource
Sciences/Veterinary Medical Sciences, University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.

During mammalian cell division, DNA methylation patterns are transferred
accurately to the newly synthesized DNA strand. This depends on maintenance DNA
methyltransferase activity. DNA methylation can affect chromatin organization and
gene expression by recruitment of histone deacetylases (HDACs). Here we show that
the methyl-CpG binding protein, MeCP2, interacts directly with the maintenance
DNA methyltransferase, Dnmt1. The region of MeCP2 that interacts with Dnmt1
corresponds to the transcription repressor domain which can also recruit HDACs
via a corepressor, mSin3A. Dnmt1 can form complexes with HDACs as well as MeCP2. 
Surprisingly, the MeCP2-Dnmt1 complex does not contain the histone deacetylase,
HDAC1. Thus, Dnmt1 takes the place of the mSin3A-HDAC1 complex, indicating that
the MeCP2-interacting Dnmt1 does not bind to HDAC1. Further, we demonstrate that 
MeCP2 can form a complex with hemimethylated as well as fully methylated DNA.
Immunoprecipitated MeCP2 complexes show DNA methyltransferase activity to
hemimethylated DNA. These results suggest that Dnmt1 associates with MeCP2 in
order to perform maintenance methylation in vivo. We propose that genome-wide
and/or -specific local DNA methylation may be maintained by the Dnmt1-MeCP2
complexes, bound to hemimethylated DNA. Dnmt1 may be recruited to targeted
regions via multiple steps that may or may not involve histone deacetylases.

PMID: 12473678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Oncogene. 2002 Dec 5;21(55):8388-96.

Prohibitin co-localizes with Rb in the nucleus and recruits N-CoR and HDAC1 for
transcriptional repression.

Wang S(1), Fusaro G, Padmanabhan J, Chellappan SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Interdisciplinary Oncology, H Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and
Research Institute, University of South Florida, 12902 Magnolia Drive, Tampa
33612, USA.

The potential tumor suppressor protein prohibitin can prevent cell proliferation 
and this required its binding to the Rb protein. Prohibitin could repress the
transcriptional activity of E2F family members and this required a part of the
marked box region of E2F. The sub-cellular localization of prohibitin has been
variously attributed to the mitochondria as well as the inner cell membrane. Here
we show that a subset of prohibitin molecules are present in the nucleus where it
co-localizes with the Rb protein. Deletion of a putative amino-terminal
membrane-docking domain of prohibitin had no effect on its ability to suppress
cell proliferation or inhibit E2F activity. Our experiments show that a 53
amino-acid stretch of E2F1 is sufficient for being targeted by prohibitin; fusion
of this region to GAL4-VP16 construct could make it susceptible to
prohibitin-mediated, but not Rb-mediated repression. Prohibitin, like Rb, could
repress transcription from SV40 and major late promoters when recruited directly 
to DNA. Prohibitin mediated transcriptional repression required
histone-deacetylase activity, but unlike Rb, additional co-repressors like N-CoR 
are also involved. Repression by prohibitin correlates with histone deacetylation
on promoters and this was reversed by IgM stimulation of cells; IgM did not
affect Rb-mediated repression or deacetylation of the promoters. Prohibitin thus 
appears to repress E2F-mediated transcription utilizing different molecular
mediators and facilitate channeling of specific signaling pathways to the cell
cycle machinery.

PMID: 12466959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Cell. 2002 Nov 27;111(5):673-85.

Identification of a Wnt/Dvl/beta-Catenin --> Pitx2 pathway mediating
cell-type-specific proliferation during development.

Kioussi C(1), Briata P, Baek SH, Rose DW, Hamblet NS, Herman T, Ohgi KA, Lin C,
Gleiberman A, Wang J, Brault V, Ruiz-Lozano P, Nguyen HD, Kemler R, Glass CK,
Wynshaw-Boris A, Rosenfeld MG.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California, San Diego, School
of Medicine, CMM-West, Room 345, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Understanding the cell type-specific molecular mechanisms by which distinct
signaling pathways combinatorially control proliferation during organogenesis is 
a central issue in development and disease. Here, we report that the
bicoid-related transcription factor Pitx2 is rapidly induced by the
Wnt/Dvl/beta-catenin pathway and is required for effective cell-type-specific
proliferation by directly activating specific growth-regulating genes. Regulated 
exchange of HDAC1/beta-catenin converts Pitx2 from repressor to activator,
analogous to control of TCF/LEF1. Pitx2 then serves as a competence factor
required for the temporally ordered and growth factor-dependent recruitment of a 
series of specific coactivator complexes that prove necessary for Cyclin D2 gene 
induction. The molecular strategy underlying interactions between the Wnt and
growth factor-dependent signaling pathways in cardiac outflow tract and pituitary
proliferation is likely to be prototypic of cell-specific proliferation
strategies in other tissues.

PMID: 12464179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Cancer Cell. 2002 Nov;2(5):387-99.

Che-1 affects cell growth by interfering with the recruitment of HDAC1 by Rb.

Bruno T(1), De Angelis R, De Nicola F, Barbato C, Di Padova M, Corbi N, Libri V, 
Benassi B, Mattei E, Chersi A, Soddu S, Floridi A, Passananti C, Fanciulli M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory B, Via delle Messi d'Oro 156, 00158 Rome, Italy.

DNA tumor virus oncoproteins bind and inactivate Rb by interfering with the
Rb/HDAC1 interaction. Che-1 is a recently identified human Rb binding protein
that inhibits the Rb growth suppressing function. Here we show that Che-1
contacts the Rb pocket region and competes with HDAC1 for Rb binding site,
removing HDAC1 from the Rb/E2F complex in vitro and from the E2F target promoters
in vivo. Che-1 overexpression activates DNA synthesis in quiescent NIH-3T3 cells 
through HDAC1 displacement. Consistently, Che-1-specific RNA interference affects
E2F activity and cell proliferation in human fibroblasts but not in the pocket
protein-defective 293 cells. These findings indicate the existence of a pathway
of Rb regulation supporting Che-1 as the cellular counterpart of DNA tumor virus 
oncoproteins.

PMID: 12450794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Cancer Res. 2002 Nov 15;62(22):6519-28.

An estrogen-responsive element-targeted histone deacetylase enzyme has an
antiestrogen activity that differs from that of hydroxytamoxifen.

Demirpence E(1), Semlali A, Oliva J, Balaguer P, Badia E, Duchesne MJ, Nicolas
JC, Pons M.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U439, 34090 Montpellier, France.

We showed previously that prolonged treatment of a MCF-7-derived cell line with
hydroxytamoxifen (OHT) induces the irreversible silencing of some
estrogen-responsive genes, whereas OHT-resistant cell growth appears
simultaneously (E. Badia et al., Cancer Res., 60: 4130-4138, 2000). Based on the 
hypothesis that particular gene silencings could be involved in triggering the
resistance phenomenon, we focused our study on the mechanism of OHT-induced
silencing. More precisely, we wished to determine to what extent the recruited
histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity, which is known to be involved in the
repressive effect induced by antagonist ligands of nuclear receptors, could
participate in various aspects of OHT effects, particularly in gene silencing. A 
fusion protein (HDAC-EG) of human HDAC1 fused with the estrogen receptor
DNA-binding domain and the glucocorticoid receptor ligand-binding domain allowed 
targeting of chimeric HDAC1 activity on estrogen-responsive elements (EREs) in
the presence of glucocorticoid ligands. When HDAC-EG was transiently expressed in
HeLa cells together with estrogen receptor, an antiestrogen-like effect was
obtained on an ERE-controlled luciferase reporter gene in the presence of agonist
or antagonist glucocorticoids. In MCF-7-derived cells stably expressing HDAC-EG
and an estrogen-regulated luciferase, liganded HDAC-EG again produced an
antiestrogenic effect on expression of natural estrogen-regulated genes such as
pS2, progesterone receptor, and cathepsin D and cell growth together with
chimeric luciferase gene expression. However, a prolonged HDAC-EG-mediated
antiestrogen effect did not lead to irreversible luciferase gene silencing, as
OHT does. It nevertheless accelerated the OHT-driven phenomenon. The antiestrogen
effect of OHT thus differs from that of an ERE-targeted HDAC1 activity that might
participate in irreversible silencing but is not sufficient to trigger it.

PMID: 12438246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Genes Dev. 2002 Nov 15;16(22):2893-905.

Histone methyltransferase activity associated with a human multiprotein complex
containing the Enhancer of Zeste protein.

Kuzmichev A(1), Nishioka K, Erdjument-Bromage H, Tempst P, Reinberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Division of Nucleic Acids Enzymology,
Department of Biochemistry, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey,
Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA.

Enhancer of Zeste [E(z)] is a Polycomb-group transcriptional repressor and one of
the founding members of the family of SET domain-containing proteins. Several
SET-domain proteins possess intrinsic histone methyltransferase (HMT) activity.
However, recombinant E(z) protein was found to be inactive in a HMT assay. Here
we report the isolation of a multiprotein E(z) complex that contains extra sex
combs, suppressor of zeste-12 [Su(z)12], and the histone binding proteins
RbAp46/RbAp48. This complex, which we termed Polycomb repressive complex (PRC) 2,
possesses HMT activity with specificity for Lys 9 (K9) and Lys 27 (K27) of
histone H3. The HMT activity of PRC2 is dependent on an intact SET domain in the 
E(z) protein. We hypothesize that transcriptional repression by the E(z) protein 
involves methylation-dependent recruitment of PRC1. The presence of Su(z)12, a
strong suppressor of position effect variegation, in PRC2 suggests that PRC2 may 
play a widespread role in heterochromatin-mediated silencing.

PMCID: PMC187479
PMID: 12435631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. EMBO J. 2002 Nov 15;21(22):6236-45.

MDM2-HDAC1-mediated deacetylation of p53 is required for its degradation.

Ito A(1), Kawaguchi Y, Lai CH, Kovacs JJ, Higashimoto Y, Appella E, Yao TP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University, Durham, NC
27710, USA.

The tumor suppressor p53 is stabilized and activated in response to cellular
stress through post-translational modifications including acetylation.
p300/CBP-mediated acetylation of p53 is negatively regulated by MDM2. Here we
show that MDM2 can promote p53 deacetylation by recruiting a complex containing
HDAC1. The HDAC1 complex binds MDM2 in a p53-independent manner and deacetylates 
p53 at all known acetylated lysines in vivo. Ectopic expression of a
dominant-negative HDAC1 mutant restores p53 acetylation in the presence of MDM2, 
whereas wild-type HDAC1 and MDM2 deacetylate p53 synergistically. Fibroblasts
overexpressing a dominant negative HDAC1 mutant display enhanced DNA
damage-induced p53 acetylation, increased levels of p53 and a more pronounced
induction of p21 and MDM2. These results indicate that acetylation promotes p53
stability and function. As the acetylated p53 lysine residues overlap with those 
that are ubiquitylated, our results suggest that one major function of p53
acetylation is to promote p53 stability by preventing MDM2-dependent
ubiquitylation, while recruitment of HDAC1 by MDM2 promotes p53 degradation by
removing these acetyl groups.

PMCID: PMC137207
PMID: 12426395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Dec;22(23):8302-19.

Inhibitors of histone deacetylase and DNA methyltransferase synergistically
activate the methylated metallothionein I promoter by activating the
transcription factor MTF-1 and forming an open chromatin structure.

Ghoshal K(1), Datta J, Majumder S, Bai S, Dong X, Parthun M, Jacob ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, College of Medicine, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

Inhibitors of DNA methyltransferase (Dnmt) and histone deacetylases (HDAC)
synergistically activate the methylated metallothionein I gene (MT-I) promoter in
mouse lymphosarcoma cells. The cooperative effect of these two classes of
inhibitors on MT-I promoter activity was robust following demethylation of only a
few CpG dinucleotides by brief exposure to 5-azacytidine (5-AzaC) but persisted
even after prolonged treatment with the nucleoside analog. HDAC inhibitors
(trichostatin A [TSA] and depsipeptide) either alone or in combination with
5-AzaC did not facilitate demethylation of the MT-I promoter. Treatment of cells 
with HDAC inhibitors increased accumulation of multiply acetylated forms of H3
and H4 histones that remained unaffected after treatment with 5-AzaC. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay showed increased association of acetylated
histone H4 and lysine 9 (K9)-acetyl H3 with the MT-I promoter after treatment
with TSA, which was not affected following treatment with 5-AzaC. In contrast,
the association of K9-methyl histone H3 with the MT-I promoter decreased
significantly after treatment with 5-AzaC and TSA. ChIP assay with antibodies
specific for methyl-CpG binding proteins (MBDs) demonstrated that only methyl-CpG
binding protein 2 (MeCP2) was associated with the MT-I promoter, which was
significantly enhanced after TSA treatment. Association of histone deacetylase 1 
(HDAC1) with the promoter decreased after treatment with TSA or 5-AzaC and was
abolished after treatment with both inhibitors. Among the DNA methyltransferases,
both Dnmt1 and Dnmt3a were associated with the MT-I promoter in the lymphosarcoma
cells, and association of Dnmt1 decreased with time after treatment with 5-AzaC. 
Treatment of these cells with HDAC inhibitors also increased expression of the
MTF-1 (metal transcription factor-1) gene as well as its DNA binding activity. In
vivo genomic footprinting studies demonstrated increased occupancy of MTF-1 to
metal response elements of the MT-I promoter after treatment with both
inhibitors. Analysis of the promoter by mapping with restriction enzymes in vivo 
showed that the MT-I promoter attained a more open chromatin structure after
combined treatment with 5-AzaC and TSA as opposed to treatment with either agent 
alone. These results implicate involvement of multifarious factors including
modified histones, MBDs, and Dnmts in silencing the methylated MT-I promoter in
lymphosarcoma cells. The synergistic activation of this promoter by these two
types of inhibitors is due to demethylation of the promoter and altered
association of different factors that leads to reorganization of the chromatin
and the resultant increase in accessibility of the promoter to the activated
transcription factor MTF-1.

PMCID: PMC134057
PMID: 12417732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Cancer Res. 2002 Nov 1;62(21):6231-9.

Down-regulation of p300/CBP histone acetyltransferase activates a senescence
checkpoint in human melanocytes.

Bandyopadhyay D(1), Okan NA, Bales E, Nascimento L, Cole PA, Medrano EE.

Author information: 
(1)Huffington Center on Aging and Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The histone acetyltransferases p300 and cAMP-responsive element-binding
protein-binding protein (CBP) are required for the execution of critical
biological functions such as proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. Both 
proteins are believed to regulate the activity of a large number of general and
cell-specific transcription factors. Here we demonstrate a dramatic decrease in
the total cellular levels of p300 and CBP with increasing population doublings of
human normal melanocytes. We show that one consequence of p300 depletion is
transcriptional down-regulation of the cyclin E gene, caused by deacetylation of 
histones at its promoter. The cyclin E promoter was activated by p300 and the
histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A. Conversely, the cyclin E promoter
was repressed by wild-type Retinoblastoma tumor suppressor p105 protein (pRB) and
by a dominant negative p300 mutant (DN p300) that lacks histone acetyltransferase
activity. We also provide evidence of the alternative recruitment of p300 and
histone deacetylase 1 to the cyclin E promoter in proliferating and senescent
melanocytes, respectively. The biological significance of these results was
established by showing that block of p300 activity by overexpression of DN p300
or by Lys-CoA, a specific chemical inhibitor of p300, resulted in growth
inhibition, down-regulation of cyclin E, and activation of the
senescence-associated beta-galactosidase marker in human melanocytes and melanoma
cells. Together, these results provide evidence for the essential role of p300 in
the regulation of proliferation and senescence in cells from melanocytic origin.

PMID: 12414652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Exp Cell Res. 2002 Nov 1;280(2):149-58.

Human CD34+ hematopoietic progenitor cells hyperacetylate core histones in
response to sodium butyrate, but not trichostatin A.

Travers H(1), Spotswood HT, Moss PA, Turner BM.

Author information: 
(1)Chromatin and Gene Expression Group, Department of Anatomy, University of
Birmingham Medical School, Birmingham, B15 2TT, United Kingdom.

Cells positive for the cell surface marker CD34 from bone marrow or umbilical
cord blood form a subset of quiescent, hematopoetic precursors that can establish
human hematopoesis in immunodeficient mice and can progress down various
differentiation pathways in vitro. They provide a valuable model system in which 
progression from quiescent to cycling to differentiated states can be linked to
changes in chromatin and histone modification. We have used the deacetylase
inhibitor sodium butyrate to show that turnover of histone H4 acetates is rapid
and comparable in quiescent and cycling CD34+ cells from human umbilical cord
blood (CD34+ UBC). Surprisingly, the widely used inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA)
had little (cycling cells) or no (quiescent cells) effect on H4 acetylation in
CD34+ UBC. Among five cell types examined, CD34+ UBC were unique in expressing
all (putative) deacetylases tested (HDAC1, -2, -3, -4, -6, -7, and -8 and
SIRT1-4), but no single deacetylase correlated with their TSA resistance. Also,
HDAC1, -2, -3, and -6 complexes isolated from CD34+ UBC by immunoprecipitation
were all inhibited by TSA in vitro. Thus, TSA resistance of CD34+ UBC is not due 
to acquired or intrinsic TSA resistance of their deacetylases and may reflect an 
enhanced ability to process the drug.

PMID: 12413881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Biochem J. 2003 Feb 1;369(Pt 3):651-7.

An ERG (ets-related gene)-associated histone methyltransferase interacts with
histone deacetylases 1/2 and transcription co-repressors mSin3A/B.

Yang L(1), Mei Q, Zielinska-Kwiatkowska A, Matsui Y, Blackburn ML, Benedetti D,
Krumm AA, Taborsky GJ Jr, Chansky HA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, WA 98195, USA. lyang@u.washington.edu

Covalent modifications of histone tails play important roles in gene
transcription and silencing. We recently identified an ERG ( ets -related
gene)-associated protein with a SET (suppressor of variegation, enhancer of zest 
and trithorax) domain (ESET) that was found to have the activity of a histone
H3-specific methyltransferase. In the present study, we investigated the
interaction of ESET with other chromatin remodelling factors. We show that ESET
histone methyltransferase associates with histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and
HDAC2, and that ESET also interacts with the transcription co-repressors mSin3A
and mSin3B. Deletion analysis of ESET reveals that an N-terminal region
containing a tudor domain is responsible for interaction with mSin3A/B and
association with HDAC1/2, and that truncation of ESET enhances its binding to
mSin3. When bound to a promoter, ESET represses the transcription of a downstream
luciferase reporter gene. This repression by ESET is independent of its histone
methyltransferase activity, but correlates with its binding to the mSin3
co-repressors. In addition, the repression can be partially reversed by treatment
with the HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A. Taken together, these data suggest that
ESET histone methyltransferase can form a large, multi-protein complex(es) with
mSin3A/B co-repressors and HDAC1/2 that participates in multiple pathways of
transcriptional repression.

PMCID: PMC1223118
PMID: 12398767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. EMBO Rep. 2002 Nov;3(11):1062-8. Epub 2002 Oct 22.

The adenovirus protein Gam1 interferes with sumoylation of histone deacetylase 1.

Colombo R(1), Boggio R, Seiser C, Draetta GF, Chiocca S.

Author information: 
(1)European Institute of Oncology, Department of Experimental Oncology, Via
Ripamonti 435, 20141 Milan, Italy.

The adenovirus early gene product Gam1 is crucial for virus replication and
induces certain cellular genes by inactivating histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1). We 
demonstrate that Gam1 (i) destroys promyelocitic leukemia nuclear bodies, (ii)
delocalizes SUMO-1 into the cytoplasm and (iii) influences the SUMO-1 pathway. In
addition, we show that Gam1 counteracts HDAC1 sumoylation both in vivo and in
vitro. Sumoylation of HDAC1 does not seem to be absolutely required for HDAC1
biological activity but is part of a complex regulatory circuit that also
includes phosphorylation of the deacetylase. Our data demonstrate that Gam1 is a 
viral protein that can affect simultaneously two signaling pathways: sumoylation 
and acetylation.

PMCID: PMC1307602
PMID: 12393750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Nov;22(22):7820-30.

Activation of the mouse histone deacetylase 1 gene by cooperative histone
phosphorylation and acetylation.

Hauser C(1), Schuettengruber B, Bartl S, Lagger G, Seiser C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Biochemistry, Department of Molecular Biology, University
of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter, A-1030 Vienna, Austria.

Histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) is a major regulator of chromatin structure and
gene expression. Tight control of HDAC1 expression is essential for normal cell
cycle progression of mammalian cells. HDAC1 mRNA levels are regulated by growth
factors and by changes in intracellular deacetylase activity levels. Stimulation 
of the mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade by anisomycin or growth factors, 
together with inhibition of deacetylases by trichostatin A (TSA), leads to stable
histone H3 phosphoacetylation and strongly induced HDAC1 expression. In contrast,
activation of the nucleosomal response by anisomycin alone results only in
transient phosphoacetylation of histone H3 without affecting HDAC1 mRNA levels.
The transcriptional induction of the HDAC1 gene by anisomycin and TSA is
efficiently blocked by H89, an inhibitor of the nucleosomal response. Detailed
studies of the kinetics of histone acetylation and phosphorylation show that the 
two modifications are synergistic and essential for induced HDAC1 transcription. 
Activation of the HDAC1 gene by anisomycin together with TSA or by growth factors
is accompanied by phosphoacetylation of HDAC1 promoter-associated histone H3. Our
results present evidence for a precise regulatory mechanism which allows
induction of the HDAC1 gene in response to proliferation signals and modulation
of HDAC1 expression dependent on intracellular deacetylase levels.

PMCID: PMC134744
PMID: 12391151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Oncogene. 2002 Oct 17;21(47):7241-6.

The interaction of HTLV-1 Tax with HDAC1 negatively regulates the viral gene
expression.

Ego T(1), Ariumi Y, Shimotohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, 
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Histone acetyltransferases (HATs) and histone deacetylases (HDACs) are known to
interact with several transcription factors and regulate their transcriptional
activities. The human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) Tax oncoprotein
activates transcription from its long terminal repeat (LTR) through interaction
with cellular factors such as CREB and a transcriptional coactivator CBP/p300.
However, little is known about the interaction between Tax and transcriptional
repressors. Here, we demonstrate the physical and functional interaction between 
Tax and HDAC1. We found that HDAC1 represses the trans-activation function of Tax
in 293T and MT4 cells. However, this repression was restored by treatment with an
HDAC inhibitor, Trichostatin A. We also observed physical interaction between Tax
and HDAC1 both in vitro and in vivo. The N-terminal region of HDAC1 (amino acid
residues 28-97) was required for this binding. Moreover, HDAC1 inhibited the
synergistic trans-activation of Tax observed on ectopic expression of CBP.
However, this repression was relieved by overexpression of CBP. Thus, HDAC1 is
likely to compete with CBP in binding with Tax and functions as a negative
regulator for the transcriptional activation by Tax.

PMID: 12370815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Biol Chem. 2002 Dec 13;277(50):48714-23. Epub 2002 Sep 26.

MBD3 and HDAC1, two components of the NuRD complex, are localized at
Aurora-A-positive centrosomes in M phase.

Sakai H(1), Urano T, Ookata K, Kim MH, Hirai Y, Saito M, Nojima Y, Ishikawa F.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of
Technology, 4259 Nagatsuta, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan.

MBD3, a component of the histone deacetylase NuRD complex, contains the
methyl-CpG-binding domain (MBD), yet does not possess appreciable mCpG-specific
binding activity. The functional significance of MBD3 in the NuRD complex remains
enigmatic, partly because of the limited availability of biochemical approaches, 
such as immunoprecipitation, to analyze MBD3. In this study, we stably expressed 
the FLAG-tagged version of MBD3 in HeLa cells. We found that MBD3-FLAG was
incorporated into the NuRD complex, and the MBD3-FLAG-containing NuRD complex was
efficiently immunoprecipitated by anti-FLAG antibodies. By exploiting this
system, we found that MBD3 is phosphorylated in vivo in the late G(2) and early M
phases. Moreover, we found that Aurora-A, a serine/threonine kinase active
specifically in the late G(2) and early M phases, phosphorylates MBD3 in vitro,
physically associates with MBD3 in vivo, and co-localizes with MBD3 at the
centrosomes in the early M phase. Interestingly, HDAC1 is distributed at the
centrosomes in a manner similar to MBD3. These results suggest the highly dynamic
nature of the temporal and spatial distributions, as well as the biochemical
modification, of the NuRD complex in M phase, probably through an interaction
with kinases, including Aurora-A. These observations will contribute
significantly to the elucidation of the yet-uncharacterized cell cycle-controlled
functions of the NuRD complex.

PMID: 12354758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Oncogene. 2002 Sep 26;21(43):6703-12.

The transcriptional corepressor MTG16a contains a novel nucleolar targeting
sequence deranged in t (16; 21)-positive myeloid malignancies.

Hoogeveen AT(1), Rossetti S, Stoyanova V, Schonkeren J, Fenaroli A, Schiaffonati 
L, van Unen L, Sacchi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. hoogeveen@ikg.fgg.eur.nl

The MTG (Myeloid Translocation Gene) proteins are a family of novel
transcriptional corepressors. We report that MTG16a, a protein isoform encoded by
the MTG16 gene deranged by the t (16; 21) in myeloid malignancies, is targeted to
the nucleolus. The amino acid sequence necessary for nucleolar localization was
mapped to the MTG16a N-terminal region. MTG16a, like MTG8, the nuclear
corepressor deranged by the t (8; 21), is capable to interact with specific
histone deacetylases (HDACs) suggesting that the protein may mediate silencing of
nucleolar gene transcription. In addition, MTG16a is capable to form oligomers
with other MTG proteins. As a consequence of the t (16; 21) the AML1 DNA-binding 
domain replaces the MTG16a N-terminal region. The AML1-MTG16 fusion protein is
targeted to the nucleoplasm where it is capable to oligomerize with MTG16a and
interact with HDAC1 and HDAC3. The deficiency of HDAC-containing complexes at
nucleolar sites and the accumulation of HDAC-containing complexes at AML1-sites
may be critical in the pathogenesis of t (16; 21) myeloid malignancies.

PMID: 12242670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Int J Oncol. 2002 Oct;21(4):727-35.

Distinct target regions for chromosome 1p deletions in parathyroid adenomas and
carcinomas.

Välimäki S(1), Forsberg L, Farnebo LO, Larsson C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Endocrine Tumor Unit, CMM L8:01, Karolinska 
Hospital, SE-171 76 Stockholm, Sweden. stiina.valimaki@cmm.ki.se

Primary hyperparathyroidism is a common endocrine disease with a multifaceted
genetic background, the elucidation of which has only begun. Among others, loss
of the short arm of chromosome 1 and somatic inactivation of the multiple
endocrine neoplasia type 1 gene (MEN1) in 11q13 represent significant alterations
in the tumorigenesis. In the present study deletions of 1p were characterized and
the findings were evaluated in relation to the loci of MEN1 and histone
deacetylase 1 gene (HDAC1), a menin interacting partner in 1p, as well as to the 
clinical characteristics. Overall 1p LOH was detected in 18 of the 42 tumors
analyzed (43%), and from the deletion patterns a main target interval of 40 cM
was identified within 1p band 32.3-36.2. The mapping of HDAC1 centromeric of the 
main interval, and the lack of altered mRNA expression in tumors with LOH,
suggest that HDAC1 is not the main target for 1p deletions in parathyroid tumors.
Twenty-five of the 42 tumors (60%) showed alteration of either 1p, of the MEN1
locus, or both. Tumors with LOH at 11q13 had a significantly higher weight than
tumors with 1p LOH. In conclusion, LOH in primary sporadic parathyroid adenomas
occur frequently on the distal part of chromosome 1p and are thus clearly
different from parathyroid carcinomas where the deletions are more proximally
located. The findings support that the short arm of chromosome 1 harbors at least
two different tumor suppressor genes involved in parathyroid tumorigenesis, the
exact identification of which may provide a molecular basis for differential
diagnosis of benign and malignant disease in the future.

PMID: 12239610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Cancer Res. 2002 Sep 1;62(17):4916-21.

FK228 (depsipeptide) as a natural prodrug that inhibits class I histone
deacetylases.

Furumai R(1), Matsuyama A, Kobashi N, Lee KH, Nishiyama M, Nakajima H, Tanaka A, 
Komatsu Y, Nishino N, Yoshida M, Horinouchi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.

FK228 is a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, the molecular mechanism of
inhibition of which has been unknown. Here we show that reduction of an
intramolecular disulfide bond of FK228 greatly enhanced its inhibitory activity
and that the disulfide bond was rapidly reduced in cells by cellular reducing
activity involving glutathione. Computer modeling suggests that one of the
sulfhydryl groups of the reduced form of FK228 (redFK) interacts with the
active-site zinc, preventing the access of the substrate. HDAC1 and HDAC2 were
more strongly inhibited by redFK than HDAC4 and HDAC6. redFK was less active than
FK228 in inhibiting in vivo HDAC activity, due to rapid inactivation in medium
and serum. Thus, FK228 serves as a stable prodrug to inhibit class I enzymes and 
is activated by reduction after uptake into the cells. The glutathione-mediated
activation also implicates its clinical usefulness for counteracting
glutathione-mediated drug resistance in chemotherapy.

PMID: 12208741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 Sep 1;30(17):3831-8.

Dnmt3L is a transcriptional repressor that recruits histone deacetylase.

Deplus R(1), Brenner C, Burgers WA, Putmans P, Kouzarides T, de Launoit Y, Fuks
F.

Author information: 
(1)Free University of Brussels, Faculty of Medicine, Laboratory of Molecular
Virology, 808 route de Lennik, 1070 Brussels, Belgium.

The Dnmt3L protein belongs to the Dnmt3 family of DNA methyltransferases by
virtue of its sequence homology in the plant homeodomain (PHD)-like motif. Dnmt3L
is essential for the establishment of maternal genomic imprints and, given its
lack of key methyltransferase motifs, is more likely to act as a regulator of
methylation rather than as an enzyme that methylates DNA. Here, we show that
Dnmt3L, like Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b, interacts both in vitro and in vivo with the
histone deacetylase HDAC1. Consistent with the binding to a deacetylase, Dnmt3L
purifies histone deacetylase activity from nuclear extracts. We find that Dnmt3L 
can repress transcription and that this repression is dependent on HDAC1 and is
relieved by treatment with the HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A. Binding of Dnmt3L
to HDAC1 as well as its repressive function require the PHD-like motif. Our
results indicate that Dnmt3L plays a role in transcriptional regulation and that 
recruitment of the HDAC repressive machinery is a shared and conserved feature of
the Dnmt3 family. The fact that, despite the absence of a methyltransferase
domain, Dnmt3L retains the capacity to contact deacetylase further substantiates 
the notion that the Dnmts can repress transcription independently of their
methylating activities.

PMCID: PMC137431
PMID: 12202768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Aug 30;296(4):1005-12.

Trichostatin A, a histone deacetylase inhibitor, activates the IGFBP-3 promoter
by upregulating Sp1 activity in hepatoma cells: alteration of the Sp1/Sp3/HDAC1
multiprotein complex.

Choi HS(1), Lee JH, Park JG, Lee YI.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Cell Signal Transduction Lab., Bioscience Research Division, Korea
Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Taejon 305-606, Republic of
Korea.

We determined the molecular mechanisms by which trichostatin A (TSA) induced
insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 3 (IGFBP-3) gene expression in Hep3B
cells, a p53-mutant human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cell line. TSA induced
the expressions of the IGFBP-3 mRNA and protein and the activation of its
promoter. Using IGFBP-3 promoter deletion constructs, the TSA-responsive element 
was mapped to a region between -115 and -30, relative to the transcription start 
site. Promoter mutation analysis confirmed that the TSA-responsive element
coincides with the Sp1/GC-rich region on the IGFBP-3 promoter. This
transcriptional activation appears to be mediated by both the Sp1 and Sp3
transcription factors and, in particular, by the phosphorylation of Sp1, because 
treatment of Hep3B cells and Schneider (SL2) cells with TSA significantly
activated phosphorylation of Sp1 in a dose-dependent manner. Consistent with the 
transcriptional activation of the IGFBP-3 promoter by TSA, TSA treatment led to
the release of HDAC1 and Sp3 from the Sp1 transcriptional factor complex,
indicating the involvement of multiprotein complexes containing Sp1, Sp3, p300,
and HDAC-1 in IGFBP-3 activation by TSA. Taken together, these results show that 
Sp1 phosphorylation and the modulation of the Sp1/Sp3/HDAC1 multiprotein complex 
play a pivotal role in the transcriptional activation of the IGFBP-3 promoter
through the Sp1/GC-rich site by TSA.

PMID: 12200149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. EMBO J. 2002 Sep 2;21(17):4632-40.

The chromatin remodeling complex NoRC targets HDAC1 to the ribosomal gene
promoter and represses RNA polymerase I transcription.

Zhou Y(1), Santoro R, Grummt I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology of the Cell II, Deutsches
Krebsforschungszentrum, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Mammalian chromatin remodeling complexes are involved in both activation and
repression of transcription. Here, we show that NoRC, a SNF2h- containing
nucleolar chromatin remodeling complex, represses ribosomal gene transcription.
NoRC-mediated rDNA silencing was alleviated by trichostatin A, indicating that
histone deacetylation is causally involved in silencing. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrate that overexpression of TIP5, the
large subunit of NoRC, mediates deacetylation of nucleosomes in the vicinity of
the rDNA promoter. Protein-protein interaction assays reveal association of TIP5 
with the histone deacetylase HDAC1 in vivo and in vitro. Deletion of the
C-terminal PHD finger and bromodomain abolishes the interaction of TIP5 and
HDAC1, and abrogates transcriptional repression. The results suggest that NoRC
silences the rDNA locus by targeting the SIN3 corepressor complex to the rDNA
promoter, thereby establishing a repressed chromatin structure.

PMCID: PMC126197
PMID: 12198165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. EMBO J. 2002 Sep 2;21(17):4621-31.

TIS7 interacts with the mammalian SIN3 histone deacetylase complex in epithelial 
cells.

Vietor I(1), Vadivelu SK, Wick N, Hoffman R, Cotten M, Seiser C, Fialka I,
Wunderlich W, Haase A, Korinkova G, Brosch G, Huber LA.

Author information: 
(1)IMP, Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Dr Bohr-Gasse 7, A-1030
Vienna, Austria.

The mammalian SIN3 complex consists of histone deacetylases (HDAC1, HDAC2),
several known proteins (SAP30, N-CoR) and as yet unidentified proteins. Here we
show that the mouse tetradecanoyl phorbol acetate induced sequence 7 (TIS7)
protein is a novel transcriptional co-repressor that can associate with the SIN3 
complex. We have identified tis7 as a gene that is up-regulated upon loss of
polarity in a mouse mammary gland epithelial cell line expressing an
estrogen-inducible c-JunER fusion protein. In unpolarized cells, TIS7 protein
levels increase and TIS7 translocates into the nucleus. Overexpression of tis7
causes loss of polarity and represses a set of genes, as revealed by cDNA
microarray analysis. We have shown that TIS7 protein interacts with several
proteins of the SIN3 complex (mSin3B, HDAC1, N-CoR and SAP30) by yeast two-hybrid
screening and co-immunoprecipitations. TIS7 co-immunoprecipitated HDAC complex is
enzymatically active and represses a GAL4-dependent reporter transcription. The
transcriptional repression of endogenous genes by tis7 overexpression is HDAC
dependent. Thus, we propose TIS7 as a transcriptional co-repressor affecting the 
expression of specific genes in a HDAC activity-dependent manner during cell fate
decisions, e.g. scattering.

PMCID: PMC125408
PMID: 12198164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 Aug 15;30(16):3602-8.

Imprinting regulator DNMT3L is a transcriptional repressor associated with
histone deacetylase activity.

Aapola U(1), Liiv I, Peterson P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Technology and Department of Pathology, Tampere
University Hospital, University of Tampere, FIN-33014 Tampere, Finland.

DNMT3L is a regulator of imprint establishment of normally methylated maternal
genomic sequences. DNMT3L shows high similarity to the de novo DNA
methyltransferases, DNMT3A and DNMT3B, however, the amino acid residues needed
for DNA cytosine methyltransferase activity have been lost from the DNMT3L
protein sequence. Apart from methyltransferase activity, Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b serve 
as transcriptional repressors associating with histone deacetylase (HDAC)
activity. Here we show that DNMT3L can also repress transcription by binding
directly to HDAC1 protein. We have identified the PHD-like zinc finger of the
ATRX domain as a main repression motif of DNMT3L, through which DNMT3L recruits
the HDAC activity needed for transcriptional silencing. Furthermore, we show that
DNMT3L protein contains an active nuclear localisation signal at amino acids
156-159. These results describe DNMT3L as a co-repressor protein and suggest that
a transcriptionally repressed chromatin organisation through HDAC activity is
needed for establishment of genomic imprints.

PMCID: PMC134241
PMID: 12177302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2002 Aug 1;166(3):392-6.

Expression and activity of histone deacetylases in human asthmatic airways.

Ito K(1), Caramori G, Lim S, Oates T, Chung KF, Barnes PJ, Adcock IM.

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Medicine, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College School 
of Medicine, Dovehouse Street, London, SW3 6LY UK.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2002 Aug 1;166(3):260-1.

Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disease that is characterized by increased
expression of multiple inflammatory genes. Chromatin modification plays a
critical role in the regulation of these genes. Acetyaltion of histones by
histone acetyltransferases (HATs) is associated with increased gene
transcription, whereas hypocetylation induced by histone deacetylases (HDACs) is 
associated with suppression of gene expression. We have examined the expression
and activity of HATs and HDACs in bronchial biopsies from normal subjects and
subjects with asthma. There was no difference in the site of HDAC1-HDAC6
expression between normal subjects and subjects with asthma, but subjects with
asthma had reduced HDAC enzymatic activity and reduced HDAC1 and HDAC2 protein
expression, as measured by Western blotting. In contrast, subjects with asthma
treated with inhaled steroids were found to have greater HDAC activity than
untreated subjects with asthma, although still lower than control subjects. In
contrast, although there was no change in the site of HAT (CREB binding protein
and p300/CREB binding protein-associated factor) expression, HAT activity was
increased in subjects with asthma. HAT activity was reduced to control levels in 
subjects with asthma treated with inhaled steroids. The increase in HAT activity 
and reduced HDAC activity in asthma may underlie the increased expression of
multiple inflammatory genes, and this is reversed, at least in part, by treatment
with inhaled steroids.

PMID: 12153977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Aug;22(16):5975-88.

Cell cycle arrest and repression of cyclin D1 transcription by INI1/hSNF5.

Zhang ZK(1), Davies KP, Allen J, Zhu L, Pestell RG, Zagzag D, Kalpana GV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, 
New York 10461, USA.

INI1/hSNF5 is a component of the ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling hSWI/SNF
complex and a tumor suppressor gene of aggressive pediatric atypical teratoid and
malignant rhabdoid tumors (AT/RT). To understand the molecular mechanisms
underlying its tumor suppressor function, we studied the effect of reintroduction
of INI1/hSNF5 into AT/RT-derived cell lines such as MON that carry biallelic
deletions of the INI1/hSNF5 locus. We demonstrate that expression of INI1/hSNF5
causes G(0)-G(1) arrest and flat cell formation in these cells. In addition,
INI1/hSNF5 repressed transcription of cyclin D1 gene in MON, in a histone
deacetylase (HDAC)-dependent manner. Chromatin immunoprecipitation studies
revealed that INI1/hSNF5 was directly recruited to the cyclin D1 promoter and
that its binding correlated with recruitment of HDAC1 and deacetylation of
histones at the promoter. Analysis of INI1/hSNF5 truncations indicated that
cyclin D1 repression and flat cell formation are tightly correlated. Coexpression
of cyclin D1 from a heterologous promoter in MON was sufficient to eliminate the 
INI1-mediated flat cell formation and cell cycle arrest. Furthermore, cyclin D1
was overexpressed in AT/RT tumors. Our data suggest that one of the mechanisms by
which INI1/hSNF5 exerts its tumor suppressor function is by mediating the cell
cycle arrest due to the direct recruitment of HDAC activity to the cyclin D1
promoter thereby causing its repression and G(0)-G(1) arrest. Repression of
cyclin D1 gene expression may serve as a useful strategy to treat AT/RT.

PMCID: PMC133966
PMID: 12138206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 20;277(38):35434-9. Epub 2002 Jul 17.

The mCpG-binding domain of human MBD3 does not bind to mCpG but interacts with
NuRD/Mi2 components HDAC1 and MTA2.

Saito M(1), Ishikawa F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Assembly, Department of Biological
Information, Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of 
Technology, 4259 Nagatsuta, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan.

Although mammalian MBD3 contains the mCpG-binding domain (MBD) and is highly
homologous with the authentic mCpG-binding protein MBD2, it was reported that the
protein does not bind to mCpG specifically. Using recombinant human wild type and
mutant MBD3 proteins, we demonstrated that atypical amino acids found in MBD3
MBD, namely, His-30 and Phe-34, are responsible for the inability of MBD3 to bind
to mCpG. Interestingly, although H30K/F34Y MBD3 mutant protein binds to mCpG
efficiently in vitro, it was not localized at the mCpG-rich pericentromeric
regions in mouse cells. We also showed that Y34F MBD2b MBD, which possesses not
the mCpG-specific DNA-binding activity but the nonspecific DNA-binding activity, 
was localized at the pericentromeric regions. These results suggested that the
mCpG-specific DNA-binding activity is largely dispensable, and another factor(s) 
is required for the localization of MBD proteins in vivo. MBD3 was identified as 
a component of the NuRD/Mi2 complex that shows chromatin remodeling and histone
deacetylase activities. We demonstrated that MBD3 MBD is necessary and sufficient
for binding to HDAC1 and MTA2, two components of the NuRD/Mi2 complex. It was
therefore suggested that mCpG-binding-defective MBD3 has evolutionarily conserved
its MBD because of the secondary role played by the MBD in protein-protein
interactions.

PMID: 12124384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 6;277(36):33431-8. Epub 2002 Jun 28.

Silencing of transcription of the human luteinizing hormone receptor gene by
histone deacetylase-mSin3A complex.

Zhang Y(1), Dufau ML.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Molecular Endocrinology, Endocrinology and Reproduction Research
Branch, NICHD, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Modification of chromatin structure by histone acetylases and deacetylases is an 
important mechanism in modulation of eukaryotic gene transcription. The present
study investigated regulation of the human luteinizing hormone receptor (hLHR)
gene by histone deacetylases. Inhibition of histone deacetylases (HDACs) by
trichostatin A (TSA) increased hLHR promoter activity by 40-fold in JAR cells and
markedly elevated endogenous hLHR mRNA levels. Acetylated histones H3 and H4
accumulated in TSA-treated cells and associated predominantly with the hLHR
promoter. Furthermore, TSA significantly enhanced the recruitment of RNA
polymerase II to the promoter. One of the two Sp1 sites essential for basal
promoter activity was identified as critical for the TSA effect, but the binding 
of Sp1/Sp3 to this site remained unchanged in the absence or presence of TSA. A
multiprotein complex was recruited to the hLHR promoter via interaction with Sp1 
and Sp3, in which HDAC1 and HDAC2 were docked directly to Sp1-bound DNA and
indirectly to Sp3-bound DNA through RbAp48, while mSin3A interacted with both
HDACs. HDAC1 and HDAC2 were shown to potently repress the hLHR gene
transcription, and mSin3A potentiated the inhibition mediated by HDAC1. Our
studies have demonstrated that the HDAC-mSin3A complex has an important role in
the regulation of hLHR gene transcription by interaction with Sp1/Sp3 and by
region-specific changes in histone acetylation and polymerase II recruitment
within the hLHR promoter.

PMID: 12091390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Jul 5;295(1):187-92.

Effects of histone acetylation on transcriptional regulation of manganese
superoxide dismutase gene.

Maehara K(1), Uekawa N, Isobe K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Gerontology, National Institute for Longevity Sciences,
36-3 Gengo, Morioka-cho, Obu, Aichi 474-8522, Japan.

To better understand the link between chromatin modification and manganese
superoxide dismutase (Mn-SOD) gene expression, we have investigated the level of 
histone acetylation at Mn-SOD proximal promoter. TSA induced the expression of
Mn-SOD mRNA and its transcriptional activity in C2C12 cells. Sp1 binding sites in
the proximal promoter region of Mn-SOD were transcriptionally responsive to TSA
by transfection studies. We have detected a localized acetylation of histones H3 
and H4, in vivo occupation by Sp1, early growth responsive-1 (Egr-1), and histone
deacetylase-1 (HDAC1) in the proximal promoter region of Mn-SOD gene using
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. Our findings indicate that Mn-SOD gene
expression is repressed by Sp1-HDAC1 complex. This repression is released by a
localized histone acetylation and at least in parts a displacement by Egr-1 in
response to TSA.

(c) 2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 12083788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Oncogene. 2002 May 9;21(20):3232-40.

The leukemia-associated transcription repressor AML1/MDS1/EVI1 requires CtBP to
induce abnormal growth and differentiation of murine hematopoietic cells.

Senyuk V(1), Chakraborty S, Mikhail FM, Zhao R, Chi Y, Nucifora G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Cancer Center, University of Illinois at Chicago,
900 South Ashland Avenue, Chicago, IL 60607, USA.

The leukemia-associated fusion gene AML1/MDS1/EVI1 (AME) encodes a chimeric
transcription factor that results from the (3;21)(q26;q22) translocation. This
translocation is observed in patients with therapy-related myelodysplastic
syndrome (MDS), with chronic myelogenous leukemia during the blast crisis
(CML-BC), and with de novo or therapy-related acute myeloid leukemia (AML). AME
is obtained by in-frame fusion of the AML1 and MDS1/EVI1 genes. We have
previously shown that AME is a transcriptional repressor that induces leukemia in
mice. In order to elucidate the role of AME in leukemic transformation, we
investigated the interaction of AME with the transcription co-regulator CtBP1 and
with members of the histone deacetylase (HDAC) family. In this report, we show
that AME physically interacts in vivo with CtBP1 and HDAC1 and that these
co-repressors require distinct regions of AME for interaction. By using reporter 
gene assays, we demonstrate that AME represses gene transcription by
CtBP1-dependent and CtBP1-independent mechanisms. Finally, we show that the
interaction between AME and CtBP1 is biologically important and is necessary for 
growth upregulation and abnormal differentiation of the murine hematopoietic
precursor cell line 32Dc13 and of murine bone marrow progenitors.

PMID: 12082639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 30;277(35):31826-33. Epub 2002 Jun 24.

Regulation of histone deacetylase 2 by protein kinase CK2.

Tsai SC(1), Seto E.

Author information: 
(1)H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, University of South
Florida, Tampa, Florida 33612, USA.

Histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) is a member of a large family of enzymes that alter
gene expression by catalyzing the removal of acetyl groups from core histones.
Originally isolated as a transcriptional co-repressor, HDAC2 possesses extensive 
amino acid sequence homology to HDAC1 (the founding member and most extensively
studied HDAC enzyme). Because of this high degree of sequence similarity between 
HDAC1 and HDAC2, coupled with the fact that the two always co-exist in the same
complexes, it is difficult to assess whether different properties exist between
these two proteins. We report here that HDAC2 is a phosphoprotein similar to
HDAC1. In addition, like HDAC1, the phospho-acceptor sites in HDAC2 are located
in the C-terminal portion of the protein. However, unlike HDAC1, which can be
phosphorylated by protein kinase CK2, cAMP-dependent protein kinase, and protein 
kinase G, HDAC2 is phosphorylated uniquely by protein kinase CK2 in vitro.
Studies using unfractionated cell extracts with CK2 inhibitors suggest that
protein kinase CK2 is the major source of HDAC2 kinase. Finally, and perhaps most
interesting, HDAC2 phosphorylation promotes enzymatic activity, selectively
regulates complex formation, but has no effect on transcriptional repression.
Together, our data indicate that like many HDACs, HDAC2 is regulated by
post-translational modification, particularly phosphorylation. Furthermore, we
demonstrate for the first time that there are similarities and differences in the
regulation of HDAC1 and HDAC2 by phosphorylation.

PMID: 12082111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 9;277(32):28733-41. Epub 2002 Jun 4.

Cyclin D1 Is a Ligand-independent Co-repressor for Thyroid Hormone Receptors.

Lin HM(1), Zhao L, Cheng SY.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Regulation Section, Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer
Research, NCI, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4264, USA.

Thyroid hormone receptors (TRs) are critical regulators of growth,
differentiation, and homeostasis. TRs function by regulating the expression of
thyroid hormone (T3) target genes in both ligand-dependent and -independent
pathways. Distinct classes of co-regulatory proteins modulate these two pathways.
We show here a novel role of cyclin D1 as a T3-independent co-repressor for TRs. 
Cyclin D1 interacted with TR in vitro and in cells in a ligand-independent
manner. Cyclin D1 acted to repress both the silencing activity of the unliganded 
TR and the transcriptional activity of the liganded TR. The repression was not
due to the inhibition of the binding of TR to the thyroid hormone response
element but by serving as a ligand-independent bridging factor to selectively
recruit HDAC3 to form ternary complexes. The repression was augmented by
increasing expression of HDAC3 but not by HDAC1 and was alleviated by
trichostatin A. Thus, cyclin D1 is a novel ligand-independent co-repressor that
opens a new paradigm to understand the molecular basis of the silencing action of
TR.

PMID: 12048199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 16;277(33):29550-4. Epub 2002 Jun 3.

The large subunit of replication factor C interacts with the histone deacetylase,
HDAC1.

Anderson LA(1), Perkins ND.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gene Regulation and Expression, School of Life Sciences,
University of Dundee, Medical Sciences Institute/Wellcome Trust Biocentre
Complex, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, United Kingdom.

Replication factor C (RFC) is a pentameric complex of five distinct subunits that
functions as a clamp loader, facilitating the loading of proliferating cell
nuclear antigen (PCNA) onto DNA during replication and repair. More recently the 
large subunit of RFC, RFC (p140), has been found to interact with the
retinoblastoma (Rb) tumor suppressor and the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha
(C/EBP alpha) transcription factor. We now report that RFC (p140) associates with
histone deacetylase activity and interacts with histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1).
This complex is functional and when targeted to promoters as a Gal4 fusion, RFC
(p140) is a strong, deacetylase-dependent repressor of transcription. Further
analysis revealed that RFC (p140) contains two distinct transcriptional
repression domains. Moreover, both of these domains interact separately with
HDAC1.

PMID: 12045192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2002 Apr;43(4):231-4.

[Histone deacetylase-targeted anti-leukemia therapy].

[Article in Japanese]

Ozawa Y.

PMID: 12043197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. EMBO J. 2002 Jun 3;21(11):2682-91.

The SUMO E3 ligase RanBP2 promotes modification of the HDAC4 deacetylase.

Kirsh O(1), Seeler JS, Pichler A, Gast A, Müller S, Miska E, Mathieu M,
Harel-Bellan A, Kouzarides T, Melchior F, Dejean A.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recombinaison et Expression Génétique, INSERM U 163, Institut
Pasteur, 28 rue du Dr Roux, F-75724 Paris Cedex 15, France.

Transcriptional repression mediated through histone deacetylation is a critical
component of eukaryotic gene regulation. Here we demonstrate that the class II
histone deacetylase HDAC4 is covalently modified by the ubiquitin-related SUMO-1 
modifier. A sumoylation-deficient point mutant (HDAC4-K559R) shows a slightly
impaired ability to repress transcription as well as reduced histone deacetylase 
activity. The ability of HDAC4 to self-aggregate is a prerequisite for proper
sumoylation in vivo. Calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase (CaMK)
signalling, which induces nuclear export, abrogates SUMO-1 modification of HDAC4.
Moreover, the modification depends on the presence of an intact nuclear
localization signal and is catalysed by the nuclear pore complex (NPC) RanBP2
protein, a factor newly identified as a SUMO E3 ligase. These findings suggest
that sumoylation of HDAC4 takes place at the NPC and is coupled to its nuclear
import. Finally, modification experiments indicate that the MEF2-interacting
transcription repressor (MITR) as well as HDAC1 and -6 are similarly SUMO
modified, indicating that sumoylation may be an important regulatory mechanism
for the control of transcriptional repression mediated by both class I and II
HDACs.

PMCID: PMC125385
PMID: 12032081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. EMBO J. 2002 Jun 3;21(11):2672-81.

Essential function of histone deacetylase 1 in proliferation control and CDK
inhibitor repression.

Lagger G(1), O'Carroll D, Rembold M, Khier H, Tischler J, Weitzer G,
Schuettengruber B, Hauser C, Brunmeir R, Jenuwein T, Seiser C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Biochemistry, Division of Molecular Biology, University
of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter, Dr Bohr-Gasse 9/2, A-1030 Vienna, Austria.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) modulate chromatin structure and transcription, but 
little is known about their function in mammalian development. HDAC1 was
implicated previously in the repression of genes required for cell proliferation 
and differentiation. Here we show that targeted disruption of both HDAC1 alleles 
results in embryonic lethality before E10.5 due to severe proliferation defects
and retardation in development. HDAC1-deficient embryonic stem cells show reduced
proliferation rates, which correlate with decreased cyclin-associated kinase
activities and elevated levels of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors
p21(WAF1/CIP1) and p27(KIP1). Similarly, expression of p21 and p27 is
up-regulated in HDAC1-null embryos. In addition, loss of HDAC1 leads to
significantly reduced overall deacetylase activity, hyperacetylation of a subset 
of histones H3 and H4 and concomitant changes in other histone modifications. The
expression of HDAC2 and HDAC3 is induced in HDAC1-deficient cells, but cannot
compensate for loss of the enzyme, suggesting a unique function for HDAC1. Our
study provides the first evidence that a histone deacetylase is essential for
unrestricted cell proliferation by repressing the expression of selective cell
cycle inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC126040
PMID: 12032080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 16;277(33):29832-9. Epub 2002 May 15.

Human ING1 proteins differentially regulate histone acetylation.

Vieyra D(1), Loewith R, Scott M, Bonnefin P, Boisvert FM, Cheema P, Pastyryeva S,
Meijer M, Johnston RN, Bazett-Jones DP, McMahon S, Cole MD, Young D, Riabowol K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta T2N 4N1,
Canada.

ING1 proteins are nuclear, growth inhibitory, and regulate apoptosis in different
experimental systems. Here we show that similar to their yeast homologs, human
ING1 proteins interact with proteins associated with histone acetyltransferase
(HAT) activity, such as TRRAP, PCAF, CBP, and p300. Human ING1 immunocomplexes
contain HAT activity, and overexpression of p33(ING1b), but not of p47(ING1a),
induces hyperacetylation of histones H3 and H4, in vitro and in vivo at the
single cell level. p47(ING1a) inhibits histone acetylation in vitro and in vivo
and binds the histone deacetylase HDAC1. Finally, we present evidence indicating 
that p33(ING1b) affects the degree of physical association between proliferating 
cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) and p300, an association that has been proposed to
link DNA repair to chromatin remodeling. Together with the finding that human
ING1 proteins bind PCNA in a DNA damage-dependent manner, these data suggest that
ING1 proteins provide a direct linkage between DNA repair, apoptosis, and
chromatin remodeling via multiple HAT.ING1.PCNA protein complexes.

PMID: 12015309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 19;277(29):25904-13. Epub 2002 May 6.

Tip60 and histone deacetylase 1 regulate androgen receptor activity through
changes to the acetylation status of the receptor.

Gaughan L(1), Logan IR, Cook S, Neal DE, Robson CN.

Author information: 
(1)Prostate Research Group, School of Surgical Sciences, University of Newcastle 
Upon Tyne, Medical School, Framlington Place, Newcastle Upon Tyne NE2 4HH, United
Kingdom.

The androgen receptor (AR), a member of the nuclear hormone receptor superfamily,
is thought to play an important role in the development of prostate cancer. The
AR is a hormone-dependent transcription factor that activates expression of
numerous androgen-responsive genes. Histone acetyltransferase-containing proteins
have been shown to increase activity of several transcription factors, including 
nuclear hormone receptors, by eliciting histone acetylation, which facilitates
promoter access to the transcriptional machinery. Conversely, histone
deacetylases (HDACs) have been identified which reduce levels of histone
acetylation and are associated with transcriptional repression by various
transcription factors. We have previously shown that Tip60 (Tat-interactive
protein, 60 kDa) is a bona fide co-activator protein for the AR. Here we show
that Tip60 directly acetylates the AR, which we demonstrate is a requisite for
Tip60-mediated transcription. To define a mechanism for repression of AR
function, we demonstrate that AR activity is specifically down-regulated by the
histone deacetylase activity of HDAC1. Furthermore, using both mammalian
two-hybrid and immunoprecipitation experiments, we show that AR and HDAC1
interact, suggestive of a direct role for down-regulation of AR activity by
HDAC1. In chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, we provide evidence that AR,
Tip60, and HDAC1 form a trimeric complex upon the endogenous AR-responsive PSA
promoter, suggesting that acetylation and deacetylation of the AR is an important
mechanism for regulating transcriptional activity.

PMID: 11994312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 May;22(10):3373-88.

Androgen receptor acetylation governs trans activation and MEKK1-induced
apoptosis without affecting in vitro sumoylation and trans-repression function.

Fu M(1), Wang C, Wang J, Zhang X, Sakamaki T, Yeung YG, Chang C, Hopp T, Fuqua
SA, Jaffray E, Hay RT, Palvimo JJ, Jänne OA, Pestell RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, The Albert Einstein
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York
10461, USA.

The androgen receptor (AR) is a nuclear hormone receptor superfamily member that 
conveys both trans repression and ligand-dependent trans-activation function.
Activation of the AR by dihydrotestosterone (DHT) regulates diverse physiological
functions including secondary sexual differentiation in the male and the
induction of apoptosis by the JNK kinase, MEKK1. The AR is posttranslationally
modified on lysine residues by acetylation and sumoylation. The histone
acetylases p300 and P/CAF directly acetylate the AR in vitro at a conserved KLKK 
motif. To determine the functional properties governed by AR acetylation, point
mutations of the KLKK motif that abrogated acetylation were engineered and
examined in vitro and in vivo. The AR acetylation site point mutants showed
wild-type trans repression of NF-kappa B, AP-1, and Sp1 activity; wild-type
sumoylation in vitro; wild-type ligand binding; and ligand-induced conformational
changes. However, acetylation-deficient AR mutants were selectively defective in 
DHT-induced trans activation of androgen-responsive reporter genes and
coactivation by SRC1, Ubc9, TIP60, and p300. The AR acetylation site mutant
showed 10-fold increased binding of the N-CoR corepressor compared with the AR
wild type in the presence of ligand. Furthermore, histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1)
bound the AR both in vivo and in cultured cells and HDAC1 binding to the AR was
disengaged in a DHT-dependent manner. MEKK1 induced AR-dependent apoptosis in
prostate cancer cells. The AR acetylation mutant was defective in MEKK1-induced
apoptosis, suggesting that the conserved AR acetylation site contributes to a
pathway governing prostate cancer cellular survival. As AR lysine residue
mutations that abrogate acetylation correlate with enhanced binding of the N-CoR 
repressor in cultured cells, the conserved AR motif may directly or indirectly
regulate ligand-dependent corepressor disengagement and, thereby,
ligand-dependent trans activation.

PMCID: PMC133781
PMID: 11971970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 28;277(26):23794-9. Epub 2002 Apr 19.

The hypertrophic response in C2C12 myoblasts recruits the G1 cell cycle
machinery.

Hlaing M(1), Shen X, Dazin P, Bernstein HS.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California, San Francisco,
California 94143-0130, USA.

Hypertrophy occurs in postmitotic muscle as an adaptive response to various
physiological and pathological stresses. Studies in vascular smooth muscle cells 
and primary cardiomyocytes suggest that angiotensin II-mediated hypertrophy
activates signaling pathways associated with cell proliferation. Regulation of
cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk)-cyclin activities is essential to cell size control
in lower eukaryotes, yet their role in the hypertrophic response in muscle is
incompletely understood. We describe an in vitro model of hypertrophy in C2C12
skeletal myoblasts and demonstrate that induction of hypertrophy involves
transient activation of Cdk4, subsequent phosphorylation of Rb, and release of
HDAC1 from the Rb inhibitory complex. We also demonstrate that E2F-1 becomes
transcriptionally active yet remains associated with Rb. We propose a model
whereby partial inactivation of the Rb complex leads to derepression of a subset 
of E2F-1 targets necessary for cell growth without division during hypertrophy.

PMID: 11967266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 28;277(26):23658-63. Epub 2002 Apr 17.

SUMO-1 modification of histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) modulates its biological
activities.

David G(1), Neptune MA, DePinho RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Adult Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Histone deacetylation plays a central role in the regulation of genes linked to
virtually all biological processes. This modification reaction is dependent on a 
family of related histone deacetylases (HDACs), which function as key components 
of large multiprotein complexes involved in the development of normal and
neoplastic cells. The mechanisms regulating HDACs and their roles in such
processes are not understood, and these form the major focus for the current
study. Here, in the course of assessing possible post-translational modifications
of HDAC1, we demonstrated that HDAC1 is a substrate for SUMO-1 (small
ubiquitin-related modifier) modification in vitro and in vivo. The HDAC1 lysines 
targeted for modification were identified as C-terminal Lys-444 and Lys-476,
which are also present in mammalian HDAC2 and lower vertebrate HDAC1/2 orthologs 
yet absent from other HDAC family members, pointing to a means of differential
regulation among HDAC proteins. Mutation of these target residues (lysine to
arginine substitution) profoundly reduced HDAC1-mediated transcriptional
repression in reporter assays without affecting HDAC1 ability to associate with
mSin3A and eliminated HDAC1-induced cell cycle and apoptotic responses upon
overexpression. Together, the results demonstrate that HDAC1 is modified by
SUMO-1, and this modification can dramatically affect HDAC1 activity in a number 
of surrogate biological assays.

PMID: 11960997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Med Chem. 2002 Apr 25;45(9):1778-84.

Binding mode analysis of
3-(4-benzoyl-1-methyl-1H-2-pyrrolyl)-N-hydroxy-2-propenamide: a new synthetic
histone deacetylase inhibitor inducing histone hyperacetylation, growth
inhibition, and terminal cell differentiation.

Mai A(1), Massa S, Ragno R, Esposito M, Sbardella G, Nocca G, Scatena R, Jesacher
F, Loidl P, Brosch G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Studi Farmaceutici, Università degli Studi di Roma La
Sapienza, P. le A. Moro 5, 00185 Roma, Italy. antonello.mai@uniroma1.it

The binding mode of 3-(4-aroyl-1H-2-pyrrolyl)-N-hydroxy-2-propenamides 1a-c,
belonging to a recently reported class of synthetic histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors (Massa, S.; et al. J. Med. Chem. 2001, 44, 2069-2072), into the new
modeled HDAC1 catalytic core is presented, and enzyme/inhibitor interactions are 
discussed. HDAC1 X-ray coordinates were obtained by virtual "mutation" of those
of histone deacetylase-like protein, a bacterial HDAC homologue. In in vitro
antimaize HD2 as well as antimouse HDAC1 assay, compounds 1a-c showed inhibitory 
activities in the low micromolar range. Similarly, 1a-c are endowed with
anti-HDAC activity in vivo: on mouse A20 cells, 1a-c induced histone
hyperacetylation leading to a highly increased acetylation level of H4 as
compared to control histones. Results obtained with acid-urea-triton
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis have been confirmed by Western Blot
experiments. Finally, compound 1a, chosen as a representative member of this
class of HDAC inhibitors, resulted endowed with antiproliferative (45 and 85%
cell growth inhibition at 40 and 80 microM, respectively) and cellular
differentiation (18 and 21% of benzidine positive cells at the same
concentrations) activities in murine erythroleukemic cells.

PMID: 11960489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Genes Dev. 2002 Apr 15;16(8):933-47.

E2F mediates cell cycle-dependent transcriptional repression in vivo by
recruitment of an HDAC1/mSin3B corepressor complex.

Rayman JB(1), Takahashi Y, Indjeian VB, Dannenberg JH, Catchpole S, Watson RJ, te
Riele H, Dynlacht BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02138, USA.

Despite biochemical and genetic data suggesting that E2F and pRB (pocket protein)
families regulate transcription via chromatin-modifying factors, the precise
mechanisms underlying gene regulation by these protein families have not yet been
defined in a physiological setting. In this study, we have investigated promoter 
occupancy in wild-type and pocket protein-deficient primary cells. We show that
corepressor complexes consisting of histone deacetylase (HDAC1) and mSin3B were
specifically recruited to endogenous E2F-regulated promoters in quiescent cells. 
These complexes dissociated from promoters once cells reached late G1, coincident
with gene activation. Interestingly, recruitment of HDAC1 complexes to promoters 
depended absolutely on p107 and p130, and required an intact E2F-binding site. In
contrast, mSin3B recruitment to certain promoters did not require p107 or p130,
suggesting that recruitment of this corepressor can occur via E2F-dependent and
-independent mechanisms. Remarkably, loss of pRB had no effect on HDAC1 or mSin3B
recruitment. p107/p130 deficiency triggered a dramatic loss of E2F4 nuclear
localization as well as transcriptional derepression, which is suggested by
nucleosome mapping studies to be the result of localized hyperacetylation of
nucleosomes proximal to E2F-binding sites. Taken together, these findings show
that p130 escorts E2F4 into the nucleus and, together with corepressor complexes 
that contain mSin3B and/or HDAC1, directly represses transcription from target
genes as cells withdraw from the cell cycle.

PMCID: PMC152357
PMID: 11959842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 May;22(9):2965-73.

Counterregulation of chromatin deacetylation and histone deacetylase occupancy at
the integrated promoter of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) by the
HIV-1 repressor YY1 and HIV-1 activator Tat.

He G(1), Margolis DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

Repression of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) transcription may
contribute to the establishment or maintenance of proviral quiescence in infected
CD4(+) cells. The host factors YY1 and LSF cooperatively recruit histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) to the HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR) and inhibit
transcription. We demonstrate here regulation of occupancy of HDAC1 at a
positioned nucleosome (nuc 1) near the transcription start site of integrated
LTR. We find that expression of YY1 increases occupancy by HDAC1, decreases
acetylation at nuc 1, and downregulates LTR expression. HDAC1 recruitment and
histone hypoacetylation were also seen when Tat activation was inhibited by the
overexpression of YY1. A YY1 mutant without an HDAC1 interaction domain and
incompetent to inhibit LTR activation fails to recruit HDAC1 to LTR or decrease
nuc 1 acetylation. Further, expression of a dominant-negative mutant of LSF
(dnLSF), which inhibits LSF occupancy and LTR repression, results in acetylation 
and decreased HDAC1 occupancy at nuc 1. Conversely, exposure of cells to the
histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A or activation of LTR expression by
HIV-1 Tat results in the displacement of HDAC1 from nuc 1, in association with
increased acetylation of histone H4. Recruitment of HDAC1 to the LTR nuc 1 can
counteract Tat activation and repress LTR expression. Significantly, when
repression is overcome, LTR activation is associated with decreased HDAC1
occupancy. Since the persistence of integrated HIV-1 genomes despite potent
suppression of viral replication is a major obstacle for current antiretroviral
therapy, strategies to selectively disrupt the quiescence of chromosomal provirus
may play a role in the future treatment of AIDS.

PMCID: PMC133763
PMID: 11940654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Curr Biol. 2002 Apr 2;12(7):594-8.

Histone deacetylase 1 inactivation by an adenovirus early gene product.

Chiocca S(1), Kurtev V, Colombo R, Boggio R, Sciurpi MT, Brosch G, Seiser C,
Draetta GF, Cotten M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, 20141,
Milan, Italy. schiocca@ieo.it

Gam1 is an early gene product of the avian adenovirus CELO and is essential for
viral replication. Gam1 has no homology to any known proteins; however, its early
expression and nuclear localization suggest that the protein functions to
influence transcription in the infected cell. A determinant of eukaryotic gene
expression is the acetylation state of chromosomal histones and other nuclear
proteins. We find that Gam1 expression increases the level of transcription from 
a variety of eukaryotic promoters, similar to the effect of treating cells with
the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA ). We show that Gam1
can effectively inhibit histone deacetylation by HDAC1 and that Gam1 binds to
HDAC1 both in vitro and in vivo. A CELO virus lacking Gam1 (CELOdG) is
replication defective, but the defect can be overcome by either expressing an
interfering HDAC1 mutant or by treating infected cells with TSA. The
identification of a viral early gene product having the specific function of
binding and inactivating HDAC suggests that deacetylase complexes play an
important role in limiting early gene expression from invading viruses.

PMID: 11937030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Mol Cell. 2002 Mar;9(3):625-36.

The phosphorylation status of nuclear NF-kappa B determines its association with 
CBP/p300 or HDAC-1.

Zhong H(1), May MJ, Jimi E, Ghosh S.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Section and Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry,
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
CT 06520, USA.

Homodimers of the NF-kappa B p50 subunit are transcriptionally repressive in
cells, whereas they can promote transcription in vitro, suggesting that their
endogenous effects are mediated by association with other factors. We now
demonstrate that transcriptionally inactive nuclear NF-kappaB in resting cells
consists of homodimers of either p65 or p50 complexed with the histone
deacetylase HDAC-1. Only the p50-HDAC-1 complexes bind to DNA and suppress
NF-kappa B-dependent gene expression in unstimulated cells. Appropriate
stimulation causes nuclear localization of NF-kappa B complexes containing
phosphorylated p65 that associates with CBP and displaces the p50-HDAC-1
complexes. Our results demonstrate that phosphorylation of p65 determines whether
it associates with either CBP or HDAC-1, ensuring that only p65 entering the
nucleus from cytoplasmic NF-kappa B:Ikappa B complexes can activate
transcription.

PMID: 11931769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 7;277(23):20974-8. Epub 2002 Apr 2.

Proliferating cell nuclear antigen associates with histone deacetylase activity, 
integrating DNA replication and chromatin modification.

Milutinovic S(1), Zhuang Q, Szyf M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, McGill University, 3655 Drummond 
Street, Montreal, Quebec H3G 1Y6, Canada.

Faithful inheritance of the chromatin structure is essential for maintaining the 
gene expression integrity of a cell. Histone modification by acetylation and
deacetylation is a critical control of chromatin structure. In this study, we
test the hypothesis that histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) is physically associated
with a basic component of the DNA replication machinery as a mechanism of
coordinating histone deacetylation and DNA synthesis. Proliferating cell nuclear 
antigen (PCNA) is a sliding clamp that serves as a loading platform for many
proteins involved in DNA replication and DNA repair. We show that PCNA interacts 
with HDAC1 in human cells and in vitro and that a considerable fraction of PCNA
and HDAC1 colocalize in the cell nucleus. PCNA associates with histone
deacetylase activity that is completely abolished in the presence of the HDAC
inhibitor trichostatin A. Trichostatin A treatment arrests cells at the G(2)-M
phase of the cell cycle, which is consistent with the hypothesis that the proper 
formation of the chromatin after DNA replication may be important in signaling
the progression through the cell cycle. Our results strengthen the role of PCNA
as a factor coordinating DNA replication and epigenetic inheritance.

PMID: 11929879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 31;277(22):19618-26. Epub 2002 Mar 27.

Phosphatase inhibition leads to histone deacetylases 1 and 2 phosphorylation and 
disruption of corepressor interactions.

Galasinski SC(1), Resing KA, Goodrich JA, Ahn NG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado 80309, USA.

The regulation of histone deacetylases (HDACs) by phosphorylation was examined by
elevating intracellular phosphorylation in cultured cells with the protein
phosphatase inhibitor okadaic acid. After fractionation of extracts from treated 
versus untreated cells, HDAC 1 and 2 eluted in several peaks of deacetylase
activity, assayed using mixed acetylated histones or acetylated histone H4
peptide. Stimulation of cells with okadaic acid led to hyperphosphorylation of
HDAC 1 and 2 as well as changes in column elution of both enzymes.
Hyperphosphorylated HDAC2 was also observed in cells synchronized with nocodazole
or taxol, demonstrating regulation of HDAC phosphorylation during mitosis.
Phosphorylated HDAC1 and 2 showed a gel mobility retardation that correlated with
a small but significant increase in activity, both of which were reversed upon
phosphatase treatment in vitro. However, the most pronounced effect of HDAC
phosphorylation was to disrupt protein complex formation between HDAC1 and 2 as
well as complex formation between HDAC1 and corepressors mSin3A and YY1. In
contrast, interactions between HDAC1/2 and RbAp46/48 were unaffected by okadaic
acid. These results establish a novel link between HDAC phosphorylation and the
control of protein-protein interactions and suggest a mechanism for relief of
deacetylase-catalyzed transcriptional repression by phosphorylation-dependent
signaling.

PMID: 11919195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Genes Dev. 2002 Mar 15;16(6):687-92.

Specific targeting and constitutive association of histone deacetylase complexes 
during transcriptional repression.

Li J(1), Lin Q, Wang W, Wade P, Wong J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Specific recruitment of corepressor complexes containing histone deacetylases
(HDAC) by transcription factors is believed to play an essential role in
transcriptional repression. Recent studies indicate that repression by unliganded
nuclear hormone receptors and by the Mad family of repressors requires distinct
HDAC-containing corepressor complexes. In this work, we show that unliganded TR
specifically recruits only the closely related N-CoR and SMRT-HDAC3 complexes,
whereas the Mad1 recruits only the Sin3-HDAC1/2 complex. Significantly, both the 
Sin3 and Mi-2/NURD complexes also exhibit constitutive association with chromatin
and contribute to chromatin deacetylation in a nontargeted fashion. These results
suggest that HDAC complexes can contribute to gene repression by two distinct
mechanisms as follows: (1) specific targeting by repressors and (2) constitutive 
association with chromatin.

PMCID: PMC155360
PMID: 11914274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Apr;22(8):2743-50.

Identification of mammalian Sds3 as an integral component of the Sin3/histone
deacetylase corepressor complex.

Alland L(1), David G, Shen-Li H, Potes J, Muhle R, Lee HC, Hou H Jr, Chen K,
DePinho RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York
10461, USA.

Silencing of gene transcription involves local chromatin modification achieved
through the local recruitment of large multiprotein complexes containing histone 
deacetylase (HDAC) activity. The mammalian corepressors mSin3A and mSin3B have
been shown to play a key role in this process by tethering HDACs 1 and 2 to
promoter-bound transcription factors. Similar mechanisms appear to be operative
in yeast, in which epistasis experiments have established that the mSin3 and HDAC
orthologs (SIN3 and RPD3), along with a novel protein, SDS3, function in the same
repressor pathway. Here, we report the identification of a component of the
mSin3-HDAC complex that bears homology to yeast SDS3, physically associates with 
mSin3 proteins in vivo, represses transcription in a manner that is partially
dependent on HDAC activity, and enables HDAC1 catalytic activity in vivo. That
key physical and functional properties are also shared by yeast SDS3 underscores 
the central role of the Sin3-HDAC-Sds3 complex in eukaryotic cell biology, and
the discovery of mSds3 in mammalian cells provides a new avenue for modulating
the activity of this complex in human disease.

PMCID: PMC133736
PMID: 11909966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Oncogene. 2002 Mar 14;21(12):1812-22.

Constitutive expression of the Id-1 promoter in human metastatic breast cancer
cells is linked with the loss of NF-1/Rb/HDAC-1 transcription repressor complex.

Singh J(1), Murata K, Itahana Y, Desprez PY.

Author information: 
(1)Geraldine Brush Cancer Research Institute, California Pacific Medical Center, 
San Francisco, California, CA 94115, USA.

The helix-loop-helix protein Id-1 is a dominant negative regulator of basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factors, and plays a key role in the control of
breast epithelial cell growth, invasion and differentiation. Previous
investigations in our laboratory have shown that Id-1 mRNA was constitutively
expressed in highly aggressive and invasive human breast cancer cells in
comparison to non-transformed or non-aggressive cancerous cells, and that this
loss of regulation is mediated by a 2.2-kb region of the human Id-1 promoter.
Here we show that a 31 bp sequence within this 2.2-kb promoter, located 200 bp
upstream of the initiation of transcription, is responsible for the constitutive 
expression of Id-1 in metastatic human breast cancer cells. Using gel shift
experiments, we identified a high molecular weight complex present only in
non-aggressive breast cancer cells cultured in serum-free medium and which appear
to be necessary for proper Id-1 repression. In contrast, nuclear extracts from
highly aggressive and metastatic cell lines do not contain this large molecular
weight complex. Using DNA affinity precipitation assays (DAPA), we show that this
complex contains SP-1, NF-1, Rb and HDAC-1 proteins. On the basis of these
findings, we propose a mechanism for the loss of regulation of Id-1 promoter in
invasive and metastatic human breast cancer cells.

PMID: 11896613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Mar;22(6):1804-18.

Critical residues within the BTB domain of PLZF and Bcl-6 modulate interaction
with corepressors.

Melnick A(1), Carlile G, Ahmad KF, Kiang CL, Corcoran C, Bardwell V, Prive GG,
Licht JD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, The Derald H. Ruttenberg Cancer Center, Mount Sinai
School of Medicine, One Gustave Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.

The PLZF (promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger) transcriptional repressor, when
fused to retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARalpha), causes a refractory form of
acute promyelocytic leukemia. The highly conserved N-terminal BTB (bric a brac,
tramtrack, broad complex)/POZ domain of PLZF plays a critical role in this
disease, since it is required for transcriptional repression by the PLZF-RARalpha
fusion protein. The crystal structure of the PLZF BTB domain revealed an obligate
homodimer with a highly conserved charged pocket formed by apposition of the two 
monomers. An extensive structure-function analysis showed that the charged pocket
motif plays a major role in transcriptional repression by PLZF. We found that
mutations of the BTB domain that neutralize key charged pocket residues did not
disrupt dimerization, yet abrogated the ability of PLZF to repress transcription 
and led to the loss of interaction with N-CoR, SMRT, and histone deacetylases
(HDACs). We extended these studies to the Bcl-6 protein, which is linked to the
pathogenesis of non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. In this case, neutralizing the charged
pocket also resulted in loss of repression and corepressor binding. Experiments
with purified protein showed that corepressor-BTB interactions were direct. A
comparison of the PLZF, Bcl-6, and the FAZF (Fanconi anemia zinc finger)/ROG
protein shows that variations in the BTB pocket result in differential affinity
for corepressors, which predicts the potency of transcriptional repression. Thus,
the BTB pocket represents a molecular structure involved in recruitment of
transcriptional repression complexes to target promoters.

PMCID: PMC135611
PMID: 11865059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Genomics. 2002 Mar;79(3):423-31.

NAPP2, a peroxisomal membrane protein, is also a transcriptional corepressor.

Gavva NR(1), Wen SC, Daftari P, Moniwa M, Yang WM, Yang-Feng LP, Seto E, Davie
JR, Shen CK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of
China.

Nuclear factor-erythroid number 2 (NF-E2) is a positive regulatory, DNA binding
transcription factor for gene expression in erythroid and megakaryocytic cells.
To further understand the mechanisms of NF-E2 function, we used expression
cloning to identify coregulators interacting with the erythroid-specific subunit 
of NF-E2, p45. We have isolated a protein, NAPP2, which contains an
aspartic-acid- and glutamic-acid-rich region and a nuclear localization signal.
The gene encoding NAPP2, PEX14, is located on chromosome 1p36 and is ubiquitously
expressed. The domains of interaction in vitro and in vivo between p45 and NAPP2 
were mapped by a yeast two-hybrid system and cotransfection experiments. In
mammalian cell culture, ectopically expressed NAPP2 inhibited p45-directed
transcriptional activation. Furthermore, NAPP2 functions as a corepressor and
interacts specifically with histone deacetylase l (HDAC1), but not HDAC2 or
HDAC3. NAPP2 is thus potentially a negative coregulator of NF-E2. NAPP2 is
identical to PEX14, an integral membrane protein essential for protein docking
onto the peroxisomes. These studies have identified a novel, bifunctional protein
capable of acting as a transcriptional corepressor and a polypeptide transport
modulator. They also suggest that NF-E2 may function both positively and
negatively in the transcription regulation of specific erythroid and
megakaryocytic genes.

PMID: 11863372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Front Biosci. 2002 Mar 1;7:d704-16.

The Epstein Barr nuclear antigen EBNA3C regulates transcription, cell
transformation and cell migration.

Subramanian C(1), Knight JS, Robertson ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Cell and Molecular Biology
Graduate Program, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109,
USA.

The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infects most of the human population and persists in
B-lymphocytes for the lifetime of the host. During the establishment of latent
infection a unique repertoire of genes are expressed. The EBV nuclear antigen
EBNA3C is essential for growth transformation of primary B-lymphocytes in vitro. 
EBNA3C regulates the transcription of a number of viral and cellular genes
important for the immortalization process. Interaction of EBNA3C with the
cellular transcription factor RBP-Jkappa and HDAC1 modulates transcriptional
activation. Additionally, EBNA3C disrupts the cyclin/cdk-Rb-E2F pathway that
regulates cell cycle progression through the restriction point at G1. Recent
studies showed that the carboxy terminal region of EBNA3C from aa 366-992,
essential for the immortalization of primary B-cells, interacts with
Prothymosin(alpha) (ProTalpha) and Nm23-H1. The interaction of EBNA3C with
ProTalpha as well as the histone acetylase p300 suggested a possible role in
modulation of histone acetylation and chromatin remodeling. Cell migration assays
geared towards determining the effect of EBNA3C on Nm23-H1 antimetastatic
function suggests that EBNA3C suppresses the effects of NM23-H1 on the motility
of breast carcinoma as well as Burkitt's lymphoma cells. This observation
suggests that EBNA3C may be involved in driving the metastatic process in EBV
associated human malignancies.

PMID: 11861219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Exp Cell Res. 2002 Mar 10;274(1):25-34.

The histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A derepresses the telomerase
reverse transcriptase (hTERT) gene in human cells.

Hou M(1), Wang X, Popov N, Zhang A, Zhao X, Zhou R, Zetterberg A, Björkholm M,
Henriksson M, Gruber A, Xu D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Hospital and
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

Activation of telomerase, essential for cellular immortalization and
transformation, requires the induction of its catalytic component, telomerase
reverse transcriptase (hTERT). However, biochemical and genetic mechanisms for
the control of hTERT expression remain undefined. In the present study, we
demonstrate that the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA)
induces hyperacetylation of histones at the hTERT proximal promoter, directly
transactivates the hTERT gene in normal human telomerase-negative cells, and
upregulates hTERT expression in telomerase-positive tumor cells. Overexpression
of HDAC1 leads to repression of the hTERT promoter activity. TSA-mediated
activation of the hTERT promoter is abolished by the mutation of Sp1 sites at the
proximal promoter, suggesting that the effect of TSA is regulated through Sp1
motifs. We also show a physical interaction of Sp1 with HDAC1 and the presence of
HDAC1 at the hTERT promoter region. Moreover, hyperacetylation of histones at the
hTERT promoter is associated with the natural up-regulation of hTERT expression
that occurs in activated T lymphocytes. Taken together, histone
acetylation/deacetylation may be a common underlying feature to hTERT
transactivation/repression in human normal and malignant cells.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 11855854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. EMBO J. 2002 Feb 15;21(4):779-88.

The retinoblastoma gene product interacts with maintenance human DNA (cytosine-5)
methyltransferase and modulates its activity.

Pradhan S(1), Kim GD.

Author information: 
(1)New England Biolabs, 32 Tozer Road, Beverly, MA 01915, USA. pradhan@neb.com

The mammalian DNA (cytosine-5) methyltransferase (Dnmt1) is involved in the
maintenance of methylation patterns in the genome during DNA replication and
development. The retinoblastoma gene product, Rb, is a cell cycle regulator
protein that represses transcription by recruiting histone deacetylase (HDAC1).
In vivo, histone deacetylase associates with Dnmt1. Here we show that Rb itself
associates with human Dnmt1 (hDnmt1) independently of its own phosphorylation
status. Methyltransferase activity was co-purified with Rb. The regulatory domain
of hDnmt1 binds strongly to the B and C pockets of Rb (amino acids 701-872) and
inhibits methyltransferase activity by disruption of the hDnmt1-DNA binary
complex. Weak interaction of Rb pockets A and B with Dnmt1 was also observed.
Overexpression of Rb leads to hypomethylation of the cellular DNA, suggesting
that Rb may modulate Dnmt1 activity during DNA replication in the cell cycle.

PMCID: PMC125847
PMID: 11847125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Chem Biol. 2002 Jan;9(1):3-16.

Deacetylase enzymes: biological functions and the use of small-molecule
inhibitors.

Grozinger CM(1), Schreiber SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology and, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Harvard University, 12 Oxford Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

PMID: 11841934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Mar;22(5):1390-401.

The B-domain lysine patch of pRB is required for binding to large T antigen and
release of E2F by phosphorylation.

Brown VD(1), Gallie BL.

Author information: 
(1)The Ontario Cancer Institute/Princess Margaret Hospital, University Health
Network, and Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario M5G 2M9, Canada.

Cell cycle-dependent, site-specific phosphorylation of the retinoblastoma
protein, pRB, is mediated by cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) and regulates the
binding of pRB to many proteins. We previously showed that the interaction of pRB
with E2F on DNA was regulated by the accumulation of phosphate groups on pRB.
Here we show that positively charged lysine residues in the B domain of pRB are
necessary for the release of pRB from E2F on DNA following phosphorylation by
cyclin E-cdk2 kinase. These lysine residues are also important in the binding of 
the simian virus 40 large T antigen (TAg) to pRB, and mutation of these lysines
to arginines alters the dependency of the pRB-TAg interaction on phosphorylation 
of pRB.

PMCID: PMC134706
PMID: 11839806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Biol Chem. 2002 Apr 26;277(17):14869-76. Epub 2002 Feb 8.

Murine Sall1 represses transcription by recruiting a histone deacetylase complex.

Kiefer SM(1), McDill BW, Yang J, Rauchman M.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Division, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 
63110, USA.

The multi-zinc finger proteins of the Sal family regulate organogenesis. Genetic 
evidence from Drosophila has shown that spalt (sal) can alter gene expression in 
a cell autonomous fashion, but Sal proteins have never been directly analyzed for
their ability to activate or repress transcription. In this report, we show that 
a member of the Sal family, mouse Sall1, is a potent transcriptional repressor.
When fused to a heterologous DNA-binding domain, Sall1 represses transcription of
a luciferase reporter by over 100-fold. Expression of the N terminus alone is
sufficient for dose-responsive repression that, as shown by deletion analysis,
requires the extreme N-terminal amino acids of the protein. The N terminus of
Sall1 can repress at both short and long range relative to the promoter, and
treatment with the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, trichostatin A,
alleviates repression by 3-fold. The same regions of the protein that are
required for repression physically interact with components of chromatin
remodeling complexes, HDAC1, HDAC2, RbAp46/48, MTA-1, and MTA-2. Finally, we
demonstrate that Sall1 is localized to discrete nuclear foci and this
localization depends on the N-terminal repression domain. Together, these results
suggest that the N terminus of mouse Sall1 can recruit HDAC complexes to mediate 
transcriptional repression.

PMID: 11836251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 Jan 15;30(2):475-81.

Functional and physical interaction between the histone methyl transferase
Suv39H1 and histone deacetylases.

Vaute O(1), Nicolas E, Vandel L, Trouche D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire Eucaryote, CNRS UMR 5099, 118 Route de
Narbonne, 31062 Toulouse, France.

The histone methyl transferase Suv39H1 is involved in silencing by pericentric
heterochromatin. It specifically methylates K9 of histone H3, thereby creating a 
high affinity binding site for HP1 proteins. We and others have shown recently
that it is also involved in transcriptional repression by the retinoblastoma
protein Rb. Strikingly, both HP1 localisation and repression by Rb also require, 
at least in part, histone deacetylases. We found here that repression of a
heterologous promoter by Suv39H1 is dependent on histone deacetylase activity.
However, the enzymatic activity of Suv39H1 is not required, since the N-terminal 
part is by itself a transcriptional repression domain. Coimmunoprecipitation
experiments indicated that Suv39H1 can physically interact with HDAC1, -2 and -3,
therefore suggesting that transcriptional repression by Suv39H1 could be the
consequence of histone deacetylases recruitment. Consistent with this
interpretation, the N-terminal transcriptional repression domain of Suv39H1 bound
the so-called 'core histone deacetylase complex', composed of HDAC1, HDAC2 and
the Rb-associated proteins RbAp48 and RbAp46. Taken together, our results suggest
that a complex containing both the Suv39H1 histone methyl transferase and histone
deacetylases could be involved in heterochromatin silencing or transcriptional
repression by Rb.

PMCID: PMC99834
PMID: 11788710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Feb;22(3):835-48.

Role of the Sin3-histone deacetylase complex in growth regulation by the
candidate tumor suppressor p33(ING1).

Kuzmichev A(1), Zhang Y, Erdjument-Bromage H, Tempst P, Reinberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry, University of
Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School,
Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA.

Sin3 is an evolutionarily conserved corepressor that exists in different
complexes with the histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2. Sin3-HDAC complexes are 
believed to deacetylate nucleosomes in the vicinity of Sin3-regulated promoters, 
resulting in a repressed chromatin structure. We have previously found that a
human Sin3-HDAC complex includes HDAC1 and HDAC2, the histone-binding proteins
RbAp46 and RbAp48, and two novel polypeptides SAP30 and SAP18. SAP30 is a
specific component of Sin3 complexes since it is absent in other
HDAC1/2-containing complexes such as NuRD. SAP30 mediates interactions with
different polypeptides providing specificity to Sin3 complexes. We have
identified p33ING1b, a negative growth regulator involved in the p53 pathway, as 
a SAP30-associated protein. Two distinct Sin3-p33ING1b-containing complexes were 
isolated, one of which associates with the subunits of the Brg1-based Swi/Snf
chromatin remodeling complex. The N terminus of p33ING1b, which is divergent
among a family of ING1 polypeptides, associates with the Sin3 complex through
direct interaction with SAP30. The N-terminal domain of p33 is present in several
uncharacterized human proteins. We show that overexpression of p33ING1b
suppresses cell growth in a manner dependent on the intact Sin3-HDAC-interacting 
domain.

PMCID: PMC133546
PMID: 11784859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 15;277(11):9447-54. Epub 2002 Jan 4.

Functional domains of histone deacetylase-3.

Yang WM(1), Tsai SC, Wen YD, Fejer G, Seto E.

Author information: 
(1)H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, University of South
Florida, Tampa, Florida 33612, USA.

Post-translational modifications of histones, in general, and
acetylation/deacetylation, in particular, can dramatically alter gene expression 
in eukaryotic cells. In humans, four highly homologous class I HDAC enzymes
(HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3, and HDAC8) have been identified to date. Although HDAC3
shares some structural and functional similarities with other class I HDACs, it
exists in multisubunit complexes separate and different from other known HDAC
complexes, implying that individual HDACs might function in a distinct manner. In
this current study, to understand further the cellular function of HDAC3 and to
uncover possible unique roles this protein may have in gene regulation, we
performed a detailed analysis of HDAC3 using deletion mutations. Surprisingly, we
found that the non-conserved C-terminal region of HDAC3 is required for both
deacetylase and transcriptional repression activity. In addition, we discovered
that the central portion of the HDAC3 protein possesses a nuclear export signal, 
whereas the C-terminal part of HDAC3 contributes to the protein's localization in
the nucleus. Finally, we found that HDAC3 forms oligomers in vitro and in vivo
and that the N-terminal portion of HDAC3 is necessary for this property. These
data indicate that HDAC3 comprises separate, non-overlapping domains that
contribute to the unique properties and function of this protein.

PMID: 11779848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 15;277(11):9590-7. Epub 2002 Jan 2.

Human class I histone deacetylase complexes show enhanced catalytic activity in
the presence of ATP and co-immunoprecipitate with the ATP-dependent chaperone
protein Hsp70.

Johnson CA(1), White DA, Lavender JS, O'Neill LP, Turner BM.

Author information: 
(1)Chromatin and Gene Expression Group, Department of Anatomy, University of
Birmingham Medical School, Birmingham B15 2TT, United Kingdom.

Antibodies to histone deacetylases (HDACs) have been used to immuno-isolate
deacetylase complexes from HeLa cell extracts. Complexes shown to contain HDAC1, 
HDAC3, HDAC6, and HDAC1+2 as their catalytic subunits have been used in an
antibody-based assay that detects deacetylation of whole histones at defined
lysines. The class II deacetylase HDAC6 was inactive in this assay, but the three
class I enzymes deacetylated all histone lysines tested, although with varying
efficiency. In comparison to HDAC1, HDAC3 preferentially deacetylated lysines 5
and 12 of H4 and lysine 5 of H2A. H4 tails in purified mononucleosomes were
refractory to deacetylation by both HDAC1 and HDAC3, unless ATP was added to the 
reaction mix. Surprisingly, ATP also consistently enhanced cleavage of free,
non-nucleosomal histones, but not small peptides, by both enzyme complexes. We
found no evidence that ATP operates by phosphorylation of components of the HDAC 
complex, but have shown that HDACs 1, 2, and 3 all co-immunoprecipitate with the 
ATP-dependent chaperone protein Hsp70. Another common ATP-dependent chaperone,
Hsp90, was absent from all HDAC complexes tested, whereas Hsp60 associated with
HDAC1 only. We suggest that Hsp chaperone proteins enhance the deacetylase
activity of HDAC complexes by ATP-dependent manipulation of protein substrates.

PMID: 11777905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Virol. 2002 Jan;76(2):619-32.

Human papillomavirus type 16 E7 maintains elevated levels of the cdc25A tyrosine 
phosphatase during deregulation of cell cycle arrest.

Nguyen DX(1), Westbrook TF, McCance DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The Cancer Center, University of
Rochester, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

Essential to the oncogenic properties of human papillomavirus type 16 (HPV-16)
are the activities encoded by the early gene product E7. HPV-16 E7 (E7.16) binds 
to cellular factors involved in cell cycle regulation and differentiation. These 
include the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein (Rb) and histone deacetylase 
(HDAC) complexes. While the biological significance of these interactions remains
unclear, E7 is believed to help maintain cells in a proliferative state, thus
establishing an environment that is conducive to viral replication. Most pathways
that govern cell growth converge on downstream effectors. Among these is the
cdc25A tyrosine phosphatase. cdc25A is required for G(1)/S transition, and its
deregulation is associated with carcinogenesis. Considering the importance of
cdc25A in cell cycle progression, it represents a relevant target for viral
oncoproteins. Accordingly, the present study focuses on the putative deregulation
of cdc25A by E7.16. Our results indicate that E7.16 can impede growth arrest
induced during serum starvation and keratinocyte differentiation. Importantly,
these E7-specific phenotypes correlate with elevated cdc25A steady-state levels. 
Reporter assays performed with NIH 3T3 cell lines and human keratinocytes
indicate that E7 can transactivate the cdc25A promoter. In addition,
transcriptional activation by E7.16 requires the distal E2F site within the
cdc25A promoter. We further demonstrate that the ability of E7 to abrogate cell
cycle arrest, activate cdc25A transcription, and increase cdc25A protein levels
requires intact Rb and HDAC-1 binding domains. Finally, by using the cdk
inhibitor roscovitine, we reveal that E7 activates the cdc25A promoter
independently of cell cycle progression and cdk activity. Consequently, we
propose that E7.16 can directly target cdc25A transcription and maintains cdc25A 
gene expression by disrupting Rb/E2F/HDAC-1 repressor complexes.

PMCID: PMC136809
PMID: 11752153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Jpn J Cancer Res. 2001 Dec;92(12):1300-4.

Expression profile of histone deacetylase 1 in gastric cancer tissues.

Choi JH(1), Kwon HJ, Yoon BI, Kim JH, Han SU, Joo HJ, Kim DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathology, College of Veterinary Medicine and
Agricultural Biotechnology, Seoul National University, Suwon, 441-744, Japan.

Although histone deacetylases (HDACs) appear to play a crucial role in
carcinogenesis, the expression status of HDACs in primary human cancer tissues
has not yet been reported. In this study, we investigated the expression level of
HDAC1 in 25 paired primary human gastric cancer (GC) tissues and corresponding
normal tissues through semi-quantitative RT-PCR and immunoblot analysis. The
HDAC1 expression pattern was also topologically examined through
immunohistochemistry. Overexpression of HDAC1 mRNA was detected in 68% of GC
tissues (17 of 25), and the relative density of HDAC1 mRNA in GC tissue was
increased 1.8-fold versus the normal counterpart (P < 0.01). Elevated expression 
of HDAC1 protein was also detected in 61% of GC samples (11 of 18), which also
showed an increased mRNA level of HDAC. Immunohistochemically, overexpression of 
HDAC1 was predominantly localized in the nuclei of most neoplastic cells,
including embolic tumor cells, whereas normal glandular epithelial cells revealed
only weak HDAC1 expression that was focal in distribution. Thus, the present
study clearly demonstrates that HDAC1 is overexpressed in GC and probably plays a
significant role in gastric carcinogenesis.

PMID: 11749695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Mol Cell. 2001 Oct;8(4):885-97.

Class I histone deacetylases sequentially interact with MyoD and pRb during
skeletal myogenesis.

Puri PL(1), Iezzi S, Stiegler P, Chen TT, Schiltz RL, Muscat GE, Giordano A,
Kedes L, Wang JY, Sartorelli V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of California-San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093,
USA. plorenzo@salk.edu

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2002 Dec;3(6):757-8.

We describe a functional and biochemical link between the myogenic activator
MyoD, the deacetylase HDAC1, and the tumor suppressor pRb. Interaction of MyoD
with HDAC1 in undifferentiated myoblasts mediates repression of muscle-specific
gene expression. Prodifferentiation cues, mimicked by serum removal, induce both 
downregulation of HDAC1 protein and pRb hypophosphorylation. Dephosphorylation of
pRb promotes the formation of pRb-HDAC1 complex in differentiated myotubes.
pRb-HDAC1 association coincides with disassembling of MyoD-HDAC1 complex,
transcriptional activation of muscle-restricted genes, and cellular
differentiation of skeletal myoblasts. A single point mutation introduced in the 
HDAC1 binding domain of pRb compromises its ability to disrupt MyoD-HDAC1
interaction and to promote muscle gene expression. These results suggest that
reduced expression of HDAC1 accompanied by its redistribution in alternative
nuclear protein complexes is critical for terminal differentiation of skeletal
muscle cells.

PMID: 11684023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Mol Endocrinol. 2001 Nov;15(11):1918-28.

5'TG3' interacting factor interacts with Sin3A and represses AR-mediated
transcription.

Sharma M(1), Sun Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California 94305, USA.

Like other nuclear receptors, the AR exerts its transcriptional function by
binding to cis elements upstream of promoters and interacting with other
transcriptional factors (e.g. activators, repressors, and modulators). Among
them, histone acetyltransferases (HATs) and histone deacetylases (HDACs) play
critical roles in altering the acetylation state of core histones, thereby
regulating nuclear hormone receptor-mediated transcription. The nuclear receptor 
corepressor can repress the TR and RAR in the absence of ligand through either a 
Sin3A-dependent or -independent manner by recruiting HDACs. AR and some other
steroid hormone receptors cannot silence transcription through a similar
mechanism in that they are located in the cytoplasm as complexes with heat-shock 
proteins before exposure to ligand. It has been shown that AR can bind to
p160/SRC, cAMP response element-binding protein-binding protein (CBP)/P300 and
other coactivators to increase the AR-mediated transcription. However, the
molecular mechanism for turning AR from transcriptionally active into silent
states is unknown. In this study, we demonstrated that the transcription
repressor, 5'TG3' interacting factor (TGIF), selectively represses AR-mediated
transcription from several AR-responsive promoters. The repression is mediated
through binding of TGIF to the DNA binding domain of AR and is trichostatin
sensitive. We also identified a direct protein-protein interaction between TGIF
and a transcription corepressor, Sin3A, which suggests a novel pathway for TGIF
recruiting HDAC1 to the repression complex. These results provide fresh insight
into understanding the mechanism for repressing AR-, and perhaps other steroid
hormone receptor-, mediated transcriptions.

PMID: 11682623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Biol Chem. 2001 Dec 28;276(52):49435-42. Epub 2001 Oct 26.

Effect of estradiol on histone acetylation dynamics in human breast cancer cells.

Sun JM(1), Chen HY, Davie JR.

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Cell Biology, Winnipeg, Manitoba R3E 0V9, Canada.

Histone acetylation plays an important role in remodeling chromatin structure,
facilitating nuclear processes such as transcription. We investigated the effect 
of estradiol on global histone acetylation in hormone-responsive human breast
cancer cells. Pulse-chase experiments and immunoblot analyses of dynamically
acetylated histones show that estradiol rapidly increases histone acetylation in 
estrogen receptor (ER)-positive, hormone-dependent T5, but not in ER-negative,
hormone-independent MDA MB 231 breast cancer cells. The effect of estradiol on
the rates of histone acetylation and deacetylation in T5 cells was determined. We
found that estradiol increased the level of acetylated histones by reducing the
rate of histone deacetylation, whereas the rate of histone acetylation was not
altered. Enzymatic assays and immunoblot analyses of cell fractions showed that
estradiol did not affect the level, subnuclear distribution, or activity of class
I and II histone deacetylases. However, estradiol did alter the intranuclear
distribution of ER and histone acetyltransferases, with both becoming tightly
bound in the nucleus and associated with the nuclear matrix. We propose that,
following the association of ER with nuclear matrix sites, ER alters the balance 
of histone acetyltransferases and histone deacetylases at these sites and the
dynamics of acetylation of histones associated with transcriptionally active and 
competent chromatin.

PMID: 11682483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2001 Oct 25;183(1-2):19-28.

Repression of androgen-regulated gene expression by dominant negative androgen
receptors.

Bramlett KS(1), Dits NF, Sui X, Jorge MC, Zhu X, Jenster G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, USA.

The androgen receptor (AR) is a ligand-dependent transcription activator
responsible for male sexual development. In order to specifically inhibit the AR 
pathway, dominant negative ARs were constructed by inactivation of the major
transactivation domains of the wild type AR and fusing this mutant (AR122) to the
Krüppel-associated box (KRAB) repressor domain and/or histone deacetylase
(HDAC1). The HDAC1-KRAB-AR122 protein was the most successful dominant negative
AR, capable of repressing the wild type AR ninefold when co-expressed at a 1:1
plasmid ratio. A maximal repression of 41-fold was achieved when HDAC1-KRAB-AR122
was cotransfected with the wild type AR at a 4:1 plasmid ratio. HDAC1-KRAB-AR122 
repressed transcription in a ligand-dependent manner since it inhibited a
constitutively active AR mutant (AR5) only in the presence of agonists. High
concentrations of partial agonists such as RU486, cyproterone acetate, and
estradiol were also capable of triggering repression by HDAC1-KRAB-AR122. The
potent dominant negative AR proteins might prove useful tools to inhibit AR
function in vitro and in vivo.

PMID: 11604220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Biol Chem. 2001 Dec 14;276(50):47733-41. Epub 2001 Oct 15.

Histone deacetylase 1 phosphorylation promotes enzymatic activity and complex
formation.

Pflum MK(1), Tong JK, Lane WS, Schreiber SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA 02138, USA.

Accessibility of the genome to DNA-binding transcription factors is regulated by 
proteins that control the acetylation of amino-terminal lysine residues on
nucleosomal histones. Specifically, histone deacetylase (HDAC) proteins repress
transcription by deacetylating histones. To date, the only known regulatory
mechanism of HDAC1 function is via interaction with associated proteins. Although
the control of HDAC1 function by protein interaction and recruitment is well
precedented, we were interested in exploring HDAC1 regulation by
post-translational modification. Human HDAC1 protein was analyzed by ion trap
mass spectrometry, and two phosphorylated serine residues, Ser(421) and Ser(423),
were unambiguously identified. Loss of phosphorylation at Ser(421) and Ser(423)
due to mutation to alanine or disruption of the casein kinase 2 consensus
sequence directing phosphorylation reduced the enzymatic activity and complex
formation of HDAC1. Deletion of the highly charged carboxyl-terminal region of
HDAC1 also decreased its deacetylase activity and protein associations, revealing
its requirement in maintaining HDAC1 function. Our results reinforce the
importance of protein associations in modulating HDAC1 function and provide the
first step toward characterizing the role of post-translational modifications in 
regulating HDAC activity in vivo.

PMID: 11602581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Gene. 2001 Oct 17;277(1-2):111-20.

The histone acetyltransferase activity of PCAF cooperates with the
brahma/SWI2-related protein BRG-1 in the activation of the enhancer A of the MHC 
class I promoter.

Brockmann D(1), Lehmkühler O, Schmücker U, Esche H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology (Cancer Research), University of Essen Medical 
School, Hufelandstrasse 55, 45122 Essen, Germany. dieter.brockmann@uni-essen.de

Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I proteins are an essential
component of the immune system allowing the organism to protect from viral
infections and neoplastic transformation. Expression of the MHC class I genes is 
regulated by a variety of cis-regulatory promoter elements among which the
enhancer A is of particular importance. This enhancer is synergistically
activated through AP-1/ATF and NF-kappa B transcription factors. NF-kappa B
recruits the histone acetyltransferase (HAT) p300/CREB-binding protein (CBP) to
the multiprotein complex bound to the enhancer A. Here we present evidence that
acetylation and deacetylation processes are involved in the activation of the
enhancer A. The p300/CBP associated factor PCAF, but not p300/CBP, counteracts
the repression of the enhancer A mediated by the histone deacetylase HDAC1.
Furthermore, overexpression of PCAF results in an increase in the acetylation of 
histone H4 bound to the enhancer A and HDAC1 counteracts the PCAF-mediated H4
acetylation. The activation function of PCAF requires the p300/CBP binding motif 
indicating that PCAF might be recruited to the enhancer A through an association 
with p300/CBP. Moreover, PCAF and the Brahma/SWI2-related protein BRG-1, which is
a key factor of the human ATP-dependent chromatin remodelling complex SWI/SNF,
synergistically up-regulate the enhancer A. Synergistic activation requires the
HAT domain of PCAF. Taken together our data suggest that members of two different
groups of chromatin modifying complexes are involved in the activation of the
enhancer A of the MHC class I promoter.

PMID: 11602348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Oncogene. 2001 Sep 20;20(42):6039-47.

In vivo complex formation of PU.1 with HDAC1 associated with PU.1-mediated
transcriptional repression.

Kihara-Negishi F(1), Yamamoto H, Suzuki M, Yamada T, Sakurai T, Tamura T, Oikawa 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Genetics, Sasaki Institute, 2-2, Kanda-Surugadai,
Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 101-0062, Japan.

We previously reported that overexpression of PU.1, a member of the Ets family of
transcription factors, induces differentiation inhibition and apoptosis
associated with c-Myc down-regulation in murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells. To
understand the molecular mechanism by which c-Myc is down-regulated due to
overexpression of PU.1, we performed luciferase reporter assays using the mouse
c-myc promoter. PU.1 repressed the activities of not only the c-myc promoter but 
also several other promoters. Experiments with deletion mutants of PU.1 revealed 
that the C-terminal region spanning amino acids (aa) 123-272 including the PEST
and ETS domains but not the activation domain was sufficient for this
transcriptional repression. It was unlikely that the repression was due to
sequestration of a limited amount of CBP/p300 nor pCAF, because overexpression of
these co-activators did not relieve PU.1-mediated transcriptional repression.
Instead, it was found that the C-terminal aa 101-272 of PU.1 formed a complex
with mSin3A and HDAC1 in vivo, which was speculated to be associated with the
repression. The C-terminal region of PU.1 also formed a complex with the basic
transcription factor TBP in vitro and in vivo. Our results suggest that
overexpression of PU.1 induces transcriptional repression in several gene
promoters including the c-myc promoter which may be mediated by its complex
formation with HDACs.

PMID: 11593411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Cell Prolif. 2001 Oct;34(5):267-74.

p21(WAF1) is associated with CDK2 and CDK4 protein during HL-60 cell
differentiation by TPA treatment.

Cho JW(1), Jeong YW, Kim KS, Oh JY, Park JC, Lee JC, Baek WK, Suh SI, Suh MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, Seonam University,
Kwangchi-Dong 720, Namwon, Chunpook 590-711, Korea.

TPA-treated HL-60 cells are mainly arrested in G1 by p21(WAF1) accumulation. We
investigate the downstream changes following such accumulation. Increased
p21(WAF1) is associated with CDK2 and CDK4. pRb is dephosphorylated in the
presence of p21-CDK2/4 complexes, and the Rb-E2F1 complex increases after TPA
treatment, whereas the Rb-HDAC1 complex decreases slightly. Our results suggest
that increased p21(WAF1) is associated with CDK2/4, and that these complexes
induce pRb dephosphorylation. In turn, hypophosphorylated pRb are mainly
complexed with E2F1, but HDAC1 appears not to be a key component in this process.

PMID: 11591175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2001 Aug;48 Suppl 1:S20-6.

Histone deacetylase as a new target for cancer chemotherapy.

Yoshida M(1), Furumai R, Nishiyama M, Komatsu Y, Nishino N, Horinouchi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Graduate School of Agriculture and Life Sciences,
University of Tokyo, Japan. ayoshida@mail.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Trichostatin A (TSA) and trapoxin (TPX), inhibitors of the eukaryotic cell cycle 
and inducers of morphological reversion of transformed cells, inhibit histone
deacetylase (HDAC) at nanomolar concentrations. Recently, FK228 (also known as
FR901228 and depsipeptide) and MS-275. antitumor agents structurally unrelated to
TSA, have been shown to be potent HDAC inhibitors. These inhibitors activate the 
expression of p21Waf1 in a p53-independent manner. Changes in the expression of
regulators of the cell cycle, differentiation, and apoptosis with increased
histone acetylation may be responsible for the cell cycle arrest and antitumor
activity of HDAC inhibitors. TSA has been suggested to block the catalytic
reaction by chelating a zinc ion in the active site pocket through its hydroxamic
acid group. On the other hand, an epoxyketone has been suggested to be the
functional group of TPX capable of alkylating the enzyme. We synthesized a novel 
TPX analogue containing a hydroxamic acid instead of the epoxyketone. The hybrid 
compound, called cyclic hydroxamic-acid-containing peptide 1 (CHAP1) inhibited
HDAC at low nanomolar concentrations. The HDAC1 inhibition by CHAPI was
reversible, as is that by TSA, in contrast to irreversible inhibition by TPX.
Interestingly, HDAC6, but not HDAC1 or HDAC4, was resistant to TPX and CHAP1,
while TSA inhibited these HDACs to a similar degree. CHAP31, the strongest HDAC
inhibitor obtained from a variety of CHAP derivatives, exhibited antitumor
activity in BDF1 mice bearing B16/BL6 tumor cells. These results suggest that
CHAP31 is promising as a novel therapeutic agent for cancer treatment, and that
CHAP may serve as a basis for new HDAC inhibitors and be useful for combinatorial
synthesis and high-throughput screening.

PMID: 11587361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Biol Chem. 2001 Dec 7;276(49):46562-7. Epub 2001 Oct 3.

A novel transrepression pathway of c-Myc. Recruitment of a transcriptional
corepressor complex to c-Myc by MM-1, a c-Myc-binding protein.

Satou A(1), Taira T, Iguchi-Ariga SM, Ariga H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido University, Kita 12,
Nishi 6, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060, Japan.

The protooncogene product c-Myc plays a role in transcription regulation both for
activation and repression. While transactivation pathways of c-Myc either from
the N-proximal or the C-proximal region that is linked to the chromatin
remodeling complex have been identified, a transrepression pathway had been
identified only from the C-proximal region via Max and Mad that recruit the
histone deacetylase (HDAC) complex. We have reported that a novel c-Myc-binding
protein, MM-1, repressed the E-box-dependent transcription activity of c-Myc
(Mori, K., Maeda, Y., Kitaura, H., Taira, T., Iguchi-Ariga, S. M. M., and Ariga, 
H. (1998) J. Biol. Chem. 273, 29794-29800). To clarify the molecular mechanisms
of MM-1 toward c-Myc, cDNAs encoding MM-1-binding proteins were screened by the
two-hybrid method with MM-1 as a bait using a human HeLa cDNA library, and a cDNA
encoding TIF1 beta/KAP1, a transcriptional corepressor, was obtained. MM-1 was
found to bind to the central portion of TIF1 beta in vitro and in vivo, and these
proteins were found to be colocalized in the nucleus. MM-1 and TIF1 beta complex 
in human HeLa cells was found to also contain c-Myc, mSin3, and HDAC1.
Introduction of the C-terminal half of TIF1 beta as a dominant negative form
abrogated the inhibitory activity of MM-1 toward c-Myc and greatly stimulated the
transcription activity of c-Myc. Moreover, the inhibitory activity of MM-1 toward
c-Myc was canceled by trichostatin A, an inhibitor of HDAC1. These results
indicate that MM-1 is a connecting factor that forms a novel transcription
repression pathway of c-Myc.

PMID: 11585818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Mol Cell. 2001 Sep;8(3):557-69.

Linking the Rb and polycomb pathways.

Dahiya A(1), Wong S, Gonzalo S, Gavin M, Dean DC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Oncology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell. 2003 Jun;11(6):1693-6.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins associate to form complexes that repress Hox genes,
thereby imposing the patterning of Hox expression required for development.
However, these proteins have a second Hox-independent role in regulating cell
proliferation. Our results suggest that association between Rb and PcG proteins
forms a repressor complex that blocks entry of cells into mitosis. Also, we
provide evidence that Rb colocalizes with nuclear PcG complexes and is important 
for association of PcG complexes with nuclear targets. The Rb-PcG complex may
provide a means to link cell cycle arrest to differentiation events leading to
embryonic pattern formation.

PMID: 11583618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Cell Physiol. 2001 Oct;189(1):34-44.

pRb2/p130 and p107 control cell growth by multiple strategies and in association 
with different compartments within the nucleus.

Zini N(1), Trimarchi C, Claudio PP, Stiegler P, Marinelli F, Maltarello MC, La
Sala D, De Falco G, Russo G, Ammirati G, Maraldi NM, Giordano A, Cinti C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Normal and Pathologic Cytomorphology, CNR, Bologna, Italy.

It has been recently reported that retinoblastoma family proteins suppress cell
growth by regulating not only E2F-dependent mRNA transcription but also rRNA and 
tRNA transcription and, through HDAC1 recruitment, chromatin packaging. In the
present study we report data showing that these various control strategies are
correlated, at least in part, with nuclear compartmentalization of retinoblastoma
proteins. In a first series of experiments, we showed that pRb2/p130 and p107 are
not evenly distributed within the nucleus and that cell cycle-dependent binding
with E2F4 changes also as a function of their subnuclear localization. Namely, in
the nucleoplasm pRb2/p130-E2F4 complexes are more numerous during G0/G1 while in 
the nucleolus they increase in S phase. Partially different functions for p107
are suggested since p107-E2F4 complexes in the nucleoplasm are more numerous is S
phase with respect to G0/G1 and no cell cycle change is observed in the
nucleolus. In a second series of experiments we showed that pRb2/p130, p107,
E2F4, and pRb2/p130-HDAC1 complexes are all inner nuclear matrix-associated
proteins and localize to sites different from pRb/p105 ones. We provide further
evidence of multiple and partially distinct retinoblastoma protein family
functional roles during cell cycle. Moreover, our data support emerging evidence 
for functional interrelationships between nuclear structure and gene expression.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11573202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. EMBO Rep. 2001 Oct;2(10):915-9. Epub 2001 Sep 24.

Physical and functional association of SU(VAR)3-9 and HDAC1 in Drosophila.

Czermin B(1), Schotta G, Hülsmann BB, Brehm A, Becker PB, Reuter G, Imhof A.

Author information: 
(1)Adolf-Butenandt Institut, Molekularbiologie, Ludwig-Maximilians Universität,
Schillerstrasse 44, D-80336 München, Germany.

Modification of histones can have a dramatic impact on chromatin structure and
function. Acetylation of lysines within the N-terminal tail of the histone
octamer marks transcriptionally active regions of the genome whereas
deacetylation seems to play a role in transcriptional silencing. Recently, the
methylation of the histone tails has also been shown to be important for
transcriptional regulation and chromosome structure. Here we show by
immunoaffinity purification that two activities important for chromatin-mediated 
gene silencing, the histone methyltransferase SU(VAR)3-9 and the histone
deacetylase HDAC1, associate in vivo. The two activities cooperate to methylate
pre-acetylated histones. Both enzymes are modifiers of position effect
variegation and interact genetically in flies. We suggest a model in which the
concerted histone deacetylation and methylation by a SU(VAR)3-9/HDAC1-containing 
complex leads to a permanent silencing of transcription in particular areas of
the genome.

PMCID: PMC1084088
PMID: 11571273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Blood. 2001 Oct 1;98(7):2116-23.

Histone deacetylase 3 associates with and represses the transcription factor
GATA-2.

Ozawa Y(1), Towatari M, Tsuzuki S, Hayakawa F, Maeda T, Miyata Y, Tanimoto M,
Saito H.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Nagoya University School of Medicine,
Nagoya, Japan.

The zinc finger transcription factor GATA-2 plays a critical role in the survival
and proliferation of hematopoietic stem cells. This study examined the
interaction of GATA-2 with histone deacetylases (HDACs) to define the involvement
of HDACs in the regulation of GATA-2 function. GATA-2 directly associates with
HDAC3 but not with HDAC1. Consistent with this, HDAC3 suppressed the
transcriptional potential of GATA-2, whereas HDAC1 did not affect
GATA-2-dependent transcription. Results further demonstrated that GATA-2 and
HDAC3 colocalized in the nucleus. These results identify GATA-2 as a nuclear
target for HDAC3-mediated repression. Furthermore, GATA-2 also directly
associated with HDAC5 but not with other class II HDACs examined, that is, HDAC4 
and HDAC6. This is the first demonstration that a tissue-specific transcription
factor directly and selectively interacts with HDAC3 and HDAC5 among HDAC family 
members.

PMID: 11567998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Oct;21(20):7065-77.

The p65 (RelA) subunit of NF-kappaB interacts with the histone deacetylase (HDAC)
corepressors HDAC1 and HDAC2 to negatively regulate gene expression.

Ashburner BP(1), Westerheide SD, Baldwin AS Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

Regulation of NF-kappaB transactivation function is controlled at several levels,
including interactions with coactivator proteins. Here we show that the
transactivation function of NF-kappaB is also regulated through interaction of
the p65 (RelA) subunit with histone deacetylase (HDAC) corepressor proteins. Our 
results show that inhibition of HDAC activity with trichostatin A (TSA) results
in an increase in both basal and induced expression of an integrated
NF-kappaB-dependent reporter gene. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays
show that TSA treatment causes hyperacetylation of the wild-type integrated
NF-kappaB-dependent reporter but not of a mutant version in which the NF-kappaB
binding sites were mutated. Expression of HDAC1 and HDAC2 repressed tumor
necrosis factor (TNF)-induced NF-kappaB-dependent gene expression. Consistent
with this, we show that HDAC1 and HDAC2 target NF-kappaB through a direct
association of HDAC1 with the Rel homology domain of p65. HDAC2 does not interact
with NF-kappaB directly but can regulate NF-kappaB activity through its
association with HDAC1. Finally, we show that inhibition of HDAC activity with
TSA causes an increase in both basal and TNF-induced expression of the
NF-kappaB-regulated interleukin-8 (IL-8) gene. Similar to the wild-type
integrated NF-kappaB-dependent reporter, ChIP assays showed that TSA treatment
resulted in hyperacetylation of the IL-8 promoter. These data indicate that the
transactivation function of NF-kappaB is regulated in part through its
association with HDAC corepressor proteins. Moreover, it suggests that the
association of NF-kappaB with the HDAC1 and HDAC2 corepressor proteins functions 
to repress expression of NF-kappaB-regulated genes as well as to control the
induced level of expression of these genes.

PMCID: PMC99882
PMID: 11564889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Sep 28;287(3):705-13.

Histone deacetylase and DNA methyltransferase in human prostate cancer.

Patra SK(1), Patra A, Dahiya R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of California at San Francisco, San
Francisco, California 94121, USA.

CpG island hypermethylation and chromatin remodeling play important roles in
repression of various genes during malignant transformation. We hypothesized that
histone deacetylases (HDACs) and DNA methyltransferases (DNMTase) are associated 
with prostate cancer and we examined the enzyme activity, gene, and protein
expression of HDAC1 and DNMT1 in cell lines and tissues. We found that DNMTase
and HDACs activities were two- to threefold higher in cell lines compared to
benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH-1) cell line. Treatment of cells with
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine decreased the activity of HDAC and DNMTase. The mRNA
expression of these genes in BPH-1 cells and BPH tissues was lower than that in
prostate cancer cells and tissues. HDAC1 and DNMT1 protein expression was higher 
in prostate cancer compared to BPH. This is the first report to demonstrate that 
DNMT1 and HDAC1 levels are up-regulated in prostate cancer compared to BPH,
suggesting their roles in inactivation of various genes, by
DNA-methylation-induced chromatin-remodeling, in prostate cancer.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11563853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Int J Oncol. 2001 Oct;19(4):773-7.

Differential expression of class I HDACs: roles of cell density and cell cycle.

Dangond F(1), Henriksson M, Zardo G, Caiafa P, Ekström TJ, Gray SG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Transcriptional and Immune Regulation, Center for Neurologic
Diseases, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

Enzymes which affect histone acetylation status have been shown to play an
important role in determining transcriptional activity in chromatin through
conformational modification of its structure. Since the timely presence of such
enzymes may be of critical importance, our experiments were designed to determine
whether the level of expression of HDAC1 is cell cycle dependent and/or affected 
by a high cell density. Our results show that in mouse fibroblasts the expression
of mHDAC1 is neither affected by cell cycle phases nor by cell density. In
contrast, the expression of several hHDACs including hHDAC1 were affected in a
cell density dependent fashion in the human prostate adenocarcinoma cell line
PC3, paralleling our previously published findings in the hepatocellular
carcinoma derived cell line Hep3B. Differential recruitment of HDAC mRNAs
suggests that these enzymes may play unique roles in different cell types and
under different environmental conditions (i.e., exposure to various cell
densities and cell-cell contacts). Our study has implications for the proposed
use of HDAC inhibitors in the treatment of human malignancy, highlighting issues 
of drug action selectivity in tissues and potential secondary effects.

PMID: 11562754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Virol. 2001 Oct;75(20):9571-8.

The bovine herpesvirus 1 immediate-early protein (bICP0) associates with histone 
deacetylase 1 to activate transcription.

Zhang Y(1), Jones C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, Center for Biotechnology,
University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Nebraska 68503, USA.

Infected-cell protein 0 encoded by bovine herpesvirus 1 (BHV-1) (bICP0) is
necessary for efficient productive infection, in large part, because it activates
all 3 classes of BHV-1 genes (U. V. Wirth, C. Fraefel, B. Vogt, C. Vlcek, V.
Paces, and M. Schwyzer, J. Virol. 66:2763-2772, 1992). Although bICP0 is believed
to be a functional homologue of herpes simplex virus type 1-encoded ICP0, the
only well-conserved domain between the proteins is a zinc ring finger located
near the amino terminus of both proteins. Our previous studies demonstrated that 
bICP0 is toxic to transfected cells but does not appear to directly induce
apoptosis (Inman, M., Y. Zhang, V. Geiser, and C. Jones, J. Gen. Virol.
82:483-492, 2001). C-terminal sequences in the last 320 amino acids of bICP0
mediate subcellular localization. Mutagenesis of the zinc ring finger within
bICP0 revealed that this domain was important for transcriptional activation. In 
this study, we demonstrate that bICP0 interacts with histone deacetylase 1
(HDAC1), which results in activation of a simple promoter containing four
consensus Myc-Max binding sites. The interaction between bICP0 and HDAC1
correlated with inhibition of Mad-dependent transcriptional repression. In
resting CV-1 cells, bICP0 relieved HDAC1-mediated transcriptional repression. The
zinc ring finger was required for relieving HDAC1-induced repression but not for 
interacting with HDAC1. In fetal bovine lung cells but not in a human epithelial 
cell line, bICP0 expression correlated with reduced steady-state levels of HDAC1 
in crude cytoplasmic extracts. We hypothesize that the ability of bICP0 to
overcome HDAC1-induced repression plays a role in promoting productive infection 
in highly differentiated cell types.

PMCID: PMC114527
PMID: 11559788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Oct;21(19):6495-506.

Histone deacetylase activity represses gamma interferon-inducible HLA-DR gene
expression following the establishment of a DNase I-hypersensitive chromatin
conformation.

Osborne A(1), Zhang H, Yang WM, Seto E, Blanck G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, H. Lee 
Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, University of South Florida, Tampa,
Florida 33612, USA.

Expression of the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein (Rb) is required for
gamma interferon (IFN-gamma)-inducible major histocompatibility complex class II 
gene expression and transcriptionally productive HLA-DRA promoter occupancy in
several human tumor cell lines. Treatment of these Rb-defective tumor cell lines 
with histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors rescued IFN-gamma-inducible HLA-DRA
and -DRB mRNA and cell surface protein expression, demonstrating repression of
these genes by endogenous cellular HDAC activity. Additionally, Rb-defective,
transcriptionally incompetent tumor cells retained the HLA-DRA promoter DNase
I-hypersensitive site. Thus, HDAC-mediated repression of the HLA-DRA promoter
occurs following the establishment of an apparent nucleosome-free promoter region
and before transcriptionally productive occupancy of the promoter by the required
transactivators. Repression of HLA-DRA promoter activation by HDAC activity
likely involves a YY1 binding element located in the first exon of the HLA-DRA
gene. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments localized YY1 to the HLA-DRA gene
in Rb-defective tumor cells. Additionally, mutation of the YY1 binding site
prevented repression of the promoter by HDAC1 and partially prevented activation 
of the promoter by trichostatin A. Mutation of the octamer element also
significantly reduced the ability of HDAC1 to confer repression of inducible
HLA-DRA promoter activation. Treatment of Rb-defective tumor cells with HDAC
inhibitors greatly reduced the DNA binding activity of Oct-1, a repressor of
inducible HLA-DRA promoter activation. These findings represent the first
evidence that HDAC activity can repress IFN-gamma-inducible HLA class II gene
expression and also demonstrate that HDAC activity can contribute to promoter
repression following the establishment of a DNase I-hypersensitive chromatin
conformation.

PMCID: PMC99796
PMID: 11533238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. EMBO J. 2001 Sep 3;20(17):4814-25.

The FK506-binding protein 25 functionally associates with histone deacetylases
and with transcription factor YY1.

Yang WM(1), Yao YL, Seto E.

Author information: 
(1)H.Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, University of South
Florida, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

FK506-binding proteins (FKBPs) are cellular receptors for immunosuppressants that
belong to a subgroup of proteins, known as immunophilins, with peptidylprolyl
cis-trans isomerase (PPIase) activity. Sequence comparison suggested that the
HD2-type histone deacetylases and the FKBP-type PPIases may have evolved from a
common ancestor enzyme. Here we show that FKBP25 physically associates with the
histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2 and with the HDAC-binding transcriptional
regulator YY1. An FKBP25 immunoprecipitated complex contains deacetylase
activity, and this activity is associated with the N-terminus of FKBP25, distinct
from the FK506/rapamycin-binding domain. Furthermore, FKBP25 can alter the
DNA-binding activity of YY1. Together, our data firmly establish a relationship
between histone deacetylases and the FKBP enzymes and provide a novel and
critical function for the FKBPs.

PMCID: PMC125595
PMID: 11532945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. EMBO Rep. 2001 Sep;2(9):794-9. Epub 2001 Aug 23.

Cell cycle-dependent recruitment of HDAC-1 correlates with deacetylation of
histone H4 on an Rb-E2F target promoter.

Ferreira R(1), Naguibneva I, Mathieu M, Ait-Si-Ali S, Robin P, Pritchard LL,
Harel-Bellan A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire 'Oncogenèse, Différenciation et Transduction du Signal', CNRS UPR 
9079, Institut Fédératif André Lwoff, 7 rue Guy Moquet, 94801 Villejuif, France.

The transcription factor E2F, which is a key element in the control of cell
proliferation, is repressed by Rb and other pocket proteins in growth-arrested
differentiating cells, as well as in proliferating cells when they progress
through early G1. It is not known whether similar mechanisms are operative in the
two situations. A body of data suggests that E2F repression by pocket proteins
involves class I histone deacetylases (HDACs). It has been hypothesized that
these enzymes are recruited to E2F target promoters where they deacetylate
histones. Here we have tested this hypothesis directly by using formaldehyde
cross-linked chromatin immunoprecipitation (XChIP) assays to evaluate HDAC
association in living cells. Our data show that a histone deacetylase, HDAC-1, is
stably bound to an E2F target promoter during early G1 in proliferating cells and
released at the G1-S transition. In addition, our results reveal an inverse
correlation between HDAC-1 recruitment and histone H4 acetylation on specific
lysines.

PMCID: PMC1084028
PMID: 11520855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Genes Dev. 2001 Aug 15;15(16):2042-7.

Regulation of cyclin D2 gene expression by the Myc/Max/Mad network: Myc-dependent
TRRAP recruitment and histone acetylation at the cyclin D2 promoter.

Bouchard C(1), Dittrich O, Kiermaier A, Dohmann K, Menkel A, Eilers M, Lüscher B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology and Tumor Research, 35033 Marburg, Germany.

Myc oncoproteins promote cell cycle progression in part through the
transcriptional up-regulation of the cyclin D2 gene. We now show that Myc is
bound to the cyclin D2 promoter in vivo. Binding of Myc induces cyclin D2
expression and histone acetylation at a single nucleosome in a
MycBoxII/TRRAP-dependent manner. Down-regulation of cyclin D2 mRNA expression in 
differentiating HL60 cells is preceded by a switch of promoter occupancy from
Myc/Max to Mad/Max complexes, loss of TRRAP binding, increased HDAC1 binding, and
histone deacetylation. Thus, recruitment of TRRAP and regulation of histone
acetylation are critical for transcriptional activation by Myc.

PMCID: PMC312761
PMID: 11511535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Aug 14;98(17):9730-5. Epub 2001 Aug 7.

Essential role of Drosophila Hdac1 in homeotic gene silencing.

Chang YL(1), Peng YH, Pan IC, Sun DS, King B, Huang DH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of
China.

Deacetylation of the N-terminal tails of core histones plays a crucial role in
gene silencing. Rpd3 and Hda1 represent two major types of genes encoding
trichostatin A-sensitive histone deacetylases. Although they have been widely
found, their cellular and developmental roles remain to be elucidated in metazoa.
We show that Drosophila Hdac1, an Rpd3-type gene, interacts cooperatively with
Polycomb group repressors in silencing the homeotic genes that are essential for 
axial patterning of body segments. The biochemical copurification and cytological
colocalization of HDAC1 and Polycomb group repressors strongly suggest that HDAC1
is a component of the silencing complex for chromatin modification on specific
regulatory regions of homeotic genes.

PMCID: PMC55521
PMID: 11493709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Sep;21(17):6080-9.

HERP, a novel heterodimer partner of HES/E(spl) in Notch signaling.

Iso T(1), Sartorelli V, Poizat C, Iezzi S, Wu HY, Chung G, Kedes L, Hamamori Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetic Medicine, Keck School of Medicine of the University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089-9075, USA.

HERP1 and -2 are members of a new basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) protein family
closely related to HES/E(spl), the only previously known Notch effector. Like
that of HES, HERP mRNA expression is directly up-regulated by Notch ligand
binding without de novo protein synthesis. HES and HERP are individually
expressed in certain cells, but they are also coexpressed within single cells
after Notch stimulation. Here, we show that HERP has intrinsic transcriptional
repression activity. Transcriptional repression by HES/E(spl) entails the
recruitment of the corepressor TLE/Groucho via a conserved WRPW motif, whereas
unexpectedly the corresponding-but modified-tetrapeptide motif in HERP confers
marginal repression. Rather, HERP uses its bHLH domain to recruit the mSin3
complex containing histone deacetylase HDAC1 and an additional corepressor,
N-CoR, to mediate repression. HES and HERP homodimers bind similar DNA sequences,
but with distinct sequence preferences, and they repress transcription from
specific DNA binding sites. Importantly, HES and HERP associate with each other
in solution and form a stable HES-HERP heterodimer upon DNA binding. HES-HERP
heterodimers have both a greater DNA binding activity and a stronger repression
activity than do the respective homodimers. Thus, Notch signaling relies on
cooperation between HES and HERP, two transcriptional repressors with distinctive
repression mechanisms which, either as homo- or as heterodimers, regulate target 
gene expression.

PMCID: PMC87325
PMID: 11486045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Sep;21(17):5979-91.

Regulation of transcription factor YY1 by acetylation and deacetylation.

Yao YL(1), Yang WM, Seto E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Interdisciplinary Oncology 
Program, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, College of
Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

YY1 is a sequence-specific DNA-binding transcription factor that has many
important biological roles. It activates or represses many genes during cell
growth and differentiation and is also required for the normal development of
mammalian embryos. Previous studies have established that YY1 interacts with
histone acetyltransferases p300 and CREB-binding protein (CBP) and histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), HDAC2, and HDAC3. Here, we present evidence that the
activity of YY1 is regulated through acetylation by p300 and PCAF and through
deacetylation by HDACs. YY1 was acetylated in two regions: both p300 and PCAF
acetylated the central glycine-lysine-rich domain of residues 170 to 200, and
PCAF also acetylated YY1 at the C-terminal DNA-binding zinc finger domain.
Acetylation of the central region was required for the full transcriptional
repressor activity of YY1 and targeted YY1 for active deacetylation by HDACs.
However, the C-terminal region of YY1 could not be deacetylated. Rather, the
acetylated C-terminal region interacted with HDACs, which resulted in stable HDAC
activity associated with the YY1 protein. Finally, acetylation of the C-terminal 
zinc finger domain decreased the DNA-binding activity of YY1. Our findings
suggest that in the natural context, YY1 activity is regulated through intricate 
mechanisms involving negative feedback loops, histone deacetylation, and
recognition of the cognate DNA sequence affected by acetylation and deacetylation
of the YY1 protein.

PMCID: PMC87316
PMID: 11486036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Biol Chem. 2001 Sep 28;276(39):36749-56. Epub 2001 Jul 27.

The Sp1-like protein BTEB3 inhibits transcription via the basic transcription
element box by interacting with mSin3A and HDAC-1 co-repressors and competing
with Sp1.

Kaczynski J(1), Zhang JS, Ellenrieder V, Conley A, Duenes T, Kester H, van Der
Burg B, Urrutia R.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Research Unit, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55901, USA.

Sp1-like proteins are characterized by three conserved C-terminal zinc finger
motifs that bind GC-rich sequences found in promoters of numerous genes essential
for mammalian cell homeostasis. These proteins behave as transcriptional
activators or repressors. Although significant information has been reported on
the molecular mechanisms by which Sp1-like activators function, relatively little
is known about mechanisms for repressor proteins. Here we report the functional
characterization of BTEB3, a ubiquitously expressed Sp1-like transcriptional
repressor. GAL4 assays show that the N terminus of BTEB3 contains regions that
can act as direct repressor domains. Immunoprecipitation assays reveal that BTEB3
interacts with the co-repressor mSin3A and the histone deacetylase protein
HDAC-1. Gel shift assays demonstrate that BTEB3 specifically binds the BTE site, 
a well characterized GC-rich DNA element, with an affinity similar to that of
Sp1. Reporter and gel shift assays in Chinese hamster ovary cells show that BTEB3
can also mediate repression by competing with Sp1 for BTE binding. Thus, the
characterization of this protein expands the repertoire of BTEB-like members of
the Sp1 family involved in transcriptional repression. Furthermore, our results
suggest a mechanism of repression for BTEB3 involving direct repression by the N 
terminus via interaction with mSin3A and HDAC-1 and competition with Sp1 via the 
DNA-binding domain.

PMID: 11477107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Biol Chem. 2001 Sep 28;276(39):36734-41. Epub 2001 Jul 25.

Histone deacetylase is a direct target of valproic acid, a potent anticonvulsant,
mood stabilizer, and teratogen.

Phiel CJ(1), Zhang F, Huang EY, Guenther MG, Lazar MA, Klein PS.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6148, USA.

Valproic acid is widely used to treat epilepsy and bipolar disorder and is also a
potent teratogen, but its mechanisms of action in any of these settings are
unknown. We report that valproic acid activates Wntdependent gene expression,
similar to lithium, the mainstay of therapy for bipolar disorder. Valproic acid, 
however, acts through a distinct pathway that involves direct inhibition of
histone deacetylase (IC(50) for HDAC1 = 0.4 mm). At therapeutic levels, valproic 
acid mimics the histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A, causing
hyperacetylation of histones in cultured cells. Valproic acid, like trichostatin 
A, also activates transcription from diverse exogenous and endogenous promoters. 
Furthermore, valproic acid and trichostatin A have remarkably similar teratogenic
effects in vertebrate embryos, while non-teratogenic analogues of valproic acid
do not inhibit histone deacetylase and do not activate transcription. Based on
these observations, we propose that inhibition of histone deacetylase provides a 
mechanism for valproic acid-induced birth defects and could also explain the
efficacy of valproic acid in the treatment of bipolar disorder.

PMID: 11473107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001 Aug 1;29(15):3131-6.

The histone deacetylase HDAC3 targets RbAp48 to the retinoblastoma protein.

Nicolas E(1), Ait-Si-Ali S, Trouche D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire Eucaryote, UMR 5099 CNRS, 118 Route de
Narbonne, F-31062 Toulouse Cedex, France and Institut André Lwoff, UPR 9079 CNRS,
Villejuif, France.

The product of the retinoblastoma susceptibility gene, the Rb protein, functions 
partly through transcriptional repression of E2F-regulated genes. Repression by
Rb is mediated, at least in part, by a histone deacetylase complex, whose
enzymatic activity relies on HDAC1, HDAC2 or HDAC3. Recently, we have shown that 
the Rb-associated histone deacetylase complex contains RbAp48 protein, which
interacts with HDAC1 and HDAC2. RbAp48 could favour the deacetylation of histones
since it binds directly to histone H4. In agreement with that, we show that
transcriptional repression of E2F activity requires the presence of RbAp48. HDAC3
was thought not to interact with RbAp48. However, we found that it shared with
HDAC1 the ability to favour the recruitment of RbAp48 to Rb. This latter effect
was unlikely to be due to activation of Rb function, since HDAC3 did not increase
Rb-E2F1 interaction. Rather, we found, surprisingly, that HDAC3 could physically 
interact with RbAp48 both in vitro and in living cells. Taken together, our data 
suggest a model in which Rb mediates the recruitment to E2F-regulating promoters 
of a repressive complex containing either HDAC1, HDAC2 or HDAC3 and the
histone-binding protein RbAp48.

PMCID: PMC55834
PMID: 11470869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Biochem Cell Biol. 2001;79(3):243-52.

Class II histone deacetylases: structure, function, and regulation.

Bertos NR(1), Wang AH, Yang XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada.

Acetylation of histones, as well as non-histone proteins, plays important roles
in regulating various cellular processes. Dynamic control of protein acetylation 
levels in vivo occurs through the opposing actions of histone acetyltransferases 
and histone deacetylases (HDACs). In the past few years, distinct classes of
HDACs have been identified in mammalian cells. Class I members, such as HDAC1,
HDAC2, HDAC3, and HDAC8, are well-known enzymatic transcriptional corepressors
homologous to yeast Rpd3. Class II members, including HDAC4, HDAC5, HDAC6, HDAC7,
and HDAC9, possess domains similar to the deacetylase domain of yeast Hdal.
HDAC4, HDAC5, and HDAC7 function as transcriptional corepressors that interact
with the MEF2 transcription factors and the N-CoR, BCoR, and CtBP corepressors.
Intriguingly, HDAC4, HDAC5, and probably HDAC7 are regulated through subcellular 
compartmentalization controlled by site-specific phosphorylation and binding of
14-3-3 proteins; the regulation of these HDACs is thus directly linked to
cellular signaling networks. Both HDAC6 and HDAC9 possess unique structural
modules, so they may have special biological functions. Comprehension of the
structure, function, and regulation of class II deacetylases is important for
elucidating how acetylation regulates functions of histones and other proteins in
vivo.

PMID: 11467738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Jul 17;98(15):8720-5. Epub 2001 Jul 10.

Histone deacetylase-dependent transcriptional repression by pRB in yeast occurs
independently of interaction through the LXCXE binding cleft.

Kennedy BK(1), Liu OW, Dick FA, Dyson N, Harlow E, Vidal M.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Building 149, 13th Street,
Charlestown, MA 02129, USA. kennedy@helix.mgh.harvard.edu

We have developed a yeast model system to address transcriptional repression by
the retinoblastoma protein (pRB). When fused to the DNA-binding domain of Gal4p
(DB-pRB), pRB can repress transcription of reporter genes containing Gal4p
binding sites; the histone deacetylase activity encoded by yeast RPD3 is required
for DB-pRB repression. Mutation of the LXCXE binding cleft in pRB, a region
reported to be required for histone deacetylase recruitment, does not interfere
with pRB-mediated repression. From these findings based on yeast experiments, we 
surmise that the small pocket region of pRB must contain an additional domain
that confers histone deacetylase-dependent transcriptional repression. This
hypothesis was verified by experiments examining pRB-dependent histone
deacetylase association in mammalian cells. In addition to RPD3, repression by
pRB in yeast requires MSI1, an ortholog of RbAp48, but not SIN3 or SAP30. By
comparing the genetic requirements of DB-pRB repression in yeast to those of
other DB-repressor fusions, we can suggest a mechanism by which pRB recruits
histone deacetylase activity.

PMCID: PMC37502
PMID: 11447271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Mol Cell. 2001 Jun;7(6):1233-43.

Role of PML and PML-RARalpha in Mad-mediated transcriptional repression.

Khan MM(1), Nomura T, Kim H, Kaul SC, Wadhwa R, Shinagawa T, Ichikawa-Iwata E,
Zhong S, Pandolfi PP, Ishii S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, RIKEN Tsukuba Institute, 305-0074, Ibaraki, 
Japan.

Fusion of the promyelocytic leukemia (PML) protein to the retinoic acid
receptor-alpha (RARalpha) generates the transforming protein of acute
promyelocytic leukemias. PML appears to be involved in multiple functions,
including apoptosis and transcriptional activation by RAR, whereas PML-RARalpha
blocks these functions of PML. However, the mechanisms of leukemogenesis by
PML-RARalpha remain elusive. Here we show that PML interacts with multiple
corepressors (c-Ski, N-CoR, and mSin3A) and histone deacetylase 1, and that this 
interaction is required for transcriptional repression mediated by the tumor
suppressor Mad. PML-RARalpha has the two corepressor-interacting sites and
inhibits Mad-mediated repression, suggesting that aberrant binding of
PML-RARalpha to the corepressor complexes may lead to abrogation of the
corepressor function. These mechanisms may contribute to events leading to
leukemogenesis.

PMID: 11430826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. FEBS Lett. 2001 Jun 15;499(1-2):101-6.

Histone deacetylases in replicative senescence: evidence for a
senescence-specific form of HDAC-2.

Wagner M(1), Brosch G, Zwerschke W, Seto E, Loidl P, Jansen-Dürr P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biomedical Ageing Research, Austrian Academy of Sciences,
Innsbruck, Austria.

To analyze mechanisms of senescence-associated gene expression, we have
investigated histone deacetylases (HDACs) in human fibroblasts undergoing
replicative senescence. We found that the overall acetylation pattern of histones
does not vary detectably with replicative senescence. By Northern blot and
Western blot, we found a significant decrease in the abundance of HDAC-1 in
senescent cells. Biochemical analysis of deacetylase activities in extracts from 
old and young cells revealed a striking difference. While by anion exchange
chromatography we found a single peak of activity in extracts from young cells,
which coincided with the elution of both HDAC-1 and HDAC-2, in senescent cells a 
second peak of activity was found. This second peak of activity is associated
with HDAC-2 but does not contain HDAC-1. These results suggest that HDAC-2 is
present in at least two distinct forms, one of which is specific for senescent
cells. Further biochemical characterization of the enzyme activity revealed that 
addition of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) did not detectably influence 
the activity of any fraction, suggesting that NAD is not an essential co-factor
for the analyzed HDACs from diploid human fibroblasts.

PMID: 11418121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Biol Chem. 2001 Apr;382(4):637-44.

Transcriptional repression mediated by the KRAB domain of the human C2H2 zinc
finger protein Kox1/ZNF10 does not require histone deacetylation.

Lorenz P(1), Koczan D, Thiesen HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, University of Röstock, Germany.

The KRAB domain of human Kox1, a member of the KRAB C2H2 zinc finger family,
confers strong transcriptional repressor activities even to remote promoter
positions. Here, HDAC inhibitors were used to demonstrate that histone
deacetylation is not required for mediating transcriptional repression of KRAB
zinc finger proteins. Two reporter systems with either stably integrated or
transiently transfected templates, both under control of strong viral promoters, 
were analyzed. Under all circumstances, HDAC inhibition did not alter the
repression potential of the KRAB domain. In case of the stably integrated
luciferase reporter gene system, neither expression levels of the KRAB fusion
protein nor complex formation with its putative co-repressor TIF1beta were
significantly changed. Furthermore, the TIF1beta/KRAB complex was devoid of
mSin3A and HDAC1. In the transient transfection system, the transcriptional
repression induced by TIF1beta and HP1alpha was not diminished by HDAC
inhibitors, whereas the repressory activity of TIF1alpha was significantly
affected. Thus, KRAB, TIF1beta and HP1alpha are likely to be functionally linked.
In conclusion, HDAC activity is not essential for the strong transcriptional
repressor activity mediated by the KRAB domain of Kox1 in particular and,
presumably, by KRAB domains in general. This feature might be helpful in
identifying and characterizing target genes under the control of

PMID: 11405226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Surg Res. 2001 Jun 1;98(1):4-8.

p21 gene regulation during enterocyte differentiation.

Archer SY(1), Johnson JJ, Kim HJ, Hodin RA.

Author information: 
(1)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts 02215, USA. sarcher@caregroup.harvard.edu

BACKGROUND: Enterocyte differentiation is associated with a withdrawal from the
cell cycle and the transcriptional activation of the cell cycle inhibitor, p21.
We sought to define the molecular mechanisms involved in p21 gene activation in
an in vitro system.
METHODS: Transient transfections were performed in HT-29 cells with plasmids
containing various 5' deletions of the p21 promoter upstream of the luciferase
reporter -/+ the histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) expression plasmid. After 24 h,
cells were treated -/+ 5 mM sodium butyrate (NaBu) or another histone
hyperacetylating agent, trichostatin A (TSA, 0.3 microM) for 24 h. After protein 
extraction, luciferase activity was measured. Acid/urea/triton gel
electrophoresis was performed to examine histone acetylation in cells.
RESULTS: NaBu and TSA both caused histone H4 hyperacetylation. Both NaBu and TSA 
caused a marked increase in the transactivation of plasmids containing 291 bp of 
the p21 promoter upstream of the transcriptional start site, similar to that
previously seen for a 2.4-kb construct. A decrease in reporter gene induction was
seen between 173 and 153 bp. This was followed by a marked increase in promoter
induction from 143 to 117 bp. Finally, only low basal activity was seen in the
case of the 93-bp plasmid. HDAC1 blocked NaBu-mediated induction of all plasmids.
CONCLUSIONS: p21 gene activation during HT-29 cell differentiation occurs via at 
least two regions of cis-acting elements: one located between -93 and -117 bp,
and the other between -173 and -291 bp. Histone hyperacetylation likely plays a
role in this activation.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11368530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. EMBO J. 2001 May 15;20(10):2536-44.

Dnmt3a binds deacetylases and is recruited by a sequence-specific repressor to
silence transcription.

Fuks F(1), Burgers WA, Godin N, Kasai M, Kouzarides T.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome/CRC Institute and Department of Pathology, Cambridge University,
Tennis Court Road, Cambridge CB2 1QR, UK.

The Dnmt3a DNA methyltransferase is essential for mammalian development and is
responsible for the generation of genomic methylation patterns, which lead to
transcriptional silencing. Here, we show that Dnmt3a associates with RP58, a
DNA-binding transcriptional repressor protein found at transcriptionally silent
heterochromatin. Dnmt3a acts as a co-repressor for RP58 in a manner that does not
require its de novo methyltransferase activity. Like other characterized
co-repressors, Dnmt3a associates with the histone deacetylase HDAC1 using its
ATRX-homology domain. This domain of Dnmt3a represents an independent
transcriptional repressor domain whose silencing functions require HDAC activity.
These results identify Dnmt3a as a co-repressor protein carrying deacetylase
activity and show that Dnmt3a can be targeted to specific regulatory foci via its
association with DNA-binding transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC125250
PMID: 11350943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Mol Cell. 2001 Apr;7(4):715-27.

The large subunit of replication factor C promotes cell survival after DNA damage
in an LxCxE motif- and Rb-dependent manner.

Pennaneach V(1), Salles-Passador I, Munshi A, Brickner H, Regazzoni K, Dick F,
Dyson N, Chen TT, Wang JY, Fotedar R, Fotedar A.

Author information: 
(1)Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, 10835 Altman Road, San Diego, CA 92121, USA.

Retinoblastoma (Rb) protein promotes cell survival after DNA damage. We show here
that the LxCxE binding site in Rb mediates both cell survival and cell-cycle
arrest after DNA damage. Replication factor C (RF-C) complex plays an important
role in DNA replication. We describe a novel function of the large subunit of
RF-C in promoting cell survival after DNA damage. RF-Cp145 contains an LxCxE
motif, and mutation of this motif abolishes the protective effect of RF-Cp145.
The inability of wild-type RF-Cp145 to promote cell survival in Rb-null cells is 
rescued by Rb but not by Rb mutants defective in binding LxCxE proteins. RF-C
thus enhances cell survival after DNA damage in an Rb-dependent manner.

PMID: 11336696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Genes Dev. 2001 May 1;15(9):1140-51.

Sharp, an inducible cofactor that integrates nuclear receptor repression and
activation.

Shi Y(1), Downes M, Xie W, Kao HY, Ordentlich P, Tsai CC, Hon M, Evans RM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies,
Gene Expression Laboratory, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

A yeast two-hybrid screen using the conserved carboxyl terminus of the nuclear
receptor corepressor SMRT as a bait led to the isolation of a novel human gene
termed SHARP (SMRT/HDAC1 Associated Repressor Protein). SHARP is a potent
transcriptional repressor whose repression domain (RD) interacts directly with
SMRT and at least five members of the NuRD complex including HDAC1 and HDAC2. In 
addition, SHARP binds to the steroid receptor RNA coactivator SRA via an
intrinsic RNA binding domain and suppresses SRA-potentiated steroid receptor
transcription activity. Accordingly, SHARP has the capacity to modulate both
liganded and nonliganded nuclear receptors. Surprisingly, the expression of SHARP
is itself steroid inducible, suggesting a simple feedback mechanism for
attenuation of the hormonal response.

PMCID: PMC312688
PMID: 11331609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 May 4;283(2):445-53.

Mammalian histone deacetylase 1 protein is posttranslationally modified by
phosphorylation.

Cai R(1), Kwon P, Yan-Neale Y, Sambuccetti L, Fischer D, Cohen D.

Author information: 
(1)Functional Genomics, Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, Summit, New Jersey 
07901, USA.

HDAC1, a member of the histone deacetylase family, is involved in transcription
regulation through the modification of chromatin structure. Several studies also 
implicated HDAC1 in tumorigenesis. Much attention has been concentrated on
protein-protein interactions involving HDAC1 and the possibility that
posttranslational modifications may occur in mammalian HDAC1 proteins has not
been carefully and systematically investigated. In this study, we utilized in
vivo labeling assays to demonstrate that both human and murine HDAC1 proteins are
phosphorylated in cells. Assays using HDAC1 deletion mutants indicated that
phosphorylation occurs in its C-terminal domain. cAMP-dependent kinase and casein
kinase II, but not protein kinase C, cdc2, or MAP kinase, could phosphorylate
HDAC1 in vitro, although HDAC1 contains several protein kinase C consensus sites.
We also found that phosphorylation did not influence HDAC1 enzymatic activity
using a human histone H4 N-terminal peptide as the substrate. Interestingly,
HDAC1-FLAG fusion protein immunoprecipitated from transfected cells was found to 
be in association with a kinase activity, providing an in vitro assay for further
studies of this posttranslational modification.

PMID: 11327722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 29;276(26):23531-8. Epub 2001 Apr 23.

Ca2+ and BMP-6 signaling regulate E2F during epidermal keratinocyte
differentiation.

D'Souza SJ(1), Pajak A, Balazsi K, Dagnino L.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pharmacology/Toxicology and Paediatrics, Child Health Research 
Institute and Lawson Health Research Institute, University of Western Ontario,
London, Ontario N6A 5C1, Canada.

The epidermis consists of a squamous epithelium continuously replenished by
committed stem cells, which can either self-renew or differentiate. We
demonstrated previously that E2F genes are differentially expressed in developing
epidermis (Dagnino, L., Fry, C. J., Bartley, S. M., Farnham, P., Gallie, B. L.,
and Phillips, R. A. (1997) Cell Growth Differ. 8, 553-563). Thus, we hypothesized
that various E2F proteins likely play distinct growth regulatory roles in the
undifferentiated stem cells and in terminally differentiated keratinocytes. To
further understand the function of E2F genes in epidermal morphogenesis, we have 
examined the expression, regulation, and protein-protein interactions of E2F
factors in undifferentiated cultured murine primary keratinocytes or in cells
induced to differentiate with Ca(2+) or BMP-6 (bone morphogenetic protein 6). We 
find similar patterns of E2F regulation with both differentiating agents and
demonstrate a switch in expression from E2F-1, -2, and -3 in undifferentiated,
proliferating cells to E2F-5 in terminally differentiated keratinocytes.
Inhibition of keratinocyte proliferation by transforming growth factor-beta1 did 
not enhance E2F-5 protein levels, suggesting that this response is specific to
differentiation rather than reversible cell cycle withdrawal. E2F-5 up-regulation
is also accompanied by formation of heteromeric nuclear complexes containing
E2F5, p130, and histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1. Overexpression of E2F5 specifically
inhibited DNA synthesis in undifferentiated keratinocytes in an HDAC-dependent
manner, suggesting that E2F-5.p130.HDAC1 complexes are likely involved in the
permanent withdrawal from the cell cycle of keratinocytes responding to
differentiation stimuli.

PMID: 11319226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Oncogene. 2001 Jan 11;20(2):240-51.

Negative regulation of bcl-2 expression by p53 in hematopoietic cells.

Wu Y(1), Mehew JW, Heckman CA, Arcinas M, Boxer LM.

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Molecular Biology in Medicine, Palo Alto Veterans Affairs
Medical Center and the Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305-5112, USA.

The p53 protein activates promoters containing p53 binding sites, and it
represses other promoters. We examined the effect of p53 on bcl-2 expression in
both the DHL-4 B cell line and the K562 erythroleukemia line. Transient
transfection analyses revealed that wild-type p53 repressed the bcl-2 full-length
promoter. The region of the bcl-2 promoter that was responsive to p53 was mapped 
to the bcl-2 P2 minimal promoter region, and we showed that p53 and the TATA
binding protein bound to the bcl-2 TATA sequence. The TATA binding protein, p53, 
histone deacetylase-1 and mSin3a could be co-immunoprecipitated from K562 cell
nuclear extract. The TATA binding protein and mSin3a could be recovered in a
complex at the bcl-2 promoter TATA sequence, however, the formation of this
complex was not dependent on the presence of p53. Treatment of K562 cells with
the histone deacetylase inhibitor, trichostatin A, resulted in an increase in
bcl-2 promoter activity whether p53 was present or not. Therefore, we
demonstrated that p53 and the histone deacetylases repress the bcl-2 promoter
independently. Similar results were obtained when endogenous bcl-2 mRNA or
protein levels were measured in response to either p53 or trichostatin A, and p53
expression resulted in enhanced apoptosis. RNase protection assays demonstrated
that transcription from the endogenous 3' bcl-2 promoter was decreased by p53.
The regions of p53 that were required for repression of the bcl-2 promoter were
defined. We conclude that the TATA sequence in the bcl-2 P2 minimal promoter is
the target for repression by p53, and that the interaction between p53 and TBP is
most likely responsible for the repression. Mutation of p53 may play a role in
the up-regulation of bcl-2 expression in some B cell lymphomas.

PMID: 11313951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Clin Cancer Res. 2001 Apr;7(4):962-70.

Inhibition of transformed cell growth and induction of cellular differentiation
by pyroxamide, an inhibitor of histone deacetylase.

Butler LM(1), Webb Y, Agus DB, Higgins B, Tolentino TR, Kutko MC, LaQuaglia MP,
Drobnjak M, Cordon-Cardo C, Scher HI, Breslow R, Richon VM, Rifkind RA, Marks PA.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York 10021, USA.

PURPOSE: We have synthesized a series of hybrid polar compounds that induce
differentiation and/or apoptosis of various transformed cells. These agents are
also potent inhibitors of histone deacetylases (HDACs). Pyroxamide
(suberoyl-3-aminopyridineamide hydroxamic acid) is a new member of this class of 
compounds that is currently under development as an anticancer agent. We
investigated the activity of pyroxamide as an inducer of differentiation and/or
apoptosis in transformed cells.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN AND RESULTS: Pyroxamide, at micromolar concentrations,
induced terminal differentiation in murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells and caused
growth inhibition by cell cycle arrest and/or apoptosis in MEL, prostate
carcinoma, bladder carcinoma, and neuroblastoma cells. Administration of
pyroxamide (100 or 200 mg/kg/day) to nude mice at doses that caused little
evident toxicity significantly suppressed the growth of s.c. CWR22 prostate
cancer xenografts. Despite the potent growth-inhibitory effects of pyroxamide in 
this tumor model, serum prostate-specific antigen levels in control versus
pyroxamide-treated mice were not significantly different. Pyroxamide is a potent 
inhibitor of affinity-purified HDAC1 (ID(50) = 100 nM) and causes the
accumulation of acetylated core histones in MEL cells cultured with the agent.
Human CWR22 prostate tumor xenografts from mice treated with pyroxamide (100 or
200 mg/kg/day) showed increased levels of histone acetylation and increased
expression of the cell cycle regulator p21/WAF1, compared with tumors from
vehicle-treated control animals.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings suggest that pyroxamide may be a useful agent for the
treatment of malignancy and that induction of p21/WAF1 in transformed cells by
pyroxamide may contribute to the antitumor effects of this agent.

PMID: 11309347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 22;276(25):22595-603. Epub 2001 Apr 16.

An essential role for Mad homology domain 1 in the association of Smad3 with
histone deacetylase activity*.

Liberati NT(1), Moniwa M, Borton AJ, Davie JR, Wang XF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, North Carolina, 27708, USA.

The Smads are a family of sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins that modulate
transcription in response to transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta) by
recruiting transcriptional activators like the histone acetyltransferase,
p300/CBP, or repressors like the histone deacetylase, HDAC1, to TGFbeta target
genes. The association of Smads and HDAC1 is mediated in part by direct binding
of Smads to the HDAC1-associated proteins, TG-interacting factor, c-ski, and
SnoN. Although ectopic expression of these proteins inhibits Smad-activated
transcription, the contribution of histone deacetylase enzymatic activity to
transcriptional repression by TGFbeta is unknown. Here, the biological
requirements for the interaction between Smads and endogenous histone deacetylase
activity are investigated. We identify residues in Mad homology domain 1 of Smad3
that are required for association with histone deacetylase activity. An amino
acid change at one of these critical residues does not disrupt the association of
Smad3 with c-ski, SnoN, and transforming growth-interacting factor but does
abrogate the ability of Smad3 to repress transcription. These findings indicate
that the association of Smad3 and histone deacetylase activity relies on
additional protein mediators that make contact with Smad3 at its amino terminus. 
Moreover, these data suggest that the suppressive effect of Smad3 on
transcription is dependent upon its association with histone deacetylase
enzymatic activity.

PMID: 11306568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Mol Biol. 2001 Apr 20;308(1):27-38.

Homo-oligomerisation and nuclear localisation of mouse histone deacetylase 1.

Taplick J(1), Kurtev V, Kroboth K, Posch M, Lechner T, Seiser C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Biochemistry, Division of Molecular Biology, Vienna
Biocenter, University of Vienna, Austria.

Reversible histone acetylation changes the chromatin structure and can modulate
gene transcription. Mammalian histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) is a nuclear protein 
that belongs to a growing family of evolutionarily conserved enzymes catalysing
the removal of acetyl residues from core histones and other proteins. Previously,
we have identified murine HDAC1 as a growth factor-inducible protein in murine
T-cells. Here, we characterise the molecular function of mouse HDAC1 in more
detail. Co-immunoprecipitation experiments with epitope-tagged HDAC1 protein
reveal the association with endogenous HDAC1 enzyme. We show that HDAC1 can
homo-oligomerise and that this interaction is dependent on the N-terminal HDAC
association domain of the protein. Furthermore, the same HDAC1 domain is also
necessary for in vitro binding of HDAC2 and HDAC3, association with RbAp48 and
for catalytic activity of the enzyme. A lysine-rich sequence within the carboxy
terminus of HDAC1 is crucial for nuclear localisation of the enzyme. We identify 
a C-terminal nuclear localisation domain, which is sufficient for the transport
of HDAC1 and of reporter fusion proteins into the nucleus. Alternatively, HDAC1
can be shuttled into the nucleus by association with another HDAC1 molecule via
its N-terminal HDAC association domain. Our results define two domains, which are
essential for the oligomerisation and nuclear localisation of mouse HDAC1.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11302704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 May;21(9):3118-25.

Unanticipated repression function linked to erythroid Krüppel-like factor.

Chen X(1), Bieker JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, New York 10029, USA. chenx02@doc.mssm.edu

The erythroid cell-specific transcription factor erythroid Krüppel-like factor
(EKLF) is an important activator of beta-globin gene expression. It achieves this
by binding to the CACCC element at the beta-globin promoter via its zinc finger
domain. The coactivators CBP and P300 interact with, acetylate, and enhance its
activity, helping to explain its role as a transcription activator. Here we show 
that EKLF can also interact with the corepressors mSin3A and HDAC1 (histone
deacetylase 1) through its zinc finger domain. When linked to a GAL4 DNA binding 
domain, full-length EKLF or its zinc finger domain alone can repress
transcription in vivo. This repressive activity can be relieved by the HDAC
inhibitor trichostatin A. Although recruitment of EKLF to a promoter is required 
to show repression, its zinc finger domain cannot bind directly to DNA and
repress transcription simultaneously. In addition, the target promoter
configuration is important for enabling EKLF to exhibit any repressive activity. 
These results suggest that EKLF may function in vivo as a transcription repressor
and play a previously unsuspected additional role in regulating erythroid gene
expression and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC86939
PMID: 11287616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. EMBO J. 2001 Apr 2;20(7):1739-53.

A role for histone deacetylase HDAC1 in modulating the transcriptional activity
of MyoD: inhibition of the myogenic program.

Mal A(1), Sturniolo M, Schiltz RL, Ghosh MK, Harter ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Lerner Research Institute, The Cleveland
Clinic Foundation, 9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

The molecular mechanism(s) that are responsible for suppressing MyoD's
transcriptional activities in undifferentiated skeletal muscle cells have not yet
been determined. We now show that MyoD associates with a histone deacetylase-1
(HDAC1) in these cells and that this interaction is responsible for silencing
MyoD-dependent transcription of endogenous p21 as well as muscle-specific genes. 
Specifically, we present evidence that HDAC1 can bind directly to MyoD and use an
acetylated MyoD as a substrate in vitro, whereas a mutant version of HDAC1
(H141A) can not. Further more, this mutant also fails to repress MyoD-mediated
transcription in vivo, and unlike wild-type HDAC1 it can not inhibit myogenic
conversion, as judged by confocal microscopy. Finally, we show that an endogenous
MyoD can be acetylated upon its conversion to a hypophosphorylated state and only
when the cells have been induced to differentiate. These results provide for a
model which postulates that MyoD may be co-dependent on HDAC1 and P/CAF for
temporally controlling its transcriptional activity before and after the
differentiation of muscle cells.

PMCID: PMC145490
PMID: 11285237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Nat Med. 2001 Apr;7(4):437-43.

Histone deacetylases induce angiogenesis by negative regulation of tumor
suppressor genes.

Kim MS(1), Kwon HJ, Lee YM, Baek JH, Jang JE, Lee SW, Moon EJ, Kim HS, Lee SK,
Chung HY, Kim CW, Kim KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Pusan National University, Pusan, Korea.

Low oxygen tension influences tumor progression by enhancing angiogenesis; and
histone deacetylases (HDAC) are implicated in alteration of chromatin assembly
and tumorigenesis. Here we show induction of HDAC under hypoxia and elucidate a
role for HDAC in the regulation of hypoxia-induced angiogenesis. Overexpressed
wild-type HDAC1 downregulated expression of p53 and von Hippel-Lindau tumor
suppressor genes and stimulated angiogenesis of human endothelial cells. A
specific HDAC inhibitor, trichostatin A (TSA), upregulated p53 and von
Hippel-Lindau expression and downregulated hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha and
vascular endothelial growth factor. TSA also blocked angiogenesis in vitro and in
vivo. TSA specifically inhibited hypoxia-induced angiogenesis in the Lewis lung
carcinoma model. These results indicate that hypoxia enhances HDAC function and
that HDAC is closely involved in angiogenesis through suppression of
hypoxia-responsive tumor suppressor genes.

PMID: 11283670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Apr;21(8):2802-14.

Temporal recruitment of the mSin3A-histone deacetylase corepressor complex to the
ETS domain transcription factor Elk-1.

Yang SH(1), Vickers E, Brehm A, Kouzarides T, Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PT,
United Kingdom.

The transcriptional status of eukaryotic genes is determined by a balance between
activation and repression mechanisms. The nuclear hormone receptors represent
classical examples of transcription factors that can regulate this balance by
recruiting corepressor and coactivator complexes in a ligand-dependent manner.
Here, we demonstrate that the equilibrium between activation and repression via a
single transcription factor, Elk-1, is altered following activation of the Erk
mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade. In addition to its C-terminal
transcriptional activation domain, Elk-1 contains an N-terminal transcriptional
repression domain that can recruit the mSin3A-histone deacetylase 1 corepressor
complex. Recruitment of this corepressor is enhanced in response to activation of
the Erk pathway in vivo, and this recruitment correlates kinetically with the
shutoff of one of its target promoters, c-fos. Elk-1 therefore undergoes temporal
activator-repressor switching and contributes to both the activation and
repression of target genes following growth factor stimulation.

PMCID: PMC86910
PMID: 11283259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Hum Mol Genet. 2001 Apr;10(7):693-8.

Transcriptional control at regulatory checkpoints by histone deacetylases:
molecular connections between cancer and chromatin.

Wade PA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Emory University School of Medicine, Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Woodruff Memorial Research Building--Room 7105B, 1639 Pierce Drive,
Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. pwade@emory.edu

Cancer cells exhibit a set of unique properties that distinguish them from their 
normal counterparts. Among these features are increased growth rates, loss of
differentiation, escape from cell death pathways, evasion of anti-proliferative
signals, a decreased reliance on exogenous growth factors and escape from
replicative senescence. Acquisition of these features by malignant cells requires
impairment of normal cellular control mechanisms. Over the past few years, it has
become increasingly apparent that an important subset of the molecular changes
commonly found in cancer cells involves inappropriate regulation of gene
expression. This review will address regulatory pathways whose disruption
contributes to the malignant phenotype. The failure to deacetylate and thus
repress transcription by the Class I histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2 due to 
disruption of the Rb family of proteins has been firmly established as a
mechanism leading to increases in growth rate and cellular proliferation. Recent 
data suggest that this regulatory circuit also executes G(1) checkpoint arrest
downstream of DNA damage, cellular senescence and contact inhibition. In contrast
to this failure to deacetylate, it now seems probable that changes in
differentiation status may result in part from inappropriate deacetylation and
concomitant transcriptional repression mediated by the Class II histone
deacetylases. This inappropriate deacetylation by HDAC4, HDAC5 and HDAC6 follows 
their relocalization from the cytoplasm to the nucleus. Thus, multiple classical 
features of cancer cells can be manifested by improper histone deacetylation.

PMID: 11257101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 23;276(12):8807-11. Epub 2001 Jan 19.

Multiple N-CoR complexes contain distinct histone deacetylases.

Jones PL(1), Sachs LM, Rouse N, Wade PA, Shi YB.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Molecular Morphogenesis, Laboratory of Molecular Embryology, NICHD,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-5431 , USA.

N-CoR (nuclear receptor corepressor) is a corepressor for multiple transcription 
factors including unliganded thyroid hormone receptors (TRs). In vitro, N-CoR can
interact with the Sin3 corepressor, which in turn binds to the histone
deacetylase Rpd3 (HDAC1), predicting the existence of a corepressor complex
containing N-CoR, Sin3, and histone deacetylase. However, previous biochemical
studies of endogenous Sin3 complexes have failed to find an N-CoR association.
Xenopus laevis eggs and oocytes contain all of the necessary components for
transcriptional repression by unliganded TRs. In this study, we report the
biochemical fractionation of three novel macromolecular complexes containing
N-CoR, two of which possess histone deacetylase activity, from Xenopus egg
extract. One complex contains Sin3, Rpd3, and RbAp48; the second complex contains
a Sin3-independent histone deacetylase; and the third complex lacks histone
deacetylase activity. This study describes the first biochemical isolation of
endogenous N-CoR-containing HDAC complexes and illustrates that N-CoR associates 
with distinct histone deacetylases that are both dependent and independent of
Sin3. Immunoprecipitation studies show that N-CoR binds to unliganded TR
expressed in the frog oocyte, confirming that N-CoR complexes are involved in
repression by unliganded TR. These results suggest that N-CoR targets
transcriptional repression of specific promoters through at least two distinct
histone deacetylase pathways.

PMID: 11254656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Jpn J Cancer Res. 2001 Jan;92(1):42-50.

Overexpression of retinoic acid receptor beta induces growth arrest and apoptosis
in oral cancer cell lines.

Hayashi K(1), Yokozaki H, Naka K, Yasui W, Lotan R, Tahara E.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Pathology, Hiroshima University School of Medicine,
Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8551, Japan.

Expression of retinoic acid receptor beta (RARbeta) is reported to be absent or
down-regulated in oral squamous cell carcinomas. Recently, we found that the
growth-inhibitory effect of 9-cis-retinoic acid (9CRA) on oral squamous cell
carcinoma may depend on the expression levels of endogenous RARbeta. In order to 
clarify the role of RARbeta in growth and differentiation, we transfected RARbeta
expression vector into oral squamous carcinoma cell lines, HSC-4 and Ho-1-N-1.
Both RARbeta-transfected cell lines displayed growth inhibition. Moreover,
RARbeta-transfected clones underwent morphological changes, and
RARbeta-transfected HSC-4 clones underwent apoptosis even in the absence of 9CRA 
treatment. In contrast, RARbeta-transfected Ho-1-N-1 clones exhibited cell cycle 
arrest without undergoing apoptosis initially; however, apoptosis was induced in 
these cells after 6 days of 9CRA treatment. RARalpha and RARgamma expression was 
reduced at both the protein and mRNA levels in RARbeta transfectants, whereas the
expression of retinoid X receptor alpha (RXRalpha) was not altered. RARb
transfectants exhibited alterations in the levels of cell cycle-associated
proteins, histone acetyltransferase (HAT) and apoptosis-associated proteins.
After 6 days of 9CRA treatment, RARbeta transfectants overexpressed Waf1 / Cip1 /
Sdi1 / p21, Kip1 / p27, chk1, p300 / CBP, BAX, Bak, Apaf 1, caspase 3 and caspase
9. Conversely, E2F1, cdc25B and HDAC1 were down-regulated in these transfectants.
In addition, histone H4 acetylation was induced in RARb transfectants. These
findings suggest that histone acetylation mediated by histone acetyltransferase
and p300 / CBP may play a role in the growth arrest and apoptosis induced by
RARbeta transfection in oral squamous cell carcinoma.

PMID: 11173543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Feb 13;98(4):1454-8.

CoREST is an integral component of the CoREST- human histone deacetylase complex.

You A(1), Tong JK, Grozinger CM, Schreiber SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, 12 Oxford
Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

Here we describe the components of a histone deacetylase (HDAC) complex that we
term the CoREST-HDAC complex. CoREST-HDAC is composed of polypeptides distinct
from previously characterized HDAC1/2-containing complexes such as the mSin3 and 
nucleosome remodeling and deacetylating (NRD, also named NURD, NuRD) complex.
Interestingly, we do not observe RbAp46 and RbAp48 in this complex, although
these proteins have been observed in all previously identified complexes and are 
thought to be part of an HDAC1/2 core. We identify the transcriptional
corepressor CoREST and a protein with homology to polyamine oxidases as
components of CoREST-HDAC. The HDAC1/2-interacting region of CoREST is mapped to 
a 179-aa region containing a SANT domain, a domain found in other
HDAC1/2-interacting proteins such as NCoR, MTA1, and MTA2. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that the corepressor function of CoREST depends on this region.
Although CoREST initially was cloned as a corepressor to REST (RE1 silencing
transcription factor/neural restrictive silencing factor), we find no evidence
for the existence of the eight-zinc finger REST transcription factor as an
interacting partner in this complex; however, we do find evidence for association
of the putative oncogene ZNF 217 that contains eight zinc fingers.

PMCID: PMC29278
PMID: 11171972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Virol. 2001 Feb;75(4):1909-17.

CREB-binding protein and histone deacetylase regulate the transcriptional
activity of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus open reading frame 50.

Gwack Y(1), Byun H, Hwang S, Lim C, Choe J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology, Taejon 305-701, Korea.

Kaposi's sarcoma (KS)-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) open reading frame 50 (ORF50)
encodes a viral transcriptional activator, which binds to the KSHV promoter and
stimulates the transcription of viral early and late genes, thus activating the
lytic cycle of KSHV. We report here that KSHV ORF50 binds to the cellular
proteins CREB-binding protein (CBP) and histone deacetylase (HDAC) and these
binding events modulate ORF50-activated viral transcription. Binding of ORF50 to 
CBP and HDAC activates and represses, respectively, ORF50-mediated viral
transcription. KSHV ORF50 was shown to bind to the C/H3 domain and the C-terminal
transcriptional activation domain of CBP, while CBP bound to the amino-terminal
basic domain and the carboxyl-terminal transactivation domain of ORF50. The LXXLL
motif within the transcriptional activation domain of ORF50 is reminiscent of the
CBP-binding sequence found in nuclear receptor proteins. The adenovirus E1A
protein, which also binds to the C/H3 domain of CBP, repressed the
transcriptional activation activity of ORF50. The cellular protein c-Jun, which
binds to the kinase-induced activation domain of ORF50, stimulated ORF50-mediated
viral transcription. The HDAC1-interacting domain of ORF50 was shown to be a
central proline-rich sequence. Our data provide a framework for delineating the
regulatory mechanisms used by KSHV to modulate its transcription and replication 
through interaction with both histone acetyltransferases and HDACs.

PMCID: PMC115137
PMID: 11160690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Feb;21(4):1121-31.

Cooperation of E2F-p130 and Sp1-pRb complexes in repression of the Chinese
hamster dhfr gene.

Chang YC(1), Illenye S, Heintz NH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Vermont College of Medicine,
Burlington, Vermont 05405, USA.

In mammalian cells reiterated binding sites for Sp1 and two overlapping and
inverted E2F sites at the transcription start site regulate the dhfr promoter
during the cell growth cycle. Here we have examined the contributions of the dhfr
Sp1 and E2F sites in the repression of dhfr gene expression. In serum-starved
cells or during serum stimulation, the Chinese hamster dhfr gene was not
derepressed by trichostatin A (TSA), an inhibitor of histone deacetylases (HDAC).
Immunoprecipitation experiments showed that HDAC1 and hypophosphorylated
retinoblastoma protein (pRb) are associated with Sp1 in serum-starved CHOC400
cells. In transfection experiments, reporter plasmids containing the reiterated
dhfr Sp1 sites were stimulated 10-fold by TSA, while a promoter containing four
dhfr E2F sites and a TATA box was responsive to E2F but was completely unaffected
by TSA. HDAC1 did not coprecipitate with p130-E2F DNA binding complexes, the
predominant E2F binding activity in cell extracts after serum starvation,
suggesting that p130 imposes a TSA-insensitive state on the dhfr promoter. In
support of this notion, recruitment of GAL4-p130 to a dihydrofolate
reductase-GAL4 reporter rendered the promoter insensitive to TSA, while
repression by GAL4-pRb was sensitive to TSA. Upon phosphorylation of pRb and p130
after serum stimulation, the Sp1-pRb and p130-E2F interactions were lost while
the Sp1-HDAC1 interaction persisted into S phase. Together these studies suggest 
a dynamic model for the cooperation of pRb and p130 in repression of dhfr gene
expression during withdrawal from the cell cycle. We propose that, during initial
phases of cell cycle withdrawal, the binding of dephosphorylated pRb to Sp1-HDAC1
complexes and complexes of E2F-1 -to -3 with DP results in transient,
HDAC-dependent suppression of dhfr transcription. Upon withdrawal of cells into
G(0), recruitment of p130 to E2F-4-DP-1 complexes at the transcription start site
results in a TSA-insensitive complex that cooperates with Sp1-HDAC-pRb complexes 
to stably repress dhfr promoter activity in quiescent cells.

PMCID: PMC99566
PMID: 11158299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. EMBO J. 1999 Sep 15;18(18):5085-98.

MEF-2 function is modified by a novel co-repressor, MITR.

Sparrow DB(1), Miska EA, Langley E, Reynaud-Deonauth S, Kotecha S, Towers N,
Spohr G, Kouzarides T, Mohun TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, National Institute for Medical Research,
The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA.

The MEF-2 proteins are a family of transcriptional activators that have been
detected in a wide variety of cell types. In skeletal muscle cells, MEF-2
proteins interact with members of the MyoD family of transcriptional activators
to synergistically activate gene expression. Similar interactions with tissue or 
lineage-specific cofactors may also underlie MEF-2 function in other cell types. 
In order to screen for such cofactors, we have used a transcriptionally inactive 
mutant of Xenopus MEF2D in a yeast two-hybrid screen. This approach has
identified a novel protein expressed in the early embryo that binds to XMEF2D and
XMEF2A. The MEF-2 interacting transcription repressor (MITR) protein binds to the
N-terminal MADS/MEF-2 region of the MEF-2 proteins but does not bind to the
related Xenopus MADS protein serum response factor. In the early embryo, MITR
expression commences at the neurula stage within the mature somites and is
subsequently restricted to the myotomal muscle. In functional assays, MITR
negatively regulates MEF-2-dependent transcription and we show that this
repression is mediated by direct binding of MITR to the histone deacetylase
HDAC1. Thus, we propose that MITR acts as a co-repressor, recruiting a specific
deacetylase to downregulate MEF-2 activity.

PMCID: PMC1171579
PMID: 10487760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Nat Genet. 1999 Sep;23(1):58-61.

MBD2 is a transcriptional repressor belonging to the MeCP1 histone deacetylase
complex.

Ng HH(1), Zhang Y, Hendrich B, Johnson CA, Turner BM, Erdjument-Bromage H, Tempst
P, Reinberg D, Bird A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Edinburgh, The King's
Buildings, Edinburgh EH9 3JR, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 1999 Sep;23(1):5-6.

Mammalian DNA is methylated at many CpG dinucleotides. The biological
consequences of methylation are mediated by a family of methyl-CpG binding
proteins. The best characterized family member is MeCP2, a transcriptional
repressor that recruits histone deacetylases. Our report concerns MBD2, which can
bind methylated DNA in vivo and in vitro and has been reported to actively
demethylate DNA (ref. 8). As DNA methylation causes gene silencing, the MBD2
demethylase is a candidate transcriptional activator. Using specific antibodies, 
however, we find here that MBD2 in HeLa cells is associated with histone
deacetylase (HDAC) in the MeCP1 repressor complex. An affinity-purified HDAC1
corepressor complex also contains MBD2, suggesting that MeCP1 corresponds to a
fraction of this complex. Exogenous MBD2 represses transcription in a transient
assay, and repression can be relieved by the deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A
(TSA; ref. 12). In our hands, MBD2 does not demethylate DNA. Our data suggest
that HeLa cells, which lack the known methylation-dependent repressor MeCP2, use 
an alternative pathway involving MBD2 to silence methylated genes.

PMID: 10471499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Genes Dev. 1999 Aug 1;13(15):1924-35.

Analysis of the NuRD subunits reveals a histone deacetylase core complex and a
connection with DNA methylation.

Zhang Y(1), Ng HH, Erdjument-Bromage H, Tempst P, Bird A, Reinberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI), Division of Nucleic Acids Enzymology, 
Department of Biochemistry, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey,
Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA.

ATP-dependent nucleosome remodeling and core histone acetylation and
deacetylation represent mechanisms to alter nucleosome structure. NuRD is a
multisubunit complex containing nucleosome remodeling and histone deacetylase
activities. The histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2 and the histone binding
proteins RbAp48 and RbAp46 form a core complex shared between NuRD and
Sin3-histone deacetylase complexes. The histone deacetylase activity of the core 
complex is severely compromised. A novel polypeptide highly related to the
metastasis-associated protein 1, MTA2, and the methyl-CpG-binding
domain-containing protein, MBD3, were found to be subunits of the NuRD complex.
MTA2 modulates the enzymatic activity of the histone deacetylase core complex.
MBD3 mediates the association of MTA2 with the core histone deacetylase complex. 
MBD3 does not directly bind methylated DNA but is highly related to MBD2, a
polypeptide that binds to methylated DNA and has been reported to possess
demethylase activity. MBD2 interacts with the NuRD complex and directs the
complex to methylated DNA. NuRD may provide a means of gene silencing by DNA
methylation.

PMCID: PMC316920
PMID: 10444591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Aug;19(8):5504-11.

Histone deacetylase 1 can repress transcription by binding to Sp1.

Doetzlhofer A(1), Rotheneder H, Lagger G, Koranda M, Kurtev V, Brosch G,
Wintersberger E, Seiser C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Vienna Biocenter, University of Vienna,
Vienna, Austria.

The members of the Sp1 transcription factor family can act as both negative and
positive regulators of gene expression. Here we show that Sp1 can be a target for
histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1)-mediated transcriptional repression. The histone
deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A activates the chromosomally integrated
murine thymidine kinase promoter in an Sp1-dependent manner.
Coimmunoprecipitation experiments with Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts and 293 cells
demonstrate that Sp1 and HDAC1 can be part of the same complex. The interaction
between Sp1 and HDAC1 is direct and requires the carboxy-terminal domain of Sp1. 
Previously we have shown that the C terminus of Sp1 is necessary for the
interaction with the transcription factor E2F1 (J. Karlseder, H. Rotheneder, and 
E. Wintersberger, Mol. Cell. Biol. 16:1659-1667, 1996). Coexpression of E2F1
interferes with HDAC1 binding to Sp1 and abolishes Sp1-mediated transcriptional
repression. Our results indicate that one component of Sp1-dependent gene
regulation involves competition between the transcriptional repressor HDAC1 and
the transactivating factor E2F1.

PMCID: PMC84392
PMID: 10409740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Cancer Res. 1999 Jun 15;59(12):2766-9.

Inhibitors of histone deacetylase relieve ETO-mediated repression and induce
differentiation of AML1-ETO leukemia cells.

Wang J(1), Saunthararajah Y, Redner RL, Liu JM.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Branch, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA.

The (8;21) translocation, found in 12% of acute myeloid leukemia (AML), creates
the chimeric fusion product, AML1-ETO. Previously, we demonstrated that the ETO
moiety recruits a transcription repression complex that includes the histone
deacetylase (HDAC1) enzyme. Here, we used inhibitors of HDAC1 to study the
pathophysiology of AML1-ETO. Both the potent inhibitor, trichostatin (TSA), and
the well-known but less specific inhibitor, phenylbutyrate (PB), could partially 
reverse ETO-mediated transcriptional repression. PB was also able to induce
partial differentiation of the AML1-ETO cell line, Kasumi-1. With the intention
of developing a clinically useful protocol, we combined PB with a number of other
agents that induced differentiation and apoptosis of Kasumi-1 cells. In summary, 
transcriptional repression mediated by AML1-ETO appears to play a mechanistic
role in the t(8;21) AML, and relief of repression using agents such as PB (alone 
or in combination) may prove to be therapeutically useful.

PMID: 10383127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. J Virol. 1999 Jul;73(7):5688-97.

Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen 3C interacts with histone deacetylase to
repress transcription.

Radkov SA(1), Touitou R, Brehm A, Rowe M, West M, Kouzarides T, Allday MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Virology and Cell Biology, Imperial College of Science, Technology 
and Medicine, St Mary's Campus, London W2 1PG, United Kingdom.

EBNA3C can specifically repress the expression of reporter plasmids containing
EBV Cp latency-associated promoter elements. Cp is normally the main promoter for
EBNA mRNA initiation, so it appears that EBNA3C contributes to a negative
autoregulatory control loop. By mutational analysis it was previously established
that this repression is consistent with EBNA3C being targeted to Cp by binding
the cellular sequence-specific DNA-binding protein CBF1 (also known as
recombination signal-binding protein [RBP]-Jkappa. Further analysis suggested
that in vivo a corepressor interacts with EBNA3C in this DNA binding complex.
Results presented here are all consistent with a component of such a corepressor 
exhibiting histone deacetylase activity. The drug trichostatin A, which
specifically inhibits histone deacetylases, relieved two- to threefold the
repression of Cp induced by EBNA3C in two different cell types. Moreover,
repression of pTK-CAT-Cp4x by EBNA3C was specifically enhanced by cotransfection 
of an expression plasmid for human histone deacetylase-1 (HDAC1). Consistent with
these functional assays, in vitro-translated HDAC1 bound to a glutathione
S-transferase (GST) fusion protein including full-length EBNA3C, and in the
reciprocal experiment EBNA3C bound to a GST fusion with the N terminus of HDAC1. 
Coimmunoprecipitations also revealed an EBNA3C-HDAC1 interaction in vivo, and
GST-EBNA3C bound functional histone deacetylase enzyme activity from HeLa cell
nuclear extracts. The region of EBNA3C involved in the interaction with HDAC1
appears to correspond to the region which is necessary for binding to
CBF1/RBP-Jkappa. A direct physical interaction between EBNA3C and HDAC1 was
demonstrated with recombinant proteins purified from bacterial cells, and we
therefore conclude that HDAC1 and CBF1/RBP-Jkappa bind to the same or adjacent
regions of EBNA3C. These data suggest that recruitment of histone deacetylase
activity makes a significant contribution to the repression of transcription from
Cp because EBNA3C bridges an interaction between CBF1/RBP-Jkappa and HDAC1.

PMCID: PMC112628
PMID: 10364319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jun 4;274(23):16646-53.

WD repeats of the p48 subunit of chicken chromatin assembly factor-1 required for
in vitro interaction with chicken histone deacetylase-2.

Ahmad A(1), Takami Y, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Miyazaki Medical College, Kihara, Kiyotake,
Miyazaki 889-1692, Japan.

Chromatin assembly factor-1 (CAF-1) is essential for chromatin assembly in
eukaryotes, and comprises three subunits of 150 kDa (p150), 60 kDa (p60), and 48 
kDa (p48). We cloned and sequenced cDNA encoding the small subunit of the chicken
CAF-1, chCAF-1p48. It consists of 425 amino acid residues including a putative
initiation Met, possesses seven WD repeat motifs, and contains only one amino
acid change relative to the human and mouse CAF-1p48s. The immunoprecipitation
experiment followed by Western blotting revealed that chCAF-1p48 interacts with
chicken histone deacetylases (chHDAC-1 and -2) in vivo. The glutathione
S-transferase pulldown affinity assay revealed the in vitro interaction of
chCAF-1p48 with chHDAC-1, -2, and -3. We showed that the p48 subunit tightly
binds to two regions of chHDAC-2, located between amino acid residues 82-180 and 
245-314, respectively. We also established that two N-terminal, two C-terminal,
or one N-terminal and one C-terminal WD repeat motif of chCAF-1p48 are required
for this interaction, using deletion mutants of the respective regions. These
results suggest that chCAF-1p48 is involved in many aspects of DNA-utilizing
processes, through alterations in the chromatin structure based on both the
acetylation and deacetylation of core histones.

PMID: 10347232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Biochemistry. 1999 May 4;38(18):5939-47.

Purification and characterization of chicken erythrocyte histone deacetylase 1.

Sun JM(1), Chen HY, Moniwa M, Samuel S, Davie JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada.

Histone acetylation is involved in nuclear processes requiring chromatin
remodeling. In chicken erythrocytes, DNA replication has ceased, and active
reversible histone acetylation is restricted to transcriptionally
active/competent chromatin domains. In this study, we set out to identify and
purify the erythroid histone deacetylase responsible for catalyzing dynamic
acetylation of transcriptionally active chromatin. Histone deacetylase purified
from chicken erythrocytes had a molecular mass of 66 kDa. Complementary DNA
encoding the chicken histone deacetylase was cloned from erythrocytes, and
analysis of the derived amino acid sequence showed the chicken histone
deacetylase to be the chicken homologue of mammalian HDAC1. Purified chicken
erythrocyte HDAC1 deacetylated the four core histones, with a preference for H3. 
We present evidence that chicken HDAC1 is a metalloenzyme, the activity of which 
is lost when incubated with zinc chelators. In Western blot analysis with
anti-HDAC1 antibodies, we found that most erythrocyte HDAC1 is associated with
the low-salt insoluble chromatin fraction and, to a lesser extent, with 150 mM
NaCl-soluble oligo- and polynucleosomes. The distribution of HDAC1 in erythrocyte
chromatin parallels that of dynamically acetylated class 1 histones. Further, we 
show that HDAC1 is associated with the erythroid nuclear matrix and that the
enzyme is bound to nuclear DNA in situ. We propose that in addition to catalyzing
dynamic acetylation of transcribed chromatin, the enzyme has a role in the
organization of nuclear DNA.

PMID: 10231548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. EMBO J. 1999 May 4;18(9):2449-58.

The E7 oncoprotein associates with Mi2 and histone deacetylase activity to
promote cell growth.

Brehm A(1), Nielsen SJ, Miska EA, McCance DJ, Reid JL, Bannister AJ, Kouzarides
T.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome/CRC Institute for Developmental and Cancer Biology, Department of
Pathology, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge CB2 1QR, UK.

E7 is the main transforming protein of human papilloma virus type 16 (HPV16)
which is implicated in the formation of cervical cancer. The transforming
activity of E7 has been attributed to its interaction with the retinoblastoma
(Rb) tumour suppressor. However, Rb binding is not sufficient for transformation 
by E7. Mutations within a zinc finger domain, which is dispensable for Rb
binding, also abolish E7 transformation functions. Here we show that HPV16 E7
associates with histone deacetylase in vitro and in vivo, via its zinc finger
domain. Using a genetic screen, we identify Mi2beta, a component of the recently 
identified NURD histone deacetylase complex, as a protein that binds directly to 
the E7 zinc finger. A zinc finger point mutant which is unable to bind Mi2beta
and histone deacetylase but is still able to bind Rb fails to overcome cell cycle
arrest in osteosarcoma cells. Our results suggest that the binding to a histone
deacetylase complex is an important parameter for the growthpromoting activity of
the human papilloma virus E7 protein. This provides the first indication that
viral oncoproteins control cell proliferation by targeting deacetylation
pathways.

PMCID: PMC1171327
PMID: 10228159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Apr 27;96(9):4983-8.

BRCA1 interacts with components of the histone deacetylase complex.

Yarden RI(1), Brody LC.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Molecular Biology Branch, National Human Genome Research
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Germ-line mutations in the BRCA1 tumor-suppressor gene are associated with an
increased susceptibility to breast and ovarian cancer. BRCA1 contains a
carboxyl-terminal domain (BRCT) that is shared with several other proteins
involved in maintaining genome integrity. In an effort to understand the function
of BRCA1, we sought to isolate proteins that interact with the BRCT domain.
Purified BRCT polypeptide was used as a probe to screen a human placenta cDNA
expression library by Far Western analysis. Here we report that BRCA1 interacts
in vivo and in vitro with the Rb-binding proteins, RbAp46 and RbAp48, as well as 
with Rb. Moreover, the BRCT domain associates with the histone deacetylases HDAC1
and HDAC2. These results demonstrate that BRCA1 interacts with components of the 
histone deacetylase complex, and therefore may explain the involvement of BRCA1
in multiple processes such as transcription, DNA repair, and recombination.

PMCID: PMC21803
PMID: 10220405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Apr 27;96(9):4868-73.

Three proteins define a class of human histone deacetylases related to yeast
Hda1p.

Grozinger CM(1), Hassig CA, Schreiber SL.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Chemistry and Chemical Biology and Molecular and Cellular
Biology, Harvard University, 12 Oxford Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

Gene expression is in part controlled by chromatin remodeling factors and the
acetylation state of nucleosomal histones. The latter process is regulated by
histone acetyltransferases and histone deacetylases (HDACs). Previously, three
human and five yeast HDAC enzymes had been identified. These can be categorized
into two classes: the first class represented by yeast Rpd3-like proteins and the
second by yeast Hda1-like proteins. Human HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3 proteins are
members of the first class, whereas no class II human HDAC proteins had been
identified. The amino acid sequence of Hda1p was used to search the
GenBank/expressed sequence tag databases to identify partial sequences from three
putative class II human HDAC proteins. The corresponding full-length cDNAs were
cloned and defined as HDAC4, HDAC5, and HDAC6. These proteins possess certain
features present in the conserved catalytic domains of class I human HDACs, but
also contain additional sequence domains. Interestingly, HDAC6 contains an
internal duplication of two catalytic domains, which appear to function
independently of each other. These class II HDAC proteins have differential mRNA 
expression in human tissues and possess in vitro HDAC activity that is inhibited 
by trichostatin A. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments indicate that these HDAC
proteins are not components of the previously identified HDAC1 and HDAC2 NRD and 
mSin3A complexes. However, HDAC4 and HDAC5 associate with HDAC3 in vivo. This
finding suggests that the human class II HDAC enzymes may function in cellular
processes distinct from those of HDAC1 and HDAC2.

PMCID: PMC21783
PMID: 10220385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 1999 Mar 15;99(1):11-9.

Molecular cloning and nuclear localization of a histone deacetylase homologue in 
Plasmodium falciparum.

Joshi MB(1), Lin DT, Chiang PH, Goldman ND, Fujioka H, Aikawa M, Syin C.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration,
Rockville, MD 20852-1448, USA.

Reversible acetylation of core histones plays an important role in
transcriptional regulation, cell cycle progression and developmental events. The 
acetylation state of histones is controlled by a dynamic equilibrium between
activities of histone acetylase and deacetylase enzymes. Histone deacetylase
(HDAC) was recently suggested to be the target of a fungus-derived antiprotozoal 
agent exhibiting structural similarity to known HDAC inhibitors. We have
initiated a study of HDAC of human malaria parasite, Plasmodium falciparum, to
evaluate its potential as the target for novel antimalarials and its role in
parasite development. We have isolated HDAC1 gene from the P. falciparum genomic 
and cDNA libraries. The nucleotide sequence contains no intervening sequence and 
its open reading frame (ORF) codes for a protein of 449 amino acid residues. We
have named the protein, PfHDAC1, as the sequence shows significant homology to
yeast, human and other eukaryotic HDACs. Northern blot analysis of the total RNA 
from different asexual and sexual stages of the parasite reveals the presence of 
single mRNA transcript, which is predominantly expressed in mature asexual blood 
stages and in gametocytes. Antiserum raised against a carboxyl terminal peptide
immunoprecipitated an in vitro translated P. falciparum HDAC gene product and
recognized an approximately 50 kDa protein in the Triton X-100 insoluble fraction
of parasites. Immunoelectron microscopy analysis showed majority of the protein
localized in the nucleus of P. falciparum. To our knowledge, this is the first
HDAC gene isolated from the malaria parasite.

PMID: 10215020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Mar 16;96(6):2639-44.

Unique forms of human and mouse nuclear receptor corepressor SMRT.

Ordentlich P(1), Downes M, Xie W, Genin A, Spinner NB, Evans RM.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 10010
North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Nuclear hormone receptors have been shown to repress transcription in the absence
of ligand. This repression is mediated by a corepressor complex that contains the
Sin3A protein and histone deacetylases (HDAC1 and 2). Studies by several groups
demonstrate that this complex is recruited to nuclear receptors through the
highly related corepressors SMRT (silencing mediator of retinoid acid and thyroid
hormone receptor) and N-CoR (nuclear receptor corepressor). We describe here the 
cloning, characterization, and chromosomal mapping of forms of human and mouse
SMRT that includes a 1,000-aa extension, which reveals striking homology to the
amino terminus of N-CoR. Structure and function studies of wild-type and natural 
splicing variants suggest the presence of 3-4 amino terminal domains that repress
in a cooperative as well as mechanistically distinct fashion.

PMCID: PMC15821
PMID: 10077563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Biol Chem. 1999 Mar 19;274(12):7803-15.

Transcriptional repression of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance
regulator gene, mediated by CCAAT displacement protein/cut homolog, is associated
with histone deacetylation.

Li S(1), Moy L, Pittman N, Shue G, Aufiero B, Neufeld EJ, LeLeiko NS, Walsh MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Liver
Diseases, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York 10029, USA.

Human cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene (CFTR)
transcription is tightly regulated by nucleotide sequences upstream of the
initiator sequences. Our studies of human CFTR transcription focus on identifying
transcription factors bound to an inverted CCAAT consensus or "Y-box element."
The human homeodomain CCAAT displacement protein/cut homolog (CDP/cut) can bind
to the Y-box element through a cut repeat and homeobox. Analysis of stably
transfected cell lines with wild-type and mutant human CFTR-directed reporter
genes demonstrates that human histone acetyltransferase GCN5 and transcription
factor ATF-1 can potentiate CFTR transcription through the Y-box element. We have
found 1) that human CDP/cut acts as a repressor of CFTR transcription through the
Y-box element by competing for the sites of transactivators hGCN5 and ATF-1; 2)
that the ability of CDP/cut to repress activities of hGCN5 and ATF-1 activity is 
contingent on the amount of CDP/cut expression; 3) that histone acetylation may
have a role in the regulation of gene transcription by altering the accessibility
of the CFTR Y-box for sequence-specific transcription factors; 4) that
trichostatin A, an inhibitor of histone deacetylase activity, activates
transcription of CFTR through the Y-box element; 5) that the inhibition of
histone deacetylase activity leads to an alteration of local chromatin structure 
requiring an intact Y-box sequence in CFTR; 6) that immunocomplexes of CDP/cut
possess an associated histone deacetylase activity; 7) that the carboxyl region
of CDP/cut, responsible for the transcriptional repressor function, interacts
with the histone deacetylase, HDAC1. We propose that CFTR transcription may be
regulated through interactions with factors directing the modification of
chromatin and requires the conservation of the inverted CCAAT (Y-box) element of 
the CFTR promoter.

PMID: 10075672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999 Jan 29;1423(1):F15-33.

Leukemia: the sophisticated subversion of hematopoiesis by nuclear receptor
oncoproteins.

Stunnenberg HG(1), Garcia-Jimenez C, Betz JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
stunnenb@sci.kun.nl

PMID: 9989207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jan;19(1):916-22.

E2F and histone deacetylase mediate transforming growth factor beta repression of
cdc25A during keratinocyte cell cycle arrest.

Iavarone A(1), Massagué J.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA.

cdc25A is a tyrosine phosphatase that activates G1 cyclin-dependent kinases
(Cdk's). In human keratinocytes, cdc25A expression is down-regulated after the
initial drop in Cdk activity caused by cell exposure to the antimitogenic
cytokine transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) or removal of serum factors. 
Here we show that the TGF-beta-inhibitory-response element in the cdc25A promoter
maps to an E2F site at nucleotides -62 to -55 from the transcription start site. 
This site is not required for basal transcription in keratinocytes. We provide
evidence that the cell cycle arrest program activated by TGF-beta in human
keratinocytes includes the generation of E2F4-p130 complexes that in association 
with histone deacetylase HDAC1 inhibit the activity of the cdc25A promoter from
this repressor E2F site. This mechanism is part of a program that places
keratinocytes in the quiescent state following the initial drop in Cdk activity
caused by cell exposure to TGF-beta.

PMCID: PMC83949
PMID: 9858615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Cancer Res. 1998 Nov 15;58(22):5049-52.

The COOH-terminal region of pRb2/p130 binds to histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1),
enhancing transcriptional repression of the E2F-dependent cyclin A promoter.

Stiegler P(1), De Luca A, Bagella L, Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Anatomy and Cell Biology, Jefferson Medical College, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

The tumor suppressor retinoblastoma protein family members pRb, p107, and
pRb2/p130 are potent negative transcriptional regulators. The best understood
target is the transcription factor E2F, which activates cell cycle-dependent
transcription of genes controlling and promoting the cell division cycle (e.g.,
cyclin A). pRb2/p130 is known to be important in implementing cell cycle exit
into G0 due to serum deprivation or various differentiation programs. Several
recent studies demonstrated the effect histone acetylases and histone
deacetylases (HDACs) have on fine-tuning transcriptional regulation of eucaryotic
cells. In this study, we demonstrate that pRb2/p130 binds to HDAC1. This
interaction increases the ability of pRb2/p130 to inhibit transcription of the
E2F-dependent cyclin A promoter in vivo. We also identify the COOH-terminal 35aa 
as being necessary for stable interaction between HDAC1 and pRb2/p130.

PMID: 9823308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Cell. 1998 Oct 16;95(2):279-89.

The dermatomyositis-specific autoantigen Mi2 is a component of a complex
containing histone deacetylase and nucleosome remodeling activities.

Zhang Y(1), LeRoy G, Seelig HP, Lane WS, Reinberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry, University of
Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School,
Piscataway 08854, USA.

Histone acetylation and deacetylation were found to be catalyzed by structurally 
distinct, multisubunit complexes that mediate, respectively, activation and
repression of transcription. ATP-dependent nucleosome remodeling, mediated by
different multisubunit complexes, was thought to be involved only in
transcription activation. Here we report the isolation of a protein complex that 
contains both histone deacetylation and ATP-dependent nucleosome remodeling
activities. The complex contains the histone deacetylases HDAC1/2,
histone-binding proteins, the dermatomyositis-specific autoantigen Mi2beta, a
polypeptide related to the metastasis-associated protein 1, and a novel
polypeptide of 32 kDa. Patients with dermatomyositis have a high rate of
malignancy. The finding that Mi2beta exists in a complex containing histone
deacetylase and nucleosome remodeling activities suggests a role for chromatin
reorganization in cancer metastasis.

PMID: 9790534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. FEBS Lett. 1998 Oct 2;436(2):193-6.

phd1+, a histone deacetylase gene of Schizosaccharomyces pombe, is required for
the meiotic cell cycle and resistance to trichostatin A.

Kim YB(1), Honda A, Yoshida M, Horinouchi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Graduate School of Agriculture and Life Sciences,
The University of Tokyo, Japan.

A gene named phd1+ encoding a protein highly homologous to the yeast and human
histone deacetylases, such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae Rpd3p and human HDAC1, was
cloned from Schizosaccharomyces pombe. The immune complex isolated from S. pombe 
cells expressing Phd1 fused to the FLAG epitope showed histone deacetylase
activity, which was inhibited by trichostatin A (TSA), a specific inhibitor of
histone deacetylase. The null mutation of phd1+ resulted in a marked decrease in 
the total cellular histone deacetylase activity and an increase in the
sensitivity to TSA. Although the phd1 disruptant showed no obvious defect in the 
mitotic cell cycle or mating, both homothallic haploid and heterothallic diploid 
cells failed to form spores in the absence of phd1+. These results indicate that 
phd1+ encodes a histone deacetylase, which is involved in the meiotic cell cycle 
in S. pombe.

PMID: 9781677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Biol Chem. 1998 Oct 16;273(42):27695-702.

Components of the SMRT corepressor complex exhibit distinctive interactions with 
the POZ domain oncoproteins PLZF, PLZF-RARalpha, and BCL-6.

Wong CW(1), Privalsky ML.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Microbiology, Division of Biological Sciences, University of
California, Davis, California 95616, USA.

Many transcription factors function by repressing gene transcription. For a
variety of these transcription factors the ability to physically recruit
auxiliary proteins, denoted corepressors, is crucial for the ability to silence
gene expression. We and others have previously implicated the SMRT corepressor in
the actions of the PLZF transcription factor and in the function of its oncogenic
derivative, PLZF-retinoic acid receptor (RARalpha), in promyelocytic leukemia. We
report here that PLZF, and a structurally similar transcriptional repressor,
BCL-6, can interact with a variety of corepressor proteins in addition to SMRT,
including the mSin3A protein and (for PLZF) histone deacetylase-1. Unexpectedly, 
these additional interactions with corepressor components are nonequivalent for
these otherwise similar oncoproteins, suggesting that transcriptional repression 
by BCL-6 and by PLZF may differ in mechanism. Furthermore, we demonstrate that
the oncogenic PLZF-RARalpha chimera lacks several important corepressor
interaction sites that are present in the native PLZF protein. Thus the t(11;17) 
translocation that creates the PLZF-RARalpha chimera generates an oncoprotein
with potentially novel regulatory properties distinct from those of either
parental protein. Our results demonstrate that otherwise similar transcription
factors can differ notably in their interactions with the corepressor machinery.

PMID: 9765306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Oct 15;26(20):4645-51.

The LAZ3(BCL-6) oncoprotein recruits a SMRT/mSIN3A/histone deacetylase containing
complex to mediate transcriptional repression.

Dhordain P(1), Lin RJ, Quief S, Lantoine D, Kerckaert JP, Evans RM, Albagli O.

Author information: 
(1)U124 INSERM/IRCL, Place de Verdun, F-59045 Lille cedex, France and Howard
Hughes Medical Institute and The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla,
CA 92037, USA. dhordain@infobiogen.fr

Recent works demonstrated that some transcriptional repressors recruit histone
deacetylases (HDACs) either through direct interaction, or as a member of a
multisubunit repressing complex containing other components referred to as
corepressors. For instance, the bHLH-Zip transcriptional repressors MAD/MXI
recruit HDACs together with the mSIN3 corepressors, whereas unliganded nuclear
receptors contact another corepressor, SMRT (or its relative N-CoR), which, in
turn, associates with both mSIN3 and HDACs to form the repressor complex.
Recently, we reported that SMRT also directly associates with LAZ3(BCL-6), a
POZ/Zn finger transcriptional repressor involvedin the pathogenesis of
non-Hodgkin lymphomas. However, whether LAZ3 recruits the HDACs-containing
repression complex is currently unknown. We report here that LAZ3 associates with
corepressor mSIN3A both in vivo and in vitro , and found that a central region,
which harbours autonomous repression activity, is mainly responsible for this
interaction. Conversely, the N-terminal half of mSIN3A is both necessary and
sufficient to bind LAZ3. Moreover, we show that LAZ3 also interacts with an HDAC 
(HDAC-1) through its POZ domain in vitro while the immunoprecipitation of LAZ3
results in the coretention of an endogenous HDAC activity in vivo . Finally,
inhibitors of HDACs significantly reduce the LAZ3-mediated repression. Taken
together, we conclude that LAZ3 recruits a repressing complex containing SMRT,
mSIN3A and a HDAC, and that its full repressing potential on transcription
requires HDACs activity. Our results identify HDACs as molecular targets of LAZ3 
oncogene and further strengthen the connection between aberrant chromatin
acetylation and human cancers.

PMCID: PMC147883
PMID: 9753732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Bull Cancer. 1998 Jul;85(7):606-7.

[Histone deacetylase and retinoblastoma protein].

[Article in French]

Magnaghi-Jaulin L(1), Groisman R, Naguibneva I, Robin P, Trouche D, Harel-Bellan 
A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Oncogenèse, Différenciation et Transduction du signal, CNRS UPR
9079, Villejuif.

The balance between cellular proliferation and differentiation is strictly
controlled in the cell and the deregulation of this balance can lead to tumour
formation. The tumour suppressor protein Rb plays a key role in this balance
essentially by repressing progression through the cell cycle and thereby it
blocks the cell in G1 phase. Rb represses S phase genes through the recruitment
of an enzyme which modifies DNA structure, the histone deacetylase HDAC1. The
Rb/HDAC1 complex is a key element in the control of cell proliferation and
differentiation. Moreover, this complex is likely to be a target for transforming
viral proteins.

PMID: 9752266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Mol Biol Cell. 1998 Sep;9(9):2491-507.

Organization of highly acetylated chromatin around sites of heterogeneous nuclear
RNA accumulation.

Hendzel MJ(1), Kruhlak MJ, Bazett-Jones DP.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Anatomy and Medical Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2N 4N1.

Histones found within transcriptionally competent and active regions of the
genome are highly acetylated. Moreover, these highly acetylated histones have
very short half-lives. Thus, both histone acetyltransferases and histone
deacetylases must enrich within or near these euchromatic regions of the
interphase chromatids. Using an antibody specific for highly acetylated histone
H3, we have investigated the organization of transcriptionally active and
competent chromatin as well as nuclear histone acetyltransferase and deacetylase 
activities. We observe an exclusion of highly acetylated chromatin around the
periphery of the nucleus and an enrichment near interchromatin granule clusters
(IGCs). The highly acetylated chromatin is found in foci that may reflect the
organization of highly acetylated chromatin into "chromonema" fibers.
Transmission electron microscopy of Indian muntjac fibroblast cell nuclei
indicates that the chromatin associated with the periphery of IGCs remains
relatively condensed, most commonly found in domains containing chromatin folded 
beyond 30 nm. Using electron spectroscopic imaging, we demonstrate that IGCs are 
clusters of ribonucleoprotein particles. The individual granules comprise
RNA-rich fibrils or globular regions that fold into individual granules.
Quantitative analysis of individual granules indicates that they contain variable
amounts of RNA estimated between 1.5 and >10 kb. We propose that interchromatin
granules are heterogeneous nuclear RNA-containing particles, some of which may be
pre-mRNA generated by nearby transcribed chromatin. An intermediary zone between 
the IGC and surrounding chromatin is described that contains factors with the
potential to provide specificity to the localization of sequences near IGCs.

PMCID: PMC25517
PMID: 9725908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Sep 1;95(18):10860-5.

ETO, fusion partner in t(8;21) acute myeloid leukemia, represses transcription by
interaction with the human N-CoR/mSin3/HDAC1 complex.

Wang J(1), Hoshino T, Redner RL, Kajigaya S, Liu JM.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Branch, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, Bethesda MD
20892, USA.

The t(8;21) translocation between two genes known as AML1 and ETO is seen in
approximately 12-15% of all acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and is the
second-most-frequently observed nonrandom genetic alteration associated with AML.
AML1 up-regulates a number of target genes critical to normal hematopoiesis,
whereas the AML1/ETO fusion interferes with this trans-activation. We discovered 
that the fusion partner ETO binds to the human homolog of the murine nuclear
receptor corepressor (N-CoR). The interaction is mediated by two unusual zinc
finger motifs present at the carboxyl terminus of ETO. Human N-CoR (HuN-CoR),
which we cloned and sequenced in its entirety, encodes a 2,440-amino acid
polypeptide and has a central domain that binds ETO. N-CoR, mammalian Sin3
(mSin3A and B), and histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) form a complex that alters
chromatin structure and mediates transcriptional repression by nuclear receptors 
and by a number of oncoregulatory proteins. We found that ETO, through its
interaction with the N-CoR/mSin3/HDAC1 complex, is also a potent repressor of
transcription. This observation provides a mechanism for how the AML1/ETO fusion 
may inhibit expression of AML1-responsive target genes and disturb normal
hematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC27986
PMID: 9724795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Sep 1;95(18):10493-8.

The three members of the pocket proteins family share the ability to repress E2F 
activity through recruitment of a histone deacetylase.

Ferreira R(1), Magnaghi-Jaulin L, Robin P, Harel-Bellan A, Trouche D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire "Oncogénèse, Différenciation et Transduction du Signal," Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique Unité Propre de Recherche 9079, IFC-01,
94801 Villejuif, France.

The transcription factor E2F plays a major role in cell cycle control in
mammalian cells. E2F binding sites, which are present in the promoters of a
variety of genes required for S phase, shift from a negative to a positive role
in transcription at the commitment point, a crucial point in G1 that precedes the
G1/S transition. Before the commitment point, E2F activity is repressed by
members of the pocket proteins family. This repression is believed to be crucial 
for the proper control of cell growth. We have previously shown that Rb, the
founding member of the pocket proteins family, represses E2F1 activity by
recruiting the histone deacetylase HDAC1. Here, we show that the two other
members of the pocket proteins family, p107 and p130, also are able to interact
physically with HDAC1 in live cells. HDAC1 interacts with p107 and Rb through an 
"LXCXE"-like motif, similar to that used by viral transforming proteins to bind
and inactivate pocket proteins. Indeed, we find that the viral transforming
protein E1A competes with HDAC1 for p107 interaction. We also demonstrate that
p107 is able to interact simultaneously with HDAC1 and E2F4, suggesting a model
in which p107 recruits HDAC1 to repress E2F sites. Indeed, we demonstrate that
histone deacetylase activity is involved in the p107- or p130-induced repression 
of E2F4. Taken together, our data suggest that all members of the E2F family are 
regulated in early G1 by similar complexes, containing a pocket protein and the
histone deacetylase HDAC1.

PMCID: PMC27922
PMID: 9724731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. EMBO J. 1998 Sep 1;17(17):4905-8.

CpG methylation, chromatin structure and gene silencing-a three-way connection.

Razin A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry, The Hebrew University, Hadassah Medical
School Jerusalem, 91120 Israel.

The three-way connection between DNA methylation, gene activity and chromatin
structure has been known for almost two decades. Nevertheless, the molecular link
between methyl groups on the DNA and the positioning of nucleosomes to form an
inactive chromatin configuration was missing. This review discusses recent
experimental data that may, for the first time, shed light on this molecular
link. MeCP2, which is a known methylcytosine-binding protein, has been shown to
possess a transcriptional repressor domain (TRD) that binds the corepressor
mSin3A. This corepressor protein constitutes the core of a multiprotein complex
that includes histone deacetylases (HDAC1 and HDAC2). Transfection and injection 
experiments with methylated constructs have revealed that the silenced state of a
methylated gene, which is associated with a deacetylated nucleosomal structure,
could be relieved by the deacetylase inhibitor, trichostatin A. Thus, methylation
plays a pivotal role in establishing and maintaining an inactive state of a gene 
by rendering the chromatin structure inaccessible to the transcription machinery.

PMCID: PMC1170819
PMID: 9724627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Mol Cell. 1998 Jul;2(1):33-42.

SAP30, a component of the mSin3 corepressor complex involved in N-CoR-mediated
repression by specific transcription factors.

Laherty CD(1), Billin AN, Lavinsky RM, Yochum GS, Bush AC, Sun JM, Mullen TM,
Davie JR, Rose DW, Glass CK, Rosenfeld MG, Ayer DE, Eisenman RN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington 98104, USA.

The transcriptional corepressor mSin3 is found in a large multiprotein complex
containing the histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2, in addition to at least five
tightly associated polypeptides. We have cloned and characterized a novel
component of the mSin3 complex, SAP30, SAP30 binds to mSin3 and is capable of
mediating transcriptional repression via histone deacetylases. SAP30 also binds
the N-CoR corepressor and is required for N-CoR-mediated repression by
antagonist-bound estrogen receptor and the homeodomain protein Rpx, as well as
N-CoR suppression of transactivation by the POU domain protein Pit-1. However,
SAP30 is not required for N-CoR-mediated repression by unliganded retinoic acid
receptor or thyroid hormone receptor, suggesting that SAP30 is involved in the
functional recruitment of the mSin3-histone deacetylase complex to a specific
subset of N-CoR corepressor complexes.

PMID: 9702189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Mol Cell. 1998 Jun;1(7):1021-31.

SAP30, a novel protein conserved between human and yeast, is a component of a
histone deacetylase complex.

Zhang Y(1), Sun ZW, Iratni R, Erdjument-Bromage H, Tempst P, Hampsey M, Reinberg 
D.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New
Jersey, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA.

Histone acetylation plays a key role in the regulation of eukaryotic gene
expression. Recently, histone acetylation and deacetylation were found to be
catalyzed by structurally distinct, multisubunit complexes that mediate,
respectively, activation and repression of transcription. Here, we identify SAP30
as a novel component of the human histone deacetylase complex that includes Sin3,
the histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2, histone binding proteins RbAp46 and
RbAp48, as well as other polypeptides. Moreover, we describe a SAP30 homolog in
yeast that is functionally related to Sin3 and the histone deacetylase Rpd3. The 
human SAP30 complex is active in deacetylating core histone octamers, but
inactive in deacetylating nucleosomal histones due to the inability of the
histone binding proteins RbAp46 and RbAp48 to gain access to nucleosomal
histones. These results define SAP30 as a component of a histone deacetylase
complex conserved among eukaryotic organisms.

PMID: 9651585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. FEBS Lett. 1998 Jun 12;429(2):183-8.

The carboxy-terminal region of adenovirus E1A activates transcription through
targeting of a C-terminal binding protein-histone deacetylase complex.

Sundqvist A(1), Sollerbrant K, Svensson C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, BMC, Uppsala University, 
Sweden.

Binding of the C-terminal binding protein, CtBP, to the adenovirus E1A moiety of 
a Gal4-E1A fusion protein abolishes conserved region (CR) 1-dependent
transcription activation. In contrast, a non-promoter targeted E1A peptide,
capable of binding CtBP, can induce transcription from the proliferating cell
nuclear antigen (PCNA) promoter. CtBP is shown here to bind the histone
deacetylase HDAC1, suggesting that a promoter targeted CtBP-HDAC1 complex can
silence transcription from the PCNA promoter through a deacetylation mechanism.
Expression of the CtBP binding domain of E1A is sufficient to alleviate
repression, possibly due to the displacement of the CtBP-HDAC1 complex from the
promoter.

PMID: 9650586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Oncogene. 1998 May 14;16(19):2549-56.

Histone deacetylase associated with mSin3A mediates repression by the acute
promyelocytic leukemia-associated PLZF protein.

David G(1), Alland L, Hong SH, Wong CW, DePinho RA, Dejean A.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recombinaison et Expression Génétique, INSERM U163, Institut Pasteur,
Paris, France.

The PLZF gene was identified first by its fusion with the retinoic acid receptor 
alpha gene in the t(11;17) translocation associated with a retinoic acid
resistant form of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). It encodes a krüppel-like
zinc finger protein with a POZ domain shared with a subset of regulatory proteins
including the BCL6 leukemogenic protein. PLZF, like BCL6, strongly represses
transcription initiated from different promoters. Here we show that PLZF
associates in vitro and in vivo with the Mad co-repressor mSin3A and the histone 
deacetylase HDAC1. Two domains in PLZF and the PAH1 structure of mSin3A mediate
these interactions. Trichostatin A, a specific inhibitor of histone deacetylases,
significantly reduces PLZF repression. These data strongly suggest that, like
nuclear receptors and Mad, PLZF represses transcription by recruiting a histone
deacetylase through the SMRT-mSin3-HDAC co-repressor complex. We also show that
BCL6 associates with HDAC1 indicating that this type of regulation might be
common to POZ/Zinc finger proteins involved in human leukemias. This work
supports a role for deregulated histone deacetylation in the development of both 
lymphoid and myeloid neoplasia in human and suggests that targeted histone
deacetylase inhibitors may be useful for treatment of certain types of
malignancies.

PMID: 9627120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Jun 15;26(12):2899-907.

The corepressor N-CoR and its variants RIP13a and RIP13Delta1 directly interact
with the basal transcription factors TFIIB, TAFII32 and TAFII70.

Muscat GE(1), Burke LJ, Downes M.

Author information: 
(1)University of Queensland, Centre for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Ritchie
Research Laboratories, B402A, St Lucia 4072, Queensland, Australia.
g.guscat@cmcb.uq.edu.au

Repression of transcription by the classical nuclear receptors (e.g. TR, RAR),
the orphan nuclear receptors (e.g. Rev-erbAalpha/beta), Mxi-1 and Mad bHLH-zip
proteins and the oncoproteins PLZF and LAZ3/BCL6 is mediated by the corepressors 
N-CoR and SMRT. The interaction of the corepressors with the components involved 
in chromatin remodelling, such as the recruiting proteins Sin3A/B and the histone
deacteylases HDAc-1 and RPD3, has been analysed in detail. The N-CoR/Sin3/HDAc
complexes have a key role in the regulation of cellular proliferation and
differentiation. However, the interaction of these corepressors with the basal
transcriptional machinery has remained obscure. In this study we demonstrated
that the N-terminalrepression domains and the receptor interactiondomains (RID)
of N-CoR and its splice variants, RIP13a and RIP13Delta1, directly interact with 
TAFII32 in vivo and in vitro . We show that interaction domain II within the
N-CoR and RIP13a RID is required for the interaction with TAFII32. We also
observed that N-CoR directly interacts with each of the basal factors, TFIIB and 
TAFII70, and can simultaneously interact with all three basal factors in a
non-competitive manner. Furthermore, we provide evidence that suggests the
RVR/Rev-erbbeta-corepressor complex also interacts with the general
transcriptional machinery, and that the physicalassociation of TFIIB with N-CoR
also occurs in the presence of Sin3B and HDAc-1. Interestingly, we observed that 
N-CoR expression ablated the functional interaction between TFIIB and TAFII32
that is critical to the initiation of transcription. In conclusion, this study
demonstrates that the N-terminal repressor region and the C-terminal RIDs are
part of the corepressor contact interface that mediates the interaction with the 
general transcription factors, and demonstrates that TAFs can also directly
interact with corepressors to mediate signals from repressors to the basal
machinery. We also suggest that N-CoR interacts with the central components of
the transcriptional initiation process (TFIIB, TAFs) and locks them into a
non-functional complex or conformation that is not conducive to transcription.

PMCID: PMC147645
PMID: 9611234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Mar 31;95(7):3519-24.

A role for histone deacetylase activity in HDAC1-mediated transcriptional
repression.

Hassig CA(1), Tong JK, Fleischer TC, Owa T, Grable PG, Ayer DE, Schreiber SL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Chemistry, Harvard University, 
12 Oxford Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

Treatment of mammalian cells with small molecule histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors induces changes in the transcription of specific genes. These changes 
correlate directly with an increase in the acetylation levels of all four core
histones in vivo. Antibodies directed against endogenous HDAC1, HDAC2, or HDAC3
immunoprecipitate histone deacetylase activity that is inhibited in vitro by the 
small molecule trapoxin (TPX), and all three HDACs are retained by a TPX-affinity
matrix. HDAC1 and HDAC2 are associated in HeLa cells in a complex that is
predominantly separate from an HDAC3 immune complex. Both Jurkat HDAC1 and HeLa
HDAC1/2 immune complexes deacetylate all four core histones and recombinant HDAC1
deacetylates free and nucleosomal histones in vitro. Purified recombinant HDAC1
deacetylates core histones in the absence of protein cofactors. Site-directed
mutagenesis was used to identify residues required for the enzymatic and
structural integrity of HDAC1. Mutation of any one of four conserved residues
causes deleterious effects on deacetylase activity and a reduced ability to bind 
a TPX-affinity matrix. A subset of these mutations also cause a decreased
interaction with the HDAC1-associated proteins RbAp48 and mSin3A. Disruption of
histone deacetylase activity either by TPX or by direct mutation of a histidine
presumed to be in the active site abrogates HDAC1-mediated transcriptional
repression of a targeted reporter gene in vivo.

PMCID: PMC19868
PMID: 9520398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Mar 31;95(7):3356-61.

Depudecin induces morphological reversion of transformed fibroblasts via the
inhibition of histone deacetylase.

Kwon HJ(1), Owa T, Hassig CA, Shimada J, Schreiber SL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology,
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

Depudecin is a fungal metabolite that reverts the rounded phenotype of NIH 3T3
fibroblasts transformed with v-ras and v-src oncogenes to the flattened phenotype
of the nontransformed parental cells. The mechanism of detransformation induced
by this agent had not been determined. Here, we demonstrate that depudecin
inhibits histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity effectively both in vivo and in
vitro. Depudecin induces similar morphological reversion in v-ras transformed NIH
3T3 cells as do other naturally occurring HDAC inhibitors such as trichostatin A 
or trapoxin. It competitively inhibits the binding of [3H]trapoxin in vitro and
the nuclear binding of a trapoxin-coumarin fluorophore in vivo, suggesting that
depudecin shares a nuclear binding protein and site on that protein with
trapoxin. Furthermore, depudecin induces hyperacetylation of histones in a
dose-dependent manner and at concentrations comparable with that required for
detransformation. An in vitro histone deacetylase assay, using purified
recombinant HDAC1, reveals that depudecin inhibits 50% of the enzyme activity at 
a concentration of 4.7 microM. These results demonstrate that depudecin is a
novel HDAC inhibitor and suggest that its ability to induce morphological
reversion of transformed cells is the result of its HDAC inhibitory activity.

PMCID: PMC19839
PMID: 9520369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Apr 17;245(2):423-7.

Effects of cell density and trichostatin A on the expression of HDAC1 and p57Kip2
in Hep 3B cells.

Gray SG(1), Ekström TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Development and Tumour Biology, Karolinska Institute,
Stockholm, Sweden.

The interplay between the acetylation and deacetylation activities within the
cell has been postulated to be a mechanism by which the cell regulates expression
from genes at the level of chromatin. We have examined the expression pattern of 
the human histone deacetylase gene HDAC1 and the cyclin dependent kinase
inhibitor p57Kip2 in the hepatocellular carcinoma cell line Hep 3B. HDAC1
expression was elevated at low cell densities, but once a critical threshold
point in cell density was attained, expression was reduced to very low levels.
Treatment of the cells with trichostatin A (TSA), a potent inhibitor of histone
deacetylases, was found to affect expression. p57Kip2 was found to be
downregulated by TSA, whereas HDAC1 was upregulated. These effects were found to 
be cell density dependent. The results suggest that HDAC1 plays a role in its own
regulation, and that investigations using TSA should be carried out when cells
grow exponentially.

PMID: 9571167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Mar 17;95(6):3003-7.

A class of hybrid polar inducers of transformed cell differentiation inhibits
histone deacetylases.

Richon VM(1), Emiliani S, Verdin E, Webb Y, Breslow R, Rifkind RA, Marks PA.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center 1275 York Avenue,
New York, NY 10021, USA. v-richon@ski.mskcc.org

Hybrid polar compounds (HPCs) have been synthesized that induce terminal
differentiation and/or apoptosis in various transformed cells. We have previously
reported on the development of the second-generation HPCs suberoylanilide
hydroxamic acid (SAHA) and m-carboxycinnamic acid bishydroxamide (CBHA) that are 
2,000-fold more potent inducers on a molar basis than the prototype HPC
hexamethylene bisacetamide (HMBA). Herein we report that CBHA and SAHA inhibit
histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3) activity in
vitro. Treatment of cells in culture with SAHA results in a marked
hyperacetylation of histone H4, but culture with HMBA does not. Murine
erythroleukemia cells developed for resistance to SAHA are cross-resistant to
trichostatin A, a known deacetylase inhibitor and differentiation inducer, but
are not cross-resistant to HMBA. These studies show that the second-generation
HPCs, unlike HMBA, are potent inhibitors of HDAC activity. In this sense, HMBA
and the second-generation HPCs appear to induce differentiation by different
pathways.

PMCID: PMC19684
PMID: 9501205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Mar 17;95(6):2795-800.

Characterization of a human RPD3 ortholog, HDAC3.

Emiliani S(1), Fischle W, Van Lint C, Al-Abed Y, Verdin E.

Author information: 
(1)Picower Institute for Medical Research, Manhasset, NY 11030, USA.

Histone acetylation levels in cells result from a dynamic equilibrium between
competing histone acetylases and deacetylases. Changes in histone acetylation
levels occur during both transcriptional activation and silencing. Cloning of the
cDNA for a human histone deacetylase (HDAC1) has shown that it represents a human
ortholog of the yeast transcriptional regulator RPD3. We have screened the
expressed sequence tag database (National Center for Biotechnology Information)
with the yeast RPD3 sequence and identified a human ortholog of RPD3, HDAC3. This
cDNA encodes a protein of 428 amino acids with 58% sequence identity with HDAC1p.
By using a specific polyclonal antiserum recognizing the C-terminal domain of
HDAC3p and Western blotting, we detected a single approximately 49-kDa band in
several tumor cell lines. HDAC3p is expressed predominantly in the nuclear
compartment. Immunoprecipitation experiments with either an antiserum against
HDAC3p or an anti-FLAG antiserum and a flagged HDAC3 cDNA showed that HDAc3p
exhibits deacetylase activity both on free histones and on purified nucleosomes. 
This deacetylase activity is inhibited by trichostatin, trapoxin, and butyrate in
vitro to the same degree as the deacetylase activity associated to HDAC1p. These 
observations identify another member of a growing family of human HDAC genes.

PMCID: PMC19648
PMID: 9501169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Nature. 1998 Feb 5;391(6667):601-5.

Retinoblastoma protein represses transcription by recruiting a histone
deacetylase.

Magnaghi-Jaulin L(1), Groisman R, Naguibneva I, Robin P, Lorain S, Le Villain JP,
Troalen F, Trouche D, Harel-Bellan A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Oncogénèse, Différenciation et Transduction du Signal, CNRS UPR
9079, Villejuif, France.

Comment in
    Nature. 1998 Feb 5;391(6667):533, 535-6.

The retinoblastoma tumour-suppressor protein Rb inhibits cell proliferation by
repressing a subset of genes that are controlled by the E2F family of
transcription factors and which are involved in progression from the G1 to the S 
phase of the cell cycle. Rb, which is recruited to target promoters by E2F1,
represses transcription by masking the E2F1 transactivation domain and by
inhibiting surrounding enhancer elements, an active repression that could be
crucial for the proper control of progression through the cell cycle. Some
transcriptional regulators act by acetylating or deacetylating the tails
protruding from the core histones, thereby modulating the local structure of
chromatin: for example, some transcriptional repressors function through the
recruitment of histone deacetylases. We show here that the histone deacetylase
HDAC1 physically interacts and cooperates with Rb. In HDAC1, the sequence
involved is an LXCXE motif, similar to that used by viral transforming proteins
to contact Rb. Our results strongly suggest that the Rb/HDAC1 complex is a key
element in the control of cell proliferation and differentiation and that it is a
likely target for transforming viruses.

PMID: 9468140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Nature. 1998 Feb 5;391(6667):597-601.

Retinoblastoma protein recruits histone deacetylase to repress transcription.

Brehm A(1), Miska EA, McCance DJ, Reid JL, Bannister AJ, Kouzarides T.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome/CRC Institute and Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge,
UK.

Comment in
    Nature. 1998 Feb 5;391(6667):533, 535-6.

The retinoblastoma protein (Rb) silences specific genes that are active in the S 
phase of the cell cycle and which are regulated by E2F transcription factors. Rb 
binds to the activation domain of E2F and then actively represses the promoter by
a mechanism that is poorly understood. Here we show that Rb associates with a
histone deacetylase, HDAC1, through the Rb 'pocket' domain. Association with the 
deacetylase is reduced by naturally occurring mutations in the pocket and by
binding of the human papilloma virus oncoprotein E7. We find that Rb can recruit 
histone deacetylase to E2F and that Rb cooperates with HDAC1 to repress the
E2F-regulated promoter of the gene encoding the cell-cycle protein cyclin E.
Inhibition of histone deacetylase activity by trichostatin A (TSA) inhibits
Rb-mediated repression of a chromosomally integrated E2F-regulated promoter. Our 
results indicate that histone deacetylases are important for regulating the cell 
cycle and that active transcriptional repression by Rb may involve the
modification of chromatin structure.

PMID: 9468139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Mol Endocrinol. 1997 Dec;11(13):2025-37.

Characterization of receptor interaction and transcriptional repression by the
corepressor SMRT.

Li H(1), Leo C, Schroen DJ, Chen JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Toxicology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester 01655-0126, USA.

SMRT (silencing mediator of retinoic acid and thyroid hormone receptor) and N-CoR
(nuclear receptor corepressor) are two related transcriptional corepressors that 
contain separable domains capable of interacting with unliganded nuclear
receptors and repressing basal transcription. To decipher the mechanisms of
receptor interaction and transcriptional repression by SMRT/N-CoR, we have
characterized protein-protein interacting surfaces between SMRT and nuclear
receptors and defined transcriptional repression domains of both SMRT and N-CoR. 
Deletional analysis reveals two individual nuclear receptor domains necessary for
stable association with SMRT and a C-terminal helix essential for corepressor
dissociation. Coordinately, two SMRT domains are found to interact independently 
with the receptors. Functional analysis reveals that SMRT contains two distinct
repression domains, and the corresponding regions in N-CoR also repress basal
transcription. Both repression domains in SMRT and N-CoR interact weakly with
mSin3A, which in turn associates with a histone deacetylase HDAC1 in a mammalian 
two-hybrid assay. Far-Western analysis demonstrates a direct protein-protein
interaction between two N-CoR repression domains with mSin3A. Finally we
demonstrate that overexpression of full-length SMRT further represses basal
transcription from natural promoters. Together, these results support a role of
SMRT/N-CoR in corepression through the utilization of multiple mechanisms for
receptor interactions and transcriptional repression.

PMID: 9415406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. J Biol Chem. 1997 Oct 31;272(44):28001-7.

Isolation and characterization of cDNAs corresponding to an additional member of 
the human histone deacetylase gene family.

Yang WM(1), Yao YL, Sun JM, Davie JR, Seto E.

Author information: 
(1)Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, the Department of Medical
Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, University of South Florida,
Tampa, Florida 33612, USA.

Several human cDNAs encoding a histone deacetylase protein, HDAC3, have been
isolated. Analysis of the predicted amino acid sequence of HDAC3 revealed an open
reading frame of 428 amino acids with a predicted molecular mass of 49 kDa. The
HDAC3 protein is 50% identical in DNA sequence and 53% identical in protein
sequence compared with the previously cloned human HDAC1. Comparison of the HDAC3
sequence with human HDAC2 also yielded similar results, with 51% identity in DNA 
sequence and 52% identity in protein sequence. The expressed HDAC3 protein is
functionally active because it possesses histone deacetylase activity, represses 
transcription when tethered to a promoter, and binds transcription factor YY1.
Similar to HDAC1 and HDAC2, HDAC3 is ubiquitously expressed in many different
cell types.

PMID: 9346952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Cell. 1997 May 2;89(3):373-80.

Nuclear receptor repression mediated by a complex containing SMRT, mSin3A, and
histone deacetylase.

Nagy L(1), Kao HY, Chakravarti D, Lin RJ, Hassig CA, Ayer DE, Schreiber SL, Evans
RM.

Author information: 
(1)The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

The transcriptional corepressors SMRT and N-CoR function as silencing mediators
for retinoid and thyroid hormone receptors. Here we show that SMRT and N-CoR
directly interact with mSin3A, a corepressor for the Mad-Max heterodimer and a
homolog of the yeast global-transcriptional repressor Sin3p. In addition, we
demonstrate that the recently characterized histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1)
interacts with Sin3A and SMRT to form a multisubunit repressor complex.
Consistent with this model, we find that HDAC inhibitors synergize with retinoic 
acid to stimulate hormone-responsive genes and differentiation of myeloid
leukemia (HL-60) cells. This work establishes a convergence of repression
pathways for bHLH-Zip proteins and nuclear receptors and suggests this type of
regulation may be more widely conserved than previously suspected.

PMID: 9150137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Cell. 1997 May 2;89(3):357-64.

Histone deacetylases and SAP18, a novel polypeptide, are components of a human
Sin3 complex.

Zhang Y(1), Iratni R, Erdjument-Bromage H, Tempst P, Reinberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry, University of
Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School,
Piscataway 08854, USA.

An important event in gene expression is the covalent modification of histone
proteins. We have found that the mammalian transcriptional repressor Sin3 (mSin3)
exists in a complex with histone deacetylases HDAC1 and HDAC2. Consistent with
the observation that mSin3-mediated repression of transcription involves the
modification of histone polypeptides, we found that the mSin3-containing complex 
includes polypeptides that tether the mSin3 complex to core histone proteins. In 
addition, two novel mSin3-associated polypeptides, SAP18 and SAP30, were
identified. We isolated a cDNA encoding human SAP18 and found that SAP18 is a
component of an mSin3-containing complex in vivo. Moreover, we demonstrate a
direct interaction between SAP18 and mSin3. SAP18 represses transcription in vivo
when tethered to the promoter, consistent with the ability of SAP18 to interact
with mSin3.

PMID: 9150135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Cell. 1997 May 2;89(3):349-56.

Histone deacetylases associated with the mSin3 corepressor mediate mad
transcriptional repression.

Laherty CD(1), Yang WM, Sun JM, Davie JR, Seto E, Eisenman RN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington 98104, USA.

Transcriptional repression by Mad-Max heterodimers requires interaction of Mad
with the corepressors mSin3A/B. Sin3p, the S. cerevisiae homolog of mSin3,
functions in the same pathway as Rpd3p, a protein related to two recently
identified mammalian histone deacetylases, HDAC1 and HDAC2. Here, we demonstrate 
that mSin3A and HDAC1/2 are associated in vivo. HDAC2 binding requires a
conserved region of mSin3A capable of mediating transcriptional repression. In
addition, Mad1 forms a complex with mSin3 and HDAC2 that contains histone
deacetylase activity. Trichostatin A, an inhibitor of histone deacetylases,
abolishes Mad repression. We propose that Mad-Max functions by recruiting the
mSin3-HDAC corepressor complex that deacetylates nucleosomal histones, producing 
alterations in chromatin structure that block transcription.

PMID: 9150134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Cell. 1997 May 2;89(3):341-7.

Histone deacetylase activity is required for full transcriptional repression by
mSin3A.

Hassig CA(1), Fleischer TC, Billin AN, Schreiber SL, Ayer DE.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology,
Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA.

Members of the Mad family of bHLH-Zip proteins heterodimerize with Max to repress
transcription in a sequence-specific manner. Transcriptional repression by
Mad:Max heterodimers is mediated by ternary complex formation with either of the 
corepressors mSin3A or mSin3B. We report here that mSin3A is an in vivo component
of large, heterogeneous multiprotein complexes and is tightly and specifically
associated with at least seven polypeptides. Two of the mSin3A-associated
proteins, p50 and p55, are highly related to the histone deacetylase HDAC1. The
mSin3A immunocomplexes possess histone deacetylase activity that is sensitive to 
the specific deacetylase inhibitor trapoxin. mSin3A-targeted repression of a
reporter gene is reduced by trapoxin treatment, suggesting that histone
deacetylation mediates transcriptional repression through Mad-Max-mSin3A
multimeric complexes.

PMID: 9150133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Cell Sci. 1997 Jan;110 ( Pt 2):169-78.

The subcellular distribution of the high molecular mass protein, HD1, is
determined by the cytoplasmic domain of the integrin beta 4 subunit.

Sánchez-Aparicio P(1), Martínez de Velasco AM, Niessen CM, Borradori L, Kuikman
I, Hulsman EH, Fässler R, Owaribe K, Sonnenberg A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Biology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

The high molecular mass protein, HD1, is a structural protein present in
hemidesmosomes as well as in distinct adhesion structures termed type II
hemidesmosomes. We have studied the distribution and expression of HD1 in the
GD25 cells, derived from murine embryonal stem cells deficient for the beta 1
integrin subunit. We report here that these cells possess HD1 but not BP230 or
BP180; two other hemidesmosomal constituents, and express only traces of the
alpha 6 beta 4 integrin. By immunofluorescence and interference reflection
microscopy HD1 was found together with vinculin at the end of actin filaments in 
focal contacts. In OVCAR-4 cells, derived from a human ovarian carcinoma which,
like GD25 cells, only weakly express alpha 6 beta 4, HD1 was also localized in
focal contacts. Upon transfection of both GD25 and OVCAR-4 cells with cDNA for
the human beta 4 subunit the subcellular distribution of HD1 changed
significantly. HD1 is then no longer present in focal contacts but in other
structures at cell-substrate contacts, colocalized with alpha 6 beta 4. These
junctional complexes are probably the equivalent of the type II hemidesmosomes.
Transfection of GD25 cells with beta 1 cDNA did not affect the distribution of
HD1, which indicates that the localization of HD1 in focal contacts was not due
to the absence of beta 1. Moreover, in GD25 cells transfected with cDNA encoding 
a beta 4/beta 1 chimera, in which the cytoplasmic domain of beta 4 was replaced
by that of beta 1, the distribution of HD1 was unaffected. Our findings indicate 
that the cytoplasmic domain of beta 4 determines the subcellular distribution of 
HD1 and emphasize the important role of alpha 6 beta 4 in the assembly of
hemidesmosomes and other junctional adhesive complexes containing HD1.

PMID: 9044047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1996;73(1-2):130-3.

Isolation and mapping of a human gene (RPD3L1) that is homologous to RPD3, a
transcription factor in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Furukawa Y(1), Kawakami T, Sudo K, Inazawa J, Matsumine A, Akiyama T, Nakamura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, University of Tokyo, Japan.

We have isolated a novel human gene RPD3L1, that is highly homologous to a
transcription factor in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, RPD3 (reduced potassium
dependency 3), from a human fetal lung cDNA library. The cDNA clone, hRPD3,
consists of 2,100 nucleotides that contain an open reading frame of 1446
nucleotides encoding 482 amino acids. It shares 62% identity in nucleotide
sequence and 52% identity in amino acid sequence to RPD3. This gene is expressed 
at various levels in all tissues examined. Furthermore, we were able to map it to
chromosome band 1p34.1 by FISH.

PMID: 8646880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


